ADAM in EDEN: OR, Natures Paradise.

The History of PLANTS, Fruits, Herbs and Flowers.

WITH Their several Names, whether Greek, (...) or (...); the places where they
grow; their Descriptions and Kinds; their times of flourishing and decreasing;
as also their several Signatures, Anatomical appropriations, and particular
Physical Virtues; Together with necessary Observations on the seasons of
Planting, and gathering of our English Simples with Directions how to preserve
them in their Compositions or otherwise.

A Work of such a Refined and Useful Method, that the Arts of Physic and
Chirurgerie are so clearly laid open, that Apothecaries, Chirurgions, and all
other ingenuous Practitioners, may from our own Fields and Gardens, best
agreeing with our English Bodies, on emergent and sudden occasions, completely
furnish themselves with cheap, easy, and wholesome Cures for any part of the
Body that is ill-affected.

For the (...) greater benefit, there is annexed a Latin and English Table of
the several names of Simples; With another more particular Table of the
Diseases, and their Cures, treated of in this so necessary a Work.

By William Coals, Herbarist.

Then the Lord took the Man, and put him into the Garden of Eden,

Genesis 2. 25. LONDON. Printed by J. Streater, for Nathaniel Brook at the Angel
in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange, 1657.

To the TRULY NOBLE, AND Perfect Lover of LEARNING, Sir William Paston, Knight
and Baronet.
Most Honored Sir,
NOtwithstanding the general Dedication of this Herball which you will sind at
the Foot of my Epistle to the Reader, I have thought it absolutely necessary to
apply my self to your Worship in Particular, humbly beseeching you to give me
leave to commit it to your more immediate Protection, that in case it should
meet with any malevolent Spirits, that should have any thoughts to cast forth
their venomous detractions and aspersions upon it, the Luster of your name
appearing in the Front, might cause them to vanish, no otherwise then the
^octurnall Spirits do at the approach of the Sun. That which imboldened me,
though a stranger to you, to presume so much upon your goodness was the
general repute, that you have really deserved by those propitious Aspects,
that the Nobleness of your Nature has vouchsafed to cast upon those, that
bend their endeavor toward the advancement of any design tending to the
public good, especially if it be in order to the laudable study of Physic,
wherein you have approved your self a good Patriot, as well as by those happy
discoveries you have communicated to the World; but more especially in that
rare cure of the Gout, which your Charity has dispensed with so much success
and comfort to many that have been afflicted with that painful disease. For as
not only those that follow military employments may be said to deserve well of
their Countries, but also those that by a more contemplative kind of Life, or
less Corporally active do lay out their Parts, and hazard their Reputations
by exposing their Labors to the view of the censorious multitude; So they that
protect the latter are as worthily to be commended as they that command the
former. And amongst the rest, Students in the Herbarary Art are as profitable
Members as any other, for besides that they are Trumpets of Gods glory, setting
forth it self so wonderfully in th^se Praesentemque refert quaelibet herba
Deum.
Vegetables, they are also by some, called the Hands of God, because they are
his Instruments to apply those things unto Mankind, that he has Created for
their preservation. And in this respect, Physic may be said to be more
effectual then Divinity it self, for though the Charmer or Preacher charm
never so wisely, yet if the Auditor be not compos m^ntis, but like the Deaf
Adder, he will lose his labor* But such are the Powerful virtues of Herbs
administered by a skillfull Professor, that they will even restore those that
have lost their Senses, and so not only make them capable of good Counsel and
wholesome instruction, but cause both mind and body to resume their pristine
Integrity. And thus in all Humility, I lay it down at your Worships feet, not
without some hopes that you will be pleased to accept it, and to pardon the
boldness of

Sir, Your most humble Servant, W. Coals.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
TO make thee truly sensible of that happiness which Mankind lost by the Fall
of Adam, is to render thee an exact Botanick, by the knowledge of so
incomparable a Science as the Art of Simpling, to re-instate thee into another
Eden, or, A Garden of Paradise: For if We rightly consider the Addresses of
this Divine Contemplation of Herbs and Plants, with what alluring Steps and
Paces the Study of them directs Us to an admiration of the Supreme Wisdom, we
cannot but even from these inferior things arrive somewhat near unto a
heavenly Contentment; a contentment indeed next to that Blessedness of
Fruition, which is only in the other World; for all our Pleasures here having
but the fading Aids of Sense are beholding, or rather subjected to our humane
Frailties, so that they must in respect of our Expectations in some kind or
other ever fall short. Nevertheless most certain it is, amongst all these
transitory Entertainments of our Lives, there is none more suitable to the mind
of man then this; for I dare boldly assert, that if there be any one that is
become so much an Herbarist, as to be delighted with the pleasant Aspects of
Nature, so as to have walked a few turns in her solitary Places, traced her
Allies, viewed her several imbroidered Beds, recreated and feasted himself
with her Fragrances, the harmless delights of her Fields and Gardens; He it
is, that has embraced one of the greatest of our terrestrial Felicities.
Hence it is, that Emperors, Princes, Heroes, and Persons of the most generous
Qualifications, have trod on their Scepters, slighted their Thro^es, cast away
their Purples, and laid aside all other Exuberancies of State, to Court their
Mother Earth in her own Dressings; Such Beauties there are to be discerned in
Flowers, such Curiosities of Features to be found in Plants. When God Almighty
would have Adam to partake of a perfection of happiness, even then when he
stood innocent, he could find none greater under the Sun then to place him in a
Garden. Spencer, the Prince of our English Po^ts, seats all Pleasures in the
Gardens of Adonis, as the more ancient did in those of Al^inous and the
Hesperides: For my part, my Genius and more particular Inclination has for a
long space made me subservient to the Sweetness of these Retirements; the best
Hours of my Life being spent in the Fields and in Physic Gardens, more
especially in that Famous One at Oxford, where I made it a great part of my
study to be experienced in this laudable art of Simpling, of which I have
already published a Treatise, neither have I persued this employment only for
the private contentment that I received thereby, much less out of a
greediness of gain, but from a Zeal to the public good, as having
observed, that through the ignorance and negligence of pretenders to the
knowledge of this art, sundry un^ansome dylasters to have happened to the ruin
of many, and amongst those, to some that deserved most of their Country. Had
Solomon that great proficient in all sublunary experiments preserved those many
volumes that he wrote in this kind, for the instructions of future ages, (so
great was that spatiousnesse of mind, that God had bestowed on him) that he had
immediately under the Deity been the greatest of Doctors, for the preservation
of mankind: But with the loss* of his Books so much la^^nted by the Rabbines
and others, the best part of this Herbarary art has since groaned under the
defects of many unworthy Authors, and yet re^naines under diverse Clouds and
imperfections. The truth is though it be necessary for a man to know and learn
all Sciences, nevertheless the knowledge of natural Philosophy ought to be
most esteemed, as being no l^sse useful then furnished with all admirable
delights, the variety of these will be things setting forth to their best
extension the invisible wisdom of the eternal Creator. When I undertook this
work, I was not insensible of the meanenesses of mine own endowments, neither
did I, without a modest reflection upon my self, survey those larger gifts
which Mr. Gerard, Mr. Johnston, and Mr. Parkinson present unto the World: Not
to mention many other Writers: for they stood on the shoulders of others, as I
am sometimes feign to do; I thought it no adventure, but a necessary endeavor
to do my Country further service: and, without arrogance I avouch it, I
determined my self happy in th^se my undertakings and that more ^specially for
these following Reasons.

1. As their Volumes are too chargable for every common Buyer, so they are
fraught with diverse passages that rend not to edification, all which I have
waved.

2. As I would do my Country that honor and right, not without reason to
compare her and her Gardens with the most eminent Countries and Gardens in the
World, so I shall less trouble the Reader with those Outlandish Plants and
Ingredients, which are almost if not altogether impossible to be obtained, but
rather acquaint him with those more wholesome Heroes and Plants that he has
growing at his own door, which are more consonant and proper for his Body.

3. Though their Cutts do take up much room and render their Books much more
abundantly dear, yet they are so much inferior to those of Matthiolus and
Dioscorides, in respect of the smallness of their Size, and the false placing
of them, that the Botanick is as commonly puzzled as satisfied, and thereby
disabled to give an ingenious account of them.

4. As many things have since their Deaths been observed in Gardens and other
places which they never discoursed of, so there are many virtues since
discovered in Plants which they never so much as mentioned.

5. As I have ministered a new method in a more compendious Volume being also
very plain and easy, so I do deliver my Reader from diverse difficulties that
till this present, he has been perplexed with.

6. I have labored to make my descriptions agreeable to the soil which neither
Ger^rd or Parkinson did, that so they may live in the Herbarists esteem, as
they do in their native and proper places.

7. I have not altogether walked alone in these my Travailes but have gone
along with Mr. Steevens Principal of Hart-Hall in Oxford, Mr. Lydall, Mr.
Brown, Mr. Wit, Mr. Hanley, Mr. Beeston, Mr. John Cross, the Apothecary, and
diverse other my good Friends, being very eminent Botanicks, in the University
of Oxford, conversed with and received advice from them, and had the
approbation of diverse other learned Herbarists now living, and if I have failed
of the best of our English men, Mr. Good-yeare, Dr. Bowl, Mr. Ashmole, the
intelligence of our late times, Dr. How, their assistance had not been wanting
to mine endeavor, if my humble deserts could have raised me to the felicity
and Honor of their Acquaintance.

8. I have not only set the Names of Plants and their Virtues but their
proprieties also, their Affects and Effects, their Increase and Decrease, their
Flourishing and Fading; their distinct Varieties and several qualities, so that
I may resolve the Reader thus much, that though no Art be able to express
Nature in her likeness, yet if any Author can with his Pen counterfeit
Similitude for Life, shape and shadows for substance, he does to the utmost
of his power express his Duty.

I hope I shall not need any motives to encourage the green Herbarist to this
study. If Pleasures may invite him, what fairer objects are there for the sight
then these painted Braveries? what Odours can ravish the sense of smelling more
then those of flowers? If the sensuality of the Taste has delighted him, what
can be more acceptable then the luxurious deliciousness of Fruits: And for
that high concernment we all seek after, Health, what has the great preserver
of all things rendered more sovereign then the virtues of Herbs and Plants,
without the use of some of which no Confection can be made by the Apothecary.
If none of these melting inducements carry force enough with them, the Reader
must give me leave to descend to the great argument of the World, Profit,
which, above the general good, has been a Bait that has caught the vulgar: In
the first Age, as Herbs and Fruits were the ordinary Meat of Men, so the
necessary use and benefit of them is the more clearly evidenced unto us, both
by the long and healthful Lives of our Forefathers, and also by the great
pains and charges, they from time to time were at in manuring and planting
Orchards and Gardens, making use and gain of Wilder places, not only
delighting themselves with some of the Ornamentall Toys of Nature, but
prosequuting the affairs of their Lives for the nearer concernment of
Provision for their Families.

And now, ingenuous Reader, that I may show my self as sincere an honourer and
true lover of the advancement of this Science as I can, give me leave most
heartily to wish that there were more Benefactors to the late noble
Institutions of some Physick-Gardens: amongst which Mr. Morgan^ of Westminster
has one in his Tuition, which by the nobleness of Dr. How is already very
full fraught, and is like to be rendered more richly fruitful. That I may not
seem too tedious in this Preface, for my Readers better satisfaction, I have
also prefixed a further Account or short Explication of my Method.

To conclude, I dedicate these my Labors to the Commonwealth of Learning, to
the College of Physicians, Chirurgions and Apothecaries; to the Court, to the
Nobility and Gentry; In fine to all those that honor this Art, and delight in
the peace and welfare of their Country: entreating them to pass over those
fallings and aberrations which must needs be incident, to one that has
traversed so many Gardens, Woods, Feilds, and Hills. With my Prayers for the
prosperity of the Nations, together with my best desires for the good success
of mine* Endeavors, I take Leave and rest,

Thine, W. Coals.

A further Account, or short Explication of the Method used in the ensuing Work.
THis Herball further then has been expressed in the Epistle to the Reader,
does, as near as is possible, acquaint all sorts of people, with the very Pith
and Marrow of Herbarism, contrived and set forth in an easy and exact Method:
wherein I have made an Anatomicall application throughout the Series of the
whole work, by appropriating to every part of the Body (from the Crown of the
Head, with which I begin; and proceed till I come to the Soal of the Foot) such
Herbs and Plants, whose grand uses and virtues do most specifical^y, and by
Signature, thereunto belong; not only for strengthening the same, but also for
curing the evil Affects whereunto they are subjected. In which industry I have
not been alone, but have found such loving friends, both Physicians,
Chirurgions, and other Coadjutors and Travelers with me in this Science also,
that I suppose I may modestly affirm that I have done that, which no English
man has preceded me in.

And besides this general Method of the whole Book, you will find that of
every particular Chapter to treat of the Names, Kinds, Forms, Places, and
Time, Temperatures and Virtues, if not the Signature of every Plant. For not
doubting but it will come into the Hands of some Learned Persons, whose longing
desire it is, to be expert in this most satisfactory employment, I have omitted
nothing that might render it incomplete, beginning with the Names which are
most commonly given them either for their most eminent virtues, or for some
notable affection, or else for difference sake; that the diversity of Names,
that the best Writers attribute Convenient rebus nomina saepe suis.
to the same thing, might partly be made known. For to set down those improper,
bastard, and insignificant names, which are used in diverse Counties of this
Land, and amongst some Writers also, would require much pains to little
Purpose. And then, that that great Variety wherein Nature has been pleased to
discover her Beauty and Liberality, might not be concealed, I have set down
most of the Species of every Genus. As for the Forms, I have usually described
that which is most ordinary, because Providence has prudently ordered that
those things which are most common, should be likewise most useful, though
there be some fantastical ones that esteem lightly of every thing which is
not rare. The Places Omne charum, rarum
are also many times particularly expressed, that the Reader may know to
obtain those Plants he stands indeed of; And that he may not look for them
at a season, that they are not to be had, the Time is expressed likewise, and
sometimes, the particular time, of gathering.

But for the time of gathering Plants in general, and the ordering of them
afterward, I shall refer him to that Book of mine, called The Art of
Simpling, wherein is set down the several ways of distinguishing Herbs, as by
the differences of their Leaves, Stalks, FloFlowers, Seeds, Roots, Juices, etc:
The Temperature and Qualities are also set down, that seeing hot diseases are
usually cured with cooling Medicines, and cold diseas^s with hot Medicines, it
might be known when a Plant is proper or not. The Signatures likeness are
taken notice of, they being as it were the Bo^ks outof which the Ancients first
learned the Virtues of Herbs; Nature or rather the Deus cuique Plantae indidit
proditorem suum Crossius, in Praefatione de Signaturis.
God of nature, having stamped on diverse of them legible Characters to discover
their uses, though he has left others also without any, that after he had
showed them the way, they by their Scivit Deus labor acquisita gratiora
hominibus esse quam sine labor obvia, quae plerumque fastidire solent. Id.
labor and industry, which renders every thing more acceptable, might find out
the rest, which they did not neglect, but prosequuted with extra^rdinary
diligence, yet have they left sufficient Inquiries for succeeding Ages. And the
Virtues, and other Properties, whether noce^t or innocent of every particular
Plant, which were found scattered in diverse Authors, I have collected and put
together; and added diverse excellent Observations, never yet taken notice of by
any other Writer, that I have met with, not omitting the way of Use and
Application, whether it be internal or external, setting down whether the
Bark, Leaves, S^alks, See^s Roots, Juices or distilled water be of greatest
Effect: So that not only Men, but Women also, who do frequently bend their
Endeavors this ingenious way, when they shall be pleased to peruse these my
Labors shall find both Pleasure and Profit in the reading of the same: For as
there be diverse Diseases which happen to them only, as those of their Breasts
and Womb, so there be many Plants, that have more specificall Virtues, for the
service of those parts, then any other; diverse of which I have marshalled
together, when I come to speak to the said Distempers. Lastly, that nothing
might be wanting that can be thought necessary for the Complement of this my
well meaning design, besides the Table of Appropriations which is to be
prefixed, there is suffixed or set after it a threefold Index or Table, one of
the Latin, and another of the English Names, with a Table of the Virtues and
Properties, whereby diverse Inquiries, whether Medicinal or other may be fully
satisfied.

And now let me tell the ingenious Reader, and by him others, that if those of
these times would but be, by a joint Concurrence, as industrious to search into
the secrets of the Nature of Herbs, as some of the former, and make trial of
them as they did, they should no doubt find the force of Simples many times no
less effectual, then that of Compounds, to which this present Age is too too
much addicted, as has been very well observed by those learned Brethren of
that noble Order of the R^secrucians. Thus have I broken the Nut of Herbarisme,
do thou take out the Kernel and eat it and much good may it do thee.

TO His Esteemed, William Coals, upon his New Methodized History of PLANTS.
SOme may condemn your forwardness, that you
Venture thus soon into the public view;
But by the wisest sort it is understood,
No man can be too hasty to do good.
And may all those that enviously do brouze
Upon your Leaves, fare like the Vicars See the Art of Simpling, Chap. 19.
Cowes;
The fault will be their own, yet still it is true,
In Yew there is poison, though there is none in You:
For you have scrutiniz'd Dame-Natures store,
To find out Remedies, that may restore
Expiring Health, when the cold Hand of Death,
Is ready to extort our vital breath.
And as Diseases subtly do part
Themselves in Squadrons; some invade the heart,
Others the Head surprise; and others strive
If not to kill, to make Us dye alive.
So you your Plot ingeniously have laid,
To raise stout Forces with small Charges paid,
To charge their several Parties in each part,
And Nature marches Hand in hand with Art.
Kind Nature always has held forth her Book.
But few have thought it worth their pains to look
Within those precious Leaves, wherein each cure
Is plainly legible in Signature.
You have revived that Knowledge, and by Her,
You will be thought her best Interpreter*
I Will say no more; your Books themselves will praise,
And every Garden yield you verdant Bays;
And they that find the good, with all their Souls,
Will with New Castle may send all such Coals.
Anthracius Botanophilus.

TO His Respected FRIEND, Mr. William Coals, upon his Herball.
KNew the blind World what price to set, on real happiness,
And not mistook for their chief good, what is their chief distress,
They would not run with such career, after the flattring bait
Of Riches, Honor, and those troubles, that on greatness wait:
Neglecting pleasures more sincere, wherein they spend their hour's,
Who dai^y with calm thoughts converse, with Gardens and with Flowrs.
These things though plain afford content, and easy are to gain,
Those seldom but through rapin, fraud, or murders men attain.
What wise man would not rather choose, in pleasant Fields to be,
Then in the midst of bloody Fights, or on the raging Sea?
There horrid Cries and Sights affright, Pale Death does there surround,
Here naught but pleasing Objects are, calm peace does here abound.
These are the joys that so proclaim the Elyzian Paradise,
But these the happy Age of Gold knew no felicities.
And Sacred Mysteries inform, that but for one Man's Sin,
This now disordered Earth had all one florid Garden been.
These thoughts Invite the gentle Muse with Rosy wings to fly
Ore Tempe and the pleasant Plains of flowery Thessaly.
Sweet Antium, fair Praneste, the delightful Rosaries
Of Pastus, where a thousand joys and pleasures wantonize,
To dwell upon the fragrant Scents, the medicable power,
And all the beauty of the world contracted in a Flowr:
Panchaia's Gums, Day^s sloping darts on a clear Fountain's streams,
Those cannot boast more balmy Smell's, nor these more orient beams.
Yet think not that a Generous Soul can rest it self at ease
With those more unrefin'd delights, which vulgar spirits please.
Court bounteous Nature, search into her deepest mysteries,
And seek that sovereign virtue that, in each Plant hidden lies.
So may we the first Ages Innocence hope to revive,
And long obscured Wisdom from her dark mists to retrive.
Behold a Garden richly fraught with Natures choicest store,
What ever springs within the Confines of the British shore;
May he whose verda^^ fancy teemed with such a smiling birth,
Enjoy a Fame fresh as his Flowers, that so adorn the Earth.
E. Philips.

TO The Excellent Herbarist, Mr. William Coals.
Worthy Sir,
AFter my so large progression in this Botanick Science, it was my happiness
to Embrace your acquaintance, and to spend some happy hours with you; in which
you rendered your self so admirably accomplished, that I thought my self obliged
to afford you my best Advice, and to furnish you with some of my Select and
Choicest Papers for the perfecting this your so Ingenuous Design: And thus much
I presume, that I may safely affirm in the behalf of this your Elaborate Volume
of English Plants, with the Physical and Anatomicall uses of them, that for
the Method and Draught of this work, I have not perused any leaves of this kind
that could be more beneficial; or that ever better pleased

Your Friend and Adorer, William How, Med. Doct.

The Approbation of diverse Herbarists concerning the ensuing, Work.
THis Author having taken into his Serious Consideration the infinite
inconveniences arising to his Native Country, (whose faithful Servant he has
approved himself to be) through the ignorance of the generality of people, who
(for Want of cheap Means, and Sound Instructions) concerning the Knowledge and
Use of suc^ Simples, as are either growing ^ea^ them, or easily to be h^d, and
the many disadvantages ensuing by their Neglect of them, it being his Care to
restore those Benefits, which our Wise Creator has provided for all men, by a
very easy and ready Method, the like whereof was never yet published; We whose
Names are underwritten can do no less then recommend it to all our loving
Countrymen, exhorting them to take notice of it, as they tender the Welfare
of themselves and their Relations, nor doubting but that in a short space; they
will be able to say, that it is a P^ece of as great Use and Concernment, as was
ever yet extant. For hereby they shall fi^^ the Way, how they themselves may
cure diverse Diseases, Distempers, and Wounds: In Approbation and Testimony
whereof we have thought good to own this Work with the Subscription of our
Names,

Edward Morgan, Herbarist to the Physic Garden of Westminster,
Thomas Gilbanck,
Richard T^ggey.
Cum multis aliis*
TO The Ingeniously Learned, Mr. W. Coals, on this His worthy Labor,
entitled, The Paradise of Plants, or, Adam in Eden.
SIr, My Affection, not my Avarice,
Has made m' Intrude into your Paradise:
Where, to Amazement, I have gladly seen
Earth's fairest Beauties, dressed in Lovely-green:
So Glorious, so full of Eloquence,
They both surprise, and captivate the Sense:
So Ravishing, I cease to wonder more,
Why Dioclesian, the Emperou^,
Put off His Purple, and resigned up all,
To lead His Life, within a Garden-Wall:
So various, as if they meant to Vie
Their different Faces, with Humanity:
So Numerous, we would think the Heavenly Scheme,
Had not a Parent, for each Plant of them;
(Whereas, though Earth their Common Mother be,
They All from Heaven, derive a Pedigree.)
And yet (to tell you Troth) there is a Plant,
Balis, by name, which Sovereign Herb, I want:
For, Draco, in his Heat, a Man has slain;
And Thylo-like, I Would have him Live again.
But O their Virtues! those do strike me Mute,
They Are past Expression; some, past finding out;
Or pestered with an Inconvenience, which
Makes Him that knows 'em, but a knowing-Witch:
And that is one Reason they are so closely hid,
( Nature's whole System, so inveloped)
And we ( Poor Mortals!) thus exposed to try
Endless Conclusions, for their Energie.
Nor should w'in any measure, this attain;
But that some Vocal Signatures, explain
The end of their Production, and Restore
To us, in part, what Adam knew before.
In which Grave Search, a number have done well,
But very few, had fortune to excel:
And those that did, the Ancients greatly Prized,
Rewarded high, nay, sometime Idolized.
Thus Chiron, for his Skill, was feigned the Son
Of Saturn and Phillyre; Aesc'lapius won
A God's repute; Blind Homer magnifies
Italian Circe: others, Canonize
Her for a Goddess; and the Marsian-race
(Descended from Her) hold in special grace.
Thus, the great Language-master, Mithridate,
Lives still Adored, for His Cabinet
Of Recipe's and Secrets; welcomer
To Pompey, than all else He got by the War:
Lenaeus famous, in the Roman-State,
Because those Jewels He did well Translate:
And Valgius, for His Tract of Simples writ
(Though left Unperfect)'s venerable, yet.
So Theophrastus, Dioscorides,
Galen, and Pli^y, wear Immortal Baies:
Rhasis and M^sue, noble Avicen,
Admired all, by every worthy Pen:
And 'twere Ingrate, should any less be done,
To Painful Gerard, or Learned Parkinson:
For, they have much advanced Bota^ick-Skill,
And made it Passable, to those that will
Pursue their Steps. But now! what shall we say
What owe we to You, that have Smoothed the Way,
And cut it shorter, by whole Shelv's of Books,
That serve, but to confound'em Overlooks
Their Bulkie Vol'ms? So Methodiz'd the Art,
That now it is Apposite Man's every Part:
Whose Triple Regions have their Plants at hand,
His Limbs, their proper M^d'cines, at command.
What Nature, but confusedly presents,
You Have Orderly disposed, to Her intents;
Distiguish'd by their several Names, and where
Those puzzel us, you are their Interpreter.
Their Qualities, their Forms, you do declare,
Which cure Diseases, which against Poisons are;
Heal Sores, or yield us D^licates, to Eat,
Which serve for Sauce, to Saporate our Meat;
And all at easy Rates. I could (almost)
Believe, the Wise-mans Books were never Lost,
(Such is the Knowledge, does from hence accrue*)
Or (were they so) I Am sure they are found in You.
Go on ( Brave Soul!) and Perfect this Design,
Whilst we conspire, to make Your Glory shine;
And (with Respect to Learning) fancy still,
That Coals has writ, as fair, as any Quill.
G. Wharton.

A Table of the Appropriations, showing for what Part every Plant is chiefly
medicinable throughout the whole Body of Man; beginning with the Head; quoted
according to the Chapters contained in this Book.
For the Head in general.
WAllnuts, 1 Peony, 2 Poppy, 3 Squills. 4 Larch Tree its Agarick, and
Turpentine. 5
For the Brain.
Wood Betony. 6 Sage, 7 Rosemary 8 Lavender, 9 Marjerome, 10 Primroses,
Cowslips, and Bears Ears 11 Lilly of the Valley 12 Misselto. 13
For restoring Hair.
Quinces, 14 Moss, 15 Maidenhaire, 16
For the Eyes.
Fennel, 17 Verveine, 18 Roses, 19 Celdndine, 20 Rue or Herb-Grace, 21
Eyebright, 22 Clarey, 23 Hawkweed, 24
For the Ears.
Asarabacca. 25 Ground I^y, 26 I^y, 27 Poplar-Tree, 28 Nightshade, 29
Sow-fennell, 30 Sow-thistles, 31
For the Nose.
Wake-Robin or Cuckowpint. 32 Flower-deluce, 33 Horsetaile, 34 Shepherds purse,
35 Willow, 36 Bistort. 37 Tormentill, 38 Cinckefoile, 39 Sowbread, 40
For the Mouth-in general.
Medlars, 41 Mulberries, 42 Mints, 43 Purslane, 44 Golden Rod, 45
For the Scurvey.
Scurvy-grasse, 46 Small Houseleeke, 47 Aloes or Sea Houseleeke, 48 Fumitory,
49 Cresses. 50
For the Teeth.
Pine, 51 Pomegranate, 52 Mis^ick, 53 Master-wort, 54 Coral, 55 Cora^-wert, 56
Resharrow, 57 Henba^e, 58 Wild ^ansy, 59
For the dryness of the Mouth.
Fleawort, 60
For the diseases of the Throat, as Roughness, Quinsy, Kings Evil, etc:
Throat-wort, 61 Date-Tree, 62 Winter Green, 63 Horsetongue, 64 Figge-wort, 65
Archangell, 66 Foxglove, 67 Orpine, 68 Pellitory of the Wall 69 Wheat, 70
Barley, 71 Garlic, 72 Liquorice, 73 Fig Tree, 74 Hyssope, 75 Rag-wort, 76
Plantaine, 76 Columbines 77 Cudweed, 77 Jews Ears, 78
For shortness of breath Coughs, Expectorarations, Hoarsenesse, etc:
Elecampane, 79 Almond-Tree, 80 The Vine, 81 Reeds and Sugar-Cane, 82 Jujubes,
83 Sebestens, 84 Sca^ious, 85 Coleworts, 86 Nettles, 87 Turnips, 88
For contracting Women's Breasts.
Ladies Mantle, 89 Sanders, 90
For breeding Milk.
Annise, 91 Nigella, 92 Mallows, 93 Dill, 94 Rampions, 95 Periwincle, 96
Lettuce, 97
For swollen Breasts.
Fennell-Gyant, 98 Gourds, 99 Basil, 100 Beans, 101 Lentills, 102 Lillies, 103
For sore Nipples.
Dock-Cresses, 104
For the Lungs, Stoppings, Consumptions thereof, etc:
Horehound, 105 Lungwort, 106 Tobacco, 107 Sundew, 108 Hedge-Mustard. 109
Coltsfoot, 110 Woodbine, 111 Mallein, 112 Cowslips of Jerusalem, 113 Sanicle,
114 Polypody, 115 Whortleberries, 116 Sweet-Cicely, 117
For the Heart, Qualms Faintness, etc:
Angelica, 118 Sa^^ron, 119 Borage, 120 Violets, 121 Strawberries, 122
Wood-Sorrell, 123 Bawlme, 124 Marigolds, 125 Swallowort, 126 Goats-Rue, 127
Vipers-grasse, 128 Pome-Citrons, 129 Gentian, 130 Scordium, 131 Burnet, 132
Avens, 133 Cloves, 134 Clove Gillowflowers: 135 Lign Aloes, 136 Cinnamon, 137
Vipers Bugloss, 138
For Stitches, and pains in the Sides.
Cardum Benedictus. 139 Our Ladies Thistle, 140 Camomile, 141 Trisolium
odoratum, 142 Melilote, 143 Oats, 144 Valerian, 145 Stitch-wort, 146 Flax and
Linseed, 147
For purging the Stomach.
Wormwood, 148 M^rabolanes, 149 Groundsell, 150 Radish, 151 Black Alder, 152
Oily Nut Ben, 153 Sena, 154 Daffodills, 155 White Hellebore, 156 Purging
Cassia, 157
For breaking Wind.
Carawaies, 158 Cummin, 159 Camells Hay, 160 Ginger, 161 Galanga, 162
Cardamoms, 163 Pepper, 164 Nutmeg, 165 Coriander, 166 Orenges, 167
For cooling and strengthening the Stomach.
Apples, 168 Pears, 169 Peaches, 170 Aprecocks, 171 Plummes, 172 Cherries, 173
Gooseberries, 174 Barberries, 175 Currants or Ribs, 176
For the Liver.
Rubarb, 177 Turmeric, 178 Agrimony, 179 Liverwort, 180 Succory, 181 Ale coast,
and Maudlin, 182 Docks, 183 S^rrell, 184 Be^tes, 185 Smallage, 186 Cleavers,
187 Chickweed, 188
For the Dropsy.
Elder, 189 Soldanella, 190 Briony, 191 Mechoacan and Jalap, 192 Broom, 193
Ash, 194 Sassafras or Ague-tree, 195 Palma Christi or Great Spurge, 196
Glasse-wort, 197 Spurge-Lawrell, 198 Toad-Flax, 199 Organyor Bastard Marjerome,
200
For the Spleen.
Dodder, 201 Black Hellebore, 202 Tamarinds, 203 Spl^^nwort or Miltwast, 204
Marts-Tongue, 205 Fern, 206 Cap^rs, 207 Tam(...), 208 Germander, 209 Calamint,
210 Poley-Mountain, 211 Lupines, 212
For the Reins, and Bladder; Stone, Strangury, etc.
Asparagus, 213 Parsley, 214 Marsh-Mail^^es, 215 Goats Thorn, 216 Spiknard, 217
Sweet smelling Fl^^g, 218 Cyperus or English Galanga, 219 Hops, 220
Knot-grasse, 221 Parsley pert, 222 Saxifrage, 223 Dropwort, 224 Gromell, 225
Onions, 226 Winter Cherries, 227 Dogs-grasse, 228 Butchers Broom, 229
Chevaill, 230 Brooklime, 231 Hawthorne, 232 Lemmons, 233 Cypress-Tree, 234
Kidney-wort, 235 Kidney Bea^es, 236 Oak, 237 Buckshorne Plantaine, 238
Sampire, 239 Fraxinella, 240 Allhe ale, 241
For the Cholick.
Bay Tree, 242 Holly, 243 Juniper, 244 Olive Tree, 245 Coloquintian, 246
Bindweed, 247
For the Worms.
Ceatory, 248 L^vage, 248 Yansey, 249 Lavander Cotton, 250 Carrots and
Pars(...), 151 ^pignell, 252 Bishops need, 253 English Wormseed, 254 Leekes,
255 Horsereddish, 256
For Looseness; and the Bloody and other Fluxes.
Sumack, 257 Myrtle, 258 Cistus, 259 Black-thorne, 260 Bramble, 261 Teosell,
262 Rice, 263 Flixweed, 264 Pilewort, 265 Water Betony, 266
For provoking Lust,
Artichocks, 267 Sea Holly, 268 Potatoes, 269 Skirrets, 270 Pease, 271 Rocket,
272 Mustard, 273 Cotton, 274 Fistick Nut, 275 Chestnut, 276 Chocolate, 277
Satyrions, 278 Dragons, 279
For abating Lust.
Agnus or the Chast-Tree. 280 Hemp, 281 Water Lilly, 282 Hemlock, 283
Camphire, 284 Tuisan, 285
For provoking the Terms.
Mugwort, 286 Penniroyall, 287 Southernwood, 288 Savoury, 289 Time, 290
Alexanders, 290 Anemonies, 291
For stopping the Terms and the Whites,
Comfrey, 292 Mouse-ear, 293 Yarrow, 294 Mede-sweet, 295 Adders-tongue, 296
Lunaria, 297 Trefoile, 298 Money-wort, 299 Darnell, 300 Flowergentle and
Blites, 301 Dragon-Tree, 302 Beech-Tree, 303 Hasel Nut-Tree, 304
For the Mother.
Mother-wort, 305 Feaverfew, 306 Catmint, 307 Burdock and Butterburre, 308
Orach, 309 Assa Foe(...), 310 Cow Parsnep, 311
For expediting Childbirth.
Birthwort, 312 Mercury, 313 Madder, 314 Dittany, 315 Dittander or Pepperwort,
316 Holme Oak and its Chermes, 317
For expelling the dead Child, and Afterbirth,
Ground Pine, 318 Savine, 319 Birth-Tree, 320
For Ruptures or Burstnesse,
Rupturewort, 321 Thoroughwax, 322 Solomon's Seal, 323 Balsome Apple, 324
Dovesfoot or Cranesbill, 325 Elm, 326
For the French Pox.
Guajacum, 327 China, 328 Sarsa parilla, 329
For the swellings in the Groine,
Starre-wort, 330 Herb Paris, 331
For green Wounds; and old Ulcers.
St. Johnswort, 332 Clown Woundwort, 333 Arssmart, 334 Bugle, 335 Self-heale,
336 Saracens Confound, 337 Loosestrife, 338 Daysy, 339 Speedwell, 340
For drawing out Splinters.
Pimpernell, 341
For Felons.
Woody nightshade, 342
For surbated Feet,
Ladies Bedstraw, 343
Errata,
Chap. 7, line the last, for Sivia r. Salvia. Chap. 8, for slight r. slight
Chap. 12, l. 27, for there is. r. as, chap. 13, l. 3. put in (...), l, 4, put
in (...), l. 15, for tibi r. sibi. chap. 20, for Stelalignity r. Malignity,
chap. 63. for Grollius r. Crollius, chap. 77 the word remedy is left out, chap.
78, for two Jewes-Eares, very well dried in two quarts of White Wind, r. two
Jewes-Eares very well dried, in 2. quarts, etc: Chap. 134. for the Kinds, r.
the Form, Chap. 148. for (...) quasi (...) r. (...) quasi (...) impotabile,
etc: Chap. 208. for absterge^dvim habet r. abstergendi vim habet with a comma.
chap. 237. for the Calix Cup Glandis, r. the Cup, Calix Glandis. chap. 241. for
Panaxris r. Panax is. chap. 260. for Spinus r. Spinos. Other literal faults
there are which may easily be discerned and amended.

ADAM in EDEN: OR, The Paradise of Plants.
THe Method which I shall follow in this ensuing Treatise, shall be according
to that which Anatomists use in Man's body, which they divide into four parts,
viz. The upper, middle, and lower Regions; and lastly, the Limbs. First
treating of those Plants which are appropriated to the Head, and to the
several parts thereof. Secondly, of those which are appropriated to the
Breast, and the parts therein contained. Thirdly, of those which do more
properly appertain to the Abdomen or lower Region. And fourthly, of those which
particularly belong to the Limbs. In all which I shall observe those Plants
which have any special Signature; And I shall begin with the Wall-nut-Tree,
because the fruit of it does resemble the Head in several particulars.

CHAP. I. Of the Wall-nut Tree.
ALthough the Wall-nut-Tree is generally known to most sorts, yet lest, in this
respect, our Treatise should seem lame, I shall take the pains to describe the
form of it; but first I shall give you the Names and Kinds as I find them
spoken of, both by the Ancient and Modern Botanicks.

The Names.
It is called by Dioscorides and the other Ancient Greeks, (...) because they
say, the smell of the Leaves causes the Headache, deriving it from (...) or
(...), which in that Language signifies an Head; and it has sometimes the
Epithet (...) adjoined, because it was brought out of Persia into Greece by
some of the Grecian Kings. It is called also by some of the Modern Greeks,
(...), Jovis glans, and so the Latins from them Diu-glans, by contracting the
word, and substracting the first Letter they called it Juglans. We English,
call it the Wall-nut-Tree; and of some, Walsh-nut-Tree. The Nut is called in
Greek (...), in English, Wall-nut; In Latin, Juglans and Nux (...)

The Kinds.
Parkinson and others reckon up eight Kinds thereof: 1. Our ordinary Wallnut.
2. The greatest Wall-nut. 3. The thin-shelled Wall-nut. 4. The long Wall-nut.
5. The Wall-nut which bears twice in a year. 6. St. John's Wall-nut, or the
late-ripe Wall-nut, which shoots not forth any leaves, till it be Midsummer.
7. The white Wall-nut of Virginia. 8. The black Wall-nut of Virginia. But
because all these kinds differ little in their virtue, I will describe here
none but the ordinary Wall-nut.

The Form.
The Wall-nut is a lust* Tree both for height and bulk, and spreads forth
many large Arms and Boughs, and must make a goodly shadow, when the leaves are
on, which consist of five or six fastened to one rib, with one standing on the
top, like those of the Ash, but that they are much larger: the bark is somewhat
green in the younger boughs; but in the Trunk, it is tending to the color of
Ashes, and is full of clefts for the most part; It bears Catkins or Aglets,
which come forth before the Nuts, of a yellowish color, which open into small
flowers, and falling away, the round Nuts come in their places, two or three
usually set together; but sometimes half a dozen or more, which are covered
with a double shell; the outermost, green, soft, thick, of a strong smell, the
juice coloring black; under which there is a woody shell, wherein a white
sweet Kernel is contained, enclosed with a yellowish, bitter peeling, which
comes off easily while it is fresh, but will not do so when it is old: the
inner pulp thereof is white, sweet, and pleasant to the taste, when it is newly
gathered, for after it is dry it becomes oily and rank. Of the whole fruit
growing on the Tree, there is this common old Riddle, which almost every Child
can say. Its

As high as an House, As little as a Mouse;
As round as a Ball, As bitter as Gall;
As white as Milk, As soft as Silk.
The Wood is much used by Joyners, to make Tables, Stools, etc. It is very
durable if it be kept dry, but rots presently in the weather.

The Place and Time.
The place of its first Nativity was in Persia, whence either the whole Tree
has been brought into diverse other parts, or else the Nuts, which being put
into the ground, do produce the Tree; for there is no other way of propagating
it, unless it be of the Virginian kinds. It grows commonly in England, and
some other places, in Orchards, Gardens, and sometimes in the streets, and by
the way sides, where the Boys lie continually pelting at them. There is a Fable
in Aesop, of a Woman which asked the Wall-nut-Tree, growing by the way side,
which was pelted at with stones and sticks, by them that passed by, Why it was
so foolish as to bring forth fruit, seeing that it was so beaten for its pains,
to which the Tree rehearsed these two Proverbiall Verses.

Nux, Asinus, Muli^r, simili sunt lege ligati
Haec tria nil recte faciunt, si verbera cessent.
The English whereof I could tell you, but that I fear the Women of this
preposterous Age would be angry. True it is, that this Tree, the more it is
beaten; the more Nuts it bears; and therefore good Husbands, after they have
beaten down the Nuts, do with long Poles, beat the empty boughs of the Tree;
and I have observed, that those Trees which have grown in the streets, have
been full, when those which have grown in the back sides have had scarce any,
which I could impute to nothing else, but that those in the street were beaten
and thrown at, more then the other: they blossom early before the leaves come
forth, and the fruit is ripe in September, except St. John's Wall-nut, which
ripeneth not till October.

The Temperature.
Dodonaeus is of Opinion, that the fresh Nuts are cold and moist, but Euchsius
says, they are drying in the first degree, and heating in the second: the bark
of the Tree does bind and dry very much, and the leaves are near of the same
temperature; but when the Nuts are old, they are hot and dry in the ^econd
degree, and of thin parts, and of harder digestion then when they are fresh,
which by reason of their sweetness, are more pleasant, and better digesting in
the stomach.

The Signatures and Virtues.
Wall-nuts have the perfect Signature of the Head: The outer husk or green
Covering, represent the Pericranium, or outward skin of the skull, whereon the
hair grows, and therefore salt made of those husks or barks, are exceeding
good for wounds in the head. The inner woody shell has the Signature of the
Skull, and the little yellow skin, or Peel, that covers the Kernel of the
hard Meninga and Pia Matter, which are the thin scarfes that envelope the brain.
The Kernel has the very figure of the Brain, and therefore it is very
profitable for the Brain, and resists poisons; For if the Kernel be brui^ed,
and moystned with the quintessence of Wine, and laid upon the Crown of the
Head, it comforts the brain and head mightily. If the Peels be taken off, they
are thought to be good for the stomach, and somewhat loosing the belly: and
mixed with Sugar, they do nourish temperately, whilst they are new; but when
they begin to grow old, they grieve the Stomach, and cause in hot bodies choler
to abound, and the Headache, and are an enemy to those which have a Cough; but
they a^e less hurtful to those which have colder stomachs, and are said to
kill the broad Worms in the stomach or belly. They are reckoned in Sch^la
Salerni, for one of those (...) things which are good against poison

Allia, Ruta, Pyra, and Raphanus ^um Theri^c^ Nu^s,
Hac sunt A(...)tum contra mortale ventuum.
And true it is, that two dry Wall-nuts, and as many Figs, and twenty leaves of
Rue, bruised and beaten together, with two or three Co^^s of salt were King
Mithridates Medicine against poison, which afte^ he had long used daily, at
last he sought to poison himself, but could not. And no marvel for the water of
green Wall-nuts, taken about Midsummer, being drunk two or three ounces,
cools and resists the Pestilence. And the water of the outer Husks of
Wall-nuts being not rotten, distilled in September, is given to drink against
the Plague, with a little Vinegar as a certain experiment* and the juice of the
same, boiled up with Honey, is an excellent g^^gle for ^^re mouths, the heat
and inflammations in the throat or stomach. Though the old Kernels are not so
fit to be eaten, yet they are used to heal the wounds of the sinews, Gangrens,
and Carbuncles, and being mixed with Figs and Rue, they cure old Ulcers of the
Breasts, and other cold Imposthumes* with Rue and Oil, they are good to be laid
to the Quinsie. The leaves with Boars grease, stays the hair from falling,
and makes it fair: the like also will the green husks do, used in like manner.
A piece of the green husk, put into an hollow Tooth, eases the pains thereof.
Some use the green husks, and sometimes the young red leaves, dried and made
into powder, instead of Pepper, to season their meat; but if some dried Sage in
Powder be put into it, it will give a seasoning and relish, not to be despised
of poor folks. The Oil of Wall-nuts made in such manner, as Oil of Almonds,
makes smooth the hands and face, and takes away scales and scurf, black and
blew marks, that come of blows and bruises, and taken inwardly, it helps the
Colic, and expels Wind very effectually. Besides, it is far better for the
Painters use, to illustrate a white color than Linseed Oil, which deadeth it;
and is of singular good use, to be laid on gilded works. The young green Nuts
before they be half ripe, preserved whole in Sugar, are not only a dainty
Junket among other of the like nature, but are good for those that have weak
stomachs, and defluxions thereon. It is averred by some, that if a Wall-nut be
put into the belly of a Chicken, it will cause it to be roasted a great deal
the sooner. The Rind of the root, having the upper part scraped of, being made
into powder, and tempered with Vinegar, if it be strained two or three times,
till it be somewhat thin and clear, and drunk liberally, cures the Ague, and
cleanses the body very much.

CHAP. II. Of the Piony.
The Names.
THe Greeks call it. (...), the Latins also Peonia, and Dulcisida, in Shops
Pionia, in English Piony, or Peony, and of some Chesses^ It has also many
Bastard names, as R^s^ Fatuina, Herba C^sta, Hasta Regia, Rosa Asinarum, of
some, Luxaria, or Luxaria Peonia, because it cures those which have the
Falling Sickness, whom most men do call Lunatici, or Lunatic. It is called
Paonia, from Paon, a famous Physician, who doubtless found out some of the
Virtues, and admired them; but Glycysid^ or Dulcisid^ from the red grains in
the Pomgranat, which in Greek are called Sida, with which it has some
resemblance. It is also called Dactylu^ Ida^^, the (...) roots thereof being
like to Dactyli Id^i, which are certain precious stones, of the form of a man's
finger, growing in the Isle of Candy. It is likewise called Aglaophotis, or
brightly-shining, taking its name from the shining redness of the red grains
or seeds, which are of the color of Scarlet, of which there are many fabulous
traditions; but I shall forbear to mention them.

The Kind^.
The Sorts of Pionyes which I have met with, are in number 11. 1. The male
Piony. 2. The Female Piony. 3. Double Red Piony. 4. The double white Pyony. 5.
The Spanish Dwarf Piony. 6. Columbine leafed Pyony. 7. The party colored
Piony. 8. The female white Piony. 9. The female yellow Piony. 10. The doubtful
female Piony. 11. Certain, single, and double female Pionies, that sprang with
Clus^^^, of the seed of the double Red, which is not (...)all. All these forts,
except the female, are Plants so scarce, that they are possessed but by a few,
and those great Lovers of Rarities in this kind, and therefore I shall trouble
you only with the description of that.

The Form:
The ordinary Female Piony rises up with many stalks, which are at first of a
reddish color, and the young leaves like unto the young red leaves of the
Wallnut-Tree, which afterward turn into a dark or dead green color, and
become large. At the top of the stalks, are growing fair large red flours, like
the great double Rose of Provence; but that it is of a darker red, having also
in the midst, yellow Threads or Thrums like them in the Rose, which some take to
be the seed though falsely, which being faded and fallen away, there come in
their places two, three, or four rough crooked Pods, bending a contrary way, as
some Rams Horns do. The seeds are of a black shining color. The Root consists
of many thick and short tuberous bunches, fastened at the end of long strings,
and all from the Head of the Root, which is thick and short.

The Place and Time.
Most of the sorts aforesaid grow in the Physick-Garden in Oxford, and in some
Gardens about London and Westminster; but else they are scarce to be found,
except the double female, as I said, which grows in many Country Gardens, and
do flower usually about May, and their Seed is ripe in July.

The Temperature.
The Root of Piony, as Galen says, does gently bind with a kind of
sweetness, and has also joined with it a certain bitterish sharpness. It is
in temperature, not very notably hot, but according to our own Symmetry or
Constitution, or rather a little hotter, and it is dry, and of subtle parts.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Heads of the Flower of Piony, being not yet blown, have some Signature and
proportion with the Head of Man, having sutures and little vai(...) di^persed
up and down like unto those which environ the brain. When the(...)owers blow,
they open an outward little skin, representing the skull, and a(...)very
available against the Falling Sickness, which next to the Roots and seeds, are
of the greatest Virtue: but the Roots are most effectual; for it they be fresh
taken up, and hung about the neck of Children they cure it; but the ^ure^l way
both for them, and especially those which are elder, it to take the roots of
male Piony, if it be to be had, and i^fuse it in a sufficient proportion of
back, for four and twenty hours at least, being first washed clean, and stamped
very small; then strain it, and drink a good draught first and last, morning
and evening, for several days togethe^ before and (...) of the full of the
Moon; a ^^ue and orderly preparation of the Body aforehand, with Posset Drink
made of Be^ony, etc. being first had. The Extraction of the Roots, and the
Syrup made of the Flowers, does the same. The Root ^ndureth ten years, it
comfort and cherishes the body, provokes Urine, and purges the Liver and
Kidneys. Being boiled in Wine, and drunk, it purges the blood, and is good for
Women in Childbed, to purge their Seconds and Terms, as much as an Almond,
being taken at a time; it helps the gripings of the belly, the shedding of
the Gall, and the pain of the Kidneys and Bladder, coming by stopp^ng of the
Urine. The smoke of the little branches of the root, received in the nose,
puts away the Kings-Evill. The Root it self takes away blac^ spots of the
body. It is to be gathered in the wane of the Moon, when she is under the
Earth; and being ^odden in wine and drunk, it purges the Belly, helps the
Cholick, clean^eth the Guts, defends against fren^^es and passions of the
brain, the Strangury, and biting of Serpents; and the spleen; and having
Castoreum boiled with it, it helps the Palfie and the stone, but there must
be taken at once but four drams. The Powder of the Root drunk with White Wind,
eases the pains of the Reins and Bladder, and is good for the Ache of the
belly, having Saffron mixed with it, it is a ^ov^raign Med^ci^e for the yellow
Jaundies. The Male Piony has black shining seed, intermixed with many red or
crim on grains, which together make a very pretty show: Of which I observe,
that the black provoke Terms, and the red stop them, ^^ they be of that color.
The black taken night and morning, by those which are troubled with the disease
called the Nightmare, are very effectual. The Powder of the seeds, ministered
in meat and drink to Children, does send forth the stone beginning in them, and
is therefore good to be used of such as have it by Inheritance from their
Parents, by a tenure called ex Vitioso Semine: or else have gotten it by
purchase, ex Intemperantia: By which two ways most part of diseases grow. And
the said Powder drunk with Wine, restores the wits, comfort the senses, and
recovereth the speech. The distilled water, or Syrup, made of the flowers,
works the same effects that the Root and Seed do, though more weakly. Take
the Roots of Piony, and peel off the outward skins: take also Periwinckle
leaves, stamp and strain them with black Cherry-water, and let the Patient for
three mornings fasting, drink a good draught thereof; but if he mend not at
three times, let him drink it longer. This Receipt was approved by the Lady Cage.

CHAP. III. Of Poppie.
The Names.
THe general name, with which the Greeks have christened this Plant, is, (...);
which some of them say, comes a (...), non ministra^do, quod vescen^^s suis
muni^s fungi non p^ssu^^, Others think it comes (...) non a (...), quia ^jus
usus nimium infrigidet and hominibus tandem motum auferat, which in plain
English i^, Because it does so stupifie those that eat it, that they cannot go
about their bu^^nesse, or because the use of it does cool too much, and at
length make men insensible. The Garden White kind, is called (...) (and of
Diascorides (...) Thyl^^iti^, and the black seed is called (...)) hortens^ or
sativum: the wild kind is called P^^^ Rheas, that is, fluidum, because the
Flowers shead presently after they are blown; in Latin, Papaver, Rh(...)
^^ticum, rubr^m, or silvestre; Of us, in English, Poppy for the most part, yet
in some Countries it is called Redweed; in others Jone Silver Pin; Fair
without, and foul within, being understood: in others, Cheesebouls. Spatling
Poppy is called in Latin Papaver Sp^meum, in respect of that frothy spattle or
froth that is called Cuckow-spittle, with which the stalk and leaves of this
Plant abounds more then any other.

The Kinds.
There be several sorts of Poppies, some tame and of the Garden, as 1. The
white Garden Poppy. 2. The black Garden Poppy. 3. The double white Poppy. 4.
The double black Poppy. 5. The double purple Poppy. 6. The Scarlet double
Poppy. 7. Small double Poppy. 8. Wild double Poppy, Others, wild and of the
field, as 1. Yellow horned Poppy. 2. Red Poppy, or Corn-rose. 3. Little red
Poppy or Corn-rose. 4. Wild Poppy, with a white flower. 5. Murry colored
Poppy, like the commonest single of the Garden. 6. Party colored Poppy. Some
spatling, as 1. Behe^ Album, or white Battle. 2. Elegant spatling Poppy, with
gilded leaves. Others bastard, called in Latin Argement. As 1. Round headed
bastard wild Poppy. 2. Long headed bastard wild Poppy. 3. Yellow wild
bastard Poppy of Wale^. To trouble you with the Descriptions of every one of
these, would be tedious. I shall therefore describe only the spatling Poppy,
the others being better known.

The Form.
Spatling Poppy (which does very little resemble any other Poppy, but only the
Seed, and Cod, or Bowl wherein the seed is contained) has diverse weak tender
stalks, full of joints, about a foot or half a yard long, usually lying on the
ground, whereon grow many pale whitish green leaves, two always let together
at the joints, one against another; having many times upon the leaves, but more
often about the joints of the stalks, a certain white frothy substance, like
unto that is called Cuckow-spittle, or Wood-seer: at the tops of the stalks
upon many slender footstalk, stand diverse white flowers, composed of five
small leaves a piece, with a deep notch in the middle of every one of them,
standing in a thin loose stripped husk, wherein the black seed is afterward
contained: the root is white, and spreads in the ground, continuing sundry
years.

The Place and Time.
Many of the Garden-Poppies are to be found in Country Gardens; but the yellow
horned Poppie grows upon the sands and banks of the Sea, near unto Rye in
Kent; in the Isles of Sheppy and Thanet, and in many other places along the
English Coast, with the other wild Poppies every Corn-field is garnished, as
also with spatling Poppy, which sometimes grows in Pastures, and
high-way-sides; the Elegant spatling Poppy, with gilded Leaves, grows in
Womersly field in Yorkshire. Argemone grows in So^^rsetshire, and near
South-fleet in Kent. The white Corn-Rose grows amongst the Wheat, between
Pontfract and Ferry-Bridge. They begin flowring in May, and continue till the
end of July: the seed of them is ripe presently after. The Roots of all, except
the spatling Poppy, perish every year, and spring again either of their own or
others sowing.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Heads of the Poppies, with their Crowns do somewhat represent the Head and
Brain, and therefore the decoctions of them are used with good success in
several diseases of the Head. The Garden Poppy Heads with the seeds, made into
a Syrup, procures rest and sleep in the sick and weak, and stays Catarrhs
and de^luxions of hot thin Rheumes from the head, into the stomach, and upon
the Lungs, causing a continual Cough, which is the forerunner of a
Consumption. The green Knops of Poppy stamped with Barley Meal, and a little
Barrows-grease, and applied in the form of a Pultis, helps St. Autho^ies
fire, called Ignis Sacer. The Leaves, Knops, and Seeds stamped with Vinegar,
Woman's milk, and Saffron, cures Erysipelas (another kind of St. Anthonies
fire) and eases the Gou^ mightily; and, put into the Fundament as a Clyster,
causes sleep. The seed of black Poppy drunk in Wine, stops the Flux of the
be^ly, and the overmuch flowing of Women's sickness. Mr. Culpepper says, that
it is the juice of white Poppy growing in England, which they sell for Opium in
the Shops, though they pretend to have it out of the Eastern Countries, where
they gather it only from the heads of the great white Poppy; but certainly his
Pen run before his Wit, when he said it grew beyond the Moon: for there is no
question, but that it is so gathered in those parts, and should be that which
is used in Narcotick Medicines, though perhaps, for want of it, our Meconium
(which is the juice of Poppy thickened, and is much weaker) is sometimes used.
It is an ingredient of much respect in those great Compositions of Treacle and
Mithridate, and in other Medicines that are made to procure rest and sleep; and
to ease the pains of the head, as well as other parts, or rather to palliate
them, and make them insensible for the time present; It is used also both to
cool Inflammations, Agues, o^ Phrensies, and generally for the same occasions,
as the seed or any part of the Plant is; but if it be taken in too great a
quantity, it causes the Lethargy, and sometimes kills, and therefore it is
to be used with caution inwardly: diverse have found, that applied to the Gout,
it has given much ease, and, put into hollow teeth cease their pain. The
Syrup of Meconium or Diacodium, which is made of the heads of white and black
Poppies, a little after the heads are fallen off, may safey be given to those
which are troubled with hot and sharp Rheums, but not to young Children which
are froward; for if Nurses would keep their own bodies temperate, their
Children would sleep well enough without it. The Syrup made of the Flowers of
the red wild Poppy, is with good effect given to those which have a Plurisie,
and the dried Flowers also, either boiled in water, or made into Powder, and
drunk either in the distilled water of t^em, or in some other drink, works
the like effect: the same also is available in all other Cephalicall or
Pectorall griefs. The distilled water of the said Flowers, is held to be of
much good use against surfeits, to drink it evening and morning: it is also
more cooling in quality, then any other Poppy, and therefore cannot but be as
effectual in hot Agues, Phrensies, and other Inflammations, either inward or
outward, but the seed is dangerous to be used inwardly. The Syrup aforesaid is
thus made. Take of the fresh Flowers or red Poppies two pound, steep them in
four pound of warm Spring Water, the next day strain it, and boil it into a
Syrup, with its equal weight of Sugar. It cools the blood, helps Surfeits, and
may be safely given in Phrensies, Fevers, and hot Agues. The Seed of Spatling
Poppy purges Phlegm, said Gal^n, and causes vomitings, says Dioscorides,
being taken in Mead, or honyed water, and is especially good for those that are
troubled with the Falling Sickness. It was the head of this Poppy; about the
time it was in flower, which the Greeks called (...), because it does foreshew,
as they conceived, the success of their love: For these Flowers, the tops being
closed together with ones fingers, seem like little Bladders, which being
broken against ones other hand, make a noise like unto the Bladders of little
Fishes, being broken: If they gave a good report, they concluded, they should
be succesful; if not, they presently let fall their suit: so superstitious were
those people, as some in our days be. The leaves of Argem^ne, or Bastard wild
Poppy stamped, and the juice dropped into the eyes, eases the Inflammation
thereof, and cures the Disease in the Eye, called Argema, whereof it took his
name by signature: which Disease, when it happens on the black of the Eye,
appears white; and contrariwise, when it appears on the white of the Eye,
it appears black. The Herb being stamped, and made into a Salve or Ointment,
with Oyl-wax, and a little Turpentine, ^ealeth any wound, Ulcer, Canker, or
Fistula. The leaves only bruised and applied to any part that is black and blew
with a blow, brings it to its right color. The juice of the Leaves and Roots
stamped, and given in drink, helps the wringings and gripings of the Belly;
and so does the dry Herb infused in warm water. The juice, taken in the weight
of two drams with Wine, mightily expels Poison, or any Venom. Warts rubbed
therewith, wear away, and being taken in meat; it helps the Milt or Spleen,
if it be wasted:

CHAP. IV. Of Squills.
The Names.
IT is called by the Greeks (...), and of some Latins also Scilla; but Varro
calls it Squilla, whose example makes it to be so called in the Shops; diverse
call it Cepa maris, for the similitude it has with an Onyon. In English it is
called Squill, and Sea-Onyon. There is a sort of this which the Greeks call
(...), the Latins Pancratium, the English the white Sea-Daffodil, or
Sea-Onyon, and of some Narcissus Constantinopolitanus, of others Hemorocallis
Valentina, and of the Turks, Consambach.

The Kinds.
Gerrard reckons up four sorts hereof. 1. Squill or Sea-Onyon. 2. Sea-Onyon
of Valentia. 3. Red flowred Sea-Daffodil. 4. Yellow flowred Sea-Daffodill.
Every one of which in Latin he calls Pancratium.

The Form.
The Root of Squill is very bulbous, and has diverse Coats, or scaly films, one
within another, like the ordinary Onyon: out of which, as in Saffron, the stalk
does first spring forth; then out of that arises a white and yellow Flower,
which being waxen old after many days, it puts forth very great and broad
leaves, upheld by no foot-stalk, many of them turning down again toward the
Earth.

The Place and Time.
The first (for that is it which I have described, and is to be used upon the
occasion ensuing) is found growing in Spain and Italy, not far from the
Seaside; but may be had at most Apothecaries Shops in England. The second
grows near unto Valentia in Spain, and therefore is so called, as also about
Constantinople. The third about the Coasts of Narbone. The fourth about Tripoly
and Aleppo. Gerrard says, that they flower from May, to the end of July; and
their Seed is ripe in the end of August; but Fuchsius says, that they flower
thrice a year, and for this he quotes Theophrastus, lib. 7. cap. 12.

The Temperature.
The Sea-Onyon is hot in the second degree, and is of a very cutting quality
which may be taken away, if it be baked in Past or Clay, or roasted in ho^
Embers.

The Signature and Virtues.
The bulbous Root of the Squill, with its many Coats, or scaly films, does
resemble the head, which consists of diverse Membranes, one within another, and
is very effectual in diverse distempers thereof, but especially the
Falling Sickness, Headache, and dizinesse: It heals also all running sores of
the Head, and the scurf Scales or Bran, being laid thereunto. If it be taken
with Honey and Oil, it drives out Worms, both long and round, cleanses the
breast, drives away old Coughs, lengtheneth the breath, and looseneth the
Belly very gently, and so do the seeds taken with Figgs or Honey. A Scale or
two of the green raw Root, laid under the Tongue quenches the thirst in the
Dropsy: Being boiled in Vinegar till it be tender, and stamped, it cures all
venomous bitings, i^ it be applied to them. Sees the inner part in Oil or
Turpentine, and apply it to the chaps of the feet, kibed heels, or hanging
warts, and it heals them. The leaves do dissolve and waste: the Kings-Evill
and Kernels about the throat, being laid thereunto, for the space of four
days, half a dram of the Root roasted, baked, or sodden (for it may not be
taken raw inwardly) is sufficient to be taken at once with Honey, for the
Jaundies; the old Cough, shortness of the Wind, and gnawing in the body. It is
good for the griefs of the Sinews, Breast, Lungs, and Joints, especially licked
in with Honey, it makes a clear voice. It helps the hardness, stopping and
swelling of the Milt, and withstandeth Putrefaction in the Body; and therefore
keeps a man in health, and makes his Body continue in young state, only it
will make a Man lean. Sanius, by the use of the Vinegar of Squills, lived in
perfect health till an hundred and seventeen years of age. If one take it in
the morning fasting, and walk half an hour after, it makes the digestion good,
a long wind, a clear voice, an acute sight, a good color, it suffers no
offensive thing to remain in the Body: neither Wind, Phlegm, Choler, Melancholy,
Dung, nor Urine: It brings forth filth, though it lie in the bones; and takes
away salt, and sour belchings, though he be never so intemperate, as Galen
says: It helps the Sciatica, and Apoplexy, breaks and expels the Stone,
and cleanses the Matrix; Being taken in the quantity of a spoonful, it does
away the Hickets. It is reported, that wheresoever this Plant grows, it
keeps its Neighbour-Plants from annoyance, and that whatsoever door, or chief
entry of the House it be hung over, it keeps the same from all mishap,
Witchcraft and Sorcery. It has been observed, that when the Flowers of the
Sea-Onyon be of a brownish color, and do not soon fade away, that year shall
be very fruitful and plentiful of Corn. The way which the Apothecaries do or
should use in ordering it, is this. That is to be taken especially which is in
the midst, which being cut in pieces, must be boiled; but the water still to be
changed, till such time as it is neither bitter nor sharp: then must the pieces
be hanged on a thread, so that no one piece touch another, and dried in the
shadow, and being thus ordered, they will last a good while.

CHAP. V. Of the Larch-Tree, with his Agarick and Turpentine.
THis Tree is called in Greek (...), in Latin also Larix, in English
Larch-Tree, and of some Larix-Tree. The Agarick is called in Greek (...), in
Latin Agaricum and Agaricus, and so likewise in Shops. The Italians,
Spaniards, and other Nations, do imitate the Greek word, and we in English call
it Agarick. The Liquid, Rozen, or Turpentine, is by the Greeks called (...), in
Latin Larix Resina Laricea, or Larigna, or Terbinthina Venetia, in English,
Turpentine, and Venice Turpentine.

The Form.
The Larch-Tree is almost as tall as the Pine or Firr-Tree, but not quite, with
a Body growing straight up, as they do: the Bark whereof is thick rugged, and
and full of chaps, which being cut in sunder is red within, but the bark
amongst the boughs is smooth, slippery, and somewhat white without: the
branches grow one above another in a comely Order, having diverse small yellow
knobs or bunches set at several distances, from whence arise many small leaves
growing in clusters thick together like tassells, which fall away at the
approach of Winter, and gain fresh every spring; which is peculiar only to this
Tree of all the Rosen bearing Trees. The blossoms are very beautiful and
delectable, being of an excellent fine Crimson Color, and very sweet, which
afterward turn into small soft Cones, like unto Cypress Nuts while they are
close, but longer then they; being made up of a multitude of thin Scales like
leaves, under which ly small seeds having a thin filme growing on them very
like to the wings of Bees or Wasps: the substance of the wood is very hard, of
color somewhat red, especially that which is in the middle, and very
profitable for works of long continuance. Yet that report that the wood of the
Larch Tree cann^^ be set on fire is false, it being preferred before all other
wood, for all (...)these work, and for Miners to melt the Ore of Metal, because
it holds fire longest and strongest, by reason of the Rosen that is in it.
The Agarick which grows on this Tree, is a kind of Mushrome or Excrescence,
not such as is upon other Trees; but covered with a hard blackish bark which
being cut and pared away that which is underneath is whiter, softer, more loose
and pongy then any other of the Mushromes; that is the best which may easily be
broken, and is light, and in the first taste sweet, hard and well compact; that
which is heavy, blackish, containing in it little threads like sinews is counted
pernicious and deadly. The liquid Rosen that proceeds from this Tree, is very
like in color and substance to the whiter honey, as that of Athens or Spain,
which notwithstanding issues not forth of it self; but runs out of the
Stock of the Tree when it has been bored to the very heart with a great and
long Augur or Wimble. It is commonly called Venice Turpentine, though the true
Turpentine issue from the tree Terebinthus. The figure of this Larch Tree, with
the Agarick growing upon it, you may see lively represented either in Gerrard
or Parkinson.

The Place and Time.
The Larch Tree grows in many woods about Trent and Brixia in Italy, and near
the river Benacus, and Padus, and in Galatia a Province of Asia, as Dioscorides
and Galen do record, and in Agaria a country of Sarmatia, from whence the
Agarick took the name; in Silesia also, Moravia, Lusatia; As the Agarick is
gathered in most of these places, so is the Turpentine, but especially from the
woods about Trent. Of all the Cone trees this only is found with out leaves in
the Winter; in the Spring, grow fresh Leaves out of the same knobs from which
the former did fall. The Cones are to be gathered before winter so soon as the
leaves are gone; for, after the scales are loosed and opened, and the seeds
drop away. The Rosen or Turpentine is to be gathered in the hottest part of the
Summer, and the Agarick toward the latter end of the year, but in November and
December especially.

The Temperature.
The leaves, bark, fruit, and kernel are of a dry and binding temperature. The
Agarick is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second: It cutteth, makes
thin, cleanses, takes away obstructions and stoppings of the Entrails, and
purges by stool; The Rosen of this Tree is moister then any other Rosen* and
without either that sharpness or biting which some of the others have,

The Signature and Virtues.
Agarick, whose copped form holds out the Signature of the Head, being boiled
in Lie with other Cephalical helps, comfort the brain and memory very much;
It is good for the giddiness of the head if it be washed therewith, as also to
stay the rheums and catarrhs thereof, and cleanses it much from scurfe and
Dandraffe, being taken with the syrup of Vinegar, it is good against the pains
and swimmings of the head, or the falling sickness. It purges phlegm Choler
and Melancholy from the Brain, Nerves, Muscles, Marrow of the Back; it
cleanses the Breast, Lungs, Liver, Stomach, Spleen, Reins, Womb, Joints, it
provokes Urine and the Terms, kills Worms, helps pains in the Joints and
causes a good color; It is very seldom or never taken alone, because it does
somewhat trouble the stomach, and therefore I shall set down a receipt or two,
The first is the syrup of Roses solutire with Agarick. Take of Agarick cut thin
an ounce, Ginger two drach^^s, Sal Gem. one drach. Polypodium bruised 2.
ounces, sprinkle them with white Wine, and steep them two days over warm
Ashes, in a pound and a half of the infusion of Damask Roses, and with two
pound of Sugar boil it into a Syrup; It cures the yellow I amdies proceeding
of obstructions, and is a sure remedy for Agnes and cold shakings, which are
caused of thick and cold humors: It purges phlegm from the Head, relieves the
senses oppressed by it, it provokes the Terms in Women, it purges the stomach
and Liver and provokes Urine. All the aforesaid virtues are attributed to the
Pills of Hier^ with Agarick, which are made as follows. Take of Species Hiera
Pic^a, Agarick of each half anounce, Aloes one ounce, Honey, Roses, so much as
is sufficient to make into a Mass according to Art. Of this you may safely
take a scruple at night going to bed, having eat a light supper three hours
before; and you may safely go about your business the next day, for it will
work very gently, and therefore you may continue taking it a week together, for
it will not work much the first time, and consequently affect little. Some give
it only with Oxymel, which is a syrup made with Vinegar and Honey, and so it
cures all sorts of Agues, either Tertians or Quotidians, eases the griping
pains of the stomach and belly, or such as have had falls or bruises, or are
bursten bellyed, all which actions it chiefly performs, by purging those
gross and vicious humors that trouble the parts, and Members of the Body, and
are causes of all these diseases. It is good against shortness of breath, the
inveterate cough of the Lungs, the Ptisick, Consumption, and those that spit
blood; Half a drach. or two scruples being taken in Wine, either by infusion,
or the powder, is an Antidote against all Poisons, and cures the bitings of
Serpents very quickly; It is applied also outwardly for the same purpose. The
Rosen or Turpentine of this Tree, taken to the quantity of an ounce will gently
open the belly, and more to the stool, provoke Urine, cleanse the Reins,
Kidneys and Bladder and helps to break and avoid the g^avel and stone, and
eases those which have the stone: if it be first washed with Plantane or Rose
Water, then made in Pills with the powder of white Amber, Red Coral, Mastick
and a little Camphir, it does wonderfully help to purge and cleanse the reins,
and stop the running of them. Being taken with honey it helps to expectorate
rotten phlegm, from those which are troubled with a continual Cough, and is
profitable also for the Ptisick or Consumption of the Lungs. This Turpentine as
it is clearest for inward uses and serves instead of the true Turpentine, so
well that they are commonly used out for another: so is it best also for
outward salves, and does both draw, cleanse, and heal all sores or ulcers, and
green wounds; and therefore there is scarce a salve for that purpose wherein
Turpentine is not. Oil drawn Chymically from Turpentine is singular good to be
used in wounds, being more drying and consolidating then the Turpentine it
self, as also to warm and ease the pains of the Joints and Sinews caused of
Cold, and being mixed with a little Ox Gall, it is good for the worms, and
deafness of the ears. The water which is distilled with the Oil, is used for
freckles and spots in the face, and a scruple weight of it taken in white Wine
purges phlegm by Vomit* Some use to mingle Bay Salt and Turpentine together,
and therewith spread a leathern girdle, which being worn about the wast of them
that have the Itch cures them: So Parkinson: it being an Excrescence, is good
for all manner of excrescences by Signature.

CHAP. VI. Of Wood Betony.
The names.
SOme of the Greeks call it (...): others (...) because it joyeth most in cold
places. Ruellius in his translation of Dioscorides calls it Cestron
^sychotrophon; the Latins call it Betonica and Vetonica, from the Vetones a
people of Spain, that first found out the virtues of it, as Pliny says. We in
England call it Wood Betony, and it has been formerly called Betayne, or
Betaine; Parkinson ad^erti^eth, that Vetonica and Betonica are diversely taken
in diverse Authors: for Vetonica, although it be set down in some Authors for
Betonica, yet more properly and usually it is understood to be the
Caryophylius, or Gilliflower, and then it is denominated Vetonica altilis.

The Kinds.
Of this Betony (for of the Water Betony I shall not treat in this place
because it is more appropriated to other parts) there are four or five sorts
differing one from another either in the leaf or flower. 1. Common Wood Beton^
which has a purple flower, 2. Wood Betony with white flowers, 3 Betonica
minima, Alpina Helvetica, Small Mountain Betony, 4. Betonica Danica,
Broad-leaved Betony, 5. Betonica Alopecuros montana dicta, Foxtail Betony That
which I shall describe, is the Common Wood-Betony.

The Form^:
The ordinary or Common Betony, which because it is most frequent in Woods, is
called Wood Betony, it has many leaves rising from the root, the lowermost
whereof are somewhat broad and round at the ends, slightly indented about the
edges, the footstalks being pretty long; but those that grow by two and two at
the joints upon the small slender foursquare and somewhat hairy stalks are a
great deal lesser. The stalk is commonly near a foot high, whereon are set
several spiked heads of flowers, of a reddish or purple color spotted with
white spots all over: the seeds are somewhat long, and uneven, and of a
blackish color. The root consists of many white threddy strings like unto
those of Plantain, the stalk perishes, but the roots with some leaves thereon
abide all the Winter, the whole plant is somewhat small, and therefore Gerard
was mistaken, who says that it has long and broad leaves.

The Place and Time.
The Common Betony loves shadowie places, as Woods, hedg-rows, Copses, the
borders of pastures, Parks, etc. That with the white flower, is more usually
found in stiff clay grounds then in any other mould, as in the VVoods by
Brumley in Kent, in a wood near a Village called Hampsteed, and in Broodsworth
VVood in Yorkshire. The third grows on the Alps of Helvetia, or
Switzerland. The broad leaved or Danish Betony grows in the Physic Garden at
Oxford. The last, as Lugdunensis says, grows in the moist valleys that are
shadowed with trees of the high hills; They flower and flowrish for the most
part, in the months of June and July, and the seed ripeneth quickly after.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Betony, though it grow wild, yet it is set in many Gardens, and is hot and
dry almost, if not quite in the second degree. The virtues of it are
innumerable, (as Antonius Musa, one of the Physicians of Augustus Caesar, who
has written a peculiar Book of this Herb, does testify) but especially it is
good for the brain, so that as Fernelius writes, Cerebrum vel odore
solorecreat, hinc Comiti^libus furiosisque medetur, Paralysin, torpentiaque
membra persanat. The hairy Roots of this Herb are some Signature, that it is
good for the head: If it be stamped and applied to the forehead of them that
are frantic, or possessed with Devils, it cures them: Boil it with Vervein and
Wormwood in water, and wash the head therewith, and grind the same Herbs with
some of the water, and Wheaten Bran, and apply it hot to the mould of the head
thrice, and it will cause the Headache to depart. Sees it with, Vervein,
Hore-hound, and Hysop, in White Wind, and apply them as liot as may be
suffered, and it cures the Megrim, which is a pain that possesses one side of
the head. If the Headache proceed of cold Phlegm, sees Betony in Wine, with a
third part of water, and apply it: For noyses in the head, pains, and giddiness
thereof, drink powder, of the leaves dried in the shade, or rather eat it with
slices of bread, steeped in Wine first and last, to restore the brain, which is
done likewise, by taking some of the powder of it in Pottage: and thus, or
green, it helps those that loath their meat; for it procures digestion, and
allayeth the sour belchings and risings in the stomach, if it be used often.
The Leaves, or Flowers, boiled in broth and drunk, or made into a Conserve,
Water, Electuary, or Powder, as any one shall like best, do help the Jaundies,
Falling Sickness, the Palsy, Con^ulsions, or shrinking of the Sinews, the
Gout, and those which are inclined unto Dropsies, those that have continual
pains in their head, though it turn to Frenzy. The Powder mixed with pure
Honey, is no less available for all sorts of Coughs or Colds, wheesing or
shortness of breath, and those Distillations upon the Lungs, which cause
Consumptions. A dram of it taken in the Syrup of Vinegar, does wonderfully
refresh those which are wearied by travel: it stays bleeding at the mouth and
nose, and helps those that piss blood, or spit it. The Decoction of it being
made with Mead, and a little Pennyroyal, is good for those that are troubled
with Quartan Agues, and to draw down and evacuate the blood and humors, that
by falling into the eyes, do hinder sight. Being boiled in Wine, and taken, it
kills the Worms, opens obstructions of Spleen and Liver, cures stitches
and pains in the back or sides, the torments and griping pains of the Bowels,
and the Wind-Cholick, mixed with Honey, it purges the Belly, helps to bring
down Women's Courses, and is of special use for them that are troubled with the
falling down of the Mother, and pains thereof, and causes an easy and speedy
delivery of Women in Childbirth: it helps also to break and expel the Stone,
either in the Bladder or Kidneys* Cum multis aliis qua nunc perscribere longum
est.

CHAP. VII. Of Sage.
The Names.
SAge is called in Greek (...). The pale, ash-colored, dry and withered
deformity of the Leaves of Sage, especially on the dry and burnt Hills in the
hot Countries, where it naturally grows, was the Reason why it was so called,
it signifying scorched, or consumed, by blasting; for (...) does signify
interquere and contrahi, to be drawn together, or wound with it self; and (...)
or rather (...) does signify that Disease in Plants which the Latins call
Sideratia, a blasting, that is, when the Sun in the Dogdayes, through its
extreme heat, or otherwise pierces into it, and drying up the moisture that
nourishes it, seems to grow faint and dry, or, as it were scorched. The
Latins call it Salvia, quia salvos homines and incolumes efficit, because it
makes them safe and sound in health. And hence it comes, that in Schola
Salerni, it is demanded, Cur moriatur homo, cui Salvia crescit in borto? As who
should say, such is the virtue of Sage, that if it were possible, it would make
a man immortal: And Sage in English, from the property in comforting, and
strengthening the Head and memory, to make men sage or wise, of the French word
Sauge.

The Kinds.
Of Sage, I find no less then a dozen sor^^. 1. Our ordinary Garden Sage,
which is sub-divided into two sorts of party colored Sage, the one white and
green; the other whitish, red, and green, in most of the leaves. 2. Great white
Sage. 3. Great Sage of Candy, with broad and narrow leaves, and bearing Ears
and Apples, and that bea^ (...). 4. Small Sage, Sage of virtue, or Pig-Sage. 5.
The sweetest small Spanish Sage, with Ears: 6. Small Candy Sage without Ears.
7. Small red flowred Sage. 8. Small Woolly Sage. 9. Round leaf. 10. The greater
narrow white Sage, with yellow leaves. 11. French or yellow wild Sage, with
broad leaves. 12. Small yellow Sage of Candy. The three last sorts have been by
some recorded to be Mullein; but they were mistaken, for as much as the Flowers
of Mullein never gape as these do.

The Form.
Our ordinary Sage bears foursquare Woody stalks, in some whiter green, in
others redder as the Leaves are also, standing by couples at the joints being
somewhat long and broad, rough and wrinckled, of a strong sweetish scent; At
the tops of the stalks come forth the flowers set at certain Spaces one above
another, which are long and gaping, like unto the flowers of Pary or
Deadnettle, but of a bluish purple color: after which come small round Seed
in the husk that bore the flower; the root is woody with diverse strings at it:
it is more usually propagated by Slips then of the Seeds.

The Place and Time.
Many of the foresaid sorts grow in the Physic Gardens at Westminster and
Oxford, but the third will not abide with us, nor ever bear those Apples, their
natural soil being in the hot Countries of Egypt, Candy, etc. They do for the
most part flower in July, yet some of them flower not until August; All of them
also do bear seed, except Pigge Sage, or Sage of Virtue, which seldom or never
bears any.

The Temperature:
Sage is hot and dry in the third Degree, and is commonly used in Sawces, as to
stuff Veal, Pork, rosting Pigges, and that for good cause, for it dries up
the superfluous moisture wherewith they abound, and stirs up appetite, and
is somewhat of a binding quality.

The Signature and Virtues.
The leaves of Sage which look as if they were scorched by blasting, do by
Signature give help to those parts of a man's body that seem to be as it were
dead by some blasting, in restoring the natural heat and vigor to the part: in
which quality it excels, giving a friendly and beneficial Comfort to the
Vital Spirits. This herb has many rare properties, but three especially which
are contained in these following Verses.

Salvia confortat Nervos, manuumque tremorem
Tollit; et ejus open, febris acuta fugit:
Sage helps the Nerves; and, by its powerful might,
Palsies and Fevers sharp it puts to flight.
Sage is of excellent good use, also to help the memory by warming and
quickening the Senses, and the Conserve made of the flowers is used to the same
purpose; The eating of Sage in the month of May with Butter, Parsley, and some
salt is very commendable for the continuation of health to the Body; as also
Sage-Ale made with it, Rosemary and other good Herbs, is good for ^eeming
women, such as are subject to miscarry through the ^oo much moisture ^r
slipperinesse of their Wombs. Ga^gles likewise are made with Sage, Rosemary,
Honysuckles, and Plantain boiled in water or wine, with some Honey or Allome put
thereto to wash Cankers, sore Mouths and Throats, or the secret parts of Man or
Woman, as need requires. And with other hot and comfortable herbs to be
boiled, to serve for the bathing of the Body or Legs in the summer time,
especially to warm the cold Joints or Sinews of young and old, troubled with
the Palsy or Cramp, and to comfort and strengthen the parts. The red Sage is
much commended against the Stich or pains in the side coming of wind, if the
grieved place be fomented warm with the decoction thereof in wine, and the herb
after the boiling be laid warm also there^o. At all times be sure you wash
your Sage, for fear that the Toades, who as I conceive come to it to relieve
themselves being overcharged with poison, should leave some of their ve^om upon
the Leaves, the danger whereof is upon record; and therefore it is good to
plant Rue amongst your Sage, and then they will not come near it. Being steeped
in drink close covered all night, it is good against infection, especially if
Rue be added thereunto, as witnesses Schola Salerni.

Sivia cum Ruta faciunt tibi pocula tuta. CHAP. VIII. Of Rosemary.
The names.
THe Greeks call it, (...) because it has a smell somewhat like unto
Frankincense, which they call, (...) and usually the Epithet of (...) is added
thereunto which signifies Coronaria in Latin, to distinguish it from the
other, (...) which are umbelliferous plants and grow only in the Gardens of
Herbarists as in Mr. Morgans Garden at Westminster, etc. The Latins
Rosmarinus, and Rosmarinum (Quasi Rosa marina according to some) and so do the
shops. The Garden Rosemary is called Rosmarinum Coronarium, the rather because
Women have been accustomed to make Crowns and Garlands thereof. The flowers are
called (...) and the composition made of them, Dianthos.

The Kinds.
There was formerly but one sort of Rosemary known, but now we have more
diversity. As 1. Ordinary Rosemary. 2. Gilded Rosemary. 3. Broadleafed
Rosemary. 4. Double flowered Rosemary. 5. Wild sweet S^lesia Rosemary. 6.
Unsavory Wild Rosemary. 7. Our wild Rosemary. 8. The Poets Rosemary or Guard
robe; so called, because the people of Granado Montpelier, and the Kingdom of
Valentia, do use it in their Presses and Wardrobes, and call it Guard^lobo.

The Form.
Though ordinary Garden Rosemary, be so well known that I shall scarce need to
describe it, yet it being a plant of so great use, I shall not so much slight
it, as to let it go without a description. It is a woody shrub growing
oftentimes to the height of three or four Cubits, especially when it is set by
a wall, and has stood there a long time; the Stem is of a close firm
substance and whitish, branching forth into sundry arms, and from them again in
to many slender brittle branches, at the Joints whereof are set at several
distances, many long and very narrow Leaves, green above and grayish
underneath, somewhat hard, and of a quick spicy taste with a pleasant sweet
strong smell; and with them all along the stalks toward the tops diverse small
gaping flowers, of a pale bleak bluish Color standing in whitish husks: the
Seed is small and of a color between black and red, but seldom does any that
is sowed in England endure the first Winter without extraordinary Care, and
therefore is usually increased by setting the slips thereof.

The Place and Time.
The Ordinary Rosemary, as also that with the gilded Leaves are no Strangers
here in England, for they are to be found in most Gardens, though their natural
soil be in France, Spain, and other hot Countries. In that part of France which
is called Provence, it grows of it self without setting, and is used for a
common fuel. There is so great plenty of it likewise in Spain, that the Odor
of it, is many times smelt by those in the Ships that pass by, many leagues
off from the Land. The third and fourth, is found only in the Gardens of
Herbarists. The fifth and sixth in Silesia, Bohemia, and the parts thereabouts.
The seventh grows in Yorkshire, but especially in Lan^^sh^re in a field
called little Reed amongst the Hurtle berries, near unto a small Village,
called Maudsley. The last grows in great abundance, in Narbone ^pain, and
Italy. The first flowreth in April, and May, and sometime in August again, the
others not until August, except our wild Ro^emary which flowereth in June and
July.

The Temperature.
Rosemary is hot and dry in the second degree, and also of an astringent or
binding quality, as being compounded of diverse parts, and taking more of the
mixture of the earthly substance.

The Virtues.
It is given against all fluxes of blood* it is also good, especially the
flowers thereof for all infirmities of the head and brain, proceeding of a
moist cause; for they dry the brain, quicken the senses and memory, and
strengthen the sinew part. It helps all cold diseases of the Head, Stomach,
Liver, and Belly, with its warming and comforting heat. To cleanse and comfort
the Stomach, and to make a sweet breath, use it in this manner; Take Rosemary
with the flowers or without, a handful or more, sees it in white Wine a good
space and put thereto if you please a little Cinnamon, then drink it and wash
your mouth therewith, the same without Cinnamon makes the skin very clear; and
therefore is good to wash the hands and face with. It helps also cold Rheumes
falling down into the Eyes, the giddiness or swimming of the head, the dumb
palsy or loss of speech, the Lethargy and falling Sickness if it be drunk,
and the temples bathed therewith. It is a remedy for the windiness in the
Stomach or bowels, and expels it powerfully, as also the Hypochondriack
passion and wind in the Spleen: it helps all those that are Livergrown by
opening the obstructions thereof, by warming the coldness, extenuating the
grosseness, and afterward binding and strengthening the weakness thereof. The
Flowers and the Conserve made of them are singular good to comfort the heart,
and to expel the Contagion of the Pestilence, and it is good to burn the
branches of it, in infectious times. Both flowers and leaves are very
profitable for Women that are troubled with the Whites, if they be daily taken.
The dried Leaves being cut and taken in a Tobacco Pipe helps them that have
any Cough, Tissick or Consumption by warming and drying the thin Distillations,
which cause those Diseases. The Chymicall Oil drawn from the Leaves and flowers
is a Sovereign help for all the diseases aforesaid, if the Temples and
Nostrills be but touched with a drop or two, it helps the head and brain, and
so it does any cold benummed-Joynt, Sinew, or member, if it be anointed with
two or three drops thereof: Great care is to be taken in applying it to inward
griefs, for it is very quick and piercing, and therefore but a very little is
to be taken at once.

CHAP. IX. Of Lavander.
The Names.
I Doubt very much, whether this Plant were at all known unto the Grecians,
because I cannot find it in Dioscorides, or any ancient or modern Greek
Author to be so much as mentioned, though I have sought diligently for it. It
is called in Latin Lavandula and Lavendula, and of some Lavanda, quia lavacris
expetitur, because it is used in Baths, and in washing of the hands for the
sweetness of the smell. The ordinary great Lavender is called by Matthiolus,
Nardus-Italica, and Pseudonardus. Tragus calls it Spica, and Nardus
Germanica; but most Authors call the greater Lavendula, major and mas, as they
do the lesser, minor and faemina. It is by some called Spikenard, because it
gives a favor, somewhat like to the true Spikenard; and by others, the female
of this here is held to be Lavender, and Spike-the-male.

The Kinds.
There are two sorts of Lavender as I said before, that is, a greater and a
lesser. Of the lesser there be three sorts, 1. Small Lavender or Spike, with
purplish blew Flowers. 2. Small white Lavender or Spike, with a white Flower.
3. Jagged Lavender.

The Form:
Ordinary Garden Lavender has a hard woody stem, parted into many small
branches, whereon are set whitish, long and narrow leaves, by couples one
against another, from among which, rise up naked square stalks, with two leaves
at a joint; and at the tops, diverse small husks standing round about them,
formed in long round heads or spikes, with bluish gaping Flowers, springing
out of each of them: the root is woody, and spreads in the ground: the whole
Plant is of a strong sweet smell, but especially the heads of Flowers, which
are much used to be put into linen and apparel, as also into Nosegayes or
Posies, because they are very pleasing and delightful to the brain, which is
much refreshed with its sweetness, as on the contrary side it is very much
offended with evil smells. I know not whether it would bear seed or not, it
being so usually gathered by our Country women for the purposes aforesaid,
before it come to maturity; and therefore it must necessarily be propagated by
slips, as Rosemary and Sage usually is.

The Place and Time.
The first Sort is found in the Gardens of most Women, that pretend to good
huswifery, who bind it up in bundles, and either carry it to the Market to
sell, or else reserve it for their own use; but it, and the second, and third
sort grow naturally in many places of Spain and Narbone in France, from whence
they have been translated into the Gardens of those which are curious of all
rare Herbs and Plants: as also the last, which was at the first found out by
Clusius, both about Malaca in Spain, and Murcia, in the Realm of Granado, and
is now to be seen in the Physic Garden at Oxon. In those hotter Countries they
flower in F^bruary or March, but here in England they flower not till the
beginning of July, or the end of June, at the soonest. It prospers best in an
open and sunny place, and if the earth be stony, it grows the better.

The Temperature.
Lavander is hot and dry, and that in the third degree, and is of a thin
substance, consisting of many airy and spiritual parts. Therefore it is good to
be given any way, against the Diseases of the Head, and especially those which
have their original or beginning, not of abundance of humors, but chiefly of
one quality only.

The Virtues.
The distilled water of Lavander being sunned for a time, is not only sweet of
smell, and therefore comfortable to the brain; but also is good for the Palsy,
and all other infirmities of the head, proceeding of cold; if the Temples, the
hollowness under the ears, and the nape of the neck be washed therewith: as the
Catalepsis, which is a Disease that takes away all motion from the body, the
Megrim, and the Falling Sickness: yea, two or three spoonfuls of the water
being drunk, recovereth the speech being lost, and reviveth them that are in a
swoun, and so it does, if it be but applied to the Temples or Nostrils to be
smelt unto; but it is not safe to use it, when the Body is full of humors,
mixed with blood, because of the hot and subtle spirits, wherewith it is
possessed. A Decoction made with the Flowers of Lavender, Horehound, Fennel,
and Asparagus Roots, and a little Cinnamon is very profitably used to help the
Falling Sickness, and the giddiness or turning of the brain. Wherefore not
without cause; the Herb is reckoned of Schola Salerni, amongst those things
that cure the Palsy:

Salvia, Castoreumque, Laevandula, Primula Veris.
Nasturt. Athanas: haec sanant Paralytica Membra,
That is to say, Sage, Castory, (that is, the stones of the Beast, called a
Castor) Lavender, Primrose, Watercresse, and Tansie, cure and heal Members
infected with the Palsy. So that though the Flowers be of most virtue, yet the
Herb it self is good for the uses aforesaid: as also for Apoplexies,
Lethargies, Cramps, Convulsions, and gripings of the body proceeding of Cold.
It helps also the stopping of the Milt, heateth the belly, and sends down
the Terms, and if the same be holden often in the mouth, it helps the Ulcers
and pains of the teeth, and the same water is excellent good for blisters of
the mouth, if the mouth be washed therewith. It being often smelled unto, does
comfort and clear the sight; and if a shirt be but wetted in the water, wherein
Lavander has been boiled, and after dried, no louse will breed or abide
therein, as long as it keeps the smell. The lesser Lavander is much commended
in all the Diseases of the Mother, as the strangling or suffocation, the
dislocation or displacing, etc. for Women to be bathed therewith, as also to
help forward their travel. The Chemical Oil drawn from Lavander, usually called
Oil of Spike, is good for the Palsy, Falling Sickness, Gouts of the Joints,
and of the feet, both taken at mouth, and also anointed; but it must be used
cautiously; some few drops, being sufficient to be given with other things,
either for inward or outward griefs.

CHAP. X. Of Marjerome.
The names.
MArjerome is called in Greek (...) and (...), in Latin Majorana, a majori
cura, ut aliqui volunt; Sampsuchum also, and Amaracus after the Greek: The
cause of which name is by some Poets supposed to be this. Amaracus the Son of
Cinara, King of Cyprus, having in his hand a Box of most fragrant Ointment, by
a mischance spilt it on the ground, the loss whereof he took so impatiently,
that he did nothing but mourn for it: in con^ideration of whose Parentage, and
excellent Perfection, the Gods in pity did transform him into that Herb, which
is called Amaracus, after his name, which still retains the smell of the
Ointment which he spilt. It is called in English sweet Marjerome, fine
Marjerome, and Marjerome Gentle. The Pot Marjerome is also called Winter
Marjerome.

The Kinds:
The sorts of Marjerome which I shall here reckon up are six. 1. The ordinary
Garden, sweet Marjerome. 2. Marjerome Gentle. 3. Winter sweet Marjerome. 4.
Winter or Pot-Marjerome. 5. Yellow Marjerome. 6. Wild or Field Marjerome. I
shall, as most commonly I do, describe only the first.

The Form.
The ordinary Garden Marjerome that is sown here in England, is a small low
Herb, scarcely mounting above a foot in height, full of branches, and small
whitish, and soft roundish leaves on them, smelling very sweet: at the tops of
the Branches stand diverse small long and round scaly heads or knots (and
therefore of some called knotted Marjerome) of a whitish green color, out of
which come here and there small white Flowers, and after them small reddish
seed: the Root is composed of diverse small threads or strings, which perishes
with the whole Plant every year. The whole Plant, and every part thereof, is of
a most pleasant taste, and aromatical smell, and by transplanting into beds
well dressed with dry dung, it prospers better, and becomes so strong, that
it is commonly able to abide the coldness of the Winter, if it be not
extraordinary.

The Place and Time.
The sweet Marjerome grows wild on the Mountains in Spain, and other places,
and the wild Marjerome in the Borders of Cornfieldsd, and Pastures in sundry
places of this Land, and particularly on both sides the Foot-way, which leads
from St. Albans, to Mr. Cottons House, near unto the place where old Verulam
stood: the rest are nursed up in Gardens, their natural places being in Creet
and Italy, from whence we have the seeds for the Gardens of our cold Countries,
which being sown in moist and shadowy places, well dunged and dug, grows
greater and taller; but if it be set in an open and sunny place, it grows
shorter and crisped. It may be propagated also by slips. They are sown in May,
and bring forth their scaly or chaffy Husks or Ears in July and August. Gerrard
says, that although it be better for other Plants to be watered morning and
evening, yet it is best for Marjerome and Basil to be watered in the middle of
the day, when the Sun shines hottest.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Our common sweet Marjerome is hot and dry in the second Degree, and ought to
be gathered in the Summer when it floureth, which is commonly in August, and
after dried in a shadowy place, and so it will serve for a year. It i^ warm and
comfortable in cold Diseases of the head, stomach, sinews, and other parts
taken inwardly, or applied outwardly. Matthiolus says, that it digesteth,
attenuateth, opens and strengthens. It comfort the brain, opens the
stopping of the Members, takes away the Apoplexy; and the Head washed in Lie
made of it, does cause the grievous pain of the Head to cease. The powder of it
given in meat, or drunk in Wine, does help the coldness of the stomach, and
comfort digestion. And the dry leaves made into powder, mixed with Honey,
and anointed upon any part, does take away black and blew spots of the skin.
The Oil made thereof is very warming, and comfortable to the joints which are
stiff, and the Sinews which are hard, to mollify, supple, and stretch them
forth. It helps the cold griefs of the womb, and the windiness thereof, it
comfort the brain and Nerves, and helps the weariness and diseases of
them, if they come of cold: it helps the dead Palsy, the back, ( viz. the
Region along the Backbone) being anointed with it, being snuffed up in the
nose, it helps Spasmus Cynicus, which is a wrying the mouth aside: It helps
noise in the Ears, being dropped in them: it provokes the Terms, and helps
the bitings of venomous Beasts; it is a most gallant Oil to strengthen the
Body, the back being anointed, it strengthens the Muscles, they being chafed
with it; it helps the Headache, the forehead being rubbed with it. Also this
Herb has the property of heating all the inward Members, it softneth the Milt,
and asswageth the swelling thereof. The Decoction of it does help those that
are beginning to fall into a Dropsy: those that cannot make water, and the
pains and torments in the belly. The Flower and Herb put in a fine bagg, and
that applied to the stomach, does take away the pain and grief thereof. The
powder of the Leaves snifted up into the nose, does both cleanse and heat the
Head, and stays Rheum, especially if it be mixed with a little Ginger.
Lastly, it is used in all odoriferous Waters, Powders, etc. and is a chief
Ingredient in most of those Powders that Barbers use, in whose Shops I have
seen great store of this Herb hanged up.

CHAP. XI. Of Primroses, Cowslips, and Bears-Eares.
THere being so great affinity in these sorts of Plants, both for form and
quality, I thought it not amiss to join them together, in one Chapter, lest our
Volume should extend it self to too great a Bulk.

The Names.
Primroses are usually called in Latin Primulae Veris, because they are the
first that flourish in the Spring, or at least flower with the first; nay,
sometimes they flourish all winter, if the weather be calm, both these and
Cowslips are named Arthriticae and Herbae Paralysis, because they are good
against the pains of the Joints and Sinews. In English, Petty Mullens, or
Palsy worts, but most commonly Cowslips. The greater sort called for the most
part Ox-lips and Paigles, are named of diverse, Herba S. Petri, in English,
Oxlip and Paigle. The Auricula Vrsi is entitled by diverse names, by sundry
Authors, as Lunaria, Arthritica and Paralytica Alphina; by Gesner, Primula
Veris Pachyphyllo's, by Lugdunensis, Sanicula sive Auricula Vrsi: first by
Matthiolus, and afterward by Lo^el; and Sanicula Alpina, by Gesner and
Bauchinus; but usually now a days, Auricula Vrsi, by all, and therefore we in
English call them Auricula's Bears-Ears, from the similitude that the Leaves
have with the Ears of a Bear, and sometimes French Cowslips, because they grow
naturally upon the Alps, and are much like unto Cowslips in flower, and
sometimes Mountain Cowslips. Some of them are called Birds-eyes.

The Kinds.
And here I might muster up a whole Regiment of these three sorts, but I shall
mention no more at this time, then those I find spoken of by Gerrard which are.
1. The white single or field Primrose. 2. The Purple Primrose, which by the
Turks is called Carchicheck. 3. The white double Primrose. 4. The green
Primrose. 5. Field Cowslips. 6. Field Oxelipps. 7. Double Paigles. 8. Cowslipps
two in a hese. 9. White Birdeine. 10. Red Birdeine. 11. Yellow Bears ear. 12.
Purple Bears ear. 13. Red Bears ear. 14. Scarlet Bears ear 15. Blush colored
Bears ear. 16. Bright red Bears ear. 17. Stamel Bears ear. 18. Little white
Bears ear. He that desires to be any better informed in these kinds of flowers,
let him consult the Masculine, but especially the Feminine Work of Mr.
Parkinson, who has treated more largely of them. There have been many sorts
also found out and brought from beyond the Seas of late days: but being no
very skilful Florist, I desire to be excused for not mentioning of them. I
should proceed to the Descriptions of the Ordinary sort of each, but because
they are so well known I shall describe only the Bears ear.

The Form.
Bears-Ear is a beautiful and brave plant, having green, thick and fat leaves
somewhat finely snipt about the edges, not altogether unlike those of Cowslips,
but smoother, greener, and nothing rough or crumpled; among which arises up a
slender round stem an handful high, bearing a tuft of flowers at the top,
sometimes of a yellow, sometimes of a purple or red, and sometimes of a white
color, not much unlike to the flowers of Oxlipps, but more open, and
consisting of one only Leaf like Cotiledon or Pennywort, the root is very
threddy, and like unto the Oxelip.

The Place and Time.
Primroses and Cowslips joy most in shadowy places, and therefore are most
commonly found in Woods and borders of fields near to the bedge sides. The
purple Primrose, the double Primrose, the green Primrose, the double Paigses
and the Cowslips two in a hose are seldom seen but in Gardens. The Red and
white Birdeine do grow very plentifully in the Northern parts of this land, as
in Harwood near Blackburn in Lancashire, at Crosby, Ravenswaith, and Cragge
Close in Westmoreland, and in some other places. The Original of the
Auriculaes came first from the mountains of Germany, Hungary Italy, as the
Alps and Pyrences, etc. But the greatest variety has risen from the Seed,
many of them will flower twice in the year, viz. in April and May, and then
again in August, and September, if the Autumn prove temperate and moist.

The Temperature and Virtues.
All of them are in Temperature dry, little or nothing hot, but astringent, and
are accounted as profitable for the pains of the head as any plant that is,
except Betony. They are excellent good against any Joynt-aches, as the Pal^y
and pains of the Sinews, as theit names do import. The decoction of the roots
are good for the stone in the Kidneys and Bladder; the juice of the leaves for
members that are loose and out of joint, or inward parts that are hurt, r^nt,
or broken. A dram and a half of the dried roots of field Primrose gathered in
the Autumn, purges by Vomit very forcibly (but safely) waterish humou^s,
choler and phlegm, in such manner as Asara bacca does. A conserve made with the
flowers of Cowslips and Sugar prevails wonderfully against the Palsy,
Convulsions, Cramps and all diseases of the Sinews, if the quantity of a
Nutrneg be taken every morning. An ointment made of the leaves, and Hogs
grease, heals wounds; and takes away Spots, Wrinkles, and Sunburning, and so
does the distilled water of the flowers; As diverse Ladies, Gentlewomen and she
Citizens, whether wives or widows know well enough. The roots of Primrose
stamped and strained, and the juice snifted into the Nose with a quill, or such
like, purges the brain and qualifieth the pain of the Megrim. An Ointment made
with the Juice of Cowslips and oil of Linseed, cures all scaldings and
burnings with fire water or otherwise. The flowers of Primt(...) sodden in
Vinegar, and applied do heal the Kings Evil, heals also the Almonds of the
Ears and Palate, if you Gargarize the party with the decoction thereof. The
leaves and flowers of Primroses boiled in Wine and drunk are good against all
diseases of the Breast and Lungs; and will draw any thorn splinter or bone out
of the flesh. The Bears ears according to their name Sanicle are no less
powerful for healing then the former, as also for the Palsy and Rupture called
Enterocele, if for some reasonable space it be put in drinks, or boiled by it
self. The roots also of Bears-ears are in great request amongst those that use
to hunt after Goats and Robucks upon the Alps and high mountains; and for the
strengthening of the head then when they pass by fearful precipices and steep
places in following their game, that Giddiness and swimming of the brain may
not seize upon them.

CHAP. XII. Of the Lilly of the Valley.
The Names.
THe Latins have named it, Lilium Convallium; Gesner does think it to be
Callionymum. It is called in English, Lilly of the Valley, or the Convall Lilly,
May Lillies, Wood Lillies, and in some places, Liriconfancy or Lilly- Confancy.
Fuschius says, that Ephemerum non Lethale and Lilium Convallium, are the same.

The Kinds.
Of this Lilly I find but two sorts. 1. Lilly-Convally with white flowers. 2.
Lilly-Convally with red flowers.

The Form,
The Lilly of the Valley has leaves, somewhat like unto other white Lillies,
or rather like unto the leaves of the smallest water Plantain, among which does
a slender and small stalk spring up; in the top of which grow forth little
small white flowers like little bells, with turned edges, and of a pleasant
smell; which being past there come small red berries, much like the berries of
Asparagus. wherein the seed is contained. The root is small and slender,
creeping far abroad in the ground.

The Place and Time.
It grows plentifully upon Hamstead-heath four miles from London; near to Lee
in Essex; and on Bushy heath thirteen miles from London; in Bagly wood which is
two or three miles from Oxford, not far from the way to Abingdon, and many
other places, in valleys, and on the sides of hills. For its great commodity
and beauty, it is brought and planted in Gardens where it prospers best, if
it be set in a moist ground and shadowy place. It floureth in May, and the
fruit is ripe in September.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The Lillies of the Valley are hot and dry of Temperature, according to Gerrard
and Sennertus; yet Hill in his Art of Gardening says, that they are cold and
moist. I assent rather to the former opinion, though there may be some reason
given for the later also. The flowers be more effectual then the Herb, and the
root passes the flowers in virtue. It cures the Apoplexy by Signature; for as
that disease is caused by the dropping of humors into the principal
Ventricles of the brain: so the flowers of this Lilly hanging on the plants as
if they were drops, are of wonderful use herein, if they be distilled with
Wine, and the quantity of a spoonful thereof drunk, and so it restores speech
to them that have the dumb Palsy; And is good against the Gout, comfort the
heart and Vital Spirits, strengthens the brain, recrutes a weak memory, and
makes it strong again. The distilled water dropped into the Eyes helps
inflammations, there is also that infirmity which is called the Pin and Web.
The flowers steeped in New Wine and drunk does help those which are pained with
a trembling of the heart or other members, it stops the passages of the Leprosy
beginning that the same spread no further abroad. Also it does take away the
scabbe and ring-Worm anointed thereupon; and the sooner, if you wash them
sundry times with the water. The water also asswageth the swellings of the
stingings of Bees and Wasps, if it be applied to the part. Take the flowers and
steep them in New Wine for the space of a month, which being finished take
them out again and distill the wine five times over in a Limbeck. This wine is
more precious then Gold: for if any one that is troubled with the Apoplexy
drink thereof, with six grains of Pepper, and a little Lavander water they
shall not need to fear it that month; It cease the Cholick, it comfort
the brain, and helps the Impostume in the hinder part thereof. Six ounces of
the water of the flowers, helps those that are poisoned or bit with a mad
Dog, and being drunk forty days, it does away the falling Scknesse. The same
water drunk helps the Strangury, the pricking about the heart and
inflammation of the Liver, and stays excessive Menstrues. Gerrard says, That
a Glass being filled with the flowers of May Lillies, and set in an Ant-hill
with the mouth close stopped for a months space, and then taken out, you shall
find a Liquor in the Glass, which being outwardly applied helps the Gout very
much.

CHAP. XIII. Of Misselto.
The Names.
THe last thing that I shall treat of as appropriated to the diseases of the
Brain, as the Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, ^alsy, etc. is Misselto, which is
called, by Dioscorides, and so is the Birdlime made thereof; but Theophrastus
calls it, who says also that in Eubaa it is called Stelis and in Arcadia,
Hyphear. In Latin it is called Viscus and Viscum, and so is also the Birdlime
made of the Berries. Ion the Poet call it S^dor Quercus, Because it grows on
Trees from their own superfluous moisture, and not as some falsely suppose from
the dunging of those Blackbirds or rather Thrushes which have eaten the Berries
hereof, so the seeds have been made fitter to grow. For it is since found by
Experience, that there is no show of seed in that dung they void upon the
Trees, or elsewhere, it being wholly altered in their bellies before the
voiding; And further the Misselto does not a^waies grow upon the boughs, but
sometimes from beneath them, where it is impossible that either any bird can
dung, or any of the seed come thither, by any other means; And therefore he
mistook that said, Turdus tibi cacat malum.

The Kinds.
The sorts of Misselto that I find upon record are three. 1. The ordinary
Misselto with few and many berries. 2. The Misselto of India. 3. Misselto of
Peru.

The Form.
Misselto is an Excrescence arising from the branch or arm of the Tree whereon
it grows with a woody stem, parting it self into sundry branches, and they
spreading again into many other smaller twigs over thwart one another, do wrap
and interlace one within an other; the bark of it is of a light or Popinjay,
green color, but the leaves are of a brownish green color, which being set by
two and two at every Joint or Knot, and at the end likewise, are somewhat long
and narrow, small at the bottom but broader toward the end. At the Knots and
Joints of the boughs of the branches grow small yellowish flowers which turn
into small white round berries, which are so clear that a man may see through
them, and are full of clammy or Viscous moisture, whereof the best Birdlime is
made, far exceeding that which is made of Holly Bark: Within the berry is
contained a small black kernel or seed, which has been put into the ground,
and other places, but was never yet known to grow, it being indeed without any
root.

The Place and Time.
This Excrescence grows upon Apple Trees, Pear Trees, Crab-Trees, and Hasles,
very plentifully in diverse places, especially in Essex; but that which grows
on the Oak, is very rare in England, That with many Berries grows in Germany,
etc. and the other two in the West Indies. Theophrastus says, that the
Misselto loses the leaves in Winter, if it grow on those Trees that shed their
leaves, as Apple Trees, etc. do; but in every green Tree, as Box, etc. it
loses them not: the Reason whereof, says he, is the tenacious humidity in the
one, which the other wants; but Experience shows, that it keep th the
Leaves fresh and green in the Winter, when the Trees whereon they grow, have
not any of their own left on them, in these parts of Europe generally. O^dinary
Misselto flowreth in the Spring; but the Berries are not ripe until O^^ber, and
abide on the Branches all the Winter, unless the Thrushes and other Birds
devour them. It is one of those things wherewith Country people adorn their
houses at Christmas, and is celebrated in this old Caroll,

Holly, and Ivy, Misselto,
Give me a red Apple, and let me go, etc.
The Temperature.
Misselto is hot and dry in the third Degree, the Leaves and Berries do heat
and dry, and are of subtle parts, for some acrimony is in them, which
overcommeth the bitterness, the Bird-lime does mollify hard knots, etc. which
is not of that property, as to heat suddenly, but after some time as Thapsia
does.

The Signature and Virtues.
Crollius says, that Misselto of the Oak, and the Bird-lime that is ma^e
ther^of, is very effectual for the curing of the Falling Sickness, and that it
does it by Signature: the viscosity and tenacious quality of the Bird-lime,
repre^enting those melancholy and phlegmatic humors, consisting of tough and
clammy slime, by which it is caused, or else as Bird-lime does detain
whatsoever it fastens to, so this Disease ceasing upon the Body, as the Remora
does upon a Ship, will suffer it to go no further, but makes it to fall down.
But some question may arise concerning the Application of the Bird-lime,
whether it is to be taken inwardly, or used outwardly, because Gerrard says,
if it be inwardly taken, it is mortal, and brings most grievous accidents*
as that it should make the tongue to be inflamed and swollen, the mind to be
distracted, and the strength of the heart and wits to fail, quoting Nicander,
as I suppose for his Author. If there be any such malicious quality in it, it
is when it is taken alone; for I not only conceive, that Crollius meant it
should be taken inwardly, but I find it prescribed by that famous and worthy
Physician, Mr. Bruel, to be taken in Pills after this manner, Rec^pe, Visci
quercini, Seeds and Roots of Piony ana 1. ounce. Nutmeg 1. ounce. of Aniseeds
1. oun. Sacchari buglossati 7. ounces. in every Pill 1. ounce. And therefore if
it be corrected with other Ingredients, there is no such great danger as
Gerrard repotteth.

The next Question will be, whether the Misselto of other Trees, be not as good
as that of the Oak? Mr. Culpepper rails against the College of Physicians, for
saying that that which grows upon Oaks, has most virtues. Clusius affirms,
that which grows upon Pear Trees to be as prevalent, and gives order that it
should not touch the Ground after it is gathered, and also says, That being
hung about the neck it remedies Witchcraft. It is wonder the carping
Astrologer had not had a sling at Clusius also for superstition, but I conceive
he escaped, because he was of an Opinion different from the College. Matthiolus
says, that that of the Che^nut-Tree is as good, (but most hold that of the Oak
to be the best) which being made into Powder, and given in Drink unto those
which have the Falling-^ickness, does heal them, as the same Author speaks
upon his own experience. Some have so highly esteemed of the Virtues hereof,
that they have called it Lignum St. Crucis, believing it to help the
Falling Sickness, Apoplexy and Palsy, very speedily, not only to be inwardly
taken, but hung about their necks; and some Women have worn it about their
necks, or on their arms, thinking it will help them to conceive. Tragus says,
that the fresh Wood of any Misselto bruised, and the juice drawn forth, and
dropped into the Ears, that have Imposthumes in them, does help and ease them
within a few days. The Bird-lime mollifieth hard knots, tumors, and
Imposthumes, ripeneth and discusseth them, and draws forth thick as well as
^^in humors, ^om the remote places of the Body, digesting them, and separating
them, and being mixed with equal parts of Rosin and Wax, it mollifieth the
hardness of the Spleen, and heals old Ulcers and Sores, with Sandatack and
Orpment, it draws off foul nails, especially if quick Lime, and the Lees of
Wine be added thereunto.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Quince-Tree.
The Names.
HAving handled several Plants that are approptiated to the Head, some by
Signature, and some without, I shall now write of a few which cure the Diseases
of the Hair, as Alopecia, Ophiasis, etc. beginning with the Quince-Tree, which
is called in Greek (...) and in Latin Malus Cydonia and Cotonea. It bears
the Name of Malus Cydonia, a Cydone Cretae oppido, unde primum advecta, because
it was brought first from. Cydon, a Town in Crete: and Cotonea, as some think
from the down, which grows upon the Fruit, which is called Cotton, as
Fuchsius writes, by which name Cato first called it, and Pliny after him. The
Spaniards call it Membrill^o and Marmello, from whence come the word Marmalade.

The Kinds.
Columella sets down three sorts of this fruit, 1. Struthia Great ones. 2.
Chrysomela, Gold Color. 3. Mustea, Early ones, but little; but in our days,
there are four or five sorts of Trees, which are known by the names following.
1. Our ordinary Quince-Tree. 2. The Portugal Quince. 3. The Barbary Quince. 4.
The Lions Quince. 5. The Brunswick Quince.

The Form.
The ordinary Quince-Tree grows oftentimes to the height and bigness of a
reasonable Apple Tree; but more usually lower, and crooked, with a rough Bark,
spreading Arms and Branches far abroad: the Leaves are somewhat round, and like
those of the Apple Tree; but thicker, harder, fuller of Veins, and white on the
under side, not dented at all about the Edges: the Flowers are large and white,
sometimes dashed over with a blush: the fruit that follows is first green, and
then yellow, when the white Freese, or Cotton, wherewith it is covered, is
rubbed off, which grows less, as the fruit ripeneth, bunched out oftentimes
in some places, some being liker an Apple, some like a Pear, of a strong heady
sent, and not durable to keep, and is sour, harsh, and of an unpleasant taste
to eat raw, but being scalded, roasted, baked, or preserved, becomes very
pleasant.

The Place and Time.
The Place of every one, save the first, is expressed already, which best likes
to grow near Ponds, and Water sides, and is frequent through the Land, but
bears not, (...) the place where it grows be somewhat moist. It flowreth
not till after the leaves put forth, and that is about the end of March, or the
beginning of April: the fruit is commonly ripe about the beginning of October.

The Temperature.
Quinces have a cold and earthy faculty in them, and by reason of their (...)
binding, they moysten the body less then other fruits; for they are cold in
^^e first, and dry in the second degree. When they are green, they help all
sort^ of Fluxes in Man or Woman, and whatsoever needs astriction.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Down of Quinces does in some sort resemble the hair of the Head, the
Decoction whereof is very effectual for the restoring of Hair that is fallen
off by the French Pox, and being made up with Wax, and laid on as a Plaster, it
brings Hair to them that are bald, and keeps it from falling, if it be
ready to shed: It heals Plague-sores, if it be boiled in Wine, and applied to
them. The Syrup of the Juice of Quinces strengthens the heart and stomach,
stays looseness and vomiting, relieves languishing Nature: for looseness, take a
spoonful of it before meat, for vomiting after meat; for others purposes it is
to be taken in the morning, and may be then taken for these also. It helps
the Liver also, when it is so oppressed, that it cannot perfect digestion, and
corrects Choler and Phlegm. If you would have Quinces purging, put Honey to
them instead of Sugar; and if more laxative, add for Choler Rubarb; for Phlegm,
Tu^bith; for watery humors, Scammony: but if more forcibly to bind, use the
unripe Quinces with Ro^es and Acacia, or Hypocistis, and some torrefied Rubarb.
The Juice of raw Quinces is held as an Antidote against the force of deadly
poison, not suffering it to have any force in the body; for it has been often
found to be most certain true, that the very smell of a Quince has taken away
all the strength of the poison of white Hellebore, which the Hunters of Spain
and Navarre make to kill wild Beasts, by dipping their Arrow-Heads therein. It
is also certain, that if Quinces be brought into an house, where Grapes are
hung up to be kept dry all the year, they will assuredly rot. If there be need
of any outward binding, and cooling of any hot Fluxes, the Oil of Quinces, or
other Medicines that may be made thereof, are very available, to anoint the
Belly, or other parts therewith: It likewise strengthens the Stomach and
Belly, and the Sinews, which are loosed by sharp humors falling on them, and
restrains immoderate sweatings. The Mucilage taken from the Seeds and
Quinces, boiled a little in water, is very good to cool the heat, and heal the
sore breasts of Women: the same with a little Sugar, is good to lenifie the
harshness, and hoarsness of the throat, and roughness of the Tongue. The
Marmalade of Quinces is toothsom, as well as wholesome, and therefore I cannot
blame such Gentlewomen, which are seldom without it in their Closets.

CHAP. XV. Of Mosses.
IT may seem strange to any one that considers not our Method, that we should
so much deviate from the common Roads which other Herbarists use to trace, as
to treat of the Quince-Tree and Moss, next to one another, there being in
their Opinion so little Similitude between them. Yet because it cures the
Diseases of the Hair, as the former does, and does a little resemble the Down
growing on Quinces, I shall handle it next.

The Names.
Moss in general is called in Greek (...) and (...), and in the Attick
Tongue, Sphagnum and Hypnum; and Pliny thereupon in one place calls it in
Latin Bryon and Sphagnum, and in another place, Sphagnos, sive Phacos sive
Bryon; but it is in Latin usually called Muscus, and properly betokens any
Herb that is composed of hairs or thread, instead of Leaves; the Arabians and
Apothecaries call it Vsnea. The Greeks, which seldom gave any thing a name,
without a Reason, called it (...), because it gives ease to the Entrails.

The Kinds.
The Sorts of these are very numerous: Parkinson reckons up thirty, and treats
of them in several Chapters. It would be somewhat tedious, and to little
purpose, to repeat them all; I shall therefore for brevity sake, set down those
which I find to be useful, and let the rest alone; and the first is, Our
common ground-Mosse. 2. Cupp-Mosse. 3. Club-Mosse. 4. Oak-Mosse. 5. Apple Tree
Moss. 6. Moss of a Dead Man's Skull. Neither of these want a Description so
much as the Club-Mosse, because it desires to be known in these times, wherein
there is so much dead Wine, which it is said, in short time to recover, I shall
therefore describe that.

The Form.
Club-Mosse, or Wolfs-Claw Moss, which is in Latin called Muscus clavatus
sive Lycopodium, grows close upon the ground, among Bushes and Brakes, to the
length of six or eight foot, consisting as it were, of many hairy Leaves, set
upon a tough string, very close couched, and compact together: from which is
also sent forth, certain other Branches like the first; in sundry places there
be sent down diverse fine little strings, which serve instead of Roots,
wherewith it is fastened to the upper parts of the Earth, and takes hold
likewise of such things as grow next it. There spring also from the Branches,
bare or naked stalks, on which grow certain Ears as it were like the Catkines
or blowings of the Hazel-Tree, in shape like a little Club, of a yellowish
white color, or rather resembling the Claw of a Wolf, whereof it took its
name, which knobby Catkines are altogether barren, and bring forth neither Seed
nor Flower, but come to nothing, as they do in all other Mosses.

The Places and Time.
The common Moss grows more or less every where, but especially in shadowy
places, and is used in slating of houses, in some Countries. The Cup or Callice
Moss which Lobel calls Muscus Pixidatus, creeps upon the ground like unto
Liverwort, but of a yellowish white color, from who^e Leaves start up things
like unto little Cups, and grows in the most barren, dry, and gravelly Ditch
Banks, particularly in a Ditch, near a house formerly called Stockers house, in
Stow-Wood, about three miles from Oxford, by the way side, as you go thence to
Islip, and sometimes upon old Pales, as upon the School-house Pales at
Adderbury in Oxford^hire. The Club-Mosse grows upon Hamsteed Heath, among the
Bushes and Brakes near a little Cottage there. Oak-mosse is found in many
Forests and Woods in this Land; but the last which is the Moss of a dead Man's
Skull is oftener brought out of Ireland, then found with Us. They are most
usually growing, and in their perfection in the Summertime.

The Temperature.
The Mosses of the Earth are dry, and astringent of a binding quality, without
any heat or cold. Those of the Trees cool, and bind, and do much partake of
the nature of the Tree, from whence it is taken: as that of the Oak to be more
binding then those of the Cedar, Larch-Ivy, etc. and Fir to be more digesting
and m^l^^^ying.

The Signature and Virtues.
A Decoction of the long Moss that hangs upon Trees, in a manner like hair, is
very profitable to be used in the falling off of the hair, and this it does by
Signature. The common ground Moss is held to be singular good to break the
Stone, and to expel and drive it forth by Urine, being boiled in Wine, and
drunk. The Herb bruised and boiled in water, and then applied to any
Inflammations, or pains, rising from a hot cause, does allay and ease them; and
therefore they do apply it to the hot Gout, to allay the pains thereof. The Cup
Moss is thought to be a singular Remedy against the Falling Sickness, and the
Chin-Cough in Children, if it be powdered, and then given in sweet Wine for
certain days together. The Club-Mosse hung in a Vessel of Wine, that has lost
the vigor and virtue, that floateth, and is become slimy, restores it to its
former goodness, if the quantity thereof be answerable to the bigness of the
Vessel, whereupon Brunfelsius has called it Wein Kraut, the Wine-Herb. The
Moss of Trees, especially of the Oak, is of good use and effect to stay Fluxes
and Lasks in Man or Woman: as also vomiting and bleedings, spitting of blood,
pissing of blood, the Terms, and the Bloody Flux, if the powder thereof be
boiled in Wine and drunk. The Decoction thereof in Wine is very good for Women
to be bathed with, or to sit in, that are troubled with abundance of their
Courses: the same also drunk, does stay the troubled Stomach, perplexed with
casting, or the Hickok, and does also comfort the heart, as Avicen says; and
as Serapio says, procures deep sleep: some have thought it available for the
Dropsy, if the Powder thereof be taken in drink for some time together. The
Oil of Roses that has fresh Moss steeped therein for a time, and after
boiled, and applied to the Temples and forehead, does marvellously ease the
Headache, that comes of a hot cause: as also the distillations of hot Rheum
or Humors to the Eyes or other parts. The Ancients much used it in their
Ointments, etc. against weariness, and to strengthen and comfort the Sinews. My
Lord Bacon says, that there is a sweet Moss growing upon Apple Trees, which
is of excellent use for Perfumers, who if they knew it, would greedily catch
after it. The Moss that grows upon dead Men's Skulls, has not only been in
former times much accounted of, because it is rare, and hardly gotten; but in
our times, much more set by, to make the Unguentum Sympatheticum, or
Weapon-Salve, which cures wounds without local application: in the
composition whereof, this is put as a principal Ingredient, but as Crollius
has it, it should be taken from the Skulls of those which have perished by a
violent death.

CHAP. XVI. Of Maidenhair.
THough the Learned Herbarists make a distinction between, Adiantum, Ruta
Muraria, Trichomanes and Polytrichon Apuleii, and therefore have treated of
them in diverse Chapters, yet desiring to be as brief as conveniently I may, and
because they are all Capillary herbs, and may be comprehended under the title
of Maidenhair, I shall make but one Chapter of them.

The Names.
Maidenhair is called in Greek, (...) in Latin Adiantum, Polytrichum,
Callitrichum, Cincinnalis, Terrae Capillus, and Supercilium Terrae; of Apuleius
Capillus Veneris, Capillaris, Crinita; and of diverse, Coriandrum Putei; The
Italians keep the name of Capillus Veneris, and ^o do the Shops; In English,
Black Maidenhair, and Venus hair; and by some, our Ladies hair. Some think it
to be called Adiantum because (...) it is never wet; but falsely, for if it be
dipped in Water it will be wet. Others think, that Rain which falls down in
Drops upon the leaves of it, slide off immediately leaving no sign of moisture;
But the most likely opinion is, that it is so called because it loves to grow
on the sides of Wells above, where the water never comes, but where the water
comes it never grows, and in this sense it may be said, (...). It is called
Callitrichon, and Polytrichon, of the effect it has in dying hair, and making
it to grow thick. Neither is it called Capillus Veneris for any other reason,
but because she is painted with curious hair. Ruta Muraria, was first so called
by Matthiolus, who afterward took it to be Paronychia Dioscoridis. Cordus
calls it, Adiantum album; Dodonaeus, Ruta Muraria; and Lobel and Lugdunsis,
Salvia vitae, and many call it Adiantum album, White Maidenhair. Trichomanes is
called in Greek (...) quod rara cute fluentem Capillum explet for (...) is
rarus and (...), Capillus. Gaza translated it Filicula and some have it
Fidicula. The Apothecaries beyond the sea, did use to call it Polytricum and
Capillaris; We usually call it in Latin Trichomanes, and in English Common
Maidenhair, and English Maidenhair, because it is more plentiful in our Land
then the rest, and is of more use, and of as good effect for all purposes as
the former. The last sort is Polytrichum Apul^^ by some called, Polytrichum
aureum, by others Adiantum aureum, Adiantum (...) and Muscus Capillaris, in
English, Golden Maidenhair.

The Kinds.
All the sorts of Maidenhair that I meet with, are eight. 1. The True
Maidenhair. 2. Common Black Maidenhair. 3. Foreign or Assyrian Maidenhair. 4.
Wall Rue. 5. The Male English Maidenhair. 6. Female English Maidenhair. 7.
Great golden Maidenhair. 8. The lesser Golden Maidenhair. Most of these sorts
are strangers in England unless it be Wall Rue, and that which is called
English Maidenhair, whose form only I shall set down,

The Form.
Common English Maidenhair does from a number of hard b^ack Fibers send forth a
great many blackish shining brittle stalks hardly a span long in many not half
so long, set on each side very thick, with small round dark green leaves one
against another and spotted on the back of them like Ceterach and other small
Ferns.

The Place and Time.
Some have reported the first to be found in Gl^stershire, but I doubt it. Wall
Rue is found at Dartford, and the bridge at Ashford in Kent, at Beaconsfeild in
Buckinghamshire, at Wolley in Huntingtonshire, on Framingham Castle in Suffolk,
on the Church wall at Mayfeild in Sussex, and in diverse other p^aces. Eng^i^h
Maidenhair grows much upon old stone Walls in the western parts, Wales and
Kent, but particularly upon New College Wall in Oxford, on the Garden Wall
which was formerly Mr. Bustards next to Adderbury Church yard, and upon a wall
near to Goreham berry in Hartfordshire. It joyeth likewi^e to grow by Springs
and Wells, and other rocky moist and Shadowy places; They are green in Winter
as well as Summer, but never flower that I know of.

The Temperature.
The true Maidenhair, as Galen testifies does dry, make thin, wast away, and
is in a mean between heat and coldness. Mesue shows that it consists of
unlike or disagreeing parts* and that some are waterie and earthy, and the same
binding, and another superficially hot and thin. And that by this it takes
away obstructions or stoppings makes things thin that are thick, loo^eneth the
belly, especially when it is fresh and green: for as this part is thin, so is
it quickly resolved and that by reason of its binding and earthy parts. Wall
Ru^ and the rest are not much unlike to this in temperature and faculty.

The Signature and Virtues.
All these being Capillary herbs do cure all the diseases of the hair by
Signature; and therefore the Lee made of any of them is singular good to
clean^e the head from scurf, and either dry or running ^ores, stays the
falling or shedding of the hair, either of the Head or Beard, and makes it to
grow again in such places where it is fallen and pilled off, and causes it to
become thick fair, and well colored: for which purpose some boil it in Wine,
putting some Smallage ^eed thereto, and afterward some Oil. They are of
singular good use against the Diseases of the Breast, the Liver, and Reins
especially, yet much conducing to others; The decoction of the herb drunk,
helps those that are troubled with the cough, shortness of breath, the
Yellow Jaundies, the diseases of the Spleen, stopping of Urine, helps
exceedingly to break the Stone, provokes Women's Courses, and stays both
bleedings and fluxes of the Stomach and belly if it be dry; But if it be green
as I said before* it loo^eneth and causes Choler and Phlegm to be voided both
from the Stomach and Liver; and by freeing the Stomach by spitting it out,
wonderfully cleanses the Lungs, and by rectifying the Liver and Blood causes
a good color to the w^ole body; and expels those disea^es that breed by the
Obstruction of the Li^er or Spleen. They are also said to resist and cure the
bitings of venomous Creatures, to consume and wast away the King's Evil and
other hard wellings, and to be excellent good against ruptures in young
Children, if the powder thereof be taken constantly for forty days together.
The Leaves of Wall Rue mixed with a little Salt Peter, and the Urine of a young
C^ild, takes away the shrivelled wrincklings that appear on Women's Bellies
after their deliverance, if it be washed therewith. So much for those Plants
that cure the Diseases of the Hair, to which I might add Thapsia, Aloes,
Millefolium aquaticum, or water- Millfole, etc. which because they are
forraigners, and more appropriate to other parts, I forbear in this place.

CHAP. XVII. Of Fennel.
COme we now from the Hair to the Eyes, and in the first place treat of those
five things, which Schola Salerni commends for the Eyes, in these Verses.

Foeniculus, Verbena, Rosa, Chelidonia, Ruta:
Ex istis fit aqua, quae lumina reddit acuta.
The first whereof is Fennel.

The Names.
The Greeks called it (...) which is thought to come from (...) which signifies
Marcesco, because it is very good to season many things, even when it is
withered. The Latins call it Faeniculum, quod quasi fanum in hyemes arefactum
vel marcidum reponatur, because it is laid up against Winter, being dried and
withered, just like Hay, or as some think, quod magno cum faen^re semen reddat,
because it makes so plentiful a return of seed, when it is sown.

The Kinds*
1. Common Fennel. 2. Sweet Fennel. 3. Small round. 4. Wild Fennel. 5. Great
Fennel of Candy. 6. Great round-headed Fennel. The common Fennel being
generally known, I shall choose rather to describe the sweet Fennel.

The Form.
Sweet Fennel grows no otherwise then the former does, having both Roots,
Leaves, Stalks and Flowers after the same manner, saving, that this neither
beyond Sea, nor in our Country does rise so high, and hardly endures the
sharpness of our VVinters: the Seed is larger, yellower, and sweeter in taste,
nearer unto Anniseed, then the former, which so continues in hot Countries;
but will not hold, either color, largeness, or sweetness long in ours: It
decays yearly, and after the third years sowing, yields as bitter, small,
and sad colored seed, as any in any other Garden or Country in this Land, so
that you may hereby certainly know, that it is the Climate only, that changes
it to be larger or smaller, longer or shorter, yellower or paler then others,
and also gives the taste to be sweeter or bitterer, which diverse have thought
to be differing sorts. Some also think that the Cardus Fennel, as the Italians
call it, is different from the other sweet sort, when as it is only the Art in
ordering it by transplanting and whitening it, that makes the leaves grow so
thick, bushing together more then the ordinary, and the whitening gives it a
sweeter relish, and a shorter crisp taste in eating.

The Place and Time.
Some of these sorts of Fennel grow in hot Countries, as Italy, Spain, Candy,
etc. and some of them are sown in Gardens amongst us, though the Climate
alters even the best and sweetest. The common sort flowreth in June and July,
and the Seed is ripe in the end of August, but the strange sorts do not perfect
their Seed, unless the year be kindly. It is to be sown in the end of
February, and that in sunny places, and somewhat stony.

The Temperature
There be different opinions concerning the temperature of this Plant. One
says, it is hot and dry in the second degree; but most affirm it to be hot in
the third, and dry only in the first. Gerard says, that the Seed is hot, and
dry in the third Degree.

The Virtues.
The distilled water of Fennel dropped into the Eyes, cleanse them from all
enormities rising therein; but the condensate Juice dissolved, or as some take
it, the natural Juice or Gum that issues out thereof, of its own accord in hot
Countries, does cleanse the Eyes from mists and films that hinder the Eyesight:
Some for this purpose take the green stalks of Fennel, and holding them to the
fire in Autumn while they are green, cause a certain Juice or Liquor to drop
from them, which they apply to the Eyes, as holding it to be more effectual,
then either the condensate Juice, or natural Gum. And some yet more neatly
make a water to clear the Eyesight in this manner: They powder some white
Sugar Candy very finely, and put that Powder into the hollow green stalk of
Fennel, while it grows a foot above the ground, so that it be between two
joints, which having remained therein two or three days, and the hole covered
and bound close over, that no rain get in, they open it at the lower joint,
having first placed a good piece of soft wax, made a little hollow,
gutter-wise, under the hole, which may serve to carry the liquor from falling
down the stalk into a Vessel* or thing set of purpose, thereto to receive it.
Neither is it only good for the Eyes, but for many other uses. It is used to lay
upon Fish, and other viscous meats, to digest the crude Phlegmatic quality
thereof, and to boil it with them, and the seed is oftentimes put in bread to
break wind, and to make a long breath. It provokes Urine, and eases the pains
of the Stone, and helps to break it, and being boiled in Barley water, and
drunk, it is good for Nurses, to increase their milk, and to make it the
wholsomer for their Nurse-Children. The leaves boiled in water, but much more
the seed stays the Hickock, and takes away that loathing which often
happens to the stomachs of sick or feavourish persons, and allayeth the heat
thereof. The seed boiled in Wine, is good for them that are bitten by Serpents,
or have eaten poisonous ^^erbs, or Mushromes; the Seed and the Root much more
helps to open the obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Gall, and thereby
much conduces to all the Diseases arising from them, as the painful and windy
swellings of the Spleen, and yellow Jaundies, as also the Gout and Cramp. The
seed is of good use in pectorall Medicines, and those which help the shortness
of the breath, and wheesings by obstructions of the Lungs, it helps also to
bring down the Courses, and to cleanse the parts after delivery. The Roots are
of most use in Physic Drinks and Broths, that are taken to cleanse the blood,
to open the obstructions of the Liver, to provoke Urine, to amend the evil
color or complexion in the face, after long sickness, and to cause a good
color, and a good habit throughout the whole body. Fennel both Leaves and
Seeds or roots, are much used in drinks and broths, for those that are grown
fat to abate their unweldinesse, and make them more gaunt and lank. The sweet
Fennel by reason of its sweetness is much weaker then the ordinary, which is
better for all the Physical purposes aforesaid; And therefore they do but
deceive themselves and others that use the sweet Fennel Seed, in compositions
as thinking it better, when as it is much weaker by want of the bitterness
which is most operative. The Juice kills the worms in the ears, if it be
dropped therein. The wild Fennel is stronger and hotter then the tame, and
therefore more powerful against the stone, but not so effectual to increase
milk, because of its dryness. Let them that live in those Countries where there
be any Serpents or Snakes, have a care they wash their Fennel before they use
it: because they delight much to be amongst it; it is thought that they make
use of it to preserve their Eyesight. Fennel roots are one of the five opening
roots; the other four being Smallage, Asparagus, Parsley, Kneeholly or
Butchersbroom, called in Latin, Ruscus Bruscus

CHAP. XVIII. Of Vervain.
The Names.
IT is Called in Greek (...) Hiera botane, id est, Herba sacra, for so it was
reputed amonst them as also amongst the Romans; for with it they purged their
houses and made clean the Table of Jupiter before the Sacricrificiall Banquets
were set there on. And (...) Peristereon because Pigeons love to be about it,
(...) signifying a Pidgeon: In Latin Verbena quasi Herbena, or Herba bona
Verbenaca, Matricalis Columbaria, Columbaris or Columbina, Exupera, Martialis
Herculania and Ferraria; and of others Vervena; in English Vervain, and in some
Countries Holy herb, Mercuries moist blood, Juno's tears; and in others,
Pidgeon-grasse, because Pigeons eat thereof as is supposed to clear their Eye
sight. For Epxlication of that place in Terence, Ex ara verbenas hinc sum, The
later Herbarists and Writers do conceive that the Poet in that place speaking
after his country Phrase (for Menander has Mirtles out of whom this was
translated) understands such herbs as lay there which were also called
Sagmina, and not Vervain only.

The Kinds.
1. Common or upright Vervain. 2. Bending or Female Vervain. 3. Vervain of
Peru. 4. Round headed creeping Vervain.

The Form:
The Common Vervain that is familiar to our Country, has diverse Leaves toward
the bottom of middle fise, deeply gashed at the bottom of them, the other part
being deeply dented about the edges, and some only deeply dented and cut all
alike, something like unto an Oaken Leaf, those that grow higher are lesser,
all of them being of a dark green Color on the upper side, and somewhat gray
underneath: the stalk is square, and branched into diverse parts, rising to be
about half a yard high, with a Spike of Flowers on the top, which are set on
all sides thereof, one above another, and sometimes two or three together,
being small and gaping, of a whitish color, and some Purple and blew
intermixed; after which come small round seed, in small, and somewhat long
heads: the Root is small and long, but of no use.

The Places and Time.
The first grows generally throughout the Land, in diverse places by the
Hedges and way sides, especially in and near unto Towns and Villages. The
second is not found to grow naturally in our Land, though Gerrard says so, for
it will not endure so much Winter, as to seed with us: the third is a natural
of the West Indies, and the last of Naples; yet to be found no doubt in the
Summer, in the Gardens of some of our exactest Herbarists. The first flowreth
in July, and the Seed is ripe soon after, and so does the last sometimes; but
the other not flowring till toward Winter, cannot in these cold Countries,
bring its seed to perfection; for in the natural places it flowreth not until
the end of July, and in August.

The Temperature.
Vervein is hot and dry, bitter and binding, and is an opener of obstructions,
cleanses and heals.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Flowers of Vervein in some sort representing the Eye, are no small
Argument, that it is thereunto to be appropriated. The distilled water of the
Herb when it is in full strength, cleanses them from Films, Clouds, or Mists
that darken the sight, and wonderfully strengthens the Optic Nerves. If the
Herb it self be stamped with the white of an Egg, and laid to the Eye that is
swollen or blood-shot, when you go to bed it will cure it. It is also an
excellent Herb for the Womb, to strengthen it, and to cure all the cold griefs
of it, as Plantain does the hot. It helps the yellow Jaundice, the Dropsy,
and the Gout: the defects of the Reigns and Longs* and generally all inward
pains and torments of the body, the Leaves being boiled and drunk. The same is
held to be good against the biting of Serpents, and other venomous Beasts, the
Plague, both Tertian and Quartan Agues, and the Worms in the Belly. It causes
a good Color in the Face and Body, strengthens the Liver and Spleen, as well
as corrects the Diseases of them, is very effectual in all Diseases of the
Stomach and Lungs, as Coughs, shortness of breath, and wheesings, and is
singular good against the Dropsy, to be drunk with some Piony Seeds, bruised
and put thereto: And is no less prevalent for the defects of the Reins and
Bladder, to cleanse those humors that engender the Stone, and helps to break
the Stone, and to expel Gravel. It consolidateth and heals all wounds, both
inward and outward, and stays bleedings, and used with some Honey, heals
all old Ulcers, and Fistulaes in the Legs or other parts of the Body: as also
those Ulcers that happen in the mouth, or used with old Hog's Grease, it helps
the swellings and pains of the secret parts in Man or Woman: as also those
Ulcers that happen in the mouth, applied with some Oil of Roses and Vinegar
unto the Forehead and Temples, it eases the inveterate pains and ach of the
head, and is good for those which are frantic. the Leaves bruised, or mixed
with some Vinegar, does wonderfully cleanse the skin, and takes away Morphew,
Freckles, Fistulaes, and such other like Inflammations, and Deformities of the
skin, in any part of the Body; and so does the distilled water, which is also
very powerful in inward Diseases, and likewise in outward, whether they be old
corroding Sores, or green wounds. The Female Vervein is held to be more
powerful then the common; but that of Peru exceeds them both. Monardus
reported, that a Noble Woman having used the help of diverse Physicians in vain,
an Indian Physician very skilful in Herbs, gave her the juice of that Vervein
to drink with a little Sugar, by whose use she avoided in few days, a long
Worm, being hairy, of a foot in length, and double forked at the tail: after
which she grew well. This Medicine was given to many others, that complained of
Worms, and it helped them. It is held also to be no less effectual against
all poison, and the venom of dangerous Beasts and Serpents: as also against
bewitched Drink^, and the like, so that it is not used in, but also against,
Witchcraft. That this Herb is used by Witches, may appear from the story of
Anne Bodenham, the late Witch of Salisbury, who sent her Ruffian-like spirits
to gather Vervein and Dill, which was to be given to one, whom she was desired
to bewitch, as you may read at large in the Book that is set forth, concerning
the said Witch.

CHAP. XIX. Of Roses.
The Names.
WE are led by the Order of the forecited Verse to the Rose, which is called in
Greek (...) Rhodon, quod largum odoris effluvium emittit, from the great
sweetness therein, as Plutarch says; in Latin, both Flower and Plant is
called Rosa, though in Greek the Plant be called (...). And because there be
six parts in a Rose, every one of which has a particular name, it will not be
amiss to set them down in this place, as 1. The Leaves. 2. The Nails* 3. The
yellow Chives, or Threads in the middle. 4. The Husk or Cup. 5. The five
Brethren. 6. The Seeds. The Leaves are so much as is left, when the Nails are
cut off. The white part of the Leaves of the Flower it self, by which they are
fastened to the Cups, are named Vngues or Nails. The yellow Chives or Threads in
the middle, properly called Capillamenta Rosarum, are by some erroneously taken
for the Rose-Seed, and called Anthera Rosarum, from the Greek (...) Flores
Rosarum, whereas indeed Anthera is the name of a compounded Medicine, appointed
for diverse parts, as Antherae Stomachicae, etc. which either in form of
Powders, or made up with Honey, still hold the same name, not taken from
Flowers of Roses, whereof in many of them, none was put in, but from the lively
Color of the Ingredients, whereof the Compound Medicine was made. That is
called Calix, or the Cup which contained, and holds in together those yellow
Threads and Leaves of the Flower. The five Brethren, called in Latin Alabastri,
are those parts of the Cup which are deeply cut; and that compass the Flower
about before it be opened; two have beards, and two have none, and the fifth
has but half a one: Some do call them with the Cup Cortices Rosarum, the
husks, some the stalks of Roses. The Seeds are contained within the Cup, which
you shall find by breaking of it: yet I believe, this Seed is not fit for
propagation, which is commonly made by Roots and slips, wherewith these kind
of shrubs abound.

The Kinds.
I shall not be very curious in searching after the several sorts of Roses;
but shall content my self in giving you the Titles of those mentioned by
Gerrard, which are 1. The white Rose. 2. The Red Rose. 3. The great Damask
Rose. 4. The lesser Damask Rose. 5. The Ro^e without prick^es. 6. The
Pro^ince-Rose. 7. The single Musk-Rose. 8. The double Musk-Rose. 9. The
Ve^^et-Rose. 10. The yellow Rose. 11. The double Cinnamon Ro^e. 12. The ^g
antine or sweet Bryer. 13. The Bryer Ro^e, or Hep-Tree. 14. The Burner Rose.
All which I shall as near as I can, wrap up into one general Description, by
which the whole Family may be distinguished.

The Form.
The Rose has long stalks, of a woody substance, set, or armed for the most
part with diverse sharp prickles: the branches whereof, are likewise full of
prickles, whereon do commonly grow leaves, consisting of five parts, set upon a
middle Rib by couples: the odd one standing at the point of the same, every one
of them somewhat snipt about the edges, ^omewhat rough, and of an overworn
green color: from the bosom whereof, shoot out pretty big footstalk, whereon
do grow very fair flowers, some single, some double, ^ome white, some red, some
damask, some yellow, etc. for the most part of a very sweet smell, having in
the middle, a few yellow threads, or chives, which being past, there succeeds
a long fruit, green at the first, red when it is ripe, and stuffed with a downy
choking matter, wherein is contained Seed as hard as stones. The Root is long,
tough, and of a woody substance.

The Places and Time.
All these sorts of Roses, or most of them, and perhaps some besides, are in
the Physic Garden at Oxford, and in several Gardens about London. The double
white Rose does grow wi^d in many hedges of Lancashire, in great abundance.
They flower one or other of them, from the end of May till the end of August.
If the superfluous branches and tops be cut away at the end of their flowring,
they will sometimes, if the Winter be calm, flower again in October, and after.

The Temperature.
Both the white and red Roses are cooling and drying, yet the white is taken to
exceed the red in both those properties, but is ^eldom used inwardly in any
Medicine. The Red as Galen says, has a watery substance in it, and a warm
joined with two other qualities, that is, an astringent and a bitter. The
yellow Chives or threads in the middle: as also the nails (which when any Syrup
or Conserve is to be made, are to be cut away) do bind more then the Rose it
self, and are more drying also. Mesue shows, that the Rose is cold in the
first Degree, and dry in the second, compounded of diverse parts or substances,
which yet may be separated namely, a watery mean substance* and an earthly
drying, an airy substance, likewise sweet and aromatical, and an hot also
whereof comes the bitterness, the redness, perfection and form. The bitterness
in the Roses, when they are fresh, especially the juice purges Choler, and
watery humors; but being dried, and that heat that caused the bitterness, being
consumed, they have a stopping, and astringent power. Those also that are not
full blown, do both cool, and bind more then those that are full blown, and the
white Roses more then the red.

The Virtues.
The Decoction of Red Roses made with Wine, and used, is very good for the
Headache, and pains in the Eyes, Ears. Throat and Gums, the fundament also, the
lower Bowels and the Matrix being bathed, or put unto them: The same Decoction
with the Roses remaining in them, is profitably applied to the Region of the
heart, to ease the Inflammation therein; as also St. Anthonies fire, and other
Diseases of the stomach. Being dried, and beaten to Powder, and taken in
steeled Wine, or water, it does help to stay Women's Courses, they serve also
for the Eyes, being mixed with such other Medicines, that serve for that
purpose, and are sometimes put into those Compositions, that are called
Anthera. The yellow Threads in the midst of the Red Roses, especially being
powdered and drunk in the distilled water of Quinces, stays the abundance of
Women's Courses, and does wonderfully stay and help Defluxions of Rheum upon the
Gums and Teeth, and preserves them from corruption, and fasteneth them, being
loose, if they be washed and gargled therewith, and some Vinegar of Squills
added thereunto. The heads with Seed being used in Powder, or in a Decoction,
stays the Lask, and the spitting of blood. Red Rose Water being cooling and
cordial, refreshing and quickening the weak and faint spirits, is used either in
meats or broths; as also to wash the Temples, to smell to at the Note, or to
smell the sweet vapor thereof, out of a perfuming Pot, or cast on a hot
Fireshovel: It is also of much good use against the redness, and Inflammation
of the Eyes, to bath them therewith, and the Temples of the Head against pain
and ach; for which purpose, Vinegar of Roses also is of very good use and to
procure rest and sleep, if some of it, and Rose Water together, be smelled
unto, or if a piece of Red-Rose Cake, moistened therewith, be cut fit for the
Head, and heated between a double folded Cloth, with a little beaten Nutmeg,
and Poppy-Seed strewed on the side that must lie next to the Forehead and
Temples, and bound so thereto for all night. The Syrup of Damask-Roses, is both
simple and compound, and made with Agarick. The simple solutive Syrup, is a
familiar, safe, gentle, and easy Medicine purging Choler, taken from one ounce
to three or four. The Syrup with Agarick, is more strong and effectual; for one
ounce thereof will open the Body, more then three of the other, and works as
much on Phlegm as Choler. The Compound Syrup, with Hellebore, is more forcible
in working upon melancholic humors, and available against the Itch, Tetters,
etc. and the French Disease. Also Honey of Roses solutive, is made of the same
infusion, that the Syrup is, and works the same effect, both in opening and
purging, but is oftener given to Phlegmatic, then choleric persons, and is
more used in Clysters, then in Potions, as the Syrup made with Sugar is. The
Conserve and preserved leaves of these Roses, are also operative, in gently
opening the Belly. The simple water of the Damask Roses is much used for fumes
to sweeten things, as also to put into Pyes, and Broths, etc. as the dried
Leaves thereof, to make sweet Powders, and fill sweet Bags, but are seldom used
in Physic, although they have some purging quality. The wild Roses are few, or
none of them used in Physic, yet are generally held to come near the nature of
the manured Roses. The fruit of the wild Bryar, which are called Heps, being
thoroughly ripe, and made into a Conserve with Sugar besides the pleasantness of
the taste, does gently bind the belly, and stay the defluxions from the head,
upon the stomach, drying up the moisture thereof, and helping digestion. The
Pulp of the Heps, dried into a hard consistence, like to the juice of
Liquorice; or so dried, that it may be made into Powder, and taken in drink;
stays speedily whites in Women. The Bryar-Ball is often used, being made into
Powder, and drunk to break the stone, to provoke Urine when it is stopped, and
to ease and help the Cholick.

CHAP. XX. Of Celandine.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek, (...), from a supposition that the Ancients had, that
with this Herb, Swallows do restore sight to their young ones, though their
Eyes be put out: which Opinion is condemned as vain and false, by Aristotle,
and Celsus from him, who show, that the young ones of Doves, Partridges,
Swallows, etc. will recover of themselves, without any thing done unto them:
Yet I find, that many Authors question not the truth of the story; for
Crollius, and diverse others, do report how that Doves make use of Vervein,
Swallows of Celandine, Linnets of Eyebright, and Hawks of Hawkweed, for the
recovery of their own, and their young ones sight: The Latin also follows
the Greek, and in it, it is called Chelidonium majus and Hirundnaria major; and
we in English, great Celandine; and of some, Swallow-wort, and Tetterwort, for
its efficacy in curing Tetters.

The Kinds.
Parkinson treats of Pilewort in the same Chapter with Celandine, which are no
more alike, then Chalk and Cheese, neither in Leaf nor Flower, only because it
is called Chelidonium minus, from an error of Dioscorides, who says, that it
springs when Swallows come in, and withers at their going away, when as it
springs before Swallows come, and vanishes long before their departure.
Therefore I shall not mention that any more here, but shall set down the kinds
of the greater Celandine, which I find to be three. 1. Common great Celandine.
2. Jagged Celandine. 3. Great Celandine of Canada.

The Form.
Common Celandine has diverse tender, round, whitish, green stalks, with
greater Joints then other Herbs ordinarily have like unto knees, very brittle
and easy to break, from whence grow branches with large tender long Leaves,
divided into many parts, each of them cut-in on the edges, set at the joints on
both sides of the branches, of a dark bluish green color, on the upper side,
like Columbines, and of a more pale bluish green underneath, full of a yellow
sap, when any part is broken, of a bitter taste, and strong scent: at the tops
of the branches, which are much divided, grow gold yellow Flowers, of four
Leaves a piece, after which come small long pods, with blackish seed therein:
the root is thick and knobby, with some threads annexed thereto, which being
broken or bruised, yields a sap or juice of the color of Gold.

The Places and Times.
The common sort grows in many places by old Walls, by the hedges and way
sides, in untilled places; and being once planted in a Garden, especially in
some shady place, it will hardly be gotten out. The second, is not known to
grow naturally, but is received into Gardens for the variety. The third, in
Canada, as the Title shows. The two first sorts flower all the Summer long,
and the seed ripeneth in the mean time; but the last flowreth very late, and
brings not its seed to perfection in this Country.

The Temperature:
The ordinary great Celandine is manifestly hot and dry, and that in the third
Degree; and withal, scoureth and cleanses effectually.

The Signature and Virtues.
Though Aristotlc will not admit that this Herb cures the Eyes of young
Swallows, yet it has been proved, by experience, that it is one of the best
cures for men's Eyes that is; for the juice dropped into the Eyes, cleanses them
from films and clowdiness, which darken the sight; but it is best to allay the
sharpness of it, with a little Breast-Milk. Mr. Culpepper says, that the Oil
or Ointment is most effectual, if it be anointed upon sore Eyes, and that it is
far better then endangering the Eyes with a Needle, The Herb or Roots boiled in
White Wind and drunk, a few Annlseeds being boiled therewith, opens
Obstructions of the Liver and Gall, helps the yellow Jaundice by Signature,
which is plainly signified by the yellow juice; and, after often using, it
helps the Dropsy, and the Itch, and those that have old sores in their Legs,
or other parts of the Body. The juice thereof taken fasting, is held to be of
singular good use against the Plague or Pestilence, and so is the distilled
water also, with a little Sugar; but especially if a little good Treacle be
mixed therewith, and they upon the taking, lie down to sweat a little: It is
good in old filthy corroding creeping Ulcers whatsoever, to stay the
stelalignity of fretting, and running, and to cause them to heal the more
speedily: The juice often applied to Tetters, Ring-worms, or other such like
spreading Cancers, will quickly heal them, and rubbed often on Warts, will take
them away. The Herb, with the Roots bruised, and heated with the Oil of
Camomile, and applied to the Navel, takes away both the griping pain in the
Belly and Bowels, as all the pains of the Mother, and applied to Women's Breasts
that have their Courses over much, stays them. The Juice or Decoction of the
Herb, gargled between the teeth that ache, takes away the pain; and the Powder
of the dried Root, laid upon an aching, hollow, or loose Tooth, will, as some
say, cause it to drop out. The Juice mixed with Powder of Brimstone, is not
only good to anoint those places which are troubled with the Itch, but takes
away all discolorings of the skin whatsoever, be they spots of marks or
bruises, stripes or wounds, the Morphew also, Sun-burning, or any the like; and
if by chance in a tender body, it cause any Itching or Inflammation, it is soon
helped, if the place be but bathed with a little Vinegar. Matthiolus says,
that if the green Herb be worn in the shoes of them that have the yellow
Jaundies, so as their bare feet may tread thereon, it helps them.

CHAP. XXI. Of Rue or Herb Grace.
The Names.
(...) is the Name which the Greeks give unto this Herb, which is the last in
the forementioned verse, and is so called, (...) a coagulando because it does
as it were condense the generative faculty by its heat and dryness, and is
therefore said to abate carnal lust; Yet Schola Salerni makes a difference
between men and women: for they say.

Ruta viris coitum minuit, mulieribus auget. Because the nature of Women is
waterish and cold, and Rue heateth, and dries; therefore (say they) it
stirs them more to carnal lust; but it diminishes the nature of men which
is of temperature like unto the air, which is hot and moist. Dioscorides says,
that what we call Ruta montana, was in his time called Moly montanum; and the
root of the Assyrian wild kind Moly, for the likeness thereunto, being black
without and white within. And Ruta in Latin, of Ruo, for the violent fierce
vapors it sends forth, causing itching blisters, etc. In English, Rue, Herb
Grace, and Herb of Grace for the many good uses it may be put to; It is without
doubt a most wholesome herb, though bitter and strong: and could dainty Palates
brook the taste and use thereof, it would work singular effects, being
skilfully and carefully applied.

The Kinds.
To omit the other sorts of herbs called by the name of Rue which have little
likeness thereunto, but only a little show in their leaves. I intend to insist
in this place of none but the ordinary Garden Rue, and those sorts which have a
more immediate relation to it, they being six in all. 1. The greater ordinary
Rue or Herb of Grace. 2. The lesser Garden Rue. 3. The greater wild Rue. 4.
Small wild Rue. 5. Mountain Rue. 6. Assyrian Rue, which with some of the other
sorts are not usually bred, nor easily kept in the Land.

The Form.
Ordinary Garden Rue grows up with hard whitish woody stalks, branching forth
on all sides, and bearing thereon sundry long leaves divided into many small
ones, being somewhat thick and round pointed, and of a dark bluish green
color: the flowers that stand at the tops, consist of four small yellow Leaves
standing opposite one against another in the form of a Cross with a green
button in the midst, compassed about with sundry small yellow threads, which
growing ripe, contains within it small black seed, the root is white and
woody spreading far in the ground and abiding many years.

The Places and Time.
The two first sorts are found only in Gardens, yet the second is not so common
as the first, and only kept by a few. The other two wild sorts grow upon the
Mountains in Spain and Italy. The fifth grows in Spain, also France, and
other hot Countries. The last grows in Syria, and in the hedges about
Constantinople, as Bellonius testifies. The Garden kinds, especially the
lesser do seldom flower in our Land, and therefore scarce ever bear good seed;
And the wild or Mountain Kinds do the like, and therefore they are commonly
propagated by slips here in England.

The Temperature.
Rue is hot and dry in the latter end of the third degree, and wild-Rue in the
fourth; It is of thin and subtle parts, it wastes and consumes wind, and it
cutteth and digesteth cross and tough humors.

The Signature and Virtues.
The virtues of Rue are pithily expressed in Schola Salerni,

Ruta facit custum, dut lumen, and iugerit astum,
Cocta facit Ruta de pulicibus loca tuta.
Rue makes chaste, and eke preserves sight,
Infuseth wit, and Fleas does put to flight.
Concerning Chastity, I have spoken somewhat already in the Names; besides it
repaireth the Eyesight and sharpeneth it, if it be eaten green as is there
mentioned; Ruta comesta recens oculos caligine purgat. Or else the Juice of Rue
together with the Juice of Fennel, the Gall of a Cock, and clarified honey
being put into the Eyes helps the dimnesse of them. The third property is,
that Rue makes a man quick, subtle and inventive, by reason that by heating
and drying it makes a man's Spirits subtle, and so clears the wit. The
fourth is, that the water wherein good store of Rue has been sodden, being
cast and sprinked about the house riddeth away Fleas and kills them. Besides,
these foresaid properties, it provokes Urine, and Women's Courses being taken
either in meat or drink. The Seed thereof taken in Wine, is an Antidote against
all dangerous Medicines or deadly Poisons. The very smell of Rue keeps a man
from Infection, as is often proved in time of pestilence; for a Nosegay thereof
is a good Preservative; but being received into the body, it is of much greater
force. A Decoction made thereof, with some dried Dill Leaves and Flowers,
eases all pains and torments inwardly to be drunk, and outwardly to be applied
warm to the place grieved. The same being drunk helps the pains both of the
Chest and Sides; as also Coughs and hardness of breathing, the Inflammations
of the Lungs, and the tormenting pains of the Sciatica and the Joints, being
anointed or laid to the places; as also the shaking fits of Agues, to take a
draught before the fit come: Being boiled or infused in Oil, it is good to help
the wind Colic, the hardness or windiness of the Mother; and freeth Women
from the strangling or suffocation thereof, if the Share and parts thereabouts
be anointed therewith; It kills and drives forth Wo^ms of the Belly, if it
be drunk after it is boiled in Wine to the half, with a little honey. It
helps the Gout or pains in the Joints, of Hands, Feet, or Knees applied
thereunto, and with Figs it helps the Dropsy being bathed therewith; being
bruised and put into Nostrills it stays the bleeding thereof. A Decoction of
it and Bay Leaves helps the swelling of the Codds, if they be bathed
therewith: if it be bruised with a few Myrtle leaves and made up with wax and
applied, it takes away Wheales and Pimples; It cures the Morphew, and takes
away all sorts of Warts, if boiled in Wine with some pepper and Nitre and the
places rubbed therewith, and with Allom and Honey helps the dry Scab, or any
Tetter or Ringworm. The Juice thereof warmed in a Pomegranate Shell or Rind,
and dropped into the Ears helps the pain of them: An Ointment made of the
said Juice, with Oil of Roses, Cerusse, and a little Vinegar, and anointed,
cures St. Anthonies fire, and all soul running Sores in the Head, and the
stinking U^cers of the Nose or other parts. Take of Nitre, Pepper, and Cummin
Seed, of each equal parts, of the Leaves of Rue clean picked as much in weight
as all the other three weighed, beat them well together, and put-to as much
honey as will make it up into an Electuary (but you must first correct your
Cummin Seed, by keeping it in Vinegar twenty four hours, and then dry it well
in a hot Fire sho^el, or in an Oven) and it is remedy for the pains or griefs
of the Chest or Stomach, of the Spleen, Belly or Sides, by wind or Stiches, of
the Liver by obstructions, of the Reins and Bladder, by the stopping of Urine,
and helps also to extenuate fat corpulent Bodies. The leaves of Rue first
boiled, and then laid in Pickle are kept by many to eat as sauce to meat, like
as Sampire is for the dimnesse of sight, and to warm a cold Stomach. The
distilled water is very effectual for many of the purposes aforesaid. In
outward applications, the wild kinds work more forcibly then the Garden kinds,
but taken inwardly by Women with child it destroys the birth, and mightily
expels the afterbirth. A Weasell being to fight with a Serpent, eats Rue,
and rubbeth her self therewith to avoid his poison. I know not what religion
Crollius was of: but he says, that the sign of the Cross which is upon the
seed; or rather, as I suppose, the flower of Rue drives away all Phantasms,
and evil Spirits, by Signature.

CHAP. XXII. Of Eyebright.
The Names.
NExt to those mentioned by Schola Salerni; We come to Eyebright which is
called in Greek, (...); or as Fuchsius would rather have it, (...) saying, that
without doubt the name of this herb has been corrupted by some Apothecaries,
that were unskifull in the Greek tongue: whereas heretofore it was called,
(...) because it does rejoice those, whose Eyes are troubled with dimnesse. But
why he would have it called, (...) and not (...), I know not, unless he should
have alluded to some plant of this kind, formerly so called by the Ancients,
which he seems to deny when he says, that though this herb has gotten an
elegant Greek name; yet nothing that I know is found concerning it, in any of
the more ancient Greek or Latin Authors. He says further, that Buglosse is
called, (...) and that Eyebright borrowed its Greek name from thence, because
as the one, drunk in Wine, does cause joy of mind, so the other delights and
clears the Eyes; So that, I conceive the mistake to be on his part: (...) as
well as (...) signifying joy or gladness; for why should we call two things by
one name, rejecting that which in all probability seems to be the right. If
Buglosse were first called, (...); it seems more likely that Eyebright should
be called (...); seeing they both signify alike, it being strange to me that
there being no want of a word, two plants should have the same appellation; and
therefore in my judgment it is more rightly called (...), then (...). It is
called also, Opthalmica and Ocularia, for its effect, and we in English call it
Eyebright, because it makes the Eyes that are dim to become bright.

The Kinds.
Parkinson reckons up seven sorts hereof, which I have here set down. 1.
Common Eyebright. 2. Small Eyebright. 3. Great red Woody Eyebright. 4. Small
red Woody Eyebright. 5. Broad leased purple Eyebright. 6. Great yellow
Eyebright. 7. The lesser yellow Eyebright.

The Form.
Common Eyebright is a small low herb, rising up usually but with one blackish
green stalk a span high, or not much more when it is highed, but seldom so high
spread from the bottom into sundry branches, whereon are set small and almost
round, yet pointed dark green leaves finely snipt about the edges, two always
set together and very thick: At the Joints with the leaves from the middle
upward, come forth small white flowers striped with purple and yellow spots or
stripes; after which follow small round heads, with very small seed therein.
The root is long small and threddy at the end. On some Hills the color of the
flower is sometimes found to vary from those that grow in other places, as
being more whitish, yellow or more purple.

The Places and Time.
The first and third are only frequent in this Island, the former grows in
dry meddowes, by green and grassy ways, and in pastures, usually on hills
sides that stand toward the Sun; and the other in many places of Kent in the
barren fields, and wast grounds about Gravesend and many other places: the rest
grow, some in Italy and at Naples, some in Spain and Austria. They seldom
flower before the beginning of August, and continue till September, and must be
gathered whilst they flower, for all physical uses; for when they are run to
seed as they will be within a while after, they are nothing so effectual.

The Temperature
These herbs are by the consent of all Authors hot and dry, but in what degree
they express not. I conceive they may be hot in the second, and dry in the
third; for Gerrard says, they are more dry then hot.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Purple and yellow spots and stripes, which are upon the flowers of
Eyebright does very much resemble the diseases of the Eyes, as blood-shot, etc.
By which signature it has been found out, that this herb is very effectual for
the curing of the same, and for removing dimnesse of sight, either the Powder
of the dry herb, or the Juice of the green. The distilled water is very
effectual for the said purpose, to be taken either inwardly in Wine or in
Broth, or to be dropped into the Eyes, and used for diverse days together. Some
also make a Conserve of the flower to the same effect. Being used any of these
ways, it also helps a weak Brain or memory, and restores them being decayed
in a short time, Arnoldus de Villa Nova, in his book of VVines much commends
the Wine made of Eyebright, put into it when it is new made, and before it
work; and certainly if it were tunned up with strong Beer, as Wormwood,
Scurvy-grasse, and the like use to be, it would work the like effects as the
Wine does, which he says, not only helps the dimness of the sight, but that
the use thereof makes old men to read small Letters without Spectacles, that
could hardly read great ones with their spectacles before, so that as Mr.
Culpepper says, If this Herb were as much used as neglected, it would half
spoil the Spectacle-makers Trade: Arnoldus says also, that it did restore
their sight, who were blind for a long while before. If a sufficient quantity
hereof cannot be had, to tun up, as aforesaid; the Powder of the dried Herb,
either mixed with Sugar, or a little Mace and Fennel-seeds, and drunk or eaten
in Broth; or the said Powders, made into an Electuary with Honey, do either-way
tend to the same effect. Diverse Authors write, that Gold-finches, Linnets, and
some other Birds, make use of this Herb, for the repairing of their own, and
their young ones sight.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Clarey.
The Names.
ANother Plant, whose name does demonstrate, that it is good for the Eyes is,
Clary, quasi Clear Eye, because the Seed put into the Eyes, does clear them.
The Greek name of it is (...) quod (...) as Dioscorides says; for (...)
signifies impetu quodam ferri quemadmodum in Venerem proni, because it
provokes to Venery, which is another property it has. And Gaza, that
translated Theophrastus into Latin, translateth it Geminalis; for the
fruitfulness it causes most likely in bearing Twins, in Latin also Horminum.
The wild sort is known by the name of Oculus Christi in Latin, and Wild Clary
in English. Clary is also called Gallitricum Orvala, and of some, Tota bona,
but not properly, Scatlea Sclarea and Centrum Galli.

The Kinds.
There are diverse sorts of Clary, some manured only, called Garden Clary,
others growing wild, as 1. Ordinary Garden Clary. 2. The true Garden Clary of
Dioscorides. 3. Assyrian Clary. 4. Low German Clary. 5. Our ordinary wild
Clary, or Oculus Christi. 6. Hoary wild Clary, with a white Flower. 7. Italian
wild Clary. 8. Wild Clary with Spike Flowers. 9. Sage leafed wild Clary. 10.
Low Candy Clary. 11. Torn and narrow leafed Clary. 12. Yellow wild Clary, or
Jupiters Distaff. 13. Ethiopian Clary.

The Forms
Ordinary Garden Clary, has apiece stalks, with broad, rough, wrinkled,
whitish, and hairy green leaves, somewhat evenly cut-in on the edges, and of a
strong sweet scent, growing some near the ground, and some by couples upon
stalks: The Flowers grow at certain distances, with two small Leaves at the
Joints under them, somewhat like unto the Flowers of Sage, but smaller, and of
a very whitish, or black blew Color, the Seed is brownish, and somewhat flat,
or not so round as the wild: the Roots are blackish, and spread not far, and
perish after the Seed-time: it is most usual to save it; for the Seed seldom
rises of its own shedding.

The Place and Time.
The first is planted only in Gardens, and so is the second in the Western
parts of Europe, both on this side and beyond the Alps, by the judgment of the
best Authors. The third was brought by Paludanus, into these parts, out of
Syria. The fourth is wild in many places of Germany. The fifth is wild in our
Country, upon dry banks, almost every where, and by the way sides. The sixth,
Clusius first found in the Meadows, near Sopronium in Hungary. The seventh was
sent out of Italy, and it is likely, is originally of that Country. The eighth
grew with Clusius, of the Seed he received out of Spain; but yet as he says,
he found it likewise near the riding place at Greenwich. The ninth grows in
Hungary, almost every where in their Vineyards, and by the way sides. The tenth
grew of the Seed which was sent out of Candy. The eleventh, both at Mompel^er,
and in Candy. The twelfth throughout Hungary, in great plenty; and in Austria,
and in many other places. The last, as Dioscorides says, on Mount Ida in
Phrygia and Messenia; but of late days, gathered from some of the Hills of
Greece and Illyria, that are near the Sea. I have seen Colus Jovis, etc.
Jupiters distaffe, and the Ethiopian Clary, grow both in the Physic Garden at
Oxford, and that at Westminster.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Clary is hot and dry in the third Degree. The Seed thereof, but especially the
wild sort called Oculus Christ, of its effects from helping the Diseases of
the Eyes, is used to be put into the Eyes, to clear them from any Moats, or other
such like things as are gotten within the Lids to offend them: as also to
cleanse them of all filthy and putrified matters, wherewith the Eyes are wont to
be infested, and to take away white and red spots out of them. If the Seed be
finely powdered, searsed, and mixed with Honey, and applied to the Eyes, it
takes away the dimness of them. The mucilage of the Seed of either sort, made
with water, and applied to Tumors or Swellings, disperseth and takes them
away, and also draws forth Splinters, Thorns, or other things gotten into the
flesh. The Leaves used with Vinegar, either by it self or with a little Honey,
does help hot Inflammations, as also Biles, Felons, and hot Inflammations
gathered by their pains, if it be applied before they are grown too great. The
Powder of the dried Leaves put into the Nose, provokes sneesing, and thereby
purges the Head and Brains of much Rheum and corruption. It provokes to
Venery, either the Seed or Leaves taken in Wine. It is in much use, to help to
strengthen the Reins, either used by it self, or with other Herbs, that conduce
to the same effect, and in Tansies often, or the fresh Leaves fried in Butter,
being first dipped in a Batter of Flower, Eggs, and a little Milk, served as a
dish to the Table, is not unpleasant to any; but especially, profitable to
those Men or Women, that have weak backs. It is used in Italy, to be given for
Women that are batten, through a cold and moist disposition, to heat and dry up
that moisture and to help them to be fruitful: it helps the Stomach oppressed
with cold phlegm, and purges the Head of Rheum, and much corruption; but the
overmuch use hereof, offends the Head, and is hurtful for the Brain and
memory. It brings down Women's desired sickness, and expels the Secondine,
or afterbirth. Yellow Clary, or Jupiters Distaffe is hot and drying, and the
juice of it is of special good use, to cleanse and heal foul Ulcers. The
Ethiopian Clary is commended for the roughness of the Throat, and to help to
expectorate the rotten and purulent matter in the Plurisie, or in other Coughs,
either the Decoction of the Root drunk, or made into an Electuary with Honey.
Dioscorides says also, that it is good for those which are troubled with the
Sciatica. The Leaves of wild Clary, are good to be put into Pottage and Broth,
amongst other Herbs; for they scatter congealed blood, warm the stomach, and
help the dimness of the Eyes.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Hawk-weed.
The Names.
THis is the last Plant that I shall treat of, as appropriated to the Eyes, and
it is called in Greek, (...) of (...) Accipiter, an Hawk, because Hawks are
said to sharpen their Eyes with the Juice of this Herb; and for the same
Reason, it is called Hawk-weed in English. In Latin it is called Hieracium,
and Accipitrina. Gaza calls it Porcellia. It is called also, Lampuca, and by
some, Hypochaeris and Hyoseris.

The Kinds.
Parkinson, (who thinks that such a multitude of Varieties in form pertaining
to one Herb, is not to be found again in Rerum natura) divides the Hawkweeds
into nine Ranks, which, with the particulars, comprehended under every one of
them, would, if only named, make this Chapter extend its limits. I shall
content my self only with those I find mentioned in the Phytologia Britannica,
which I conceive to be the usuallest sorts growing within these Dominions, and
they are 1. Rough Hawk-weed, or yellow Succory (for all of them are numbered
amongst the Succories by some.) 2. Dandelyon Hawk-weed. 3. Succory Hawk-weed.
4. Endive Hawk-weed. 5. Rough Mountain Hawk-weed. 6. Long rooted Hawk-weed. 7.
Great Hawk-weed. 8. Hares Lettice, or little Hawk-weed, yellow Devils bit. 9.
Little Mountain Hawk-weed. 10. Black Hawk-weed, with more cut Leaves.

The Form,
Hawk-weed has diverse Leaves, of no great size, lying on the ground, much
rent, or torn on the sides into many gashes, somewhat like unto Dandelyon; from
among which arises a hollow rough stalk, of about half a yard, or two foot
high at the most, that ever I saw oranched from the middle upward, wherein are
set at every Joint ^esser Leaves, but not so much indented as the former;
bearing at their top, sundry pale, yellow Flowers, consisting of many small
narrow Leaves, broad pointed, and nicked in at the ends, set in a double Roe or
more, the ^^er most being larger then the inner: which form most of the
Hawk-weeds do hold, which turn into Down, and with the small brownish Seeds, is
blown away with the wind: The Root is long and white, with many small fibers
thereat. The whole Plant is full of bitter milk.

The Places and Time.
The kind of Herbs do grow in untilled places, near unto the borders of
Cornfields, in Meadows, Highways, Woods, Mountains, and Hilly places, and
many times near unto the brinks of Ditches. They flower for the most part all
the Summer long, some sooner, and others later.

The Temperature.
The kinds of Hawkeweed, are cold and dry, and somewhat binding.

The Signatures and Virtues.
Hawkeweed, Argemone (which I touched, when I spoke of the Poppies) Marigolds,
Anemonies, Scabious and wild Tansy, which I shall have more occasion to mention
hereafter; do cure the Eyes by Signatures, as they say who have studied them;
and indeed they are all of them very good, for the preserving and recovery of
the sight, by removing the many diseases which afflict that part more then any
other, because it is more tender and more employed being the Organ of the most
busied Sense to those that have it. The Juice of Hawkeweed being mingled with
the milk of a Woman, and dropped into the ^yes is singular good for all defects
and diseases of the Eyes, and so is the di^^led Water used in the same manner.

It is also used with good success, in fretting or creeping ulcers, especially
in the beginning. The green herb bruised and with a little Salt applied to any
place burnt with fire, before blisters do arise, helps them; as also
Inflammations, St. Anthonies fire, and all Pushes and Eruptions, Heat and Salt
Phlegm. The same applied with Meal and fair Water in manner of a Pultis to any
place affected, with Convulsions and the Cramp, or such as are out of Joint
does give ease and help, the Juice thereof in wine helps digestion,
discusseth Wind hinders Crudities abiding in the Stomach, and helps the
difficulty of making water, the biting of Venomous Serpents and Sting of the
Scorpion, if the herb be also outwardly applied to the place; and helps all
other Poisons except that of Cerussa, or those that hurt the Bladder, or kill
by strangling. A Scruple of the dried Juice given in Wine and Vinegar, is
profitable for those that have the Dropsy. The Decoction of the herb taken
with Honey digesteth thin Phlegm in the Chest or Lungs, and with Hysop helps
the Cough. Being boiled in Wine with a like quantity of wild Succory, and
taken, it helps the wind Cholick and hardness of the Spleen, it procures
rest and sleep, hinders Venery, and Venereous Dreams, cools heats, purges
the Stomach, increases blood, and helps the Diseases of the Reins and
Bladder. The distilled water is of good use in many of the diseases aforesaid,
besides those of the Eyes, and the face washed therewith cleanses the skin,
and takes away freckles and spots; the Morphew and other blemishes in the
skin, and helps to take away the wrinckles in the face also. The Juice of the
Rough Dande-lyon like Hawkeweed, is singular good for the Pleurisy, if it be
taken in drink.

CHAP. XXV. Of Asarabacca.
THe Plants appropriated to the Eyes being thus dispatched, we come next to
some that are good for the Ears; for it would be a piece of Injustice to take
all the Care for the former, and to neglect the latter: though I indeed scarce
find any plant good for the Ears, but is so likewise for the Eyes. Amongst
which Asarabacca is none of the meanest whose Names are as follow.

The Names.
Pliny thought that it was called, (...) in Greek quasi (...) in ornatum non
veniens, because it was not used in Garlands; but the Text of Dioscorides is
flat against him, for he says it is, (...), a sweet herb used in Garlands; It
is also called (...) in Latin Asarum and Nardus sylvestris, or Nardus Rust^ca,
and as Macer says Vulgago, as by his Verse appears; Est Asarum Graece;
V^lgago dicta Latinis. The former times thought Asarum and Baccharis to be one
herb; and therefore they called it, Asara baccara, which name is continued in
Spain and other places, and with us even to this day; but the descriptions of
them being so diverse, it is fit this m^stake should be taken notice of and
amended.

The Kinds.
The sorts hereof are three. 1. Common Asarabacca. 2. Virginian Asarabacca. 3.
Bastard Asarum of Matthiolus.

The Form.
Asarabacca has many Heads rising from the Roots, from whence come many smooth
Leaves, every one upon his own footstalk, which are rounder and bigger then
Violet Leaves, thicker also, smoother and of a darker green shining color on
the upperside, and of a paler yellow green underneath, little or nothing dented
about the Edges; from among which arise small round hollow brownish green husks
upon stalks, of about an inch long, divided at the brims into five divisions,
very like the Cups or Heads of the Henbane seed, but that they are smaller: and
these be all the flowers it has, which being smelled unto, are somewhat sweet;
and wherein when they are ripe, are contained small cornered rough seeds, very
like the kernels or stones of Grapes or Raisins. The roots are small and
whitish, spreading diverse ways in the ground, and increasing into diverse
heads, but not running or creeping under the ground as some other creeping
herbs do: They are somewhat sweet in smell, resembling Nardus, but more when
they are dry then green, and of a sharp but not unpleasant Taste.

The Place and Time.
The first grows naturally under Trees, and upon shady Hills in Pontus,
Phrygia and other places, and is frequent in Gardens amongst us. The title
shows the place of the second; It is said that the third is found upon some
Mountains of Bohemia, and likewise in Somersetshire here in England. The first
and second keep their green Leaves all the Winter, but shoot forth new in the
Spring; and with them come forth those Heads or Flowers, which give ripe seed
about Midsummer or somewhat after, the other does follow much the same course.

The Temperature.
The Leaves of Asarabacca are hot and dry, with a purging quality joined
thereunto: yet not without a certain kind of astriction or binding. The roots
are also hot and dry, yea more then the leaves, they are of thin and subtle
parts; they procure Urine, provoke the Terms, and are like in faculty, as
Galen says, to the roots of Acorns, but somewhat more forcible, yet they may
be promiscuously used one for another.

The Signature and Virtues.
By the Leaves of Asarabacca, the Ears of a man are in some sort represented,
and it is found by experience, that a Conserve may be made of the flowers of
this Plant, which being eat, does very much strengthen and increase both
hearing and memory. The memory is also helped, and the Head and Brain, that is
ill affected by taking cold, comforted; if the Leaves and Roots be boiled in
Lee, and the head often washed therewith while it is warm. The Common use
hereof is to take the juice of five or Seven Leaves in a little drink, which
not only provokes Vomiting, but purges downward, and by Urine also, purging
both Choler and Phlegm, if you add to it some Spikenard, and the whey of Goats
Milk, or Honyed water: but it purges Phlegm more manifestly then Choler; and
therefore does much help pains in the Hips and other parts. Being boiled in
Whey, it wonderfully helps the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and is
profitable for the Dropsy and Jaundies, being steeped in Wine and drunk. It
helps those continual Agues that come by the plenty of stubborn humors. An
Oil made thereof by setting it in the Sun, with some Laudanum added to it,
provokes sweating (the ridge of the back being anointed therewith) and thereby
drives away the shaking fits of the Agues. It will not abide long boiling, for
it loses its strength thereby; nor much beating, for the finer powder does
provoke Vomits and Urine, and the coorler purges downward. The Roots also work
in the same manner, but not so forcibly: but an Extract made thereof, according
to Art, with Wine, might be more safe and effectual, and may be kept all the
year to be ready at hand to be given, when there is occasion, the quantity only
is to be proportioned, according to the constitution of the Patient, as the
learned Physicians can best appoint. It is also effectual against the biting
of Serpents, (the root especially) and therefore it is put amongst other
simples, both into Mithridate and Venice Treacle. A dram of the root in
powder given in Whitewine, a little before the fit of an Ague, takes away the
shaking fit, and thereby causes the hot fit to be more remiss, and in twice
taking expels it quite. It is said that the leaves being a little bruised,
and applied to the forehead and temples, do ease the pains of the head, and
procures sleep; and applied to the Eyes takes away the inflammation of them.
The Juice with a little Tutia prepared, put to it, and dropped into the corner
of the Eyes, sharpeneth the Eyesight, and takes away the dimnesse and
mistiness that is often in them. The Bastard Asarum, as Matthiolus says, has
a little cleansing quality, but a greater property to attenuate, or make thin
that which is thick, to cut or break that which is tough, and to open that
which is obstructed. A dram of the powder hereof taken, in sweet Wine, or
honyed Water, does loosen the Belly, and purges from thence tough and thick
phlegm, and black or burnt Humors: It is for very good purpose and profit,
given to those which have the yellow Jaundies, to those that have the falling
Sickness, and to those that have the Palsy, the herb either taken of it self,
and eaten as in Sallets, or the decoction thereof made and drunk: It kills
also the worms of the Belly.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Ground Ivy, or Alehoofe.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek, (...) because it always creeps upon the ground, and
has Leaves somewhat like unto the true Ivy, yet they are lesser, thinner,
hairy, and crumpled as it were. It is called also, (...) because it spreads,
and is a Garland upon the Ground. It is called in Latin Hedera hum^lis, Hedera
terrestris, and Corona terrae. Cordus calls it Chamadema; and Brunfelsius
mistaking it, made it his fourth El^tine. Lugdunensis calls it Malacocissos,
id est, Mollis Hedera Plumiatica. The Shops call it Hedera terrestris, and we
in English, according to the several Countries appellations, Gilrumbith-ground,
that is, Gill run by the ground. T^^d^oore, Gill creep by the ground, Catsfoot,
Hay Maids, and Alehoof most generally, or Tunhoof, because Country people
formerly did use it much in their A^le and Beer, and so they would now, if they
were so wise, and Ground Ivy as frequently: although Lobel judges the Hedera
helix, or barren Ivy, to deserve that name more properly; and some Country
people that would have the barren Ivy to be the true Ground Ivy, call the other
Maidenhair; but it is only their Opinion, without good advice: for all that
have experience in Herbarisme, judge otherwise.

The Kinds.
There be of this, four sorts. 1. Common Ground Ivy, or Ale-hoof. 2. The lesser
Ale-hoof. 3. Mountain Ale-hoof. 4. Stone-Ale-hoof.

The Form.
Ground Ivy is a low Plant, seldom exceeding a Span in height, but it lies,
spreads, and creeps upon the Ground all about, shooting forth Roots at the
Joints of the cornered tender stalks, set all along with two round Leaves at
every Joint, somewhat hairy, and crumpled as it were, and unevenly dented about
the edges, with round dents: at the Joints likewise with the Leaves toward the
end of the Branches, come forth hollow long Flowers, gaping at the ends, of a
bluish purple color, with small white spots upon the Label or lips that hang
down, as also in the mouth or Jaws, the Root is small, but very fibrous.

The Place and Time.
The common sort is found under the Hedges and sides of fields, and Ditches,
under house sides, and in shadowed Lanes, and other wast Grounds, in every
place almost: the second is found at the bottom of old Trees, in some Countries
of G^rmany: the third is found to grow on Hills and Mountains: the last in
Narbone, and Province in France, and in some places of Somersetshire. They
flower somewhat early, and abide so a great while, the Leaves keeping their
Verdure unto the Winter, and sometimes abiding, if it be not too vehement and
sharp.

The Temperature.
Ground Ivy is quick, sharp, and bitter in taste, and thereby is found to be he
and dry, it opens, also cleanses and rarifyeth.

The Virtues.
The Juice of this Herb dropped into the Ears, does wonderfully help the noise
and singing of them, and helps their hearing that is decayed, especially i^
burnt white Coperas be dissolved therein, and three drops thereof be put into
the Ears morning and evening. The Juyces of Celandine, Daysies of the field,
and Ground Ivy clarified, and a little fine Sugar dissolved therein, dropped
into the Eyes, is a sovereign Medicine for all pains, redness, and watering of
the Eyes, the Pin and Web, Skins or Films growing over the sight, or whatsoever
might offend them: the same helps Beasts as well as Men. It is also a
singular good Wound-Herb, for all inward Wounds, and likewise for exulcerated
Lungs, and other parts, either by it self, or with other the like Herbs boiled
together; and besides, being drunk by them that have any griping pains of windy
or choleric humors in the stomach, spleen or belly, does ease them in a short
space: it likewise helps the yellow Jaundies, by opening the obstruction of
the Gall, Liver, and Spleen, it expels venom and poison, and the Plague
also. It provokes Urine, and Women's Courses, and stays them not, as some
have thought; but the Decoction of the Herb in Wine, being drunk for some time
together by those, that have the Sciatica, or Hip-Gout, as also the Gout in the
hands, knees, or feet, helps to dissolve, and disperse the peccant humors,
and to procure ease: the same decoction is excellent good to gargle any sore
throat or mouth, putting thereto some Honey, and a little burnt Allome: as also
to wash the Sores and Ulcers of the privy parts, in Man or Woman. It speedily
heals green wounds, being bound thereto. The Juice boiled with a little Honey
and Verdigrease, does wonderfully cleanse Fistulaes, and hollow Ulcers: It
helps also the Itch, Scabs, Wheals, and other eruptions, or exulcerations in
the skin, in any part of the body, and stays the malignity of spreading or
eating Cancers and Ulcers. Country people heretofore did often use to run it up
with their drink, not only for the clearing of the sight, and other special
Virtues that it has; but for that it will help also to clear their drink. This
Age forsakes all old things, though never so good, and embraces all kind of
novelties whatsoever; but the time will come, that the sopperies of the present
times shall be slighted, and the true and honest prescriptions of the Ancients
come in request again. Some do affirm, that an handful put into drink that is
thick, will clear it in a night, yea in few hours, say they, and make it more
wholesome, and fit to be drunk: yet others are so prejudicious to the Virtues of
simples, that they think fabulous, whatsoever things are related concerning
them, though they stand in great need of them. To try such a thing as this,
would not require, either much time or cost.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Ivy.
The Names.
NEither is Ground Ivy, only good for the Ears, but other Ivy also, I shall
therefore handle it in this place. It is called in Greek (...) and (...),
Cissus and Cittus, as the Greeks report, from Cissus, a little Boy, whom
Bacchus turned hereinto. The Athenians called Bacchus himself Cittus, who by
some is thought to have brought it out of India into Greece, and called it
after his own name, and wore a Crown thereof, because, As he is always young,
as the Poets feign; so this is continually green. But Pena and Lobel think it
rather derived from (...), which word in English, signifies a Weavill, which is
a little Creature, that lives upon Corn and Malt, eating up the Kernel thereof;
for as this eats up the heart of the Corn, so does the Ivy rob the Tree it
grows upon of its nourishment, or from (...) a Pumice stone, because it is
full of pores, as a Pumice stone is, and being so, whatsoever Wine is put into
a Cup, made thereof, soaketh through, according to Cato and Varro. The Latins
call it Hedera, vel quod parietibus hareaet, vel potius quia edita petat, vel
quia id cui adhaeserit ed^t and enecat, says Pompeins. The English know it by
no other name but Ivy.

The Kinds.
Two sorts hereof only are found in England, and those are the ordinary climing
Ivy, and the barren Ivy, to which I shall add here, as I do in most other
places, those which grow in foreign parts, which are five more, 1. White
berried Ivy, to which Virgil alluded in that Verse, Candidior Cygnis, Hedera
formosior alba. Than Swan more lovely, or than Ivy white. 2. Yellow berried
Ivy. 3. Trefoil Ivy of Virginea. 4. Five leaved Ivy of Virginea. 5. Lobels Ivy
leaved Plant. I might be very large in the Description of our ordinary climing
Ivy; but because it is so well known, I shall be the briefer.

The Form.
Ivy has a thick woody Trunk, or Body sometimes as big as ones arm, usually
climing up Trees, and by the small Roots it sends into them, draws
nourishment from them, many times to their bane, and utter ruin: sometimes it
creeps up walls, sending forth Roots into their chinks, or joints, where
growing great, they often crack them to their destruction: After it has gotten
hold of either Tree or Wall, it will grow thereon, though the body below be cut
away: Whilst the Tree is young, the Leaves of most will be cornered; but when
it grows elder, they grow rounder, abiding fresh and green Winter and Summer.
The small Mossie yellow Flowers, stand in an Umbel, upon small stalks, after
which come small round Berries, first green, and afterward turning black: in
every one of which, is contained usually four Seeds. It sometimes, though
rately, grows alone by it self, into a pretty Bush or Tree.

The Places and Time.
The first grows upon Trees, and upon the Stone-walls of Churches, Houses,
etc. and sometimes alone, though seldom. The second, which bears neither
Flowers nor Seed, grows in moist and shadowy places, in Lanes, under Hedges,
and the corners of wast ground, and the like. The first Forreigner is said to
grow in France, and some places of Turkey, and some say in Naples also. The
second, Pena and Lobel say, grow in Campania, and Apulia, and is sown in
Gardens of Italy, and Germany. The third and fourth, grow in the Northwest
parts of America, where our English Colonies are planted. The last, was found
by Lobel, on the Hills, as he passed through Italy. Our Ivy flourishes not
until July, and the Berries are usually ripe about Christmas, when they have
felt the winter frosts. We have little acquaintance with the outlandish one,
and therefore we say no more of them, or their times of flowring.

The Temperature
Ivy, as Galen says, has contrary faculties; for it has a certain binding,
earthy and cold substance, and also a substance somewhat biting, which even the
very taste does show to be hot. Neither is it without a third faculty, as being
of a certain warm watery substance, and that is, if it be green: for whilst it
is in drying, this waterish substance being earthy, cold, and binding,
consumes away; and that which is hot and biting, remains. Being therefore
such an inconstant Hermes, it is the more carefully to be applied, because it
causes barrenness in Man or Woman, if they should take too often thereof, and
procures a weakness and trouble in the Brain and Senses.

The Virtues.
A Pugil of the Flowers of Ivy, (being as much as one may take up with the^
three foremost fingers together) which may be about a dram, says Dioscor^d^
drunk twice a day in red Wine, helps the Lask, and bloody Flux. It is an
enemy to the Nerves and Sinews, being taken much inwardly; but is very helpful
unto them applied outwardly. The Juice of the Leaves and Berries, with a little
Oil of bitter Almonds, dropped into the Ears, whilst it is warm, helps the
hearing, and cures all the old and running sores of them. The Berries made
into Powder, and drunk in Wine, help to break the stone, provoke urine, and
Women's Courses, as Tragus says; yea so powerful they are in those parts, that
a bath made of the Leaves and Berries for Women to sit in, or over the fumes,
or a pessary made of them, and put up, does mightily prevail to bring them
down, and to draw forth the dead birth, and afterbirth; but this to be
cautelously used, and that only in Cases of extremity. The fresh Leaves of Ivy,
boiled in Vinegar, and applied warm to the sides of those which are splenetick,
or troubled with any Ach or Stitch in their sides, does give them much ease:
the same applied with Rose Water, and Oil of Roses, to the Forehead and
Temples, does ease the inveterate pains of the head. If the fresh Leaves be
boiled in Wine, and old filthy Sores and Ulcers, that are hard to be cured, be
washed therewith, it wonderfully helps to cleanse and heal them, and so it
does green wounds, quickly sodering up the lips of them: the same also is
effectual to heal scaldings of water, and burnings by fire, and the
exulcerations that happen thereby, or upon the sharpness of salt phlegm, and
hot humors in other parts of the body. The Juice of the Berries or Leaves
snuffed up into the nose, purges the head and brain of thin Rheum, which
makes defluctions into the Eyes and Nose, and cures the Ulcers and stench
therein. The fresh leaves are commonly used to lay upon Issues, in what place
soever, as Arms, Legs, etc. to keep them open, and to draw forth the humors,
which come thither: but a little piece of the Root, made round like a pease,
and put into the Orifice, keeps it running without Leaf or Plaster, if you
lay upon it half a sheet of issue-Paper eight times double. The Wood made into
a Cup, and used by those that are troubled with the Spleen, shall find ease and
be much helped thereof, if they let their drink stand some small time therein
before they drink it. Cato says, if you suspect your Wine to have any water in
it, put some of it into a Cup made of Ivy wood, and the Wine will soak through,
and the water remain: such is the Antipathy that is betwixt them. If any one
has got a surfeit by drinking of Wine, his speediest cure is to drink a draught
of the same wine wherein an handful of Ivy leaves, being first bruised, have
been boiled. There is a Gum gathered from Ivy in hot Countries, which is
exceeding sharp and hot, burning and exulcerating the skin; yet being dissolved
in Vinegar, it takes away superfluous hair in any place, and kills Lice and
Nits, and eases the pain of hollow teeth, if it be put therein.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Poplar Tree.
The Names.
BEcause Ivy is a plant that seldom grows but where Trees grow, I have placed
a tree next it, and that is the Poplar Tree: their leaves being also somewhat
alike; to which, the Ancient Greeks having two sorts gave them, two distinct
Names, they called the white Poplar, (...) because of the whiteness in Latin,
Populus alba, and Farfarus: according to that of Plautus in his Penulus --
Viscum Legioni dedi Fundasque: eos prosternebam, ut folia Farfari, which the
learned suppose to be the leaves of Poplar. They called the Black Poplar (...);
in Latin, Populus nigra: the first or new sprung buds whereof the Apothecaries
call, Oculi Populi Popular Buds; Others choose rather to call it, Gemma Populi:
some of the Grecians name it, (...). To these is added a third, called Populus
tremula, and by Theophrastus, (...) quod nimirum ista planta instar (...)
stipite oblongo sit, terete and in acutum desinente; because this Tree with its
long and round body, is somewhat like a Weavers Beam, which the Greeks call
(...). In English Aspe, and Aspentree, and may also be called, Tremble, after
the French name; because the leaves wag, though there be no wind: and therefore
the Poets and others have feigned them to be the matter, whereof Women's tongues
were made, which seldom cease wagging. All, that with glory conquered their
enemies in fight, were wont to wear a Garland of the branches of white Poplar
from the Example of Hercules, who having overcome Cerberus, came crowned with
the branches of it, which he found by the River Acheron; and from thence Homer
in the fifth book of his Iliads calls it (...). Their Error, that Succinum,
yellow Amber, was the Gum of the Black Poplar, is sufficiently confuted by
Matthiolus.

The Kinds:
Besides these three sorts above named, I find two more. 1. The smaller leafed
white Poplar tree. 2. The round leafed Indian Poplar tree. I hold it best to
describe the Black Popular, because it is more useful.

The Form.
The black Poplar is a Tree very tall and straight, with a grayish bark,
bearing broad and green leaves, somewhat like to Ivy leaves not cut-in on the
Edges but whole and dented, ending in a point and not white underneath, hanging
by slender long footstalks, which with the Air are almost continually shaken,
like as the Aspen Leaves are; the Catkins hereof are great, composed of many
round green berries, as it were set together on a long cluster: wherein is much
Downy matter contained; which being ripe, is blown away with the wind the eyes
or clammy Buds hereof, before they spread into leaves (and not of the white as
some have thought, nor yet the Uvae or berries, which each of them have under
them) are gathered about the beginning of April, to make the Vnguentum
Populeon, and are of a yellowish green color, and small, but somewhat sweet
and strong; the wood is smooth, tough, and white, and will quickly be cloven to
make shingles, pales, or the like. On this, as also on the white Poplar Tree
grows a sweet kind of Musk, which in former times was much used to be put
into sweet Ointments, and commended by Galen and others to be the best, next
unto that of the Cedar Tree.

The Place and Time.
The first kind of white Poplar grows not very common in England, yet in some
place here and there it is found, as in a low Meadow, turning up a Lane at the
further end of a Village, called Black-wall; and in Essex at a place called
Ovenden, and in some other places which are low and moist, as in Meadows near
unto Ditches, standing warers, and Rivers, and in some moist woods where the
other three sorts do also grow; but the Indian Poplar grows in most part of
the Islands of America. These trees bud forth in the end of March and the
beginning of April: but the Catkins appear sooner.

The Temperature.
The white Poplar has a cleansing faculty says Galen, and a mixed
tempe^rature, consisting of a watery warm essence, and also a thin earthly
substance. The Rosin or clammy Substance of the black Poplar buds, is hot and
dry and of thin parts, and does attenuate and mollify; the leaves have in a
manner the like operation, but weaker and not so effectual. What temperature
uhe Indian sort is of, I have not found.

The Virtues.
I described the Black Poplar, because that had most similitude with Ivy; but
it is the white Poplar (whose form differs not much from the other, save that
the leaves are almost like those of the Vine, or rather Coltsfoot) which is
appropriated to the Ears, the juice of whose leaves being extracted warmed and
dropped into them eases the pains in them, and heals Ulcers there, if there
be any. The young clammy buds, or eyes, before they break out into leaves
bruised, and a little Honey put to them, is a good Medicine for a dull sight by
Signature. An ounce of the bark in Powder being drunk, says Dioscorides, in
wine, it is likely, is a remedy for those that are troubled with the Sciatica or
Srangury; and Serenus is of the same Judgment. The black Poplar is held by some
to be more cooling then the white; and therefore they have with much profit
applied the leaves bruised with Vinegar to places troubled with the Gout, and
so do the young leaves and buds made into an Ointment with May-butter: the seed
is held to be good against the falling sickness, if it be drunk in Vinegar.
That water that droppeth from the hollow places of the black Poplars, does take
away Warts, Pushes, Wheales, and other the like breakings out in the body. The
young black Poplar Buds, says Matthiolus, are used by women to beautify their
hair, bruising them with fresh butter, and straining them after they have been
for some time kept in the Sun. The Ointment called Populeon is singular good,
for any heat or inflammation in any part of the Body, and to temper the heat of
wounds; It is used also to dry up the Mi^k in Women's Breasts after their
delivery, and when they have weaned their Children. The Aspen leaves are
somewhat weaker, then those of the black Poplar; yet the quantity being
augmented, they are used for the same purposes.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Nightshade.
The Names.
SOme of the Greeks call it, (...); but others, and that more usually, (...).
In Latin Solanum and Solatrum, Uva Lupina, and Uva Vulp^s, Cuculus and
Morella. Pliny says, it was also called, Strumam and Cucubalus, but they are
thought bastard names, and not proper to this plant. In English, Nightshade,
Morrel, Petty-Morrel, and in some places Hounds berries. There is a sort hereof
which is called Dwale, or deadly Nightshade, by reason of its pernicious and
excess cold quality; and is therefore not to be used but by a skillful hand,
but the Common or Garden Nightshade is not dangerous, being heretofore planted
in Gardens as other herbs, for food; wherefore it was called Solanum hortense,
or Garden Nightshade, but is now no where used but Physically, and is cast out
of Gardens.

The Kinds.
Dioscorides reckons up four sorts, (...) Hortense, (...) Vesicarium, (...)
Somniferum, and (...) Manicum: which are by a later Writer distinguished into
ten kinds. 1. Common Nightshade. 2. Red berried common Nightshade. 3. Sleepy
Nightshade. 4. The true sleepy Nightshade of the Ancient Writers. 5. Sleepy
Nightshade of another sort. 6. Dwale or Deadly Nightshade. 7. Hoary Indian
Nightshade. 8. Red Nightshade, or Redweed of Virginia. 9. The great Marvel of
Peru. 10. The small Mervail of Peru, which is a kind of Nightshade: besides
which there are diverse other sorts that I may have occasion to mention
elsewhere.

The Form.
The Common Nightshade has a somewhat upright round green hollow stalk, and
about a foot high, bushing forth into many Branches, whereon grow many dark
green leaves, somewhat broad and pointed at the ends, soft and full of juice,
larger then the leaves of Basil, else somewhat like, and a little unevenly
dented about the edges: at the tops of the stalks and branches, come four or
five or more white flowers, made of five small pointed leaves a piece, standing
on a stalk together, one by or above another, with yellow pointells in the
middle, composed of four or five yellow threads set together, which afterward
turn into so many pendulous green berries, of the bigness of a small pease,
full of green Juice, and small whitish round flat seed lying within it; the
root is white and a little woody, when it has given flower and fruit, with
many small fibers at it: the whole plant is of a waterish insipid taste; but
the Juice within the Berries, is somewhat viscous, like unto a thin mucilage,
and is of a coolng and binding quality.

The Place and Time.
Common Nightshade grows without planting under old walls, and in rubbish,
by the common Paths, and sides of Hedges and Fields, and sometimes in Gardens,
out of which it is cast as a weed. Dwale, or deadly Nightshade, grows not
only in the Woods of Germany, but in diverse places in our own Land, as in the
Castle-yard of Framingham in Suffolk, in Cambridge-shire, Essex, etc. The rest
are strangers, and not to be found, unless it be in the better sort of Gardens,
as the Physic Garden at Oxon: that at Westminster, etc. The first and the
second die every year, and rise of their own sowing: the rest dye down to the
ground in Winter, and shoot afresh in the spring. They do not spring out of the
ground, until it be late in the year, as not until the latter end of April,
at the soonest. They flower in Summer, even till the beginning of Autumn, and
then the fruit ripeneth.

The Temperature.
Galen says, in his Book of the faculties of simple Medicines, that Garden
Nightshade, is used for those infirmities, that have need of cooling and
binding; for these two qualities it has in the second degree, which thing also
he affirms in his Book of the faculties of nourishments, where he says, that
there is no Pot-herb which we use to eat, that has so great astriction, or
binding, as Nightshade has; and therefore Physicians do worthily use it, and
that seldom as a nourishment, but always as a Medicine. Dwale is cold, even in
the fourth Degree.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Berries of Nightshade having some similitude with a Bladder, are of
excellent use to provoke Urine, and to expel the stone, especially the Seeds
contained in them, being drunk with White Wind. It is commonly used to cool hot
Inflammations, either inwardly or outwardly, being no way dangerous to any that
shall use it, as the rest of the Night-shades are, if it be used moderately;
for, the often taking thereof in too great a quantity, procures the Frenzy:
the remedy whereof, is to take good store of warm honyed water. The Juice
dropped into the Ears eases the pains thereof, that arise of heat or
Inflammation: The distilled water only of the whole Herb, is fittest and safest
to be taken inwardly. The Juice also clarified, and mingled with Vinegar, is a
good Gargarisme for the mouth and throat that is inflamed. But outwardly the
Juice of the Herb or Berries, with Oil of Roses, and a little Vinegar, and
Cerusse, labored together in a leaden Mortar, is very good to anoint all hot
Inflammations in the Eyes: It does also much good for the Shingles, Ringworms,
and in all running, fretting, and corroding Ulcers, and in moist Fistulaes: if
the juice be made up with some Hens-Dung, and applied thereto. A Pessary dipped
in the Juice, and put up into the Matrix, stays the immoderate Flux of Women's
Courses. A Cloth wet therein, and applied to the Testicles or Cods, upon any
swelling therein, gives much ease, as also to the Gout, which comes of hot
and sharp humors. The deadly Nightshade is very dangerous to be taken
inwardly, as might be shown by some lamentable instances: yet if the Temples
and forehead be a little bathed with the Juice of Leaves, and a little Vinegar,
it procures rest and sleep, when it is hindered by hot fits of Agues, or other
distemperature, and takes away the pain of the head, proceeding of a hot
cause. The Leaves bruised, or their Juice may be applied to such hot
Inflammations, as St. Anthonies fire, the Shingles, and all other fiery or
running Cankers, to cool and stay the spreading.

CHAP. XXX. Of Sow-Fennel, or Hoggs-Fennel.
The Names.
THe Grecians call it (...), the Latins Peucedanus and Peucedanum, as some
take it of the pitchy scent, it carries; from (...), which signifies a Pitch
Tree; and others, of the Pine Tree, whose Leaves are like it, call it
Pinastellum, as Apuleius. It is also called Faeniculum Porcinum; but by
Tabermontanus, Cauda porcina, for the likeness that is between it and an
Hoggstail. We in English call it Hoggs-Fennel, or Sow-Fennel from the Latin.
Hore-strange, and Hore-strong, Surphurwott or Brimst one-wort, from the yellow
Sap or Liquor, which quickly waxes hard or dry, smelling not much unlike
Brimstone, called Sulphur.

The Kinds.
Of Sow-Fennel, there be three sorts. 1. Common Sow-Fennel. 2. Small
Sow-Fennel. 3. Great Sow-Fennel of Italy.

The Form.
The common Sow-fennel has diverse branched stiff stalks, full of knees, of
somewhat thick and long leaves, almost like the leaves of the wild Pine, three
for the most part joined together at a place, amongst which rises a crested
straight stalk, less then Fennel, with some joints thereon, and leaves growing
thereat, and toward the top some branches issuing from thence: likewise on the
tops of the stalks and branches, stand diverse tufts of yellow Flowers, where
after grow somewhat flat, thin, and yellowish Seeds, almost twice as big as
Fennel-Seed. The Root grows great, and deep, with many other parts and Fibers
about them, of a strong scent, like melted Brimstone yielding forth a yellowish
milk, or clammy juice, somewhat like a Gum, and having also at the top of it,
about the superficies of the Earth, a certain bush of hair, of a brown Color,
amongst which the leaves and stalks do spring forth.

The Place and Time.
The first grows in good plenty, in the salt low Marshes, a little by
Feversham in Kent, near unto the Haven, upon the banks thereof, and the Meadows
adjoining; on the South side of a Wood belonging to Waltham, at the Nase in
Essex, by the High-way-side; also at Whitstable in Kent, in a Meadow near the
Seaside. The second was found on St. Vincents Rock, by Bristow, by Label, as
he sets it down in his Adversaria, p. 331. and in Hungary and Austria, by
Clusius. The last grows naturally upon the Seacoast of Mount Pelier, in
France, and in diverse places in Italy. They all flower and seed in the end of
Summer, that is in July and August.

The Temperature:
These Herbs, especially the yellow Sap of the Roots, is hot in the second, and
dry in the beginning of the third Degree.

The Virtues.
As Nightshade being a cold Plant, was good for such distempers of the Ears,
as happen by reason of heat: so this Hog-Fennel being of a hot temperature, is
very effectual for such griefs as happen to the Ears upon a cold cause, if a
little of the juice be dissolved in Wine, and dropped into the Ears. The same,
according to Dioscorides and Galen, used with Vinegar and Rose Water, or the
juice, with a little Euphorbium put to the Nose, helps those that are
troubled with the Lethargy, the Frenzy, the turning of the brain, or
dissiness of the head; the Falling Sickness, long and inveterate Headache, the
Palsy, the Sciatica, and the Cramp; and generally all the Diseases of the
Nerves and Sinews, if it be used with Oil and Vinegar. The juice dissolved in
Wine, or put into an Egg, is good for the Cough, and shortness of breath, and
for those that are troubled with wind, and tormenting pains in the body. It
purges the belly gently, and dissolveth the wind, and hardness of the spleen,
it gives ease to those Women that have sore travel in Childbirth, and eases
the pains both of Bladder and Reins, and womb also. A little of the concrete
juice put into an hollow Tooth, cease the pains thereof, and the Root works
to the like effect; but more slowly, and less. The dried Powder of the Root,
being put into foul Ulcers, of hard curation, cleanses them thoroughly, removes
any splinters of broken bones, or other things in the flesh, and heals them
up perfectly, and likewise bringeth-on old and inveterate sores to cicatrising:
it is also put into such salves as serve to heat or warm any place. Pliny
records the virtue hereof in diverse places: the Root being drunk in Wine,
with the Seed of the Cypress-Tree, in powder, eases the strangling of the
Mother, but some use to burn it, and by the smell thereof gives ease
thereunto: the juice helps the burstings of Children, and their Navels when
they stick forth: the Root is of so great force in green Wounds and Sores, that
it draws out the Quitture from the very bones. By the Signature of this
Plant, it should cause hair to grow apace, where the places wanted it, or were
deprived; for so does Thapsia, or scorching Fennel, which has less similitude
then this.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Sow-Thistles.
The Names.
NExt to Sow-Fennel, I have placed Sow-Thistles, which amongst others, has a
virtue, that it is very sovereign for the Ears, with which I shall finish the
Plants appropriated to them. It is called in Greek, (...), quod salubrem fundat
succum. The Latins also call it, Sonchus, which is divided into Asperum and
Laevem, and into Asperiorem and Laeviorem. We in English call them Prickly and
Smooth Sow-thistles, and sometimes Ha^es Lettice, which because of their like
Virtue I have Joined together. They are called of diverse Cicerbita Lactucella,
and Lacterones; of Apulelus, Lactula Leporina; of some, Brassica Lep^rina, or
Hares-Coleworts, Palatium, Leporis; and some have it Leporum* Cubile.

The Kinds.
To reckon up all the sorts of these, that are to be found in other Herbals;
would not be to much purpose; and therefore I shall content my self, to mention
those only which I find in the Phytologia Britannica, being in number Eight. 1.
Tree-Sow-Thistle. 2. Wall or Ivy-leafed Sow-Thistle. 3. Lesser Prickly
Sow-Thistle. 4. An Elegant Sow Thistle with a white flower, having yellow in
the middle. 5. Narrow leafed Sow-Thistle. 6. Broad leafed Sow-Thistle. 7.
Prickly Sow-Thistle. 8. Common Sow-Thistle: which last I shall only describe.

The Form.
The Common Sow-Thistle is well known to rise up with a round ^ollow stalk two
or three foot high or more sometimes, if it grow in good grounds and Gardens,
as u^ually it does; set with many long and much torn leaves, of a whitish green
color, not having that roughness or those sharp prickles on them which some
of them have, branching forth toward the top, into diverse branches, bearing
pale yellow flowers, which pass away into a down, and with the seed into the
wind. The root grows down right, and has many fibers thereat, perishing
likewise every year, and raising its self of its own ^owing; and is plentiful
in giving Milk which is somewhat pleasanter, and not so bitter as that of the
prickly ones.

The Places and Time.
All the Sow-Thistles above named, grow in unmanured as well as in manured
soyls, some in Gardens, and Orchards where the leaves are usually lesser and
lesser divided, than in the rough and unmanured grounds; and sometimes by and
upon old walls, the pathsides of fields and highwaies: but the first is seldom
seen, save in the Gardens of Herbarists, and the fourth grows only in
Yorkshire and Cheshire naturally. They do flower and shed their seed from
Midsummer or thereabout all the Summer long, and sometimes till August be past.

The Temperature.
The Sow Thistles as Galen writes, are of a mixed temperature: for they consist
of a watery and earthy Substance, cold and likewise binding.

The Signature and Virtues.
Least any one should think Nightshade too cool, or Sow-Fennel too hot, I have
added Sow Thistle as being more moderate, as long as they are young and tender,
and being so, they are eaten familiarly by those beyond the Seas, but the roots
are much more esteemed by them being very tender and sweet. The Juice boiled or
thoroughly heated with a little oil of bitter Almonds in the Pill of a
Pomgranate, is a sure remedy for deafness and singings, and all other diseases
in the Ears; and it is said, that the herb bruised and bound upon Warts, will
quickly take them away. The herb bruised or the Juice is profitably applied to
all hot inflammations in the Eyes or wheresoever else, and Pustules, Wheales,
Blisters, or other the like Eruptions of heat in the Skin: as also for the heat
and itchings of the Hemorrhoides or Piles, and the heat and sharpness of
humors happening in the secret parts of man or woman. The disti^ed water of the
herb, is not only effectual for all diseases aforesaid, to be taken inwardly
with a little Sugar, which Medicine the dantiest Stomach that is, will not
refuse; or outwardly by applying Clothes or Spunges wetted therein: it is
likewise wonderfully good for women to wash their faces, to clear the skin, and
give a luster thereunto. The herb it self is very fit to cool an hot Stomach,
and to ease the gnawing pains thereof; and are therefore eaten by some as
Sallet herbs in Winter and Spring: being boiled in wine, it is very helpful to
stay the dissolutions of the Stomach; and the milk that is taken from the
stalks when they are broken, given in drink, is beneficial to those that are
short winded, and have a wheesing withal: Erisistratus, says Pliny, did
therewith cause the gravel and stone to be voided by Urine; and says, that the
eating thereof helps a stinking breath: The Juice thereof to the quantity of
three spoonfuls taken in Wine warmed, and some Oil put thereto, causes Women
in Travel of Child, to have so easy and speedy delivery, that they may be
easy to walk presently after: the said juice taken in warm drink, helps the
Strangury, or pissing by drops, and pains in making water. The decoction of the
Leaves and stalks given to Nurses, causes abundance of milk, and makes their
Childrens faces to be well colored, and is good for those, whose milk does
curdle in the Breasts, and this it does by signature. When Sowes have Piggs,
they do most greedily desire it, because they know by a certain natural
inflinct, wherewith most Brutes are endued, that it does very much increase
their milk; and for that Reason, I conceive it is called by the name of
Sow-Thistle.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Wake-Robin, or Cuckow-point.
THe two last parts, to which I did endeavor to appropriate such Plants as
were fittest for the remedying the distempers thereof, were the Eyes and the
Ears. I come now to the Nose, and shall begin with an Herb, that not only
helps it, but the parts aforesaid, which Janus- like, has respect to what
goes before, and what comes after.

The Names.
IT is called in Greek, (...); and in Latin Arum, and of some Pes Vituli,
because the Leaf has some resemblance with a Calves-foot: Some also call it
Dracontea minor, and Serpentaria minor: Others again from the Figure of the
Pestle, or Clapper in the middle of the Hose, call it Sacerdotis Penis, and
Canis Priapus: Others, Aron, and Barba-Aron: In English, Wake-Robin,
Cuckows-Pintle, Priests-Pintle, Ramp, Buckrams, and of some, Starchwort,
because formerly Linen was starched with it, and pure and white Starch is made
of the Root of it, but such as is hurtful to the hands of the Landresse that
uses it; for it choppeth, blistereth, and makes the hands rough, and rugged,
and withal, smarting. There is a kind of Arum, which is called, Ar^sarum, or
Friars Cowle.

The Kinds.
Parkinson in his Chapter of Arum, reckons up these eight sorts, 1.
Common-Wake-Robin, without spots. 2. Spotted Wake-Robin. 3. Round leafed
Wake-Robin. 4. Wake-Robin of Constantinople. 5. Broad leafed Friars Cowl. 6.
Long or narrow leafed Friars Cowl. 7. The Egyptian Culcas, or Wake-Robin, with
a rounder and longer Root. 8. Dioscorides and Theophrastus their Egyptian Bean,
whose Root was called Colocasia, which he sets down to confute the mistake of
those, who take Arum and Colocasia to be the same:

The Form:
Common Wake Robin shoots forth some few Leaves from the Root, every one of
which is somewhat large and long, broad at the bottom next the stalk, and
forked; but ending in a point, without any dent or cut on the edges, of a full
green color, each standing upon a thick round stalk, of a hands breadth long
or more; among which, after two or three months, that they begin to wither,
rises up a bare, round, whitish green stalk, spotted, and straked with Purple,
somewhat higher then the Leaves; at the top whereof stands a long hollow ^ose
or Husk, close at the bottom, but open from the middle upwards, ending in a
point; in the middle stands a long slender Pestle, or Clapper, smaller at the
bottom then at the top, of a dark Purple color, as the husk is on the inside,
though green without, which after it has so abidden for some time, the husk
with the Clapper, decays, and the foot or bottom thereof grows to be a long
slender bunch of Berries, green at the first, and of a yellowish red color
when they are ripe, of the bigness of an Hazel Nut Kernel, which abides
thereon almost till winter. The Root is round, and somewhat long, for the most
part lying along, the leaves shooting forth at the bigger end, which when it
bears, its Berries are somewhat wrinkled and loose: another growing under it,
which is solid and firm, with many small threads hanging thereat.

The Place and Time.
The two first sorts grow frequently under Trees, and almost under every hedge
side, throughout the Land. The third is found in some places of Germany.
Clusius says, the fourth came among diverse other Roots, from Constantinople;
the fifth, is found in Spain and Portugal, the sixth in Italy, the seventh in
Candy. The last in Java and Surrat. The four first sorts shoot forth Leaves in
the Spring, and continue but till the middle of Summer, or somewhat later,
their Hoses or Husks appearing before they fall away, and their fruit showing
in August. The fifth and sixth do shoot forth their green Leaves in Autumn,
presently after the first frosts have pulled down the stalks with fruits, and
abide green all the Winter, withering in Summer, before which their Husks
appear. The seventh flowreth with his Hose and Clappers very late; even in the
warm Countries, seldom before October or November, and the fruit does there
seldom come to perfection: the last flowreth, and bears fruit in the Summer,
as other Herbs do.

The Temperature.
Wake-Robin is hot and dry in the third Degree, yet Galen affirms, that it is
more sharp and biting in some Countries, then in others.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Leaves of Wake-Robin, either green or dry, or the Juice of them, does
cleanse all manner of rotten and filthy Ulcers, in what part of the body
soever, and helps the stinking sores in the Nose, called Polypus. The water
wherein the Roots has been boiled, dropped into the Eyes, cleanses them from
any film or skin, Clouds or Mists, which begin to hinder the sight, and helps
the redness or watering of them, or when by some chance they become black and
blevv. The Juice of the Berries boiled in Oil of Roses, or beaten into Powder,
and mixed with the Oil, and dropped into the Ears, eases pains in them. The
Root mixed with Bean-flower, and applied to the Throat or Jaws that are
inflamed, helps them, and the Roots or Berries beaten with hot Oxe-Dung* and
applied, eases the pains of the Gout. Tragus reports, that a dram or more,
if need be, of the spotted VVake-Robin, either green or dried, being beaten,
and taken, is a most present and sure Remedy for Poison, and the Plague. The
Juice of the Herb taken to the quantity of a spoonful, has the same effect; to
which if there be a little Vinegar added, as also to the Root aforesaid, it
somewhat allayeth the sharp biting taste thereof upon the Tongue. The green
Leaves bruised* and laid upon any Boil or Plague Sore, does wonderfully help to
draw forth the poison. A dram of the Powder of the dried Root, taken with twice
so much Sugar, in the form of a licking Electuary, or the green Root, does
wonderfully help those that are pursie and short winded, as also those that
have the Cough; it breaks, digesteth, and riddeth away Phlegm from the
Stomach, Chest, and Lungs. The milk wherein the Root has been boiled, is
effectual also for the same purpose. The said Powder taken in Wine, or other
drink, or the Juice of the Berries, or the Powder of them, or the Wine wherein
they have been boiled, provokes Urine, and brings down Women's Courses, and
purges them effectually after Childbearing, to bring away the afterbirth,
and being taken with Sheeps milk, it heals the inward Ulcers of the Bowels.
The Leaves and Roots also boiled in Wine with a little Oil, and applied to the
Piles, or falling down of the Fundament, eases them; and so does the sitting
over the hot f^mes thereof. The fresh Roots bruised, and distilled with a
little milk, yields a most sovereign water to cleanse the skin from skurf,
freckles, spots, or blemishes whatsoever therein. The fresh Roots cut small,
and mixed with a Sallet, will make excellent sport, with a saucy sharking
guest, and drive him from his overmuch boldness, and so will the Powder of the
dry Root, strewed upon any dainty bit, that is given him to eat: For either
way, within a while after the taking it, it will so burn, and prick his mouth
and throat, that he shall not be able ^o eat any more, or scarce to speak for
pain: The green leaf biteth the Tongue also. To take away the stinging of
either, give the party so served new milk, or fresh butter. This Plant should
be Venereous by its Signature.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Flower de Luce.
The Names.
THe Greeks call it, (...) as also (...), quasi Sacra* whereupon some have
translated it Consecratrix, all great and huge things being counted by the
Ancients to be Holy; but it was called Iris, a caelestis Ar^us similitudine,
quam flores e^us representant; from the Rainbow whose various colors the
flower thereof does imitate. There have been some heretofore that made a
difference between Iris and Ireos, according to the Latin verse extant
thereof, which is this, Iris purpureum florem g^rit, Ireos album; but this is
an error proceeding as some suppose from the Greek word (...) which signifies
a white Lilly, and by casting away the first letter becomes (...) by changing
the last syllable, as if the Lilly and the Iris were all one, of which most
Authors make a distinction: It is called Rad^x Marica, because it is excellent
for the Piles; and some have called it, Radix Naronica of the River Naron, by
which great store does grow. The knobbed Iris is called of Matthiolus,
Hermodactylus Verus, because the roots are like unto fingers; and from him
diverse did so call it, but most erroneously it being a wild kind of flower de
luce* as Dodonaeus truly affirms. Gladwin which is a kind hereof, also is
called in Greek, (...) Xyris ob Folii similitudinem, quasi Rasorium cultrum,
aut novaculum dixeris; because of it Swordlike or sharpedged Leaf, and in
Latin Spatula, or Spathula faetida; for Spatha, is taken for a sword as
Gladium is; and I have heard it called Roast Beef, for that the leaves being
bruised smell somewhat like it. The Flowerdeluce is called in English Iris but
most commonly Orris.

The kinds.
So many of the sorts as I find set down in Parkinsons Theater of Plants, I
here set down; which are eight. 1. The greater Broad leafed Flowerdeluce, 2.
The greater Narrow leafed Flowerdeluce. 3. Portingall Flowerdeluce. 4. Broad
leafed dwarf Fowerdeluce. 5. Stinking Gladwine. 6. The first broad leafed
bulbed Flowerdeluce of Clusius. 7. The greater bulbed Flowerdeluce. 8. The
lesser bulbed Flowerdeluce; to which I add. 1. Iris tuberosa the knobbed
Flowerdeluce; 2. The common Flowerdelucer; 3. Water flags or wild Flowerdeluce.

The Form.
The Common Flowerdeluce has long and large flaggy leaves, like the blade of a
sword with two edges, amongst which spring up smooth and plain stalks, half a
yard long or longer, bearing flowers toward the top, compact of six leaves
joined together: whereof three that stand upright are bent inward one toward
another, and in those leaves that hang downwards there are certain rough and
hairy Welts, growing or rising from the nether part of the leaf upward, almost
of a yellow color, The Roots be long, thick and knobby, with many hairy threads
hanged thereat; but being dry it is without them, and white.

The Places and Time.
These Fowerdeluces aforementioned, and many more, though they grow naturally
in Africa, Greece, Italy and France, and some in Germany: yet they are nursed
up in the Cardens of those who are lovers of such varieties. Gladwin grows
wild in many places, as in woods and shaddowy places, near the Sea here in
England, and so does the Water Flowerdeluce in moist meddows: and in the
borders and brinks of rivers, ponds, and standing Lakes; but though it be
natural to such places, yet being planted in Gardens it prospers we^^. The
dwar^e kind of Flag Flowerdeluces, flower in April, the greater in May, and the
bulbous sorts not until June, the Gladwin not till July; The Seed is ripe in
the end of August, or beginning of September; yet the husks after they are ripe
will hold their seeds with them two or three months, and not shed them.

The Temperature
The Roots of the Flowerdeluce, when they are green and full of Juice, are hot
almost in the fourth degree; but when it is dry; it is hot only in the third;
yet then it burns the throat and mouth of such as taste thereof. It offends
the stomach and causes blood to be voided, if given in too great a Dose, and
to weak persons. It is not safe to be taken by Women with child, because it
brings down the courses: yea a Pessary made of the Juice with Honey, and put
up into the body, brings away the birth; therefore it is not safe to give it
alone but with good Correctives. In gripings of the bowels give it with Mastick
in the Joint gout with Castor, in the Dropsy with Honey of Roses in diseases
of the Liver with Rubarbe, Juice of Agrimony, etc.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Juice of the Root of the Common Fowerdeluce, being first extracted,
afterward set a while to clear, and then put up into the Nostrills, provokes
sneesing, and thereby purges the head of phlegm; so that though some one may
say, this plant is not proper to the Nose, yet as long as it may be
appropriated to the head, we are not quite out of our Sphere: for it eases the
pain of the head, and procures Rest if it be applied with Rose Cake and
Vinegar: it cleanses spots in the Eyes, and helps watery Eyes by cleansing
them. The Roots are effectual to warm and comfort all cold Joints and Sinews,
as also to ease the Gout and Sciatica, and mollifieth, dissolveth, and
consumes all Scrophulous tumors and swellings by Signature; especially made
into an Oil called Oleum Irinum, which oil also helps the Cramp and
Convulsion, the rheum that is cold and distilling from the head; and being
nointed on the breast, it helps to extenuate or make thin, tough and cold
phlegm making it more easy to spit out: it helps the stench of the Nostrils,
the pain and noise in the Ears, and much eases the painful Piles. The root it
self green or in powder, does cleanse, heal, and incarnate wounds, and covers
with flesh the naked bones which Ulcers have made bare; and is also good to
cleanse and heal up Fistulaes and Cancers that are hard to be cured. It helps
the pains and swellings of the Cods, if it be thus used; Take of the roots in
powder half an ounce, Cinamom and Dill of each two drachms, Saffron a scruple,
mix them well together, lay them on a Scarlet Cloth moistened in White wine, and
apply it warm to the Cods. The green roots bruised, and applied to black and
blew marks in the skin takes them away and all other discoloring of the skin,
whether Morphew or the like; but it is better to apply it with red Rose water,
and a little Lin-Seed Oil, ot oil of Parmacity in manner of a Pultis. Moreover
a decoction of the roots gargled in the Mouth eases the Toothache, and helps
a strong or stinking breath; Being mixed with a little Honey, and drunk, it
purges and cleanses the stomach of gross and tough phlegm and choler
therein; it likewise helps the Jaundice and the Dropsy, by evacuating those
humors both upward and downwards: it eases also the pains of the belly and
sides, the shaking of Agues, the diseases of the Liver and Spleen, the Worms in
the belly the Stone in the Reins; Convulsions or Cramps that come of cold
humors, and helps those whose seed passes from them unawares. It is a
remedy against the bitings and stingings of venomous Creatures, being boiled in
water and Vinegar and drunk; being boiled in Wine and drunk it provokes Urine
and the Cholick. An Electuary made hereof, called Dia-ireos Solomonis, is very
good for the Lungs, and helps cold infirmities of them, as Asthmaes, Coughs,
difficulty of breathing, etc. You may take it with a Liquoris stick, or on the
point of a knife, a little of it at a time and often.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of Hors-tail.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek, (...); and Hippuris, in Latin; also by diverse
Equ^setum, or Cauda Equina, which is the same with Hippuris: of the form o^ an
Horsetail, which the stalk of leaves, being turned downwards, does resemble. By
other names it is likewise called, as Equinalis, and by Pliny, Equ^sclis, and
of some, Salix Equina and Sangu nalis, from the powerful effic^cy it has to
stench blood; and of others, Asprella because of its ruggedness which has not
formerly been unknown to Country Hou^wives, who with the rougher kind hereof,
called in English Shavegrass, did, as now with Elder Leaves, but more
effectually, scowre their Pewter, Brass, and Wood^en Vessels; and therefore it
has been by some of them called Pewterwort: but I think that piece of
thriftinesse with many other are laid aside, which might profitably be revived,
if they knew it. Of some it is called Ephedra, Anabasis and Caucon. Fletchers
also and Comb makers polish their work therewith.

The Kinds.
There be hereof fourteen sorts mentioned by modern Writers. 1. The greater
Marsh Horsetail. 2. Broad leafed Horsetail. 3. Small Marsh Horsetail. 4. Barren
Marsh Horsetail. 5. The smallest and finest leafed Horsetail. 6. Many headed
Horsetail. 7. Rush or naked Horsetail. 8. Branched Rush Horsetail. 9. Small
party colored Horsetail. 10. Stinking Horsetail. 11. The great Meadow
Horsetail. 12. Corn Horsetail. 13. Wood Horsetail. 14. Mountain Horsetail of
Candy.

The Form.
The greater Horsetail that grows in wet grounds, at the first springing has
heads somewhat like to those of Asparagus, and after grow to be hard, rough,
hollow stalks, joynted at sundry places up to the top, a foot high: so made as
if the lower part were put into the upper, whereat grow on each side a bush of
small long Rush like hard leaves, each part resembling an Horsetail, at the
tops of the stalks come forth small Catkins like unto those of Trees; the root
creeps under ground having Joints at sundry places.

The Places and Time.
Many of the foresaid sorts grow generally up and down this Land, but some of
them are not so frequent as others, as the smallest and finest Leased Horsetail
which grows in the lower wet grounds, in the woods about Highgate not ^ar
from London: Small party colored Horsetail, or Horsetail Coralline (whose
leaves being bitten, seem to be composed of Sand, from their grating between
the teeth) grows on a bog by Smochal, a wood nigh Bathe. The Stinking
Horsetail was found by Mr. William Brown of Magdalen College, myself, and
others in a bog about half a mile from Stockers house in Stow Wood, by Oxford
by the Road that goes to Islip. You may guess where the rest grow by their
titles: they do all spring up with their blackish heads in April, and put
forth their blooming Catkins in July, seeding for the most part in August, and
then perish down to the ground, rising afresh in the Spring.

The Temperature.
Horsetail, as Galen says, has a binding faculty with some bitterness, and
therefore it does mightily dry, and that without biting.

The Virtues
I know nor where more properly to bestow this plant then in this place, it
being so effectual to stanch bleedings which most commonly burst forth at the
Nose if the Juice or Decoction thereof be drunk: or the Juice Decoction o^
distilled water applied outwardly. It stays also all sorts of Lasks and
Fluxes in Man or Woman, and pissing of blood: it heals also, not only the
inward Ulcers and Excoriations of the intralls, bladder, etc. But all other
sorts of soul moist and running Ulcers, and soon sodereth together, the tops of
green wounds, not suffering them to grow to maturation. It cures also Ruptures
in Children quickly, but in those that are elder more time is required,
according to the disposition of the party and the continuance. The Decoction
hereof in wine being drunk is said to provoke Urine, to help the Strangury and
the Stone; and so does the distilled water thereof drunk two or three times a
day, a small quantity at a time, as also to ease the pains in the Entralls or
Guts, and to be effectual against a Cough that comes by distillation of rheum
from the head. The Juice or distilled Water being warmed and hot Inflamma ions,
Pustules or Red wheales and other such Eruptions in the skin being bathed
therewith does help them, and does no less ease the swellings, heat and
Inflammations of the Fundament and privy parts in Man or Woman, and cures
Tetters and Ringworms. The fume of it is good to cause children guts to go back
into their Body, when as through Flux or cold they hang forth, and so it
stops the immoderate Terms of Women. The young buds are dressed by some like
Asparagus, or being boiled are often bestrewed with flower and fried to be
eaten. The smother rather then the Rough, and the leafed then the bare, is both
more used, and of better effect in physic.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Shepherds purse.
The Names.
THis Plant has not gotten any name in Greek that I can learn from any Author.
All Latin Writers that make mention of it call it Bursa, or Pera Pastoris, and
Pastoria Bursa, except Gesner who calls it Thlaspi Fatuum; and Castor
Durantes, Herba Cancri. In English it is called Shepherds purse or Scrip, from
the likeness the Seed has with that kind of leatherne bag, wherein Shepherds
carry their Victuals into the field: of some, Shepherds pouch and poor man's
Parmacety, it being in some sort effectual for the same things that Parmacety
is; and in the North part of England Toywort, Pickpurse and Caseweed, and of
some Clappedepouch.

The Kinds.
These were formerly but two sorts of Shepherds purse known, but Bauhinus
makes paticular relation of two more, which are the second and last, so that
there are four kinds in all. 1. The greater common Shepherds purse. 2. Great
Shepherds purse with whole leaves. 3. Small Shepherds purse. 4. Hairy Mountain
Shepherds purse.

The Form.
The Common Shepherds purse, has diverse small and long leaves somewhat deeply
cut-in, on both sides like Rocket, of a pale green color, most commonly spread
upon the Ground; amongst which rises up a small round stalk parted into
sererall branches, some of which are sometimes about two handfulls high, and
have smaller and less divided leaves on them to the tops: where grow many
white flowers one above another, after which follow flat whitish pouches or
Se^d Vessels, small at the bottoms, broad at the heads, and parted like the
Thlas^, a^^ost in form of an heart, in each side whereof lies a small brownish
yellow s^^d; the root is small and white, and perishes after seed-time; but
arises of the scattered seed, the same or the next year.

The Places and Time.
The greater and lesser sorts that have cut leaves, are frequent in every place
with us in England, but the other two whose leaves are whole, do not grow wild
here; yet in Germany Mompelier and Italy, they do, as Bauhinus and Thalius
affirm. They flower and seed all Summer long, yea so quick some of them are,
that they flower and seed twice in every year.

The Temperature.
Shepherds purse is cold and dry, and very much binding after the Opinion of
Ruellius, Matthiolus, and Dodonaeus; but Label and Pena finding a little heat
upon the sharp taste of the flowers and seeds, do judge it not to be cold at
all but drying and astringent.

The Virtues.
This Plant also being a stopper of blood, does in a manner require this place,
because the nose is the Organ, through which the blood does commonly make its
way, and sometimes continues so long, that unless it be timely prevented, it
endangereth the life. For remedying of which distemper, it may be used by
holding the hands full of it, or by binding it about the neck, by using it in
meats, or by applying it with Vinegar and water to the secret parts. The
deco^^ion thereof drunk, stops the Lask, the Bloody Flux, spitting blood,
pissing blood, the Flowers and all other issues of blood, most excellently
well, howsoever it be taken, but especially with red Wine, or Plantain water.
Some do hold, that the green Herb bruised and bound to the wrests of the hands,
and soles of the feet, will help the yellow Jaundice: the Herb bruised, and
laid Pultis-wise upon Inflammations, St. Anthonies fire, or the like,
represseth them: The juice dropped into mattering or running ears, helps
them: it closes the lips of green wounds, and is of great effect, being made
into a Salve for wounds in the Head. The juice thereof being drunk, helps the
straitness of the breath, and the Strangury, it stops Rheum, and provokes
Urine. It is very prevalent against venomous bitings, if it be drunk with Wine;
and it preventeth the fits of Agues, if it be taken one home before the fit. It
cures creeping and running sores, Fistulaes, spitting of blood and matter, the
holy fire, swellings and hardness, Shingles, heat of the stomach, new wounds,
hot Imposthumes, and rheumatick sores; and all other kind of Fluxes.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Willow.
The Names.
AFter so many Herbs, it will not be amiss to bring in a Tree, which though in
form has little, yet in virtue has some affinity. The Willow is called in
Greek, (...), quod cito in altum excrescat; and Salix a Saliendo in Latin,
because it grows with that speed, that it seeme^h to leap. There is a greater
sort, which is called in English Sallow, VVithy, and Willow, and there is a
lesser sort called Osier, small VVithy, and Twig Withy. Petrus Crescentius
calls it Vincus a vinciendo, because it is necessary to bind Faggots, or any
other Commodities that stand in need thereof.

The Kinds.
Many are the sorts of this Plant, which Authors reckon up, whereof I shall
set down only those which I conceive to grow in our own Country, and they are
1. The ordinary great white Willow-Tree. 2. The ordinary black Willow. 3. The
Rose Willow. 4. The hard black Willow. 5. The black Withy. 6. The round leafed
Sallow. 7. The longer leafed Sallow. 8. The lesser broad Willow. 9. The silver
leafed Sallow. 10. The upright low broad Willow. 11. Creeping broad leafed
Willow. 12. The least red or stone Willow. 13. The least Willow without fruit.
14. The Osier. 15. The straight dwarf Willow, with narrow Leaves. 16. Creeping
low Willow, with narrow Leaves. 17. The black low Willow. 18. Willow Bay. I
shall describe only the first, that by it you may guess at the rest.

The Form,
The ordinary white Willow grows quickly to be a great and tall Tree, if it
be not lopped, as it is usual in most places, with a smooth white bark on the
body, and bigger branches, the younger sprigs being somewhat green with the
whiteness: the Leaves are long and narrow, pale, green on the upper side, and
of a shining silver white color underneath, without any dent on the edges: the
Flowers come out before the Leaves appear, and are small, long, and round
yellow mossie heads, smelling sweet for the most part, diverse standing one
above another, upon a long stalk, which in time turn to down, that is blown
away by the wind, and the Seed with it, if it has any: The wood is soft and
white, and with the branches hereof are made stakes for hedges, or to uphold
Vines, etc.

The Places and Time.
Most of these Willows are common, and to be sound in low grounds, near Water
Courses and ditches; the Rose Willow in sundry places of Essex and
Cambridgeshire; others on Hamsteed-Heath, Rumney Marsh, and the like. The Osier
is always in the low grounds, that are often overflowen, where it will only
thrive. The Blossoms come forth before any Leaves, appear, and are in their
most flourishing estate, usually before Easter., diverse gathering them to deck
up their houses on Palm Sunday, and therefore the said Flowers are called Palm.

The Temperature.
The Leaves, Flowers, Seed, and Bark of Willows, are cold and dry in the second
degree and astringent.

The Virtues and Signature.
The Leaves and Bark of Willow, but especially the Catkins, are used with good
success, to stanch bleeding of wounds, and at the mouth or nose, and spitting
of blood, as also all other fluxes of blood in man or woman; and likewise to
stay casting, and the desire thereunto, if the decoction of them in Wine be
drunk: It helps also to stay thin, hot, and sharp salt distillations, from
the head upon the Lungs, causing a Consumption. The Leaves bruised with some
Pepper, and drunk in Wine, do much help the Wind-Cholick. The Leaves only
bruised and boiled in Wine, and drunk, do much stay the heat of lust, and
wholly exstinguish it both in man and woman, if it be much used: the Catkins
also are of the like effect. The water that is gathered from the Willow,
whilst it flowreth, the Bark being slit, and a Vessel apt to receive it, being
fitted to it, is very good for redness, and dim eyesight, and Films that
begin to grow over them, and stay the Rheums that fall into them, to provoke
Urine, being stopped, if it be drunk, and to clear the face and skin of any
spots or discolorings, if washed therewith. The Flowers, says Galen, have a
stronger effect, to dry up any Flux or humor, being a Medicine without any
sharpness, and the Bark much more, as all Barks do; but if the Bark be burnt
and used, it does yet dry more forcibly, and being mixed with Vinegar, it
takes away Warts and Corns, and other the like callous flesh, that grows on
the hands or feet, or other parts. The decoctions of the Leaves and Bark in
Wine, is good to bath the Sinews, as also the places pained with the Gout, and
to cleanse the Head or other parts of scurf. The Juice of the Leaves and green
Bark mingled with some Rose Water, and heated in the Rhind of a Pomegranet, is
singular good to help deafness, to be dropped into the Ears. The Seed of the
black Willow mixed with Litharge of Silver, in equal quantity, made into an
Ointment, and used on any place, where the hair grows, that you would take
away, after it has been bathed well before, or else in the bain or Stove, does
cause it to fall away. This Plant is not propagated by Seed; but any stick
thereof, though almost withered, being fixed in the Earth, grows: which
Signature does truly declare, that a Bath made of the decoction of the Leaves,
and Bark of Willow, restores again, withered and dead Members, to their former
strength, if they be nourished with the fomentation thereof.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Bistort.
The Names.
BY what Name the Grecians called this Plant, is not known; but amongst the
Latins it has diverse. It is called Bistorta, quod radice in se serpentis modo
contorta and convoluta constet, by Fragus, Leonicerous, and others, and
Col^brina of the similitude the Root has with a Serpent, rouling it self up
together. Parkinson says, that Fuschius calls it Serpentaria, quod
venenosorum serpentium ictibus succurrit: which though it happily performs,
yet Fuschius gives it no such Etymology, as I can find, but very much blames
those Herbatists and Apothecaries which call it so: Serpentaria being an Herb
much differing from this, both in form and virtue, which the Greeks call (...),
and the Latins Dracunculus and Serpentaria, which we in English call Dragons:
but Bistort is not called Dragons, but Snakeweed.

The Kinds.
All the Bistorts that I can find, are not above six. 1. Common Bistort, or
Snakeweed. 2. Bistort with more crooked Roots. 3. Great Mountain Bistort. 4.
Small Bistort of our own Country. 5. Small Bistort of the Alps. 6. Variable
leafed small Bistort.

The Form.
Common Bistort has a thick short knobbed Root, blackish without, and somewhat
reddish within, a little crooked or writhed together, of an harsh or astringent
taste, with diverse blackish Fibers growing thereat, from whence spring up every
year, diverse Leaves, standing upon long footstalk, being somewhat long and
broad, very like unto a Dock-Leaf, and a little pointed at the ends, but that
it is crumpled, of a bluish green color on the upper side, and of an Ash
color gray, and a little Purplish underneath, having diverse veins therein:
from among which, arise diverse small and slender stalks, about half a yard
high, almost naked, and without Leaves, or with very few narrow ones, bearing a
spiky bush of pale flesh colored Flowers, which being past, there abides
small Seed, somewhat like unto Sorrel-Seed, but greater.

The Places and Time.
The two first grow at the foot of Hills, and in shadowy, moist Woods near unto
them, in many places of Germany; and in our Country likewise, in moist and
watery places, particularly in a Meadow, about a stones throw above the Abbey
Mill at St. Albans, about an Acres breadth, or somewhat more from the River
side, where the common Bistort grows plentifully, though it be chiefly
nourished in Gardens. The fourth, grows in Westmerland, about Crosby, in
Cumberland about Ravenswaith, in Yorkshire, Lancashire, and diverse other
places. The third grows on the high Hills in Silesia, and other places. The
two last are round on the Alps, in diverse places* and the last also amongst the
Switzers. They all flower about the end of May, and the Seed is ripe about the
beginning of July.

The Temperature.
Bistort is cold and dry in the third Degree, and very astringent.

The Signature and Virtues.
This Plant has a double Signature, both proceeding from the Roots, the one
from the color of the inside of them; the other, from the writhed or twisted
form. The bloody color of the Roots, betokens that it is effectual to stay
the bleeding of the Nose, and all manner of inward bleeding, and spitting of
blood: as also any Fluxes of the body, in man or woman, and likewise vomiting:
the Powder of the Root in Wine, or the decoction thereof being drunk. The juice
hereof being put up into the Nose, prevails much against the Di^ease called
Polypus, and all other Sores or Cancers, that happen in the Nose or any other
part; but the surest way is, first to wash them with the distilled water, and
afterward to apply the Powder of the Root thereto: It is good also to fasten
the Gums, and to take away the heat and Inflammation that happen as well in the
Jaws, Almonds of the Throat or Mouth: if the decoction of the Roots, Leaves,
or Seeds be used, or the juice of them. The Root of Bistort, Pellitory of
Spain, and burnt Allome, of each a like quantity, beaten small, and made into a
Past with Honey, a little piece thereof, put into an hollow Tooth, or holden
between the teeth, if they be not hollow, stays the defluxions of Rheum upon
them, when it is the cause of their pain, and helps to cleanse the Head, and
void much offensive matter. The wreathed form of the Root, is a sign that is
good against the bitings of Serpents, or Snakes, for which it is found to be
very effectual: as also for the venoming of Toads, Spiders, Adders, or the
like venomous Creatures, if the place be washed with the water that is
distilled from the Root and Leaves. A dram of the powdered Root taken in drink,
expels the Venom of the Plague, the small Pox, Measels, Purples, or any
other infectious Disease, driving it forth by sweating. The Powder of the Root,
or the decoction thereof being drunk, is very available against Ruptures or
burstings, or all bruises or falls whatsoever, dissolving the congealed blood,
and easing the pains that happen thereupon. The said decoction being made with
Wine, and drunk, hinders abortion, that is, when Women are apt to miscarry in
Childbearing, the Leaves kill worms in Children, and is a great help to them
that cannot keep their water: if some juice of Plantain be put thereto, which
applied outwardly, does give much help in the Gonorrhaea, or running of the
Reins. A dram of the Powder of the Root taken in the water thereof, wherein
some red hot Iron or Steel has been quenched, is also an admirable help
thereto, so as the body be first prepared and purged from the offensive
humors. The Leaves, Seeds, or Roots are all very good in Decoctions, Drinks,
or Lotions for invard or outward wounds, or other sores, and the Powder strewed
upon any Cut or Wound in a vein, stays the immoderate bleeding thereof. The
Decoction of the Roots in water, whereupon some Pomegranate Pills and Flowers
are added, injected into the Matrix, stays the access of humors, to the
Ulcers thereof, and brings it to its right place, being fallen down, and
stays the immoderate Flux of the Courses. The Roots are most used in Physic,
and will keep good a year or two. The Dose in Powder is from a scruple to a
dram: into Decoction from a dram to two or three, which is made by bruising a
sufficient quantity of the root, suppose two drachms, and boiling it in half a
pint of Pos^et drink, till about half be consumed, then strain it and give the
clearest to be drunk in a morning

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Tormentil.
The Names.
THough none of the Greek writers have mentioned this herb, yet it has got a
Greek name, and is called, (...) ex (...) Septem et (...) folium, that is
Seven-leaves; but not properly it being only one leaf cut into seven divisions.
For there is a general rule in all Leaves, whether of herbs or trees, that,
that which falls away with the stalk, and not in parts and at several times,
is the leaf; though it be winged as that of the Ash, Elder, Walnut tree, etc.
the great Centory, Agrimony, Danewort, Parsnep, Valerian, etc. is: or divided,
as Trefoil, Cinquefoil, or Tormentil, etc. is. It is called in Latin
Tormentilla, quia valet adversus tormenta intestinorum; from its virtue in
easing the torments of the Guts, and Heptaphyllum or Septifolium, and of some
Stellaria from the form of the leaves, though that be a name applied to other
plants of the like form. In English, Tormentil, Setfoil or Seven-leaves.

The Kinds.
Formerly there was but one sort of Tormentill known, but now there are three.
1. Common Tormentil. 2. The greater Tormentil. 3. Silver leafed Tormentil.

The Form.
The common Tormentil has many reddish, slender, weak branches rising from the
root, lying upon the ground, or rather leaning then standing upright, with many
short leaves that stand closer to the stalks, as the Cinkfoil does (which this
is otherwise somewhat like) with the footstalks encompassing the Branches in
several places; but they that grow next the ground, are set upon longer
footstalks each whereof are like the leaves of Cinkfoil, but somewhat longer
and lesser, and dented about the edges, many of them having five divisions,
some six, most seven and sometimes though seldom eight, according to the
fertility of the soil. At the tops of the branches stand diverse small yellow
flowers consisting of five leaves like those of Cinkfoil but smaller. The root
is smaller then Bistort; somewhat thick, tuberous, or knobby, blackish without,
and reddish within as the former, sometimes a little crooked, having many
blackish fibers.

The Places and Times
The common sort grows not only in Woods and shadowy places, but also in
pastures and Closes, lying open to the Sun: Great plenty of it is to be found
in Pray Wood near St. Albans; and in a Close that lies between the Week and
Stafford Lane near Heddington in Oxfordshire, where the biggest roots that ever
I saw grow. The second grows amongst the Helvetians or Switzers, as also in
the county of Tirol. The last grows upon the Alps, in diverse rocky or stony
places as also upon the Pyrenaean mountains, and among the Savoyards likewise.

The Temperature.
The root of Tormentil does mightily dry, and that in the third degree, and is
of thin parts; it has in it but little heat, and is of a binding quality; and
therefore it must not be given to dry bodies, nor to such as are very costive.

The Signature and Virtues.
The redness of the inside of the root of Tormentil is an eminent token, that
it is most excellent to stay all kinds of fluxes, of blood or humors in Man or
Woman, whether at Nose, Mouth, Belly, or any wound in the Veins or elsewhere.
It provokes sweat, expells poison and is good to cure wounds; the herb, root,
and water are in use. It is much used in the Pestilence and other malignant
diseases, as small Pox, Measels, Purples, and spotted Fevers, driving forth by
sweat any contagion, especially if the Flux of the belly be joined with these
diseases. It is u^e(...) in Catarrhes to dry up the rheums, and in the French
diseases, and generally for all other things that Bistort is good for, and may
be used for the same. The distilled Water of Tormentil taken in a morning
fasting, is excellent against Venom, or any contagion* and is a good
preservative in time of infection. The Dose is two or three Ounces, the same
taken morning and evening cures all inward Ulcers in the Body stays the
Fluxes of the Belly; especially in the Dysentery or bloody Flux. It does
comfort the brain, heart, and stomach, liver and spleen; as also the whole
body, and cures most agues. The best way to still the water is to steep the
herb all night in Wine, and then distill it, Balneo Mariae. The water thus
distilled taken with some Venice Treacle, and the party laid presently to sweat
will certainly, by Gods help, expel any Venom or Poison, the Plague, Fever,
etc. For it is an ingredient of special respect in all Antidotes or
Counterpoisons. The powder of the dried root made up with the white of an Egg
in the form of a little cake* and baked upon an hot Tile, will stay all fluxes,
restrain all choleric belchings, and much vomiting with loathings in the
stomach. The Leaves and Roots being bruised and applied, dissolve all Knots,
Kernels, and Hardness gathered about the Ears, throat and Jaws, and the Kings
Evil. The same also eases the pains of the Sciatica or Hipgout by straining
the sharp humors that flow thereto: the Juice of the Leaves and roots used
with a little Vinegar, is a special remedy against running sores of the head or
other parts; scabs also and the itch* or any such eruptions in the skin
proceeding of salt and sharp humors. The same also is effectual for the Piles
or Hemorrhoids if they be washed and bathed therewith, or with the distilled
Water of the Herb or Roots: It is found also helpful to dry up any sharp Rheum,
that distilleth from the head into the Eyes causing redness, pain, waterings,
Itchings or the like, if a little prepared Tutia or white Amber be used with
the distilled water hereof.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Cinckfoile.
The Names.
COme we next to Cinckfoile, not only for the likeness of properties that is
between it and Tormentill, but of the outward face and form of the Plant, as
you shall hear hereafter. It is called in Greek, (...) and in Latin
Pentaphyllum and Quinque-folium, a numero foliorum; in English Cinckfoil, and
Cinckfield, and Five finger grass, or Five leaved Grass.

The Kinds.
The sorts of Cinckfoile are very numerous, an exact account whereof, we shall
not labor for; those nine reckoned up by Gerard, being sufficient for our
present purpose. 1. Great Cinckfoil. 2. Common Cinckfoil. 3. Purple Cinckfoil.
4. Marish Cinckfoil. 5. Stone Cinckfoil. 6. Upright Cinckfoil. 7. Wall
Cinckfoil. 8. Hoary Cinckfoil. 9. Wood Cinckfoil.

The Form.
Common Cinckfoil spreads and creeps far upon the ground, with long slender
strings, like Strawberries, which take Root again, and shoot forth many Leaves,
made of five parts, and sometimes of seven, dented about the edges, and
somewhat hard. The stalks are slender, leaning downwards, and bear many small
yellow Flowers thereon, with some yellow threads in the middle, standing about a
smooth green head, which when it is ripe, is a little rough, and contains
small brownish seeds. The Root is of a blackish brown color, seldom so big as
ones little finger, but growing long with some threads thereat; and by the small
strings, quickly spreading it self abroad.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in Switzerland naturally, and is nursed up in some of our
^ardens. The second grows by high-way-sides, and in low and moist Meadows.
The third grows in the Woods of Clavena and Narbon. The fourth in a Marish
Ground, adjoining to the Land called Bourn Pondes, half a mile from Colchester.
The fifth grows upon Beestone Castle in Cheshire. The sixth, upon Brick and
Stone-walls about London. The seventh, on the Alps of Rhetia, near Clavena.
The eighth, in the hollowness of Peakish Mountains, and dry gravelly Valleys.
The last grows in Woods. The Plants do flower from the beginning of May, to
the end of June.

The Temperature
The Roots of Cinckfoil, especially the two last, do vehemently dry, and that
in the third Degree, but without biting; for they have very little apparent
heat of sharpness.

The Virtues.
Common Cinckfoil is held to be effectual for all the purposes, whereunto
Bistort and Tormentill, is applied; as well for preserving against venomous and
infectious Creatures and Diseases, in each respect, as in keeping from
putre^action, for binding and restraining Fluxes, either of blood or humors,
which are excessive, especially bleeding at the Nose, which it performs, if
the juice be drunk in Ale, or red Wine, or the Roots or Leaves applied to the
Nose. Some hold, that one Leaf cures a Quotidian, three a Tertian, and four a
Quartan, which is a mere whimsey; but the truth is, if you give a scruple of
it, (which is twenty grains) at a time, either in White Wind, or
White-wine-Vinegar: you shall seldom mis^e the Cure of an Ague in three fits,
be it what it will, even to admiration, as Mr. Culpepper affirms. The juice
hereof drunk about four Ounces at a time, for certain days together, cures
the Quinsie, and the yellow Jaundice; and taken for thirty days together,
cures the Falling Sickness. The Roots boiled in milk, and drunk, is a most
effectual Remedy for all Fluxes, either in Man or Woman, whether the whites,
reds, or Bloody Flux. The Roots boiled in Vinegar, and the decoction thereof
held in the mouth, eases the pains of the Toothache. The juice, or decoction
taken with a little Honey helps the hoarsness of the Throat, and is good for
the Cough of the Lungs. The distilled water of the Roots and Leaves, is also
effectual to all the purposes aforesaid: and if the hands be often washed
therein, and suffered every time to dry of it self, without wiping, it will in
short time help the Palsy, or shaking of them.

CHAP. XL. Of Sow-bread.
The Names.
THis Plant is the last that I shall treat of, in relation to the Nose. The
Greek Names of it are, (...) and (...). It was called by the first Name, (...),
a Circulo, because both the Leaf and the Root are of a circular or round
Figure; by the later, (...), because it was used to kill Fishes. It is called
in Latin Tuber terrae, and Terrae rapum, because of its knobby Tur-nep-like
Root; and Umbilicus terr^, because as the Navill of a Man's Body strutteth out a
little above the Belly, so this sometimes above the Earth; of some,
Orbicularis; of others Palalia, Rapum porcinum, and malum Terrae. In Shops,
Cyclamen, Panis Porcinus, and Artanita. In English, Sowbread, or Swine-bread,
because the Swine love it, and feed upon it in those Countries, where it is
plentiful.

The kinds.
Parkinson in former book has reckoned up a dozen sorts, or more hereof; the
want whereof will constrain me to content my self only with the mentioning of
three, which are 1. Common round Sow-bread. 2. Ivy-Sow-bread. 3. A strange
Plant sent for a bastard Sow-bread of the Spring.

The Form.
The common kind of Sow-bread has many green and round leaves, like unto
Asarabacca, saving that the upper part of the Leaves are mixed here and there,
confusedly with white spots, and under the Leaves next the ground, of a purple
color: amongst which rise up little stems, like the stalks of Violets, bea^ing
at the top small purple, or murrey colored Flowers, which turn themselves
backwards, of a small scent or savor, or none at all: which being past, there
succeed little round knops or heads, that contain slender brown seeds: these
knops are wrapped after a few days in the small stalks, as thread about a
bottom, where it remains so defended from the in jury of the winter, close
upon the ground, covered also with the green Leaves aforesaid, by which means
it is kept from the frost, even from the time of his seeding, which is in
September until June, at what time the leaves do fa^e away, the stalks and
seed remaining bare and naked, whereby it enjoys the Sun the sooner, to bring
them to maturity: the Root is round, like a Turnep, black without, and white
within, with many small strings annexed thereunto.

The Places and Time.
The first grows plentifully about Artois, and Vermandois in France, and in
the Forest of Arden. The second, which is the best of all, in many places of
Italy. The third on the Pyrenaean Hills. Gerard says, that he has heard that
Sow-bread grows on the Mountains in Wales, on the Hills of Lincolnshire, and
Somersetshire, which I never heard of from any, but him who had it but from
another* and therefore I believe the relator was mistaken, it being not so much
as mentioned in the Catalogue of British Plants: notwithstanding, it is
frequent in Gardens, and is nursed up there, more for its Flower then any thing
else, because it is in its prime, when most others are decayed; for it flowreth
in September, and afterward, when the Plant is without Leaf, which do
afterward spring up, continuing green all winter, covering and keeping warm
the Seed unto Midsummer next, at what time the Seed is ripe. The third flowreth
in the Spring, and therefore it is called Cyclamen vernum, or Sow-bread of the
Spring.

The Temperature.
Although Mesue does determine the Degrees hereof, to be hot and dry in the
beginning of the third, yet Galen does not so, but says only (70. Simplicium)
that it cutteth, cleanses, and opens the mouths of the Veins, draws and
digesteth, which is plainly seen, by the particular operations thereof.

The Virtues and Signature.
Matthiolus says, that the distilled water from the Roots of Sow-bread,
snuffed up into the Nostrils, stays their bleeding wonderfully; and that if
six Ounces of that water be drunk, which an Ounce of fine Sugar, it will stay
the blood that comes from the breast, stomach or Liver, in a wonderful
manner: or if any Vein be broken in them: It purges somewhat violently, and
therefore it is fit, as he says, to mix therewith some Mastick, or Nutmeg, or
a scruple of Rubarb: by the use whereof many have been helped of the hardness
and swelling of the spleen, which could not be helped by other things. It
eases also the pains and torments of the Bowels, which we call the Cholick.
And if, says he, the Root hereof be beaten with a few Peach-stone-Kernels, and
bitter Almonds, and after laid in sleep in Aqu^vitae for three days, a drop or
two of the expressed Cream thereof dropped into the Ears that are deaf, or have
much noise, helps them: the juice mixed with Honey, or Plantain-water,
helps all sores in the mouth or throat, being gargled therewith, and the
Toothache also. The juice of it opens the Hemorrhoides or Piles, and strongly
moves to the Stool, being put up in Wool, and says Mesues, it avoideth tough
Phlegm used in a Clister: It is also used with such Medicines, as discuss
swellings, Kernels, and other hard knots, in any part of the body: It helps
also the Pin and Web in the Eyes, being infused with Honey, as also avoideth it
by the Nostrils, and that by snuffing up the juice, the head and brain is
purged from those humors that offend it, the Ach also, and daily pains of it,
and the Meagrim. This Plant belongs to the womb by Signature, and therefore
as Theophrastus affirms, the fresh Root put into a Cloth, and applied for a
little time, to the secret parts of a Woman, that is in sore and long Travail
in Childbirth, helps them to an easy and speedy delivery* but it is
dangerous till then, to be meddled with, by Women with Child, because it will
make them miscarry. It is profitable for those that have the yellow Jaundice,
to drive it forth by sweating, if after the taking of three drams of the Powder
in Mead or Honeyed water, they be carefully ordered to sweat: It helps also
to cleanse all the deformities or discolorings of the skin, and the Freckles
and spots thereof, as well fresh as dry. The Juice mingled with Vinegar,
helps the falling down of the Fundament, if it be anointed therewith. The
Juice of Sow-bread, and the Juice of Plantane, of each a like quantity, mixed
together, and Aloes, Mirth, and Olibanum added thereto, stops the bleeding
of the Nose, if it be applied to the Nostrils, and forehead. And thus I have
done with Plants, that are appropriated to the Nose, for the Polypus, and the
stopping of blood.

CHAP. XLI. Of Medlars.
The Names.
THe Mouth challenges the next place, and it is fit, that that part should
especially be regarded, without which others could not subsist. And because
Medlars are found to be helpful to many distempers thereof. I begin with that.
It is called in Greek, (...) and (...); in Latin, Mespilus, and the fruit
(...), Mespilum. Dioscorides affirms, that this Medlar-Tree is called (...),
and so does Galen, and of diverse Sicanion. The fruit of the Neapolitan kind, is
called Tricoccos, of the three grains or stones that it has. The Tree is
called in English, the Medlar or Openarse-Tree, and the fruit Medlars and
Open-arses.

The Kinds.
Five sorts hereof are reckoned up. 1. The great manured Medlar. 2. The
ordinary or small Medlar. 3. The common Italian Medlar. 4. The great white
Medlar. 5. The Medlar of Naples.

The Form.
The great Medlar-tree grows near to the bigness of the Quince-tree spreading
forth branches, of a reasonable size, with longer and narrower Leaves, then
either the Apple or Quince, and not dented about the edges. At the end of the
sprigs stand the Flowers, made of fair white great broad pointed Leaves, nicked
in the middle, with some white threads also: after which, comes the fruit of a
brownish green color, being ripe; being a Crown as it were on the top, which
were the five green Leaves: which being rubbed of, or fallen away, the head of
the fruit is seen to be somewhat hollow. The fruit is very harsh, before it be
mellowed, and has usually five hard Kernells within it.

The Places and Time.
Three of these sorts grow with us here in England: the two first do grow in
Orchards, and sometimes in hedges, amongst Briars and Brambles; and the last
with some few lovers of rarities: The other two have scarcely been seen in this
Country. They flower in May for the most part; but the fruit is not ripe till
September or October: after which, they must lie till they be as it were
rotten, before they be fit to be eaten.

The Temperature.
The Medlars are cold, dry, and astringent: the Leaves are of the same nature.

The Signature and Virtues.
Suppose that place to be a mouth, which some call by another name, as it well
may be, and then we may appropriate it to the mouth by Signature: However, the
mouth is not only gratified by its pleasant taste, being mellow, and ordered
with Honey or Sugar; but the decoction of them is good to gargle and wash the
mouth, throat and teeth, when there is any defluxion of blood, or humors, to
stay them, which otherwise might cause pains and swellings, to bind those
distillations, and to ease the pains: The same also serves well, both to
drink, and to bath the stomach warm, that is given to loathing, casting, or
vomiting, by sortifying digestion, and preserving the humors from
putrefaction; but if a Pultis, or Plaster be made with dried Medlars, beaten
and mixed with the juice of Red Roses, whereunto a few Cloves and Nutmegs may
be added, and a little red Coral also, and applied to the stomach, it will
work more effectually. The decoction aforesaid, serves also for a good bath,
for Women to sit in or ove^ that have their Courses come down too abundantly;
or for the Piles, when they bleed too much. The d^yed Leaves in Powder, strewed
on bleeding or fresh wounds, restrains the blood, and heals up the wound
quickly: both leaves and fruit, are of singular good use, to bind and to
strengthen whatsoever has need of those qualities. The stones or Kernels
bruised to Powder, and drunk in Liquor especially wherein some Parsley Roots
have been steeped all night, or a little boiled, do mightily drive out stones
and gravel from the Kidneys, and that by Signature. Besides these effects, the
mellowed fruit is often served amongst other sorts of fruit to the Table, and
eaten with pleasure, by those who have no need of Physic, but works in Women
with Child, both to please the taste, as in others, and to stay their longings
after unusual meats, etc. as also very effectual for them that are apt to
miscarry, and make them joyful Mothers. That of Naples is the more delicate,
and is also accounted more effectual for the purposes aforesaid.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Mulberry Tree.
The Names.
THe tree is named in Greek (...) and (...) Morea and Sycaminus in Latin;
Morus a Mora, from its slownesse to put forth its Leaves, for of all trees it
buddeth last, which it seldom does before May, the cold weather being past; and
therefore the old Writers were wont to call it the wisest tree. It is called in
shops Morus celsa quasi excelsa, as a distinction between it and the Bramble
Cubus, whose Berries are also called Mora, but b^^i is added to know them by.

The Kinds.
Parkinson has but three sorts hereof. 1. The common black Mulberry tree. 2.
The white Mulberry tree. 3. The Virginian Mulberry tree. Besides which, as I
have been informed, there is a wild kind which puts out leaves somewhat like
the former, and about the same time; and has fruit not much unlike, but it
never brings it to perfection.

The Form.
The Common black Mulberry tree grows very great and tall, the body and the
greater arms being covered with a thick rugged bark, the younger boughs and
branches being smoother, whereon are broad roundish leaves, set pointed at the
end, and dented about the edges like Mint leaves, but that they are far bigger
and smoother. The bloomings or flowers are downy like Catkins, after which
immediately follows the fruit made of many grains, set together of a pale
green color at first, then red when they are harsh and sour, but afterward
black when they are full ripe, being full of a sweetish Juice, which will die
the fingers and mouths of them that gather and eat them; wherein ly diverse
small seeds: the root grows not deep, but spreads far, being of a yellowish
color.

The Places and Time.
The two former sorts are nourished up in woods, or great Orchards in the
Levant or Eastern countries to nourish their silk Worms, where they keep them
in abundance; and may peradventure be natural in some of these places, they are
plentiful nursed up in Italy for the same purpose, and might have been very
numerous here in England; if the Letters of King James to the Lords Lievtenants
of the several shires for the increasing of Mulberry trees, and the breeding of
Silk worms in his Kingdom, had taken their wished effect, which they did not,
because they had not the instructions to that purpose annexed to them. But now
the way then thought of, is revived by that industrious Common wealthsman,
Samuel Hartlib Esquire, of propagating them by seed; to whose book called the
Reformed Virginian Silkworm, I refer you: whereas formerly there was no way of
propagating but either by slips, grafting, or inoculation, which seldom ^ook
effect. The biggest of them that ever I saw, grows in New College in Oxon,
in a place between the great Quadrangle and the Garden. The third as the name
imports came from Virginia where it grows hugely, with great store of great
leaves, and small store of fruit, but in the season with the other which in
August and September. The wild kind grows, along the Mount^^ce in Merton
College Orchard, half a dozen at least close by one another which never
perfecteth its fruit, as I said before.

The Temperature.
The Mulberry is of different parts, the ripe berries by reason of their
sweetness and slippery moisture opening the belly, and the unripe binding it;
especially when they are dried: and are then good to stay fluxes, and lasks,
and abundance of Women's courses; but the bark of the root has a stronger
purging quality and a bitterness withal; the leaves and young tender tops
have a middle or temperate faculty,

The Virtues and Signature.
The Juice of Mulberries or syrrup made of them, helps all inflammation^ and
sores in the mouth or throat, and the Uvula or Palate of the mouth when ^t is
fallen down. The Juice of the leaves is a remedy against the biting of
Serpents; and for those that have taken Aconite or Wolfsbane. The leaves beaten
with V^negar is good to lay on any place that is burnt with fire. A decoction
made of the bark and leaves, is good to wash the mouth and teeth when they ache.
It is reported that if the root be a little slit or cut, and a small hole made
in the ground next thereunto in the harvest time, it will give out a certain
Juice, which being hardened is the next day of good use to help the Toothach, to
dissolve knots and purge the belly; the leaves are said to stay bleeding at
mouth and nose, or the bleeding of the Piles, or of a wound being bound unto
the places. A branch of the tree taken when the Moon is at full, and bound to
the wrist of a Woman's arm, whose courses come down too much, does stay them in
short space. The bark of the root kills the broad worms in the bodies of men
or children. The leaves of the vine of the early Fig, and of the Mulberry
boiled in Rain water is good to wash the hair, and to make it have a clear and
fair color. The ripe berries if they be taken before meat, do make passage for
what follows; but if after meat, and pass not quickly away, they corrupt in
the stomach, and draw the rest on to putrefaction with them, otherwise they
trouble little. There be growing upon the Cods, and about the Breech of some
people certain tumors like unto Mulberries, which the powder of those berries
and leaves does cure by Signature. The leaves of this tree, are the most
natural food of Silk worms, as you may gather by what has gone before: of
which there might be great profit made here as, well as in Italy, Spain and
France, if we had been as industrious as they in nursing up these kinds of
trees; but it is not too late to learn any thing that may make for the
attainment of national and private profit and riches. When the Mulberry tree
begins to put out its buds, then the Silkworms Eggs begin to hatch, as the
nature of this wise creature is, when he^ food begins once to appear she comes
forth of her shel; so that if a Mu^berry leaf be laid upon them they will come
upon it instantly; and after that they have been sed with fresh leaves about
forty five days they will begin to spin their Silk bottom.

CHAP. LXIII. Of Mints.
The Names.
IT was called by the old Greciaus, (...) (as Pliny records) who followed the
story of the Poets, that says it was so named from (...) one of Plutoes
Minions whom he turned into this ^erb; but of the later (...) ab odoris
bonitate or jucunditate: because it is so sweet, (...) signifying sweet and
(...) smell. The Latin name is Mentha, which the Apothecaries, Frenchand
Italian keep: in English, Mint.

The Kinds.
Of the manured and wild Mints, I find a dozen kinds. 1. Heart Mint or Spare
Mint. 2. Cross Mint. 3. Red or brown Mints. 4. Crisped or curled Mints. 5. The
great curled Mint of Germany. 6. The manured wild Mint. 7. Long leafed wild
Mint. 8. Hungarian wild Mint. 9. Clusius his knobbed wild Mint. 10. Wild Mints
with joynted roots. 11. Hairy wild Mints. 12. Small round leafed mints. To
which we may add Water mint or Horse mint.

The Form.
Mint is so well known that it needs no description, yet it deserving one no
less then other plants, I shall not be so injurious as to let it pass without
one though it be the shorter. Garden mints which is the third kind above
mentioned comes up with stalks four square of an obscure red color somewhat
hairy, which are covered with round leaves nicked on the edges, like a Saw; of
a deep green color: the flowers are little and red, and grow about the stalks
circlewise, as those of Penny Royal: the root creeps aslope in the ground,
having some strings on it, and now and then in sundry places it buddeth out
afresh, and will overrun the ground where it is set, if it be let alone any
long time.

The Places and Time
The first four sorts are only found planted in Gardens, and the fith found
wild first both with us and elsewhere, but for especial respects brought into
Gardens. The other sorts are likewise wild by nature in their places, but now
are cherished by those that love such kind of plants in many places. All the
sorts of garden as well as wild mints, flower not until the beginning of
August: so that the Garden mint seldom brings forth good seed; nevertheless
the defect thereof is recompensed by the increase of the root. The water-mint
grows in every ditch.

The Temperature.
Mint is hot and dry, in the beginning of the third degree, of thin parts,
bitter and binding.

The Virtues.
The decoction of mint ga^gled in the mouth, cures the ^ums and Mouth that is
sore, and mendeth an ill savoured breath, to which if there be a little Rue,
and Cor^ander added and gargled likewise, and held in the mouth, causes the
Palate of the mouth that is down to return to its place: applied with Mead or
honyed Water, it eases the pains of the Ears, and takes away the roughness
of the tongue being rubbed thereupon, and if it be laid to the forehead or
Temples, it eases the pains of the head; and the water wherein good store of
it has been boiled, is good to wash the heads of young Children against all
manner of breakingins out them, whether sores or scabs, and heals the Chaps
of the Fundament. Two or three branches thereof taken with the Juice of
Pomgranats, stays the Hiccough, Vomiting, and allayeth Choler: it dissolveth
Impostumes being laid to with Barley Meal. It is good to repress the milk in
Women's breasts; and for such as have swollen ^^agging or great breasts. Simeon
Seth^ says, it helps a cold Liver, strengthens the Belly and Stomach,
causes digestion, is good against the gnawings of the Heart, provokes
Appetite, takes away Obstructions of the Liver and stirs up bodily Lust;
but thereof too much must not be taken, because it makes the blood thin and
wheyish, and turns it into Choler; and therefore Choleric persons must
abstain from it. It is a safe medicine for the biting of a mad Dog, being
bruised with salt and laid thereon. The powder of it being taken after meat
helps digestion and those that are Splenetick; taken in wine it helps women
in their sore Travel in Childbearing. It is good also against the Gravel and
Stone in the Kidneys, and the Stangury. It suffers not milk to curdle in the
Stomach, if the leaves hereof be s^eeped or boiled in it before you drink it;
and some say, that it will never be drawn to Curds though you put Rennet
thereunto. The distilled water of mints is available for all the purposes
aforesaid, yet more weakly; But if a Spirit thereof be rightly and Chimically
drawn, it is much more powerful then the herb it self. The Virtues of wild mint
are especially to dissolve wind in the Stomach, to help the Cholick and those
that are short winded, and are an especial remedy for those that have Venereous
dreams and pollutions in the night, being outwardly applied to the Testicles or
Cods. The Juice dropped in the Ears eases the pains of them, and destroys
the Worms that breed in them, they are good against the venomous bitings of
Serpents, and help the Kings Evil or kernels in the Throat, if the Juice be
laid on warm. The decoction or distilled water helps a stinking breath,
proceeding from the corruption; and snuffed up into the Nose purges the head.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Purslane.
The Names.
THis Herb is called by Dioscorides in Greek, (...), Andrachne; and by
Theophrastus, (...), Adrachne: and so each of them call the Arbutus or
Strawberry-Tree, which some call Portulaca Arbor in Latin, as also they call
this Herb, Portulaca Herba. In English, Purslane and Porcellain* Sea-Purslane
is called in Greek, (...), in Latin Portulaca marina.

The Kinds.
There be not many sorts of Purslane in all, and therefore I will put them
together. 1. Garden Purslane. 2. Wild Purslane. 3. Camerarius his Purslane. 4.
Candy Purslane. 5. Sea-Purslane.

The Form.
The Garden- Purslane has round, thick, somewhat red stalks, full of juice,
smooth, glittering, and parted into several branches, trailing upon the
ground: the Leaves be almost an inch long, if it grow in rank ground;
something broad, thick, fat, glib, and somewhat green, whiter on the nether
side: the Flowers are little, of a faint yellow color, and grow out at the
bottom of the Leaves: After them, springs up a little Husk, of a green
color, of the bigness almost of half a Barley-Corn, in which is small black
Seed, the Root has many strings.

The Places and Time.
The first is sown in Gardens, and delights to grow in a fruitful and fat
so^l, not dry. The second grows about Ramsey Mere, in the foot-paths, by the
Rape-Mills. The third was found about Lipswick, by Camerarius, who, as he
himself affirms, was the first that made it known. The other should come out
of Candy, by its Title: Sea-Purslane, grows in the Salt Marshes, near the
Seaside, as you pass over the Kings Ferry, into the Isle of Sheepey, going to
Sherland-House; and in the Isle of Thanet, as you go from Margate to Sandwich;
and in many other places along the Coast. Garden-Purslane may be sown in March
or April: it flourishes, and is green in June, and afterward, till it be
toward Michaelmas. Sea-Purslane is a little shrub, which bears out the
Winter, with the loss of a few Leaves: and Flowers, in July.

The Temperature
Purslane is cold, and that in the third degree, and moist in the second, but
VVild Purslane is not so moist. Sea-Purslane is (as Galen says) of unlike
parts; but the greater part thereof, is hot in a mean; with a moisture
unconcocted, and somewhat windy.

The Virtues and Signature.
Raw Purslane is much used in Sallets with Oil, Salt, and Vinegar: it cools
an hot stomach, and provokes appetite. It cools the mouth also, and takes
away the pain of the Teeth, and asswageth the swellings of the Gums, and
fasteneth the teeth in them, and is good for teeth that are set on edge, with
eating of sharp things: It is likewise good to cool any heat in the Liver,
blood or Reins, and in hot Agues, there is nothing better: It stays hot and
choleric Fluxes of the Belly, Women's Courses, and Gonorrhea, or running of the
Reins, of which it has the Signature; the distillations from the head, and
pains therein proceeding of heat, want of sleep, or the Frenzy. The seed is
more effectual then the Herb, and is of singular good use to cool the heat and
sharpness of the Urine, and the outrageous lust of the body, venereous Dreams,
and the like; insomuch, that the over-frequent use thereof, extinguisheth the
heat and virtue of natural procreation. The Seed bruised and boiled in Wine,
and given to Children, expels the Worms. The juice of the Herb is held as
effectual to all the purposes aforesaid: as also to stay vomitings; and taken
with some Sugar, or Honey, helps an old and dry Cough, shortness of breath,
and the Ptisick, and stays immoderate thirst. It is also singular good in the
Inflammations, and Ulcers of the secret parts in Man or Woman, as also of the
Bowels and Hemorrhoides, when they are ulcerous or excotiations in them. The
Herb bruised and applied to the forehead and Temples, allayeth excessive heat
therein* hindering rest and sleep, and a^plyed to the Eyes, takes away the
redness and inflammation in them; and thos^ other parts where Pushes, Wheals,
Pimples, St. Anthonies fire, and the like, b^e^k forth, especially, if a little
Vinegar be put to it: And being laid to the neck, with as much of Galls and
Linseea together, takes away the pains therein, and the Crick in the Neck. The
juice is used with Oil of Roses for the said Causes, or for blastings by
lightening, and burnings by Gunpowder, or for Women's sore Breasts, and to allay
the heat in all other sores or hurts: Applied also to the Navels of Children
that stick forth, it helps them. The distilled water of the Herb is used by
many (as the more pleasing) with a little Sugar, for many of the sam^ effects.
Camerarius says, that it takes away the pains of the teeth, when ^ll other
Remedies fail, and that the thickened juice made in Pills, with the Powder of
Gum-Tragacanth and Arabic being taken, prevails much to help those that make
a bloody water.

CHAP. XLV. Of Golden-Rod.
The Names.
IT has no Greek Name that I can learn. In Latin it is called Aurea Virg^*
because the branches are like a Golden Rod. Anguillara thought it might b^ the
Leucographis of Pliny, because it is said in the description thereof, that ^t
is found sometimes with white strakes in the Leaves; but why Tabermontanus
should take it to be Symphitum Petreum, is not known. In English, Golden Rod.

The Kinds.
All the sorts hereof that I can find, are but three. 1. The ordinary Golden
Rod. 2. Arnold of Villa Nova or the new Town, his Golden Rod. 3. Golden Rod of
America.

The Form.
The Golden Rod, that is most common to our Country, rises up with brownish
small round stalks, about half a yard high, or higher, if it grow in a fat
soil, or in a Garden, having thereon many narrowish, and long dark green
Leaves, very seldom with any nicks or dents about the edges, and as seldom with
any strakes, or white spots therein; and yet sometimes, and in some places,
they are so to be found, divided at the tops into many small branches, with
diverse small yellow Flowers on every one of them, which are turned one way; and
being ripe, do turn into down, and are carried away with the wind: the Root
consists of many small Fibers, which grow not deep into the ground; but
abides all the winter therein, shooting forth new branches every year, the old
ones dying down to the ground.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in diverse places of this Land, in the open places of Woods
and Copses, both in moist and dry grounds; but especially in Hampsteed-VVood,
near unto the Gate that leads out of the Wood, unto a Village called
Kentish-Town, not far from London: in a Wood by Rayleigh in Essex; in
Southfleet also, and in Swanscombe-Wood near Gravesend. The second is not so
frequent, yet that is found also in some places of Hampsteed-VVood, though
sparingly. The last came from America, as the Title shows. The first flowreth
later then the second, which is about July, and the other in the beginning or
middle of August; the last also flowreth very late.

The Temperature.
Golden Rod is hot and dry in the second Degree; it cleanses with a certain
astriction or binding quality.

The Virtues
This Herb is of especial use in all Lotions, for Sores, or Ulcers in the
mouth and throat, or in the privy parts of Man or Woman: The decoction thereof,
likewise helps to fasten the teeth that are loose in the Gums. It is much
commended also against the stone in the Reins and Kidneys, and to provoke Urine
in abundance, whereby the gravel or stone engendered in the uritory parts, by
raw and tough phlegmatic humors, may be washed down into the b^adder, from
growing into a stone in those parts, and thence may be avoided with the Urine;
the decoction of the Herb, green or dry, or the distilled water thereof, is
very effectual for inward bruises: as also to be outwardly applied: the same
also stays bleedings in any part of the body, and of wounds also, and the
Fluxes of the menstruall Courses in Women, and the Fluxes of the belly and
humors: as also the bloody Flux in Man or Woman; it is no less prevalent in
all Ruptures, or burstings, to be both drunk, and outwardly applied: it is the
most sovereign wound-Hearb of many, and can do as much therein as any, both
inwardly for wounds and hurts in the body, and for either green wounds, quickly
to cure them, or old sores and Ulcers that are hardly to be cured, which often
come by the Flux of moist humors thereunto, and hinder them from healing.
Gerard says, that the dry Herb that came from beyond the Seas, was formerly
sold for half a Crown an Ounce; but since it was found to be so plentiful on
Hampsteed-Heath, and other places in England, no man will give half a Crown for
an hundred weight of it. And here I may take an occasion, as Gerrard does, to
specify the inconstancy, and sudden mutability of the people of this Age, who
esteem no longer of any thing (how precious soever it be) then whilst it is
strange and rare, verifying that common Proverb, Far fetched, and de^r bought,
is good for Ladies. Neither are many Physicians to be justified in this
particular, who though they have found an approved Medicine and perfect Remedy,
near home, against any Disease; yet not contented with that, they will seek for
new farther off, and by that means, many times hurt more then help. And this is
one Reason, that Mr. Culpepper inveighs (I will not say how justly) against the
College of Physicians, who choose rather to make use of foreign Plants, then
those of our own growing.

CHAP. LXVI. Of Scurvy-grasse.
The Names.
FRom the mouth in general, let us come somewhat more particularly, to speak
of such Plants, as serve to cure the Disease thereof, called the SCVRVY; One of
the chief whereof is Scurvy-Grasse, which is thought to have been unknown to
the ancient Greek Writers, because they name it not: And though some imagine it
to be Plinies Britannica, yet Gerard and Parkinson, who were curious compares
of Simples, are both of Opinion, that it cannot be it. The more modern Latin
Writers call it Cochlearia, from the similitude the Leaf has with a Spoon,
being round as well as hollow: It is called in English, Scurvy-grasse and
Scruby-grasse; and sometimes, though but seldom, Spoon-wort, after the Latin
name.

The Kinds.
The Sorts hereof are four. 1. Common Scurvy-Grasse. 2. The great Dutch, or
Garden Scurvy-Grasse. 3. Small Dutch Scurvy-Grasse. 4. The least Scurvy-Grasse.

The Form.
The great Dutch, or Garden Scurvy-Grasse (which is most known and frequent in
Gardens) has diverse fresh, green, and almost round Leaves, rising from the
Root, nothing so thick as the common sort: yet in some places, as in a rich,
strong dunged ground, very large, even twice so big as in others, nothing at
all dented about the edges, and sometimes a little hollowed in the middle, and
round pointed, of a sad green color, every one standing by it self, upon a
long foot-stalk: from among these, rise up diverse long, slender, weak stalks,
of about a foot in length, thick, beset on each side, with small white Flowers
at the tops of them which turn into small pods, with little brownish Seeds, the
Root is white, small and threddy: the taste of it, is somewhat bitterish.

The Places and Time
The first grows along by the Th^mes, both on the Essex and Kentish shores,
so far as the brackish Seawater comes, even to Dover, as also from Dover,
round about the Seacoasts, to Portsmouth, and even to Bristoll, where it is
had in plenty* but on the Northern Coasts, it scarcely grows at all: But the
second grows in the Marshes of Holland in Lincolnshire, as well as Holland in
the Low Countries: as also in other places of Lincolushire, and other places by
the Seaside. It has been also found upon Ingleborough Hills in Lancashire,
and in the ^eak in Darbyshire, and is sown now in many Gardens, where it
prospers well. The smaller sort have been brought to us from Denmark, where
they grow in an Island called Almagria. They all flower betimes, even in March,
oftentimes, and in April, and give their ripe Seed about the latter end of May.

The Temperature.
Scurvy-Grasse is evidently hot and dry, very like to the Garden-Cresses in
Quality, but not of so aromaticall, or spicy a taste.

The Virtues.
Before I speak of the Virtues of Scurvy-Graesse, it will not be altogether
improper to tell you what the SCVRVY is. It is a Di^ease proceeding through a
melancholy humor, which makes the Gums to become swollen and exulcerated,
loosning also the sinews and teeth; so that he that has it, does with* very
much difficulty chew any thing: the mouth stinketh grievously, the Thighs and
Legs are withal very often full of blew spots, not much unlike those that come
of bruises: the Face, and the rest of the Body is often times of a pale Color;
and the Feet are swollen as in the Drop^e, and will have a pain in the soles of
them, and so will the fingers ends. This hurtful Di^ease happens at Sea
amongst Fishermen, and fresh water Soldiers, (and such as delight to fit
still, without labor, and exercise of the body) especially, if they make not
clean their Biscuit from the Flower, or mealiness that is upon the same, which
does spoil many. For the curing whereof, this excellent Plant, therefore called
Scurvy-Grasse, is found to prevail: the juice thereof, if it be taken in Ale or
Beer; or if six great handfulls of the Leaves, be steeped with long Pepper,
Grains, Aniseed, and Liquorice, of each an Ounce, the Spices being brayed, and
the Herb bruised a little in a Mortar of Wood or Stone, put them in a
Stone-Pot, called a Steane, with four Gallons of strong Ale, to steep or infuse
the same in for three days, which done, it will be fit for your use; and then
you must drink it three weeks together* as your ordinary drink. The Decoction
is good for the same purposes, and so is the Herb, tunned up in new drink,
either by it self, or with other things; for it opens obstructions, and
evacuateth cold, clammy, melancholy, and phlegmatic humors, both from the
Liver, and Seat of blood, and the spleen, wasting and consuming, both the
swelling and hardness thereof, and thereby bringing the body back again to a
most lively Color: the juice also helps all foul Ulcers and Sores in the
mouth, if it be often gargled therewith, and used outwardly, does cleanse the
skin from spots, marks, or skars that happen therein: The Conserve is a fine,
delicate Medicine, for weak and tender stomachs, and works the same effect.

CHAP. XLVII. Of small House Leek.
The Names.
THis kind of Houseleek is called in Greek (...), Aizoon minus, that is, Semper
vivum, in that it is always green, and lesser then the former, yet some do
call both kinds, Aithales, for that they are ever living: Pliny calls this
lesser kind, Trithales quia^ter floreat, and Erithales or Erisithales and
Chysothales; in English Prick-Madam, Stonecrop, or (...) Stonecrop. In Latin
Sedum Minus, Vermicularis, and Illecebra.

The Kinds.
Of this small Houseleek or Prickmadam there be Nine sorts. 1. The Ordina^y
Prickmadam or Stonecrop. 2. Stonecrop with turning heads. 3. Small Stonecrop.
4. White flowered Stonecrop with round pointed leaves. 5. A smaller white
flowered Stonecrop. 6. Marsh or Field Stonecrop. 7. Wall Pepper. 8. Unsavory
Wall Pepper. 9. Summer Houseleek or Stonecrop.

The Form.
The Ordinary Prickmadam or Stonecrop, is but small, creeping along the place
it grows, with diverse trailing Branches, and some what slender which are
encompassed about with a great number of Leaves that are different from the
common sort of leaves; in regard that they are thick, though little, long,
sharp-pointed, inclining to a greenish blew color; the flowers stand at the
tops of the Branches, many set together yet somewhat loosely, and not in a
thick ^ust or cluster, as the Orpines, of a yelowish color: the roots are very
small, creeping in the earth, and send forth stalks with leaves here and there
all abouts.

The Places and Time.
Many of these sorts grow either on mud Walls, or on those Stone Walls that are
capped with mud, or among rubbish; and in other sandy or gravelly places, and
oftentimes also upon the sides of all tiled houses, and pent houses; as also
upon the rocks of the high mountains in Wales, except the sixth which grows
only in moist Meadows and Marshes; and the last whose root is small and
perishing, which I have seen at the Physic Garden in Oxford. They all flower
in June, and July and sometimes sooner: the leaves of many of them continuing
green all the Winter.

The Temperature.
Stonecrop is cold in the third degree; it is also dry but not very much,
because of the waterish essence that is in them.

The Signature and Virtues.
The lesser Houseleek or Stonecrop has the Signature of the Gums; and
therefore the Juice thereof being pressed forth is very much commended in that
distemper of the mouth called the Scurvy, which I described in the foregoing
chapter. It is good both for inward and outward heats as well in the Eyes as
other parts of the body. A Posset made with the Juice of Houseleek, is singular
good in all hot Agues* for it cools and temperateth the blood and spirits,
and quenches the thirst; and is also good to stay all hot defluxions of sharp
and salt rheum into the Eyes, the Juice being dropped into them: the Ears also
participate of its Virtue; for the pains thereof are hereby also cured, if the
Juice thereof be dropped thereunto: it helps also all fluxes of humors into
the bowels, and the immoderate courses of Women. It is said also to kill the
worms, and wonderfu^l to help the bitings of Venemuos beasts: it cools and
restrains all other hot inflammations, St. Anthonies fire, and all other hot
eruptions in the flesh scalding also and burning, the Shingles, fretting
ulcers, Cankers, Tette^^, Ringworms and the like, and eases much the pain of
the Gout, proceeding of an hot cause: the Juice also takes away warts and
corns in the hands or feet being often bathed therewith, and the skins of the
Leaves being laid on them afterward. It eases also the headache, and
distempered heat of the brain in frensies, or through want of sleep, being
applied to the Temples and forehead; the leaves bruised, and laid upon the
Crown or Seam of the head, stays bleeding at the nose very quickly. The
distilled water of the herb, is profitable for all the purposes aforesaid, the
leaves being gently rubbed on any place stung with nettles or bees, or bitten
with any venomous Creature, does presently take away the pain. But take notice
that Wall Pepper, which though it be a kind of Sedum as to the form, yet it is
of a very hot sharp, and exulcerating quality, and raises blisters in the skin
if it be laid thereupon but a while, as forcibly as Ranunculus or Crowfoot will
do; and therefore it behooves all those that shall have any occasion to use any
of the cooling Stonecrops, that they do not mistake this for some of them,
whereunto it is so like; yet it is not without some other good qualities whereof
good use may be made; for it is said to procure vomiting, the Juice thereof
taken with Vinegar, and some other drink, drives forth thick choleric and
phlegmatic humors, whereby quartane Agues and others of long continuance may
be cured; and that taken in the same manner it does expel any poison, or the
force of venomous herbs and of the Aconites, which virtue notwithstanding is by
some referred to the greater kinds; but there may be some danger in the taking,
and therefore may be let alone seeing there be diverse medicines to the same
purpose in this book. Yet it is not altogether unlikely that it should do so;
for why may not this as well expel the poison of Aconite, as well as Aconite
prevail so mightily against the bitings of Scorpions or Vipers: or fire fetch
out fire, which experience tells us it does. Dioscorides says, that being
applied outwardly with Axungia, that is, Hogs-suet, it will take away knots and
kernels as well in the Neck and Throat which is called the King's Evil, as in
any other part of the body* and applied by it self or boiled in Oil of Roses,
and the sore piles anointed therewith, does ease the pains and cure them of the
grief. And thus having given you the virtues of the greater as well the lesser
Houseleeks that grow by land, it will not be impertinent to give you those of
Aloes, or Sea Houseleek also, which I shall do in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of Aloes or Sea Houseleek.
The Names.
DIoscorides, and all others both ancient and modern writers call it (...)
which name some suppose to have been given to it, either from (...) that is, a
sale; or else from (...) a Salo, the Sea it self, with whose breath it is much
delighted. It is called also, (...) because it grows not only in the ground,
but sometimes out of the ground, though it be hanged up in an house. Some of
the modern Herbarists do call it Semper vivum marinum, from the thickness of
the leaves and likeness unto Sedum majus or the greater Houseleek called
Semper vivum. The hardened Juice thereof, is also usually called Aloes of which
(as Schroderus says) there be four sorts now in use, and because there is but
one kind (except the American) of that plant, I will set down the kinds of
Juyces.

The Kinds.
There is, 1. A Blackish sort called Aloe Caballina, because it is fit only for
Horses. 2. A more pure sort, in color like the Liver, called Aloe Hepatica. 3.
Another sort called, Aloe Succotrina or Succo citrina; because the powder
thereof is of a citrine or yellow color, or Socotorina rather, because there
is great plenty of it in the island Socotora. 4. The fourth kind is the purest
part of the Juice and is called, Aloe lucida; because being held up against the
Beams of the of the Sun, it shows very clear like a kind of red glass. The
best is that which is most clear and transparent, of a redish or yellow Color,
being easy to b^eak, and very bitter.

The Form.
Sea-Houseleek, has diverse long fleshy pale green Leaves, of the thickness of
ones finger, with diverse hard dents or points on both sides of them, and
pointed at the ends likewise, the one enclosing the other at the bottom, and
standing round, the outermost bending for the most part backwards: from the
middle of which arises a short thick stalk little more then a foot high,
bearing many small bottle-like flowers. It bears seed in husks like unto an
Asphodil after the flowers are past; the root is thick and about a foot long,
or less within the ground, shooting out some thick Fibers at the end.

The Places and Time
It grows in Arabia, Asia, Syria, and all the East Countries, and in India,
as well a great way within the land, as near the Sea side; and in the islands
there as in Socotora, as Garcius says, where the best is made, as also in many
places in Italy and in Spaiu, about Andalousia near the sea shore in such
plenty, that diverse thought to have made good store of Aloes there; but after
trial it was not found any way so effectual as the Indian sort. It flowreth
in the hotter Countries, in the first Summer months, but never in these
colder; for it is preserved with great care from the frosts in Winter, which
will cause it quickly to rot, if it feel never so little cold.

The Temperature
Aloe, that is to say, the juice that is used in Physic is moderately hot, and
that in the first Degree, but dry in the third, extreme bitter, yet without
biting: it is also, of an emplaistick or clammy quality, and something binding.

The Virtues and Signature.
Aloes opens the Belly, purges the stomach, helps those that have a pale
color, and is used against the yellow Jaundice by Signature, not without good
success: It is also profitable in the Headache, when Vapors arise from the
stomach, in the Nightmare, in the Scorbute or Scurvy, in the Falling Sickness,
and in Rheums: It resists putrefaction, kills worms of all sorts, whether
in the belly or stomach: nay it is a special Antidote against worms, and is
more proper for the stomach, then all other purging Medicines, notwithstanding
Cardans Opinion to the contrary, seeing it does not only purge away Choler and
phlegm from it, but also comfort it, and help it much when it is crude, moist,
and nauseous. It preventeth Arthriticall pains, or pains of the joints: it
quickens the senses by purging obnoxious humors from the brain. It provokes
Women's Courses, and the Hemorrhoides or Piles, but hardly draws humors from
any part above the Liver. Being outwardly applied, it has a consolidating
faculty to heal green wounds, and dries: as also mundifieth or cleanses, and
takes away all putrefaction in wounds. It heals wounds of the Testicles and
Privities: it cures the redness of the Eyes, and consumes the spots growing
therein. It is good in the Inflammations of the Eyes, and Apostumes of the Lips,
Nose, and Eyes. It heals Ulcers that are hardly brought to cicatrize, and
especially those in the Fundament and privy Members. Being mixed with Oxe-Gall,
or the juice of Wormwood, and laid upon the belly near the Navel* it kills
worms. If it be dissolved in Wine and used, it helps the falling or shedding
of the hair. Though taken inwardly, it be hurtful to such as have the
Hemorrhoides or Piles, yet being made in Powder, and applied outwardly, it
stays the bleeding of them: mixed with Honey and used, it takes away
blackness and spots. Aloes in Powder being mixed with Myrrh and Dragons blood,
and cast into putrified wounds, eats out spongious flesh without pain. It
must not be taken inwardly, either too often, or in too great a quantity; for
then it does fre^ and excoriate the stomach and bowels; and therefore those
that are troubled with the Flux of the Womb, Belly, or any other bloody Flux,
Women with Child, those that have the Hectic or burning Fever, all hot, dry,
macerated or lean Bodies, must avoid it* as also those that have hot Livers,
and such Children as are of an hot and dry constitution especially when the
season is extreme hot, or very cold. Cinnamon, Mace, Nutmeg, Cloves, Mastick,
and Gum Tragacanth, are the best Correctors of Aloes, and may be mixed with it.
If Aloes be taken a little before Supper, it does so much the less hurt and
offend the stomach. It is given in substance, from a dram, to two drams* in
infusion from a dram and a half to three drams. Aloe Rosata, which is a very
safe, and gentle Medicine is given, from half a dram to a dram and a half, to
all sorts of persons before or after meat. It purges the stomach of Choler,
and other offensive humors, opens stoppings, is good in the Jaundice,
strengthens the stomach, and is good against Surfets. The same Dose may be
given of washed Aloes, which does not purge so effectually as it did before,
but strengthens more. Aloe is the Basi^ of most Pills; for there are but few
purgative Pills, which have it not as one chief Ingredient.

CHAP. XLIX. Of Fumitory.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek, (...), and (...), Capnos and Capnion, quasi Fumus, eo;
quod succus oculis inditus lachrymationem movet, sicut Fumus and claritat^m
eorum efficit, says Fuschius, that is, it is called in Greek, (...), which in
that Language, signifies smoke, because the juice of it put into the eyes, does
make them water, as smoke does, and clarifies or clears them, which though it
happily does, contrary to the nature of smoke; yet I think, the other Reason
why it should be so called, to be the better, which is, because being of a
whitish, blew Color, as smoke is, it appears to those that behold it at a
distance, as if the ground were all of a smoke, and hereunto agrees Fumus
Terrae, and Fumaria, which are the names the Latins put upon it, and the
English name Fumiterr^, and Fumiterrie, though it be now most commonly called
Fumitory.

The kinds.
The sorts commonly treated of are eight. 1. Common Fumitorie. 2. Fine leased
Fumitory. 3. Candy Fumitory. 4. Yellow Fumitory. 5. Indian Fumitory. 6. Climing
Fumitory. 7. Bulbous Fumitory, with a green Flower. 8. Knobbed Indian Fumitory.

The Form.
Common Fumitory is a tender sappy Herb, sending forth from one square, slender
weak stalk, and leaning downwards on all sides, many branches two or three foot
long; with finely cut jagged leaves, of a pale bluish, or Seagreen color,
somewhat like unto Coriander, as to the form, but of nothing so deep a color:
At the tops of the branches stand many small Flowers, as it were in a long
spike, one above another, made like little Birds, of a reddish purple Color,
with whitish bellies commonly, though in the Fields in Cornwall, it bears
perfect white Flowers: After which, come small round husks, containing small
black seed. The Root is yellow, small, and not very long, full of juice whilst
it is green, but quickly perishing with the ripe Seed.

The Places and Time.
The first grows as well in the Cornfieldsd, almost every where, as in
Gardens also. The second, in Spain, and in the Vineyards about Mompelier. The
third, in Candy. The fourth, on the Hills in Apuliae and Calabria, in Naples,
and in Illyria also. The fifth, in Virginia, and the back parts thereof, called
Canada. The sixth, about the hedge sides, and among the bushes of the Low
Countries. The seventh, in the Woods of Germany. The last, in the West Indies.
They flower in May for the most part, and the Seed is ripe in August.

The Temperature.
It is hot in the first Degree, and dry in the second, and not cold, as the
vulgar conceive; for its bitterness shows it to be hot.

The Virtues.
Fumitory also may be appropriated to that Scurvy-Disease aforementioned, for
it gently purges melancholy and salt humors, from whence it arises: as also
from the impurity of the blood, the Obstructions and stoppings of the Liver and
Spleen, which are the usual parts that are first affected: it opens and
cleanses the Entralls, and does corroborate those parts. It purges choleric
humors by Urine, and avails in the Itch, Scab, Leprosy, Cancer, Fistulaes,
and such kind of soul Diseases of the skin, arising from adust humors; as
also in the French-Disease. It is profitable in Fevers, (arising from Choler,
both yellow and black) in the Jaundise, and the Quartane Agues, it kills the
worms, and prevails in Chronicall Diseases arising from the stoppings of the
viscerous parts, and in Affects of the Hypochonders. Brasavola says, that the
Powder of the dried Herb given for some time together, has cured a melancholy
person. The dis^illed water cures the yellow Jaundice, if three or four Ounces
be drunk morning and evening, for certain days together, and avails against
the Scab, Itch, and such like Diseases; and being constantly taken, it
preserves from the Leprosy. Being taken in London-treacle, and
Bole-Armoniack, it is good in the Pestilence, as a dram or two of Treacle, and
a scruple of Bole-armoniack, mixed in two Ounces of the water, and so taken.
Also it dissolveth congealed blood, and tumors, and provokes the Terms or
Courses in Women. The juice dropped into the Eyes, does clear the Eyes, and
quicken the sight: the juice also mingled with Gum-Arabick, and applied to the
Eyelids, will cause that the hair (that has once been pulled off) shall not
grow again. A decoction thereof made, and the feet bathed therewith, cures the
Gout; or boiled in Wine, and so applied, it does the like: the juice mixed with
the juice of Docks and Oxymel, or Vinegar, cures the Morphew, being anointed
therewith. Also a Bath made of the same, with Mallows, Violets, and
Dock-Roots., with Barley bran, and Nep, cures the Scab and Itch. The juice
mingled with Oil of Nuts and Vinegar, cure malign Scabs, and the Leprosy,
being nointed therewith. The distilled water helps Sores, and Ulcers of the
mouth, being therewith washed and gargled; especially if you take four Ounces
of the water, adding thereto one Ounce of Honey of Roses, and wash the mouth
therewith.

CHAP. L. Of Cresses.
The Names.
GArden-Cresse is called in Greek, (...), being a comforter to the heart, as
some suppose; but others think it to be so called, quasi (...), quod acrimonia
and ignea vi praeditum caput tentat; and thereupon the Greeks had this Proverb
(...), Ede nasturtium, because heating the head with its fiery virtue, they
would therefore bid a man that was dull and heavy, eat it to stir up his
Spirits, it being effectual to this purpose. The Latins call it Nasturtium, a
Narium tormento, as Pliny says: and some after the Italians call it Cressio
hortensis; but in English it is called Cresse, being a name borrowed of the
Germans, who call it Kersse VVater-Cresse is called Nasturtium Aquaticum.
VVinter-cresse is commonly called Barbarea. Lady Smocks, which are also a kind
hereof, are called Cardamine, sive: Nasturtium pratense.

The Kinds.
J shall reckon up the chief sorts of each. Of Garden-cresse. 1. Great Spanish
Cresse. 2. Curled Cresse, with larger and lesser Leaves. 3. Ordinary Garden
Cresses. 4. Stone Cresse. Of VVater-cresse. 1. Common Water-Cresse. 2. Italian
VVater-Cresse. 3. Bitter VVater-Cresse. 4. Sweet smelling VVater-Cresse. Of
VVinter-cresse, which some will have to be a kind of Rocket. 1. Common VVinter
Rocket, or Cresse. 2. Double floured VVinter Cresse. 3. Small VVinter Cresse.
Of Lady-Smocks, which is also a Nasturtium. 1. Great Lady-Smocks. 2. Small
Lady-Smocks. 3. Small flowred Lady-Smocks. 4. Tuberous rooted sweet
Lady-Smocks. 5. Small jagged Lady-Smocks. I have put these all together in a
Chapter, because they are all effectual for curing the Scurvy; but for as much
as the Water-Cresse is chiefly commended for the said purpose, I shall describe
that.

The Form.
Water-cresse has many fat and weak hollow branches, trailing upon the Gravel
and Earth where it grows, taking hold, and rooting in sundry places, as it
creeps; by means whereof, the Plant spreads over a great compass of ground.
The Leaves are likewise compact, and winged, with many small Leaves set upon a
middle Rib, one against another, except the point Leaf, which stands by
himself, as does that of the Ash, if it grow in its natural place, which is in
a gravelly spring. The upper part of the whole Plant, is of a brown color, and
green under the Leaves, which is a perfect mark to know the Physical kinds
from the other. The white Flowers grow in spoaky roundels. The Roots is nothing
else, but as it were a Thrum, or bundle of Threads.

The Places and Time.
The first of the first sort was brought out of Spain, as for the other three,
their Original is unknown; but they are all four planted in our Gardens. All
the Watercresses do grow about ponds, and other watery places; but those that
grow in the shallow running streams of the most clear Fountains, and gravelly
Springs, are of greatest use in Physic. The common Winter-cresse grows often
times of its own accord, in Gardens, and in the Fields; also, by the paths and
way-sides, in diverse places, and by name on the brook sides, in Lady Meade,
near Adderbury in Oxfordshire; That with double Flowers, was sound in the
Province of Berne, among the Switzers, and the last in Gardens only, both with
us, and in Germany. The three first sorts of Lady Smocks, are found in diverse
places of our Land, in moist Meadows, and near unto brook sides, or the small
Rills of water, that pass through the low grounds: the others are of Germany.
The first sort, to wit, the Garden-cresses flower about June and July, and so
do the Watercresses; but it is most useful for all purposes in March, for then
it is best. Winter-cresses flower in May, and the single ones do seed in June;
but the double abides gr^en, without seeding, both Summer and Winter. The Lady
Smocks do commonly flower about April; but there is the Impatient Lady Smock
growing in Gardens, which flowreth in February.

The Temperature.
The common Garden-cresse is very hot and dry, but especially the Seed, near
unto the fourth Degree, Water-cresse, Winter-cresse, and Lady Smocks, are hot
and dry in the second Degree.

The Virtues.
All these Plants tend to the cure of the Scurvy, but especially the
Water-cresse, which is very much commended upon this account. The Garden-cresse
being green, and therefore the more qualified, by reason of its humi^ity is
eaten by Country people either alone with Butter, or with Lettice and Purssane,
in Sallets, or otherwise, It cutteth gross phlegm, and make it apt to
expectorate; it provokes Urine, cleanses the Reins and Bladder, procures
Women's Courses, kills the birth, and stirs up Venery. Some say, it
looseneth the Belly, and purges it from viscous humors: it helps the
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and heals all inward wounds, and
drives forth poison and venom. Being taken with Oil it is beneficial for the
Cough, and shortness of Wind, and the pains of the Breast and Chest; and being
chewed in the mouth, it helps the Toothache. The Leaves bruised and applied,
take away all Freckles, Pimples, spots, and marks of the Body, helps the
Itch, and eases the pains of the Sciatica, and of the Loins; draws forth
bones, splinters, and thorns; stays the corroding and creeping Ulcers: the
Seed chewed in the mouth, helps the Palsy in the Tongue; provokes sneesing,
raises Lethargick people, and such as are drowsy and heavy, by quickening
their blood and spirits: Being boiled with Vinegar, and applied to the Kernels
of the Throat, heals the Kings Evil, and heals also the Scabs and Sores of
the head, if they be anointed with it, and Goose-grease mixed together: It
ripeneth also the Plague-sores, and breaks them, and takes away the
deformity of the Nails. The Water-cresse is good for many of the purposes
aforesaid, and is used particularly to make broth for purging the blood in the
Spring; and for preventing any of these Diseases which might ensue. It breaks
the Stone, and so does Winter-cresse, and perform most of the Cures aforesaid.
And it is used, as other Cresses and Rocket in Summer: so this in Winter, with
as great desire and content to be eaten, when variety of Sallets are not to be
had. The Lady Smocks are as effectual in the Scurvy, as the Watercresses. And
so much for such Plants as cure the Scurvy.

CHAP. LI. Of the Pine Tree.
The Names.
IN the next place the Teeth require a little more particular notice, which you
will find we take of them, if you read some of the ensuing Chapters. First
then, of the Pine Tree, which in Greek is called, (...), in Latin Pinns: the
Cones are called (...), in Latin Cont, and the Ancienter Greeks (...), but now
the Kernels are so called, they being named (...), Pityides formerly.

The Kinds.
Ten sorts hereof may be reckoned up. 1. The manured Pine Tree. 2. The fruitful
wild Pine Tree, 3. The soft-sheld wild Pine Tree. 4. The low wild barren Pine
Tree. 5. The taller barren wild Pine Tree. 6. The greater Sea Pine Tree. 7. The
lesser or Dwarf Sea Pine Tree. 8. The Dwarf mountain Pine Tree. 9. The crooked
mountain Pine, with thin leaves. 10. The crooked mountain Pine* with broader
Leaves.

The Form.
The tame Pine grows very great and high, with a thick reddish colored bark,
spreading large arms toward the top, and they again divided into lesser,
whereon are set by couples together at a joint or knot all along the branches,
close one unto another, long narrow or almost round, hard and sharp pointed
pale green Leaves, abiding continually on the young branches, and not falling
away but from the elder: this bears certain small yellow Catkins in the
Winter which fall away in the Spring as the Cones increase; the fruit or Cones,
that are somewhat long and found grow very high on the branches, and are
somewhat greater then in any of the other sorts, composed of sundry hard brown
woody Scales, lying close one unto and upon another, which when they open of
themselves or are caused by the heat of the fire, do show within them certain
hard shells, which contain in each of them, a long and white very sweet kernel,
covered with a very thin reddish skin, that is easily rubbed off: the wood
hereof is firmer, heavier, and closer grained then of the Fur or Deal,
reddish also, and not so short or brittle as that is; and with a kind of
moisture about the heart, which slived out into shivers will burn like Torches,
and were so used by the Ancients, who called them Ted^.

The Place and Time.
The ma^^red kind is planted in sundry places, both of this and diverse other
Countries: for the beauty of the Tree with his ever green leaves, yet are they
found also wild about the sea side. The other sorts grow both in Spain Italy
and Germany, and the parts near adjoining; and sea kinds near the sea in many
places, and upon the Land also, as Cl^sius has observed: the Catkins of many
come forth in the Winter, and fall away in the spring; others spring not until
May: the fruit of some of them being ripe in the end of Autumn, and others not
of a year after the springing.

The Temperature.
The Bark of the Pine Tree is binding and drying: The kernells of the Nuts do
concoct and moderately heat, being in a mean between cold and hot. The Leaves
are cooling, and assuage Inflammations.

The Signature and Virtues.
Cro^i^s in his Book of Signatures, says that the woody scales, whereof the
Pine Apple is composed, and wherein the kernels lie, do very much resemble the
foremost teeth of a Man; and therefore Pine leaves boiled in Vinegar make a good
decoction to gargle the mouth for asswaging immoderate pains in the teeth and
gums, and so do the shivers of the Torch-pine boiled in Vinegar, and gargled
warm as the former must be. The Kernels of the Apples are wholesome, and much
nourishing whilst they are fresh, and although they be somewhat hard of
dige^^ion, yet they do not offend: especially if they be steeped three or four
hours in warm water before the taking, to soak out their sharpness and
oyliness: those that are of hot constitutions may take them with sugar; but
those that are cold, with; Honey and so they do amend the putrefying humors in
the stomach and bowels, and stir up bodily lust, and increase sperme, if they
be made into an Electuary with the powder of Penids, and some sweet Wine; Also
they much help an hoarse throat, wheesings, and shortness of breath, recover
the voice being lost, expectorate phlegm, are good for an old Cough, and the
Ulcers of the Lungs: They also lenifie the Uritory passages being fretted with
the stone, and cause it to be easily voided; they help also to ripen inward
Impostumes, and are singular good for macilent bodies, to hearten them and make
them grow fat, and being often taken they help the Palsy, numnesse, and
shaking of the members. There is a Water distilled from the green Cones or
Apples, that is very effectual to take away wrinckles in the face, to abate
the overswelling breasts of Maids by bathing them with Clothes wetted therein;
and to restore such as are ravished, into better terms. The Scales of the Pine
Apple, with the bark of the Tree, do stop the Lask and bloody flux.

CHAP. LII. Of the Pomgranat Tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and (...); and by Hippocrates, (...); in Latin
Malus Punica, and Malus Granata, and the fruit Malum Granatum or Punicum;
because it is thought they were brought from that part of Africa where old
Carthage stood, into that part of Spain, which is now called Granado; and from
thence called Granatum. The flowers of the tame kind are called Cytini, which
is notwithstanding properly the Cup of the flower, and Balaustium is generally
taken to be only the double flowers of the wild kind. The rind of the fruit is
called in Greek, (...) and (...) and so also Psidium and Sidium, in Latin; but
generally Malicorium or Cortex Granatorum. The greater doubled blossomed kind
is called Balaustium Creticum and Cyprium: because it grows it both those
places, and there is another which is called Romanum.

The Kinds.
All the sorts of Pomgranats are but three, 1. The Pomgranate Tree bearing
fruit. 2. The greater double blossomed Pomegranate Tree. 3, The lesser double
Pomegranate Tree.

The Form.
The Pomgranate Tree bearing fruit goweth up to the height of seven or eight
Cubits in the warm Countries, and where it is natural (though in ours it rises
for the most part into several brownish twigs, which never attain near unto
that height) spreading it self into many slender, but tough branches set here
and there with thorns, and with many very fair green shining leaves, like in
form and bigness unto large Myrtle leaves, every one upon a small reddish
Footstalk; amongst the Leaves come forth here and there, the flowers which are
like bell flowers broad at the brims, and smaller at the bottom, being one
whole leaf divided at the top into five parts, of an orient red crimson color
naturally; but much paler with us, and many veins running through it with
diverse threads in the middle; and standing in a brownish hollow Cup, or long
hard husk: The fruit is great and round, with a hard smooth brownish red rind,
not very thick, but yellowish on the inside; and a great crown at the top
stored plentifully with a most clear liquor or Juice like wine: either sweet or
sour, or between both according to the soil, climate or Country where they
grow.

The Places and Time.
They grow in the hot countries toward the South, as in Spain, Portugal,
Italy, but chiefly in the kingdom of Granado: they grow in many places without
manuring; yet being manured they prosper better: for in Gardens, Vineyards,
Orchards, and other like husbanded grounds they come up more cheerfully; but in
our cold Country, much care is to be taken for the preservation especially of
the wild. They must be set in a Tub or large pot filled with rich Earth, so
that they may be housed in the Winter. They flower in May, and their fruit is
ripe about the end of August in the countries aforesaid, but with us they
hardly flower.

The Temperature.
All Pomgranates do contain in them a thin and small nourishment, yet they are
helping to the stomach, and those that are sweet please best, but that they
somewhat heat it. The sour ones, and so likewise the grains or seeds of each,
are astringent and cool evidently

The Signature and Virtues.
The grains or seeds of the Pomgranate are in Signatures said to hold a near
resemblance with the Teeth; and therefore a Decoction made of them is very
powerful in fastening the teeth, and strengthening the Teeth, if the same be
washed therewith. The Kernels of the sour Pomgranate dried in the Sun helps
all manner of fluxes both of the Belly and Matrix, and drunk with raw water
they help the spitting of blood, and so do the flowers and rinds thereof: the
Juice and kernels are good in hot griefs, and burning fevers to quench thirst,
and heat of the stomach, and so is the syrup of the Juice of it. The rind
sodden in Wine and drunk, kills Worms: and the powder of the rind or flowers
drunk or taken fasting, is good for a cold and stops the Rheum, the Juice of
the kernels mixed with honey and sodden, is good for painful sores of the Yard,
Mouth, and Fundament; and for the looseness of the skin about the nails, and
for swellings and knots in any part of the body, for ach of the Ears and griefs
of the Nostrills, especially the kernels of the sour Pomgranates, which is the
best to cure the heart burning, and swooning that is caused by Choler, the
inflammations of the Liver, and to procure appetite, and to stay the immoderate
longings of Women with Child. The powder of the Flowers is good against
burstings, if it be used in plasters and applied, especially if some Gauls be
put thereto. The rind or pill being used in a Gargarisme or Lotion for the
Throat, brings down the hot swellings of the Almonds in the Throat; The
foresaid blossoms and shells are good to put into restraining powders for the
stanching of blood in wounds, and to make the best sort of Ink, if they be put
instead, or amongst Gauls.

CHAP. LIII. Of the Mastick Tree.
The Names.
(...) is the name whereby this Tree is called in Greek, quasi (...) fissilis,
because it is ^o easiy to cleave either for making Toothpickers, for which it
is most proper, or for other uses; and the berries are called (...), and not
(...) as some Copies have it; The Name by which all Latin Authors call it is
Lentiscus; perhaps a foliorum Lentore from the clamminesse of the leaves and
the Gum Resina Lentiscina, and Mastiche and Mastix by some; but by the
Arabians, Gluten Romanum. There is a Tree like unto Mastick growing in Peru,
which the Indians call Molle.

The Kinds.
I read but of three sorts of the Mastick Tree, mentioned by any Author. 1.
The Mastick Tree. 2. the Indian Mastick tree. 3. The Indians Molle.

The Form.
The Mastick Tree grows commonly like a shrub, without any great body, rising
up with many Springs, and shoots like the Hasel; and oftentimes it is of the
height and bigness of a mean tree: the body and branches are covered with a
bark of a yellowish red color, being pliable and hard to be broken; there
stand upon one rib for the most part, eight leaves set upon a middle rib, much
like to the leaves of Liquorice, but harder of a deep green color, with a
reddish circle about the edges; and some reddish veins on the underside also
smelling sweet, and abiding green always: the flowers grow in clusters at the
joints with the Leaves being small and of a purplish green color; and after in
their places come small blackish berries of the bigness of Pepper Corns, with a
hard black shell under the outer skin, and a white kernel within: it bears
besides these berries, cetrain horns containing a clear liquor within them,
which after a while putrifies and turns into small flies, that fly away: It
gives also a clear white Gum in small drops when the stocks are wounded in
several places, which is gathered with great care and attendance, which as I
said is called Mastick.

The Places and Time
The first grows as well in the Provence of France as in diverse places of
Italy, and in many places of Graecia, and in Candy also, and some other places;
but no where so plentiful as in the Isle of Chio now called Sio, from whence
comes the best Gum, which is clear, splendent, white, and brittle; other
places yielding not so much nor so good, that of Candy being of a yellowish
color and bitter taste The inhabitants of Chios tend, pruine, and manure it
with as great pains and care, as others do their Vines, which goes beyond them
in the profit of the Gum, and send it into all parts of the World. The second
and third kind grow in Peru, and the Westindies. They flower in April, and the
berries ripen in September; and the Mastick is gathered about the time that
Grapes be*

The Temperature.
The Leaves, Bark and Gum, of the Mastick-tree, are hot and dry, almost in the
third Degree, and somewhat astringent.

The Virtues.
Mastick is one of the best things I know, for the Toothache, and may easily be
gotten at the Apothecaries Shops, being infused, or steeped in Rose Water, it
is good to wash the mouth withal, to fasten loose Teeth, and to strengthen the
Gums, or Mastick heated in Wine, and the Gums, Mouth, and Teeth washed
therewith, cleanses the corruption thereof, and fastneth the looseness, both
of Gums and Teeth. The same spread on Velvet or Plush, and laid unto the
Temples, stops the Rheum from falling down, and so eases the Toothache. The
Teeth likewise being rubbed with the Powder thereof, are whitened thereby.
First hold the Root of Pellitory of Spain in the mouth, as near as may be to
the place where a hollow Tooth is, to draw out the Rheum, and then fill it with
Mastick and it will cease the greatest aching that is: Being held in the mouth,
and chewed upon, it does dry and comfort the brain, by drawing down phlegm from
it, and stays the falling down of the humors, and also causes a sweet
breath. It is used in Ointments, and Plasters, to cleanse and heal Ulcers and
Sores, to stay the fretting Fluxes of humors to them, and to dry them up, and
to fill up the hollownesse: it strengthens and binds all the parts whereunto
it is applied, and comfort the aching joints and sinews wonderfully: it is
used also in Plasters and Ointments, to strengthen and comfort the stomach, to
mollify the hardness of tumors, and to mitigate the pains of the joints and
sinews: it strengthens also the Liver and heart; but the Chimicall Oil, does
serve for that and the former purposes, much more effectually. Being taken
inwardly, it stays vomiting, and nauseous subversions, and helps the
retaining virtue of the stomach, and brings good concoction and digestion: It
stops the Flux of the Belly, and profits those that spit blood, and that
have Coughs, being taken with Syrup of Coltsfoot, or the like; it stays the
acrimony or sharpness of strong purging Medicines, and is a good Corrector of
them.

CHAP. LIVE. Of Masterwort.
The Names.
THis Plant was scarcely known to the Ancients, and therefore I cannot tell
you, by what name they called it; but by later Writers, it is generally called
Imperatoriae, as some say, from the excellent virtues it has: It is a good
Herb indeed; but there being many as excellent as it, methinks that should not
be the Reason, why it should bear away the Bell from the rest: I suppose it
rather to be so called, because if it meet with a piece of ground it likes it
will so disperse it self on every side, that it will prove it self the General
or sole Commander of the place, and so may others happily, if they compare the
name, and the nature of the Plant together. And so much also does the word
Magistrantia (from whence, the word being corrupted, comes Astrantia) import
from the over-mastering of its neighboring Plants. The like might be said of
its English name Masterwort. It is by some called Pellitory of Spain, but
falsely, that being a small low Plant, bearing many finely cut long Leaves, upon
the stalks, lying on the ground, like Camomil, but somewhat larger. Gerard
calls it English-Masterwort, or false Pellitory of Spain.

The Kinds.
As a Lion brings forth but one Whelp, so this mighty Plant is not very
numerous in its Progeny; for of it there are but two sorts. 1. Common
Masterwort. 2. Mountain Masterwort.

The Form.
Common Masterwort has diverse great broad leaves, divided into sundry parts,
three for the most part standing together upon a small footstalk, on both sides
the greater, and three likewise at the end of the stalk; each of which leaves
are somewhat broad, and cut-in on the edges, into three or more divisions, and
all of them besides, dented about the brims, of a dark green color, and do so
much resemble Angelica Leaves, that I have known them mistaken for the same:
yet if they be well regarded, they may easily be known asunder; for that they
grow lower to the ground, and upon lesser stalks: amongst which rise up two or
three short stalks, in comparison of Angelica, being about half a yard, or two
foot high, and slender, with such like leaves at the joints as grow below; but
lesser, and with fewer divisions, bearing umbels of white Flowers, and after
them, small, thin, flat, blackish Seed, bigger then Dill-Seed: the Root is
somewhat great, and grows rather side-wayes, then downright into the ground,
and is the hottest and sharpest part of any of the rest of the Plant, and the
Seed next unto it, being somewhat blackish on the outside, and smelling well.

The Places and Time
The first, is found on sundry Hill in Italy, as also in Germany: yet it is
usually kept in Gardens with them, as well as Us: The other was found on the
Alps, in Switzerland. They flower, and seed late with us, as not until the end
of August.

The Temperature.
The Root of Masterwort is hotter then Pepper, even to the third Degree
complete, and is of very subtle parts.

The Virtues.
The Roots of Pellitory of Spain, being very rare in England, the Roots of
Masterwort are the best substitute, and are commonly sold in Shops under that
Notion. The dried Root being chewed in the mouth, draws down from the head
much phlegm* and is thereby available to ease the pains in the Head and Teeth,
and to draw forth cold Rheum, Catarrhes, and Defluxions upon the Lungs, or
Distillations into the Eyes. It is available in all cold Diseases and Griefs,
both of the Stomach and Body, dissolving wind very powerfully, both upward and
downward. The same also provokes Urine, and helps to break the Stone, and
expel Gravel from the Kidneys; it procures Women's Courses, and expels the
dead Birth, and is singular good for the strangling of the Mother, and other
the like Women's Diseases: it is effectual also against the Dropsy, Cramp, and
Falling Sickness. It is of a rare quality against all sorts of cold poisons,
to be taken as there is cause, either more or less, and provokes sweat. The
juice hereof dropped, or Tents dipped therein, and applied either to the green
wounds, or rotten Ulcers; yea, although they fret and creep, and be almost
gangrenated; and those also that come by envenomed Weapons, does soon cleanse
and heal them; or if they be bathed with the distilled water: the same also is
good to help the Gout, coming of cold cause. Tragus says, that the Decoction
of the Root in Wine, being drunk, does revive the ability of generation; but
surely he had not observed Galens Rule, who says, that those things that are
so hot to expel wind, do not help, but hinder nature. The other sort is more
effectual, and especially for Quartane Agues, to expel the dead Child, to purge
the brain, and to expel wind, and help the Cholick,

CHAP. LV. Of Coral.
The Names.
THough it may seem strange to some at first sight, that I should treat of
Coral amongst Plants, which seems more like unto a Stone: yet whosoever
shall consider the manner of its growing, will conclude with the Herbarists of
all Ages, that it is fitly reckoned amongst them. It is called (...) in Greek,
and Corallium by all that have written of it; and thereto rubrum, or album,
etc. is set for distinction-sake, yet the white is not remembered but by modern
Authors: the black sorts are called Antipathes, and Corallium Nigrum: there is
a second sort of Antipathes, or rough bristly black Coral, and is called by
the Fishers of Sardinia, Sambeggia.

The Kinds.
The Sorts of Coral mentioned by later Writers, are ten, 1. The great red
Coral. 2. The greater and siner white Coral. 3. Loose white Coral. 4. Hollow
white Coral. 5. Knotty and spotted white Coral. 6. Starry white Coral. 7.
Joynted white Coral. 8. Black Coral. 9. Rough, bristly black Coral. 10.
Yellow Coral.

The Form.
The greater red Coral which I take to be of greatest use, is found growing on
the Rocks in the Sea, like unto a shrub, with Arms and Branches, breaking forth
some into greater, and some into lesser sprigs, set full of knaggy eminences,
of a pale, or whitish red color on the outside, for the most part, as it is
taken forth of the water; but being scraped or filed, and polished, becomes
very fair, as it is usually seen, yet some will be much more red on the
outside, at the first taking up, and much redder within also, being also of a
firmer, or hard stony substance, after it is kept a while out of the water, but
pliable whilst it is there.

The Place and Time.
Most of these Coralls are found about Marcelles, and the Isle of Sardinia, and
other places of the Mediterranean Sea; but seldom on this side, unless it be
upon the Rocks, on the west side of England, about St. Michaels Mount, where
Gerard says, that white and yellow Coral do grow. They are to be found
growing at all times of the year.

The Temperature.
All the Sorts of Coral do cool and bind, yet the white is thought to be of a
colder operation, then the red or black.

The Signature and Virtues.
The substance both of red and white Coral, comes very near to that of the
Teeth; but the white being nearest in color, may more properly be said to have
their Signature: yet we find, that the red also is very useful in all the
accidents that belong to them. As first, it helps Children to breed their
Teeth, their Gums being rubbed therewith; and to that purpose they have it
fastened at the ends of their Whistles: it fastneth the Teeth also, that are
loose, and makes them white; it helps sore Gums, and Ulcers in the mouth,
and heals up foul hollow Ulcers in other parts, and fills them with flesh,
and is used in Medicines for the Eyes, to stay the Flux of Rheum, and takes away
the heat and redness thereof, by cooling and drying up the moisture; and some
hang it about the neck of such as have the Falling Sickness. The color of red
Coral holds forth by its Signature, that it stops bleeding, which it does,
if it be but held in the hands of those that bleed, either at the Nose or
Mouth: it is commended also, to be very effectual for those that spit blood,
or be troubled with any other Flux of blood, either in Man or Woman; and being
often taken in Wine, or other drink, does diminish the Spleen; it helps also
the Gonorrhea in Men, and the Whites in Women: It likewise helps them much
that are troubled with the stopping of their water, or that make it by drops,
and also those that have the tormenting pains of the Stone in the Bladder, if
the Powder when it is burnt be taken in drink. It strengthens the Heart,
Stomach, and Liver, and is therefore very useful in the Pestilence, against
venom, and all pestilent Fevers, and malignant Diseases; it chears the heart,
and is good against melancholy. The Powder taken in Wine, or distilled water,
brings rest to such as have Agues, and is good for them that are troubled with
the Cramp. As it is commended in the Falling Sickness: so likewise it is said
to prevent it, if a Child so soon as it is born, take ten grains thereof, in
Black-Cherry-water, or in the Mothers Milk. Some affirm, that it causes an
easy delivery of the birth, which it do, it must be by some specific Virtue;
for experience does manifest it, to be of a binding nature. The Chymicall Oil
of Coral, is also commended for most of the purposes aforesaid.

CHAP. LVI. Of Corall-wort.
The Names.
Several Names have been given to this Plant, by later Writers; for it is
conceived, that none of the Ancients, as Dioscorides or Pliny, etc. took any
cognizance of it. Some have called it from the form and color of the Roots
Dentaria, Dentillaria, Coralloides, and Alablastrites, as Lobel, and Dentaria,
Coralloide radice: All which Names do agree, both with the Plant, and place it
here stands in; for, the Root of it being white, smooth, and shining, as Teeth
ought to be, it was fitly named Dentaria, Dentillaria, and Alablastrites, and
as fitly Coralloides, and Dentaria Coralloide Radice: the diverse small round
knobs set together, whereof the Root is composed, resembling the knaggy
Eminences of the Coral, especially the white with which it agrees in color
too. Others both from the Root and Flowers, that are like unto
Stock-Gillow-Flowers, which were anciently comprehended under the name of
Viola, called it Viola Dentaria, as Dadonaus. We in English call it Toothed
Violet, or Corallwort.

The Kinds.
Parkinson presents you with seven sorts of Coralwort, 1. Bulbe-bearing toothe^
Violets. 2. Cinquefoile Corallwort. 3. Another Cinquefoile Corallwort. 4.
Trefoile Corallwort. 5. Setfoile Corallwort. 6. Bulbed narrow lea^ed
Corallwort. 7. The least Corallwort.

The Form.
The bulbe bearing Toothed Violet, shoots forth one or two winged Leaves,
upon long brownish footstalk, which in their rising up out of the ground, are
as it were doubled, or folded downwards, and then open themselves in seven
leaves, most usually, and sometimes but five, each whereof is somewhat long
denied about the edges, and Poynted, of a sad green color, and set on both
sides of the middle Rib, one against another: the stalk that bears Flowers,
rises up in the same manner with the Leaves, and is bare, or naked of Leaves,
unto the middle thereof, where it shoots forth a Leaf, and so one of two more
up higher, each consisting but of five Leaves, and sometimes but of three:
having also the uppermost single, at each whereof, comes forth a small round
bulbe, cloven, or, as it were, divided into some parts of cloves, of a sad
purplish, green color, which being ripe, and put into the ground, will grow to
be a Root, and bear Leaves, ^^^e as the bulbes of a red bulbed Lilly; about
which, at the top, stand four or five Flowers in long h^^sks, upon short
footstalk opening into four leaves, of a Purplish color, very like unto the
Flowers of Stock-Gillow-Flowers, or Dames Violets: after which come small, long
Horns, or Cods, poynted at the ends, wherein lie such like Seed, as are in the
Cods of Dames Violets, which will, as soon as it is ripe, break the Pod and
fall out: the Root is very smooth, white, and shining: It does not grow
downwards, but creeps along under the upper crust of the ground, and
consists of dive^rs small, round knobs set together: the taste, both of the
leaf and Root, is somewhat bitter, hot, and sharp like Radish.

The Places and Time.
The first and last have been found in our Land, as Parkinson says; the first
at Mayfield in Sussex, in a Wood called Highreed, and another Wood therein
called Foxholes; but for the place of the last he does not express it, yet I
find that it grows very plentifully about Croydon in Surrey, as also a
greater sort of Corallwort not mentioned by him: The rest in the shadowy woods
of Germany, Switzerland, and Savoy* Naples, Italy, and diverse other places.
They flower about the end of April, and the beginning or middle of May, and are
withered and gone, before July for the most part, the roots abiding safe under
ground.

The Temperature.
The Root of Coralwort, is drying binding and str^ngthening: yet it helps to
provoke Urine, and to expel gravel and the stone as some affirm by a special
Virtue.

The Signature and Virtues.
Both the form of the root of Corallwort which is made as it were of many Teeth
set together, and the smoothness and white and shining color are sufficient
Signatures to manifest that it is an excellent remedy for all maladies of the
Teeth, whether the Decoction be gargled in the Mouth, or the dry root held
between the Teeth. It is also exceeding good for the Dropsy by Signature also,
according to Oswald Crollius in his book of Signatures. It helps likewise the
griping pains of the sides and belly, and cures inward wounds that are made in
the Breast, Lungs, and Bowels, a dram of the powder of the root taken for many
days together in Red Wine; the same also given to them that are bursten or
have a rupture, is very beneficial in the distilled Water of the herb called
Horsetail: It stays also Lasks and Fluxes, that do not proceed of hot and
Choletick humors, the decoction of the herb is good to be applied both to
green Wounds quickly to con^olidate them, and for old ^ilthy Sores to dry up
their moisture, and thereby to cause them to heal the sooner.

CHAP. LVII. Of Rest Harrow.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek, (...) and likewise in Latin Anonis and Ononis; some
think it to be so called, Anonis, from its unprofitablenesse, quasi non juvans;
because it is an enemy both to the Husbandmen ploughing up the ground, and to
the Corn as it grows: Others will rather have it to be Ononis (...) quasi
dicas, Asini oblecta^entum, because Asses love to roll themselves upon it, and
to shrub their backs with its prickles. It is also called, Resta Bovis, and
Aresta Bovis, and Remoram Aratri: because the Roots are both so ^ough that the
Ploughshare cannot easily cut them, and so deeply and strongly fastened in the
ground, that it causes the Oxen to be at a stand for the first twitch* not
being able without mo^^ then ordinary str^n^^h to pull them f^^th. Cordus on
Dioscorides callerth it Acutella, because the thorns of it do prick those that
unwarily go by it. It is called in English Restharrow Cammock Petty Whin, and
Ground Furse.

The Kinds.
The Sorts hereof according to Parkinson are Eight. 1. Common Rest Harrow with
Purplish flowers. 2. Rest Harrow with white Flowers. 3. The great yellow
prickly Rest Harrow. 4. The lesser yellow prickly Rest Harrow. 5. Purplish Rest
Harrow without thorns. 6. The greater yellow gentle Rest Harrow. 7. Variable
yellow gentle Rest Harrow. 8. The lesser gentle Rest Harrow.

The Form.
Common Rest Harrow rises up with diverse rough woody twigs about half a yard
long, set at the joints without Order with little roundish Leaves, sometimes
more then two or three at a place, of a dark green color, without thorns
whilst they are young, but afterward armed in sundry places with short and
sharp thorns. The flowers come forth at the tops of the Twigs and branches,
whereof it is full, fashioned like Pease or Broom Blossoms, but lesser,
flatter, and somewhat closer, of a faint purplish color; after which come
small Pods, containing small, flat, and round seed: the root is blackish on the
outside, and whitish within, very tough and hard to break, when it is fresh and
green; and as hard as a horn when it is dried, thrusting down deep into the
ground, and spreading likewise, every piece being apt to grow again, if it be
left in the ground.

The Places and Time.
The first and the fifth grow in many places of this Land, as well in the Arable
as wast ground: The second with white flowers grows near unto Darby. Gesner
says, the third grows on the hill Gemma; and Columna says, the fourth
grows in the kingdom of Naples, and about Bristow in England, as Lobel and
others affirm. The sixth seventh and eight with their varieties, grow as well
in Narbone in France and about Mompelier, as in Spain and Portugal, they do all
flower about the beginning or middle of July, and their seed is ripe in August.

The Temperature.
Galen says that the root of Rest Harrow is hot in the third degree having
some cleansing, and cutting faculty therein also.

The Virtues and Signature.
A Decoction of Rest Harrow, made with Vinegar, and gargled in the mouth eases
the Toothach, especially when it comes of Rheum. The powder of the roots
strewed upon the hard callous brims of Ulcers, or the said powder mixed with
any other convenient thing and applied, does consume the hardness, and cause
them to heal the better. The powder taken in Wine for many days together cures
the fleshy Rupture, for it consumes it by little and little. The decoction
thereof is effectual to open the stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, and other
parts, and to help the Jaundise, as also to cure the blind Hemorrhoides or
Piles. The ^ender Sprigs or stalks thereof, before they become prickly, are
pickled up to be eaten by themselves, or as sauce with meat, and are commended
against a stinking breath; and to take away the swell of Wine in them that have
drunk too much, and are good for the gravel and stone boiled in Oxymel to the
Consumption of the one half, it is a singular drink for the falling Sickness.
The Bark that is the Root having the pith between taken out made into powder
and taken in Wine provokes Urine, breaks the Stone, and drives it forth,
and so do both the husks and seeds, and that by Signature. Croll. Tract. de
Signat.

CHAP. LVIII. Of Henbane.
The Names.
IT is called in the Grecians, (...), quasi faba parcina, sive suilla, says my
Author, because Swine having fed thereon, are very muck disturbed thereby, yea
are in danger of their lives, if they wallow not themselves in water presently
thereupon: neither do they go into the water to wash themselves, but to seek
after Crevises, by the eating of which they recover. But for my part, I can
scarce allow of the Name, for this reason aforesaid, because I never saw any
Hogs feed upon it, much less to go into the Rivers to catch Crevise; for in
the Mire where they commonly wallow, there be none; and besides why that should
be called their Bean, which is their Bane, I know not. I rather suppose it to
be so called: for that in such places as these Cattle do commonly dung,
abundance of this plant grows, as in Hog-yards, Dunghills, and such places as
they frequent, it being the Nature of their dung to breed it, as I have heard
it confirmed, by some skilful Husbandmen. The Latins call it Apollinaris
either from Apollo the Inventer of Physic, or because it makes men mad like
unto Apollo's Creatures, when they deliver his Oracles: Is called also Altercum
ab altercando, because they that have eat it are apt to quarrel: Camerarius
says, it is also called Priapeia, because the Italians do use the seed of it,
to allay the Enormity, called Priapismus. Pythagoras, Zoroastes, and others,
call it Insana, Alterculum, Symphoniaca and Calicularis; the Phrygians Remenia,
the Tuscans Fabulonia, and Faba Lupina: Matthaeus Sylvaticus, Dens Caballinus,
Milimandrum, Cassilago: Jacobus a Manlijs Herba Pinnula: in shops it is called
Jusquiamus and Hyoscyamus: in English Henbane; because the Seeds are hurtful to
Hens.

The Kinds.
The Sorts of Henbane are four. 1, Common Henbane. 2. White Henbane 3. Henbane
of Candy. 4. Henbane of Egypt..

The Form.
Common Henbane has very large, thick, soft, woolly leaves, lying upon the
Ground, much cut in, or torn on the edges, of a dark or evil grayish color,
among which rise up diverse thick and soft stalks about half a yard or two foot
high, spread into diverse smaller branches with some lesser leaves on them, and
many hollow flowers, scarce appearing above the Husks, and usually torn on the
one side, ending in five round points, growing one above another, of a deadish
yellow color somewhat paler toward the Edges, with many purplish veins
therein, and of a dark yellowish purple, in the bottom of the flower, with a
small pointell of the same Color in the middle, each of them standing in a
hard close husk, which after the flower is past, grows like the a husk of
Asarae Bacca; and somewhat sharp at the top points, wherein is contained much
small seed very like Poppy seed, but of a duskie grayish color. The root is
great white and thick, branching forth diverse ways under ground, so like a
Parsnip Root (but that it is not so white) that it has deceived diverse. The
whole plant more then the root, has an heavy ill soporiferous smell somewhat
oftensive

The Places and Time.
The first is commonly growing by the way sides, hedges, and wall sides where
Hogs frequent: for out of theirs and such like Ordure it does grow. The second
grows by the Sea sides in Narbone in France; near where the River Rhodanus
runs into the Sea. The third grows in Candy, and in Spain also, from
whence the seed being sent grows in our Gardens, and so does the last; though
their natural place be both in Egypt and Syria. They do all flower in July,
yet the strange kinds some what later; and from their seed growing ripe and
suffered to shed, it springs up again every year, but the two last do scarce
perfect their seed with Us.

The Temperature.
White Henbane is cold in the third degree, and the others in the fourth*
procuring drowsinesse, and senselesseness of spirit, by its stupifying and
benumming quality.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Husk wherein the seed of Henbane is contained, is in figure like to a Jaw
Tooth; and therefore the Oil of it, or the Juice by it self, or the Decoction
of the root with Arsmart in vinegar, being gargled warm in the mouth, is very
effectual in easing the pains of the Teeth. The leaves of Henbane do cool all
hot Inflammations in the Eyes, or any other part of the body: and are to
assuage all manner of Swellings of the Cods or Women's Breasts, or elsewhere, if
they be boiled in Wine, and applied either themselves, or the Fomentation, warm;
it also asswageth the pain of the Gout, Sciatica, and all other pains in the
Joints, which arise from an hot cause. And applied with vinegar to the forehead
and Temples, helps the Headache, and want of sleep in hot Fevers. The Oil of
the Seed is helpful for the Deafness, Noise and Worms in the Ears, being
dropped therein; and the Juice of the Herb or Root does the same. The Decoction
of the Herb or Seed, or both kills Lice in Man and Beast; the sum of the
dried Herb, Stalks and Seed burned, quickly heals Swellings, Chilblains or
Kibes, in the hands or feet, by holding them in the smoke thereof being burnt,
which will also make Hens to fall down from their roosting place, as though
they were dead. The white only is fit to be taken inwardly, which is most
available to many good purposes, if it be wisely and conveniently applied, but
the other sort are accounted dangerous; and therefore not to be used inwardly,
unless in case of necessity, when the white cannot be had: But if at any time
any one should wittingly, or unwittingly take Henbane and be distempered
thereby, the Remedy is to drink Goats Milk, Honyed Water, or Pine kernels with
sweet Wine; or in the absence of these Fennel Seed, Nettle Seed, the Seed of
Cresses, Mustard, or Radish; as also Onyons or Garlic taken in Wine, do all
help to free them from danger, and restore them to their right temper again.
Though the plant used, as aforesaid be effectual for the Toothach, yet I cannot
commend the way of receiving the fume of the Seed into the mouth by holding it
over a Chafingdish of Coals, it being but a mere Cheat; besides, it may
produce dangerous effects, intoxicating the head and troubling the sight. The
root being eaten causes great drought, stoppage of Urine, and many other
Symptoms, as you gather from the story Mr. Parkinson relates concerning a
friend of his, who eat the roots of Henbane instead of Parsneps, to whose book
I refer you.

CHAP. LIX. Of Wild Tansey.
The Names.
BY what Name the ancient Botanists did call this Plant, is altogether unknown,
but the later call it Argentina, a foliorum argenteo splendore, from the bright
silver color of the Leaves; or rather as Gerard says, of the silver drops
that are to be seen in the distilled water thereof, when it is put into a
Glass, which you shall easily see rouling and tumbling up and down in the
bottom: It is likewise called Potentilla, ab eximiis viribus quibus pollet,
from its powerful operations: of diverse, Agrimonia silvestris, there being some
likeness between it and Agrimony: Anserina, because Geese love to feed upon
it: And Tanacetum sylvestre, it differing little from the Garden Tansie; but in
color. In English, it is called Wild Tansie, and Silverweed, whereof there is
but one kind.

The Form.
VVild Tansie creeps upon the ground, taking root at the joints, every where
round about the place where it grows, that it will quickly take up a great
compass, shooting forth sundry winged Leaves, made of many, set on both sides
of a middle Rib, some smaller, being set amongst the greater, somewhat like to
Agrimony, or Medesweet, and likewise unto the ordinary Tansie of the Garden;
for it partaketh in form with them all, and dented about the edges; but of a
fair green color on the upper side, and of a silver shining white color
underneath: it bears no stalk; but the Flowers every one by it self, stand
upon a small short footstalk, rising from the joints with the Leaves, which
consist of five other small, yellow, round joynted Leaves, very like unto those
of Cinquefoile, or fiveleaved grass: the prime Root shoots downwards like a
Cinquefoile.

The Places and Time
This Herb grows most commonly in moist places, near the High-way-sides, and
sometimes in other places also, so that it will be wanting to none that will
use it. And here I think good to observe, that many other Plants also, as
Mugwort, Vervein, Mercury, Knotgrasse, Hounds-Tongue, Pellitory of the wall,
etc. which are most useful, are most common; Nature, or rather the God of
Nature, having placed those things we most need, even before our Eyes. It
flowreth in June and July.

The Temperature.
VVild Tansie, especially the Root of it, is dry almost in the third Degree,
hahaving in it very little heat apparent; and withal, a binding faculty. And
therefore Fuschius says, that some Writers have been much mistaken, in
affirming it to be moist, for no other Reason, but because it grows in moist
places. For then Watercresses, which are dry in the third Degree, must be
moist also; which no one dares be so impudent as to affirm. And certainly, had
they but considered its astringency, which is a certain token of dryness, they
could not have concluded otherwise. For Galen in his fourth Book of the
faculties of simple Medicines says, that astringents have in them some earthly
quality, and are consequently drying.

The Virtues and Signature.
Wild Tansie boiled in Vinegar with Honey and Alum, and gargled in the mouth,
eases the Toothache, fasteneth loose Teeth, helps the Gums that are sore,
and setleth the Palate of the mouth in its place, when it is fallen down: It
cleanses and heals the Ulcers in the mouth, or secret parts, and is very
good for inward wounds, and to close the lips of green wounds: as also to heal
old, moist, corrupt, running Sores in the Legs, or elsewhere. Being boiled in
Wine, and drunk, it stops the Lask, the Bloody Flux, and all other Fluxes of
blood, either in Man or Woman, which some say it will also do, if the green
Herb be worn in the shoes, so it be next the skin* and it is true enough, that
it will stop the Terms, if worn so; and it may be the Whites also, which the
Powder of the dried Herb will assuredly do, if it be taken in some of the
distilled water; but more especially, if a little Coral, and Ivory in Powder
be put to it. Moreover* it stays spitting, or vomiting of blood, and is much
commended to help Children that are bursten, and have a Rupture, being boiled
in water and Salt. Being boiled in Wine, and drunk, it eases the griping pains
of the Bowels, and is good for the Sciatica, and Joynt-Aches: Being bruised,
and applied to the Soles of the Feet, and the Hand-wrists, it wonderfully
cools the hot fits of the Agues, be they never so violent. The distilled
water dropped into the Eyes or Clothes, wet therein and applied, takes away the
heat and Inflammations in them by Signature: the Flower of it representing the
Apple of the Eye. The said water cleanses the skin of all discolorings
therein, as Morphew, Sun-burning, etc. as also Pimples, Freckles, and the like;
but the Leaves steeped in White Wind, or Butter-milk, is far better; but the
best way of all is to steep it in strong White-wine-Vineger, the face being
often bathed, or washed therewith.

CHAP. LX. Of Flea-wort.
The Names.
I shall conclude this Subject concerning the mouth, and the parts thereof with
Fleawort, which is called in Greek, (...), in Latin Pulicaria and Herba
Pulicaria: in Shops, Psyllium, in English Flea-wort. All which Names were given
to it for the same Reason; (...) in Greek, and Pulex in Latin, signifying a
Flea: yet not because it drives away Fleas, if it be brought green into an
House; but because the Seed is like unto Fleas, that, were it not in respect of
motion, you could hardly distinguish them by sight. It is of some called
Fleabane; but improperly, there being another Pulicaria, called Conyza, which
drives away Fleas.

The Kinds.
The Ancients knew but one sort of Flea-wort, but later times have discovered
four. 1. The ordinary Flea-wort. 2. The greater ever-green Flea-wort. 3.
Indian Flea-wort, with dented Leaves. 4. Small Flea-wort.

The Form.
The ordinary Flea-wort, rises with a stalk two foot high, or more, full of
Joints, and Branches on every side, up to the top; and at every joint, two
small, long, and narrow whitish green Leaves, somewhat hairy. At the tops of
every branch, stand diverse small, short, scaly, or chaffy heads, out of which,
come forth small, whitish, yellow threads, like to those of the Plantane Herbs,
which are the bloomings or Flowers. The Seed enclosed in those Heads, is small
and shining, while it is fresh, very like unto Fleas, both for color and
bigness; but turning black, when it grows old. The Root is not long, but
white, hard, and woody, perishing every year, and rising again of its own
Seed, for diverse years, if it be ^uffered to shed. The whole Plant is somewhat
whitish, and hairy, smelling somewhat like Rozin.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in the Fields, and untilled places of Spain, and Italy; but
with Us, no where but in Gardens. The second, grows in the Fields, that are
near the Sea. The third, is thought to come out of the Indies. The last, is
naturally of Egypt, or Arabia. All these Flea-worts flower in July, or
thereabouts with Us; but in their natural places, all the Summer long, yet the
last is the latest with Us.

The Temperature.
Galen and Serapio, do record, that the Seed of Flea-wort, which is chiefly
used in Medicine, is cold in the second Degree, and temperate in moisture and
dryness.

The Virtues
The Muscilage, or infusion of the Seeds of Flea-wort, being made with
Rosewater, or Barley-water, and taken with Syrup of Violets, Syrup of Roses or
Sugar, purges Cholet, and thick phlegm, and is useful in hot burning Fevers,
in great thirst, and helps to lenifie the dryness of the mouth and throat; it
helps also the hoarsnesse of the Voice, and Diseases of the Breast and Lungs,
caused by heat, as the Plurisie and such like. It helps all Inflammations of
the Head, and all hot pains of the Joints. The Muscilage of the Seed, made into
an Elect^ary, with Marmalade of Quinces, with Popyy-Seed, and Sugar Pellets, or
Sugar Candy, and so taken, does temper the heat, and roughness of the Throat
and Tongue, and stays hot Fluxions, or Rheums flowing down. In hot burning
Agues, it quenches thirst, and abates heat, being taken with Syrup of Violets,
or Barley-water, and purges also Choler gently. The Seeds torrifyed, or dried,
and taken with Plantane water, stays the Flux of the Belly, and helps the
corrosions, or gripings thereof, that come by reason of hot, Choleric, sharp,
and malignant humors, or by the super purgation, or over-working of any
violent Medicine, such as Scammony, or the like. The Seeds being kept on the
Tongue eases the Cough, and helps the dryness thereof, proceeding from
heat. It does so wonderfully cool (says Fernelius) that being cast into hot
boiling water, it presently cools it. The Seeds bruised, or the Herb, and
mixed with the juice of Housleek, or Nightshade, eases the hot Gout, and hot
Apostumes being thereunto applied; mingled with Oil of Roses and Vinegar, it
cures hot Swellings in the Joints, and Apostumes behind the Eat, with
Vinegar, or Oil of Violets, it helps the pain of the head, if it be applied
to the forehead and Temples. The same layd-to with Vinegar, is good against
the going out of the Navel, and burstings of young Children. The water, wherein
the Seeds have been steeped, is good against St. Anthonies fire, or Wildfire.
The juice with Honey put into the Ears, kills Worms, and stays the running
thereof. It helps hot swellings, or eruptions of the skin, as Blains, Wheals,
and such like; as also pains of the Joints, and places out of joint, and the
Hip-Gout. The same is applied to Women's Nipples, and sore Breasts, and that
with good success, laying it often thereon. Being mixed with Hog's Grease, and
applied to foul, corrupt, and filthy Ulcers and Sores, cleanses and heals
them, by cooling the heat, and repressing the sharpness of the humors,
flowing unto them. The Muscitage of the Seed made in Plancane-water, whereunto
the Yelk of an Egg or two, and a little of the Ointment, called Populeon, is
put, is a most safe, and sure Remedy to ease the sharpness, prickings, and
pains of the Hemorrhoides or Piles, if it be laid on a Cloth, and bound
thereunto. It stays the bleeding of the Nose, applied with the juice of
Shepheards-purse, and Bole-Armoniack. The Herb boiled, or the Seeds with the
Root, and the Fundament bathed therewith, or to sit over the hot Liquor, eases
the Fenasmus, a Disease when one is often provoked to stool, without voyding
any excrement. It takes away the burning, and acrimony of Lime, Euphorbium and
Cantharides. It takes away the roughness of the hair, being bathed with the
Muscilage thereof. Fleawort-Seed keeps Camphor very well, and that by its
coldness and moisture. There is no danger in it, if it be wisely, and
conveniently applied: yet it is not amiss, to give with Cinnamon or Mace.
However, in cold and moist Bodies, which have but narrow Entrals, it is not
safe.

CHAP. LXI. Of Throat-wort.
The Names.
PAssing from the Plants appropriated to the Mouth, we come to those that do
more immediately relate to the Throat; amongst which, Throatwort by its Name
should be none of the meanest. The Greeks call it, (...), and the Latins
Trachelium, from (...), which signifies the Neck or Throat. It is called also
in Latin, Cervicaria; for that it helps the Sores of the Neck and Throat,
either inward, or outward. It is also called Uvularia, because it helps the
Uvula, or Palate of the Mouth, (which has the diminitive from Uva) for the
likeness unto a Grape, when it is swollen and fallen down. Others call them
Campanula, of the likeness of Flowers unto Bells, and therefore called
Bell-Flowers. Some also call them Rapi sylvestris genus, but improperly; and
Rapunculus, or Rapuntium, Rampions, because they are like unto Rampions, and
many of them edible as they are. We in English, call it Throat-wort,
Canterbury-Bells, and sometimes Haskewort.

The Kinds.
There are fifteen Sorts of Throat-wort, reckoned up by Parkinson. 1. Great
Throat-wort. 2. The great Globe-Rock Throat-wort. 3. The lesser Globe-like Rock
Throat-wort. 4. The greater Mountain Throat-wort. 5. Narrow leafed Throat-wort.
6. The Rock spiked Throat-wort. 7. Thin leafed Throat-wort, with spiked Heads.
8. Vmbelliferous, blew Throat-wort. 9. Small Mountain Throat-wort. 10. Wild
Buglosse leafed Throat-wort. 11. The late flowring Throat-wort. 12. Giant
Throat-wort, or Bell-flowers. 13. Bell-flowers, with small dented Leaves. 14.
The Syrian Coventry Bells. 15. Round-leafed Throat-wort.

The Form.
Great Throat-wort has large hairy Leaves, of an over-worn green color,
somewhat rough, and slightly indented about the edges. The stalk is also hairy,
about half a yard high, or somewhat better, whereon those Leaves are set from
the bottom to the top almost, after the fashion of Nettles. Toward the top,
upon a short foot-stalk, come forth hollow Flowers, of a Bell-fashion, not
unlike to the Coventry-Bells, of a purplish blew color, and somewhat hairy
within. The Root is white, thick, and long lasting.

The Places and Time.
The first, grows in Stow-wood by Oxford, on that side next unto Barton, in
the Ditch, on the right hand as you go in, and diverse other places about that
Wood. The Globe-like Throat-worts, and those with spiked Heads, grow naturally
in diverse places beyond the Seas, as some in Candy, some upon Mount Baldus, the
Alps: as also in Germany, Italy, and Naples. A lesser sort of wild Buglosse
leaved Throat-wort, was found by Bauchinus, on the Hills amongst the Switzers.
The Syrian Coventry Bells were found by Ranwolfius, at the foot of Mount
Libanus in Syria, in the shadowy Woods. Giant Throat-wort grows in several
places in Yorkshire. And there is a little Throat-wort which grows near unto
the Lanes end, that leads from Dedington to Oxford, about the place where the
way turns, from Dedington to Dunstew. Many of these sorts, and peradventure,
some others grow in the Physick-Garden at Oxford, and Mr. Morgans Garden at
Westminster. They all flower in the Months of June and July; but yet some of
them flower not till all the rest are past, and scarce perfect their Seed; but
are increased by their Root.

The Temperature.
These Plants are cold and dry, as are most of the Bell-flowers.

The Virtues.
The Roots of some of these be sweet in taste, and therefore eaten in Sallets,
either raw, or strewed, as both the greater and smaller ordinary sorts of
Rampions are: yet some of them are not so pleasant, but more astringent, by
which quality they are found to be effectual, not only in all Ulcers of the
mouth and Throat, to gargle, and wash them, or for the Uvula, or Palate of the
mouth, when it is swollen and fallen down, but for all other Sores, whether in
the secret parts of Man or Woman, to be used in a decoction with Honey, Wine,
and Allome, or in any other part of the Body; for by the faculty of drying, and
binding, they are very profitable for old Sores, to restrain the moist, and
sharp humors, which fret the place, and keep them from healing; and for green
Wounds and Cuts, to close up the Lips of them speedily. These are all the
Virtues that I find as yet, attributed to the Throat-worts, which though not
many, yet are pertinent to our present purpose, which is sufficient.

CHAP. LXII. Of the Date-Tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), in Latin Palma, the fruit, (...) Palmulae and
Dactyli: the sheath or skin which encloseth the Flowers, is called (...), Elat^
and (...), Spatha: and some think one kind of Date is called Caryotae, and
Phaenicobalanis, which were also called Regiae, because they were fittest for
the diet of Kings. Thebanes were the lean dry Dates, that had little substance
in them. The wild or low Palm is called (...), by Theophrastus; and
Chamaeriphes in Latin, by Lobel, Lugdunensis; and Palma humilis, also by
Matthiolus; and Palmitee, or Palmito, by the vulgar in Italy, Spain, etc. The
Greeks also call that head that is used to be eaten, (...), the Latins Palmae
cerebrum, the brain of the Date-Tree.

The Kinds.
Besides the manured Date-Tree, there is the wild, or low Date-Tree, called the
Palmito-Tree, as I said before, and the thorny Palmito.

The Form.
The Date-Tree usually grows very great and tall, yet in some places, nothing
so tall as in others, bare of Branches unto the top: the Bark whereof, is not
so well to be said scaly or rugged, as knaggy; having short knaggs, which are
the ends of the middle Ribs of the Leaves, sticking out round about the Body,
which give an easy footing, like steps to climb, or get up into the tops of
the Trees, to gather the fruit; the Leaves that grow at the top, are very long
and large, made as it were, of diverse parts, and folded together double: the
middle Rib being thick, and almost woody, but spongy within, which do always
abide green, and hang down-wards with their ends: the Flowers are enclosed with
a long skinny sheath, hanging down from the lower Branches of Leaves, and
sometimes higher, which opening it self at the end, into two parts, show forth
abundance of white Saffron-like small Flowers, hanging by small threads, in
great bunches together; after which, come the fruit upon the said threddy
footstalk, green at the first, and reddish when they are ripe, with a hard,
firm, small, long, and round whitish stone, with a furrow in the middle: some
Sorts are small, and some great; some of a lost substance, some firmer and
harder; some whitish, some yellowish, or reddish, or blackish; some round like
an Apple, others long with the roundness; some having the top soft, some none
at all, some so sweet and lushious, that they will nor abide long, unless they
be pressed into Cakes to be kept; others will abide whole for a long time, and
fit to be sent also into any far Country: yet all of them have a small round,
hard Crown, or Cap at the head, which with rubbing one against another, falls
off. The stones within the fruit, notwithstanding that they are so solid, and
firm, as a very stone, and can hardly be broken with an Hammer: yet having a
small hollow place in the middle of them, with so ^mall a Kernel therein, that
it would not be thought to spring thereby: yet being put whole into the ground,
has shot forth, even in this Country, long, narrow, hard Leaves, which have
abiden in a convenient warm place, diverse years, without any great progress,
so little it likes a cold Climate.

The Places and Time
The manured Date grows in all the Eastern Countries, generally, and those
have been most commended by some, that grow in Judaea, and in the valley of
^ericho; but Bellonius says, they deserved not Commendations, neither were
they ripe about Jerusalem, above a month after they had been gathered in
Egypt: they grow also in Italy, where they are planted, but bear no fruit; and
in Spain, by the Seaside, but the fruit is nothing so good as in Cyprus, and
the Levant. The other two sorts, the first in Sicilia, Candy, etc. the other in
Spain, they flower in April, and are ripe in November, or later.

The Temperature.
Dates are hot and dry, almost in the second Degree, and astringent or binding,
especially, when they are not through ripe; being through ripe, they are hot,
and moist in the second Degree; some say, hot, and moist in the first Degree.

The Virtues.
Dates yield a gross, and clammy, and fatty, or impinguating nourishment:
therefore they he^p the hoarsness, and roughness of the Throat: the sharp
Cough, by reason o^ sharp Rheum, falling on the Breast and Lungs, and are used
also against Consumptions, and wasting of the Body. The Decoction of them
taken, allayeth the force of hot Agues, and stays spitting of blood, the pain
in the Stomach and Bowels, by reason of a Flux; and boiled in Water and Honey,
and taken does refresh the spirits, they somewhat provoke to Venery: the
Decoction helps the weakne^^e, and pains in the Back and Bladder: they
strengthen the weakness of the Liver and Spleen being mixed with other
convenient Medicines: They are used in Broths, against Consumptions, and pining
Diseases, and are counted restorative, e^pecially the sweet ones. Dry Dates
being eaten, do stop the Belly, and stay vomiting of Women with Child, and help
against miscarrying: they stay Women's Courses and the bleeding and falling down
of the Fundament and Piles, being taken in Red Wine. If they be made into a
Poultis alone, or with other things, and applied to the Stomach and Belly, they
stay the vomiting of Women with Child. The Decoction of Dates, or the Leaves of
the Date-Tree, makes the hair black, being often used, and stays fretting
Ulcers. Being mixed with Wax and Saffron, they help the black and blew marks,
remaining after stripes or b^owes, and reduces the skin to its natural
color. Date Stones being burnt and washed, serve instead of Spodium, to bind
and restrain the fluent humors into the Eyes, and to consume the Pin and Web in
them, and to dry up Pushes; being u^ed with Spiken^rd, it stays the falling
of the hair from the Eyebrows; and being mingled with Wine and used, it
helps any Excrescences of the flesh, as Wens, and such like* and brings
foul Ulcers to Cicatrising, and stays the spreading of them. A Poultis made
of them, and applied, helps any luxation or joints out of place, and they are
used in astringent Cataplasms or Pultises. They are not to be used by such as
are troubled with the Headache Colic, or hot Livers. Diaphaenicon, which is
the Electuary, made of Dates, purges Choler and Phlegm, very effectually, so
it be taken with good caution and advice; and that from two drams, unto six, in
White Wind; or a Decoction of Sena as shall be thought fit* and is conveniently
given in compound, and long Agues and in those Di^eases which are bred of raw
humors; as in the Cholick, the pains of the back and Mother. The Head of the
Date, or Date brains, is very pleasant and savoury to the taste, and is much
used where they grow, to be eaten with Pepper and Salt. Of the Leaves of the
Palmito, they use to make Brooms, to sweep the House, which will last a long
time, of them likewise, they make Mats and Baskets.

CHAP. LXIII. Of Winter Green.
The Names.
IT is called Pyrola in Latin (for it has not found any Greek name) a
foliorum Pyri arloris similitudine, and florum, etiam similitudine, of the
likeness of the Leaves, and I may say of the flowers also; unto Peartree
Leaves, and flowers. Diverse have taken it to be Limonium; but the true Limonium
is now so well known, that it puts all out of doubt. Some have called it
Beta sylvestris, as Pliny and Fuschius; because it appears in the Spring
about the time that Garden Beets do; but Galen says, there is no wild sort of
the Beet. Others have called it Tintinnabulum Terrae from the likeness of the
flower to a bell, says Fuschius, but is generally of all now a days called
Pyrola; in English, Winter-green.

The Kinds.
Though formerly but one, now six sorts are known. 1. Ordinary Winter Green. 2.
The least Winter Green. 3. Slender Winter Green. 4. The Winter Green of Europ,
with Chickweed Flowers. 5. Winter Green of America with Chickweed flowers. 6.
Shrubby Winter Green.

The Form.
The first sort grows, sending forth seven, or eight, or nine Leaves from a
small brownish creeping root, every one standing on a long Footstalk, and being
almost as broad as long, round pointed of a sad green color, hard in handling,
and like unto the Leaf of the Peartree, but others compare them to be like unto
the small leaves of Beets, from whence arises a slender weak stalk, yet
standing upright, bearing at the top many small white flowers, smelling as
sweet as those of Lilly Convally, laid open like a star, consisting of five
round pointed leaves, with many yellowish threads standing in the middle, about
a green head and a long style with them, which in time grows to be the
Seed-Vessel, which when it is ripe is formed five square with a small point at
it, wherein is contained as small seed, as the dust it self.

The Places and Time.
The Sort I have now described grows in Lansdale and Craven in the North part
of England, especially in a Close called Crag Close, and also in a Bog by
Rosecre in the Kings County. The second grows at the foot of the high hills
in Austria and Stiria, as Clusius says. The third in Germany, as also near
Savoy. The fourth grows on the Woods of Germany in diverse places, as also in
the Beechwood in Scotland, as is recorded by Bauhinus; and on the Mountains in
in Wales likewise. The fifth grows in Brasil toward the West Indies. The
last grows in most of the Provinces of Hungary, Germany and Bohemia: they do
all flower except the American Sorts about June and July, but the other more
late with Us.

The Temperature.
Winter green is cold in the second degree, and dry in the third, and exceeding
astringent and glutinous withal.

The Virtues.
Grollius in his Book of Signatures, puts down Pyrola to be a principal Herb
for the Throat; and therefore says he, we use it in Gargarisms; but how to
make out the Signature, is beyond my poor skill. It is a singular Remedy for
green Wounds, to consolidate their lips speedily together; either the green
Leaves bruised and applied of themselves, or the juice of them, or a Salve made
of the green Herbs stamped, or the juice boiled with Hogs-lard, or with
Sallet-Oyl and Wax, and some Turpentine added unto it; which is so sovereign a
Salve for all manner of wounds and Sores, that the Germans use it exceeding
much and extol it beyond all other Salves, made of a simple Herb: They
likewise use it for inward wounds or hurts, being boiled, either by it self, or
with other Wound-Herbs, as Comfry, Burnet, Mos-eare, etc. wherewith they use to
heal, whomsoever is wounded, either in the Body or Bowels or any other part, by
giving them to drink of such a decoction. The Herb boiled in Wine, or water,
and thereof given to drink, to them that have any inward Ulcers in the Kidneys,
or neck of the Bladder, does wonderfully help them: It stays also all Fluxes,
whether of blood; or of humors, as the Lask, Bloody Fluxes, or Women's too
abundant Courses: as also the bleeding of wounds, and both takes away
Inflammation, rising upon the pains of the heart, and hinders any to arise,
being presently applied after the hurt received: It is no less helpful for
foul Ulcers, hard to be cured: as also for Cancers and Fistulaes. The distilled
water of the Herb, does effectually perform the same things; and some keep the
dried Herb to use in Decoctions, or made into powder to drink, as often as they
shall have occasion.

CHAP. LXIV. Of Horse-Tongue, or Double-Tongue.
The Names.
THe Grecians call it (...), Hippoglossum, either because (...) is a word
oftentimes prefixed before great Plants, as Hipposelinum, Hippolapathum,
Hippomarathrum, etc. or because it somewhat resembles an Horses Tongue; but
others think it should be more truly called (...), Hypoglossum, because of the
small Leaves, like small Tongues, growing upon the greater. The Latins keep
the name, and call it Hippoglossum, or Hypoglossum; and some to express it
more fully. Bislingua, two Tongues, or double Tongue; some, Lingua Pagana; and
of Apuleius, Victoriola. It is also called Bonifacia by Angularia, and Uvularia
by Bru^felsius, Leonicerus, Tabermontanus, and others. This is not Laurus
Alexandrina, as some have supposed.

The Kinds.
Besides the ordinary sort, Fabius Columna makes mention of another, with
larger Tongues, upon the Leaves, which as he says, is much more rare to find.

The Form.
Horse-Tongue shoots forth diverse hard stalks, with Leaves on them, which are
somewhat broad, yet pointed at the end, somewhat hard, with Ribs running
through them; upon which, from the middle Rib, grows a smaller Leaf or
Tongue, about the middle of the Leaf, on the upper side, which makes it to
differ from all other Plants, that grow upon the ground: Under the smaller
Leaf, at the bottom where it joyneth to the greater, comes forth one small,
whitish green Flower, and sometimes two standing upon short footstalk, where
afterward stand the Berries, which when they are ripe, are very red, very like
unto the Berries of the Yew-Tree, wherein is a white hard Seed: the Root
consists of many, long, hard, whitish strings, growing from a head.

The Places and Time.
It grows upon Hills, and in Woods, in diverse places, both of Italy and
Germany; but is only cherished in Gardens with Us, particularly in the Physic
Garden in Oxford. It flowreth in June, and the Berries are ripe at the end of
September, in the natural places, as in the warmer Countries; but it seldom
comes to perfection in our Land.

The Temperature.
Horse-Tongue is evidently hot in the second Degree, and dry in the first.

The Signature and Virtues.
The little Leaf like a Tongue, growing upon the greater, is no light Argument
that this Plant is effectual for Sores in the Mouth and Throat, and to settle
the Palate of the Mouth in its place, that is subject to fall down, by reason
of too much moisture, which may likewise be signified thereby. It is likewise
of singular good use in old and filthy Ulcers, in any part of the Body, to dry
up the moisture, and to bring them on more speedily to be healed; either the
Powder of the Leaves or Roots, to be used alone, or with other things put into
them, or the decoction to wash them, or inject into them. It is held to be most
powerful also of any Herb, that is, to help the suffocations, and other
Diseases of the Muther, to take the Powder of the dried Leaves or Roots, in
Wine, Broth, or other drink; for it will speedily give ease. Three or four
drams of the said Powder, taken in sweet Wine, procures a speedy delivery, and
drives forth the afterbirth provokes the Courses and Urine, when they are
stopped, and expels the Stone in the Reins and Kidneys. If a dram or two of
the said Powder be given to drink in Wine, or Broth, for some certain days
together, it will help all those which have a rupture, or are bursten; and for
this purpose, it is accounted by diverse, that there is no help better, which
although it may bring some pains at the first taking, yet by continuance, it
will knit and heal the part, if a Trusse be used a good while after, as well as
during the Cure: It is good also for those that have an imperfection in their
Speech, so as it be not natural.

CHAP. LXV. Of Figg-wort.
The Names.
THis Plant, and the use thereof being found out but of later days, has no
Greek appellation, but what may be taken from the Latins, who call it
Scrophularia major; because it is available, ad Scrophulas: and, major, to
distinguish it from Pile-wort, which by most Writers, is called Scrophularia
minor. It is also called Millemorbia, Ficaria, Ferraria, and Castrangula, as
well from the form of the Roots, as from the many effects; for which the former
Ages more then ours did put it to, and did find available. Although the other
sorts want the knobs in the Roots, which the true Fig-wort has, yet for the
other likeness they have the same name imposed upon them: We in English call it
great Fig-wort, and great Pile-wort; and of some, great Kernel-wort, and
Brown-wort, from the color of the stalks.

The Kinds.
Of Fig-wort the greater, there be eight sorts set down by Mr. Parkinson. 1.
The ordinary great Fig-wort. 2. Great Fig-wort, without knobbed Roots. 3. Great
leafed Fig-wort, of Candy. 4. Strange great Fig-wort. 5. Another strange great
Fig-wort. 6. Yellow Fig-wort. 7. Indian Fig-wort. 8. Elder-like Fig-wort.

The Form.
The common great Fig-wort sends forth diverse great, strong, hard, square,
brown stalks, two or three foot high, whereon grow large, hard, and dark green
Leaves, two at a joint, which are larger, and harder then Nettle Leaves, but
not stinging. At the tops of the stalks, stand many purple Flowers, set in
Husks, which are somewhat gaping, and open somewhat, like those of
Water-Betony: after which, come hard, round heads, with a small point in the
middle, wherein lie small brownish Seed. The Root is great, white, thick, and
full of knobs and bunches, as it were knots and kernels, at it, growing aslope
under the upper Crust of the ground, and abides many years, but keeps not
its Leaves green in the winter, the stalks perishing, as those of Water Betony,
and other such like Plants do.

The Places and Time.
The first is frequent in diverse places of this Land, both in moist and shadowy
Woods, and in the lower parts of Fields and Meadows, particularly in Stowwood
by Oxford: the second Lobel says, grows not but in the warm Counties of
Narbone in France, Ravenna, and Rome in Italy. The third and fourth came from
Candy: the fifth, was sent out of Italy, among other Seeds: the sixth, came
from Hungary, and other parts of Germany: the two last, from Spain and Italy.
They all flower about July, yet some a month sooner, and the Seeds will be
ripe within a month after the Flowers be past.

The Temperature.
I cannot find the temperature of this Herb, set down in any Author, yet I
guess it to be the same with the lesser Celandine, o^ Fig-wort (because it
works the same effect) which is hot and dry in the end of the third Degree.

The Signature and Virtues.
The likeness of the Roots unto those Scrophulous tumors, which ap^^r about
the Throat: as also the Arm-holes and Fundament, do evidently ^^old forth, that
it is excellent good for the Kings-Evill, or any other knots, k(...) bunches,
or Wens, growing in the flesh wheresoever, if the Decoction of the Herb be
taken inwardly, and the bruised Herb applied outwardly; and so it is ^^
singular good use, to be applied for the Hemorrhoides or Piles, when they grow
painful, and fall down, and for such other knobs and kernels, which sometimes
grow in and about the Fundament: It is also very effectual, to dissolve
c^ot^ed, or congealed blood within the Body, which happens by any wound,
bruise, or fall, being used as is said before. An Ointment made hereof, in this
manner, may be used at all times, when the fresh Herb is not to be had. Wash
the Roots clean, bruise them, and put them into a Pot with fresh Butter, well
mixed together, and let them so stand for fifteen days, close covered, in some
moist or moorish place, which afterward, set upon a gentle fire, to boil
easily for a little space, which then being strained forth, let it be kept in a
Pot covered, to use when occasion requires: With the Roots and Le^ves,
likewise bruised and boiled in Hogs-Lard, or Oil and Wax, is made the like
Ointment, exceeding good to heal all sorts of Scabs, and Lepry also. The
distilled water of the whole Plant, Roots and all, is used for the same
purposes, either to take inwardly, or applied outwardly by bathings, and
serves well also for foul Ulcers that are hollow, or corroding, to stay the
malignity, and to dry up the superfluous virulent moystute of them: the same
also, takes away all redness spots, and freckles in the face: as also the
scurf, or any foul deformity therein, that is inveterate, and the Leprosy
likewise.

CHAP. LXVI. Of Archangell, or Dead Nettle.
The Names.
LEonhartus Fuschius in his History of Plants, does huddle up together in the
71. Chapter, Galeopsis, Urtica, Labeo, Scrophularia major, Ficaria,
Millemorbia, and Castrangula, as if they were one and the same Plant including
Archangel also. I have already showed you, that Scrophularia major, etc. is the
great Fig-wort: I shall here demonstrate, that though Fuschius and some others
have taken Archangel, and Galeopsis to be the same, yet they are by more modern
Botanicks made to differ; for as much as the one is stinking, the other not
stinking. That which stinketh not, Pliny calls Lamium, from the Flowers
veluti cucullo larvatam Lamiam representante, which look, like an old Witch,
hudled up in a Hood. It is called also Urtica in^rs, non mordax and mortua,
quia foli^s non mordacibus sed mitissimis sit: Urtica, for some resemblance it
has with other Nettles; iners, etc. because it stingeth not, as other Nettles
do. Some call it Archangelica, ab eximiis viribus; for its excellent virtues,
from whence we in England (to which it is more proper, then to other Countries)
call it Archangel: as also Dead Nettle, and Blind Nettle: by which two last
Names, it is best known to Country people.

The Kinds.
Of this Plant properly called Archangel, there are eight sorts, 1. Red dead
Nettle, or Red Archangel. 2. White Archangel. 3. Spanish Archangel. 4.
Longleafed red Archangel. 5. Archangel with spotted Leaves. 6. Archangel with
white lines in the Leaves. 7. Yellow Archangel. 8. Strong Archangel.

The Form.
The white Archangel (which is most pertiment for the present occasion) has
diverse square stalks, about a foot high, not standing straight upright, but
leaning downwards toward the ground, by reason of the great weight of its
ponderous Leaves (as some conceive, though I do not) which are in shape like
those of the stinging Nettles, nicked about the edges; yet not stinging at all,
but soft, and as it were downy: At the joints with the Leaves stand large, and
open-gaping white Flowers in husks, round about the stalks, fashioned like to
little gaping Hoods or Helmets: in which there is many times a sweet, honyish
moisture, as may be perceived, if you suck them, as many times you shall see
Children and Bees do: in the Husks, after the Flowers are fallen, stand small,
roundish black Seeds: The Root is white, with many Fibers thereat, not growing
downwards, but lying under the upper crust of the Earth, spreading and
increasing like unto Couch-grasse, which abides many years still increasing.

The Places and Time*
The first sorts are found under Hedges, old Walls, common ways, among
rubbish, in the Borders of Fields, in arable, and in Gardens that are ill
husbanded, except the Spanish kind, which grows not, but in Gardens here in
England, as in the Physic Garden at Oxon, etc. The fifth grows in Germany,
as Thalius says, and in Italy, as Matthiolus and Columna say, very
plentifully. Those with white spots and lines are rare to meet with. The
seventh grows in some places of England: yet not very commonly, as in
Bagley-Wood by Oxford, and under an hedge on the further side of a Meadow, by
St. Albans, near the Causey that leads from thenc^^ to Mr. Cottons House, on
the left hand, a little before you come to the turning of the way, up to
Windridge, where I showed to my worth^ Friends, Dr. Arris, a Doctor of Physic,
and Mr. Dichfield, Schoolmaster of St. Albans: the last grows in Candy, as
Pona says, and in Naples, as Columna says. They flower from the beginning of
the Spring, all the Summer long.

The Temperature.
Archangel is hot and dry in the first Degree, or thereabouts. It is of thin
and subtle parts (and therefore it dries, consumes, and discusseth) as the
bitterness of the taste does clearly demonstrate.

The Virtues and Signature.
Archangel bruised, and with some Salt and Vinegar, or with Hogs-La^^ ^ayd upon
any hard tumor or swelling, and that in the Neck or Throat, which is called
the Kings Evil, does help to dissolve or discuss them: in like manner applied
to the Gout, Sciatica, or other Joynt-aches, or of the Sinews, does very much
allay the pains, and give ease. It is also effectual in all Inflammations, as
a repercussive, and to heal all green wounds, by drying and closing up the lips
of them; and for old Ulcers also, to stay their malignity of fretting and
cor^oding, or spredding thereby, causing them to heal the more speedily. It
draws forth splinters, or other such like things, gotten into the flesh. It
is used also for the obstructions and hardness of the Spleen, both inwardly,
by drinking the Decoction of the Herb in Wine, and afterward applying the Herb
hot, or the Decoction to the Region of the Spleen, as a Cataplasme, or
somentation with Sponges. The Flowers of the white Archangel are preserved, or
conserved daily to be used, or the distilled water of them stays the Whites;
and those of the Red stays the Reds in Women by Signature, and is thought
good to make the heart merry, to drive away melancholy, and to quicken the
spirits, and is commended also against Quartan Agues. Likewise it stancheth
bleeding at the Nose, if the Herb be stamped and applied to the nape of the
Neck; and if it be so applied to the loosnesse and clefts of the skin, about
the Roots of the Nails of the Fingers, it immediately cures them by Signature,
as Crollius affirms. Pliny highly commends it for many other things, as for
bruises and burnings; but the Archangel with yellow Flowers, is most commended
for old, filthy, and corrupt sores, or corrupt Ulcers; yea, although they grow
to be Fistulous, or hollow, and to dissolve tumors.

CHAP. LXVII. Of Foxglove.
The Names.
SOme call it in Greek, (...), and make it to be a kind of Mullein, but
certainly it is not, neither was it known to any of the ancient Greek, o^
Latin Writers. Fuschius makes, as if he were the first that called it
Digitalis, being induced thereunto, by the hollow form of the Flowers, which
are like Finger-stalls. Casalpinus calls it Virga Regia major flore purpureo,
Alcima also, and Damasonium. Tragus calls it Campanula sylvestris flore
purpureo and flore luteo. Columna takes it to be the Ephemerum Dioscoridis;
and D^lechampius upon Pliny, takes it to be Viola Calathiana Plinii. So
different is the Opinion of Authors, concerning this Plant. It has no other
name in English, that I know, but Foxgloves, unless some call it Foxfinger.

The Kinds.
The Sorts of Foxgloves are eight in all. 1. Common Purple Foxglove. 2. Dun
colored Foxgloves. 3. Blush colored Foxgloves. 4. Orange Tawny Foxgloves. 5.
The greater white Foxgloves. 6. The lesser white Foxgloves. 7. The greater
yellow Foxglove. 8. The small pale yellow Foxglove.

The Form.
The common Foxglove has many long and broad Leaves, lying upon the ground,
dented about the edges, a little soft or woolly, and of a kind of hoary green
color: among which, rise up sundry stalks sometimes, and but one very often,
bearing such Leaves thereon, from the bottom to the middle, from whence to the
top, it is stored with large and long hollow reddish Purple Flowers, a little
more long and eminent at the lower edge, with some white spots within them, one
above another, with small green Leaves at every one; but all of them turning
their heads one way, and hanging downwards, having some threads also in the
middle; from whence rise round heads, pointed sharp at the ends, wherein small
brown Seed lies: the Roots are many small husky Fibers, and some greater
strings among them: the Flower has no scent, but the Leaves have a bitter hot
taste.

The Places and Time.
Two of these Sorts, namely, the Purple, and the Greater white* grow naturally
in England, in such grounds for the most part, as are sandy and dry, as well on
the higher as lower places, under hedge sides, in diverse Counties. The red
grows between Stoken-Church and Little Wickham, and likewise about St.
Albans. The white grows by VVulwich, and also in Landesdale, Craven, and in a
Field called Cragclose, in the North of England, by Colchester in Essex, and by
Exeter, in the West. The rest are strangers in England, unless it be in the
Gardens of them that delight in such pretty Ornaments. They seldom flower
before July, and their Seed is ripe in August.

The Temperature.
The Foxgloves in that they are bitter, are hot and dry, with a certain kind of
cleansing quality joined to them.

The Virtues.
The use of this Plant, if not the Plant it self, was altogether unknown unto
the Ancients, it being not so much as once mentioned in their Medicines; but
that is no excuse to the Physicians of our times, who, notwithstanding the
admirable properties thereof, do in a manner neglect it. The Italians, with
whom it is in greater esteem then with us, call it Aralda, and have an usual
Proverb with them concerning it, which is, Aralda tutte Piaghe salda, Aralda
salveth all Sores; for they use it familiarly to heal any fresh or green wound,
or cut the Leaves, being but bruised, and bound to; and sometimes also they use
the juice of it in old Sores, to cleanse them, dry up their moisture, and heal
them the more speedily, which it performs by the bitter quality therein. But
the Reason why I treat of it in this place is, because it has been by later
experience, found to be very available for the Kings Evil, the Flowers being
stamped together with fresh Butter, and applied to the place; or if the Flowers
cannot be had, the Leaves bruised and applied, or the juice made up into an
Ointment, and used thereon, works the same effect, though not altogether so
powerfully. By the rarifying and extenuating Virtue that it has, it cutteth
and consumes thick, tough Phlegm, and viscous humors, troubling the Chest or
Stomach, if it be boiled in water, or Wine and drunken: The Decoction or Juice
hereof, made up with some Sugar, or Honey, is available for the same purpose:
as also to cleanse and purge the Body both upwards and downwards, sometimes of
tough phlegm, and clammy humors, and to open the obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen. It has been also by later experience found to be available for the
Falling Sickness, and diverse have been cured thereby; for after the taking of
the Decoction of two handfulls thereof, with four Ounces of Polypody of the Oak
bruised, made in Ale, they that have been troubled with that Disease six and
twenty years, have been cured thereof. Mr. Culpepper says, that he is
confident, that an Ointment of it is one of the best remedies for a scabby head
that is.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of Orpine.
The Names.
IT is called by the Grecians, (...), and (...), by the Latins, Telephium, and
Sempervivum Sylvestre. It took the name Telephium, some have thought, from
Telephus, the King of Mysia, whose wounds received from Achilles, and grown
almost past cure, were healed therewith; and hence the Medicines appointed for
such purposes, were called Telephia: yet I must tell you, that it is more
frequently said, that Telephus was cured with the rust of Achilles his Sword
which hurt him, both happily being mixed together: It is called also,
Scrophularia media vel tertia, of Brunfel sius; Fabaria, Faba crassa, and Faba
inversa by diverse; and so also by Lobel, a foliorum fabae similitudine; and
Crassula, or Crassula major by diverse also, as well as Dioscorides a foliorum
crassitie. Cordus upon Dioscorides calls it Acetabulum alterum: and Columna,
takes it to be Cotiledon alterum of Dioscorides: Gesner in hortis Germaniae,
takes it to be Anacampseros: and Matthiolus Dodonaeus and Clusius, and diverse
others, call it Telephium; and Vulgar, because it is most common in all these
parts. In English, it is called Orpine; and of some, Livelong, because a Branch
of the green Leaves hung up in any place, will keep the verdure along time.

The Kinds.
The Sorts of Orpine are six in number, 1. Common Orpine. 2. Purple flowred
Orpine. 3. Small creeping Orpine. 4. The great Spanish Orpine. 5. Imperatus of
Naples, his true Orpine. 6. Matthiolus his small Orpine.

The Form.
The common Orpine rises with diverse round brittle stalks, thick set, with fat
and fleshly Leaves, without any Order, and little or nothing dented about the
edges, of a pale green color: The Flowers are white, or whitish, growing in
tufts: after which come small chaffy husks, with Seed like dust in them. The
Roots are diverse, thick, round, white, tuberous Clogs* which is not altogether
so great, in diverse Fields, and Wood-sides, where it is found wild, as it is in
Gardens.

The Places and Time:
The first is frequent almost in every Country of this Land, being generally
cherished in Gardens and in many places growing wild, as about Heddington
Quarries in Oxford shire, and about St. Albans in Hartfordshire. The second is
often found in many places of Germany; as Tragus Camerarius, Clusius, and
others set down. The third was sent out of Italy by Alphonsus Pancius, a worthy
Herbarist and Physician of Ferrara. The fourth is found both in Spain and
Hungary. The fifth came originally from Imperatus of Naples. The last (which was
called Cepea by Matthiolus* and all that have written since, Cepea-Matthioli)
was first communicated from Padoa, and is chiefly nursed up in the Gardens of
those that are lovers of rare Plants. They do all flower in July, and their
Seed is ripe in August.

The Temperature.
The Qualities of Orpine are differing from the Telephium of Dioscorides in
that they are cooling as Purslain is, especially the leaves, for the root is
more enclining to heat; and by reason of the Muscilaginesse therein, it is
somewhat astringent also: whereas the true Telephium as Dioscorides and Galen
say, is somewhat hot and of a cleansing drying quality; yet it is thought the
plant is the same, though the Temperature be altered by the difference of the
Climate in this as also in other Plants.

The Virtues and Signature.
The Leaves of Opine bruised and applied to the throat cures the Quinsy, which
is an Inflammation of the Throat, or of the highest parts of the Gullet,
hindering breathing and swallowing, when as the fault is neither in the Breast
nor Lungs. Mr. Culpeper says, that if you please to make the Juice thereof
into a Syrup, with Honey or Sugar,, you may take a spoonful or two at a time
for a Quinsy, and you shall find the medicine more pleasant, and the Cure more
speedy then if you took a Dogs Turd, which is the Learned Colleges vulgar
cure. This may be a good remedy: but if Mr. Culpeper had been so wise, as to
have known the goodness of a Dogs Turd for this purpose: he would not have
belched it forth so opprobriously in disparagement of the College; whom I know
not for what cause, he takes occasion many times to inveigh against, where
there is none. But to return to Orpine: It is seldom used (notwithstanding Mr.
Culpepers Syrup) in inward medicines with us; but Tragus says, and that from
experience, that in Germany the distilled water thereof is used for gnawings or
excoriations in the Stomach or Bowels, and for Ulcers in the Lungs, Liver, or
other inward parts; as also in the Matrix, and helps all those diseases,
being drunk for certain days together, and that it stays the sharpness of
the humors, in the bloody flux, and other fluxes in the belly, or in wounds.
The Root thereof also performs the same effect. It is used outwardly to cool
any heat or Inflammation upon any hurt or wound, and eases the pains of them:
as also to heal Scaldings and Burnings: the Juice thereof beaten with some
Sallet Oil and anointed, The leaf also bruised, and laid to any green wound in
the hands or Legs does heal them. The root helps Ruptures and Burstnesse by
Signature; the tuberous and glandulous Cloggs being not much unlike those hard
swellings, or falling down of the Cuts into the Cods.

CHAP. LXIX. Of Pellitory of the Wall,
The Names.
IT is called in Greek, (...) Helxine, quod foliorum and semin^^^ hirsutiae
vestibus adhaereat, and (...) quod perdices ea libenter vescantur; in Latin
also Helxine (but not Cissamp^ll^s) Perdicum Perdicaria of Partridges which
sometimes feed hereof; and Urceolaris, Vitrigo, or Vitriolaris herba, because
the roughness thereof serves to cleanse either pots or Glasses; but it is
commonly called Parietaria, or by a corrupt word Pariraria, because it grows
upon or near Walls, and for the same cause it is named of diverse Muralium, and
Herba Muralis: in English, Pellitory of the Wall; not that it has any
correspondency with Pellitory of Spain, but corruptly instead of Paritary,
which was so called from Parietaria, the English as well as other Countries
imitating the Latin: but somebody forgetting the word Paritary, called it
Pellitory: which name, it does still retain: and, (of the Wall) is added to
distinguish it from the other howsoever.

The Kinds.
There be but two sorts of Pellitory of the Wall. 1. Common Pellitory of the
Wall. 2. Small Pellitory of the Wall,

The Form.
The Common Pellitory of the Wall ri^eth up with many brownish red, tender and
weak, clear and almost transparent stalks, not above a foot high at most that
ever I saw; upon which grow at the several joints two leaves like unto those of
French Mercury, or Amaranthus called flower gentle: but not so big of a dark
green: which afterward turn brownish not dented at all, but smooth on the
Edges, rough and hairy as the Stalks are also: at the joints with the Leaves
from the middle of the stalks upwards, stand many small pale purplish flowers,
in hairy or somewhat rough heads or husks; after which come small black and
rough seed which will stick to any Garment or Cloth, though not so easily as
some report. The root is somewhat long, with many small Fibers annexed
thereunto of a dark reddish color, which abides the Winter, although the
stalks with the Leaves do commonly perish, and spring afresh every year.

The Places and Time
The first grows wild generally throughout the Land near or upon old walls,
in the moist corners of Churches and stone buildings, amongst rubbish and such
like places; from whence those that have a mind may bring it into their
Gardens, where being planted in the shade it will grow, and increase so much,
that after a while, it will not easily be gotten out. The other grows
naturally in few places, but in Constance in Germany. They flower in June and
July, and the seed is ripe soon after.

The Temperature.
Pellitory of the Wall is counted by most to be cold and moist, but surely it
is hot, otherwise it could not be so effectual against wind and the Stone,
unless it be by a Specific Virtue.

The Virtues.
The dried Herb in powder made up with Honey into an Electuary, or the juice of
the herb or the Decoction thereof made up with Sugar or Honey, is a singular
remedy, for an old or dry Cough, the shortness of breath and wheesing in the
Throat. The Decoction of the herb with a little honey added thereto, is good to
gargle a fore throat, and being drunk without honey, it eases the pains of
the Muther, and brings down Women's Courses; it also eases those griess that
arise from obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and Reins: the juice held in the
mouth eases the Toothache; and three ounces thereof taken at a time does
wonderfully help the stopping of the Urine; and to expel the Stone or Grayel
in the Kidneys or Bladder; and is therefore put among herbs, used in Clysters
to mitigate pains in the Back, Sides, or Bowels proceeding of wind, stopping
of Urine, the Gravel or Stone as aforesaid. If the bruised herb sprinkled with
some Muscadine be warmed upon a Tile, or in a dish upon a few quick Coals in a
Chasingdish, and applied to the Belly, it works the same effect. A pultis
made hereof with Mallows, being boiled in Wine with wheat Bran, and Bean
Flower, and some Oil put thereto, and applied warm to any bruised Sinew, Tendon
or Muscle, does in very short time restore them to their strength; and takes
away the pains of bruises, and dissolves the congealed blood of any beatings or
falls from high places. The juice or the dis^illed Water, which is useful for
many of the purposes aforesaid, is excellent also to cleanse the skin, from
Spots and Freckles, Purples, Wheales, Sun-burn, Morphew, etc. and makes it
smooth and delicate. The said water or juice, does assuage hot Impostumes,
burnings or scaldings, as also all other hot tumors or Inflammations, be it
St. Authonies fire, or any other Eruptions of heat, being bathed often in wet
Clothes dipped therein, or the said juice made into an Ointment with Cerusse
and Oil of Roses and anointed therewith, which does also cleanse foul rotten
Ulcers, and stays creeping Ulcers, and running Scabs in Childrens heads; and
helps also to stay the falling off the hair of the head, etc. The Leaves
mixed with Oil of sweet Almonds in manner of a P^ltis, and laid to the pained
parts is a good help for them that are troubled with the Stone or with wind and
gripings. The juice dropped into the Ears eases the Noise and hummings in
them, and takes away the pricking and shooting pains in them. The juice or
the herb bruised and applied with a little salt, is very effectual to cleanse
Fistulaes and to heal them. It is likewise very effectual for any green wound,
that is, if it be bruised and bound thereto for three days, you need no other
medicine or salve to heal it.

CHAP. LXX. Of Wheat.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek, (...) in Latin Triticum quod tritum ex spicis sit,
because it is threshed out of the Ears, as Varro says, as also, (...) that is,
Frumenium a fruendo, id est, vesc^ndo quod Culmus extulit, because we do enjoy
this Noble Grain more the any, it being the best to make bread, which is the
Staff of Man's life, There was a sort of it amongst the Ancients, called Robus,
which though some have taken to be the same with bare or naked White Wheat, yet
it is more probable that red Wheat is meant thereby, being so called a rubore
grani.

The Kinds.
Me thinks Mr. Parkinson, who was a Man* so exquisitely experienced in the form
of all sorts of Vegetables, should not be so mistaken in so common a thing as
Wheat: yet he seems to ^e so to be; for in rekoning up seven sorts of Wheat he
says that there is. 1. Bare or naked white Wheat. 2. Bearded or Red Wheat 3.
Bright eared Wheat. 4. Double eared Wheat. 5. The wild Wheat of Candy. 6.
Tripoly wheat. 7. Summer wheat. For my part I never saw a Land of Red Wheat
with beards, but many hundred Acres without; and for White Wheat, I have seen
it both without, and with Beards. I have heard of sorts of wheat, which Country
People call Duckbill Wheat, Cone Wheat, etc. Which whether they be by names to
any of the former, I am not certain; but I think, by Duckbill Wheat they mean
the Red; and by Cone Wheat, they mean the White Wheat with beards, which makes
not so white bread as the Red. The Summer-wheat is also called, Triticum
Amyl^um, Starch Corn, whereof Starch is made. Whose description I shall give
you, because it is not so well known as the other.

The Form.
Starch Corn is very like unto wheat in Stalk and Seed, but the Ears are
narrower, the beards longer, and the grains smaller: the Ear thereof is set
round about, and made up with two ranks, with certain beards as I said before,
almost after the manner of Barley, and the Seed is closed up in Chaffy Hus^s,
and is sown in the Spring.

The Places and Time.
I have observed the white Wheat to grow frequently in Hartfordshire, and the
Bright Eared Wheat also here and there. The Red Wheat in Oxfordshire, but
without Beards. The double Wheat grows about Lions in France, The fifth was
brought from Tripoly. The sixth from Candy. The seventh grows in Germany,
Poland, and Denmark. The double Wheat, Summer Wheat, and that of* Candy, are to
be sown in the Spring, because they will not endure the cold of the Winter, but
the rest are sown in Autumn, and are reaped in July or August.

The Temperature.
The kinds of Wheat according to their natural qualities are hot in the first
Degree, but neither dries nor moistneth evidently as Galen says, yet Pliny
says it dries.

The Virtues.
The bread that is made of Wheat being applied hot out of the Oven for an hour
three days together, to the Throat that is troubled with Kernels or the Kings
Evil, heals it perfectly; and Slices of it, after it is a little stale being
soaked in Red Rose Water, and applied to the eyes that are hot, red, and
inflamed, or that are bloodshot helps them. The flower of Wheat mixed with
the juice of Henbane does stay the flux of humors to the joints being laid
thereon: the said meal boiled in Vinegar helpe^h the shrinking of the Sinews,
says Pliny, and mixed with Vinegar and Honey, boiled together heals all
^reckles, spots and Pimples on the face: Wheat-flowre being mixed with the Yolk
of an Egg, Honey, and Turpentine, does draw, cleanse, and heal any Bile or
Plague Sore, or any other foul U^cer: the Bran of Wheat Meal is often boiled in
the Decoction of a Sheeps Head* and it is given in Clysters, to cleanse and
open the Body, and to ease the griping pains of the Intralls. The said Bran
steeped in sharp Vinegar, and then bound in a Linen Cloth, and rubbed on those
places that have the Morphew, Scurf, Scab, or Leprosy, will take them away, so
that the Body be well prepared and purged before: the Decoction of the Bran of
Wheat or Barley, is found of good use, to bathe those places which are bursten
by a Rupture: the said Bran boiled in good Vinegar, and applied to swollen
Breasts, does help them, and stays all Inflammations: It helps also the
biting of Vipers, ^^ other venomous Creatures. The Leaven of Wheat Meal has a
property to ^eal and to draw; and in especial, it rarifieth the hard skins of
the feet and hands; as also Warts, and hard knots in the flesh, being applied
with some Salt. Starch moystned with Rose Water, and laid to the Cods, takes
away their itching. The Waters that are made of the purest and finest volatile
Flower, being put in water, and drunk, does stay the Lask and Bloody Flux, and
is profitably used both inwardly and outwardly for the Rupture in Children, and
boiled with Roses, dry Figs, and some Jujubes, makes a fit Lotion to wash sore
mouths or Throats, and when the Kernels thereof are swollen and sore: the same
also boiled in water, unto a thick gelley, and taken, stays the spitting of
blood, and boiled with Mints and Butter, it helps the hoarsnesse of the
Throat. Pliny says, That the Corns of Wheat, parched upon an Iron Pan, and
eaten, is a present remedy for those that are chilled with cold. The Oil
pressed from Wheat, between two thick Plates of Iron or Copper heated, heals
all Tetters and Ring-worms, being used warm: And hereby Galen says, he has
known many to be cured. Matthiolus commends the same Oil to be put into
hollow Ulcers to heal them up, and it is good for Chops in the hands or feet,
and to make a rugged skin smooth. Dioscorides says, That to eat the Corns of
green Wheat hutteth the stomach, and breeds Worms, but chewed and applied to
the biting of a mad Dog, it cures it.

CHAP. LXXI. Of Barley.
The Names.
THis Grain is generally in Greek called (...), in Latin Hordeum; but two of
the kinds are distinguished into Distichon, and Polystic^n, which last is most
likely to be that which Galen calls Gymnocrith^n, that is, Hordeum nudum; not
that the Ears are without rows, but because the Grain is Huskless: and may be
also the Cantherinum of Columella, which he says, the Countrymen called
Hexasticum. We have a small kind of Grain brought from Germany to our
Druggists, in great quantity, termed French Barley, and is probable to be this
Barley which Cordus says, was sent him out of Italy, having six rows in the
Ears. There is a kind also, which by Tragus and Cordus is called Hordeum minus;
and by Columella, Hordeum Galaticum, because it is whiter; from (...) Milk
which is of a white color.

The Kinds.
The Sorts of Barley are in number four. 1. Bear Barley, or common Barley. 2.
Big Barley. 3. Winter Barley. 4. Naked or bare Barley.

The Form.
The ordinary Barley is so well known to all sorts of people, that to describe
it, were to teach them that which they know already, and therefore I shall
describe that which is called naked or bare Barley. It has many rows of Corns
in the Ear, which are enclosed in the Husks, having not that skin on them,
that the other has, being lank, small, yellow, and short, almost like Wheat,
but less. The stalks are like unto the common Barley, saving that it has not
so many stalks, rising from the Roots; so that though the one have six rows,
yet the other has thirty or forty stalks to countervail them.

The Place and Time.
The first is Our usual Barley, in all the South parts of this Nation: the
other in the North parts only: the third is not very frequent in our Land; but
the last is more rare: yet it has been sown in our Gardens in April, and not
before, and was ripe in the beginning or middle of August. The usual time for
the ordinary sort being in March, as to the sowing; and the latter end of
August, as to the mowing.

The Temperature.
Barley is cooling, and drying in the first Degree. It has also a little
abstersive, or cleansing quality, and does dry, somewhat more then Bean Meal.

The Virtues.
The Meal of Barley and Fleawort, being boiled in water, and made into a Pultis
with Honey and Oil of Lillies, applied warm, cures Tumors under the Ears,
Throat, Neck, and such like places. A Plaster thereof with Tar, Wax, and Oil,
helps the hard swellings of the Throat, called the Kings Evil. A Pultis made
of Barley, Meal, or Flower, boiled with Vinegar and Honey, and a few dry Figs
put unto them, dissolveth all hard Impostumes, and excrescences upon the
Eyelids, growing in the form of a Barley Corn by S^gnature and asswageth
Inflammations also, being applied. And being boiled with Melilote and Camomile
Flowers, and some Linseed, Fennigreek, and Rue in Powder, and applied warm, it
eases the pains in the sides and stomach, and the windiness of the Spleen:
boiled with sharp Vinegar into a Pultis, and laid on hot, helps the Leprosy:
being boiled in red Wine, with Pomegranat Rinds, and Myrtills, it stays the
Lask, or other Flux of the Belly: boiled with Vinegar, and a Quince, it eases
the hot pains of the Gout. Barley Flower, white Salt, Honey and Vinegar mingled
together, is used by diverse, to take away the Itch speedily, and certainly. The
distilled water of green Barley stilled in the end of May, is very good for
those that have Defluxions in the Eyes, to stay the humors, and to ease the
pains, being dropped into them, or white bread laid to steep therein, and bound
thereto, does the same. All the preparations of it, as Barley-water, and other
things made thereof, do give great nourishment to persons troubled with
Fevers, Agues, and Heats in the Stomach. French Barley is much used in
pectorall Diseases, or Diseases of the Breast, helps the sharpness of the
Throat, and increases Milk, especially boiled with Fennel. It provokes Urine,
and is very profitable in Choletick Fevers, if it be thus administered; Take
two Ounces of French-Barley, boil it in two fresh waters, then boil it again in
a quart of water, (adding half an Ounce of Licorish, and an handful of Violet
Leaves, and as many Strawberry Leaves) to a pint, or a pint and a half, strain
it; and put thereto of Syrup of Violets two Ounces, or for the poorer sort, you
may sweeten it with a little Sugar. It is used outwardly, to soften hard
swellings, and is good for Inflammations, and soreness of the Throat, being
boiled alone, or with other fitting Herbs, and the Mouth and Throat washed
therewith. Take Mallows, Violet, Beets, black Hellebore, Fumitory, of each
three handfuls, of French Barley, six handfulls, boil them in a sufficient
quantity of water for a Bath, and use it against the Scab, Itch, etc. you shall
find it very effectual.

CHAP. LXXII. Of Garlic.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), in Latin Allium, which last name, the
Apothecaries do commonly use. Some say it is called (...), quasi (...) i. e.
Rudis Rosa, because of its strong scent, offending the Nose. Allium also
seems to have its Original from the Greek word (...), i. e. exilire, because
of its growth, which is so speedy, that it is said as it were to leap. Galen and
others have called it Theriaca Rusticorum, the Country Man's Treacle. We in
English call it Garlic. Some of this kind are called Scorodoprassum and Moly.

The Kinds.
There are 12 sorts of Garlic mentioned by Authors. 1. Common Garlic. 2.
Crow-Garlick. 3. Ramsons spotted, or Snake-Garlick. 4. Great Turkey Garlic. 5.
Great Turkey Garlic, with a bulbed and twining head. 6. Clusius his first
leafed Hungarian Moly. 7. Sweet smelling Hungarian Moly. 8. Purple round headed
Mountain Moly. 9. Purplish headed Moly of Africa. 10. The small Italian white
Moly. 11. Indian Moly. 12. Ramsons.

The Form.
Omitting the Description of Garden Garlic, because it is so common, I shall
give you that of the wild or Crow Garlic, which the Greeks call (...), that is
Snakes Garlic. It has small, tough, long Leaves, like Rushes, but not so
round, smooth, and hollow within: Amongst which, rises up a naked stalk,
round, slippery, hard, and sound: on the top whereof, after the Flowers be
gone, grow little Seeds, made up in a round cluster, like small Kernells,
having the smell and taste of Garlic. Instead of a Root, there is a bulbe or
round head without any Cloves at all.

The Places and Time.
Garlic is seldom sown of Seed, but planted in Gardens, of the small Cloves,
which are commonly set in March. Some on St. Peter's day, knit the blades
together in a knot, that it may head the better, and is gathered not long
after. The Crow-Garlick grows in fertile Pastures in all parts of England,
particularly in a Field, called the Mantels, on the back side of Islington, by
London. The rest are peculiar to diverse Countries, as Germany, Hungary, France,
Spain, Italy, Turkey, and our Land also, flowring in Summer, and Seeding after.

The Temperature.
It is hot and dry in the fourth Degree, and raises Blisters, being applied to
the skin.

The Virtues.
Garlic being eaten, heateth the Body, makes thin, thick, and gross humors;
cutteth such as are tough, and clammy, digesteth and consumes them: it also
opens Obstructions or stoppings, and is an enemy to cold poison, and to the
biting of venomous Beasts. It takes away the roughness of the Throat, also
helps an old Cough, provokes Urine, kills Worms, expels Wind, helps
the Cholick, cures the Dropsy proceeding of a cold Cause, provokes the
Courses in Women, and stirs up Venus and Lust, but dries the Seed of
Generation, and is most excellent for a cold and moist stomach, and to stir up
natural heat. An old Man by lying in the cold in the Winter season, had almost
lost the innate or natural heat of his stomach, and his appetite was even
decayed, after many hot Medicines used in vain, at length was cured with
Garlic and Honey. It is a good preservative against the contagious and
pestilent Air. A Decoction thereof made with Origanum, and Wine, being drunk,
kills Worm-Lice, and Nits. It is profitable against the biting of a mad Dog,
and for such as are inclined to the Palsy, for shortness of breath, and to
dry up Rheum; and also for the cold Headache. It is commended against the
Consumption of the Lungs, pissing of blood, and for such as cannot hold their
water. The distilled water is good for the same Diseases, and for the Quinsie.
The milk wherein Garlic has been boiled, is good for worms in Children, or
two Ounces of the water may be given morning and evening for a week together,
if need be. The Decoction thereof used for a Bath, or Fume to sit over, brings
down the Flowers and Afterbirth. It cures the bitings of mad Dogs, or the
bitings of any other venomous Creature: being bruised with Rue, and applied, it
takes away the Morphew, Tetters, and cures scabbed Heads in Children,
Dandraffe and Scurf, tempered with Honey, and the parts anointed therewith. The
ashes of Garlic being strowed in Ulcers, heals them. The smell of Garlic
drives away venomous Creatures, and applied with Figs, and Cummin, it cures
the bitings of the Mouse called a Shrew. A Clove of Garlic put into an hollow
Tooth that aketh, eases the pain thereof, or stamp it with Saffron or Pepper,
and hold it between the Teeth; being bruised, and applied to the Throat, it
helps the Quinsey, and swelling thereof. The juice mixed with Saffron and
Goose-grease, cures the noise of the Ears, being put therein. Garlic burned,
and the ashes mingled with Honey, and laid to black and blew marks after
bruises, takes them away, and helps wildfire and Scabs, being bruised and
applied. They usually cure the Pip in Poultry with Garlic; and being given to
Cocks, it makes them to overcome in fighting. Notwithstanding all these
Virtues, raw Garlic eaten too liberally, makes the Eyes dim, offends and
hurts the stomach, causes thirst, hurts the Kidneys, heateth and burns
the blood, yields no nourishment to the body, and is hurtful to young men,
and to such as are hot, and choleric, and in hot seasons: It hurts Women
with Child, and such as give suck. The juice of Garlic, if it be taken in any
great quantity, is rank poison: yet the flesh, and all being eaten together
moderately, is good for such as are cold and moist, and abound with phlegmatic,
gross, and tough humors, for old persons, and in cold seasons. The best way
of preparing it for food, is to boil it thoroughly, and to eat it with Oil,
Vinegar, or such like.

CHAP. LXXIII. Of Liquorice.
The Names.
THe Greeks called it (...); the Latins, Dulcis Radix; the Apothecaries,
Liqueritia. Both the Greek and Latin names are derived from the sweetness of
the Root, without dispute. Theophrastus in his ninth Book of his History of
Plants, calls it Radix Scythica, because it grows very plentifully in
Scythia, about the Lake Maeotis. There be that call it (...), because it
drives away thirst, if it be held in the mouth. There is also a wild sort
hereof called Glanx Leguminosa, sive Glycyrhiza silvestris; Liquorice, vetch.

The Kinds.
To this kind four sorts may be referred. 1. Common Liquorice. 2. Dioscorides
his Liquorice. 3. The most common Liquorice Vetch. 4. Another Liquorice Vetch.

The Form.
Common Liquorice rises up with diverse woody stalks, whereon are set at
several distances, many narrow, long green Leaves, set together on both sides
of the stalk, and an old one at the end, very well resembling a young Ash-Tree
sprung up from the Seed: This by many years continuance in a place without
removing, and not else, will bring forth Flowers, many standing together,
Spike-Fashion one above another, upon the stalks of the form of Pease
Blossoms, but of a very pale blew Color, which turn into long, somewhat flat
and smooth Cods, wherein is contained small round hard seed: the root runs
down a great way into the ground with diverse other smaller roots, and Fibers
growing with them, and shoot out succors from the main roots all about,
whereby it is much increased of a brownish color on the outside, and yellow
within.

The Places and Time.
The first sort of liquorice grows wild in many places of Germany and chiefly
about Noremberg, but it is not comparable to that which is planted with Us in
Gardens here in England, being the best in the world, even by the confession of
those who so much extol outlandish plants, of which there is great profit to
be made as diligent Gardners can tell you; yet now it beginning to become
common is not half so profitable as formerly, many more places being stored
therewith. The second, in France, Spain, Italy and in some few gardens here in
Enland, but flowreth late with Us, and seedeth as late if at all. The third
grows in many places of this Land, as about Cambridge, in Claringdon Park by
Salisbury; and in Butlers close at Adderbury Towns end, as you go to Banbury.
The last grows only in Germany that I can heareof. They flower in July and
the Seed is ripe in September.

The Temperature.
Liquorice is temperate in heat and moisture; and therefore familiar to the
Temperature of Man's body, as also in that it is sweet, and has a little
astriction joined to it, notwithstanding the bark thereof is somewhat bitter,
and hot; but this must be scraped away when it is used; the fresh root when it
is full of Juice does moisten more then dry.

The Virtues.
The Root of Liquorice is good against the rough harshnesse of the Throat and
Breast, it opens the Pipes of the Lungs when they be stuffed or stopped and
ripeneth the Cough, and brings forth Phlegm. The Rob or juice of Liquorice
made according to A^t and hardened into a Lump which is called Succus
Liqueritiae serves well for the purposes aforesaid, being holden under the
tongue, and there suffered to melt; and is profitable also against the heat of
the Mouth and Stomach, and quenches thirst, and is good for green wounds being
laid thereupon. Moreover with the Juice of Liquorice, Ginger and other Spices
with some Wheaten flower, Gingerbread is made which is also very good against a
Cough, and all infirmities of the Breast and Lungs. The same is drunk with the
Wine of Raisins, against the distempers of the Liver and Chest, Scabs or Sores
of Bladder, and diseases of the Kidneys. Liquorice boiled in fair water with
some Maiden^air and Figs makes a good drink for those that have a dry Cough to
digest Phlegm and to expectorate it, or hoarsness, Wheesing, Shortness of
Breath, and for all griefs of the Breast and Lungs, Ptisick or Consumptions,
caused by the distillation of Salt humors on them: it is good also in all
pains of the Reins, the Strangury and heat of the Urine. The Scythians are
said, by chewing this in their mouths to keep themselves from thirst in their
long Journeys through the deserts for ten or twelve days; and stays hunger
also. Liquorice boiled in water with a little Cinnamon added to it, serves
instead of drink in many places, especially if it be set to work with Barm, as
Beer is and then tunned up and will grow clear, strong and heady in time, as
Beer will do. The fine powder of Liquorice blown through a quill into the Eyes,
that have a Pin and Web as they call it, or Rheumatick distillations into them,
does cleanse them and help them. The Juice of Liquorice dissolved in Rose
Water, with some Gum, Tragacanth, is a fine Lohoch, or licking medicine for
hoarsnesse wheesings and all other roughness in the Mouth or Throat; and to
expectorate tough Phlegm, as also to condensate thin rheums, falling on the
Lungs. It is likewise very much used by Farriers and Smiths to put in drenches
for such horses as are hide bound, and do not thrive, or that have gotten a
Cold or any other distemper of the Breast or Lungs; and may also be given to
any other Cattle upon the like occasion.

CHAP. LXXIIII. Of the Fig Tree.
The Names.
THe Tree is called in Greek, (...); and the fruit, (...); in Latin Ficus both
Tree and Fruit: the wild Fig Tree is called in Greek, (...) and (...) by Galen
and others; in Latin Ficus Sylvestris; and Caprificus: the unripe fruit of the
manured, as also of the wild kind is called in Greek (...), and in Latin
Grossus: but properly Olynthus as well as Grossus does signify the early ripe
of each sort: the dried Figs are called in Greek, (...) and of some (...) as
Paulus Aeginetus and others, in Latin Caricae: the grains of small kernels
within the Fig are called by the Greeks (...); and by the Latins Ficaria: the
Greeks call the early Figs, (...) quasi praecursores, the Latins praecoces and
Grossi, the Branches of the tree are called Cradae both in Greek and Latin;
yet Nicander his Interpreter does call the Figs so.

The Kinds.
Of ordinary Fig Trees, that grow in Europe, and bear eating Figs, there be
four sorts. 1. The ordinary Fig Tree. 2. The wild Fig Tree. 3. The Fig Tree
that bears blew Figs early ripe. 4. The Dwarf Fig Tree.

The Form.
The ordinary Fig Tree, is usually planted against a Wall; and therefore to be
conceived of no extraordinary bigness, with a grayish rugged bark on the body
and elder boughs, and green on the younger which are hollow, and pithy in the
middle: the leaves grow single on the Branches, being long, large, thick, rough
and of a sad green color on the upperside, whitish underneath, divided into
three, but usually into five parts; yielding a sharp bitter, and almost
exulcerating milk when they are broken, as the branches and Figs also will do
when they are green: the fruit breaks out from the branches without any
flower or blossom, and are both of sundry colors, of several sizes, and
ripening at contrary times of the year: as also with thicker or thinner skins
that cover them. Those that are most ordinary are white, and of a reasonable
bigness.

The Places and Time.
The manured Fig Tree grows plentifully in Italy and Spain, but not without
planting: where the fruit being gathered before it be over ripe, is laid in the
Sun to dry that it may be the better to keep all the year after, and is
thence transported into other countries: And so are the blew Figs which grow
there also; but not so commonly, whose Tree as it is thought came out of
Barbary. They bear ripe fruit both in the Spring, and in August or September.
We have them in diverse Gardens of this Land, but the fruit though many times it
appear before the leaves; yet seldom comes to perfection, unless it be
planted under a hot Wall.

The Temperature.
The Fig Tree is hot and of thin parts; which the milk that issues from the
Leaves and Branches being broken, and the juice taken from them by press^ing
them when they are young, does plainly declare; being exceeding hot not only
biting and sharp, or forcibly cleansing, but even exulcerating and offending
the mouths of the Veins; and therefore it is not safe to be taken inwardly. Yea
the branches of the Tree are of such an hot temper, that if they be put to
boil with Beef that is hard, it will thereby become tender and soft: the wild
Fig Tree and the Milk thereof is more effectual then that of the manured. The
Figs themselves are hot and moist in the second, or almost in the third degree
and nourish well; yet the dried better then the green.

The Virtues and Signature.
A decoction of Figs is good for the Cough Lungs and throat, as also against
shortness of breath, especially if it be boiled with Hyssop and Liquorish,
they are good for the Reins and Bladder; and to recover a good Color to them
that by long Sickness have lost it, and useful also in the Dropsy,
Falling Sickness, Quinsie, and for the infirmities of the womb where cleansing
is required: they expel all superfluous humors from the inward parts to the
circumference and therefore useful to Expel Pox, Measells, and such like
venomous matter to the skin. Figs stamped with salt, Rue, and the kernels of
Nuts, withstand Poison and corruption of the Air. They are best fasting, or
when the Stomach is empty. Toasted Figs are good for women to hasten, and
facilitate the Birth. Figs bruised and applied with Barley Meal, and the powder
of Fennygreek seed do mollify the hard tumors and Kernells under the Throat
and Ears, and elsewhere by Signature; as also the hardness of the Muther; and
if some Leaven and Salt be put to them, it breaks Plague sores; and, it may
be, was the same that cured Hezekiah. They are also mixed with Copperas against
old sores of the Legs, and all other foul running Ulcers: being boiled in Wine
with Wormwood, and then applied with Barley Meal to the bellies of them that
have a Dropsy, helps them very much; and beaten with Salt applied, takes
away the Itch and Scab, and the ashes of the wood made up with Hogs Grease and
applied, heals Kibes and Chilblaines. Figs bruised with Fennygreek, and
Vinegar eases the Hot Gout of the Feet. A Fig, slit and toasted, does
oftentimes ease the Toothache being applied. The milk that issues out from the
Leaves or Branches when they are broken off being dropped upon Warts, takes
them away. The decoction of Fig Leaves does also avail much to do away any
other malady that in^ects the hands, by Signature; the Leaf being commonly
divided into five parts, as the hand into five fingers; and because the hand is
a place full of joints it has therefore been applied to the Joints that have
been pained, and found e^fectual. The same is likewise excellent good to wash
sore heads withal; neither is there scarcely a better remedy for a Leprosy
then it is; it clears the ^ace also of the Morphew, and the body of white
Scurffe, moist Scabs, and running sores: If it be dropped into old fretting
Ulcers, it cleanses out the moisture and brings up the flesh: and because
the green leaves are not to be had in winter, an Ointment may be made of them
in the Summer for the same purpose. The Juice being put into an hollow Tooth
eases the pain, and is an effectual Remedy for pain and noise in the ears,
and also for deafness if it be dropped into them. A Syrup made of Fig leaves
taken inwardly, dissolves congealed Blood caused by bruises or falls, and helps
the bloody Flux; An ointment made of the Juice of Hogs grease, is as excellent
a Remedy for the biting of a mad Dog, or any venomous Creature, as any is. A
Syrup made of the leaves or green fruit, is excellent good for Coughs,
Hoarseness or shortness of Breath, and all diseases of the Breast and Lungs.
Some say that the Fig Tree as well as the Bay tree is never hurt by Lightning;
as also that a Bull, if he be never so mad being tied to a Fig tree will become
tame and gentle, and that it prospers the better if Rue be set near unto it.
The blew Fig is no doubt of the same operation with the white to all purposes,
but the fruit comes most to maturity with us, and is eaten as a pretty Junket
with Salt and Pepper, for unless they be so eaten, or some Wine drunk after
them to digest them, they pass not quickly out of the Stomach, but putrify
therein; and do sometimes put the party eating them in danger of a Fever. Dry
Figs also immoderately eaten do engender Crude and windy humors in the Body,
and soon corrupt in the Stomach, whereby they cause Itch, Scab, and breed Lice
also. They hurt such as have the Cholick and windy diseases, and that have hot
Livers and Choleric Stomachs; they are best for old Phlegmatic persons, and
in cold and moist seasons. They are commonly eaten with Almonds, and so they
cleanse the Breast and Lungs the better, by a special Virtue they have; Two or
three Figs slit, and laid all night in Aqua Vitae, are very good for those that
are pursy, and short winded if taken in the morning.

CHAP. LXXV. Of Hyssop.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), which as some think takes its name quasi (...)
(pro (...) quia super vultus affunditur, because the face being washed with the
Decoction or distilled water thereof, is made fairer, it being of a very
abstersive quality; And therefore David Prays God to purge him with Hyssop,
and in Schola Salerni, it is commended for the same purposes in these words
Vultibus eximium fertur praestare colorem. It is called in Latin Hyssopus; and
of Us, Hyssop.

The Kinds.
I find fifteen sorts of Hyssop set down by Parkinson. 1. Ordinary Garden
Hyssop. 2. White Hyssop. 3. Golden or yellow Hyssop. 4. Russet Hyssop. 5.
Double Hyssop. 6. Broad leafed Hyssop. 7. Jagged or dented Hyssop. 8. Musked
Hyssop. 9. Red flowered Hyssop. 10. Dwarf Spanish Hyssop. 11. Tufted Hyssop.
12. Curled Hyssop. 13. Mountain wild Hyssop. 14. Narrow leafed Hyssop. 15.
Round Leafed Hyssop.

The Form.
The Common Garden Hyssop, is a plant that rises sometimes to be about a foot
high, with many woody branches, but render; at the tops whereof are set at
certain distances, sundry small long and narrow green Leaves: at the tops of
the stalks stand bluish purple gaping flowers in spiked heads, one row above
another; after which follow the seed which is small and blackish; the root is
somewhat woody with many threddy strings; The whole plant is of a strong sweet
sent, and is fit to be strewed in windows, and such places.

The Places and Time.
Our common Hyssop grows naturally upon the hills of Romania, about Verona,
and near unto mount Baldus. The Dwarf kind in Spain, and the mountain wild
kind, on the hills in many places of Germany; and, as Matthiolus says, on the
hill Salvatia, in the Country of Goritia: the rest are nursed up in the gardens
of those that are Lovers of curious Simples. They do all flower in June and
July, and their seed is ripe in the beginning or middle of August.

The Temperature.
Hyssop is hot and dry in the third degree; and therefore must needs be of thin
parts. It cutteth and breaks tough Phlegm, it ratifieth or makes thin that
which is thick and gross, it opens that which is stopped, and cleanses that
which is corrupt.

The Virtues.
A Decoction made of Rue and Honey, being drunk does help those that are
troubled with Coughs, shortness of Breath, Wheesings and rheumatick
Distillations upon the Lungs: taken also with Oxymel, or water and Honey, it
purges gross humors by the stool; and with Honey kills Worms in the Belly.
It amendeth the native color of the Body spoiled by the yellow Jaundise,
helps the Dropsy and the Spleen, if it be taken with Figs and Nitre. It is
good in the Falling Sickness, provokes Urine, expels Wind; and brings down
Women's Courses, and eases sharp fits of Agues. The Distilled water is good for
the same diseases; especially, those that proceed from a cold, if the quantity
of a quarter of a pint, be warmed and drunk with Sugar at night when one goes
to bed; but the Decoction, as also the Syrup is more effectual. It takes away
black and blew spots, and marks that came by strokes, bruises, or falls being
boiled and the places bathed therewith. It is an excellent medicine for the
Quinsie to wash and gargle the Throat, being boiled with Figs: it helps the
Toothach, being boiled in Vinegar and the mouth gargled therewith: the hot
Vapors of the Decoction, taken by a Funnel in at the Ears eases the
Inflammations of them; and as Mesue says, the singing noise of them also:
Being bruised, and Salt, Honey, and Cummin-Seed put to it, it helps those
that are stung by Serpents. The green Herb bruised, and a little Sugar put to
it, does quickly heal any green Wound or Cut in the Hand, or elsewhere. The
Oil thereof kills Lice, and takes away the itching of the Head, if it be
anointed therewith. It helps those that have the Falling Sickness, which way
soever it be applied: It helps to expectorate tough phlegm, and is effectual
in all cold griefs or Diseases of the Chest and Lungs, being taken either in a
Syrup, or licking Medicine. There is also a Wine made of Hyssop, named
Hyssop-Wine, which is good for the purposes aforesaid; and there may be
Hyssop-Ale, made after the manner of Sage-Ale, by adding an Ounce or two of
good Liquorice.

CHAP. LXXVI. Of Ragwort.
The Names.
IT has no Greek name, being an Herb, but of later knowledge; for if it had
been formerly known, we should find it mentioned by some ancient, Greek, or
Latin Author, or other, which we cannot do, unless you would, as some do,
refer it to the (...), Erigerum of D^oscorides, which the Latins ca^ Senecio,
and therefore Lobel calls it Jacobaea Senecio. Tragus, Matthiolus, and others
call it Flos Sti Jacobi, and Herba Sti Jacobi. Dodonaeus and the latest Writers
Jacobaea; for what cause I know not, unless it be, because it flourishrisheth
about St. Iames-tide. Some have taken the Sea kind to be Arthemisia Marina, or
a species of it, because the divi^^on of the Leaves is somewhat like the
Arthemisia vulgaris. Others call it Cineraria and Argentea, from the whiteness
of the Leaves, which show like silver, or as though they were covered with
Ashes, and is usually with Us, called Jacobaea marina and maritima, Sea-Ragwort
in English, and Rag-weed, by some Country people, from the raggedness of the
Leaf.

The Kinds.
Of Ragwort there be nine sorts. 1. The Greater common Ragwort. 2. The lesser
common Ragwort. 3. The first Hungarian broad leafed Ragwort. 4. The other
broad-leafed Hungarian Ragwort. 5. Smooth leafed Ragwort. 6. Round leafed hoary
Ragwort. 7. The common Sea-Ragwort. 8. The lesser Sea-Ragwort 9. Broad leafed
Sea-Ragwort.

The Form.
The greater common Rag-wort, has many large, and long dark green Leaves,
lying on the ground, very much rent and torn on the sides, into many pieces:
from among which, rises up sometimes but one, and sometimes two or three
square or crested, blackish or brownish stalks, two or three foot high,
sometimes branched, bearing diverse such like leaves upon them, at several
distances unto the tops, where it brancheth forth into many stalks, bearing
yellow Flowers, consisting of diverse Leaves, set as a pale or border, with a
dark yellow thrum in the middle, which do abide a great while; but in the end,
growing full ripe, are turned into down, which with the small, blackish gray
Seed, is carried away with the wind: the Root is made of many Fibers, some
greater, and others lesser, whereby it is firmly fastened into the ground, and
abides many years.

The Place and Time.
The two first Sorts grow wild in pastures, and untilled Grounds, in many
places, and both together in one Field often times: the three next grow in
Hungary, and Austria: the sixth grew in some parts of France, but it is not
expressed where: the seventh grows on our own Coasts, not far from the Sea,
in the Isles of Sheppey and Thanet, and along the Kentish shore in many places:
the eighth grows on the Mediterranean Seashore of Italy, and other places,
as by the Sea side in Zeland: the last is mentioned by Bauhinus, but he
expresses not the place where it grows. Diverse of them are nursed up by
diverse Herbarists, and are to be seen in the Physick-Gardens at Oxford, and
Westminster. They flower in June and July, and their Seed is ripe in August.

The Temperature.
Ragwort is hot and dry in the second Degree, as some think, with some
bitterness joined therewith; and therefore cleanses, digesteth, and
discusseth.

The Virtues.
The Decoction of Ragwort is very much commended to wash the Mouth or Throat,
that have Ulcers and Sores therein; and for swellings, hardness, or
impostumations; for it thoroughly cleanses and heals them: as also the
Quinsey and the Kings Evil. It does help to stay Catarrhes, thin Rheums and
Defluxions from the Head, into the Eyes, Nose or Lungs. The Juice is found by
continual experience, to be singular good, both to heal green wounds, and to
cleanse and heal all old and filthy Ulcers, as well in the Privities, as in
other parts of the Body, and inward Wounds and Ulcers also, and stays the
malignity of fretting or running Cankers, and hollow Fistulaes, not suffering
them to spread further. It is much commended also, to help Aches and pains,
either in the fleshy parts, or in the Nerve and Sinews: as also the Sciatica,
or pain of the Hips, or Hucklebone, to bathe the places with the decoction of
the Herb, or to anoint them with an Ointment made of the Herb, bruised and
boiled in old Hogs-Suet, with some Mastick and Olibanum in Powder, added unto
it, after it is strained forth, and not before; for otherwise it would be to
little or no purpose. It is held also to be a certain remedy to help the
Staggers in Horses, and upon that account, some call it Stagger-wort, and
indeed it is not without a Signature thereof: the unevenness of the edges of
the Leaves, being like unto those uneven motions which Horses make in that
Disease.

CHAP. LXXVI. Of Plantaine.
The Names.
THE general appellation that the Greeks have bestowed upon this excellent
Simple, is (...), Arnoglossum, which they were enduced to do from the form
which it does somewhat represent, to wit, of a Lambs Tongue* It is called in
Latin Plantage, ^u^to a Planta vocabulo, as if this were the Plant of Plants,
as indeed it is; It is divided also by the Greeks into (...), and (...), which
the Latins call Septinervia and Quinquenervia, the first having seven Ribs,
Nerves, or Veins, the other five; The general English name is Plantaine; but
that which the Greeks call Eptaneuron, we call Way-bred, because it commonly
breeds by the way sides; and that which they call Pentaneuron* we call
Ribbewort, and Ribbew^rt Plantaine, the Latins calling it Plantago
angustifolia, from the narrowness of the Lease, as they do the other
Latif(...), because it is broader.

The Kinds.
The sorts of Plantaine which are most remarkable, are ten. 1 Common Way^^ed or
Plantaine. 2 The greatest Plantaine. 3 Hoary Plantaine. 4 Rose Plantain. 5
Besome Plantaine or Plantaine with spoky tufts. 6 The greater Ribwort or
Ribwort Plantaine. 7 The lesser Ribwort. 8 Rose Ribwort. 9 Great Water
Plantaine. 10 Dwarf Water Plantaine.

The Form.
The common Waybred bears many fair broad and almost round Leaves, saving
that they are a little pointed at the end with seven ribs or sinews in most of
them, running from the one end of the Leaf to the other, of a saddish green
color on the upperside, but more inclining to yellow underneath; from amongst
which do rise up diverse small slender stalks of about a foot high, naked and
bare of Leaves up to the top, whereon grows a blackish green spike or scaly
head, with blossoms like unto those of Corn, after which comes the seed,
which being small, is enclosed in those little husks; The Root is made of many
white little strings, whereby it takes fast hold in the ground.

The Places and Time.
The first grows by those ways and paths that are made through Pastures and
Meadows in most places of this Land; The second about Mompelier; The third is
of our own Land, but not so frequently as the first; The fourth grows in St.
John Danvers his Garden at Chelsey; The sixth and seventh grow very plentifully
in Meadows, Fields, and sometimes in Gardens, without invitation or welcome,
though they be as useful as any there; The eight is found also in this Land,
but so rarely, that it is taken into the best Gardens; The two last grow in
silent Rivers and standing Waters; They flower in the Summer Months of May,
June, and July.

The Temperature.
All the sorts of Plantaine are cold and dry in the second degree; The Roots
and Seed which is of subtle parts, are not altogether so cold as the Leaves.

The Signatures and Virtues.
Although Plantaine be beneficial to all the parts of the Body, both inward
and outward, yet because the Mouth is the first part, whereinto it is commonly
received, I have appropriated thereunto, and the rather because it has the
Signature of the Tongue, which is not only expressed by the outward Form
thereof, but also by the Sinews and Vein* that run thorough it; And therefore
it avails very much in diverse diseases of the Tongue, whether they happen
from wounds, as biting, cutting, or the like, or from inflammations of that or
any other part adjacent, as the Mouth, Gums, Throat, etc. as also from the
Cankers, or any other eating sore, the decoction, juice or water thereof being
often gargled in the mouth, or especially, a little Vinegar, Honey and Allome
being mixed therewith; The juice or Herb stays the bleeding of the Nose, or
the bleeding of wounds; The clarified Juice or Water thereof dropp^d into the
eye, cools the heat thereof, as also the Pin and Web thereof, and dropped into
the ears, eases the pains therein, and helps deafness; The same with the
juice of House-leeke, is very profitably applied against all inflammation, and
breakings out of the skin, and against burnings or scalding by Fire or Water;
The juice mixed with the Oil of Roses, and the Temples and Forehead anointed
therewith, eases the pains of the head, proceeding from heat, and helps
frantic and lunatic persons very much, as also the biting of Serpents or a
mad Dog; The clarified juice drunk for diverse days together by it self,
or with some other liquor, is wonderful good to stay spitting of blood, and
all other bleedings at the Mouth, when a vein is broken at the mouth of the
Stomach; and is likewise effectual to heal any Ulcer in the Reins or Bladder,
when bloody or foul water proceeds therefrom; It is held also an especial
remedy for those that have the Consumption of the Lungs, or that are troubled
with any Ulcer in that part, or that have Coughs that come with Heat; The same
also is commended very much against all torments and frettings in the Guts,
stays the Courses, and all other manner of Fluxes, as well in Man as Woman;
The decoction or powder of the Root or Seed is much more binding then the
Herb, whereby it helps Agues; The seed made into powder and mixed with the
yolk of an Egg and some wheaten flower, and made into a Cake and baked, does
stay vomiting, or any other Flux or rising in the Stomach; The herb, but
especially the Seed is likewise held to be profitable against the Dropsy,
Falling Sickness, Yellow Jaundise, and the stoppings of the Liver or Reins;
The powder of the dried Leaves taken in warm drink or Posset drink, kills
worms in the Belly; The juice of the Leaves mixed with oil of Roses is
profitably applied to all hot Gouts in the Hands or Feet, especially in the
beginning to cool the heat and repress the humors; It is also good to be
applied where any bone is out of Joint, to hinder Inflammations, Swellings, and
pains which will arise presently thereupon; A decoction of the Leaves kills
Worms that breed in old and foul Ulcers. One part of Plantaine-Water and two
parts of the brine of powdered beef boiled together and clarified, is a most
sure remedy to heal all spreading Scabs and Itch in the Head or Body, all
manner of Tetters or Ringwormes, the Shingles, and all other running and
fretting sores; The Leaves laid upon any place where the skin is scratched of,
skinneth it again, whether it be newly done or not; and being made into a Salve
with Oil, Wax and Turpentine, it cures deep wounds, though the Sinews and
Veins be cut asunder, whereof it has the Signature; The juice alone, or
stamped with Vinegar, and applied to the Feeet, that surbated sore, and swollen
with travel, brings them again to their right temper.

CHAP. LXXVII. Of Columbines.
The Names.
THere is great contesting amongst Authors concerning this Plant, whether it
were known to the Ancients or not; One will have it to be the Pothos of
Theophrastus, another his Diosanthos, another would have it to be the Isopyrum
of Dioscorides, but Cornutus affirms point blanck that it was not known; It is
generally called by the Writers of a later date Aquileia, Aquilina and
Aquilegia, because the folds of the Leaves do somewhat resemble those Pipes
called Aquileges, which were made as Pliny mentions, for the conveying of
water, which they also contain in them, as Cornu^us seems to infer,
especially from that sort of his which came from Canada; That this Plant should
have likeness of properties with wild O^tes, called in Greek Aegilops, seems
to be altogether improbable; It knows no other English name but Columbines.

The Kinds.
To set forth the varieties of Columbines according to their colors, would be
the Task of a Flourish; I shall only give you those which have different Terms,
and they are six. 1 Single Columbines. 2. Double Columbines. 3 Double inverted
Columbines. 4 Rose Columbines. 5 Degenerate Columbines. 6 Columbines of
Virginia.

The Form.
The Columbine has diverse pretty large spread Leaves standing upon stalks,
about a foot long, when they are at their full growth, every one being divided
into diverse parts with large indentures upon the edges, of a dark bluish green
color, a little resembling Celandine, from amongst which arise stalks,
sometimes two or three foot high, divided usually into many branches, bearing
one long divided leaf at the lower joint, above which the flowers grow, every
one standing on a long stalk, consisting of five hollow Leaves, crooked or
horned at the ends, and turning backwards; The flowers being past, there arise
small long Cods four or five together, wherein are contained black shining
seeds; The Roots are thick and round for a little space within the ground,
they abide many years sending forth their Leaves in the beginning of the
Spring; I mentioned not the color of the flowers because they are so variable.

The Places and Time.
The first sort has been found to grow wild in the woody mountains of Germany,
but with us they are found only in Gardens, as the rest are, their place being
otherwise unknown, only that of the last, which was brought from Virginia, by
that industrious searcher after rarities Mr. Tredescant the elder; They flower
commonly about the end of April, and the beginning of May, perish before the
end of June, only the Virginian kind flowreth a Month sooner then ordinary.

The Temperature.
Columbines are said to be temperate in respect of coldness and dryness, and
moderately digesting.

The Virtues.
Every good Housewife in the Country, is hardly now to learn that Columbine
Leaves have in them a faculty wherey they are found very effectual, if they be
boiled in Milk and given to those that are troubled with sore Mouths o^
Throats; but there be other ways of using them for the like purposes, as for
the Kanker, Red gum, Quinsie, Kings-evill, etc. For the Water Canker in the
Mouth, drink the seed; For the Quinsie, drink the seeds often with good Ale, or
stamp the seeds and herbs with Honey, and take it with milk or drink; It is
good for young Children to drink it against the Red gum; To help the Struma, or
painful swelling in the Throat, called the Kings evil, sees it in milk,
sweet wine, or Oxymel, and drink it, or gargle therewith; It is good also for
the inflammations and sores of the jaws and Windpipe, and likewise against the
Jaundise and sounding; besides it opens the Liver; Against the Jaundise and
stopping of the Liver, and the several diseases that may come thereof, drink a
dram of the seed, and a half penny weight of Saffron, with Wine, and be laid
well covered to sweat; The juice of Columbines being drunk in the beginning of
a Frenzy, and the party use Pottage of Sage, Valerian or Rue, it helps him;
The decoction both of the Herb and Root being made in white Wine, and some
Ambergrise put thereto, is with good success used by those that are given to
swo^^ings; Camerarius says, that the Root eaten for many days together in the
morning fasting, helps those that are troubled with the Stone in the Reins
or Kidneys; The seed taken in Wine, causes a speedy delivery to Women in
Childbirth, and if the first draught do not take effect, take a second, and
th^^ will; The seeds drunk with Featherfew, in stale Ale, causes those Joints
that are broken to knit again with the greater speed, and the juice with
wheat-Meal applied warm, dries up moist humors in Boyles and Sores.

Seeing there is another Plant somewhat like in Form to Columbines, I have
thought fit to set it down here at the foot of this Chapter, after them, as
not meeting with a fi^^er place.

IT is called in Greek (...) and (...), Thalictrum and Thalietrum, from (...),
vireo, from the liveliness of the green color of the young Leaves, and so it
is called in Latin, as also Pseudorhabarbarum, Bastard Rubarbe, both because
the Roots of it are yellow, and from its purging and binding quality, both
joined together, as in the true Rubarbe; Others call it Ruta pratensis, because
the Leaves are a little like Rue; But in English it is most commonly called
Meadow Rubarbe, of which there be two sorts. 1 Meadow Rubarbe. 2 Spanish Meadow
Rubarbe. The ordinary Meadow Rubarbe or Meadow Rue, as some will have it, is of
a middle size, between Columbines and Rue, that I need not say any more
thereof. It grows in diverse Meadows and particularly in that between Oxford
and Isley; The Spanish Meadow Rubarbe, though it be most frequent in Spain,
yet it grows in England, also about Marget; They flower about July; They are a
little hot and drying withal, and therefore as Dioscorides says, being
bruised and applied to old Sores, it brings them to a perfect cure, and the
distilled Water of the Herbs and Flowers does the like; some use to put this
herb amongst other Pot Herbs to help, to move or open the belly, or make it
soluble, but the Roots washed clean, and boiled in Ale and drunk, does provoke
to the Stool more then the Leaves, but yet very gently; The decoction of the
Roots is very much commended for the destroying of Lice and Vermin, if the
body of the party so affected be well washed therewith.

CHAP. LXXVII. Of Cudweed.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Gnaphalium, and so likewise the Latin, because
the Ancients used it, (...), that is, instead of flocks, which come from Cloth,
by the dressing of the Fuller, to stuff their Beds with; (...), in Greek,
signifying to dress Cloth, as Fullers do, or sheare or toase wool. It has
also diverse other Latin Names, as Centunculus, and Centuncularis, from Cento,
which in Latin signifies, a covering made with course Wool, or Flocks,
whereunto this Plant has so much likeness; Tomentum Tomentaria and
Tomentitia, Cottonaria sive Bombax humilis, especially the Sea-kind, Filago and
Herba impia, Herb Impious, because no Beast will taste thereof, as Pliny says:
as also that it was called Camaezelon, as some Copies have it, or rahter
Camaexylon, the low Bombast or Cotton-Plant, and Albinum from the whiteness. In
English it is called Cudweed or Cottonweed.

The Kinds.
The Sorts of Cudweed which I meet with are ten. 1. Our great common Cudweed.
2. The lesser Cudweed, or Herb Impious. 3. Another lesser Cudweed. 4. The
lesser broad leafed Cudweed. 5. Small leaning Cudweed. 6. The great Cudweed of
America, commonly called Livelong; or life everlasting. 7. Mountain Cudweed, or
Cats-foot. 8. Sweet smelling, white flowred Cudweed. 9. The greater German
Cudweed. 10. Sea Cudweed, or Cotton-weed.

The Form.
The common Cudweed rises up, but with one stalk sometimes, and sometimes two
or three, thick set on all sides, with small, long, and narrow, whitish, or
woolly Leaves from the middle of the stalk, almost to the top: from amongst
which do grow small Flowers, of a dun or brownish yellow color, like those of
the small Conyza, or Fleabane: in the Heads of which, after the Flowers are
fallen, comes small Seed, wrapped up with the Down therein, and is carried
away with the wind: the Root is small and threddy.

The Places and Time
The three first grow every where almost in this Land, especially in barren,
dry, sandy, and gravelly Grounds. The Mountain- Cudweed has been found in
Scosby Leas, near Donkester, and in Sherewood Forest near Bescot Park path,
and no where else. The sweet smelling white flowred Cudweed, grows on a
goodly Heath, by Barneck: the rest are found in the like places, beyond the
Seas, only the last is found upon the West Seacoasts of our Land, in diverse
places, as well as in others, although smaller, which makes it to seem another
sort. They do all flower about July, and their Seed is ripe in August.

The Temperature.
These Herbs are all of them astringent, or of a binding, or drying quality.

The Virtues.
Pliny says, that the Juice of the Herb Impious, or lesser Cudweed, taken in
Wine or Milk, is a Sovereign against the Mumps and Quinsey; and further says,
that it is mavelous, what is reported of it, that whosoever shall take it,
shall never be troubled with that Disease again. Cudweed is also profitable for
Defluxions of Rheum from the Head, into any other part, and to stay Fluxes of
blood, wheresoever, either at the Nose, or mouth, or by siege, which is the
Bloody Flux; and eases the torments that come thereby, the decoction being
made into red Wine, and drunk, or the Powder taken therein. It stays also the
immoderate Courses of Women, and is also good for inward or outward Wounds,
hurts and bruises, as the Western Country people do daily find by experience;
and helps Children of burstings, and the Worms, and the Disease called
Tenasmus, (which is an often supposed provocation to the stool, and doing
nothing) to be either drunk, or injected, or otherwise. The green Leaves
bruised, and laid, or bound to any green wound, stays the bleeding, and
heals it up quickly: the Decoction or Juice thereof, does the same, and does
help all old and filthy Ulcers quickly. Most of them also may be used for a
week, in Lamps, etc. to burn* but especially, that which grows by the
Seaside. When the Hoggs were troubled with tuberous Baggs of corruption about
their Necks, the Country people were formerly wont to give them of the Herb
Impious boiled in Milk, or the like, and they observed that which soever of
them refused to take it, would assuredly die.

CHAP. LXXVIII. Of Jews Ears.
The Names.
AMongst other Simples, there is an Excressence of the Elder, or Bore-tree,
which I shall treat of a part from the Tree it self, and with it put a period
to those things that are appropriated to the Throat, it being of so great use
for this part, whereas the Elder it self is available to many others.
Notwithstanding, I think that the Grecians took so little notice of it, that
they scarcely afforded it a Name. It is called in Latin, Fungus Sambucinus,
and Auricula Juda; some having supposed the Elder-tree, to be that whereon
Judas hanged himself, and that ever since these Mushromes, like unto Eats,
have grown thereon, which I will not persuade you to believe. It is called in
English, Jews Ears, the Mushrome of the Elder; by some the Gelly, and by
others the Sponge, growing upon the Elder.

The Kinds.
My Lord Bacon in his natural History says, that Jewes-E^res grow upon other
Trees, besides the Elder, as the Ash, Fir, etc. but I suppose he was mistaken.
There are sometimes growing on those Trees, certa^n Mushromes, but like to
Jewes-Eares, neither in form, nor virtue, and therefore not to be called by
that Name.

The Form.
This Excrescence called Jewes-Eares, is a soft and limber Mushrome, which
while it is fresh, is not very thick, but transparent, and of a blackish
color, of differing forms and sizes; for some will be swollen and puffed up, in
one place more then in another, having some resemblance to a Man's Ear; some
thin on the edge, and thick in the middle; and some two or three growing
together: all of them being dried, become of a blackish, gray color, and then
may be kept a whole year, or more, safe without spoiling, to be used as you
need.

The Places and Times
Jewes-Eares grow as I said, upon the Elder-tree, but not so frequently upon
them in other places, as upon those that are planted upon Cony-Boroughs, for
their shadow and shelter. I understand not, but they may be found there at any
time of the Year.

The Temperature.
Gerard says, that the jelley of the Elder, otherwise called Jewes-Eares, has
a binding and drying quality.

The Virtues.
Dr. Martin Blochwich, Physician-Ordinary of Oshatin, in his ingenious Tract,
called the Anatomy of Elder, says, that even common Country Women, so soon as
they suspect any Disease in the Throat of their young Children, they steep the
Sponge of Elder in their Drink: and when it is swelled, they therewith
carefully wipe away all the filth of the Palate, Gums and Tongue. It is likewise
used for the same purpose, being boiled in Ale or Milk, with Columbine Leaves,
and with a little Pepper, and Pellitory of Spain in Powder, it helps to put
up the U^^la, or Palate of the Mouth, being fallen down. Take of the water, or
Decoction of Elder-Flowers, wherein a little Elder-Honey has been mixed, and
add thereunto some Leaves of Self-heal, and a Jews Ear or two, and you will
find it a sure Experiment for the Quinsey. And a Lohoch, or licking of the Rhob
of Elder, inspislated with Sugar, with some pulverised Jewes-Eares added
thereunto, is commodious. The distilled water of Jewes-Eares, is very
profitable for the Dropsy, according to Cr^lli^s de signaturis rer^^, and a
drink made by sleeping three whole dried Umbels of Elder Flowers, and two
Jewes-Eares, very well dried in two quarts of White Wind, if it be used, and no
other drink: the tumor will vanish away suddenly. An handful of Jewes-Eares
infused in a quart of the Spirit of Wine, and a full draught thereof given to
one that is troubled with the suffocation of the Matrix, in the time of her
fit, cures her. The Powder of the Grains of Elder, being mixed with an equal
part of Jewes-Eares is commended in spitting blood.

CHAP. LXXIX. Of Elecampane.
The Names.
HAving appropriated several Simples, to the inside and outside of the Throat,
the Breast comes next in Order to be provided for, both internally, and
externally, to which there is nothing more proper then Elecampane, which is
called in Greek, (...), Helenium also in Latin; and of some Inula and Enula,
and Enula Campana: some think it took the name from the tears of Helen, from
whence it sprung, which is a Fable; others say it was so called, because Helen
first found it available against biting and stingings of venomous Beasts; and
others think, it took its name from the Island Helena where the best was found
to grow. We in English call it Elecampane generally, yet in some Countries of
this Land, it is called Sabwort and Horse-heal.

The Kinds.
To this Plant, which otherwise would be single, do some refer the Flowers of
the Sun, as 1. The greater flower of the S^^* 2. The lesser flower of the Sun.
3. The Male flower of the Sun. 4. The Marigold Sun flower.

The Form.
Elecampane shoots forth many large leaves lying near the ground, which are
long and broad, but small at both ends; somewhat soft in handling of a whitish
green on the upper side; and gray underneath, each set upon a short footstalk:
From amongst which, ri^e ^p diverse great and strong hairy stalks, two or three
foot high with some leaves thereon compassing them about at the lower ends, and
are branched toward the tops bearing diverse great and large flowers like unto
those of the flower of the Sun of which it is said to be a kind, as I said
before; both the border of the leaves and the middle Thrum being yellow, which
is not wholly converted into large seed, as in the flower of the Sun; but
turns into Down with some long small brownish seed among it, and is carried
away with the wind: the R^^t is great and thick, branched forth diverse ways,
blackish on the outside, and white within, of a very bitter taste but good sent
especially when it is dried, no part else of the plant having any smell.

The Places and Time.
This is one of the Plants, whereof England may boast as much as any: for there
grows none better in the world then in England; let Apothecaries and
Druggeists say what they will. It grows in Meadows that are fat and fruitful,
as in Parsons Meadow by Adderbury as I have been told, and in diverse other
places about Oxfordshire. It is found also upon the Mountains and shadowy
places that be not altogether dry: it grows plentifully in the fields on the
left hand as you go from Dunstable to Puddle hill. Also in an Orchard as you go
from Col^r^^ to Ditton Ferry, which is in the way from London to Windsor and in
diverse places in Wales, particularly in the Orchard of Mr. Peter Piers at
Guieruigron near St. Asaphs. The flowers are in their beauty in June and July,
the best time to gather their roots is in Autumn, when the leaves fall: yet it
may be gathered in the Spring before they come forth.

The Temperature.
Elecampane is hot and dry in the third degree, especially the dried root which
is of greatest use; for before when it is green, and as yet full of Juice, the
hot and dry quality is not so eminent.

The Virtues.
Elecampane opens the Breast, and helps shortness of Wind caused by tough
Phlegm stopping the Lungs. Also it opens the Opilations of the Liver and
Spleen, and comfort the Stomach; as says, Schola Salerni, Enula Campana
reddit praecordia sana. A Decoction of the Root is good against poison and
bitings of Serpents: for such as have Ruptures, Cramps, and Convulsions, or
have any member out of joint, and for the Hip-Gout; The same or the Juice taken
kills all manner of Worms, in the belly or stomach, and is good for them that
spit blood, or have inward bruises. The roots canded, or the Conserve taken
does warm a cold and windy Stomach; and helps the pricking and s^tiches
therein, or in the sides caused by the Spleen, and, to help the Cough,
shortness of breath, and wheesings in the Lungs. The dried Roots mixed with
Sugar, and taken, serve for the same purposes; and is also good for those that
are troubled with the Muther, and is, in the Plague and putrified Fevers, very
useful. The Roots and leaves bruised, and put into Ale or Beer, and daily
drunk, clears, strengthens, quickneth the sight of the Eyes wonderfully.
The Root bruised and applied helps Gouts, Cramps, or Convulsions, loosnesse
and pains in the Joints, or those members that are out of joint, by cold or
moisture happening unto them. The Roots hoyled well in Vinegar, beat afterward
and made into an Ointment with Hogs grease, or oil of Trotters, and a little
Vinegar and Salt in powder added thereunto, is an excellent remedy for Scabs or
Itch in young or old. The place also hathed or washed with the Decoction does
the same; and helps all sorts of old putrid, or filthy sores or Cankers
whatsoever. The Decoction of the roots in wine, or the juice taken therein
gargled in the Mouth, or the root chewed fastneth loose Teeth, and helps to
keep them from putrefaction. The dis^illed water of the Leaves, and roots
together is very profitable to cleanse the skin of the face or other parts,
from any Morphew spots, or blemishes therein, and makes it clear. Pliny says,
that Julia, Augusta let no day pass without eating some of the root of E^^la
conci^ed, which it may be she did to help digestion, to expel Melancholy and
sorrow, and to cause mirth, and to move the belly downwards; for all which it
is very effectual. The Oil thereof helps tormenting wind of the guts, and is
good for the Sinews. The decoction thereof drunk provokes Urine and the terms.
The wine thereof does cleanse the Lungs and b^east. The root in powder may be
given from twenty grains to thirty, to cold and moist bodies, but not to those
that are hot and dry.

CHAP. LXXX. Of the Almond tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek, (...), and the fruit, (...), in Latin Amygdalus, and
the fruit Amygdalum and Amygdalium: some think that Cato meant these by the
Names of Nuces Gr^c^, but yet some do rather refer them to the Walnuts.
Columella makes mention of Nuces Gr^c^, Juglandes, and Amygdale, as of three
kinds; for many think the Almond Tree was not known in Italy in Cato's time.
Some have soundly conceived that the bitter Almond tree might be made to bear
sweet Almonds, and the sweet bitter; and that Inscriptions and engravings might
be made upon them, if one open the shell of an Almond and write upon the
kernel: But this Error and many others of this Nature, are discovered by the
skilful Practiser in the Art of planting, Mr. Ralph Austen, it being contrary
to the Law, that God has set in all plants to preserve the kind, to change or
alter from one kind to another.

The Kinds.
Though all Almond Trees be so like that they cannot be distinguished by the
external form: yet there are sundry sorts, as may be gathered from the fruits
they bear; for some of them are bitter, and some sweet* of sweet some are
bigger called Jord^n Almonds, others less called Valence Almonds, and Barbary
Almonds: the bitter are small like the Barbary Almonds.

The Form.
The Almond Tree grows greater and higher then any Peach, but otherwise it is
very like it (and therefore usually planted by it self and not against a Wall,
not by grafting but by setting a kernel or stone into the ground where it
should grow; because it will hardly be transplanted) the body thereof becoming
very great, whereby a shows to be of long continuance, spreading greater Arms
and Smaller branches; but brittle with very long Leaves upon them like unto the
Peach Tree. The flowers are of a paler Purple Color then the Peach blossoms,
and not so bitter; and the fruit very like the Peach* for the outward form
before it be ripe, but the outer ^ind is a dry skin without any cleft in it, of
edible substance under it as the Peach has, and the shell under it is smooth
and not rugged like it, and not so thick a kernel within. It is observed that
those that grow in the Isle of Cyprus bend down their Heads contrary to all in
any other Place.

The Places and Time.
They grow in all places planted that I know or can hear of, in Syria, Barbary,
Turkey, Spain, Italy, and wheresoever: we have (says my Author) both the
bitter and the sweet of that sort which is thick and short, growing in many
places of our Land; and blossom earlier then the Peach of any sort, and the
fruit ripe also before them. There is one of them growing in the Orchard at
Merton College in Oxford, which flowreth early, but whether it brings its fruit
to perfection I cannot assure you.

The Temperature.
The sweet Almonds are the pleasanter meat, formed into many fashions as every
one likes, but the bitter are the more Physical; the sweet are hot and moist
in the first degree, the bitter are drying in the second.

The Virtues.
The Oil of Sweet Almonds mixed with the fine Powder of Sugar Candy is good for
the dry Cough and Hoarsenesse to take a little at once: the said Oil drunk
either alone, or with the Syrup of Marshmallows, is good for those that are
troubled with the Stone, to ease the pains; by opening and making slippery the
passages thereof. It is used also by women in Childbed after their sore travel,
for it helps Throws and after-paines, if you give two or three drachms of it
to Children that are newly born and troubled with gripings, mingling Sugar
Pellets or white, Sugar Candy therewith, it will much avail. The sweet Almonds
themselves yield good and plentiful nourishment to the body; therefore they are
good for weak and macerated persons, or such as are lean. They open and cleanse
the breast, provoke spitting, and are good in the Pleurisy and shortness of
Breath; they open the passages of Urine, cleanse the Kidnyes and provoke sleep.
They increa^e geniture, or seed both in men and Women, open the stoppings of
the Liver and Spleen and help the sight. Being blanched and dried that they may
be made in powder, which taken by it self or with other things, stays the
looseness of the belly. Bitter Almonds open the stoppings of the Liver and
Spleen, cleanse the Lungs from gross tough phlegm, cleanse the Kidnyes and
provoke Urine. They take away flatulent or windy humors in the body, and
provoke the Courses in Women. Being taken with Amylum or Starch, and Mints,
they are good against spitting of Blood; and taken with water they are good for
pains in the back, and the Inflammation of the Lungs. They preserve from
drunkenness if five or six be eaten in a morning fasting. The Oil of bitter
Almonds being taken kills Worms, helps the pains, Suffocations and
tortions of the Womb. Being drunken with wine it mitigateth the Cough, and
brings away the stone or gravel in the kidnyes. It is reported that if bitter
Almonds be given to a Fox* he dies presently after. The oil both of bitter and
sweet Almonds, is good to cleanse the skin from roughness and spots, but the
bitter is most effectual. Being mixed with Oil of Roses, and Oil of Capers, and
the Spleen anointed therewith, it helps the hardness thereof. It cures
deafness and noise in the Ears if it be dropped into them, and helps the
Scurfynesse of the head, and the sores thereof. If the Temples be anointed
therewith, it eases the pains of the head and brings rest; or boil bitter
Almonds with vinegar of Roses, and Rose Leaves and apply it to the Temples.
Being bruised with Honey they are good against the biting of a mad dog. The
powder of the Almond Cakes after the Oil is pressed from them, does cleanse the
hands or skin in any place better then Soap. If the Oil be mixed with Honey,
powder of Liquorice, Oil of Roses and White wax and the eyes therewith
anointed, it clears them and helps the dimness thereof:

CHAP. LXXXI. Of the Vine.
The Names.
THe manured Vine is called in Greek (...), and (...), and in Latin Vitis
Vinifera, and sativa, or culta: the wild is called (...), and in Latin Vitis
sylvestris: Vitis a vino, vel quia inv^tetur ad uvaa pariendas, dicitur; but
there is another Vitis sylvestris of the Grecians, that is the Clematis urons
of the Latins, by some; and Amara-dulcis by others, when as this is called
Labrusca, to cause it to be known asunder: the juice of the unripe Grapes of
the manured Vine, or rather of the Grapes of the wild Vine, which come not to
ripeness, are called (...) in Greek, Omphacium; and Agresta in Latin, in
English Varjuice: The Grapes when they are dried in the Sun, are called Uvae
passae, and Passulae Solis, Raisins: the Juice or Liquor pressed out of the
ripe Grapes, is called Vinum, Wine; the Kernels are called (...), acini; the
Dregs or settling of the Wine, are called Vini faces, Wine Lees, while they are
moist; but being dried, is called ^artarum, Tartar or Argol; the distilled Wine
is called Spiritus Vini, Spirit of Wine, and the Lees distilled Aquavita. In
the wild Vine, the Flowers are called (...), and Oenanthe, that is, Vini flos
in Latin, which was of much use in former times; but now is wholly neglected.

The Kinds.
There is so great a variety of Vines that are manured, that it would require a
large recital; but studying brevity, I shall only mention five Sorts, with the
chiefest Grapes; not because there be more sorts of Grapes then Vines, but
because there be many Sorts of manured Vines. 1. The Manured Vine. 2. The Vine
with thin cut Leaves, like Parsley, which is a manured Vine; but differs from
the former in the Leaf. 3. The wild Vine of Europe. 4. The wild Vine of
Virginia. 5. The wild Vine of Canada. The chiefest Grapes are, 1. The Damasco
white Grape, which is the true Uva zibeba, that the Apot becaries should use in
sundry of their Compositions. 2. The Muscadine Grape, both white and red. 3.
The Frontignack or Musk Grape. 4. The party colored Grape. 5. The Raisin of
the Sun Grape. 6. The Curran Grape, which dried, are those the Grocers sell. 7.
The small early black Grape. 8. The black Grape of Orleance. 9. The Grape
without stones. To which I add the starved or hard Grape, and the Fox Grape.

The Form.
The manured Vine, in places where it has stood long, and thrived, has a
great stem, as big as ones Arm, sleeve and all, spreadding without end or
measure, if it be suffered, many slender weak branches, that must be sustained
from falling down, the young being red, and the old of a dark color, with a
pith in the middle; at the sundry joints whereof, grow several large, broad,
green Leaves, cut into five Divisions, and dented also about the edges, at the
joints, likewise against the Leaves come forth long twining tendrells, clasping
or winding about whatsoever it may take hold of: at the bottoms of the Leaves,
come forth clusters of small greenish, yellow Flowers; and after them Berries,
thick set together in bunches of several forms, greatness, color, and taste;
in some, the clusters are close in others more open; some round, others long,
and some tending to a square: some likewise are very small, as the Currah
Grape; others great, and some a mean between both: some again are white, others
black or bluish, or red or parti-colored: within which there are usually one,
two, or three kernels; for taste, some sweet, some sour, some mixed according to
the Clymate wherein they grow. They that keep their Vines in the best manner,
do keep them low, and cut them often, both Winter and Summer: yet if they be
pruned later then February, they loose their nourishment with weeping; but in
October and November is the best time, and being thus dressed, they grow
better, take up less room, bringing their Grapes, both fairer and sweeter.

The Places and Time.
It is true, that manured Vines are planted every where; but there is much
difference in what Soil and Climate they grow; for though the Vine that grows
in the Canary Islands, is the same with that at Malaga and Sheris, yet the one
still excels the other, in sweetness and strength. And though many of our
Vines be of the same kind with those in France, yet they seldom come to
maturity, to make so good Wine as theirs, our Country being colder: however, I
have heard of Wine made in England, of Grapes, growing in Mrs. Pits Garden at
Harrow on the Hill. But the Vine which is thought fittest for our Clymate, is
the Parsley Vine which bears abundance of fruits to perfection. The Fox Grape,
and the red and white Muscadine Grape set against the South, and well ordered,
bear store of good fruit. They are not ripe here, till September, but sooner in
the hotter Countries. The Raisin of the Sun-Vine, grows as I suppose in
Spain, and about Damascus and Smyrna; for thence are they brought into these
parts, and therefore so called. The Vine that bears Currants, grows about
Corinth, and therefore they are called Uvae Corinthiacae, and in the Isle of
Lante. The wild Vine of Europe, grows in many places of Italy, France, and
Germany: the other wild sorts are expressed in their Titles. These wild sorts
flower later then the other, and their fruit is ripe later.

The Temperature.
The Vine has in it, diverse differing and contrary properties, some cold, some
hot, some sweet, some sour, some mild, and some sharp, some moystening, and
some drying. The tender and clasping Branches of the Vine, and the Leaves do
cool and mightily bind. And as Grapes are diverse in taste, so they are in
quality; for sour Grapes are cold and moist; and sweet Grapes are hot and
moist. Raisins be hot in the first Degree, and moist in the second: being
stoned, they open the Breast and Liver, and loosen the belly; but eaten with
stones, they bind.

The Virtues.
Many things there are that proceed of Grapes, besides what I have mentioned
already, as Must, Lora, Cute, Argel, Lees, etc. which have their several uses:
at some of which, I may chance to touch; but my purpose is to show you, how
proper dried Grapes or Raisins are to help Coughs, hoarsnesse of the Throat,
shortness of wind, toughness of phlegm, causing it to be expectorated more
easily, and do lenifie sharp and nauseous humors that offend the mouth of the
stomach, a decoction being made of them, and Liquorice, Maidenhair,
Coltsfoot, etc. They serve likewise, to open the stoppings of the Liver,
Spleen, and Bladder, and taken by themselves they nourish much, by reason of
their thick sweet and temperate substance, whereby also they stay not long nor
putrify in the Stomach: but withstand putrefaction and concoct raw humors, as
Galen writes, and for this purpose they may well be eaten fasting, the stones
being first taken out. And ^ot crudity or rawnesse of the stomach, Mr. Eliot by
his own report never found any thing better then Rubarb chewed with Currants of
small Rai^ins; yet by the judgment of Arnoldus, they cause oppilations of the
Spleen, though they be good for the breast and Reins; and so says Schola
Salerni, Passula ^on Spleni, tussi valet, and bona reni; and therefore some
think that Rubarb may be better eaten with great Raisins. These being bruised
and applied (the stones taken out) with Rue in manner of a Poultis, it helps
Warts, Carbuncles, Corns in the feet; the Gangrene and the Gout. They take away
loose Nails being applied. Being mixed with a little Cumminseed in powder, and
Oil of white Li^^ies, it asswageth the swelling of the Cods. They are hurtful
to hot and Choleric persons if they eat too largly of them. If Grapes newly
gathered be eaten they trouble the belly and fill the stomach with wind; but if
they be kept two or three days after they be gathered till the husk be
somewhat assuaged, they nourish the better, and are less laxative, neither do
they inflate so much, as says Arnoldus. Ripe Grapes and sweet do nourish much
and make one fat, as Galen proves by experience of some Vinedressers that fed
thereon, but the fat so gotten soon wears away, because it is not firm and
fast, but loose and overmoist. White wine is good to be drunk before meat,
preserves the body, and pearceth quickly into the bladder: but upon a full
stomach it rather makes oppilations or stoppings, because it does swiftly
drive down meat before it be digested. Claret Wine does greatly nourish and
warm the Body, and is wholesome with meat especially unto Phlegmatic people;
but very unwholsom for young child^en, as Galen says, because it heateth above
nature, and hurts the head. RedWine stops the belly, corrupts the blood
breeds the Stone, is hurtful to old people; and good for few, but such as are
troubled with the lask, bloody flix, or any other looseness of the body. Sack
has been used of a long time to be drunk after meat, to cause meat the better
to digest: but common experience has found it more beneficial to the stomach
to be drunk before meat. Likewise Malmesie, Muscadine, Tent, and such sweet
wines have been used before meat to comfort the cold and weak stomach,
especially being taken fasting, but Sack is much better and warmeth more
effectual if it be taken moderately; but all wine taken inordinately relaxeth
the si^ews, brings with it the Palsy, and falling sickness; to the aged it
brings hot Fevers, Phrensy, and Lechery, consumes the Liver and other of
the inward part^. Moreover, excessive drinking wine dishonors Noblemen,
beggereth those which otherwise might have had sufficient, and more have been
destroyed with furfeiting therewith, then with the cruel Sword. The Juce of
the green leaves, branches, and tendrels of the Vine drunken, is good for those
that vomit or spit blood; for the bloody flix and women with child, that vomit
over much. The kernel within the Grapes boiled in water and drunk, has the
same effect.

CHAP. LXXXII. Of Reeds, but especially of the Sugar Cane or Reed.
The Names.
A Reed, called in Greek (...) and in Latin Calamus, and Harundo, or Arundo as
some write it, whereof the Mas according to Theophrastus is the Nastos farcta,
the solid or stuffed Reed, and the Faemina, the hollow. But I suppose the Sugar
Reed was not known to the Greek Writers; for we find no name that it has in
Greek: the Latins have called it Arundo Saccharina with this additament
Indica; because it was first known or came from India. Of some it is called
Calamus Saccharatus, in English Sugar-Cane. The Sugar that is made of them is
called Saccharum, Sacchar, Succharum, Mel Arundi^aceum, and mel Cannae, that
is, Honey of the Cane. The white Juice or Liquor dried or hardened in the Sun was
called by the ancient Latin Writers Sal Indum and Saccharum Indum, which was
used before Sugar was made out of the Canes by boiling.

The Kinds.
Pliny, numbereth up five and twenty sorts of Reeds, most of which are known to
Us on^y by the dry Canes; therefore I shall mention those which are propet to
these near climates, together with the Sugar Reed, which for its sweetness
deserves the first place. 1. The Sugar Cane or Reed. 2. Our common Reed. 3.
Finger Reed. 4. The Spanish Reed or Cane. 5. The stripped or party colored Reed.
6. Low branched Reed. 7. The small writing Reed. 8. The Arrow or Dart Reed 9.
The greater solid Reed. 10. The lesser solid Reed. 11. The Thorny Reed. 12. The
Flowring Reed.

The Form.
The Sugar Cane is a pleasant and profitable Reed, having long stalks seven or
eight foot high, joynted and knee'd like the common walking Canes, but that the
Leaves come forth of every joint on every side of the stalk one, like unto
wings long narrow and sharp pointed. The Cane it self or stalk is not hollow as
the other Canes and Reeds are; but full and stuffed with a spungious substance,
in taste exceeding sweet. The root is great and long creeping along within the
inner crust of the earth, which is likewise sweet and pleasant, but less hard
or woody then other Canes or Reeds; from which do shoot many young Cions which
are cut away from the main or Mother plant; because they should not draw away
the nourishment from the old stock; and so get unto themselves a little
moisture, or else some substance not much worth, and cause the stock to be
barren, and themselves little the better: which shoots do serve for plants to
set abroad for increase.

The Places and Time.
The Sugar Cane grows naturally in the East and West Indies, the Barbados,
Madera, and the Canary Islands, and Barbary also. It is planted likewise in
many parts of Europe at this day, as Spain, Portugal, Oliba, and in Province.
Some shoots have been planted in England, but the coldnes^e of the Climate
quickly made an end of them. The two next in England, the fourth in Spain. The
fifth in Bengala. The sixth was found in a Sack full of Costus and Ginger, as
it was brought from Arabia. The seventh was found by Bellonius in a Valley on
Mount Athos, and in the River Jordan; and of this they make their writing Pens
in Turkey, where the four next sorts are thought to grow. The last grows in
Italy and diverse other places; but all of them delight in moist or watery
overflown grounds. The Sugar Cane is planted at any time of the year in those
hot Countries where it does naturally grow, by reason they fear no frosts to
hurt the young shoots, at their first planting: they are most of them ripe
about the end of September.

The Temperature.
The Juice of the Sugar Reed, made into Sugar, is hot and moist in the first
degree, or temperately hot and moist, and is abstersive or cleansing,

The Virtues.
Sugar is good to make smooth the roughness of the breast and Lungs, clears
the voice and puts away hoarsness and the Cough; and so does Sugar Candy. It
is convenient for the Stomach, helps the roughness and dryness of the mouth
and throat, also thirst and drought in Feaverse, specially being mixed with
water and so taken, and it is very profitable for the Reins and Bladder. It is
used to put sowrenesse, and bitterness out of the mouth of sick persons, and
may be put into cooling as well as heating and warming Medicines. Sugar or
White Sugar Candy, put into the Eye, takes away the dimnesse, and the blood
shotten therein: It is good to be put into green wounds whilst they are yet
bleeding and strewed into foul sores, it cleanses them. This is the Physical
use of Sugar, which has obtained now a days so continual and daily use; that
it is almost accounted not Physical, and is more commonly used in Confections,
Syrups, and such like; as also preserving, and conserving sundry fruits, as
Cherries, Damsons, Mulberries, etc. and Flowers* as Roses, Violets, Rosemary
Flowers and such like, which still retain with them the Name of Sugar, as Sugar
Roset, Sugar Violet, etc. to write of all which, is besides our Intentions. Now
for our ordinary Reeds; The roots, as Galen says, have a cleansing quality,
but not sharp; and the Leaves also. The fresh Leaves bruised, or the roots
applied to those places that have Thorns, Splinters, or the like in the flesh
do draw them forth in a short space the same also applied with Vinegar, helps
Members out of joint by Signature and eases the pains in the Loins: the fresh
leaves also, bruised and applied unto hot Impostumes, Inflammations, or St.
Anthonies sire eases them; the Ashes made of the outer rind of the stalk,
mingled with Vinegar, helps the falling off the hair. If the flower or woolly
substance happen into the ears, it sticks therein so fast, as that by no
means it will be gotten forth again, but will procure deafness withal. Some
have observed that the Fern and the Reed are at perpetual enmity, the one not
abiding where the other is: which may b,e as my Lord Bacon says, not because
of any Antipathy in the plants; but because they draw a like nourishment, and
so starve one the other; whereas there is such amity they say, between
Asparagus and the Reed, that they both thrive wondrous well, which is because
they draw a different Juice. Reeds are al^o put to many necessary uses, as to
thatch houses, to serve as walls and defense to Gardiners in the cherishing of
their plants, to Watermen to trim their boats, to Weavers to wind their yarn
on and for diverse other purposes: Nay those that grow in the Indies by reason
of the heat of those Climates grow so great and tall, that they serve instead
of timber, both to build their houses, and to cover them.

CHAP. LXXXIII. Of the Jujube-Tree.
The Names.
THe Tree it self is called (...) and (...), in Greek; Zizypha, and Zinz^pha,
of Columella: Z^z phus rutila; of others, Rubra and Punicea; and of the
Arabians, from whom the Apothecaries took it Jujube, and ^o do Lobel and Pena.
The Fruit or Plums, arenamed in Greek (...), an^ (...), which are the same that
Galen calls (...). In Latin likewise Zizipha and Serica; in Shops, Jujube; in
English Jujubes.

The Kinds.
Although in former times, there were but one sort of Jujube known, yet now we
have three. 1. The greater Jujube-Tree. 2. The lesser Jujube-Tree. 3. The wild
Jujube-tree.

The Form.
The Jujube-tree grows sometimes to be very high, but more often to a
reasonable height, having his Stem or Body bowed or crooked, and spreading
rather in breadth, the Wood whereof is whitish and hard, covered with a rugged
Bark, from whence spread great Branches, and from the lesser and slender,
whitish twigs about a foot long, full of Leaves, set on both sides, not usually
directly one against another, but one a little above another, with an odd one
at the end; each whereof is small, somewhat broad, and pointed at the end,
dented, or finely nicked about the edges, with long Veins in them, smooth, and
somewhat hard in handling, each standing on a short foot-stalk, and very like
unto the Leaves of Paliurus, or Christ's Thorn: at the foot of every Leaf,
toward the tops of the Twigs, come forth small yellowish Flowers, of five
Leaves a piece, where afterward stand the fruit, which is somewhat like unto a
small Plum or Olive, but a little long, green at the first, and then ^t is
somewhat harsh, and yellowish after; but at last red, and of a reasonable
sweetness; yet sharp withal, and somewhat clammy, when they are ripe* flat as
it were, at the lower end next the stalk, whose skin is thicker and harder then
a Plum, and the stone within it, is small, firm, and solid, long, round, and
solid, like unto an Olive, or Cornelian Cherrystone, both for form and
hardness. All the Branches, both greater and sm^ller, are armed with Thorns,
two always at a joint, whereof the one is long, s^^ong, sharp pointed and
straight and the other crooked, both of them of a blacki^^ red color, like
unto the elder Branches: The Roots are long, and firm in the Ground.

The Places and Time.
The first grows naturally in Africa* Egypt* Arabia, and Syria and those more
Easterly Countries, from whence as Pliny says it was brought into Italy* and
planted there in his time, by Sextus Rampinius, in the latter end of Caesar
Augustus his Reign, which now a days is very frequent, not only in many
Gardens and Orchards of Italy, but of Provence in France also: It is so tender,
that it cannot endure long in our Country, by reason of the cold. The other
likewise was brought into Italy, in these later times from Syria, where it is
only to be seen, and but with a few that are lovers of rarities. The last
grows wild in the Fields, by the Hedges, not far from Verona, abundantly, as
Pena says. They all shoot forth in April, at which time, the Seeds or Stones
are to be set and sown for increase. They flower in May, and their fruit is
ripe in September, the Leaves falling off shortly after.

The Temperature.
Jujubes are temperate in heat and moisture.

The Virtues.
They open the Body, and gently purge Choler, and cleanse the Blood, according
to Actuarius, and Simeon Sethi, especially when they are fresh: yet Matthiolus
following the Opinion of Avicen, denies that they have any purging quality in
them at all. But all Authors do agree, that they cool the heat and sharpness
of the Blood; and therefore hold them to be good in hot Agues, and to help them
that have a Cough, by bringing away tough phlegm, and are very profitable also
for other Diseases of the Chest and Lungs: as shortness of breath, hot Rheums,
and Distillations proceeding from hot humors. They are also to good purpose,
used to cleanse the Reins and Bladder from Gravel, in making the passages
slippery: they also stay Vomitings, procured by sharp humors. But they are
hard of digestion, nourish very little, and do not easily pass through the
stomach, and are therefore used in decoctions, with other Ingredients, fitting
for the foresaid griefs.

CHAP. LXXXIV. Of the Sebesten, or Assyrian Plum-Tree.
The Names.
THere are also to be had, at the Apothecaries Shops, a certain kind of Plums,
called by them Sebestens, in Greek (...), and (...), a muccoso fructus lentore;
(...) enim muccum significat. The Tree whereon this Fruit grows, is called in
Greek (...), in Latin Myxos, for the Tree; and Myxa, and Myxaria for the
Fruit. It is thought as Ruellius says, that the Syrians in honor of Augustus,
called them Sebastae, from whence the Arabians called them Sebesten.

The Kinds.
The Sorts hereof are two. 1. The Sebesten or Assyrian Plum-Tree. 2. The wild
Sebesten-Tree.

The Form.
The Sebesten-tree grows somewhat lower then the Plum-tree, covered with a
whitish Bark, the Branches are green, whereon grow rounder, thicker, and harder
Leaves, then those of the ordinary Plum-Tree: the blossoms are white,
consisting of five Leaves a piece, growing many together on a stalk, which
afterward turn into small Berries, rather then Plums, of a blackish green
color, when they are ripe, every one standing in a little Cup, of a sweet
taste, and glutinous and clammy substance, and a very thick skin: within which,
lies a three square, hard stone, with a thick Shell, and a small Kernel: these
are gathered, and laid in the Sun, whereby they grow wrinckled, and so they are
kept, and brought over unto us in Boxes.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in Syria, and is but planted in Egypt, as Alpinus says, and
from thence were brought into Italy, in Pliny his time, which were grafted on
the Service Tree and do now grow in many places there in their Orchards: it is
so tender, not enduring the cold with us, that we can as hardly keep it, as
cause it to spring, the Shell of the Stone being so thick, and the Kernel so
small. The other as Alpinus seems to aver growth in Egypt naturally. They
flower in May, and their Fruit is gathered in September.

The Temperature.
Sebestens are temperately cold and moist, and have a thick clammy substance.

The Virtues.
They are very effectual, to lenifie, or make smooth the hoarsnesse, and
roughness of the Throat, which is caused by sharp humors, which descend from
the Head, into the Wine-pipe, galling it, and fretting it, so that unless
there be means used to stop them, and to prevent the Throat from corroding,
they will run down abundantly, and with great force, making the Patient to
breath with great difficulty. Neither are Sebestens good only for the Throat,
but also do very much help the Cough, and wheesings of the Lungs and
Distillations upon them, by lenifying the passages, and causing much phlegm to
be avoided: They also give ease to them that are troubled with pains in their
sides, and marvellously helps those that are troubled with the sharpness of
their Urine, proceeding from Cho(...) or salt phlegm: they also drive forth the
long worms of the Belly. By the judgment both of the Arabians and Greek
Physicians, they open the body in the fame manner, or rather more, by reason of
the Muscilaginesse in them, than Damask Primes, yet more when they are green,
and less when they are dry; yet the decoction of them, or the infusion of them
in broth, although dried, works effectually. They serve to cool any
intemperate heat of the Stomach or Liver, and therefore are good in hot Agues,
and to purge Choler, whereof they come. (...) says, that he has found often
by his experience, that ten drams, or twelve at the most, of the pulp of
Sebestans, taken from the Skins and Stones, works as well, and to as good
purpose as the pulp of Cassia fistula. There is a kind of Birdlime made of
these fruits, by boiling them a little in water, to take away their Skins and
Stones, and after boiling them more to a consistence, the which, as M(...)
says, was used in V(...), to catch Birds; but Alpinus says, they use it in
Egypt as a Plaster, to dissolve hard tumors or swellings.

CHAP. LXXXV. Of Scabious.
The Names.
IT has no Greek Name, unless it be, as some think, that Herb which Aetius
calls (...): but few dare venture to say, it is the same, because there is
nothing but the bare Name, without any Description extant in him; yet the Greek
word signifies Scabies in Latin. It took the name of Scabi^sa, either a
foliorum scabritie quae pr^sertim primo huic generi convenit, or rather, and
that more usually, quod Scabi^i medetur, which it does by Signature; for
Crollius says moreover, quod in summis caulium capitulis florum calices
promit, compactili squammarum ordine structos: ideo Scabi^i medetur, that is,
It brings forth cups of Flowers, which stand on the tops of the stalks, like
unto scales or scabs; and this also may be a reason, why it is called so. The
Name is applied to diverse Herbs, as to the Jacea's Stabe's, and others; but
there has much difference been discovered between them by the modern
Herbarists, as in the Heads of Flowers, and also by the Leaves, if they be
broken; for the Leaves of Scabious, being broken easily, you may plainly
perceive many little Films in them, which Knapweed, or Stab^ has not.

The Kinds.
The Sorts of Scabious are so many, that they would take up much room to little
purpose, if I should but name them all. I shall therefore set down a dozen of
them, and no more. 1. Common Scabious. 2. The small common Scabious. 3. Middle
Scabious. 4. Corn Scabious, 5. Purple flowred Scabious. 5. Red Scabious of
Austria. 7. Mountain Scabious. 8. Broad leafed Mountain Scabious. 9. Spanish
Scabious. 10* Strange Scabious. 11. Sheeps Scabious. 12. Hairy Sheeps Scabious.

The Form.
The common Field-Scabious, grows up with many hairy, soft, whitish green
Leaves: some whereof, are either not at all jagged, or divided on the edges, or
very little; others are much rent and torn on the sides, and have Films, or
small threads in them, as I said before: which upon the breaking, may be plainly
seen; from among which, rise up diverse round, hairy, green stalks, two or three
foot high, with such like hairy green Leaves on them; but more deeply and
finely divided, branched forth a little; at the tops whereof, which are naked
and bare of Leaves for a good space, stand round heads of Flowers, of a pale
bluish color, many set together in a head, or knop: the outermost whereof,
are larger then those inward: with many threads also in the middle, somewhat
flat at the top, as the Head with Seed is likewise: the Root is great, white,
and thick, growing down deep into the ground, and abides many years.

The Places and Times.
The first grows very often in Meddow Grounds, especially those that do not
lie very low. The two next grow also in some dry Fields, but not so plentifully
as the former. The fourth grows both in the places where Corn is standing,
and in those also that were formerly sown, and now lie fallow, and in the
borders of such like Fields. The fifth came from India, and is common in our
Gardens. The sixth from Austria, as the title shows. The seventh and eighth,
upon the Alps. The ninth in Spain. It is not known whence the tenth came, and
therefore it is called Strange Scabious. The two last grow in dry, sandy, and
heathy Grounds: the one of them being common, the other somewhat rare. They all
flower in June and July; and some abide flowring until it be late in August,
and the Seed is ripe in the mean time.

The Temperature.
Scabious is hot and dry in the second Degree, opening, cleansing, digesting,
and making thin.

The Virtues.
It is effectual for all sorts of Coughs, shortness of breath, and all other
the Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, ripening and digesting cold phlegm, and
other tough humors, voyding them forth by coughing and spitting. It ripeneth
also all sorts of inward Ulcers and Apo^humes, yea the P^uri^e al^o: if the
Decoction of the dry or green Herb, being made with Wine, be drunk sometimes
together, thereby voiding it ^orth by Urine, as well as other ways. Four
Ounces of the clarified Juice of Scabious taken in the morning ^asting* with a
dram of Mithridate, or Venice Treac^e, does free the Heart from any infection
of the P^ague or Pestilence; so as upon the taking thereof, they sweat two
hours in their Beds, at the least: yet after the first time taking, let them
that are infected, take the same proportion again, and again, if need be, for
fear of further danger: and the same is good against the stinging of any
venomous Beast. The Decoction drunk, helps the pains and stitches of the
^ices. The Decoction of the Roots taken for forty days together, or the Powder
of them to the qu^ntity of a dram at a time, taken in Whey, does as Matthiolus
says, wonderfully help those that are troubled with dangerous running, or
spreading Scabs, Tetters, or Ringworms; yea although they proceed from the
French Pox. The Juice, or the Decoction drunk, does very much help those that
are broken out into Scabs and Itches: the Cups of Flowers having the Signature
thereof, as I said before. The same also wonderfully helps all inward wounds,
be they made by thrust or stroke, by the drying, cleansing and healing quality
therein. A Syrup made of the Juice and Sugar is very effectual to all the
purposes aforesaid; and so is the distilled water of the Herb and Flowers, made
in due time. The green Herb bruised, and applied to any Carbuncle, or
Plague Sore, is found good by experience, to dissolve or break it, within the
space of three hours, and the same applied, helps the stinging of any
venomous Beast. The Juice made up into an Ointment with Hog's Grease, helps
the Itch and Scab, being thereto applied. The Decoction of the Herb and Roots
applied, does help all sorts of cold tumors, or swellings, in any part of the
Body; and is also as effectual for any shrunk Sinew or Vein in any place. The
Juice made up with the Powder of Borax and Camphor, does cleanse the skin of
the face, or other part of the Body, as Freckles, Pimples, Morphew, and Lepry.
The same decoction helps the Redness and Spots in the white of the Eyes,
used either by it self, or with the Juice of Fennel. The Head washed with the
same Decoction, cleanses it from Dandraffe, Scurf, Scabs, Sores, Itches, and
the like, being used warm. Tents also dipped in the Juice, or water thereof,
does heal all green Wounds, old Sores and Ulcers. The Herb bruised, and
applied, does loosen, splinter, broken Bone, Arrow Head, or other such like
thing lying in the flesh, and causes it easily to be drawn forth.

CHAP. LXXXVI. Of Coleworts.
The Names.
THe Greeks call it (...), and Attice (...), or (...), so called as it is
supposed by some, quod (...), i. e. oculorum pupillas obtundat and hebetet,
because it dulleth and dimmeth the Eyesight, which Columella signifies in
these words, Oculis inimica Coramble; but he contradicts himself; for he and
other Authors also say, that it is good for dim Eyes, as also to take away the
Canker in the Eyes. Others say, quod (...), vel rectius, (...) quod Crapulae
satietatique adversatur, because it is a remedy against surfeiting and
drunkenness. Theophrastus and other greek Authors before him, call it (...)
Raphanus, Anglice, a Radish because of the likeness of the seed: they
supposing that if it were old, the one would degenerate into the other; which
error in this as in many other things, though very fatal to the old world
has been discovered by the Judicious of these later times; but amongst the
Commons, whose opinions are unalterable, many falsities and absurdities are
continued. It is called also in Latin, Brasica quasi Praseca, as Varro says,
quod hujus scapui minutatim prasecatur; or as others think, (...) a vocando,
because poor people did most of all call for them to eat them; It is also
called in Latin of many Caulis, quia prae cateris grandi validoque turgescit
Caul^. And from thence came as most suppose our English words Cole and Cale,
whereby the Colewort was anciently, and is yet called by some.

The Kinds.
Many are the sorts hereof, I shall set down sixteen. 1. Garden Colewort. 2.
Curled Garden Cole. 3. Red Colewort. 4. White Cabbage. 5. Red Cabbage. 6. Open
Cabbage. 7. Double Colewort. 8. Double Crisped Colewort. 9. Cole Florie. 10.
Swollen Colewort. 11. Savoy Cole. 12. Curled Savoy Cole. 13. Parsley Colewort.
14. Fine cut Colewort. 15. English Sea Colewort. 16. Wild Sea Colewort.

The Form.
The Garden Colewort has many green broad Leaves, of a deep black green color
mixed with Ribbs; and Lines of reddish and white Colors. The stalk grows out
of the midst from among the leaves, branched with sundry arms, bearing at the
top little yellow flowers; and after they be past, there do succeed long Cods
full of round seed like those of the Turnep but smaller, with a woody root
having many strings or threads fastened thereto.

The Places and Time.
The greatest sort of Coleworts do grow in Gardens, and do love a soil which is
fat and thoroughly dunged, and well manured, they do best prosper when they be
removed: and everyone of them grow in our English Gardens, except the wild
which grows in fields and new dug ditch banks. The Sea Colewort grows
naturally by the Sea side, where there is no earth to be seen, but sand and
rolling peeble stones, particularly between Whitstable and the Isle of Thanet
near the brink of the Sea, and in many places near Colchester. It is sown in
the Spring as in March, April, and oftentimes in May, and sometimes in August
but the especial time, is about the beginning of September, and those that are
then sown, are fittest to be transplanted in March or April following: that so
having the benefit of the Summer for their full growth, they may be gathered to
eat, in the Winter or Autumn, after the frost has a little bit them. But the
Savoy Cole and the Cole-flory (which is commonly called Collyflower) must be
sowed in April in a bed of hot Horsedung, and covered with Mats or Straw, to
keep it from the cold frosty mornings; for if you tarry for warmer weather, the
year will be spent before it come to ripeness; it should also be removed when
it has gotten six leaves, or thereabouts.

The Temperature.
All the Coleworts have a drying or binding faculty with a certain nitrous or
salt quality whereby it mightily cleanses either in the Juice or broth
thereof. The whole substance or body of the Colewort, is of a binding and
drying faculty, because it leaves in the decoction this Salt quality, which
lies in the Juice and watery part thereof: it yeildeth to the body small
nourishment, and does not engender good Blood but gross and Melancholic.

The Virtues.
The Decoction of Coleworts being mingled with honey and drunk recovereth
hoarsenesse or loss of the Voice, the leaves themselves help those that are
entering into a Consumption, if they use to eat them well boiled, and often. The
pulpe of the middle ribs of Coleworts, boiled in Almond-milk, and made up into
an Electuary with honey, is very profitably used, by those that are shortwinded,
and purify if they often take thereof. Being boiled twice, and an old cock
boiled in the broth and drunk, it helps the pains and obstructions of the
Liver and Spleen, and the stone in the Kidneys. The juice boiled with honey,
and dropped into the Corner of the Eye, clears the sight by consuming any
filme or cloud beginning to dim it; it also consumes the Canker growing
therein. They are much commended being eaten before meat to keep one from
surfeiting, as also from being drunk with too much wine, or quickly make a man
sober that is drunk before. Being gently boiled in broth and eaten, they open
the body, but the second decoction binds. The juice thereof drunk in wine
helps those that are bitten by an Adder; and the decoction of the flowers
brings down Women's Courses. The decoction of Coleworts takes away the pain
and ach, and allayeth the swellings of swollen, and gowty Legs and Knees,
wherein many gross and watery humors are fallen, the place being bathed
therewith warm: It helps also old and filthy sores being bathed therewith,
and heals all small scabs, pushes and wheals that break out in the skin. The
ashes of Colewort stalks mixed with old Hogs Grease, is very effectual to
anoint the sides of those that have had long pains therein, or any other place
pained with Melancholy and windy humors, helping mightily to digest them: It
is reported that the old Romans having expelled Physicians out of their
territories, did for six hundred years preserve their health, and helped their
infirmities, by using and applying it for their only medicine in every disease
and Chrysippus affirms as much in his book concerning it. The broth or first
decoction of the Sea Colewort likewise does by the sharp nitrous and bitter
qualities therein, open the belly and purges the body (but the second
decoction both of this and the former also, is said to bind the body) yet, as
Galen thinks, not without some hurt thereto; because as he says, it much
varieth from the Temperature of our body, being hotter and dryer then the
Garden kinds; and therefore as all other wild herbs are stronger in operation,
and so this cleanses and digesteth more powerfully then they. The Leaves while
they are young although bitter, being boiled (in Lie says Dioscorides, but in
fair water is most usual with us in these days) are eaten as other Coleworts
are by diverse poor people near the Sea, the boiling taking away much of the
bitterness thereof; the seed hereof bruised and drunk kills worms, the
leaves or the Juice of them applied to sores or ulcers cleanses and heals
them, and dissolveth tumors and swellings, and takes away the Inflammations.

CHAP. LXXXVII. Of Nettles.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek, (...) Acalyphe quia Tactu aspera et injucunda est, by
reason of its offending them them that touch it, and (...) quod vellicet et
punget; a verbo, (...) quod vellicare and pungere significat, because it
stings. In Latin Vrtica ab urendo, quod pruritum pustulasque igni similes
excitat; because it raises blisters, like unto those that are caused by
burning with fire.

The Kinds.
Of those Nettles that are stinging, of Which alone I shall entreat in this
Chapter, there are four sorts. 1. The Roman Nettle. 2. The greater wild Nettle.
3. The middle wild Nettle. 4. The lesser wild Nettle.

The Form.
The Roman Nettle grows up with diverse round hairy branches, rather leaning
down then standing upright, never above the height of a foot that ever I see,
whereon at the Joints are two leaves set together, very rough; and although it
has no sharp prickles, yet it has an hairy down thereon, that will sting the
skin most cruelly if it be touched therewith, and raise it full of blisters as
if it were burnt with fire and dented at the edges somewhat deeply; at diverse
places of the branches come forth small stalks, of reddish and yellowish
flowers, made of threads which fall away without bearing any thing else; but at
the Joints with the leaves in other places, from the middle of the branches
upwards come forth small round rough green prickly Pellets or Buttons, wherein
is contained diverse flat brown shining seeds, something like unto Line, or
Flexseed, but smaller and rounder. The root is yellowish, and spreads diverse
long strings and small Fibers, whereby it takes fast hold in the ground, yet
perishes every year, requiring a new sowing every spring.

The Places and Time.
The first is most usually sown in Gardens where it is desired, as it is also
in the upper and Lower Germany, and most places of France also: but it has
been found naturally growing time out of mind, both at the Town of Lidde by
Romney; and in the streets of the Town of Romney in Kent, where it is recorded
that Julius Caesar landed with his Soldiers and abode there a certain time:
which very probably was by them called Romania, and corruptibly therefrom
Romeney or Romney; and for the growing of it in that place, it is reported that
the soldiers brought some of the seed with them and sowed it there, for their
use to rub and chafe their Limbs: when through extreme cold they should be
stiff and benumbed: being told before they came from home, that the climate of
Britain was so extreme cold, that it was not to be endured, without some
friction and ^ibbing to warm their blood, and to stir up natural heat: since
which time it is thought it has continued there, rising yearly of its own
sowing. It grows also in the streets of Bardney in Lincolnshire, the other
three sorts grow in wast grounds, by hedges and Wall sides, and many other
untilled places; yet they will be also found in most Gardens, where if they be
suffered or neglected but a while, it will be hard to rid them out again. They
flower and seed in the end of Summer; and the lesser is so plentiful, that it
will seed and shed, and spring, and seed again, bearing ripe seed twice in one
year, if it be let grow.

The Temperature.
Although Nettles do hurt and sting while they are green, which is caused by
the hair or rough down upon them, and might be thought to be Caustic and
exulcerating, being otherwise applied; yet it is not so, they being found to be
hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues and Signature.
The roots or Leaves of nettles boiled or the Juice of either of them or both
made into an electuary, with honey or Sugar is safe and sure medicine, to open
the Pipes and Passages of the Lungs, which is the cause of wheesing and
shortness of breath, and helps to expectorate tough phlegm, as also to raise
the Impostumated Plurisie and spend it by spitting: the same helps the
swelling of the Almonds of the Throat, the Mouth and Throat, being gargled
therewith. The juice is also effectual to settle the Palate of the mouth in its
place, and to heal and temper the inflammations and soreness of the Mouth and
Throat. The decoction of the leaves in wine being drunk, is singular good to
provoke Women's Courses, and settle the suffocation or strangling of the Muther,
and all other diseases thereof, as also applied outwardly with a little Myrrh.
The same also or the seed provokes Urine, and expels the Gravel or Stone in
the Reins or Bladder as has been often and effectually proved in many that
have taken it. The same kills the Worms in Children, eases pains in the
sides and dissolveth the windiness in the Spleen, as also in the body,
although others think it to provoke Venery, which it may be said to do by
Signature. The Juice of the Leaves taken two or three days together, stays
bleeding at the mouth. The seed being drunk, is a remedy against the stinging
of venomous Creatures, the biting of mad Dogs, the poisonous qualities of
Hemlock, Henbane, Nightshade; Mandrak, or other such like herbs that stupifie
and dull the senses; as also the Lethargy especially to use it outwardly to rub
the Forehead or Templs in the Lethargy and the places bitten or stung with
beasts, with a little Salt. The distilled water of the herb is also effectual
(although not so powerful^) for the diseases aforesaid, as for outward wounds
and sores to wash them, and to cleanse the skin from Morphew, Leprosy, and
other discolorings thereof; The seed of leaves brui^ed and put into the
Nostrils stays the bleedings of them, and takes away the flesh growing in
them called Polypus. The juice of the leaves or the decoction of them or of the
roots is singular good to wash either old rotten or stinking ^ores or Fistulaes
or Gangrenes, and such as are eating fretting or corroding scabs manginesse and
itch in any part of the body; as also green wounds by washing them therewith,
or applying the green herb bruised thereunto, yea though the flesh were
separated from the bones. The same applied to wearied members refresh them, or
to places that have been out of joint being first set again, strengthening,
drying, and comforting them, as also those places that are troubled with Aches
and Gouts, and the defluxions of humors upon the joints or Sinews, it eases
the pains, and dries or dissolveth the defluxions. An ointment made of the
juice, oil, and a little wax, is singular good to rub cold benumbed Members, to
bring them to their proper activity again. An handful of the green Leaves of
Nettles, and another of Wallwort or Danewort, bruised and applied simply of
themselves to the Gout, Sciatica, or Joynt-Aches in any part has been found to
be an admirable help thereunto. It is said that if green Nettles be put into
the Urine of a sick body, if it be fresh and green after it has lain four and
twenty hours therein, the party shall recover of that sickness, but if it do
not abide green, it signifies death or danger. It is said, likewise that if
the Juice of the roots of Nettles, be mixed with Ale or Beer, and given to one
that is suspected to have lost her maidenhead, if it remain with her she is a
maid, otherwise not. If you give Hens some dry Nettles broken small with their
meat in Winter it will make them lay eggs all the Winter more plentifully, It
is said also that if the herb be rubbed on the privities of female beasts that
will not suffer the males to cover them; it will cause them the more willingly
to suffer them to do it. The oil of Roses, or Sallet Oil boiled with the juice,
or the juice of the Leaves themselves, is a present Remedy to take away the
stinging of Nettles: To all the purposes aforesaid, the Roman Nettle is held
the most effectual; yet where it cannot be had, the others are in a degree next
it, as effectual. Nettle tops are usually boiled in Pottage in the Spring time,
to consume the Phlegmatic superfluities in the body of Man, that the coldness
and moisture of the Winter has left behind.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. Of Turnips.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek, (...) Gongyle, ob rotunditatem figuraeradicis, because
of the roundnesse of the root: for the Greeks did call every thing that was
made round, after this manner. (...) It is called in Latin Rapum and Rapa
which is commonly used in shops and every where else. The Lacedaemonians call it
(...): the Beetians (...) as Athaeneus reports: We English, Turnep and Rape.

The Kinds.
There be sundry sorts of Turnips, some wild, some of the Garden: some with
round roots globe fashion; others ovall or Pear-fashion, some great, and some
of a smaller sort. I shall mention only these four following. 1. The great
round Turnep. 2. The little round Turnep. 3. The long Turnep. 4. The Orange
colored Turnep.

The Form.
The Turnep has long rough and green leaves, cut or snipt about the edges with
deep gashes. The stall divides it self into sundry branches or arms, bearing
at the top small flowers of a yellow color, and sometimes of a light purple
which being past, there do succeed long Cods full of small blackish seed like
Rape seed. The root is round like a bowl; and sometimes a little stretched out
in length, growing very shallow in the ground, and oftentimes showing it self
above the Surface of the Earth.

The Places and Time
The Turnep prospers well in a leight loose and fat earth, and so loose as
Petrus Crescentius shows that it may be turned almost into dust, it grows
in diverse fields, and Gardens in most places of England. The other sorts are
not so common as the first, yet those that are ever awhit delighted with
rarities of this nature, have them growing in their Gardens. It is not
convenient that the ground where they are to be sown be dug so deep as for
other things, or if it be, the Gardner would do well to tread the ground before
he sow them, for then will they head the better. They may be sown in any Month
from March to October, but they are commonly sown in April and May, as also in
the end of August. They flower and seed the second year after they are sown;
for those that flower the same year that they are sown, are a degenerate kind
causing frensy and giddiness of the brain for a season, wherefore are by some
called Madneps.

The Temperature.
The bulbous or knobbed root which is properly called Rapum or Turnep, and has
given the name to the plant whilst it is raw, for so it is sometimes eaten
especially by the poor people in Wales, is windy and ingendreth cold and gross
blood, but being boiled it cools less, yea so little as that it cannot be
perceived to cool at all, yet it is moist and windy

The Virtues and Signature.
The Decoction of Turnips is good against the Cough and hoarsnesse of the voice
being drunk in the evening with a little Sugar or a quantity of clarified
honey. The Syrup of Turnips being extracted by baking them mixed with life
Honey, honey of Roses or Sugar and a Spoonful thereof taken at night about
bedtime works the same effect, and is good for those that have a vein Broken.
Dioscorides writes that the Turnep it self being stamped, is with good
success apaplyed to the Kibed heels, and also that Oil of Roses boiled in an
hollow Tu^nep under the hot Embers does cure the same. The young or tender
shoots or springs of Turnips at their first coming forth of the ground, boiled
and eaten is a delicate Sallet which provokes Urine. The seed is mixed with
counter poisons, and Treacles; and being drunk it is a remedy against poison.
They of the low countries, do give the oil which is pressed out of the seed
against the afterthrows of women newly brought a bed, and also do administer it
to young children against the worms, which it both kills and drives forth.
The Oil mixed with water does allay the fervent heat and rugged nesse of the
skin, it avails not a little how they be prepared: for being boiled in water
alone or with meat, is most moist and sooner descends, and makes the body
more soluble; but being roasted or baked it ingendreth less wind, and yet it
is not altogether without wind, but howsoever they be dressed they yield more
norishment then the raw: they provok Urine, increase natural seed and milk in
women's breasts by Signature, there being a near resemblance between a woman's
breast and a Turnep. And now I think it will not be amiss, to turn my style
from the in side of the breast to the out side; and because the breasts of
Women are more subject to indisposition, then men's. I shall set down some
plants, which may be serviceable upon that account.

CHAP. LXXXIX. Of Ladies-Mantle.
The Names.
ALthough Branfelsius and others have thought this Plant to be Leontopodium, or
Lions foot, being deceived by the name, because diverse Nations have so called
it from the form or likeness of the Leaf: yet it cannot be gathered, that it
was known to Dioscorides, or any of the ancient Greek Writers. It is usually
called in Latin Alchymella, by most Writers, because as some think, the
Alchymists gave mighty Commendations of it. It is called also of Matthiolus
Lugdunensis; and others, Stellaria, from the form of the Leaf, that with the
corners resembles a Star; but there are diverse others Herbs called Stellaria,
by several Authors; and some also call this ^es Leonis, and Pata Leonis:
others call it Sanicula major; for the Virtues of it, which are like unto
Sanicle. Cordus calls it Drosera, Drosium, and Psiadeion, from the Germans
name Sinnaw, because the hollowish Leaf will contain the Drops of Dew. We in
English, call it our Ladies Mantle, from the prettynesse of the Leaf, and great
Sanicle; and of some, Lions Foot, or Lions Paw.

The Kinds.
The Sorts are but two. 1. Common Ladies Mantle. 2. Cinquefoile Ladies Mantle.

The Form.
Common Ladies Mantle has many Leaves, rising from the Root, standing upon
long hairy footstalk, being almost round; but somewhat cut-in on the edges,
into eight or ten parts, more or less, making it seem like a Star, with so
many corners and points, and those not so deeply, but more finely indented
round about, of a light green color, and as if it were plaited and folded at
the first, and then crumpled in diverse places, which makes them a little
hollow; being also hairy as the stalk is, which rises up among them, to the
height of a foot, and sometime a foot and half, with a few such Leaves
thereupon, but smaller, and being weak, is not able to stand upright, but
bends down to the ground, divided at the top, into two or three small
Branches, with small whitish green heads and flowers, of a yellowish green
color, breaking out of them, which being past, there comes small yellowish
enclosed in the greenish Husks. The Root is somewhat long, and black, with many
strings and Fibers thereat.

The Places and Time.
The first grows naturally in many Pastures and Woods in Oxford, Hartford,
and Wiltshire, and also in Kent; as in Stow-VVood near Oxford, in Millmead by
Rungill Well near Adderbury; in Pray VVood, near St. Albans; in King VVood,
near Feversham; in the Pastures, near Fidnam and Chepstow, and in other places
of this Land. The other grows on St. Barnards Hill among the Switzers. The
first flowreth in May and June, the other not until August, but both abide
after Seed-time, green all the Winter after.

The Temperature.
Ladies Mantle is hot and dry in the second Degree; as some think, in the
third, being very astringent, binding and drying.

The Virtues.
The decoction of Ladies Mantle being drunk, and the bruised Herb outwardly
applied, helps to keep down Maidens Paps or Duggs: as also to bring back the
Breasts of Maids, or Women that are too big, or over-flagging to their due
bigness and hardness. It is very proper for those wounds that have
Inflammations, and is very effectual to stay bleedings, Vomitings, and Fluxes
of all sorts, in Man or Woman; and Bruises by falls, or otherwise, and helps
Ruptures, and serves also to stay the whites in Women, wherein it is so
powerful, that it is used as a surfuling water also. The distilled water drunk
twenty days together, by such Women as are barren, and cannot conceive, or
retain the birth after conception, through the too much humidity of the
Matrice, and Flux of moist humors thereunto, causing the Seed not to abide,
but to pass away without fruit, will reduce their Bodies to so good and
conformable an Estate, that they shall thereby be made more fit and able to
retain the Conception, and bear out their Children, if they do also sit
sometimes as in a Bath, in the decoction made of the Herb. It is accounted one
of the most singular Wound-herbs that is, and is therefore extolled with
exceeding great praise; and they never dress any wound, either inward or
outward, but they give of the decoction hereof to drink; and either wash the
wound with the said decoction, or dip Tents therein, and put them thereinto,
which wonderfully dries up all the humidity of the Sores, or of the humors
flowing thereunto, yea although they be fistulous and hollow, and abateth also,
such Inflammations as often happen unto Sores; but for fresh or green wounds,
or Cuts, it so quickly heals them up, that it suffers not any quitture to
grow therein, but consolidateth the lips of the Wound, not suffering any
corruption to remain behind.

CHAP. XC. Of Sanders.
The Names.
THe ancient Grecians have not made any mention of it, but the Arabians only,
who generally call it Sandal: It is called by the Natives of the Isle of Timor,
and the Provinces thereunto adjoining Chandama, and those of Canara Decan, and
Surrat call it Sercanda: In Latin it is called Sandalum and Sa^^alum: In
English, Sanders.

The Kinds.
There are three Sorts of Sanders. 1. Santalum album, or white Sanders. 2.
Santalum rubrum, or red Sanders. 3. Santalum ci^ri(...) vel flavum: Yellow
Sanders.

The Form.
The Sanders-Tree grows to be as big as the Wallnut-tree, having fresh green
Leaves, like unto the Mastick-tree, and darkish blew Flowers, the Fruit being
like unto Cherries, for the size, but without any taste, black when they are
ripe, and quickly falling away: the wood it self is without sent, as it is
said, whilst it is living, and fresh; and smells sweet, only when it is dry;
the white and the yellow Woods, are so hard to be distinguished before that
time, as it is said, that none but those Indians which usually fell those
Trees, do know their difference before hand, and can tell which will prove
better then others: the chiefest part and smelling sweetest, being the heart of
the Wood; and as the Trees do grow in several places, so are their goodness,
being more or less plentiful in the substance of ^he heart; for thereafter
are they accounted.

The Places and Time.
The white and yellow Sanders grow naturally, and that in great abundance, in
an Island called Timor, and also in the East Indies, beyond the River Sa^ges,
or rather Ganges, which the Indians call Hanga; and also about Java, where it
is of better odor, then any that grows elsewhere. The red Sanders grows
within the River Ganges, especially about T^^as^rim, and in the Marish Ground
about Charamandel, and in most parts of Brasil, where the Brasil Wood also
grows, which is somewhat like it; but they may be easily known asunder,
because Sanders is neither sweet in taste, nor gives any Dye, as the Brasil
does, besides Sanders in heavyer then it, and will sink in water. These Trees
grow green, Winter and Summer, and the Indians are feign to mark them, that
they may distinguish them, when their Mart comes; for they are not easily
known one from another, by the sight of the vulgar.

The Temperature.
They are cold and dry in the second or third Degree: some say they are hot;
the red is more cooling and binding. The yellow is the best, the next is the
white, the red is least of use.

The Virtues.
The red Sanders have a more astrictive, as I said, and strengthening faculty,
and therefore applied to Mayds, or Women's great Breasts, mixed with the Juice
of Purslane, abateth their greatness, and represseth their overmuch growing.
It is also very effectual for the stoppage of blood at the Nose, or any other
place* if it be taken in red Wine, the Signature thereof declaring so much. It
is used likewise, to stay Defluxions of thin Rheum from the Head, and to cool
hot Inflammations, hot Gouts, and in hot Ag^es, to cool and temp^^ the heat:
but in Cordial Medicines, the white and yellow are most effectual and
comfortable, by reason of their sweetness, helping faintings of the heart and
palpitation, or beating thereof: as also weak and faint stomachs, which come
through heat, diverting melancholy, and procuring mirth and alacrity. They open
the Obstructions of the Liver, and cool the heat thereof, and ease the pain of
the Head. They are used to stay, and bind the spermaticall Flux in Men or
Women; for which purpose, either the Powder taken in a rear Egg, or mixed with
other things for the purpose, or steeped in red Wine, and kept in an hot
Balneo, or in hot Embers, close stopped all Night, and strained forth, and
drunk in the morning and evening, both stay the Gonorrhea, or running of the
Reins in Men, and the whites in Women. They are good in hot burning Diseases,
as in Fevers, Inflammations of the Liver, and such like. The Indians (says
Gerard) do use the decoction made in water, against hot burning Agues, and the
overflowing of the Courses Erisipelas the Gout, and all Inflammations, for
which it is very effectual, especially* if it be mixed with the juice of
Nightshade, Housleek, or Purslane. They are put in Collises, Jellies, Sauces,
Pies, etc. both because they are good to strengthen and revive the Spirits; and
also for the pleasing red color, which they give to them. They are used
outwardly in Catarrhes and Rheums, pains of the Head against Vomiting, and in
Epithems, and fomentations against the intemperate heat of the Liver. They
being applied with Rose Water to the Temples, give ease to the Headache, and
keep back the flowings of humors into the Eyes.

CHAP. LXXXXI. Of Annise.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), quia est sine aequali, there being no Plant
equal to it in goodness, for increasing Milk, and breaking wind; and in
Latin, Anicum generally, by all Authors, and almost by all Nations, according
to their Dialect: only the Spaniards call it Matahalna, and Yerva dulce.

The Form.
Anise is a small low Herb, seldom above half an yard high, having the lower
Leaves broader then those above, few upon the stalks, seldom divided, but
dented on the forepart, of a whitish green color, and of a good sweet taste
and smell, the stalk is round, and not spread into branches, saving at the top,
where the white umbels of Flowers do stand, which afterward give small round
whitish Seed, very sweet; yea, more then any umbelliferous Seed, and pleasant
taste, and smell, yet somewhat quick withal: The Root is small, and perishes
every year.

The Places and Time^
Though Annise were formerly sown only in the East Countries as Syria, etc. as
being more natural to those hot Climats, yet it is found out by later
experience that it will grow and prosper here in our English Gardens also: the
time of sowing, is taught in that excellent Book called, the Garden of Eden, as
follows. Sow English Anniseeds, when the Moon is at the full in Febr. or any
time between the full and the change: if frosts will not suffer you to take the
full Moon to hatch them into the ground with a rake stricken thick upon them:
then strew new Horse dung thinly upon the ground, to defend the seeds from the
Frost: These will ripen about Bartholomewtide. Then respecting the Moon as
before, sow again in May; and these seeds will be ripe sooner, then those that
were sown in February. These seeds will also come up well being self sown, only
break up the ground about them when they begin to ripen. The time of its
flowring does continue four or five months, so that at one time a man may find
both the flower tender, and the seed near to its full growth as in Fennel and
the like. That ground which you would sow in February, break up about
Michaelmasse: let it lie and crumble all the Winter, then when you mean to
sow, stir it up again, that it may be mellow; for the mellower the better. A
black rich mellow ground i^ best, and they like well in a rich dunged ground,
as has been proved.

The Temperature.
Galen has erred very much in relating the Temperature of Annise-Seed, saying,
that it is hot and dry in the third Degree, and burning withal, by reason of
the sharpness and bitterness; when as it is well known, it has no such
acrimony: the sweetness so tempering the sharpness, that it does not exceed
the second degree in heat, and the first in dryness. But the Chymicall Oil
drawn from the Seed, exceeds much those degrees; the spirits being
contracted, must needs be more fierce.

The Virtues.
Another indisposition of the Paps, is want of milk, in those that are Nurses,
which may be remedyed, if the Leaves or Seeds of Annise, or (for defect
thereof) of Fennel (as has been said before, in the handling of Fennel upon
another occasion) being boiled in Barley water, and drunk, neither does it only
increase milk; but make it more wholesome for their Children to take. To eat the
Seeds comfited, or Anniseed Comfits, works the same effect, and is very good
for ^eeming Women, and those which are with Child. They help those that are
short-winded, or have a Consumption, to take the decoction with Figs,
Liquorice, etc. They help to expectorate phlegm, in those that have a Cough, or
straitness in the Breast, and are very conducible to the stomach; and being
boiled in Wine, and taken, it helps the stoppings of the Liver, and the
Dropsy that comes thereby. The same stays the Hickop, and helps
diges^ion. It stirs up bodily lust, and boiled in Wine, it is good against
all poison, and biting of all venomous Beasts. It avails in Children, that have
the Falling Sickness, being taken, and is very effectual to help a stinking
breath, and to break wind in any part of the body, be it in the Head, Stomach,
Spleen, Bowels, or Mother, and to provoke Urine and sleep, to them that want
it. The Chymicall Oil taken in broth or wine, three or fo^r drops at a time,
does help the giddiness of the Head, the straitness and pains in the Breast
and Stomach, and the crudities and belchings therein, the much desire to cast,
and the rising of the Mother: as also all other griefs and pains inwardly, that
rise of Cold or Wind. The Quintessence of it, gives ease to those that are
frantic, and distempered in their Brains, and for such as are troubled with
the Falling Sickness, or have the Cramp or Convulsion. A decoction of Annise
Seed is also excellent in the Cholick. If Annise, either green or dry, be
beaten, and laid to their eyes, that have any hurtful thing fallen into them,
it will soon draw it forth; and likewise take away the venom of any hurt, by
the biting of venomous Creatures, and heals them quickly. The Herb or Seed
boiled in Oil of Roses, and dropped warm into the Ears, eases the pains and
noise in them: the Seeds bruised, and mixed with St^rax, and the fumes thereof
taken, being cast on quick Coals, will soon ease the continual Headache. The
Italians say, that he that holds a Plant of Annise in his hand, shall not be
troubled with the Falling Sickness; but although this may seem too easy to
help so grievous a Disease, yet the quinte^ence, as is said before, is most
effectual, which is made after this manner. Infuse the Seed bruised a little
in the Spirit of Wine, for four and twenty hours, let it stand as long in an
hot Balneo, the^^ ^et it be pressed forth, and distilled, or vapoured gently in
Glass; the Residue in the bottom, when it is come to the thickness of Honey,
keep for your use. And here I might be injurious to the public* if I should
omit that notable secret concerning Bees, for the multiplying and keeping
whereof, the planting of Annise near them, is proved the best means: as al^o
for their breeding of great store of Honey. For first, it yie^^eth an
innumerable company of small Flowers* which carry a scent so pleasant, and
grateful to them, that they choose rather to seed upon it, then any Plant
whatsoever, besides the excellent sweetning Ferment, by which the Dew is
converted into a thi^ker substance and sweet, many degrees passing bare Dew,
which in it self has a sweet Sacharine salt, to which they greedily resort and
suck, and of it load themselves. But the main excellency is the long duration
of its flowring time, so that it will afford them a supply, the greatest part
of their gathering time: whereas Apples blossom at a peculiar time, and that of
small continuance. The Herb being taken, and the inside of the Hive, as also
the Orifices thereunto, being rubbed therewith, will so much delight them, that
when they (...)st forth their swarms, which they will do (if they seed hereon)
three times a year, they will certainly enter into them, and repair no where
else. But in case, that upon the neglect, any be swarved forth, and settled unto
some Tree, the fault may be amended, by rubbing the inside of the new Hive with
Annise, and holding it on the top of a Pole to the Bees, they will be allured
by the sweet scent of the Annise, to enter thereinto of their own accords. A
Baron in Austria so thrived by this secret, that he furnished many Countries
with Honey and Wax, and thereby increased his Wealth and Revenue.

CHAP. LXXXXII. Of Nigella.
The Names.
BOth the Greek and Latin Names of this Herb, are derived from the color of
the Flower; but especially, the Seed; for the Greeks, call it (...) and (...),
the Latins Nigella, a nigro seminis color, from the blackness of the Seed,
and Nigella Romana, and anciently Gith: diverse other bastard Names have been
given it, as Salusandra and Papaver Nigrum, from the Greek word: All late
Authors call it, either Melanthium, or Nigella: only Fuschius and Cordus, take
it to be Cuminum sylvestre alterum of Dioscorides. We in English call it Gith
and Nigella Romana, after the Latins* Mr. Parkinson calls it Fennel Flower;
others, Bishops wort; and others Divae Katharinae flos, or St. Catharines
Flower; and, some Kiss me twice, before I rise; and, the old Man's Beard.

The Kinds.
There be many Sorts of Nigella, twelve whereof I have here set down. 1. The
Roman smelling Nigella. 2. The Spanish Nigella. 3. Damask Nigella. 4. Double
flowred Nigella. 5. Wild Damask Nigella. 6. Field Nigella. 7. Nigella of Candy,
without scent in the Seed. 8. Candy Nigella, with broad Leaves, and sweet
smelling Seed. 9. Another sweet Candy Nigella. 10. A sweet Nigella of Candy,
with double formed Seeds. 11. Single white Nigella, with yellowish Seed. 12.
Carden Nigella, whose description follows.

The Form.
The Garden-Nigella, has weak and brittle stalks, about a foot in height, full
of Branches, with many finely cut and divided Leaves upon them, somewhat like
unto those of the Larks heel, but of a more grassy green color: the Flowers
grow at the top of the Branches, of a whitish blew color, each Flower being
divided into five parts, Star-fashion, each part also consisting of many fine
small Leaves: The Flowers being faded, there come up small knops or heads,
having at the end thereof, five or six little sharp horns or poyntels, and
every knop or head is divided into several small cells, or partitions, wherein
the Seed is contained, which is of a blackish color, somewhat like unto
Onyon-Seed; but a little bigger, of a sharp taste, and a sweet strong favor:
the Root is small, threddy, and yellow, perishing yearly.

The Places and Time.
The four first Sorts, with the last which is most common, are sown in
Gardens, as well in England, as in Italy, and elsewhere. The other Sorts grow
wild in the Cornfieldsd of Italy, Candy, Germany, etc. Where they are once
sown and the Seed suffered to shed, there will be no need of sowing them
again, for they will sow themselves; but for those that will bring any of them
into their Gardens, the Seed must be sown in April, and then they will flower
in July, and the Seed will be ripe in September.

The Temperature.
The Seed of the Garden Nigella is hot and dry in the third Degree, and of thin
parts. The sweet smelling Seeds are most effectual, the other that do not
smell well, are in a manner refused. Sure the Herb it self cannot but be of
good use.

The Virtues.
The Seed drunken in Wine, increases Milk in the Breasts of Nurses, is a good
remedy against shortness of Breath, expels Wind, provokes Urine, and the
terms in Women, kills worms, and is very good against poison, and the biting
of venomous Beasts, if it be taken moderately, otherwise, it is not only
hurtful to Nurses, but to all others that take thereof, too often, or in too
great quantity. It is very effectual, both in tertian and quartan Agues, if a
dram thereof be taken in Wine or Posset Drink, before the fit. It opens
obstructions also, if it be boiled with Vinegar, and so taken, is an excellent
remedy in all other distempers, where there is need of cleansing, drying and
heating. It kills Worms, being laid to the Navel, with the Juice of Wormwood.
Being dried, and put into Linen or Sarsenet, and so quilted in, and laid to
the Head, it cures Catar^hes, or Rheums, dries the brain, and restores the
smelling, being lost. It takes away Freckles, Scurf, and hard Swellings, being
mixed with Vinegar, and applied. The smoke or fume thereof, drives away
venomous Creatures, and ^^lleth Flies, Bees, and Wasps. The same mingled with
the Oil of Flower de luce, and laid to the forehead, cures the Headache,
coming from cold. The Do^e of the Seed is from half a dram to a dram.

CHAP. XCIII. Of Mallows.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and in Latin Malva, because it softeneth the
Belly, the Greek word coming from (...), which signifies; to soften; and for
the Latin name, Schola Salerni, will tell you that.

Dixerunt malvum veteres quia molliat alvum. Some think it to be called Mallow
in English, quasi Mellow, either from the softness of the Leaf, or from the
softening of the Belly and hard tumors, or peradventure from the Latin.

The Kinds.
Parkinson reckons up so many sorts of Mallows, that they would take up more
room then I can spare, to set them in. I shall therefore mention those that
follow, reserving the Marsh Mallows, and its kinds, for another Chapter upon
another occasion. 1. The common Mallow, with purplish Flowers. 2. The Purplish
Mallow with white Flowers. 3. Small wild Mallow. 4. Single Garden Hollihocks.
5. Double Hollihocks. 6. French curled Mallows. 7. Fine cut, or Vervain
Mallows. 8. A strange Mallow called Malva Rosa, by Mr. Brown.

The Form.
The common Mallow is so well known, as also the Hollihocks, that the
description of either of them is not so necessary, as that of the Vervain
Mallow, being less taken notice of. The lower Leaves of it are soft and green,
somewhat like unto the wild common Mallow Leaves, but lesser, and more cut in
on the edges, besides the denting; but those that grow up higher upon the stalk
(whose bark may be broken in the threads, like Hemp, and is sometimes near as
high as the ordinary wild kind is) are more cut in and divided, somewhat like
unto Vervain; the Flowers hereof, are of a paler purple color then the common
Mallow; but in most, not so much divided into several Leaves, and laid so open,
but abiding more close, or less spread, and without those stripes oftentimes,
being smooth, and somewhat shining: the Seed, and Seed Vessels, are like the
common Mallow: the Root also is long, tough, and white, but somewhat more
woody.

The Places and Time.
The first is known to grow every where, but the second with white Flowers is
more rate, growing but in few places, as about Ashford and other places in
Kent, and at Thrapstone in North(...) etc. The third is found under Walls, and
Hedges, in many places. The fourth, fifth, and sixth, are Inhabitants of
Gardens, and so is the seventh, which is found in the Fields also about St.
Albans, etc. The last was showed me by Mr. Ball in his Garden near Sion House,
which came with some other Seeds from beyond the Seas. They flower about June
and July.

The Temperature.
The wild Mallows have a certain moderate heat, and moystnesse withal. The
Juice thereof is slimy, clammy, or giving: the which are to be preferred before
the Garden Mallow, or Hollihock; but the French Mallow is generally holden to
be the wholsomest; and, as Gerard thinks, is that which Hesiod commends. It
easily descends, not only because it is moist, but also by reason it is slimy.

The Virtues.
Although Mallows are commonly said to mollify the belly and make it soluble,
yet there are other things more effectual to that purpose; I shall therefore
appropriate it to the Breasts or Paps of women: for it not only procures
great store of Milk in the Breasts of those Nurses that ear it, being boiled
and buttered, as other herbs commonly, are or shred into their pottage; but
also asswageth the hardness of them, being boiled and applied unto them warm:
as also all other hard Tumors, Inflammations of Impostums, and swelling of
Cods, and other parts, and eases the pains of them, and likewise the
hardness of the Liver and Spleen, being applied to the places, especially if a
Pultis be made, by adding some Bean or Barley flower, or Oil of Roses to them.
The Leaves and Roots also boiled in wine, or water, or in broth, with parsley
or Fennel Roots; does help to open the Body, and is very convenient in hot
Agues, or other distempers of the body; for by its mollilying quality, it not
only voideth hot choleric, or other offensive humors; but eases the pains
and torments that come by the stoppings of the belly, and to that end the
boiled leaves are applied warm to the Belly, and it is used in Clisters for the
same purpose. The Decoction of the seed of any of the Common Mallows made in
milk or wine, does marvellously help Excoriations of the Bowels, Ptisick,
Pleuresie, and other diseases of the Chest and Lungs that proceed of hot
causes, if it be continued taking for some time together; The Leaves and Roots
work the same effects. The juice drunk in wine, or the Decoction made in wine,
does help women to an easy and speedy delivery. The Leaves bruised and laid to
the Eyes, with a little Honey, takes away the Impostumation of them. The Leaves
rubbed upon any place stung with Bees, Waspes or the like, takes away the
pains, redness and swelling thereof. The juice of Mallows boiled in old Oil,
and applied, takes away all roughness of the skin, as also the falling of the
hair, the Scurse, Dandraffe, or Dry-Scabs, in the head, or other parts, if
they be anointed therewith, or washed with the Decoction: the same also is
effectual against Scaldings or Burnings, and to help wildfire, and all other
hot, red, and painful swellings in any part of the body. The Flowers boiled in
water and a little Honey added, is a good Gargle for any sore mouth or throat:
If the feet be bathed with the Decoction of the Leaves, Roots and Flowers, it
helps the flowing down of Rhume from the head, which rose out of the Stomach:
the green leaves beaten with Nitre and applied, draws out thorns or pricks
out of the flesh. The roots being made clean from the earth and washed and at
the end a little ^cotched with a knife, and then rubbed hard upon the teeth
takes a way sliminesse of them, and makes them very white. The Vervain-Mallow
is thought to be most effectual for burstings or ruptures and the b^oody s^ix:
and also for the shrinking of the Sinews and Cramp. The diuilled water hereof,
being made when it is in flower, works the same effects but more weakly, yet
it is much commended in hot Agues, and Fevers. Pl^ny says that whosoever
shall take a spoonefull of the juice of any of the Mallows, shall for that day
be free from all diseases, and it is especial good for the Falling Sickness;
The Syrup also and Conserve made of the flowers are very effectual to the same
diseases and for Costivenesse. The young leaves may be eaten as a Sallet with
Salt and Vinegar, and so the Nurses may eat them.

CHAP. XCIV. Of Dill.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), quod cito crescat, from its speedy growing; for
though it be late before it come up, a month or two after Fennel to which it
is very like; yet it perfecteth its feed as much before it, and then fades
away; And this in my opinion is the likeliest Etymology; yet, others think it
to be so called quasi (...), id est, invictum quia c^bi appetentiam excit^^,
because it provokes appetite, or from (...), which is Congressus and ^^^tio
Venerea, for which the Ancients held it very e^^ectuall. It is called in Latin;
Anethum and Anetum: In English, Dill and A^et.

The Kinds.
Though there were but one sort of Dill known formerly, yet in these latter
times two other sorts have been found out as: 1. Common Garden Dill. 2. Great
Wild Dill 3. Small Wild Dill.

The Form
The Common Dill grows up with seldom more then one stalk, neither so high
nor so great usually as Fennel; being round and with fewer joints thereon,
whose Leaves are sadder and sometimes longer and so like Fennel that it
deceives many; but harder in handing and somewhat thicker, of a stronger scent
also and not altogether so pleasant: the tops of the stalks have fewer branches
and smaller umbells of yellow flowers, which turn into small seed, somewhat
flatter and thinner then Fennel seed, but of a stronger and not so pleasant a
taste. The Root is small and woody, perishing every year after it has born
seed, and is at no time put to any use.

The Places and Time.
The first is most usually sowed in Gardens and grounds, for the purpose; yet
it has been found wild in some places. It may be sown about the beginning of
April and then happily it may come up about the end thereof but where it is once
sowed, and the Seeds suffered to shed, it will come up of its own accord, yet
not till about the time aforesaid, it being a wise Plant, and not willing to
venture ab^o^d, till the Winter be gone: It brings forth its Flowers in July,
and Seeds i^ August. The second, as is said, has been found in Sicilia, and so
the last likewise.

The Temperature.
Gerard and Parkinson differ about the Temperature and Virtues of this Plant.
Gerard says, Dill (and he quoteth Galen for it) is hot in the end of the
second Degree and dry in the beginning of the same, or in the end of the f^rst
Degree. Park^nson says it is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second;
but when it is dried, it is hot in the third: whence he upon seeming suppo^tion
of Galens, concludes, and after him Mr. Pemel and Mr. Culpepper; the two first
contradicting, and the other omitting the lacti^ick virtues, which
notwithstanding do reside in this herb.

The Virtues.
Though the forementioned Authors deny that Dill has the Virtue of procuring
Milk in the Breasts of Nurses, yet D^oscorides, that Oracle of Herbarism
affirming it, I durst not follow them; but searching some other Authors, I
find them to differ also, though they allow of its lactifick Virtue; for Mr.
Barrow in his Method of Physic, treating of those things that procure milk,
says, that Rocket, Fennel, Dill and Parsley, will do it, whilst they are
green; for they being dried, do heat and dry more then they ought to do. Mr.
Gerard says, the decoction of the tops of Dill dried, and likewise of the
Seed, being drunk, ingend^e^h Milk in the Breasts of Nurses, which I conceive
it might do, though it were hot and dry in the third Degree; for why may not
Dill have this faculty, as well as the Seeds of Nigella, which are likewise hot
and dry in the third degree, which Parkinson grants without scruple. But it
matters not much, of what quality it be of, so it be endued with a specific
quality to draw milk into the Breasts, as it seems this has. And though it be
probable, that it breeds not much blood from whence milk proceeds, yet
stirring up the Appetite to other food that does it, it may be said to do it.
So much for breeding of Milk. Now for its other virtues. The decoction of the
Herb and Seeds provokes Urine, expels wind, eases pains and swellings in
the Body, stays vomiting, and the Hickops; for which last purpose, it will be
more effectual, if it be boiled in Worm-wood-Wine, or Wine with a few branches
of Wormwood, and red Rose Leaves, and the stomach bathed therewith; but if the
Seed be only boiled in Wine, or Beer, then tied in a Cloth, and so smel^ed, it
will stay them, if they be not too violent. Being boiled in Wine and drunk, it
is good to strengthen the Brain, and stop the loosnesse of the Belly, and to
stir up Venery and so does the green Herb; yet either of them taken often, or
in any great quantity, does very much dull the Eyesight, and dries up the
natural Sperm. The decoction thereof, helps Women that are troubled with the
pains and windiness of the Muthes, if it be put into the Case of a close
Stool, Wi^ker Chair, or some such hollow thing, that the fume thereof may
ascend upward, the more effectually. The Seed is of more use then the Leaves,
although they be much used to relish Condiments, as pickled Cucumbers, etc.
and is more effectual to digest raw and viscous humors, and is used in all
Medicines that serve to expel wind, and ease torments and pains thereof. The
Seed being roasted, or fried, and used in Oils, or Plasters, dissolveth the
Apostumes in the Fundament, dries all Ulcers, especially in the secret parts,
and likewise those sub praeputio, though they be old, and of long continuance:
Oil, wherein Dill Seed, or Dill has been boiled, procures sleep, and is
effectual to warm the Brains and Stomach, and Belly, either of them being
anointed therewith, to resolve humors and Impostumes, or hard Tumors, and to
ease pain.

CHAP. XCV. Of Rampions.
The Names.
SOme call these Rapunculi* and Rapuntia: Gesner Dodonaeus, and others call
them Rapa Sylvestria, which though they have but little likeness at all with
Rapum the Turnep, but in the ediblenesse of the Root: yet the name is a
diminutive thereof. Others call them Campanula, of the form of the Flowers,
being like little Bells. Columna takes Rapunculus minor, to be the Erinus of
Nicander and Dioscorides; and the other Rapunculi, to be kinds thereof.
Ma^hiolus takes Campanula Persici folio, to be the Phyteuma of Dioscorides:
and Casalpinus calls the Rapunculus Spicatus sive Alepecuroides, Phyteuma
foliis Rapunculi, chiefly, because the Heads with Seed, have holes in them, as
Dioscorides says, the Phyteuma has. They are called in English, Rampions,
some being Garden Rampions, some wild Rampions, and some Bell-flowers.

The Kinds.
Of Rampions Parkinson reckons up no less then seaventeen Sorts. 1. Garden
Rampions. 2. Long Foxtail Rampions. 3. Round Foxtail Rampions. 4. Bushheaded
Rampions, which are also of three Sorts. 5. Candy Rampions. 6. The lesser
Steeple Belflowre. 7. Wood Rampions. 8. Wood Rampions, with great Flowers. 9.
Sullen broad leafed Bell-flowre. 10. The least broad leafed Bellflowre. 11.
Wild field Bell-flowers. 12. Small wild Bell-flowers. 13. Flax leafed
Bell-flower. 14. Small yellow Bell-flowers. 15. Time leafed Bell-flower. 16.
Ivy leafed Bell-flower. 17. Rock Rampions, to which I shall add the Peach
leafed Bell-flower, and the horned Rampions.

The Form.
The Rampions that are usually kept in Gardens, are accounted a lesser kind
then many of the others that grow wild, and lying upon the ground, with diverse
small, and long, round pointed pale green Leaves, before it run up to stalks,
which spread diverse such Leaves thereon, but smaller to the top, where break
forth sundry pale, Purplish Flowers, ending in five points, like unto the
Flowers of Throatwort, but much smaller, having also such like heads, with
small brownish Seed therein: The Root is small and white, and gives milk,
being broken, as all the rest of the Plant does, shooting two or three
branches, almost of an equal bigness, which is sweet in taste, and therefore
much used to be eaten.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in the Physic Garden in Oxford, and diverse other Gardens.
The second, seventh, eleventh, and twelfth grow also in England; but I find
not the particular place expressed. The Peach-leafed Bell-flowre, which is the
last save one, grows in the Garden of my most honored Friend, John
Cartwright Esquire, at his Manor of Aino on the Hill, in Northamptonshire.
The last grows plentifully, between Selbury Hill, and Beacon Hill, in the way
to Bathe. The rest are strangers, some of them growing in Candy, others in
Italy, and some in Germany, etc. They flower all the Summer long, some abiding
long and lasting, until in Autumn cold dewes do take them away, others being
sooner spent.

The Temperature.
The Roots of these are of a cold Temperature, and somewhat binding, yet scarce
exceed the first Degree.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Roots and Leaves of Rampions being broken, as I said before, do send forth
a very white milky Juice, which is an apparent Signature, that they being so
temperate, are available for the engendring of store of Milk in Nurses Breasts,
which without controversy, they do effectually procure. The Roots of all the
Sorts of Rampions, and so likewise some of Bell-flowers, especially if they
have any greater Roots, then the ordinary stringy ones, are used for Sallets,
either ^old with Vinegar, Oil and Pepper, or boiled and strewed with Butter, or
Oil, and some black or long Pepper cast on them; either way, or any way else,
they are familiar to the stomach, stirring up the appetite, and by reason of
their temperate quality, cause a good digestion. The Roots beaten small, and
mixed with some Meal of Lupines, cleanses the skin from spots, marks, or other
discolorings. The distilled water of the whole Plants, Roots, and all,
performs the same, and makes the place very splendent and clear. Sure these
useful Plants were not known to Mr. Culpepper, to grow in England; but he
fearing them to be outlandish, to which he was a professed Enemy, very
ignorantly omitted them, when as he has busied himself about those that are
less useful. This I wrote, the rather because I would have you take notice of
Rampions, and endeavor to propagate them.

CHAP. XCVI. Of Periwinckle.
The Names.
IT is called (...) in Greek, because it brings forth stalks, which creep
like those of the Vine, called (...); and Daphnoidas, because the Leaves are
somewhat like, though lesser then those of the Bay Tree. It is called also
Clematis Daphnoides in Latin; but it is most commonly known by the name of
Vinca Pervinca, both in Shops and elsewhere. Pliny calls it also Camaedaphne
and Centunculus, though there be other Plants, to whom those names do more
properly belong. In English Pervinkle, Peruinkle, and Periwinckle.

The Kinds.
There be diverse Sorts or Kinds of Periwinckle, whereof some be greater, others
lesser; some with white Flowers, others Purple, and double, and some of a fair
blew Sky Color.

The Form.
The common Sort of Periwinckle has many Branches trailing or running upon the
ground, shooting out small Fibers at the Joints, as it runs, taking thereby
hold in the ground, and rooteth in diverse places. At the Joints of these
branches, stand two small, dark, green shining Leaves, somewhat like
Bay Leaves, but smaller, as I said before, and with them come also the Flowers
(one at a joint standing upon a tender Foot-stalk) being somewhat long and
hollow, parted at the brims, sometimes into four, sometimes into five leaves,
of a pale blew co^our. The Root is not much bigger then a Rush, bushing in the
ground, and creeping with his Branches far about, whereby it quickly possesses
a great compass, and is therefore most usually planted under hedges, where it
may have room to run up upon the sticks, which it does encompasse and bind over
and over, and is perhaps from thence called Vinca Per winca.

The Places and Time
The first grows on the north west side of St. Albans under an hedge,
encompassing a field sometimes in the occupation of Mr. Pollard. and in
Kingsland near Paradise. The other sorts are found only in the Gardens of those
that are delighted with such pretty sorts of Varieties. The flowers of them do
flourish in March, April, and May, and oftentimes later.

The Temperature.
Periwinckle is somewhat hot, but within the second Degree, and likewise
something dry and astringent.

The Virtues.
Perhaps it may seem very strange to many, that I should appropriate this Plant
to the Breasts, for the breeding of Milk, when as the greater part of
Herbarists, ascribe no such Virtue to it. But to me it is sufficient, that I
have for my President, that famous Herbarist Spigelius, who in his second Book,
and fourth Chapter, treating of those things that generate Milk, says, There
are also some Herbs, as well hot as cold, which although they breed little
blood, and are of small nourishment: yet they cause great plenty of milk, as
Lettice, Cabbage, and Periwinckle, which being boiled in water, or the Broth of
Meat, does recall the defect of Milk into the Breasts, though they nourish
little or nothing at all, which actions, they perform, rather by an occult
specific virtue then any manifest quality. The other properties that it has,
are that it stays bleeding, both at Mouth and Nose, if some of the Leaves be
chewed, and the French do use it to stay their menstruall Courses. Dioscorides,
Galen, and Aegineta commend it against the Lasks and Fluxes of the Belly, to be
drunk with Wine, and being chewed, it eases the pains of the Teeth. It is
likewise good against the biting of Adders, being bruised, and applied to the
place, especially, if the infusion thereof in Vinegar be taken inwardly.
Parkinson says, it is a tradition with many, that a wreath made hereof, and
worn about the Legs, defends them from the Cramp; by which words, he seems
in my judgment, to doubt of the truth thereof; but indeed, he needed not so to
do; for I knew a friend of mine, who was very vehemently tormented with the
Cramp, for a long while, which could be by no means eased, till he had wrapped
some of the Branches hereof about his Legs, and other parts that we afflicted.
Mr. Culpepper writes, that Venus owns this Herb, and says, That the Leaves
eaten by Man and Wife together, cause love, which is a rare quality indeed if
it be true.

CHAP. XCVII. Of Lettuce.
The Names.
THe Garden Lettuce is called in Greek, (...), and of the Pythagoreans (...).
In Latin, Lactuea sativa a lactei succi copia, from the plenty of Milk that it
has, and causes. When the Leaves of this kind are curled, or crompled, it is
called of Pliny, Lactuca crispa; and of Columella Lactuca Ceciliana, in
English, curled or crumpled Lettuce. The Cabbage Lettuce is commonly called
Lactuca capitata, and Lactuca sessilis. Pliny names it Lactuca Laconica;
Columella, Lactuca Baetica; Petrus Crescentius Lactuca Romana. In English,
Cabbage Lettuce, and Loved Lettuce. There is another Sort with Reddish Leaves,
called Latin, Lactuca Cypria; in English, Red Lettuce.

The Kinds.
Of Lettuce, there be seven kinds, 1. Garden Lettuce. 2. Curled Lettice. 3.
Small Curled Lettuce. 4. Savoy Lettice. 5. Cabbage Lettuce. 6. Lumbard Lettuce.
7. Red Lettuce, to which it will not be amiss, to add Lambs Lettuce, or Corn
Sallet, which is called in Greek, (...), in Latin Album Olus and Lactuca
Agnina, whose description I shall give you, because the other Sorts are more
generally known.

The Form.
Lambs Lettuce has many slender, weak stalks, trailing upon the ground,
growing to the height of a foot, if the ground be very fertile; but otherwise
not above an hand or two high, with sundry Joints or Knees; out of every one
whereof, grow a couple of Leaves, narrow and long, not unlike to Lettuce, at
the first coming up, as well in tenderness, as taste in eating: the form being
somewhat like that of Valerian; for a kind whereof, it has been set forth by
some. On the top of the stalks, stand upon a broad tuft, as it were, certain
white Flowers, that be mavelous little, which canscarcely be known to be
Flowers, saving that they grow many together like a Tuft or Umbel: it has
instead of Roots a few slender threads, like unto hairs.

The Places and Time.
All the Sorts of Lettuces are nursed up in Gardens, but none so commonly as
the first, which is sown in every Garden. Most of the others are scarce known
to the common Sort of people: yet some that are curious, have them. They
delight to grow in a manured, fat, moist, and well dunged Soil, and will
prosper the better, if they be sown very thin, and in fair weather. The best
time of sowing them is in the Spring presently after the winter is spent, yet
they may be sowed all the Summer long. The Lambs Lettice grows naturally in
many Corn Fields, and has thence been brought into the Gardens of those that
know it, and its use. It is found green almost Winter and Summer, and is eaten
in Sallets, in February and March, before the Garden Lettice can be had.

The Temperature.
Although these sorts of Lettice do differ in form, one from another, yet their
temperature is the same; which is cold and moist, in the second or third Degree.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Milky juice which Issues forth from the wounded stalks and Leaves is a
sufficient Signature, that this Herb, if it be eaten boiled or raw, makes
plenty of milk in Nurses, who through heat and dryness are not stored with a
competency thereof; for it breeds Milk by tempering the dryness and heat;
but in Bodies naturally cold, it does not engender milk at all but is rather
an hinderance thereunto, so that it will be necessary to examine the
Constitution of the party before any thing can be prescribed. If this defect
happen in a dry body, there is nothing better then Lettuce, but if in a cold
one then hot things, as Nigell Fennel and Dill will be proper, because
diseases are cured by their Contraries. It is also good for a hot Stomach, and
yeildeth good nourishment to the Body. Antonius Musa did by Lettuce ease
Augustus of the Violence of his Disease. It procures rest and sleep; being
taken raw or boiled it helps to loosen the belly, and the boiled more then
the raw, which last eaten performs it the better: and was generally so used
by the Ancients. It helps digestion, quenches thirst, and eases all griping
pains of the Stomach or bowels that come of Choler; it abateth bodily lust
and tempereth the heat of Urine, the seeds and distilled water are good for the
virulent running of the Reins, and for the heat of the Urine, as also for the
foresaid purposes. But for procuring rest, and sleep and easing the headache, if
it proceeds from an hot cause, it will be convenient that the juice of Lettuce
be mixed or boiled with oil of Roses, and applied to the Forehead and Temples;
with applied Champhir to the Cods, it abateth the heat of Lust, or applied to
the same manner to the Region of the Heart Liver or the Reins or, by bathing
the said place with the juice or distilled water, wherein some white Sanders
and red Roses are put, does abate the heat and Inflammations therein; as also
strengthen those parts. The Lambs Lettice is with pleasure eaten with vinegar
Salt and oil as other Sallets be, amongst which is none of the rest.

And let thus much suffice to be written concerning those plants which cause
Milk for which purpose Sowthistle, Rocket, Anemonies, and diverse other plants
are effectual, some whereof are already and the rest shall be hereafter
handled. In the next place, it will be convenient to speak of those that dry
up Milk in Women's Breast when they weane their Children, or be overcharged
with abundance of Milk; and those also that keep it from Curdling and dissolve
the tumors of the Breasts.

CHAP. XCVIII. Of Fennel Giant.
The Names.
THe Grecians called the greater sort (...) and the least (...) which Gaza in
his Translation of Theophrastus calls Ferula and Ferulago in Latin. The
Greek name Signifies Thyrsum, Virgultum, Bacillum, the ancients using the
stalks of it, which grow to be very strong and Substantial, for props to hold
up the weaker Sort of Plants, and for staves for old men to walk with. The
Latin name is derived a feriendo because the said stalks were used by
Schoolmasters, for their Sceptra Paedagogica and with them did smite the hands
or heads of their Idle and truant Scholars, and therefore Martial calls
them tristes ferulas. This Herb growing in Cyrene of Africa, nigh to the Oracle
of Jupiter Ammon, brings forth a Gum which is therefore called Ammoniacum, as
some think: when it grows in Media it brings forth Sagapenum; and in Syria
Galbanum. Of the two last I shall treat elsewhere: but of the first, which
grows in Cyrene, I shall principally take notice of, because it dries up
milk.

The Kinds.
There be three Sorts of Fennel Giant. 1. Fine leafed Fennel Giant. 2. The
broader leased Fennel Giant. 3. Small Fennel Giant.

The Form.
Fennel Giant brings forth sundry, large, hollow Fungous, thick branched
stalks, of very light, fine, thin, (for substance but thick set) leaves, placed
out of order, the bottom of the stalks being as thick as ones finger; but
compassing one another with broad thin hollowish Skins, at the bottom, from
amongst which, rises up a strong stalk, eight or ten foot, in its natural
soil; but with us, it seldom rises higher then a yard and a half, or two yards
high, sometimes as big as a great Cudgel; set with diverse such fine Leaves
thereon, one above another, compassing the stalk at the bottom: out of the
bosom whereof, come forth several small Branches toward the tops; the top
also being divided into sundry parts, forming a large Umbel of small yellow
Flowers, which turn into blackish flat Seeds, two always joined together, by
the little foot-stalk, whereon they stand, as is usual in all umbelliferous
Plants: the two inner sides being somewhat hollow, and the outsides round with
the longnesse: the Root grows very great, and never decays, branching forth
many ways, of a blackish brown on the outside, and somewhat white within,
yielding a thick juice, being broken in any part, which does quickly
condensate, and grow into a yellowish gummy substance, not smelling any thing
strong in our Country, as it does in the hotter Climates.

The Places and Time.
The most natural places of these Plants, are as I said before Cyrene in
Africa, Media, and Syria, yet they are all found growing, as well in Narbone in
France; among the Rocks that are torrified with the Sun all day, as in diverse
places of Italy, Apulia, and Florence, and diverse other places, but yields
little Gum in Europe. They are likewise growing in our English Gardens, as in
the Physic Garden at Oxford, and that at Westminster. They flower in June and
July, and the Seed is ripe in the beginning, or end of August.

The Temperature.
Ammoniacum is hot in the second Degree, and dry in the beginning of the same:
or, as some say, hot in the third Degree, and dry in the second. When it is
applied outwardly, it is of a dissolving nature.

The Virtues.
It being generally supposed, that Ammoniacum proceeds from the Root* (...)
this Fennel Giant; and because it is held good to dissolve the tumors with
which sometimes Women's Breasts are affected, or brings them to maturity, and
ripens, being applied thereunto, and to decrease the Milk, and keep it from
curdling, being mixed with Vinegar, and applied likewise, and therefore I have
thus disposed of it. Being taken inwardly, it purges thick phlegm from the
Head, Nerves, Stomach, Mesentery, and also from the Joints. It much prevails in
Asthmaes, that is in the shortness of the breath, and in Diseases coming of
phlegm. It is good in old pains of the Head, and against stoppings of the
Liver: it provokes the terms in Women, and Urine, and is good in any kind of
Gout, whether Sciatica, or Joint Gout: as also in the Falling Sickness. It
kills Worms, called Ascarides; and is excellent against the hardness of the
Liver or Spleen. It brings away the dead Child. Being outwardly applied, it
consumes spongious or proud flesh, it softneth Corns, and the hard swellings of
the Joints, which come by reason of the Gout, and draws forth Corns,
Splinters, and the like, if it be dissolved with Vinegar; but it is more
effectual, if it be mixed with Honey, Birthwort and Saffron. It consumes
Strumaes, or Swellings, called the Kings Evil, and ripeneth all kinds of
Impostumes, being applied on Wool that is not greasy. Being mixed with Honey,
and applied to the Throat, it helps the Quins^e, and Swelling in the Neck or
Throat. It takes away Spots of the Eyes, being mixed with Women's Milk, and it
cleanses the sight, being mixed in Medicines for the Eyes. Being dissolved with
Frankincense in Vinegar, and applied, helps Ring-worms. It is dangerous, to
be taken by Women with Child, lest it make them miscarry, and though it provoke
Urine, yet too much of it will make one piss blood. Galen sets down the
properties of the Ferula it self, in this manner. The Seed, says he, does heat
and rarifie, the pith of the stalk is of a binding quality, whereby it helps
the spitting of blood, and those which are troubled with the Colic. It is a
most acceptable food to Asses, but a present poison to other Creatures,
especially the Lamprey. It does help the Falling Sickness, being taken at
several times of the Moon, and the fresh Juice of the Root, dropped into the
Eyes, clears the dimnesse of the sight.

CHAP. LXCIX. Of Gourds.
The Names.
THe Gourd is called in Greek (...), Colocyntha Edulis to distinguish it from
the wild or bitter Gourd called Colocynthi or Coloquintida: In Latin,
Cucurbitat, a concurvatus (as it is thought) quod faeile, si quid obstiterit
quo minus extendatur incurvescat because it will grow crooked if there be any
thing in its way.

The Kinds.
Of this kind of Gourds, Parkinson reckons up seven sorts. 1. The greater
bottle Gourd. 2. The lesser bottle Gourd. 3. The Long Gourd. 4. The Buckler or
Simnell Gourd. 5. Rugged Gourds. 6. Winter Gourds or Millions. 7. Round Indian
Gourds or Millions.

The Foorme.
The greater bottle Gourd, grows as all other of these kind of herbs do,
spreading many great rough and hairy arms, and branches with several great and
broad leaves, soft and almost round: yet pointed at the ends, and sometimes
dented about the edges, set upon long footstalks, and long clasping tendrels,
like a Vine set at other joints; whereby it climeth, taking hold and winding it
self about whatsoever poles, arbours, trees, or other things that stand next
unto it; or else not having whereon to climb or raise it self, it lies on the
ground spreading a great compass as the Pompion does; at the several joints
likewise with the leaves come forth several flowers in the same manner as
Pompions, Cucumbers or Melons, but are very large and hollow like Bells ending
in five points or corners, with a round green head under each of them, that
will bear fruit: for many flowers wither and bear no fruit, not having that
round green head under the flowers which should grow to be the fruit, and will
be full and ready to come forwards with the short stiff stalk under it; the
color of the flowers are either white, or pale-white, or pale-yellow: the
fruit when it is ripe has an hard outward rind or shell, yellowish, large and
round bellied, flat at the bottom like n^ou a g^asse bott^e, and smaller up to
the neck; above which, is a small round formed head whereunto the stalk is
fastened, and sometimes without any small head being pendulous or hanging down
not standing forth or upright: within which fruit, lie dispersedly many seeds,
having smooth hard woody shells, flat and broad at the upper end or head, and
somewhat pointed below; wherein lies a sweet white kernel, the root consists
of many long strings spreading much within the ground, but perishes usually
with the first frosts.

The Places and Time.
The Gourds are cherished in the Gardens of these cold Regions, yet the fruit
seldom comes to perfect maturity, for want of heat to ripen them. In the hot
Countries where they come to ripnesse, the rinds of them are sometimes of that
bigness, that they are used to put in Turpentine, Oil, Honey; and also serve
them for pailes to fetch water in and many other the like uses; as in Egypt,
Syria etc. Many of the lesser of them are used to put Tobacco in, even here
amongst Us in England. The best way is to plant them in April, in a bed of
Horsedung; yet, so ordered that that they may not want moisture: for if either
of these be wanting, they thrive not; but both of them concurring, they will
flourish in June and July, and the fruit will be ripe in the end of August, but
they are gathered to eat before the rinds grow to be woody.

The Temperature.
All these sorts of Gourds however different in form, yet are of one quality
that is, cold and moist in the second degree.

The Virtues.
If either the juice of the leaves or young branches of any of those Gourds, or
the distilled water of them, be applied in clothes and spunges wet therein to
Women's breasts pained with the abundance of milk, it eases them by cooling and
restraining the hot quality and quantity thereof. Wine* that is kept in a fresh
Gourd all night, before it has been cleansed from the loose inward pulpe and
seed, and drunk in the morning, will cause the body to be soluble. They are
conveniently given to hot and choleric bodies to cool the heat and
inflammation of the Liver and stomach: but the distilled water of them before
they are through ripe drunk with Sugar, does wonderfully help to assuage thirst
and the hot fits of Agues. For want of a Still to make the water, you may take
this course, Cut off the upper head of the Gourd, and having cleansed it from
the seed* put it into an Oven with a batch of bread, and in the middle thereof
there will be gathered a fine clear water, which being poured out, may be kept
to use as need requires. The leaves and young branches are also conveniently
applied to all hot Humors Imposthumes and Inflammations, and to assuage the
pains of the head, the redness and heat in the eyes, the pains in the ears,
and the pains of the Gout; if either the juice of them or the water be applied
in clothes wet therein. The said water or Juice being drunk or applied
outwardly to the privy Members of Man or Woman, restrains the immoderate Lust
of the Body. The Ashes of burnt Gourds are used of many to cleanse and heal old
ulcers and sores, as well in the Genitories as other patts of the body, and to
help scaldings or burnings by fire or water: they are accounted as good for
macilent lean and weak bodies to feed on, as they are hurtful to such as have
the wind cholick, to whom they are not to be given at any hand. The feeds of
Gourds are one of the four greater sorts, of cold seeds, used very much in
Physic, and are very available in Decoctions, Juleps, Emulsions, or Almond,
milk, to cool the heat of the Liver, the Reins or back and urine; and to give
much ease to them that are troubled with the Stone or Gravel in the Kidneys,
and the ulcers or sores, of the inward parts and bladder. The whole Gourds are
eaten in hot countries with much delight, kept and preserved with great care,
art and pains, to be spent almost all the year after; and have there a far more
sweet and pleasant relish then in these colder Climates, where being more
waterish they are more insipid; they are eaten boiled or stewed, but much
better being fried, whereby they give the better nourishment to the body; for
by their moisture being boiled or stewed they are the more Lubrick or slippery,
and make the body more soluble as they do being pickled up, as oftentimes they
are beyond the Seas: yet with Us the fruit is seldom eaten any of these ways,
by reason of its very waterish taste, unless it be that of the Simnel Gourd,
which being of a firmer Substance, if it be well dressed, is an acceptable
meat, and is no less effectual in medicine. The Indian sorts are somewhat more
waterish, others more solid and accordingly are more or less fit for meat or
medicine. Citruls or Turkey Millions are of the same Temperature as the Gourd,
and the seeds are used as Gourds, Millions, and Cucumbers to cool the heat of
the fits of Agues, etc.

CHAP. C. Of Basil.
The Names.
SOme will have the Greek name of this plant to be (...) quia cito crescit,
from the speedy springing of the seed, which is usually within three or four
days if it be an hot and dry time, for much rain turns it into a gelly, as
may be seen if observed, as they say. Others will have it derived from (...),
which signifies to smell or give a savor, and to be writ, (...), Ozymum, of
the sweet smell thereof. It is written by most Latin Authors Ocimum not
Ocymum, which some will have to be that kind of grain called Fagopyrum or
Fragopyrum, in English Buckwheat: others be a medly kind or corn pulse sown
together. It is called by later Greek Writers, (...), Basilicum, because the
smell thereof being so excellent, is fit for a Kings house. It is called in
English, Basil, Garden Basil, the great Basil Royal, the lesser Basil Gentle,
and Bush Basil; and of some Basilicum Gariophyllatum Clove Basil.

The Kinds.
There are nine sorts of Basil. 1. The greater Garden Basil. 2. The middle
Garden Basil. 3. The lesser garden Basil. 4. The greatest Citron Basil. 5. The
great Clove Basil. 6. Anniseed Basil. 7. Indian Basil. 8. Curled Basil. 9. Small
dented Basil.

The Form.
The greater ordinary Basil rises up, usually but with one upright stalk,
diversely branching forth on all sides, whereon are set two Leaves at every
Joint, which are somewhat broad and round yet a little pointed, of a pale green
color but fresh, a little snipt about the edges, and of a strong heady scent,
somewhat like a Pomcitron as many have compared it, and therefore call it
Citratum; the flowers are small and white standing at the tops of the branches,
with two small leaves at the joint, in some places green, in others brown,
after which comes the black seed, the root perishes at the first approach of
Winter Weather, and is to be new sown every year by them that desire it.

The Places and Time.
These plants grow only in Gardens; with Us as also in Italy and other places
where they are cherished, the natural being not known: only the Indian and
curled Basil are said to come first from the West Indies into Spain, and from
thence into other places. Most of them do flower in the heat of Summer, and
some of them afterward.

The Temperature.
Basil, as Galen says, is hot in the second Degree, but it has a superfluous
moisture adjoined with it, so that he guesseth it not so fit to be taken
inwardly but outwardly applied; he says it is good to digest or distribute,
and to concoct.

The Virtues.
Notwithstanding the superfluous moisture of Basil, the same Galen says also,
that it being corrected with oil and Vinegar it was eaten by many in his time,
and thus it may be eaten by Women to dry up their milk: or if upon trial they
find any inconveniency of taking it this way, it may be applied to the breasts
outwardly being first bruised a little. Chrysippus with whom Mr. Culpeper
seems to take part raileth down right against this Royal Plant, yet it
seems to me more reasonable to defend it, as Pliny does; their frivolous
objections against it being not worth the answering. Perhaps it may be hurtful
to a weak brain, and cause the headache by reason of its strong savor, yet by
those whose brains are stronger, it is as much esteemed as any other sweet
smelling herb, to sweeten or perform any thing, and held as effectual to
comfort the brain, and likewise to open and purge the head. It is good for
those that are short winded, provokes Urine and the Terms in Women, and brings
a speedy deliverance to them in travail. The seeds are used to help the
trembling of the heart and to comfort the same, as also to expel Melancholy or
sadness. A decoction of the herb made and taken, is good against poison and
sting of Scorpions, and helpful for those that are given to swoonings, and it
provokes Venery or Lust, used with Oil of Roses, Myrtles and Vinegar, is good
against the pains of the head, and it is profitably applied to those that are
troubled with the Lethargy, the Jaundise and Dropsy. It is good to be put into
the ears of young children With a little Goosegrease to help them of the pains
thereof; the juice or seed bruised put into the Nostrils procures sneesing.
Mixed with honey and used, it takes a way spots in the face. The Juice put
into the Eyes takes away the dimnesse thereof, and dries up humors that fall
into them: so that as it seems this herb applied outwardly cures that which it
caused being taken inwardly: for most Writers say that it dulleth the sight, if
it be eaten in any plentiful manner. I conceive that Hollerus relating the
story of the Italian, who by often smelling to Basil had a Scorpion bred in his
brain, mistook the cause and that the Scorpion being there before he used to
smell the Basil, was then most quiet when he did so, for it is observed that
scorpions are pleased with its smell, and so the Italian found it which made
him use it so much, but being grown too big for that narrow compass, he caused
those vehemenr and long pains whereof he dyed.

CHAP. CI. Of Beans.
The Names.
THis kind of pulse is called in Greek, (...), and Faba in Latin* a wild kind
whereof is called, (...) in Greek; and Faba Sylvestris, in Latin: and is of
some thought to be the true Physical bean of the Ancients; whereupon they have
named it Faba Veterum, and also Faba Graecorum. But because they are different
both in form and color, the Greek-bean being no bigger then a pease and very
black, the wild bean being bigger and not so black, I hold it to be a mistake.

The Kinds.
The several sorts of Beans are very numerous, but I shall set down but five
of them in this place. 1. The Garden Bean. 2. The Field bean. 3. The wild bean.
4. The old Greekish bean. 5. The Greek bean with dented leaves. The old
Greekish bean being most Physical, I shall give you its description, the two
first being well known.

The Form.
The Greekish bean shoots forth two or three long flat stalks with two edges
lying or running on the ground, if it have nothing whereon it may ramp or rise,
which branch out on every side into stalks of leaves, four usually set thereon
by two and two, with a distance between them, like unto the Garden Bean, and
each branch bending in a long clasper: the flowers are set singly at the joints
of the branches under the leaves, and are of a dead and sullen purple color
with some palenesse at the bottom of them: after which succeed long and
somewhat flat Pods, with two sharp edges and dented about, a little hooked or
bowing, green at the first but black and hard when they are ripe, wherein are
contained four or five or more round seeds as big as pease and very black; so
that one may well say they are rather Pease than Beans; the root grows not
deep nor far, with some strings or long Fibers thereat, dying yearly.

The Places and Times
The first are set in Gardens and fields by the major part of the Gard^ners,
and are by them carried to the Market and sold for man's meat. The second are
sown generally through the Land by Husbandmen, and used by them to give their
horses and Hoggs, which Mr. Parkinson affirms also of the third kind, but I
doubt he was mistaken, for in all the Countries that I have been, I never saw
any of the Beans which they sow for Horsemeat to have Claspers* the other grow
generally in Spain, whence the seeds which we sow in our English Gardens are
transported. They flower in June and July, and sometimes sooner in Gardens: and
are commonly ripe within a month or thereabouts after their flowering.

The Temperature.
The Garden Beans are with us more used for food, then for Physic, and being
boiled whilst they are green and young, they are no contemptib^e food; for
even the better sort of people feed upon them* yet they are accounted windy.
The Field Beans are in many Countries used with a little Wheat and Rye, to make
Bread, and Beer also being mixed with Malt, and may be eaten green; but then
they are more windy, then when they are dry; and being dry, they are harder of
digestion, though they be boiled, parched, or fried. Being green, it is cold
and moist, being dry it is cold and dry. They are of a spongy, and light
substance, which has a scouring, or cleansing faculty; for it is plainly seen,
that the Meal of Beans cleanses away the filth of the Skin.

The Virtues and Signature.
When the Paps are so filled, and swollen through abundance of Milk, that they
are scarce able to hold, make a Pultis of Bean-flower, and Oil, or Vinegar, or
both, and apply unto them, and it will not only repress the Milk, but also
discuss the swelling of the Paps, caused by the curdling thereof. The distilled
water of the Flowers, is used of many, to cleanse the Face and Skin, and to
take away both spots and wrinckles, and so does the Meal or Flower of it, and
the water dis^i^led from the green husks, is held to be very effectual against
the Stone, and to provoke Urine. Bean Meal mixed with Fenugreek and Honey, and
applied to Fe^ons, Biles, blew marks by-blowes, or bruises, and Impostumes, or
Kernells about the Ears, it helps them all. With Rose Leaves, Frankincense,
and the white of an Egg, it helps the Eyes that swell, or grow out, if it be
applied: as also the watering of them, or stripes upon them, if it be used with
Wine. If a Bean be parted in two, the skin being taken away, and then laid on
the place where a Horse-Leech has been set, that bleedeth too much, it stays
the bleeding. Bean-flowre boiled to a Pultis, with Wine and Vinegar, and some
Oil put thereto, cease both the pain and swelling of the Cods, and being
taken inwardly, it stirs up Lust in those which cannot use the act of
Generation, because of the sluggish impotency, and weakness of their Members,
which it does by Signature: a Bean very much resembling the Nut of a Man's yard;
and that was the Reason that Pythagoras so much condemned them, their windiness
causing Lust* which he endeavored to suppress. If fried Beans be boiled with
Garlic, and daily taken as meat it helps inveterate Coughs, almost past
cure, the hoarsne^ of the voice, and the Impostumes in the Breast. The Husks of
them boiled* good while in water, that is to the thirds, stays the Lask; and
the ashes of the said Husks, made up with old Hog's Grease, helps the old
pains, contusions, an^ wounds of the Sinews, the Sciatica also and the Gout.
Though the Faba veterum be without doubt, that true Bean which D^oscorides,
Galen, and other Greek Authors intended, when they set down the aforesaid
Remedies; yet our ordinary Bean-flowre, is as proper for all those purposes,
and may be used to as goo^ effect.

CHAP. CII. Of Lentills.
The Names.
THere is another Sort of Pulse, which may be appropriated to the same purpose,
which the Grecians called; (...), and (...), Phacos, and in Latin Lens and
Lenticula. Pliny says, Lib. 18. Chap. 12. that the Etymon thereof seems to
be taken, quasi lenis dicta sit, lenitatisque significationem habet and
aquanimitatem fieri vescentibus ea. It is seldom used for Man's meat here in
England, and therefore I cannot justify any such operation it has, unless he
meant it of Cattle, who are much pleased with it and for their Food it is sowed
in diverse Countries. In Hampshire they leave out the first syllable, and call
it Tills, and in Oxfordshire, Dills.

The Kinds.
Of these Lentills I find but three Sorts. 1. The greater Lentills. 2. Spotted
Lentills. 3. The lesser Lentill.

The Form.
The greater Lentill has sundry, slender weak Branches, somewhat hard, two
foot long, from whence shoot forth at several places long stalks, of small
winged Leaves, that is many on each side, of a middle Rib, without any odd one
at the end; for the middle Rib of each stalk, ends in a small clasper: the
Flowers are small, and rise from between the leaves and the stalks, two for the
most part at the end of a long foot-stalk, of a sad reddish purple color,
somewhat like to those of Vetches, after which come small, short, and somewhat
flat Cods, within which are contained two or three flat, round, smooth Seeds,
of a pale, yellowish, ash color; the Root is fibrous, and perishes yearly.

The Places and Time
The first, even beyond the Seas, is only sown in the Fields, as other
manured pulses are, and so likewise in some places of our Land; but does seldom
come to maturity with us, if the season be not kindly and dry. The second is
wild, in Portugal. The last is most common in England, and is sown in
several Counties thereof, being the most pleasant and acceptable.

The Temperature.
Galen says, that Lentills hold a mean between hot and cold, yet do they dry
in the second degree, the outer Skin being binding, and the inner meat also,
which is a little harsh, and binds the Body, yet the outer Skin much more: it
is, says he, of contrary qualities; for the first decoction thereof does not
bind, but loosen the body, and therefore they that would have it to bind, cast
away the first water, and use the second, which stays Lasks, and
strengthens the stomach, and all the inward parts. Lentils husked, says he,
lose with their shells, the strength of binding, and the other qualities that
follow it, and then nourish more then those that are not husked: yet so give
they a thick and evil nourishment, and slowly pass away, neither do they stay
Fluxes, and Dysenteries, as those that are not husked.

The Virtues.
The Seeds of the Lentils boiled in Seawater, and applied to Women's Breasts
that are ready to burst through abundance of Milk, or have it curdled within
them, by any cold distemper, brings them again into good temper. It is good
also to bind and stay Lasks and Fluxes, but with other binding Herbs as
Purslane, Red Beets, Myrtles, Dried Roses Pomegranate Rindes, Medlars,
Servises, etc. taken with Vinegar, they are the more powerful. The Decoction
thereof with Wheat-flowre, applied eases the Gout, used with Honey, it closes
up the lips of Wounds, and cleanses foul Sores; being boiled in Vinegar, it
dissolveth Knots and Kernels, and being boiled with Quinces, Melilote, and a
little Rosewater put thereto, it helps the Inflammations of the Eyes and
Fundament; but for the chaps thereof, which need a stronger Medicine, it is
boiled with dried Roses, and Pomegranate Rindes, adding a little Honey to it:
It likewise stays those creeping Cankers that are ready to turn to a Gangrene
putting thereto some Seawater, and so it is good for Wheals, and running and
watering Sores, St. Anthonies Fire, Kibes, etc. being used with Vinegar. The
Decoction thereof is a good lotion for Ulcers, either in the mouth, privy
parts, or Fundament, adding a few Rose Leaves, and Quinces. But to eat
Lentills, or the broth made of them too largely, as Galen says, breeds the
Leprosy and Cankers; for gross thick Meat, is fit to breed melancholy
humors; yet it is profitably given to those that are of a watery disposition,
and evil affected thereby; but it is utterly forbidden to those that have dry
Constitutions: it is also hurtful to the sight, dulling it by drying up the
moisture, and is not convenient for Women that want their Courses; but is good
for those that have them in too much abundance. Dioscorides further adds,
that it breeds troublesome Dreams, and is hurtful to the Head, the Lungs, and
the Sinews.

CHAP. CIII. Of Lillies.
The Names.
THe Lilly is called in Greek (...), in Latin Lilium, also Rosa Junonis or
Junoes Rose, because it is reported, that it came of her Milk that fell upon
the ground. For the Poets feign that Hercules, whom Jupiter had by Alcumena,
was put to Junoes Breasts, whilst she was asleep; and after the sucking, there
fell away abundance of Milk, and that one part was spilt in the Heavens, and
the other on the Earth; and that of this sprang the Lilly and the Circle in
Heaven, called Lactens Circulus, or the milky way, or otherwise in English, The
way to Watling-street. Thus much for the white Lilly. As for the other Sorts,
which are many, I shall only put down some of them.

The Kinds.
Though there be diverse Sorts of Lillies, yet I shall only set down these. 1.
The white Lilly. 2. The white Lilly of Constantinople. 3. The gold red Lilly,
4. The red Lilly. 5. The fiery red Lilly. 6. The great Mountain Lilly. 7. The
small Mountain Lilly. 8. The red Lilly of Constantinople. 9. The Persian Lilly.
10. The Crown Imperial. 11. The double Crown Imperial.

The Form.
The white Lilly has long, smooth, and full bodies Leaves, of a grassie, or
light green color. The stalks are two Cubits high, and sometimes more, set or
garnished with the like Leaves, but growing smaller and smaller toward the
top; and upon them do grow fair white Flowers, strong of smell, narrow toward
the foot of the stalk, whereon they do grow wide or open in the mouth like a
Be^l. In the middle part of them, do grow small tender Poyntels, tipped with a
dusty, yellow color, ribbed or chamfered on the back side, consisting or six
small leaves, which are thick and fat. The Root is a bulb made of Scaly Cloves,
full of rough and clammy juice, wherewith the whole Plant does greatly abound.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in many Gardens in England: The second at Constantinople,
and the parts adjacent, from whence it was translated into our Eng^ish Gardens,
where all the rest that follow are planted also, the red Li^^ies being brought
thither, out of the plowed Fields of Italy and Langue-dock, in the Mo^ntains
and Valleys of Hetruria, and those places adjacent, where they grow wi^d. The
Mountain Lillies, as Dioscorides writes, do grow wild in Laodic^a, and
Antioch, a City of Syria* and has likewise been found upon the Mountains in
Italy and such hot Countries* as do border upon Morea or Greece, many days
journies beyond Constantinople, whereabouts the red Lilly of Constantinople
also grows. The Persian Lilly grows naturally in Persia, and those places
adjacent, whereof it took its name, as the former did from Constantinople,
whence the Crowns Imperial have been also brought. They all flower in May and
June, except the Crown Imperial, which flowreth in April, and sometimes in
March, when as the weather is warm and pleasant.

The Temperature.
The white Lilly Leaves and Flowers are hot and moist, and partly of a subtle
substance, the Root is dry in the first degree, and hot in the second. The
Flower of the red Lilly (as Galen says) is of a mixed temperature, partly of a
thin, and partly of an earthly Essence. The Root and Leaves do dry and cleanse,
and moderately digest, or wast, and consume away. All Authors are silent
concerning the temperature of the rest.

The Signature and Virtues,
The Snowy whiteness of the white Lilly, being altogether of the same color,
with Milk, as some sign that this Plant is to be appropriated to the Paps,
especially if we regard their Original, which though it be altogether
fabulous, yet certainly has some mystery to this purpose included therein. For
if a Woman's Breast be so grievously swollen, that there is no other way, but to
break it, the Roots of the white Lilly boiled in Milk, with Leaven, till they
be tender, and applied hot, morning and evening, will do it effectually: after
which an handful of Parsley, stamped with a piece of fat Bacon, and the yolk of
an Egg, and applied, will heal it. Besides, if the Paps which are afflicted
with curd^ed Milk in them, be anointed with the Oil of Lillies, it dissolveth
it; but there must be a care, that it touch not the Nipple. The Root roasted,
and well mixed with the Oil of Roses, does soften the hardness of the Matrix,
and provokes the Courses in Women, being laid thereupon. The same stamped with
Honey, gleweth together Sinews that be cut in sunder, consumes and scoureth
away the Ulcers of the Head, called Achores, and likewise all scursinesse of
the Head and face, and is good to be laid to all dislocations, or places out of
Joint. The same stamped with Vinegar, the Leaves of Henba^e, or the Meal of
Barley, cures the tumors and Apostumes of the privy Members; it brings the
hair again upon places that have been burned, or scalded, if it be mingled with
Oil or Grease, and the place anointed therewith. The same roasted in Embers,
and stamped with Leaven of Rye-bread, and Hog's Grease, breaks pestilentiall
Botches, and ripeneth Apostumes in the Flanks, coming of Venery and such like:
the same mixed with Oil of Roses, cures Wildfire, and burnings, and closes
wounds and Ulcers, and is good also to be laid upon the bitings of Serpents.
The same boiled in Vinegar, and applied, cures Co^ns. The Roots boiled in
honyed water, and drunk, drives forth by the Seige, all corruption of* blood,
as Pliny says. The Seeds are good to be taken against the biting of Serpents,
and expels the poison of the Pestilence, causing it to break forth in
blisters, in the outward part of the skin, being taken in Wine, or the Roots
stamped and strained with Wine, and given to drink for two or three days
together. The Juice tempered with Barley-Meal, and baked in Cakes, and so e^ten
ordinarily for a month or six weeks together, with Meat and no other Bread for
that time, cures the Dropsy, as it is said. The distilled water being taken,
is said to cause easy and speedy deliverance, and to expel the A^^er-birth.
The same water is used in Diseases of the Lungs, shortness of breath, the
Cough, etc. Being mixed with Camphir, and Oil of Tartar, ti is used to
beautify the Face. The Oil made of the Flowers, is good to supple, mollify,
and digest; excellent to soften the Sinews, and to cure the hardness of the
Matrix. Take of Sorrel, and Marsh Marigold, of each an handful, white Lilly
Root a dram, bruise them, and roast them in Embers, in a Dock-Leaf, and bind it
hot to the place affected with a Felon, and it will cure it. The red Lilly
Roots, when the other are not to be had, may be applied outwardly, for any of
the purposes before mentioned; but for their inward use, I find them not
commended. The Mountain Lillies, the red Lilly of Constantinople, the Persian
Lilly, and the Crowns-imperiall, are nourished in Gardens, more for their
beautiful shape* than for any Physical use that I read of.

CHAP. CIV. Of Dock Cresse.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek, (...), in Latin Lampsana, So^chus Sylvaticus, and
Pap^llaris; in English Dock-Cresses, Tetterwort; and Nipplewort, by Mr.
Park^^son; and the reason why he calls it so, he says is, because it is good
to heal the Ulcers of the Nipples of Women's Breasts, as Camerarius also
testifies.

The Kinds.
All former Writers have made but one sort thereof (which some of them would
have to be a Sallet or Potherb whereon the poorer sort of people did ^eed, as
being the meanest and cheapest, of all others; whereas indeed there is no
probability thereof, it being never received by any as food to seed upon) but
Bauhinus has added thereunto another that comes very near it, and Mr.
Parkinson has added a third. The first is called, Ordinary Dock-cresse or
Nipplewort. The second Nipplewort of Austria. The third, wild or wood Bastard
Nipplewort.

The Form.
The Ordinary Dockcresse or Nipplewort sends forth sundry hard upright
stalks, whereon grow dark green leaves from the bottom to the tops, but lesser
still as they are higher toward the top; in some places whole without any
dents on the Edges, and in others with a few uneven Cuts, therein somewhat like
a kind of Hawkweed; the tops of the stalks have some small long branches, which
bear many small star-like yellowish flowers on them which turn into small seed,
the root is small and threddy, and yields a bitter milk as the others do.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in diverse places as upon Walls, under hedges, upon the banck
of ditches, and the border of fields almost every where. The other, Clusius
says, he found in Hungary and in Saxonies, Harcynia sylva, and other places;
the last is found near Woodsides, and Hedg-rowes. They flower in the Summer and
the seed ripeneth soon after.

The Temperature.
If Gerard mistake not (as, Mr. Parkinson says, he does fowly about this
plant) it is of nature hot and somewhat abstersive or scowring.

The Virtues.
I believe there are few Women that ever gave suck but know in some sort what a
pain it is to be troubled with sore Nipples: I am sure I have known those that
have not only affirmed it, but also by their lamentable outcries confirmed that
there is scarce any pain like unto it, and it may well be, because the veins
and arteries of the breast do concenter therein, which makes it sensible of the
least di^^e^per that can be. For a remedy hereunto, it has been by experience
found that wooden or rather silver nipples, or those made of chalk, are very
effectual if there be laid under them, upon the Nipple, a Violet leaf, a Rose
Campion Leaf, or which is most proper, a leaf of Dockcresse: which as I said
before some call Nipplewort from the extraordinary virtues it has to heal
Women's breasts and their Nipples when they are sore and exulcerated, as the
Women in Prussia very well know; and therefore they call it Papillaris which
induces us to think, not with Gerard but rather with Parkinson, that it has
an especial healing qu^lity therein and that it is temperate in heat and
dryness with some tenuity of parts, able to digest the virulency of those
sharp humors that break out into those parts.

I shall trouble you no further with any more plants, though there be diverse
which might occasionally be spoken to upon this Subject; hoping that the female
Sex, whose welfare I do exceedingly tender, will vouchsafe to accept th^se my
directions, and I doubt not but they will find ease thereby upon this account.
I shall now return from whence I digressed, and that is from the inside of the
Breast and Lungs, to which I shall now speak somewhat more particularly.

CHAP. CV. Of Horehound.
The Names
IT is called in Greek (...); in Latin Prasium and Marrubium, which name is
also attributed both to the ^^nking kind, which is properly called Ballete, and
to the sweet. P^iny has confounded the words Prasium and Prasum, id est*
Porrum a Leek, together* which he might easily do, there being but a letter
difference. But I hope this Caveat will prevent the Reader from doing the like.
It is called Marrubium ab amaro succo, Rob signifying Juice; and Marrubiastrum.

The Kinds.
Herbarists reckon up Eight sorts of Horehound. 1. Common Horehound. 2. White
Spanish Horehound. 3. Sweet Candy Horehound. 4. Unsavory Candy Horehound. 5.
French Horehound. 6. Curled White Horehound. 7. Spanish black Horehound. 8.
Black French Horehound with long leaves.

The Form.
Common Horehound grows up with square hoary stalks, about a foot and
sometimes about half a yard high or more, set at the joints with two round
crumpled, or as it were rough leaves; of a sullen hoary green color, of a
reasonable good scent, but of a very bitter taste; The flowers are small white
and gaping, set in rough hard prickly husks round about the joints with the
leaves, from the middle of the stalks upwards, wherein afterward is found small
round blackish seed. The Root is blackish hard and Woody with many strings
thereat, which dies not but abides many years.

The Places and Time.
The first i^ found in many places of our land, in dry grounds and waste green
places particularly under the Park Wall at Greenwi^h on that side next the
^e^^s near the way that goes from thence to Colonel Blunts house. The ^e^ond
came from Spain and being sown of the seed, abides: The third in ^ike manner
was sown from seed that came from Candy, as the fourth was also. The ^^th was
found growing about Paris in France. The sixth ni Germany. The ^eventh in
Spain: and the last about Mompelier in fat grounds* and sometimes in the Wheat
^e^ds.

The Temperature.
Horehound as Galen teaches is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third,
and of a bitter taste.

The Virtues.
A decoction of dried Horehound with the seed, or the juice of the green he^b
taken with honey i^ a ^emedy for those that are purly and sho^t win^ed (...)
tho^ that have a Cough and for such as by long sickness or thin di^^i^ation o^
(...) upon the Lungs, are wa^ed and fallen into a Con^umption; it helps to
(...) ^way tough Ph^egm from the Chest, being taken with the ^r^ed ^oo^ o^
(...)is which is flower de Luce. It is given to Women to bring down their
Cour^es, and to expel the afterbirth, as also to those that have sore and
^ong trave^s: it is also given to them that have taken poison* or are bitten o^
^^ung by any Veremous Serpents or beasts; but it hurts the B^adder and Reins,
and must no^ be used in hot and dry bodies; yet if Rai^ns and Liquorice be used
therewith it is less hurtful to them and more pro^^tab^e to other parts. The
leaves being u^ed with honey do purge foul Ulcers, stay running or creeping
sores and the growing of the flesh over Nails: it helps the pains of the
^^des, opens stopping both of Liver and Spleen, kills Worms, and is good for
such as have the Itch Scab or any running Sore. The Juice thereof with Wine and
Honey helps to clear the Eyesight and snuffed up into the Nostrills helps to
purge away the yellow Jaundi^e; and either of it self or with a little Oil of
Roses being dropped into the Ears, eases the pains of them. The green leaves
brui^ed and boiled with old Hogs Lard into an ointment, heals the bitings of
Dogs, abateth the swellings of Women's breasts* and takes away the swellings
and pains that come by any pricking of thorns or any such like thing. Used
with Vinegar it cleanses and heals Tetters. If says Matthiolus, you boil
two ounces of fresh Horehound in three pints of good White wine, with the roots
of Buglosse, Elecampane and Agrimony, of each one dram and an half, of Rubarb
and Lignum A^oes of each a dram, till half be consumed and strained, hereby
is made an excellent medicine to help the yellow Jaundise, that comes by the
obstruction of the Vessels and overflowing of the Gall, if two ounces thereof
(having a little Sugar put to it to sweeten it) be taken fasting for nine days
together; but he counsels that if they that take this medicine have an Ague*
the ^ecoction must be made with water and not with Wine. The decoction thereof
is a singular medicine for Women that are troubled with the Whites if they sit
over it whi^est it is warm; the same also heals any scabs whether they be dry
or moist if the places be bathed therewith. Being stamped and put into new
Milk, and set in any place overpestered with flies, it will soon destroy them
all. The Syrup of it is most effectual for old Coughs to bring away tough ^eam,
as also for o^d men and others whose Lungs are oppressed with thin and cold
Rheum, to help to avoid it, and for those that are asthmatick, shortwinded,

CHAP. CVI. Of Lungwort.
The Names.
WHether this he^b was so far taken notice of by any of the ancient Greeks o^
Latin Writers as to re^eive a name ^^om them, is not yet found. The Phy^ti^ns
and Herbari^s of later times have called it Pulmonaria of the likeness of the
^orm which it has with the Lungs or Lights calle^ ^n Latin Pulmones* of some
Lichen, and L^chen arborum; in Eng^sh Lungwort, Tree Lungwort, and Wood Liver
^ort.

The Kinds.
To this kind I find but three sorts that may be properly referred, and those
are 1. Tree Lungwort. 2. Sea Lungwort or Oi^ter Green. 3. Sea Oak or Wrake.

The Form.
Lungwort is a kind of Moss that grows on sundry sorts of trees especially
Oaks and Beeches with broad grayish tough leaves diversely folded, crump^ed,
and gashed in on the edges and sometimes spotted also with many small ^pots on
the upper side* it was never ^een to bear any stalk or flower at any time.

The Places and Time.
It grows upon the Bodies of old Oaks, Beeches and other wild Trees in think
and dark shady woods, and is ^ometimes found growing upon rocks and other
shadowy places, and as I have been particularly informed not far from Croydon
in Surry. It flourishes e^pecially in the Summer Months. The Sea Lungwo^t or
Oi^^er green grows upon rocks within the bowe^s of the Sea, but especially
where Oi^^ers breed. The Sea Wrake is found upon the drowned rocks, which are
naked and bare of water at every tide.

The Temperature.
Lungwort is thought to be of a cold and dry quality; but as for the
temperatures of the other two, I have not met with any that have passed their
censure upon them.

The Signature and Virtues.
The similitude that Lungwort has with the lungs, as also the speckels which
are sometimes found thereon is a perfect Signature that this plant is to be
appropriated to the lungs; and therefore it has been commended by Physicians
of former times, and has been expe^imentally approved by the learned of this
age to be very effectual against the ^isea^es of the lungs; especially for the
ulcers and inflammations of the same, being brought into powder and drunk in
Water; and also for Coughs, Wheesings and shortness of breath, and likewise
for spitting of blood, and pissing of blood. It is likewise commended for
bloody and green wounds and for Ulcers in the secret parts, and also to stay
the Reds in Women. Moreover it stops the bloody flix, and other flixes and
scowrings, either upwards or downwards, especially if they proceed of choler;
it s^ayeth Vomiting* and stops the looseness of the belly. It is reported
that shepherds and certain horse Doctors, do with good success give the powder
hereof with salt, unto their sheep, Horses, and other cattle which be troubled
with the Cough and are broken winded. Oyster-green fried with eggs, and made
into a Tansey and eaten, is a singular remedy to strengthen the weakness of
the back.

CHAP. CVII. Of Tobacco.
The Names.
I Cannot understand that Tobacco was known before the discovery of the
West Indies, and if so, it cannot be expected that I should tell you by what
name the Greek Writers called it, they being deceased long before. It is called
in Latin Petum, and Nicotiana from John Nicot a French man who being an Agent
in Portugal for the French King, sent some of it to the French Queen, whereupon
it was also called Herba Regina. The Indians call it Picielt and Perebecen^e,
but in most other languages it is called Tobacco.

The Kinds.
To set down the several sorts of Tobacco that are brought into England is
beyond my skill. The sorts that I have read and heard of, though perhaps the
same plant planted in several Countries, are 1. Spanish Tobacco, which ^ome
affirm to be brought into Spain from Virginia, and other places, and that it is
there made up and transported into England, and called Spanish Tobacco. 2.
Ordinary Virginia Tobacco, which is a great deal less esteemed, and sold for
less then half the rate. 3. English Tobacco, which is so called (not that it
is natural of England, but) because it is more commonly with Us growing in
every co^ntry Garden almost, and endures better here then the other. I have
heard of Trinidada, Autego, S. Christophers, VVinscomb Tobacco, which I suppose
to be ^o called from the places where they grow. It will be more to our purpo^e
to give you the description of that which is called English Tobacco, and
therefore take it as follows.

The Form.
English Tobacco rises up with a thick round stalk, sometime two foot high
whereon do grow thick fat green leaves, nothing so large as the other Indian
kinds, somewhat round pointed also, and nothing dented about the Edges. The
stalk brancheth forth and bears at the tops diverse flowers set in green
Husks, somewhat like the flowers of Henbane, but nothing so large; scarce
standing above the brims of the Husks, round pointed also, and of a greenish
yellow color. The seed that follows, is not very bright, but large,
contained in great heads. The roots are neither great nor woody, perishing
every year with the hard frosts in Winter; but generally of its own sowing, if
it be let alone after it has been once sowed.

The Places and Time
Though that Tobacco which bears away the Bell from the rest be (as I said)
called Spanish Tobacco, yet there is, for ought I can learn, but very little
Tobacco growing in Spain if any at all, but is brought thither out of the
provinces of America, one of which, where it was first found is called Peru,
from whence it is named Hyoscyamus Peruvicanus; but improperly, though some
would have it to be a sort of Henbane. It grows also in Brasil, which is
another Country of the West Indies, whence the seed being brought into England
and sown has prospered very well in those soils that have been fruitful, and
especially about VVinscomb in Glocestershire, where I think the planting of it
is discontinued now, because the store that came from thence was an hinderance
to the public revenue coming in for the Custom of that which is brought from
beyond the Seas; Howbeit it is continued in many Gardens though in no great
quantity. It flowreth from June, sometimes to the end of August, or later; and
the seed ripeneth in the mean time.

The Temperature.
Tobacco is hot and dry in the second degree, and is withal of power to
discuss or resolve, and to cleanse away filthy humors, having also a certain
small ^striction, and a s^upifying or benumming quality, and is endued with a
certain power to resist poison.

The Virtues.
Though our Tobacco which grows in England be not so strong or sweet as that
which comes from the Indies, yet it is found by good experience almost to be
as available to expectorate tough phlegm out of the Stomach, Chest, and Lungs,
the Juice thereof being made into a Syrup, or the distilled Water of the herb
drunk with Sugar, or else the smoke taken through a pipe, as is usual but
fasting, o^ the whole substance rolled into Pills and swallowed; so that
whether of the two can be more easily procured, may be used. The same also
helps to expel worms in the Stomach and Belly, being inwardly; or a leaf
applied to the Belly, and to ease the pains in the head or Megrim, and the
griping pains in the bowels. It is profitable also for those that are troubled
with the stone in the Kidneys both to ease pains, and by provoking Urine to
expel gravel, and the stone engendered therein, and has been found very
effectual to expel windiness and other humors, which cause the strangling of
the Muther, The seed hereof is much more effectual to ease the pain of the
Toothache then any Henbane seed, and the ashes of the burnt herb cleanses the
gums and the teeth, and makes them white. The herb bruised and applied to the
Kings Evil helps it in nine or ten days effectually: It is said also to be
effectual to cure the Dropsy by taking four and five ounces of the Juice
fasting, which will strongly purge the body both upwards and downwards. The
distilled water is often given with some Sugar before the fit of an Ague to
lessen them, and take them away in three or four times using; if the distilled
F^ces of the herb having being bruised before the distillation, and not
distilled dry, but set in warm dung fourteen days, and afterward hung up in a
bag in a wine Cellar; that liquor that distilleth therefrom, is singular good
to use for Cramps, Aches, the Gout, and Sciatica; and to heal Itches, Scabs and
running Ulcers, Cankers and foul sores whatsoever. The Juice is also good for
all the said griefs and likewise to kill Lice in Childrens heads. The green
herb bruised and applied to any green wound, is known to diverse to cure any
fresh wound or cut wheresoever, and the Juice put into old Sores, both
cleanses and heals them; but especially, a Salve of it made thus; Take of
the green Herb, three or four handfuls, bruise it* and put it into a quart of
good Oil of Olives, boil them on a gentle fire, until the Herb grow dry, and
the Oil will bubble no longer; then strain it forth hard, and set it on the
fire again, adding thereto Wax, Ro^en, and Sheeps Tallow, or Deares Sewet,
which you will, of each a quarter of a pound, of Turpentine two Ounces, which
being melted, put it up for your use: This Salve will likewise help Impostumes,
hard tumors, and other swellings by blows of falls.

CHAP. CVIII. Of Sundew, or Ros Solis.
The Names.
THere is no Greek Name found for this Plant, It is called in Latin Ros Solis,
of diverse Rorella, and of Lobel Rorida, and of some Salsirora, and corruptly
Rosa Solis, as we in English likewise do now and then. All which Names are put
upon it from the Dew, which is always upon it, but then especially, when the
Sun is at the hottest. It is called in English Lustworth, because Sheep and
other Cattle, if they do but only taste of it, are provoked to Lust. It is
called also, Youthwort, and in the Northern parts of our Land, they call it the
Red Rot, because as they think, their Sheep feeding thereon, run to rot; Some
call it also Mooregrasse.

The Kinds.
There be three Sorts of Sun-dew. 1. The greater Sun-dew. 2. The lesser
sun-dew. 3. Sun-dew with long Leaves.

The Form
It has diverse small, round, hollow Leaves, somewhat greenish, but full of
certain red hairs, which makes them seem red, every one standing upon his own
foot stalk, which is likewise of a reddish color, and hairy. The Leaves are
continually moist in the hottest day; yea, the hotter the Sun shines on them,
the moyster they are, with a certain sliminesse that will rope (as we say) the
small hairs always holding this moisture. Among those Leaves rise up small
slender stalks, reddish also, three or four fingers high, bearing diverse small
white knobs, one above another, which are the Flowers; after which in the
Heads, are certain small Seeds; the Root looks, as if it consisted of a few
small hairs.

The Places and Time.
Th^se Plants do usually grow on Bogs, and wet places, and sometimes in moist
Woods. One of the Sorts with round Leaves, whether it be the greater or the
lesser, I cannot say, grows upon Sho^^ver-Hill, on that side toward
Heddington Quarries near Oxford, and likewise upon a Bog in Bagley VVood,
betwixt Oxford and Abb^ngdon. In Lancashire, in their Moss Grounds, where they
dig their turfs; there is great store of it also. That with Leaves of a span
long, grows plentifully in a Bog by Edenderry in Ireland. It was sound by Mr.
Heaton, who gave some of it to Zanchy Sylliard, Apothecary in Dublin, which he
sent to Mr. Parkinson. It grows also in England, by Ellesmeere in Shropshire.
It flows in May or June, and continues flourishing till August; within which
time, it may be gathered, the weather being dry and calm, and as near the
middle of the day as you can; for then it is fullest of Dew, wherein the virtue
most consists.

The Temperature.
Some say, that it is a searing or caustic Herb, and very much biting; being
hot and dry in the fourth Degree; others only, that it is sharp and quick, yet
a little acide drying and binding.

The Virtues and Signature.
There is some difference amongst Authors, concerning this Herb. Dodonaeus
holding it to be an extreme biting Herb, says* that the distilled water
thereon cannot be taken with safety, though the later Physicians have thought
it to be ^^ are and singular remedy against the Consumption of the Lungs, and
especially the distilled water; which Parkinson records, without any Cavil.
The same water is held to be good for those also that have salt Rheums
distilling on the Lungs, which is the cause of a Consumption, so that it is not
only Therapeuticall, or restorative, but Prophylacticall or preventionall in
this case. The said water is available also for all other Diseases of the
Lungs, as Ptisicks, Wheesings, shortness of Breath, or the Cough; as also to
heal Ulcers that happen in the Lungs, and it comfort the Heart, and fainting
Spirits. The Leaves outwardly applied to the Skin, will raise Blisters, which
have caused some to think it dangerous to be taken inwardly; but there are
diverse other things that will also draw Blisters, yet may be taken inwardly
without danger, if they be used with discretion. There is an usual Drink made
hereof, called Rosa Solis, which may without any offense or danger, be used in
Qualmes, and passions of the heart: as also to strengthen and nourish the Body.
Crollius says, that it has the Signature of a Cancer, and therefore it is
effectual for the curing of the same. And some have thought, that as this Herb
does keep and hold fast the moisture and dew so pertinaciously, that the
extreme drying heat of the Sun, cannot consume and wast away the same: so
likewise they thought, that herewith the natural and lively Heat in Men's
Bodies, is preserved and cherished, and this may be also by Signature. If any
one desire to knowhow to make the Rosa Solis, before mentioned, let the Herb
called Ros Solis, or Sun-dew, be gathered in June, July, or August: the weather
being dry, and about the mid-time of the day, then pick it clean* and cut off
the Roots; or if it be rank, you may cut up only the Leaves when you gather it;
and having done so, take a pot of good Aquavitae, or Aqua Composita, and put
into it two good handfuls, or more of the said Herb, and half a pound of fine
Sugar, half an Ounce of whole Mace, of Ginger pared, of Nutmegs, of Cinnamon, of
A^^seeds, all gross beaten in a Mortar, of each half an Ounce Liquorice an
Ounce, first made clean from the Bark, then cut into small pieces, and a little
bruised; Dates four Ounces, cut small, and the Stones, and the white Skin that
is within taken out; put all together into a large Pot, or Bottle, and stop it
close, and so let it stand for three Months, shaking it, and stirring it
together, ever now and then, afterward (if you list) you may strain away the
stuff, or let it remain in all the year, and when you would use some of it,
cast a cloth over the mouth of the Bottle to keep in the Spices. Some do put in
red Rose Leaves also, in the making, to resist Lust, which Sun-dew provokes
exceedingly. The distilled water hereof, that is drawn forth with a
Glasse-Still, is of a glittering yellow color, like gold, and colors Silver
put therein like Gold; which Bath water, will also do, as I have heard.

CHAP. CIX. Of Hedge-Mustard, or Bank-Cresse.
The Names.
THe Greek Name is (...), which seems as is most likely, to be derived (...),
quod ob suam caliditatem ^ttrahendi facultate prad^tum est it being o^ a very
attractive quality: in Latin also, Erysimum and Irio, quod ab acr^monia sua
irru^t in gustum, from its sharp taste. This is the Erysimum of Dioscorides,
which he calls also (...) Chamapl^on, but not of Theophrastus; for he places
his Erysimum among the sorts of Corns or Grains. In English it is called
Ba^k-Cresse, by Gerard; but because Parkinson sound the most judicious to make
it a kind of wild Mustard, therefore he entitled it wild Hedge-Mustard.

The Kinds.
There were formerly but two Sorts of Hedg-Mustard known, but now there are
six. 1. The common wild Hedg-Mustard. 2. The true Hedge-Mustard. 3. Broad
leafed Hedge-Mustard. 4. Broad-leafed Hedge-Mustard of Naples. 5. Narrow leafed
Hedge-Mustard of Naples. 6. An hairy Hedge-Mustard, with uncut Leaves.

The Form.
The common wild Hedge-Mustard, grows up usually, but with one blackish green
stalk, tough, easy to bend, but not so to break, branched into diverse parts,
and sometimes with diverse stalks, set full of Branches whereon grow long rough,
or hard rugged Leaves, very much torn, or cut on the edges, into many parts
some bigger, and some lesser, of a dirty green color: The Flowers are small
and yellow, that grow at the tops of the Branches, in long Spikes, flowring by
degrees, so that continuing long in flower, the stalks will have small round
Cods at the bottom, growing upright, and close to the stalk, while the top
flowers as yet show themse^ves; in which are contained, small, yellow Seed,
sharp and strong, as the Herb is also. The Root grows down slender and
woody, yet abiding and springing again every year.

The Places and Time.
The first is very frequent in our Land, by the ways, Walls, and Hedge-sides,
and sometimes in the open Fields: the third is more rare to meet with yet it is
sometimes found, but in better grounds, which makes it so large: The second is
found wild in Italy, as Matthi^lus says, in like places with the first: The
fourth and fifth are of Naples, as Col(...) says: the last grows upon stones
and rubbish, and upon old Mud-walls at Basil, Mompelier, and other places. They
flower sometimes late, and sometime; earlyer, but most commonly in July, or
thereabouts.

The Temperature.
The three first Sorts of Erysimum, as the most in use, and effectual, do
temperately heat, consisting of a thin substance, cutting and cleansing with
some moist parts joined therewith, so that it does make viscous phlegm easy to
be spit forth.

The Virtues.
This Herb is of singular ^fficacy in all the Diseases of the Chest and Lungs,
hoarsnes of voice, and by the use of the Decoction thereof for a little space,
those have been recovered, who had utterly lost their voice, and therewith
almost their spirits also. The juice thereof, made into a Syrup, or Lohoc, with
Honey or Sugar, is no less effectual for the said purpose, and for all other
Coughs, Wheesings, and shortness of Breath. The same also is profitably taken
of those that have the Jaundies, the Pleurisy, pains in the Back and Loins,
and for Torments and wringings in the Belly, or in the Colon, which is called
the Colic, being used also in Glisters. The Seed is held to be an especial
remedy against poison, and venom. It is singular good for the pains in the
Hips, or Huck-bones, called the Hip-gout, or Sciatica, the Gout also, and all
Joynt-Aches: as also for Fistulaes, hollow Ulcers, and eating or running
Cankers, and for Apostumes Sores, and Cankers in the Mouth or Throat* or behind
the Ears, and no less also for the hardness and swellings in Women's Breasts,
or in the Testicles and Stones. There is to be had at the Apothecaries, a Syrup
made of Hedge-Mustard, Elicampane Coltsfoot, Liquorice, and such other
Ingredients, which was invented against cold afflictions of the Breast and
Lungs, as Asthmaes, hoarsness, etc. and may be easily taken with a Liquorice
stick, to the great relief of those, which are afflicted with any of the
aforesaid distempers.

CHAP. CX. Of Coltsfoot.
The Names.
BUt all this while I had almost forgot Coltsfoot, which is so called in
English, from the similitude it has with a Horses or Coltsfoot. It is called
in Greek (...): and Tussilago, in Latin, a notissima utilitate quam praebet in
orthopnaeicis and tussi vexatis, of its notable qualities, to cure Coughs, and
other Diseases of the Lungs. The Apothecaries call it Farfara and Vngula
Caballina; and of some, Populago, from the likeness of its Leaves, to those of
the white Poplar, which was named of the Ancients Farfarus. Many suppose, that
this may be Tiphyum of Theophrastus, as well as the Petasites, in that both of
them bring their Flowers before the Leaves, and therefore are by some called
Filii ante patres, it being somewhat preposterous, and very rare amongst
Plants; and this was the cause why some Herbarists thought, that Coltsfoot put
^orth no Flowers, supposing that this Plant, as others commonly do, would have
put forth Flowers after the Leaves, if any at all. Pliny calls it Farranum
and Farrugium. It is called al^o in English, Foale-foot and Horse-foot. There
is a sort hereof, called in Greek (...), in Latin Cacalia; in English, Great
and strange Coltsfoot.

The Kinds.
The Coltsfoot, and the Cacalia, make but four kinds. 1. Coltsfoot. 2. Hoary
Strange Coltsfoot. 3. Smooth strange Coltsfoot. 4. Strange Coltsfoot of
America.

The Foorme.
Coltsfoot shoots up a slender stalk, with small yellowish Flowers, somewhat
early, which fall away quickly; and after they are past, come somewhat round
Leaves, yet sometimes dented a little about the edges, much lesser, thicker,
and greener then those of the Butter-burr, with a little Down or Freese, over
the green Leaf on the upper side, which may be rubbed away, and whitish, or
mea^y underneath. The Root is small and white, spreading very much in the
ground, so that where it takes, it will very hardly be cleansed from it again,
it any little piece be abiding therein, and from thence springing fresh Leaves.

The Places and Time.
The first grows of it self, near unto Springs, and on the brinks of Brooks
and Rivers, in wet furrows, by Ditches sides, and in other moist and watery
places, almost every where; and if it be brought into a Garden, it will take
such possession on a sudden, that it will not be quickly outed. The second and
third, grow in sundry Valleys, beyond the Seas, and by the Bathes, where they
want not moisture. The last in America, Virginia and Canada. The Leaves and
Flowers of the first, are seldom or never to be ^ound together: the Flowers
being past before the Leaves appear. It flowers in the end of March, and
beginning of April: the stems and Flowers also quickly fading away: After them
grow forth the Leaves, which remain green all the Summer long. The strange
Sorts put out their Leaves first, and from thence arise the Flowers, which bear
Seed also in the Summertime.

The Temperature.
Coltsfoot, whilst it is fresh, is cooling and drying; but when it is dry, the
cooling quality which remained in the moisture, being evaporate, it is then
somewhat hot and dry.

The Virtues.
This is an Herb generally known, to be very available for those that have thin
Rheums, and Distillations upon the Lungs, causing the Cough thereby t^ ^hi^^en
and dry it, and then the dried Leaves are best, as the fresh Leaves, or Juice
o^ Syrup made thereof, is fittest for an hot, dry Cough, and for Wheesings, and
shortness of Breath. The dried Leaves, taken in a Pipe, as Tobacco is, has
been found in like manner, good for the thin Rheums, Distillations and Coughs:
as also the Root taken in like Sort, as some Authors affirm. The distilled
water hereof, simply, or with Elder-flowers, and Nightshade, is a singular
Remedy against all hot Agues, to drink two Ounces at a time, and to have some
Clothes wet therein, and applied to the Head and Stomach. The same also applied
to any hot Swellings, or other Inflammations, does much good; yea, it helps
that Disease called St. Anthonies fire, and burnings also, and is singular good
to take away Wheals, and small Pushes that rise through heat; as also against
the burning heat of the Piles, or of the privy parts, to apply Clothes wet
therein, to the places. Matthiolus shows, that in the Root of this
Coltsfoot, there grows a certain Cotton, or VVhite-wool, which being
cleansed from the Roots, and bound up in Linen Clothes, and boiled in Lie for
a while, and afterward some salt Nitre added unto it, and dried up again in
the Sun, is the best tinder to take fire, being stroke from a Flint, that can
be. The Root of Cacalia steeped in Wine, and eaten, is also good for the Cough
and hoarsnesse, which Galen affirms of his Cacanum, which is thought to be
the same; for it is without sharpness, and good for hoarsness. Dioscorides
adds, that the Peare-like Grains, which are found in his Cacalia, beaten and
mixed with a Cerot, or Ointment, does make the Skin smooth, and will stay the
falling of the hair, as Pliny says.

CHAP. CXI. Of Wood-bind, or Hony-suckle.
The Names
IT is called in Greek (...); but the Greeks in these days call it (...); in
Latin, Periclymenum also, and Caprifolium; but Pliny mistaking the word
Periclymenum, sets down the properties of Clymenum, which is Tutsan, for it:
with some it is called Sylvae matter, and Matris Sylva, Volucrum majus, and
Lilium inter Spinas, and Vinciboscum by Caesalpinus, according as his Italians
called it. In English, it has no other name but VVood-bind, and Honey-suckle.

The Kinds.
There are diverse Sorts of Wood-binds, some that are winding about whatsoever
stands next them; and for the most part, known throughout the Land; others
are strangers, or not so well known: there are diverse that wind not, but stand
upright; all which being summoned together, are in number eight. 1. Our
ordinary Wood-bind. 2. The German red Honisuckle. 3. Double Wood-bind, or
Honysuckles. 4. Dwarf Honisuckle. 5. Upright Wood-bind, or Hony-suckle. 6.
Black berried upright Hony-suckle. 7. Blew berried upright Hony-suckle. 8. The
greater upright Hony-suckle. I shall not trouble you with the description of
the ordinary Hony-suckle, but of the upright red berried Hony-suckle, as being
less known.

The Form.
The diverse stalks of the Red Berried upright Hony-suckle, are somewhat
straight and upright, about three or four foot high, at the least, divided and
spread into diverse Branches, covered with a very thin whitish Bark: the Leaves
stand by couples on the Branches, and two likewise at every joint, which are of
a whitish green color, smooth, and lesser then those of the windy Wood-binds:
the Flowers also stand by couples, at the end of short stalks, that come from
the joints, with the Leaves, and are much smaller then the other, and never
opening or spreading much, of a pale whitish color: after which come two red
Berries, long, with the roundnesse; both of a bigness in the natural places,
and in some open places, but seldom so with us; for one is usually withered,
and never comes to perfection.

The Places and Time.
The first grows abundantly in this Land, almost in every Hedge. The second
came out of Germany: The third out of Italy, both which are set against our
housesides, to run about the Windows, where they keep the Rooms cool, and make
a goodly show without. The last was found by Dr. Penny, as Clusius says, by
Dantswick. The four last were found by Clusius in Germany, Austria, and Syria,
and some on the Pyrenean hills, and in Savoy, and are most of them kept in our
^ardens. The first is in flower in June, and the Fruit is ripe in August. The
second and third, flower about the latter end of April, and the beginning of
May; and so do the rest, their fruit being ripe in July or August; except the
second, which has not been seen to bear any.

The Temperature.
The Flowers and Leaves of Hony-suckles, are of a cleansing, consuming, and
digesting quality.

The Virtues.
A Decoction made of the Leaves, or the Flowers and Leaves of Honey-suckles,
with some Figs, and Liquorice added thereunto, is very effectual for the
expectorating of phlegm from the Chest and Lungs, whenever they shall be
overcharged therewith. A Syrup made of the Flowers, is good likewise to be
drunk, against the Diseases of the Lungs and Spleen that is stopped, being
drunk with a little Wine. Mr. Culpepper says, that it is fitting that a
Conserve of the Flowers of it, should be kept in every Gentlewomans House; for
that he knew no better cure for an Asthma, then this. Besides, it takes away
the evil of the Spleen, provokes Urine, procures speedy delivery to Women in
Travel, helps Cramps, Convulsions, and Palsies, and whatsoever Griefs come of
cold or stoppings. The Leaves or Flowers in Powder, or the distilled water of
them are commended to dry up soul and moist Ulcers, and to cleanse the face and
skin from Morphew, Sun-burn, Freckles, and other discolorings of the skin.
Notwithstanding, Parkinson following Galen and Culpepper backing him, as
usually he does, be the matter right or wrong, conceives, that it is an error
to use the decoction of the Leaves of Hony-suckles, or the distilled water of
the Flowers in Mouth-waters; yet it is certainly found by experience, that the
said water is good against the soareness of the Throat, or Uvula; and with the
same Leaves boiled, or the Leaves and Flowers distilled, are made diverse good
Medicines, against Cankers and sore mouths, as well in Children, as elder
people; and likewise for Ulcerations, and Scaldings in the privy parts of Man
or Woman, if there be added to the decoction hereof, some Honey, and Allome, or
Verdigrease; if the Sores require greater cleansing outwardly. Provided
always, that there be no Verdigrease put into the water, that must be injected
into the secret parts. As for the provoking of Urine, care must be had, that
the taking of the decoction be not continued too long; for though at first it
will but provoke Urine only; yet being drunk six days together, it will make
the Urine like blood. It causes also barrenness in Women, and makes men
unable for generation. The flowers and leaves are of more use then the seed,
yet they also help the shortness and difficulty of breathing, and cure the
Hicket.

CHAP. CXII. Of Mullein.
The Names.
ITt is called in Greek, (...) uro, for that it served as a Week to put into
Lamps to burn in former times, and of the Latins Candela Regia and Candelaria,
because the elder age used the stalks dipped in Suet to burn, whether at
Funerals, or for private Uses; and so likewise the English name Higtaper for
Hightaper, the ( h) being left out, is used in the same manner, as a Taper or
Torch. It has also some other names in Latin, as Thapsus Thlapsus and Tapsus
Barbatus, and Lanaria. In English also some call it Torches, some Bullocks
Lungwort, some Hairs beard, and some Jupiters Staff.

The Kinds.
There are of this kind besides the Moth Mullein, nine sorts. 1. Common
Mullein. 2. Dwarf Mullein of Denmark. 3. White Mullein with long leaves. 4.
Sweet white Mullein. 5. Ordinary black Mullein. 6. Sweet black Mullein. 7.
Jagged Mullein. 8. Sage leafed Mullein. 9. Small Sage leafed Mullein of Syria.

The Form.
The Common white Mullein has many fair large woolly leaves lying next the
ground, somewhat longer than broad, pointed at the ends, and as it were dented
about the Edges; the stalk rises up to be four or five foot high, if it grow
in very rank ground, covered over with such woolly leaves as the lowest, but
lesser: so that the stalk can be hardly seen for the multitude of leaves
thereon up to the flowers, which come forth on all sides of the stalks, without
any branches for the most part; and are many set together in a long spike, in
some of a gold yellow color, in others more pale, consisting of five round
pointed leaves, which afterward give small round heads, wherein small brownish
seed is contained; the root is long, white, and woody perishing ever after it
has born seed.

The Places and Time.
The first grows by the side ways, and Lanes in many places, and for its
usefulness is taken into some Gardens, and so is the second, but it grows
naturally only in Denmark in the fields between Cronemberg, and Hafnia, near
Elsemore. The third and fourth grow but in some places of our own Country, so
that one shall hardly find a plant in a great way. The fifth in many places of
Kent, Surrey, Essex and elsewhere. The sixth is also sometimes to be found wild
abroad; but yet scarcely to be met with, and indeed unless one well exercised
in the knowledge of plants do light upon it and know it, it will be scarce
regarded by a great many others. The seventh, was found by Lobel near the
ruins of an old Church at Bathe in England. The eighth grows at Padoa or
thereabouts: and the last in Syria, as by its title does appear. They all
flower in June and July, and bring forth their seed the second year after the
sowing, except the two last, of whose time we cannot resolve you.

The Temperature.
Mullein is of a dry temperature, the leaves have also a digesting and
cleansing quality as Galen affirms.

The Virtues.
A Decoction of the leaves of Mullein, is likewise very good for the Lungs and
for those also that are troubled with an old Cough; And this our a^e^tion is
confirmed in that the Country people, especially the Husbandmen in Kent do give
it their Cattle against the Cough of the lungs, it being an approved medicine
for the same, whereupon they call it Bullocks ^ungwort; and I the^e^ore mention
it because Cattle are also in some sort to be provided for ^n their ^i^eases.
The said leaves being a little bruised, and laid o^ bound to an Ho^es foot.
that is grievously pricked with shooing, ^oth wonderfully heal it in a sho^t
^pace-Neither is it useful for Cattle but for men also, A small quantity of the
root taken in Wine, is commended against Lasks and fluxes of the Belly; the
Decoction thereof gargled in the mouth eases the pains of the Toothach^ and
b^ing drunk it is profitable for those that are bursten, and for those that
have Cramps and Convulsions. If the Seed and flowers hereof, and the powder or
dried Venice Turpentine be cast upon a few quick coals, in a Cha^ng^ish or
some other thing let into a C^olestool, the Pan being taken out, and the party
sitting bare over the fumes that is troubled with the Piles, or falling down of
the Fundament, or any other pains of that place, does give much ease and help;
as also for those that have a great desire to go often to the stool and can do
nothing, especially to such as have the bloody flux. An Oil made by the often
infusion of the flowers is of very good effect for the Piles also. The
decoction of the root in Red Wine or in water, if there be an Ague, wherein red
hot steel has been often quenched does stay the bloody flux. The same also
opens the Obstructions of the bladder and reins, when one cannot make water.
A decoction of the leaves hereof and of Sage, Marjerom and Camomil flowers, and
the places bathed therewith that have their Veins and Sinews stark with cold,
or with Cramps does bring them much ease and comfort: Three ounces of the
distilled water of the flowers drunk morning and evening some days together,
is said to be a most excellent remedy for the Gout. The juice of the leaves and
flowers being laid upon rough warts; as also the powder of the dried ^oots
rubbed on does easily take them away, but does no good to them that are smooth.
The powder of the dried flowers is an especial Remedy for those that are
troubled with belly aches, or the pains of the Cholick. The decoction of the
root and so al^o of the leaves, is of great effect to dissolve the Tumors
Swe^lings or Inflammations of the Throat. The seed and leaves boiled in wine*
and applied does speedily draw forth Thorns or Splinters gotten into the flesh
eases the pains and heals them. The leaves bruised and wrapped in double
papers, and covered with hot Ashes and Embers to bake a while* and then taken
forth and laid warm on any botch happening in the Groin or share, does dissolve
and heal them. The seed bruised and boiled in Wine, and laid on any member that
has been out of joint, and is newly set again, takes away all swellings and
pains thereof.

CHAP. CXIII. Of Cowslips of Jerusalem.
The Names.
I Cannot find that this herb is mentioned by any Greek Author, and therefore
know not how to tell you what they called it, if they knew it. It is called in
Latin by the Herbarists of later times Pulmonaria and Pulmonalis; of Cordus,
Symphytum Sylvestre, or wild Comfrey; but seeing that Comfry or the great
Consound, is oftener found wild then this, it may more aptly be called Symyhytum
maculosum, or maculatum: In English spotted Comfry, Sageof Jerusalem, Cowslip
of Jerusalem, Cowslip of Bethlehem; and of some, Lung wo^t from the spotted
leaves: although there be a kind of Moss called Lungwo^t, of which I have
entreated already; both that and this being appropriated to the Lungs. I
suppose they are called Cowslips, because the flowers are of the form of
Cowslips though not the color; and Comfrey because the leaves feel like it but
there is no reason to be given why they are called Cowslips of Jerusalem;
un^esse a great quantity of them should grow thereabouts; I should have
supposed them to have been brought from thence, but that I find they grow
naturally here in England, as you shall hear anon.

The Kinds.
I have not yet met with any more then four sorts of Cowslips of Jerusalem. 1.
(...) Cow^^ip* of Jerusalem. 2. Buglosse Cowslips. 3. French or golden
Lung^ort* 4 The lesser French or Golden Lungwort.

The Form.
Cowslip* of Jerusalem (which Gerard would have to be the true and right
Lungwort) hat^ ^o^gh hairy and large leaves, of a brown green color,
confused^y potted with diverse spots* or drops of white; amongst which spring up
certain sta^ks about a Span long when they are longest, but seldom above half
so long* bearing at the top many fine flowers growing together in bunches like
the flowers of Cowslips; saving that they be at first red or purple; and
sometimes b^ew and oftentimes of all these colors at once. The flowers being
fallen, there come small buttons full of Seed. The root is of a hard substance,
and black color, with many threads at the end of it.

The Places and Time.
They are all nourished up in Gardens, because they do not commonly grow wild
yet the first was found growing naturally near Kingswood in Hampshire. The
second was found in the Newforrest being in the same county, in a wood by Mr.
Goodreer, who (as I am informed) is the ablest Herbarist now living in England.
He is a man we^l stricken in years, and his dwelling in some part of Sussex,
the name of the p^ace being yet unknown to me. The third grows about Godalmin
in Surrey. The place of the last I have not yet met with: they flower for the
most p^rt about the end of March, and the beginning of April, and their seed is
ripe in May, or thereabouts.

The Temperature.
The leaves of this herb are of the same temperature with Comfrey, that is,
cold and dry in the first degree; but the roots, seeing they are hard and
woody, are of a more drying and binding quality.

The Virtues and Signature.
The diverse spots or drops of white, wherewith the leaves of Sage of Jerusalem
are marked, do perfectly represent the like spots upon the Lungs; and therefore
the decoction thereof is given with very good success to those that are
troubled with any diseases of the Lungs, as Coughs, shortness of breath,
exulcerations, stoppage by reason of thick, corrupt, or rotten matter, Spitting
of blood, etc. if it be made in water and drunk. It is commended also for all
the wounds or hurts that happen to any other of the Intralls and inward parts,
and also for burstings, or ruptures. It is a very good Potherb, and the leaves
thereof would then especially be chopped as other Pot Herbs are to be boiled in
broth when any one shall be afflicted, with any of the aforesaid distemper. The
flowers thereof are likewise very wholesome and are pleasant to be put in Sallets
in the Spring time. It is used to heal old or new wounds, being thereunto
applied, especially if it be boiled in hog's grease, and afterward being
strained and set a cooling, and then laid upon the wound.

CHAP. CXIV. Of Sanicle.
The Names.
NEither is it found that Sanicle was known to any of the ancient Greek o^
Latin Authors but has* as many other vulnerary and other Herbs, been found
out* and named by later Writers. It is called in Latin, Sanicula (...) a pot
ore sanandi mun^re from its excellency in healing wounds by Ruell^us and by
Brunfelsius Matthiolus, and Lobel Diapensia, and by Tabermontanus, Consolida
quinquefolia. The^e is another sort hereof called Pinguicula, by Gesner, and by
some with us, Pingu^cula Eboracensis because it grows plentifully in
Yorkshire. We call it in Eng^ish Butterwort and Butter-Root, because of the
Oylinesse of the Leaf, which seems to have Oil or Butter always upon it. The
Country people do think their Sheep will catch the Rot, if for hunger they
should eat thereof* and therefore they call it the White Rot, as they do Rot
Solis, the Red Rot, as I have said before.

The Kinds.
There be diverse Herbs, that the learned Writers have entitled Sanicle, as
Avens, Bears-Eares, Corall-wor^; but that which I here at present treat of, is
Sanicle, properly so called, of which there be five sorts. 1. Ordinary Sanicle.
2. Butterwort, or Yorkshire Sanicle. 3. Spotted Sanicle. 4. Bears Ear
Sanicle. 5. The Shrub-Sanicle of America.

The Form.
Ordinary Sanicle sends forth many Leaves of a middle size, somewhat deeply
cut, or civided into five or six parts, and some of them cut-in also sometimes,
standing upon brownish footstalk, of about an handful long, and somewhat like
unto the broader Leaves, of the broadest sort of Anemonies, but ^ne^y dented
about the edges, smooth, and of a dark, green, shining color, and sometimes
reddish about the brims; from among which, rises up small* round, green
stalks, without any joint or leaf thereon, saving at the top, where it
brancheth forth into Flowers, having a leaf divided into three or four parts at
that joint with the Flowers, which are small and white, starting out of small
round greenish yellow heads, many standing together on a tuft: in which
afterward are the Seeds contained, which are small, round, rough Burs,
somewhat like the Seeds of Cleavers, and stick in the same manner, upon any
thing that they touch: the Root is composed of many black strings of Fibers set
together, at a little long head, which abides with the green Leaves all the
Winter.

The Places and Time.
I have seen the first grow by Oxford, in Stow-Wood, in several places amongst
the Bushes, and likewise by St. Albans, under an Hedge, that grows between
the Trench that went about old Verulam, and the way Windridge. The second,
(which has little likeness with the first, but only for its healing virtue,
being composed of four or five fat Leaves, lying flat on the ground, of a
yellowish color) grows in a moist bottom belonging to the same Wood, and is
commonly found upon sundry bogs in the West Country and Wales, but chiefly in
Yorkshire. The third distereth not much from the first, only the Leaves are not
so deeply cut in, and they are full of Red Spots. It grows, and so does the
fourth, upon all the Austrian and Stirian Hills, in the shadowy places of them,
whence they have been brought into our English Physic Gardens, as into that at
Oxford, and that at Westminster also. The last came from the back part of
Virginia, called Canada. The first and second flower not until June, and their
Seed is ripe soon after. The two next flower much e^rlyer, and sometimes again
in Autumn. The last flowreth in July.

The Temperature.
Sanicle is bitter in taste, and thereby is heating, and drying in the second
degree, and it is astringent also.

The Signature and Virtues,
The Spotted Sanicle not only seems to have the Signature of the Lungs, but
is so effectual for them, that there is not any He^b sound, that can give such
present help, either to Man or Beast, when any Di^ease falls upon the Lungs.
It is exceeding good to heal all green Wounds speedily, or any Ulcers,
Impostumes, or Bleedings inwardly, to which the Lungs are more subject then any
other part, it being fullest of blood, because of its continual motion, and
plenty of heat proceeding from thence; as also from the Vi^inity and neerness
of the heart: And for these purposes, the ordinary Sanicle is as effectual as
the other, which does wonderfully help those that have any Tumo^s in any part
of their Bodies; for it represseth, and dissipateth the humors, if the
decoction or juice thereof be taken, or the Pow^e^ in ^^ink and the Juice ^^ed
outwardly. It is a ^o very good to ^eal up all the putrid ma^ignant Ulcers in
the Mouth, Throat an^ P^^^ties, by g^^g^ing or washing them with the Decoction
of the Leaves an^ Root, made in water, and a little Honey put thereto. It he
peth to stay Women Co^^ses and all other Fluxes of Blood, either by the Mouth.
Urine or Stool, and Lasks o^ the Belly, the Ulcerations of the Kidneys al^o and
the pains in the B^wells, and the Gonorrhea, or running of the Reins, being
boiled in Wine o^ Water, and drunk. The same also is no less powerful, to he^p
any Ruptures or Burstings, used both inwardly and outwardly; and briefly it is
effectual in binding, restraining, consolidating, heating, drying and healing,
as any of the Consounds, which are Comfrey, Bugle, Self-heal, or other
Vulnerary Herbs what^oeve^ ^o that. He that has Sanicle to help himself,
needs neither Physician nor Chyrurgion. Butterwort is also a vulnerary Herb,
and of great e^eem with many as well for the Rupture in Children, as to heal
green Wounds: the Country people which live where it grows, do use to rub it
upon their hands, when they are chapt by the Wind, or when their Kines Udders
are ^woln, by the biting of any vi^^lent Worm or Vermin or otherwise hurt,
chapt, or rift. The poorer ^o^t of people in Wales, make a Syrup thereof, as is
of Roses, and therewith purge themselves and their Children: they put it
likewise in their Broths for the ^ame purpo^e, which purges phlegm effectually:
they also, with the He^b and Butter, make ^n Ointment singular good against the
Obstructions of the Liver, as has been experimently affirmed by some
Physicians of good account.

CHAP. CXV. Of Polypodie.
The Names.
THere are diverse conjectures, why the Grecians called this Herb (...). Some
conceive it to be derived from (...), multus, and (...), pes, because the many
small narrow Leaves resemble the feet of the Polypus; others a cavernosis
acetabulis seu cirris Polyporum, from the holes in the Root, which are like to
the holes that are in the said Fish; others, quia polypum sanat, because it
cures the Disease in the Nose, called Polypus. It is likewise called in Latin,
Polypodium, and Filicula quasi parva filix, and Filicularis herba; for its
likeness with Fern: In English Oak-Fern, and VVall-Fern according to their
places of growth, but generally Polypody. Yet there is another sort of OakFern,
called in Greek (...) Dryopteris, that is Filix querna, which Oribasius calls
(...) Bryopteris quasi Filix Muscosa, Mosse-Fern, of its growing on the Moss
on Trees.

The Kinds.
Of Polypody, under which, both that of the Wall, and the Oak-Fern, are
included, there be six sorts. 1. Common Polypody of the Oak. 2. Small Polypody.
3. Island Polypody. 4. Indian Polypody. 5. Creeping Oak-Fern. 6. White Oak-Fern.

The Form.
Common Polypody of the Oak is a small Herb, consisting of nothing but Roots
and Leaves, bearing neither Flower nor Seed. It has three of four Leaves ri^ng
from a Root, every one singly by themselves, of about an hand breadth, which
are winged, consisting of many small narrow Leaves, cut into the middle Rib,
standing on each side of the stalk, large below, and smaller and smaller, up to
the top; not dented or notched on the edges at all, (as the Male Fern is) of a
sad green color, and smooth on the upper side; but on the under ^^de, somewhat
rough, by reason of some yellowish spots ^et thereon. The Root is smaller then
ones little finger, yet long and creeping aslope, whereon are certain little
knags and holes, as are on the tail of the Fish Polypus.

The Places and Time.
There has been of late days, such a slaughter of Oaks, and other Trees, all
over this Land, that should I nominate any particular place, I might thereby
seem to be a de^eiver. I shall therefore tell you in general, that it grows
as well upon old rotten Trun^s, or stumps of Trees, be it Oak Beech, Haze^,
Willow, or any other, as in the Woods under them; and sometimes upon slated
Houses, and old Walls, as upon a Wall and side of an House, in Adderbury
Churchyard and many other places. That of the Oak is reckoned the best; but any
of the other may be used in ead thereof. The Island Polypody, grows in the
Island Ilua, which is in the Medite^rane^n Sea, the last in India. It being
always green; and bearing neither F^ow^e nor Seed, may be gathered for use at
any time, yet it shoots forth green Leaves only in the Spring. The two last
lose their leaves in Winter, and spring up a fresh again about May.

The Temperature.
It is hot and dry in the second Degree, as may be gathered from the sweetish
harshness that it has in the taste.

The Signature and Virtues.
The rough spots that are on the under sides of the leaves of Polypody as also
the Knags, or Ex^rescences on each side the Roots is a sign that it is good for
the Lungs, and the exulcerations thereof. The distilled water, both of Roots
and Leaves, with some Sugar Candy dissolved therein, is good against the Cough,
shortness of Breath, and Whee^ngs, and those distillations of thin Rheum upon
the Lungs, which cause Pti^icks and o^tenti^es Consumptions. The Herb it self
taken in decoction broth or infu^^on, dries up thin humors dige^eth tough and
thick, and purges burnt Cho^er, and especially tough and thick phlegm, and
thin phlegm also, even from the joints; and is therefore good for those that
are troubled with melancho^y, or Quartan Agues especially if it be taken in
Whey, or honyed water, or in Barley water, or in the Broth of a Chicken with
Epythymum, or with Beets, and Mallows. It is al^o good for the (...) of the
Spleen, and for prickings, or Stitches in the sides; as also the Cholick. Some
use to put to it Fennel-Seeds, or Annise-Seeds, to correct the ^o^thing that it
brings to the Stomach; but it may be taken without, by any person at any
time; and an Ounce of it may be given at a time in a Decoction if there be not
Sena, or some other strong purger put with it. A Dram o^ two of the Powder of
the dried Roots taken fasting, in a Cup of Honyed water works gently and for
the purposes aforesaid. The distilled Water, both of Roots and Leaves, is much
commended for the Quartane Agues, to be taken for many days together, as also
against Me^ncholy or fearful or troublesome sleeps, or dreams. The fresh Roots
bea^^^ small or the Powder of the dried Root, mixed with Honey, and applied to
any Member that has been out of joint, and is newly set again, does much help
to ^^engthen it. Applied also to the Nose, it cures the Disease called
Polypus, which is a piece of flesh growing therein, which in time sloppeth the
passage of breath through that Nostril; and it helps those clefts or chops
that come between the Fingers or Toes. Crollius says, that because it has
such rough spots on the backside of the Leaves, it heals all sorts of scabs
whatsoever by Signature. And here I might tell Mr. Culpepper, that the College
of Physicians forbid not other Polypody, but only prescribe that of the Oak
for the best, because every Excrescence or Plant upon a Plant, as Polypody
commonly is, does participate of the nature of that Tree whereon it grows.
And seeing that the Oak is of a more drying or purging quality then any of the
other Trees it commonly grows upon therefore the Polypody of the Oaks is best;
but why do I answer for the learned College, who are more able to answer for
themselves, had they thought their ^^^ing Antagonist worth the taking notice
of. Creeping Oak-Fern, has been by some Apothecaries beyond the Sea, mistaken
for Polypody, to the endangering of those that took it; for it has not that
purging quality proper to Polypody; but a pernicious operation. Yet it is a
remedy to take away hairs, as Dioscorides says, if the Roots and Leaves be
bruised together, and applied after sweating. Matth^^lus says, that the Root
in Powder, with a little Salt and Bran, is given to ^orses for the Worms. The
last, viz. White Oak-Fern is moderate in taste, somewhat drying, and may be
safely used instead of the true Maidenhair.

CHAP. CXVI. Of Whortle-Berries.
The Names.
THere be several Sorts of Whortle-Berries, whereof that with black-Berries is
taken to be (...), of Theophrastus, that is, Vitis ex part Idae quam vocant
Phalacras; (...), and Vitis, being both taken in a large Sense, as the word
Vine must also be. The Latin follows the Greek, in which it is called Vitis
Idaea Theophrastl; and because all the rest have a resemblance to this, they
are all called Vites Idaea. The fruits are called Vaccinia; and therefore some
have thought this sort to be the Vaccinia Nigra of Virgil; but he puts his
Vaccinia amongst Flowers, and not among fruits, saying, Et nigrae violae sunt ^
vaccinia nigra. Vitruvius and Pliny indeed have a Vaccinium, which was used to
dye Garments, which might very well be this; for such a Purple Color will the
juice hereof give, if it be rightly ordered. It is also called Myrtillus, and
by some, Myrtillus Germanica, because the Physicians, and Apothecaries in
Germany, and thereabouts, took them to be true Myrtle-Berries and so used them,
till they were showed their error. They are called Whorts, and Whortle-Berries
and Bill-Beries also, in the parts about London.

The Kinds.
There be nine sorts of Whorts reckoned up by Authors. 1. Black Whorts, or
Bill-Berries 2. The greater Bill-Berry. 3. Hungarian black Whorts. 4. Red
Whorts, with Box-Leaves. 5. Red Whorts, with longer Leaves. 6. The Spanish Red
Whort. 7. The French, Honey, sweet Whorts. 8. The talled red Whorts of Candy.
9. The lower Candy red Whorts.

The Form.
The small Bush that bears black Whorts, or Bill-berries, creeps along upon
the ground, scarce rising half a yard high, with diverse small, dark, green
Leaves, set on the green branches, not always one against another, and a
little dented about the edges: At the foot of the Leaves, come forth small,
hollow, pale, blush colored Flowers, the brims ending in five points, with a
reddish thread in the middle, which pass into small round Berries, of the
bigness and color of Juniper Berries; but of a Purple, sweetish sharp taste the
juice of them gives a Purplish color, to the hands and lips of them, that
handle and eat them, especially, if they break them, containing within them
diverse small Seeds. The Root grows aslope under the surface of the ground,
shooting forth in sundry places as it creeps. This loses its Leaves in the
Winter, but the red kind retains them.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in many Heaths, Woods, and barren hilly places in this Land,
as Hampstead-Heath, Finchley, and St. John's Wood, not far from London, and in
sundry other places. The first red sort in the Northern parts, as
Northumberland, Lancashire, and Yorkshire, on the Hills, etc. The rest grow in
Hungaria, Bavaria, and Germany, and in other Countries also. The sixth, Clusins
found in Spain. The seventh grows as L^^el says, on every of the Hills in
Provence of France. The two last in Candy. They all flower in March, and April,
and the fruit of the black, is ripe in June and July; the other, later.

The Temperature.
The Bill-berries do cool in the second Degree, and do a little bind, and dry
withal.

The Virtues.
The Berries aforesaid, are an excellent Medicine for those that are troubled
with an old Cough, or with an Ulcer in the Lungs, or other Disease thereof; but
if they be eaten by those that have a cold or weak stomach, they will much
offend and trouble it; and therefore the Juice of the Berries made into a
Syrup, or the pulp of them made into a Conserve with Sugar, will be more
familiar to such, and help those pains the cold fruit procured; and being thus
prepared, they will be the more effectual in hot Agues, and to cool the heat
of the Stomach and Liver, and do somewhat bind the Belly, and stay castings and
loathings, with the juice of the Berries. Painters, to color Paper and Cards,
do make a kind of Purple blew color, putting thereto some Allome and Galls,
whereby they can make it lighter and sadder, as they please. And some poor
folks, as Tragus shows, do take a Pot full of the juice strained, whereunto
an Ounce of Allome, four spoonfulls of good Wine-Vinegar and a quarter of an
Ounce of the wast of the Copper forgings, being put together, and boiled all
together into this liquor, whilst it is reasonable, but not too hot, they put
their Cloth, Wool, Thread, or Yarn therein, letting it lie for a good while,
which being taken out, and hung up to dry, and afterward washed with cold
water, will have the like Turkey blew color; and if they would have it sadder,
they will put thereto, in the boiling, an Ounce of broken Gauls. Gerard says,
that he has made of the juice of the red Berries, an excellent Crimson color,
by putting a little Allom thereto* The red Whorts are taken to be more binding;
and therefore to be used in stopping Lasks, and Women's Courses, spitting of
blood, and any other Flux of blood, or humors, as well outwardly as inwardly.

CHAP. CXVII. Of Sweet Cicely.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), as well as (...), and Myrrhis, and Myrrha,
likewise in Latin, in imitation of the Greek* and also because of its pleasant
savor, being somewhat like unto Myrrh. Pliny says, that some called Myrrhis,
by the name of Smirnisusa, and others Myrrha; yet some have it Smyrrhiza, from
the likeness unto S(...)ium. Some also call i^ Caerefolium magnum, and some
Cicutaria, from the likeness of the Leaves, and of some Conilaus. We in England
also call it Myrrhis, Sweet Chervill, great Chervill, sweet Cicely, and sweet
Fern.

The Kinds.
There be five Sorts of Sweet Chervill. 1. The ordinary Garden sweet Chervil.
2. The lesser sweet Chervill. 3. Wild sweet Chervill. 4. Wild sweet Chervill of
England. 5. Wild sweet Chervill of Naples.

The Form.
The ordinary Garden Sweet Chervill, which is so like Hemlock, that many have
mistaken it for the same; yet it grows not so high, but has large spread
Leaves, cut into diverse parts, tasting as sweet as the Anniseed, that rises to
be two foot high, or better, being crested, or hollow, having the like Leaves
at the Joints; but lesser, and at the tops of the branched stalks, umbels, or
tufts of while Flowers: after which come large, and long-crested, black-shining
Seed, pointed at both ends, tasting quick, yet sweet and pleasant, like the
Leaf or Anniseed: the Root is great and white, growing deep in the ground, and
spreading sundry long Branches therein, in taste and smell, stronger then the
Leaves or Seed, and continuing many years.

The Places and Time.
The first is planted in diverse Gardens here in England, and in Germany also,
though it be thought by some, to grow wild in the fields of that Country, which
the 3d sort may happily do with them, as well as with us in England, near unto
the ditch sides, and other water courses: The second is a natural of Geneva,
and the parts thereabouts, as Lobel says; but was sent also by Aicholzius,
from Vienna to Norunberg, to Camerarius, as he says, and is likely to be
natural of those parts also. The fourth was found by Columna, upon some of the
Hills in Naples. The last has been seen growing in some wast places of this
Land. These Herbs do flower in May, and their Seed is ripe in July.

The Temperature.
Galen says, that Myrrhis, that is, Sweet Cicely, is hot in the second degree
with some tenuity of parts.

The Virtues.
The Root of the ordinary Garden sweet Chervill, boiled in the broth wherein
flesh has been sodden, does cleanse the breast from phlegm, and all corruption,
and is very good for such as be lean and weak* or falling into a consumption of
the Lungs, to make them strong and ^usty. It is likewise good to help the
P^isick, if it be boiled but in Beer. Being drunk with Wine, it provokes
Women's Courses, it expels the dead Child and Afterbirth, and purges Women
after their deliverance; it provokes Urine, and is good against all venomous
bitings. If the Root be sliced, and said to s^eep in White Wind all night, and
drunk in the morning with Sugar, it will give the party that takes it three or
four stools. It procures an appetite to meat, and helps to expel wind. The
juice, with Powder of burnt Allom, heals the Ulcers of the Head and Face; and
kills the Canker in the Mouth or Throat, being anointed therewith. The
Candid Roots of this Chervill, are held as effectual as Angelica, to preserve
the spirits from infection, in the time of a Plague: as also to warm, and
comfort a cold weak stomach. Both Leaves, Seeds and Roots, are so fine and
pleasant in Sallets, as there is no Herb comparable unto it, and gives a
better relish to those it is put with: the Seeds while they are fresh and
green, sliced, and put among other Herbs, make them taste very pleasant: the
Root boiled, and eaten with Oil and Vinegar, or without Oil, if any one mislike
it, does much please and warm a cold or old stomach, oppressed with phlegm or
wind, and those that have the Ptisick, and Consumption of the Lungs.

The Lungs and the particular Diseases thereof, being thus spoken to, I shall
descend unto the Heart, which is the first thing in a Man that lives, and the
last that dies: upon the welfare whereof, the welfare of all other parts
depends, and therefore especially to be provided for, so that I shall muster up
a little Regiment of Simples to defend it from those poisonous enemies, which
would otherwise assault it, to the endangering of the wh^le Microcosme. And I
shall begin with Angelica, because it relates both to that which goes before,
and that which comes after.

CHAP. CXVIII. Of Angelica.
The Names.
IT is not yet known, whether any of the Ancients knew this Herb, or by what
name the Greeks did call it, however it has gained many worthy names of the
Latin Writers; for some have called it Sancti Spiritus radix, and have been
blamed for it already; others, Lacuna; and Dodonaeus thinks it to be some
kind of Laserpitium: some have taken it to be Smyrnium, and some Panax
Heracleum; but generally, it is called Angelica, for the rare smell, and
Angel-like properties therein, and that name it retains still, all Nations
following it so near as their Dialect will permit.

The Kinds.
Former times knew but two sorts hereof, but now there are sound out two more,
1. Garden Angelica. 2. Wild Angelica. 3. Mountain Wild Angelica, 4. The great
Water Angelica.

The Form.
The Garden Angelica, has diverse large and fair spread and winged Leaves, half
a yard long or better sometimes, made of many great and broad ones, set usually
one against another on a middle rib, of a pale but fresh green Color, and
dented about the edges, from among which usually rises but o^e round hollow
stalk being very thick, and four or five foot high, with diverse great joints
and Leaves set on them, whose footstalk do compass the main stalk at the
bottom, and from thence also toward the top, come forth branches with the
like, but lesser Leaves at* them, and at their tops large, round, spread umbels
of white flowers; after which comes the seed which is somewhat flat, thick,
short, and whitish, two always set together, as is usual in all these
umbelliferous plants, and a little crested on the round seed; the root grows
great and woody, when it flowreth, with many great long branches to it, but
perishes after seed, which being suffered to fall of its own accord, will more
certainly grow, then that which is gathered and sown by hand, at any other time.

The Places and Time.
The first is very Common in our English Gardens, and was brought hither as is
conceived from beyond the Seas or from the Rocks, not far from Barwick, upon
which it grows. It is found in great plenty in Norway, and in an Island of
the North call Iceland, where it grows very high, and is eaten of those that
come into that Country for want of other food, the bark being pilled off. It
grows likewise in diverse mountains of Germany, and especially of Bohemia: The
second Sort is wild both in many places of Essex, Kent, and near Kentish-Town
by London, and in other places: The third grows on diverse mountains of
Germany and Hungary: The last is not only natural to grow in watery ditches,
but in moist grounds, also in most places of England. They flower in July and
August, whose roots for the most part do perish after the seed is ripe; and
therefore they which desire to preserve them must keep it from seeding by
cutting off the Leaves to Still, and so both the root and plant may be
continued diverse years together.

The Temperature.
Angelica, especially that of the Garden, is hot and dry, some put it in the
second, and others in the third degree; howsoever it opens, attenuateth, or
makes thin, digesteth, and procures sweat. The whole plant both Leaf, and
Seed, and Root, is of an excellent pleasant scent, and taste very comfortable,
being not fierce or sharp, but rather sweet, and gives a most delicate relish
when it is tasted or used: the Leaves be the weakest, and some hold the seed to
be next, and the root to be the strongest, especially being not ready to grow
up for stalk.

The Virtues.
If the Root of Angelica be taken in powder to the weight of half a dram at a
time, with some good Treacle in Carduus water, or if treacle be not at hand,
take the root alone in Carduus or Angelica water, and sweat thereupon, it
re^steth poison by defending the Heart, the blood and spirits; and gives heat
and Comfort to them, and it does the like against the Plague and Infection of
the Pestilence, and so do the stalks or roots candyed, and eaten fasting at
such times, and also at other times to warm and Co^^ort a cold and old
stomach. The root also steeped in Vinegar, and a little of that Vinegar taken
sometimes fasting, and the root smelled unto, are both good Preservatives also
for the same purpose. A water distilled from the Root simply, or steeped in
Wine and distilled in glass is much more effectual then the water of the
leaves: and this water drunk two or three spoonfulls at a time, ea^eth all
pains and torments coming of Cold and Wind, so as the body be not bound; and
some of the root taken in powder at the beginning helps the Pl^urisie, and
all other diseases of the Lungs and Breast, as Coughs, Pthisick, and Shortness
of breath, and a Syrup of the stalks does the like. It helps likewise the
torments of the Colic, the Strangury, and stopping of the Urin, procures
women's Courses, expels the Afterbirth, opens the obstructions o^ the Liver
and spleen, and briefly eases and discusseth all inward tumors and windiness.
The decoction drunk before the fit o^ an Ague, that they may sweat if possible
before the fit come, will in two or three times taking, rid it quite away: it
helps digestion and is a remedy for a surfit. The juice or the water being
dropped into the eyes or ears, helps dimnesse of sight, and deafness, and the
juice put into an hollow Tooth eases the pains. The roots in powder made up
into a Plaster with a little pitch, and laid on the biting of a mad dog* or
any other Venomous Creature, does wonderfully help. The juice or the water
dropped, or Tents wet therein, and put into old filthy deep Ulcers, or the
powder of the Root (in want of either) does cleanse them and cause them to
heal quickly by covering the naked Bones with flesh: The distilled water
applied to places pained with the Gout or Sciatica, does give a great deal of
ease. The green or dry Leaves boiled in Beer, or put therein upon the Tunning
up, makes it more wholesome, and gives thereunto a most excellent relish. The
decoction taken helps inward bruises and congealed blood, strengthens the
stomach and is effectual for the Suffocation of the Muther. The root taken dry
or drunk in any Liquor, will abate the rage of Lust in young persons. The root
being used green, helps such as be Short-winded, and those that are troubled
with stuffings in their Stomach. The Wild Angelica is not so effectual as the
Garden, although it may be used for all the purposes aforesaid. The root of the
garden Angelica is a better substitute in Theriaca Andromachi or Venice
Treacle, and Mithridate, then many others, that have been used therein.

CHAP. CXIX. Of Saffron.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), in Latin Crocus and Crocum which are the Names
used in the shops of Apothecaries, in English Saffron. The Poets say, it was
called Crocus, from a young man of that name who pining away for the love of
Smilax, was turned into this Flower; Ovid testifying as much, in the verse
following,

Et Crocum in parvos versum cum Smilace flores.

It may not unfitly be called, Filius ante patrem, or the Father before the
Son. Because it first puts forth the Flowers, and then the Leaves*

The Kinds.
There being but one kind of the true manured Saffron I shall put down five of
the more Common wild sorts; 1. Wild Saffron flowring early with an Ash-colored
streaked flower. 2. Wild, yellow, Spring Saffron. 3. Broad leaved Wild-Spring
Saffron with a Purple flower. 4. Autumn Wild Saffron, with white Flowers. 5.
Small Wild Saffron.

The Form.
The manured true Saffron, has its Flower first rising out of the ground,
nakedly without any Leaves, shortly after which, rises up its long small
grassy Leaves, seldom bearing Flower, and Leaves at once, the root is small,
round, and Bulbous. The Flower consists of six small blew Leaves, tending to
Purple, having in the middle many small yellow strings or threads, amongst which
are two or three or more thick fat Chives, of a fiery color, somewhat reddish,
of a strong smell when they be dried, but being newly gathered, and but rubbed
upon ones hand, they will make it very yellow.

The Places and Times.
Fuchsius says, that heretofore the best Saffron, grew upon the Mountain
Corycus in Cicilia, and the next to that upon Olympus a Mountain in Lycia; but
since the profit that arises from this commodity has been discovered, it has
been planted in Germany, and likewise in England, in diverse places, but
especially in Cambrigeshire, about Walden, which is therefore called
Saffron-VValden, where there be diverse feilds full of it. It begins to
Flower in September, and presently after the Leaves Spring up and remain green
all the Winter-long, dying again in April, when it commonly puts forth
another Crop of Flowers, which must be gathered as soon as it is blown, or else
the Chives in the middle, which are the Commodity, will perish; so that it is
allowed to be gathered on the Sabbath day, by that strict Sabbatarian Mr.
Greenham in his Treatise on that subject, because it is conceived that God who
has made the Saffron so to Flower, would not that a thing so useful for man's
health, should be lost for want of gathering. This information I had from my
learned friend Mr. Hudson, Minister of Putney, the place of my abode at the
writing hereof. The Wild Sorts were brought some out of Italy, and some out of
Spain, and are growing in diverse of our London Gardens: they Flower for the
most part in Jannuary and February; but that with Flowers, grows upon
certain craggy Rocks, in Portugal, not far from the Sea side, which has been
brought over into England also, and flowreth in September.

The Temperature.
Saffron is a little astringent or binding, but his hot quality does so over
rule in it, that in the whole essence it is in the number of those herbs which
are hot in the second degree, and dry in the first: therefore it has also a
certain force to concoct, which is furthered by the small astriction that is in
it, as Galen says.

The Virtues.
There is not a better Cordial amongst herbs then Saffron is; for it does much
comfort the Heart, and recreateth the Spirits, and makes them cheerful that
use it, and therefore it is called Cor hominis the Heart of man, and when we
see a man over merry, we have a Proverb Dormivit in sacco Croci, He has slept
in a bag of Saffron. It expells Venomous Vapors from the Heart, and therefore
is very useful in the Plague, Pestilence, and small Pox, strengthens the
stomach, preservs the Entralls, helps Concoction and natural heat; It is
called by some Anima Pulmonum, because it is very profitable for the Lungs, and
the Consumption thereof, as also for the shortness of breath. It is likewise
very profitable for the Head, Stomach, Spleen, Bladder, Womb, Animal, Vital and
Natural Spirits, and is useful in cold diseases of the Brain and nerves, and
quickens the memory, and senses. It is good in the Pleurity, opens the
stoppings of the Liver, and ^all, and therefore is useful in the yellow
Jaundise, which it cures by sig^^(...)e, and against Melancholy, provokes
Urine, and Venus, hastneth Childbirth, procures a good color to them that use
it. It is profitable, in sits of the (...) especially the Tincture thereof: It
is best for old persons that are phlegmatic and Melancholic, and that in the
Winter Season. It is outwardly used against the Gout, to ease the pain
thereof, being mixed with the Yolke of an Egg and Oil of Roses and applied. A
Cataplasme of Pul^ is made of Saffron, Milk, and the crumbs of Bread being
applied, mollifyeth Tumors and Aposthums, it eases sore Eyes and
blood-shotten, being used with red-Roses and the white of an Egg, being mixed
with red-Rose-water, and Woman's Milk; it preserves the Eyes from the small
Pox, and Measles, and being made up in a stay and put under the Throat of one
that has the Smallpox; keeps them from the place which would otherwise be
much more troublesome, if the life not hazzarded. It is used against
Erysipelas, or Wildfire, and Inflammations; it helps deafness, if it be
mixed with Oil of bitter-Almonds, and put into the Ear warm, or dip black
wool in some of it, and put it into the Ears. It kills the Itch, and is
used in pultisses for the Matrix and Fundament, to ease the pain thereof, and
also for old Swellings, and Aches. Too much of it causes the Headache,
offends the Brain and Senses, brings drowsinesse, and hurts the sight: it
causes a loathing of the stomach, and takes away the appetite, and provokes
laugh(...). Some write, that if two or three drams thereof be taken, it brings
death; it is not safe to give to Women with Child. The weight of ten grains of
Saffron, the kernells of Wallnuts two ounces, Figs two ounces, Mith^idate one
dram, and a few Sage Leaves, stamped together with a sufficient quantity of
Pimpernell water, and made into a mass or lump, and kept in a Pot for your
use, and thereof twelve grains given in the morning fasting, preserves from
the Pestilence, and expels it from those that are infected. Infinite
advantage has been made of this commodity, by those that Planted it, there
being no Saffron comparable to the English, but now it is manured by so many,
that it is not so profitable, as formerly.

CHAP. CXX. Of Borage.
The Names.
IT is called by the Greeks (...), Euphrosyne ab efficienda animi volupta^^
from causing mirth. Apul^^us said, that Buglossum (meaning our Borage was
called by them of Luca, Corrag^, quod cordis affectibus medetur, because it is
very Cordial, which by the alteration of one letter is Borrage, and from
thence as is supposed came the name Borrage, which is not found in any of the
ancient Writers, whom I can perceive to make little or no difference between it
and Buglosse, but rather that it is the same that was formerly so called, yet
we have them growing in distinct forms in our Gardens.

The Kinds.
And of Borage commonly so called, I find five sorts; 1. Garden Borage with
blew Flowers; 2. Garden Borage with white Flowers; 3. Everlasting Borage; 4.
Small creeping Borage; 5. Small wild Borage.

The Form.
And because the first Garden Borrage, is so well known, I shall describe the
Everlasting Borage, which has very many broad Leaves, rough and hairy, of a
black dark green color, amongst which rise up stiff hairy stalks, whereupon
do grow fair blew Flowers, ripe seed, and buds for new Flowers all at once,
whereupon it is called Everlasting, and that very properly, because it lasts
both Summer and Winter, and is seldom without Flowers, buds, ripe or unripe
seed, whereby it greatly increases. The root is very durable.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in most Gardens, and there increases very much after it is
once sown, the second and third are not so common, yet found in diverse Gardens
of those that affect rarities; the last in Germany, as Lobel says: and in
Naples, as Columna says; and in Kent, if Mr. Parkinson mistake not. The fourth
came to us out of the Low-Countrys, and prospers well in the Physick-Garden
at Oxfora; they do all Flour in the months of June and July; except the
Creeping Borage, which Lobel says flow^eth both in the Spring and in August,
and their seed does ripen quickly after; both ripe seed and Flowers, may at one
time be gathered from many of them.

The Temperature.
The Garden kinds are temperate, and accounted rather hot, and moist in the
first degree then cold, and yet for their cordial properties, are often used
amongst other cold herbs, as conducing to the like effect.

The Virtues.
The Leaves, Flowers, and Seeds of Borage, all, or either of them are very
Cordial, and help to expel sadness and melancholy, arising without manifest
cause, whereof came the saying Ego Borrago gaud a semper ago: I Bo rage bring
allwaies Courage. It helps also to clarify the blood, is to very good
purpose, used in all putrid or Pestilentiall Fevers to de end the Heart, and
to help to re^st and expel the poison, or the venom of other Creatures. The
juice made into a Syrup, prevails much to all the purposes aforesaid, and is
also put with other cooling, opening, and clensing herbs to open obstructions,
and to help the yellow Jaundise, to cool and cleanse the blood, and temper the
heat and sharpness thereof, especially with Fumitory, and thereby to help
the Itch, Ring-wormes or Tetters, or other spreading Scabs or Sores, that arise
from adust and sharp humors, and for that purpose is put into the Syrupus
Byzantinus which works to the same effect. The Conserve made of the Flowers,
or the Flowers candyed are helping also in those causes, but are chiefly used
as a Cordial, and good for those that have been long sick or in a Consumption,
to comfort the Heart and Spirits, and is thereby good for those that are
troubled with often swouning or passions of the Heart. The distilled Water, is
no less effectual to all the purposes aforesaid, and the eyes washed
therewith helps the redness or inflammation of them. The dried Herb is almost
useless, yet the Ashes thereof boiled in Meade or Honyed water is available
against Inflammations and Ulcers in the mouth or Throat, to wash and gargle it
therewith. The green Leaves and stalks with the Flowers on them are frequently
used in the summertime to be put in Wine or Beer; for the comforting the
Heart, and giving a better relish thereunto. Syrup made of the Juice of Borage
and Sugar, having some of the powder of the Heart-bone or a Heart put into it,
is good against swouning, the Cardiack passion of the Heart, against
melancholy, and the falling sickness. The wild Borage is, somewhat hotter and
dryer, and is very near the property of Vipers Buglosse, which differs
little from what has been already said of Borage, as you shall hear hereafter.

CHAP. CXXI. Of Violets.
The Names.
THe Garden Violet is called in Greek (...) Viola purpurea by Dioscorides, and
(...) Viola nigra, and Melanion by Theophrastus. Some would have the name to
come from Io, whom Jove transformed into a Cow, because she fed on them,
chiefly; Others from certain Nymphs of Jonia, who first gave of the Flowers to
Jupiter, for a presen^^ others think it to be derived (...) quasi^re, aut
primum prorumpere: veris enim praevia, est Viola; because it is one of the
first herbs that flowreth. The Latins call it Viola Martia, and Herba
Violaria* Hearts^ease, which is also a kind of Violet, is called in English
Pansyes, as also Love in idleness, Call me to you, and, Three faces under a
hood: in Latin, Viola Tricolor, etc: of the three colors therein.

The Kinds.
There are many sorts of Violets; 1. Single purple Violets; 2. Single white
Violets; 3. Double purple Violets; 4. Double white Violets. 5. Upright Violets.
6. Small narrow Leafed Violets. 7. Mountain Violets with jagged Leaves. 8.
Yellow Violets of Virginia. 9. Yorkshire striped red Violets. 10. Wild
Violets. 11. Garden Pansyes. 12. Wild Pansyes or Heartsease.

The Form.
The description of the ordinary Garden Violets being needless, I shall set
down that of the upright Violet which grows a foot-high or near upon, with
hard upright stalks which yet bend down again their tops, having two Leaves
somewhat round, set at each joint; but longer and more dented about the edges
then the Garden kinds, at which joints with the Leaves, on both sides of the
stalks comes forth a larger Flower, and more spread open then it, being more
like a Pansye; but of a pale purplish color, almost as sweet as the Violet as
Matthiolus, but without scent as Lobel says.

The Names.
The four first sorts are usual in Gardens, the fifth was found upon Mount
Baldus as also upon the Vaganean hills in Narbone, the sixth was found in
Spain by Boel, The Seventh in Itady by Dr. Mera, The Eight came from
Virginia, The Ninth from Yorkshire, The Tenth grows under Hedges and Bushes
almost every where; the last in the Corn fields and in such as ly Ley, and in
the borders of other fields. The Violets Flower in February and March; and
after them the Pansies till the end of July.

The Temperature.
The Garden Violets, and so likewise the Wild kinds are cold and moist whilst
they are fresh and green.

The Virtues.
The Flowers of Violets as well as those of Borage are reckoned to be chief
Cordial Flowers, and are much used in Cordial drinks, powders and other
Medicines especially where cooling Cordialls as Roses and Saunders are used.
They are used to cool any heat or distemperature of the Body either inwardly
or outwardly in the Inflammation of the Eyes, in the Womb and Fundament when
they are fallen down, and are full of pain, Imposthums also, and hot
Swellings, to drink the decoction of the Leaves of Flowers made with Water or
Wine or to apply them pultis wise to the place that is grieved; It likewise
eases pains in the Head, which are caused through want of sleep. A dram of
the dried Leaves of the Flowers of Violets does purge the body of Choleric
humors and asswageth the heat, being taken in a draught of Wine or other drink.
The powder of the Leaves of the purple Flowers only picked and dried and drunk
in powder with Water, is said to help the Quinsie and the Falling sickness in
Children especially in the beginning of the Disease. The Flowers of the white
Violets ripen and dissolve Swellings: The seed being taken resists the poison
of the Scorpion. The Herb or Flowers whilst they are fresh, or the Flowers
when they are dry, are effectual in the Pleurisy and all other diseases of the
Lungs, to lenify the sharpness of hot Rheums, and the hoarsenesse of the
Throat, the heat also of the Urine, and the sharpness thereof, and all pains
of the back or reins or bladder, They are good also for the Liver and the
Jaundise, and in all hot Agues, helping to cool the heat and quench thirst:
But the Syrup of Violets is of most use and of better effect, being taken in
some convenient Liquor, and if a little of the Juice, or Syrup of Lemons be put
to it, or a few drops of the Oil of Vitriall, it is made thereby the more
powerful to cool the heat, and to quench the thirst, and, besides the effect,
gives to the drink both a Claret Wine color, and a pleasant taste, Violets
taken or made up with honey do more cleanse then cool, and with Sugar
contrariwise. The Leaves of Violets are used in cooling Plasters, Oils,
Cataplasms, or Pultises, and are of great efficacy among other Herbs, as
Mercury, Mallows, etc. to be put in Clysters.

CHAP. CXXII. Of Straw-berries.
The Names.
THe whole Plant is called Fragraria, and the Berries Fraga, a fructus
fragrantia, odoris, and gustus; for it has no certain Greek name: yet there
are some which think it to be (...), that is, Rubus Idaus, because it has no
prickles, which Opinion Fuchsius says, is not to be despised. Others say, that
they called it (...), because of the ^ikeness of the fruit, with that of the
Tree-Strawberry. Servius calls them, Mora terrestria, Ground Mulberries,
because they are somewhat like those that grow on Trees.

The Kinds.
I have not yet met with any more then six sorts of Straw-berries. 1. Red
Straw-berries. 2. White Straw-berries. 3. Small Straw-berries, with hard
Leaves. 4. Flat Straw-berries. 5. Dwarf Straw-berries. 6. Barren or
unprofitable Straw-berries.

The Form.
I know not whether the Dwarf-Straw-berry be brought over in England, yet I
shall venture to give you so much of its Description, as Parkinson has set
down, choosing rather to give you the Description of a strange Plant, then of
the others which are so commonly known. It has very small triparted Leaves
next the ground, closer set together upon short footstalk then any other, and
those that are set on both sides of the long branch, not above four inches
long, which lies creeping on the ground, grow less, and without stalk: the
Flower stands at the end of the Branch many times; but one at a place, which
consists of five round Leaves, like a Straw-berry, but larger then agrees
with the proportion of the Plant, and is of a yellowish color; what fruit it
bears, is not set down.

The Places and Time.
The two first grow in Gardens, though it is probable, they were brought out of
the Woods, where they do most delight: yet being set in a rich soil, they
become far greater. The three next grow upon diverse of the Alps, and other
places of Germany. The last is to be found in our own Land, in most Woods, and
the Field sides, near unto them in Cornwall, as Lobel says, and in other
places also. They flower in May, or thereabouts most commonly, and are ripe in
June; but I have seen ripe Straw-berries after Michaelmas also.

The Temperature.
The Leaves of them are cooling in the first Degree, and yet some say, they are
hot and drying in the second, the Root is more drying and binding: the Berries,
wh^^e they are green, are cold and dry; but when they are ripe, they are co^d
and moist.

The Virtues and Signature.
The water of the Berries carefully distilled, is a sovereign remedy and
Cordial in the pa^pitations of the heart, that is, the panting and beating of
the heart, and is good for the overflowing of the Gall, which causes the
ye^^ow Jaundise. The Berries themselves are ex^e^ent good to cool the Liver,
the B^ood and Spleen, or an hot cho^eri^k s^omach, to refresh and comfort the
^ainting Spirits, and to quench thirst. They are good also for other
Inflammations; yet it (...)veth one to be ca^telous, or rather to refrain them
in a Fever, (...) by the^ putri^ying in the ^^oma^h, they increase the Fits,
and make them to be (...)ore fier^e. The Leaves and Roots boiled in Wine and
Water, as drunk, do likewi^e coo^ the Liver and Blood, and assuage al
Inflammations in the Reins and Bladder provokes Urine, and allayeth the heat,
and sharpness thereof: the same also being drunk, stays the Bloody Flux, and
Women's Co^^es and helps the swel^ings of the Sp^een. The Juice dropped into
foul Ulcers, or they washed therewith or with the decoction of the Herb and
Root, does wonderfully cleanse them, and he^p to cure them. All Lotions and
Gargles that are made for sore mouths or Ulcers therein, or in the privy parts,
or elsewhere, are made with the Leaves and Roots he^eof, which is good also to
fasten loose Teeth, and to heal spungy foul ^ums. The same also helps to stay
Catarrhs, or Defluxions of Rheum, into the Mouth, Throat, Teeth, or Eyes. The
juice or water, is singular good for hot and red inflamed Eyes, if some thereof
be dropped into them, or they bathed the^ewith: the said juice or water, is
also of excellent property for all Pushes, Wheals, and other eruptions of hot
and sharp humors, into the face or hands, or other parts of the Body, to bathe
them therewith, and helps to take away any redness in the face, and spots, or
other deformities of the Skin, and to make the Skin clear and smooth. The water
of Straw-berries distilled in a body of Class, after they have stood in a bed
of hot Horse-dung, twelve or fourteen days, cures the Lepry by Signature, if
it be drunk, and the Spots be bathed therewith. And upon this account, they are
commended by R^imundus Lull^us, being macerated in the spirit of Wine, and
used. The same is very profitable for most of the purposes aforesaid; and also
for the Morphew.

CHAP. CXXIII. Of Wood Sorrel.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) from the sharp taste that it has; in Latin,
Trifol^um Acetosum, and of some, Panis Cucul^ Cuckow-bread either because the
Cuckowes de^ight to seed thereon, or that it begins to b^ossom, when the
Cuckoo begins to ^tter her voice. It is ca^ed by the Apothecarie in their
Shops, Alleluja and (...)jula, the one as some think because it was found in
Procession, whi^est the Processioners were singing Alleluja or else because it
^owreth about that time, which is used to be between Easter and Wh^ts^utide,
the other came corruptly from Juliola, as they of Calabria in N^ples do call
it: In English Wood Sorrel, Wood-sower, Stabwort, and Sorrel du bois.

The Kinds.
There are two sorts of Wood Sorrel, the one fami^iar enough, and that is
Common Wood Sorrel: the other a stranger, as far as I can earn and on^y
^herished in the Gardens of those that are curious, and that is Wood Sorrel,
with ye^low Flowers.

The Form.
The common Wood Sorrel grows low upon the ground, without any stalk rising
from it, has a number o^ Leaves coming from the Root, made of three Leaves,
like a Trefo^le, or three-leafed Grass, every leaf somewhat resemb^ing an
Heart, being broad at the ends, cut in the middle, and sharp toward the stalk
of a faint yellowish green color, every one standing on a long red foot-stalk
which at their first coming up, are close fo^ded together to the stalk, but
opening themselves afterward: and are of a fine sour relish, more p^easing
them many of the other Sorrels, and yielding a juice, which will turn red when
it is clari^ed, amongst these leaves, rise up diverse slender weak footstalk,
not growing above them, with every one of them a flower at the top, consisting
of five small and pointed Leaves, Star-fashion, of a white color in most
places, or in some dashed over with a small show of blush, and in some, but on
the back side only: after the Flowers are past, follow small, round heads, with
small yellowish Seeds in them: the Roots are nothing but threads, or small
strings fastened to the end of a small long piece, all of them being of a
yellowish color, not perishing every year, but abiding with some Leaves
thereon in the Winter.

The Places and Time.
The Common Wood Sorrel grows plentifully in many places of this Land, in
Woods and Wood-sides, where it may be moist, and shadowed, and in other places
that are not too much open to the Sun, yet it is known by few* except it be by
those Herb-women, that gather it, and sell it to the Apothecaries. The other
grows in diverse shadowy places, about Sevill in Spain, and in Gardens at
Mompeliar. The first flowreth early in April and May, the other after Midsummer
and so continues in flower until the Autumn colds make it to perish, but some
Seed is ripe in the mean time.

The Temperature.
Wood Sorrel is as the other Sorrels are, cold and dry in the second Degree.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Leaves of this Herb representing the Heart, are according to their
Signature, found to be very effectual for the said part, by defending it from
the Plague, or any other pestilentiall Disease that may ceaze thereon; and also
by cooling it in Fevers, Agues, or other sicknesses, or faintings that rise
from heat, a dram of the Conserve thereof, being taken every morning, or
oftener, if occasion require* It hinders putrefaction of the blood, and Ulcers
of the ^^uth and Body, quenches thirst, strengthens a weak stomach,
procures an Appetite, stays vomiting, and is of most singular use in any
contagious Disease, or Pestilentiall Fever. Of the juice, which will turn red,
when it is clarified, is made a dainty fine Syrup, very effectual also in any
of the distempers aforesaid, and so is the distilled water of the Herb also.
Spunges, or linen Clothes, wetted in the juice, and applied outwardly, to any
hot tumors and Inflammations, does exceedingly cool and help them: the same
juice taken into the mouth, and there gargled for some time, and after spit
forth, and fresh taken, will wonderfully help a stinking foul Canker, or Ulcer
therein. It is also singular good in wounds, Punctures, thrusts and stabs into
the Body, to stay the bleeding, and to cleanse and heal the wounds speedily,
and helps well also to stay any hot defluxions, or Catarrhs, upon the Throat
and Lungs.

CHAP. CXXIV. Of Baulm.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek, (...), Melissophyllum, or Meliphyllum, id est, Apum
folium, that is, Bees-Leaf, because the Bees are very much delighted therewith.
In Latin, Melissa, and Citrag^, ab odore Citri, because it smells like a
Citron, Apiastrum, from the pleasure that Bees take in it, and Melissophyllum
of the effect, it being good for Bees. We in English call it Bawm, from the
singular effects therein, in imitation of the true natural Balm.

The Kinds.
Besides the Ordinary Baulm, which usually grows in our Gardens, there are
five other sorts. 1. Turkey Baulm, with a blew Flower. 2. Turkey Baulm, with a
white Flower. 3. Unpleasant Baulm. 4. Great Assyrian Baulm. 5. Prickly Assyrian
Baulm.

The Form.
The Common Garden Baulm has diverse square green stalks, with round, hard,
dark, green Leaves, pointed at the ends, like an Heart, and a little dented
round about the edges, set by couples at the joints; of a sweet smell, coming
nearest to a Citron or a Lemmon, the Flowers are small and gaping, growing at
the tops of the stalks, of a pale Carnation color, almost white: the Roots
fasten themselves strongly in the ground, and endure long* the leaves and
stalks dying down yearly.

The Places and Time.
The first grows no where but in Gardens: the two next grow naturally in
Moldavia, which is under the Turkish Dominion. The third at the foot of diverse
Hills, both in Germany and Narbone in France. The fourth and fifth in Syria, as
their Titles do declare. The three first, flower somewhat earlier in the
Summer, then the two Assyrian kinds, which flower very seldom before the middle
of August, so that it hardly gives any good Seed, although the two former do
plentifully.

The Temperature.
Baulm is hot and dry in the second degree, having also a purging quality
therein, with some tenuity of parts.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Leaves of this Herb have also the Signature of the Heart; and accordingly
it is very much commended for the passions of the heart. For Serapio says, it
is the property of Baulm, to cause the mind and the heart to become merry, to
revive the fainting heart falling into Swoonings, to strengthen the weakness of
the Spirits and Heart, and to comfort them; especially, such who are troubled
in their sleep, to drive away all troublesome cares and thoughts out of the
mind, whether those passions arise from melancholy, or burnt phlegm, which
Avicen also confirms. It is good for a cold stomach, to help digestion, and
to open the obstruction of the Brain: as also among other things for the
Plague, the water thereof, but especially, the Conserve of the Flowers being
used. It provokes Women's Courses, helps a stinking breath, and is good for
the rising of the Mother. A Decoction of Baulm made in Wine, and drunk, is good
against Venom and Poison, helps the griping pains of the Belly, and is good
for them that cannot take their breath, unless they hold their necks upright,
being taken in a Lohock, o^ licking Electuary. The Syrup of Baulm is likewise a
good Cordial, and strengthens the heart and stomach, resists Melancholy,
and is very profitable in burning and contagious Fevers. A Cawdle made with
the juice hereof, while it is young: together, with Eggs, and some Rose Water
and Sugar put thereto, is often given to Women in Childbed, when the
Afterbirth is not thoroughly avoided; and for their faintings upon, or after
their sore Travels. The Herb bruised and boiled in a little Wine and Oil, and
laid warm on a Boil, will ripen and break it, used with Salt, it takes away
Wens, Kernels, or hard swellings in the flesh or Throat: it cleanses foul
Sores, and eases the pains of the Gout. The juice thereof used with a little
Honey, is a good remedy for the dimness of the sight, and to take away the
mistiness of the Eyes. It is used in Bathes, amongst other warm Herbs, to
comfort the Joints and Sinews. It is a good remedy against the sting of
Scorpions, or other venomous Creatures* and against the stinging of Bees: as
also against the bitings of Dogs: The Decoction thereof is good for Women to
bathe or sit in, to procure their Courses, and for those that have the bloody
Flux: as also to wash the Teeth therewith, when they are full of pain. It is
very often put into Oils or Salves, to heal green Wounds. It is very necessary
for those that keep Bees, to have this Herb planted near them, both to have
their Hives rubbed therewith, which will not only keep them together, but draw
others; for they love very much to suck and feed upon it, as its name imports.

CHAP. CXXV. Of Marigolds.
The Names.
IT is not certainly known by what name the Greeks called this Plant. Some
think it to be (...); but I think that name does more properly belong to the
Corn Marigold, the Flower of that coming nearer to a golden color then that
of the Garden, though there be some of the Garden, that are near that color
also. It is called in Latin Calendula, because it has been observed, to
flower most about the Calends of every month, and it is so called of the Shops
also. Of some Caltha, and Caltha Poetarum, whereof Columella and Virgil do
write. It is thought to be Gromphena Plinii. In English, Marigolds and Ruds.

The Kinds.
There be near upon twenty sorts of Marigolds, yet I shall trouble you with no
more* then ten at this time. 1. The greatest double Marigold. 2. The greater
double Marigold. 3. The smaller double Marigold. 4. The double Globe-Marigold.
5. The straw-coloured double Marigold. 6. The single Marigold. 7. The fruitful
Marigold. 8. Jack an Apes on Horseback. 9. Mountain Marigold. 10. The wild
Marigold.

The Form.
The greatest double Marigold has many large, fat, broad Leaves, springing
immediately from a fibrous or threddy Root: the upper side of the Leaves are of
a deep green, and the lower side of more light, or shining green: among which,
rise up stalks somewhat hairy; and also somewhat joynted, and full of a
spongious pith: The Flowers growing on the top, are beautiful, round, very
large and double, something sweet, with a certain strong smell, of a light
Saffron color, or like pure Gold: from the which follow a number of long
crooked Seeds, especially the outmost, or those that stand about the edges of
the Flower, which being sown, commonly bring forth single Flowers, whereas
contrariwise those Seeds in the middle are lesser, and for the most part, bring
forth such Flowers, as that was from whence it was taken.

The Places and Times.
All the Sorts aforementioned are Inhabitants of the Garden, except the two last,
whose natural places of being, may be discovered by their Titles. They flower
from April, even unto Winter, and in Winter also, if it be warm, and therefore
some have called it Flos omnium mensium, supposing it to flower throughout
every month in the year.

The Temperature.
The Flower of the Marigold is of temperature hot, almost in the second Degree,
especially when it is dried.

The Virtues and Signature.
The Flowers of Marigolds, comfort and strengthen the Heart exceedingly,
provoke sweat and Women's Courses, and expel the Afterbirth, withstand poison
and Venery, are good in pestilent and contagious Fevers: as also in the
Jaundise, and are very expu^sive, and little less effectual in the small Pox
and Meazles, then Saffron. The Conserve made of the Flowers, taken morning and
evening, helps the trembling of the heart, and is very useful in the time of
Pestilence, when the Air is corrupted. The Flowers either green or dried, are
used much in Possets, Broths, and Drinks, as a comforter of the Heart and
Spirits, and to expel any Malignant or Pestilentiall quality, that might annoy
them, especially amongst the Dutch, where they are sold by the penny. The Juice
helps the Toothache, the pained Tooth being washed therewith; and if Warts be
rubbed therewith, it takes them away. The said juice mixed with Vinegar, and
any hot swelling bathed with it, instantly gives ease, and asswageth it. A
Plaster made of the dry Flower in Powder, Hog's Grease, Turpentine, and Rosin,
and applied to the Breast, strengthens and succors the Heart infinitely in
Fevers, whether Pestilentiall, or not Pestilentiall. A fume of the Decoction
used hot, helps to expel the Secondine or Afterbirth. The juice dropped
into the Ears, kills Worms. The di^i^led water is good for many of the
purposes aforesaid, and also helps red and watery Eyes, being washed
therewith, which it does by Signature, as Crollius says.

CHAP. CXXVI. Of Swallow-wort.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), ab Aesculapio, from Aesculapius, that famous
Doctor of Physic, whom the Greeks called (...). Some Bastard Names it has
also, as (...), quasi Hederula, and (...) quasi Hederula folium, the form of
the Leaves being like unto Ivy. Ruellius calls it Hederalis in Latin, but it
is better known by the Names of Asclepias, and Vincet^xicum; which last is a
general word for any Counter-poyson, and comes from Vinc^, to overcome, and
Toxicum Poison: It was anciently called Hirundinaria* (although both the kinds
of Chelidonium majus, and minus, be called Hirundinaria) that is,
Swallon-vvort; ab Hirundine, from a Swallow, because the pointed Cods, when
they are open and the Silk appears out of them, do somewhat resemble a
Swallow flying. Others say from the Seed, which is feathered, as it were, with
Down about it. In English, it is called Svvallovv-vvort; and of some, Silken
Cicely.

The Kinds.
There be only three Sorts of Swallow-wort, that I can find, 1. Swallow-wort
with white Flowers. 2. Swallow-wort with black Flowers. 3. Swallow-wort of
Candy.

The Form.
The Swallow-wort with white-flowers, rises up with diverse slender weak
stalks to be half a yard or two foot long, not easy to break, yet scarce able
to stand upright, and therefore for the most part lean or lie down upon the
ground if they find not some thing to sustain them, and then sometimes they
will twine themselves about it, whereon are set two leaves at the joints being
somewhat broad, and long pointed at the end, of a dark green color and smooth
at the edges: at the joints with the Leaves toward the top of the stalks, and
at the tops themselves, come forth diverse small white flowers, consisting of
five pointed leaves a piece, of an heavy sweet sent; after which come small long
pods, thick above, and growing less and less to the point; wherein by small
flat brown seed wrapped in a great deal of white silken down, which when the
pod is ripe, opens of it self, and sheddeth both seed and cotton upon the
ground, if it be not carefully gathered: the roots are a great bush of many
white strings fastened together at the head, smelling somewhat strong while they
are fresh and green, but more pleasant when they are dried; both leaves and
stalks dye down every year to the ground, and rise a new in the Spring, the
stalks at their first coming up being of a blackish brown color.

The Places and Time.
One or two if not all of these sorts grow in the Physic Garden at Oxford; but
as for their natural places, the two first grow in rough untilled places and
on Mountains in diverse places, both in France about Narbone, Marscilles, and
Mompelier, and in Italy also, and in other places. The last grow in Candy
whence the seed came, which being sown, grows with us. They all flower in
the months of June and July, and sometimes not until August, if the year be
backward, and their Cods with seed are ripe about a Month after; the empty
husk abiding on the dry branches, when the seed and silk is shed out and
fallen on the ground or blown away with the wind.

The Temperature.
The roots of Swallow-wort are hot and dry and have a sovereign quality
against all poisons, but in particular against the Apocinum or Dogsbane.

The Virtues.
A Dram of the powder of the roots of Swallow-wort taken in Sorrel or Bnglosse
water is very effectual against all the passions of the heart, and if a few
Citron seeds be taken therewith in the same manner and measure, it eases all
the griping pains of the belly. It is likewise effectually given to any that
are bitten by any venomous beast, or stung by any Serpent or other Creature; as
also against the biting of a mad dog, a dram and an half of the root being
taken in Carduus water for diverse days together. It is taken also in Wine
every day against the Plague or Pestilence. The decoction of the roots made
with White Wind, taken for diverse days together, a good draught at a time and
sweating presently thereupon cures the Drop^y; the same also helps the
Jaundise, provokes Urine, and ea^eth the Cough, and all defects of the Chest
and Lungs. The powder of the Roots taken with Peony seed is good against the
Falling sickness, or what Basil seed or the rind of Pome Citrons, is good
against Melancholy. Taken with the roots of White or Bastard D^ttany it kills
and expels the Worms of the Maw and Belly. The roots are very effectually
used with other things in Bathes, made for women to ^t over, to ease all pains
of the Mother, and bring down their courses. The Decoction likewise of the
Roots hereof, and of Comfrey made with wine, is much commended to help those
that are bursten, or have a rupture, and for them that have bin bruised with a
fall, or otherwise. The powder of the root or leaves is no less effectual to
cleanse all putrid, rotten, and filthy Ulcers, and so^es wheresoever, then the
Roots of Aristolochia or Birthwort, and may safely be used in all Salves,
Unguents, and Lotions made for such purposes, instead thereof, the one for the
other. The Leaves and Flowers boiled and made into a pultis, and applied to the
hard tumors or swellings of women's Breasts, cures them speedily; as also such
evil sores, as happen in the Matrix: although they be inveterate or hard to be
cured. The Down that is found in the Cods of these herbs, does make a softer
stuffing for Cushions or Pillows, or the like, than thistle down, which is much
used in some places for the like purposes.

CHAP. CXXVII. Of Goates-Rue.
The Names.
THis Herb being unknown to the Ancient Authors, has no Greek Name: in Latin,
it is usually called Galega or Ruta Capraria. For they that first found it, and
the virtues, gave that Name of Rue thereunto, as finding it no less effectual
then the Best Rue, and Capraria because it is good for Goats. Some call it
Gralega, and some Herba Gallica as Fracastorius, and of some Capraria. Some
with us call it Italian-Vetch, but most Commonly Goats Rue.

The Kinds.
The Sorts hereof are but two, 1. Common Goats Rue, 2. Mountain Goats Rue.

The Form.
The Common or most usual Goats Rue sends forth many round hard stalks,
three or four foot high, whereon grow one above another at several Joints,
Long winged Leaves, that is, many Leaves set one each side of a middle rib
which are small, yet somewhat broad and long, and pointed at the end; smooth on
the Edges without any dents, somewhat like unto the Leaves of Vetches, and of a
faint green Color: at the topps of the stalks stand many small Leguminous
flowers, one above another, of a pale bluish purple Color, and in some plants
pure white, after which come small round pods about ^n inch and an half long, a
little bunched out in some places, but nothing so much as the Orobus or Bitter
Vetch, wherein lie three, or four, or five small pale seed, like unto a Vetch.
The root is white and woody, spreading well in the ground and abiding diverse
years.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in diverse Gardens of this Land, as in the Physic Gardens so
often mentioned, and very plentifully in a Garden at St. Albans, not far from
the Prison, sometimes in the possession of Dr. Arris, who was a great admi^er
of the same for its Cordia virtues. It grows Naturally by the way sides of
moist fields, and Meadows, both in Italy, Savoy, and other places, and has
also bin found some years since in the Meadows by Linton, in Cambridgeshire.
The other is said only to grow upon the tops of mountains. They flower in the
end of June and July and the seed is ripe in August.

The Temperature.
Goats Rue is said to be of a mean Temperature between hot and cold.

The Virtues.
There is not any Plant more effectual to preserve the heart from
Palpitations, tremblings, and sownings, and against Melanchosicke Vapors
oppressing it, then Goats Rue, which is a great Preservative also against the
bitings or stings of any venomous Creatures: yea those Italians, (as Pena and
Lobel say) and others, that use to gather Vipers, will use it rather then the
Beast-Treacle to defend themselves from being bitten or stung by them, or to
preserve them from any other infection, and therefore eat it continually, as
other Herbs in Sallets, or otherwise in their meats, and broths. It is
likewise very powerful against any poison taken inwardly, the Pestilence or
any infectious or pestilentious Fevers, or diseases, that break forth into
spots or marks; as the Measells, Purples, and the Smallpox, in all which it is
admirable both to preserve from infection, and cure those that are infected, to
take every morning some of the juice thereof, as also to eat the Herb it self
every morning fasting: but it will be the more effectual, if the juice be
taken with a little good Treacle, and some Tormentill Roots in powder, mixed
with Carduus Benedictus water, or with some Vinegar and fine Bolearmonick and
Treakle in the said Water, and presently to sweat two hours thereupon, which
it causes in some sort it self. A spoonful of the juice given in a morning
fasting, is very effectua^l to kill the worms in Children; or the Herb it
self, fried with a little Oil of bitter Almonds, and laid hot unto the Navill;
as also to help the Falling Sickness before it grow strong and old upon them.
It is very profitably applied to the belly, pained with the griping of the wind
and Colic, being fried and laid-to warm. In the same manner, laid unto
plague Sores before they be broken, it either disperseth them, (yet defending
the heart, not striking it inwardly,) or draws them forth and heals them.
It is also effectually applied with Vinegar to Gangrenes, running Ulcers and
Sores, to stay the malignity in their fretting and spreading and to defend the
vital Spirits from danger. Some use a Syrup made of the juice, and some of
the distilled water as a more familiar Medicine, to take upon all occasions
inwardly, for all the purposes aforesaids. And some use to make an Oil of the
Flowers, digested in the Sun, by often repetitions of infusion, to anoint the
wrests of the hands, where the pulse is felt; as also the region of the heart,
to defend it from the diseases aforesaid, and danger of infection It is no
less effectual for Sheep, Goats, and other Cattle by the experiments that
Goatheards have made herewith. The Mountain Goates-Rue, is held almost as
effectual against poison and the pestilence, as the former.

CHAP. CXXVIII. Of Vipers-Grasse.
The Names.
IT was found, and the Virtues thereof discovered, but of late days by a
Mauritanian bondslave, who help diverse that were bitten of that Venomous
Beast, (or Viper as it is called by others, which they of Catalonia, where they
breed in abundance, call in their Language Escuersos, from whence Scorzonera is
derived,) with the juice of this Herb, and the root given them to eat, which
both took away the poison, and healed the bitten place very quickly, when
Treacle and other things would do no good: which ever since has grown in
estimation both against Venom and other diseases also. It is called in Lattin
Viperaria, Viperina, or Serpentaria, but most Commonly Scorzonera, which name
is generally given it by all Nations. We in English call it Scorzonera and
Vipers-grasse.

The Kinds.
I find Ten Sorts of Vipers-grasse rekonned up by Authors, 1. Common Vipers
grass, 2. Dwarf Vipers grass, 3. Spanish Vipers grass, 4. Dwarf Spanish
Vipers grass, 5. The greater Hungarian broad leafed Vipers grass, 6. The
Dwarf Hungarian Vipers grass. 7. The small Hungarian Vipers grass, 8. Purple
Vipers grass, 9. Tall Narrow Leaved purple Vipers grass. 10. Vipers grass of
Sclavony.

The Form.
The first of the Vipers grasses has long broad leaves, fat or full bodyed,
uneven about the edges, sharp pointed, with an high swollen rib down the middle,
and of an overworn green color, tending to that of Woad, amongst which rises
up a stiff stalk, smooth and plain, of two cubits high, whereon do grow such
leaves as those next the ground. The flowers stand on the top of the Stalks,
consisting of many small yellow leaves, thick thrust together, very double,
like unto those of Tragopogon or Goates-beard, whereof most think it to be a
kind. The Root is long, thick, very brittle, continues many years, yielding
great increase of roots, black without, white within, and yields a milky
juice, as do the leaves also like unto the Goates-beards.

The Places and time
Many of the Sorts aforesaid are to be found in the Gardens of some Physicians,
and Apothecaries who know the worth of them, as also in the Physic Gardens at
Oxford, and Westminster, but especially the two first. The Third and Fourth in
Spain as their titles do declare. The fifth in many places of Germany, Bohemia
and Hungary. The Sixth on the hills by Baden in Germany. The Seventh in many of
the same places with the Fifth. The Eighth and Ninth on a small hill nigh unto
Stampfen, which is two Duch miles from Posonium, a chief City in Hungary. The
last in Illyria or Sclavony, as Alpinus says. They do all flower in May, and
their seed is ripe before the end of June.

The Temperature.
V^pers-Grasse is thought not to exceed the first Degree of heat and moisture,
which are the predominant qualities.

The Virtues and Signature.
The water of this Herb distilled in Glasses, or the Root it self taken is good
against the passions and tremblings of the heart, and also against swounings,
sadness and melancholy: the same also is a present remedy against all
contagious Fevers; for by causing sweat, the infection is evaporated, and the
sick person restored. The Root preserved, and taken fasting, ^or the said water
drunk for some days together, does open the obstructions of the Liver, Spleen,
and other inward parts: as also helps to bring down Women's Courses, and to
ease the suffocation or other Diseases of the Mother whatsoever; for in those
feminine griefs, it has a very powerful effect, as has been often and
certainly found true. It is also very good against the swimming or turning of
the brain, and all other pains in the head, and likewise very Cordial, both to
strengthen the vital ^pirits, when they are much subject to faint, or swoun;
as also against melancholy or sadness, that arises without manifest cause. If
the clarified Juice of the (...)b be set in the Sun for certain days, and the
pure liquor thereof mixed with a (...)e Honey, be dropped into the Eyes, it
both clears and strengthens the s^ght, and takes away the spots and
blemishes in them. Monardus, by whom the first knowledge hereof came to the
World, although it was found out, and the use thereof thirty years before he
wrote of it, says, that the Roots of those in Spain are somewhat sweet, like a
Parsnip, and may be eaten in the same manner. He says also, that the Root
hereof, whether raw, or dressed, or condited, as also the juice of the Herb
taken by themselves, or with any other Cordial or Counterpoyson, does not only
help the biting of that venomous Serpent Escuersos or Scorzon, which Crollius
says, it does by Signature there being some resemblance between the form of
the Serpent and the Root; but of the Viper, and all other virulent Creatures
whatsoever.

CHAP. CXXIX. Of the Pome Citron-Tree.
The Names.
THe great Pome-Citron is called in Greek (...) that is, Malus Medica because
as Theophrastus conceives, it came from Media and Persis, and therefore was
also called Malus Persica. Some call it also Malus Assyria; but the most proper
and generally received name, is Malus Citria, because Malus Med^ca does
comprehend Lemmons and Orenges also, and Malus Assyria is put for that Tree
which bears Adams Apples: yet the fruit hereof is called in Greek (...), in
Latin, Malum Medicum, Malum Citrium, Malum Persicum, Malum Assyrium, as also
Oedromelum, Citromelum and Citrangulum, and of some Poncires, quasi Pomum
Citrium, in English Citron. The lesser sorts differ from the first, both in the
Tree and Fruit, and therefore have a different name for the Tree: is called
Limonera, and the Fruit Limones.

The Kinds.
Of Citron-Trees and Limones, or Limerones, there be six sorts. 1. The greater
Pome-Citron-Tree. 2. The lesser Pome-Citron-Tree. 3. Big-bellied, or double
Citrons. 4. Sweet Limoones, or Limerones. 5. Sour Limoones or Limerones. 6.
Changeable Limoones or Limerones.

The Form.
The greater Citron-Tree grows not very high in some places, but with a
crooked short body; yet in others, not much lower then the Lemmon-Tree,
spreading sundry great long Arms and Branches, set with long and sharp thorns,
and fair, large, and broad fresh green Leaves, a little dented about the edges,
very smooth, and sweet of smell: The Flowers grow at the Leaves all along the
Branches, being somewhat longer then those of the Orange, made of fine thick,
whitish purple, or blush Leaves, with some threads in the middle; after which,
all the year long follows fruit; for it is seldom seen without ripe fruit,
and half ripe, and small, young and green, and blossoms all at once. This kind
bears great and large fruit, some as great as a Musk Melon, yet others
lesser; but all of them with a rugged, bunched out, and uneven yellow bark,
thicker then in any of the other sorts, and with small store of sour juice in
the middle, and somewhat great pale, whitish, or yellow Seeds, with a bitter
Kernel lying therein: The smell of this Apple is very strong, but very
comfortable to the senses.

The Places and Time.
All these sorts of Citrons grow in Spain, with those that are curious to nurse
up rare fruits, but gained from sundry places abroad, and the last from the
Fortunate Islands. Their time is without time, even all the year throughout,
flowring and bearing fruit.

The Temperature.
Galen makes the Seed to be cold, which Matthiolus would excuse, by diverting
his intent to the juice; but Avicen says, it is hot in the first Degree, and
dry in the second: the Bark or Rind, hot in the first, and dry in the end of
the second Degree: the inner white substance being between the outer Bark and
the inner juice, hot and moist in the first Degree, and the acide juice cold
and dry in the third Degree.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Fruit of the Pome-Citron-Tree being like to the heart in form, is also a
very sovereign Cordial for the same, and an excellent Antidote against Venom
or Poison, against the Plague, or any other infection, if the outer yellow
Rind, which has a very aromaticall smell, but bitter taste, be dried and taken:
Besides, it warmeth and comfort a cold or windy stomach, mightily dissolving
the Wind, and dispersing raw, cold, and undigested humors therein, or in the
Bowels. Being chewed in the mouth, it amendeth an evil breath, and causes a
good one; it also helps digestion, and is good against Melancholy: these
outer Rinds being preserved with Sugar, are used in a Junket, more then in any
Physical manner, yet are they often used in Cordial Electuaries, as
preservatives against infection and melancholy, and other the Diseases
aforesaid. It also helps to loosen the Body, and therefore there is a
solutive Electuary made thereof, called Electuarium de Citro solutivum, to
evacuate the Bodies of those that are of a cold and phlegmatic constitution,
and may also be safely u^ed, where Choler is intermixed with Phlegm: The inward
white Rind of the Fruit is almost un^avory, and without taste, and is not used
in any manner of Physic; but being preserved, serves to sort with other
Suckets at Banquets. The sour juice in the middle, surpasses that of Lemmons
in the effects, although it be not so sharp in taste; it is very good in all
pestilentiall and burning Fevers, to restrain the venom and infection, to
suppress the violence of Cholar, and hot distempers of the blood, extinguisheth
thirst, corrects the ill disposition of the Liver* stirs up an Appetite,
refreshes the over-spent and fainting spirits, resists drunkenness, and
helps the turnings of the Brain, by the hot vapor arising thereinto, and
causing a frenzy or want of sleep. The Seeds are very effectual to preserve
the heart and vital spirits, from the poison of the Scorpion, or other
venomous Creatures; as also against the infection of the Plague and Pox, or any
other contagious Disease: they kill the Worms in the Stomach, provoke Women's
Courses, cause abortment, and have a digesting and drying quality, fit to dry
up and consume moist humors, both inwardly in the Body, and outwardly in any
moist, or running Ulcers and Sores, and take away the pains that come after the
biting of any venomous Creature. The whole Fruit or Branches of the Trees laid
in Presses, Chests, or Wardrobes, keeps Cloth or silk Garments from Moths and
Worms, and gives them a good scent also. The Syrup of Citron Pills or Rhinds,
strengthens the stomach, resists poison, strengthens the heart and
resis^eth the passions thereof, palpitation faintings, and swounings: it
strengthens the vital spirits, restores such as are in Consumptions, and
Hectic Fevers, and strengthens nature much. The Syrup of the juice, is also
good for most of the aforesaid purposes.

CHAP. CXXX. Of Gentian, or Felt-wort.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and so likewise Gentiana in Latin, a Gentio
Illyricorum rege primum inventore, because Gentius King of Illyria, was the
first discoverer of them and their virtues, as Dioscorides and Pliny set it
down. Scrapio says, it was called Basilica: some have called it Centauria
radix, some Alo^s Gallica, Narces Chironium, and, as Pliny says, some Romans
called it Cnendia and some Cimiualis. The Italians call it also Gentiana, but
that sort which the Latins call Gentiana cruciata, they call Petimborsa,
quasi, mettere in bursa, put it into your Purse: either because as Matthiolus
says, it was to be gathered wheresoever it was found, and deserved to be kept
in ones purse, that it might be ready upon all occasions; or because by curing
Diseases, it got store of Crowns to be put in the Purses of the Physicians,
that make use of it; so much they did esteem of it. We in English call it
Crossewort Gentian; but the ordinary sort is called Felwort, which is a mongrel
word mixed of Latin and English together, or Bitterwort, and of some Baldmony.
The Latins call the lesser sort, Gentianella.

The Kinds.
Though there be a great number of these Gentians reckoned up by Parkinson, in
both his Books, yet I shall omit most of them, and nominate only those six
sorts that grow within the Con^ines of great Britain. 1. Hollow Gentian or
Fellwort. 2. Croswort Gentian. 3. Alps Felwort of the Springtime. 4.
Gentianella, with a white Flower. 5. Bastard or Dwarf-Felwort. 6. Autumn
Gentian, with small Centaury Leaves.

The Form.
Hollow-leafed Felwort, or English Gentian, has many long, tough Roots,
dispersed hither and thither, within the upper crust of the Earth; from which
immediately rises a fat thick sta^k joynted or kneed* at certain distances,
set at every knot with one leaf, and sometimes more, keeping no certain number:
which Leaves do at the first inclo^e the stalks round about, being one whole
entire Leaf, without any incisure at all, as if it were a hollow Trunk; which
after it is grown to his fu^ness, breaks on one side or other, and becomes
a flat ribbed Leaf, like unto those of the great Gentian or Plantane. The
Flowers come forth of the bosom of the upper Leaves, set upon tender
footstalk, in shape like those of the small Bind-weed, or rather the Flowers
of Sope-wort, of a whitish color, washed about the brims, with a little light
Carnation. Then follows the Seed, which has not yet been observed.

The Places and Time.
The first was found by Gerard, in a small Grove of Wood, called the Spinny,
near unto a small Village in Northamptonshire, called L^chbarrow. The second
grows in a Pasture at the West end of Little Rain in Essex, on the North side
of the way leading from Braintry to Dunmow, and in the Horse-way by the same
Close. The third grows abundantly on the Mountains, between Gort and Galloway
in Scotland. The fourth near the Devizes, and by Hachbury in Wiltshire. The
fifth in the Physick-Garden in Oxford. The sixth in diverse places of Kent, as
about South-fleet, and Long-field; upon Barton-hills in Bedfordshire: also not
far from St. Albans, upon a piece of wast cha^ky ground, as you go out of
Dunstable way, toward Gorehamberry. The first springs out of the ground in
April, and brings forth his Flowers in the end of August, and the Seed is
ripe in September, and so do all the rest for ought I can ^ea^n.

The Temperature.
The Root of Gentian, which is chiefly in use, is hot and dry in the third
Degree, or hot in the third degree, and dry in the second.

The Signature and Virtues.
There is a sort of Gentian that has Leaves like an Heart, and is therefore
called Heart-like Gentian, which I mentioned not amongst the rest, because it
grows not in Britain, having in it the virtue of strengthening the Heart
preserving it against fainting, and sounding, and resisting all putrefaction,
Poison, and the Pestilence, for which there is not a more sure remedy then it,
it strengthens the stomach exceedingly and helps digestion. Answerable unto
this in the several qualities and properties are our English Gentians, nay
some will have them more proper for English bodies then the foreign, and may
be as well u^ed for the purposes aforesaid. The Powder of the dry Roots helps
the bitings of mad Dogs, and venomous Beasts, opens the obstructions of the
Liver, and restores (...) Appetite. The Herb steeped in Wine, and the Wine
drunk, refreshes such as are over-weary with Travel, and are grown lame in
their joints, either by cold or evil Lodgings. It helps ^^itches, and griping
pains in the sides, and is an excellent Remedy for such as are bruised with
falls. It provokes Urine, and the Terms exceedingly, therefore let it not be
given to Women with Child. The same is very profitable for such as are troubled
with Cramps and Convu^^^ons, to drink the Decoction; and being so taken, it
helps the Stone and stopping of ^^ine. It is likewise very available in the
Dropsy, and suffocation of the Mother, and against the Falling Sickness,
Ruptures, Worms, and dissolveth congealed blood. It brings away the Birth,
Afterbirth, and dead Child, and is useful in the Cough and shortness of
breath. It repelleth wind very much in the body, and is profitable in all cold
Diseases; and would people but like this, and other bitter things, it would
effect very much in curing many desperate Diseases, as well as Agues, yellow
Jaundise etc. The Juice or Powder of the Root heals fresh wounds, and is very
effectual for all sorts of foul, putrid, or rotten Ulcers wheresoever, yea,
though hollow, or fistulous, cancrous, fretting or running; for it does very
much cleanse, dry, and heal up. Also the same applied to Knots or Kernels of
the Neck or Throat, which is called the Kings-Evill, heals them safely and
speedily; as also the painful swellings of the Hemorrhoidall vein, called the
Piles when they are fallen down, and grow ulcerous and sore. The juice being
put into the Eyes, takes away Inflammations and redness therein, and cleares
them from Skins and Films growing upon them. The Root is in use among
Chyrurgions, to enlarge the orifice of any Wound or Sore. The same made into a
Pessary, and put into the matrix, brings down the dead Child, and
Afterbirth. It is given to Cattle for the Bots, Worms, and swellings, upon
sicking up any Tick, or venomous worm. When Kine are bitten on the Udder, by
any venomous Beast, do but stroke the p^ace with the decoction of any of these
and it will instantly help them. The distilled water is useful in the like
cases, and also cleanses the face from freckles, Morphew, or other Spots.

CHAP. CXXXI. Of Scordium, or Water Germander.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and in Latin Scord^um, from (...), which is
Allium, Garlic; because the smell of it is something like unto the smell of
Garlic, as Authors report, which I never perceived, though I have gathered it
oftentimes. It is also called Frixago Palustris Water, or Marsh-Germander, both
of the likeness thereof to Germander, called Frixago, and for the growing
thereof in Marshes, etc. Some also call it (...) from the strong scent, being
so unpleasant to the Senses. Pliny says, that Crateras did ascribe one of the
sorts hereof unto Mithridates, and called it Mithridation; and it may be from
hence, as well as from Garlic that it was called Poor-Mens-Treacle, and by our
Country People, English-Treacle.

The Kinds.
Parkinson joyneth together in the same Chapter, for affinity in name or smell,
these six following. 1. Scordium or Water-Germander. 2. Wood-Sage, which is
called in Latin, Scorodania sive Scordium alterum quibusdam, and Salvia
agrestis. 3. The first Garlic Germander of Pliny. 4. Another Garlic Germander
of Pliny. 5. Sawse-alone, or Jack by the H^dge. 6. The Germander-like Herb of
Naples.

The Form.
Water-Germander from a small Root, full of white strings, spreading in the
ground, and creeping or running about also, shoots forth diverse weak square,
hairy Branches, which take root in diverse places, as they lie and ^pread,
whereby it increases much, whereon do grow many Leaves two always at a joint,
which are not altogether so large and long, as the Garden-Germander Leaves of a
saddish or darkish green color, whereon there is also a show of hairne^s and
hoariness, somewhat soft in handling, full of veins, and dented about the
edges. The Flowers are small, red, and gaping, standing at the Joints, with the
Leaves toward the top of the branches. Whether it perfect its Seed, has not
been yet observed, but it is thought it does not but is propagated by its
branches.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in many wet grounds, and by water sides in many places of
England, as upon Botley Cawsey presently after you are over the stream that
goes to Osney milles, not very far from Reuley, which is the place Mr. Gerard
mentions, but on the other side the water. Dioscorides says, it grows on
Hills also, which it is like enough to do, for it will abide well if it be
transplanted into Gardens, where I have seen it often grow; as in the Physic
Garden at Oxon, in the School-house Garden at Adderbury in Oxfordshire, where I
my self planted it; and in the Garden of my worthy friend Mr. Solomeau at his
house at East-Sheen in Surray. The Second grows in woods and by wood sides,
as also in diverse fields, and by-lanes in diverse places with us. The Third and
Fourth in Candy; The fifth grows under walls, and by hedge sides, and path
ways, in fields, and town-sides in moist places. The Last on the Hill
Capoclari in Naples, as Columna says. They do flower in June, July, and
August, so^ewhat before which time, the most usual manner is to gather the
Scordium, and dry it to keep.

The Temperature.
Water Germander, is hot and dry; it has a certain bitter taste, harsh and
sharp, as Galen witnesses, and every one may perceive it, that tastes it,
though I suppose our English kind is not so like in scent unto Garlic as that
of the Ancients. Wood-Sage is hot and dry, in the Second degree.

The Virtues.
Whosoever does but understand that Scordium o^ water Germander is the Bas^^ of
that ra^e Composition called Diascordium, and know but the virtue thereof, will
be sufficiently convinced, that this plant is not unfitly appropriated to the
heart, for it is of excellent use for the comforting and strengthening of that
part, especially in such Fevers, as are accompanied with want of sleep. It
does also provoke the Terms, hastens women's Labors, helps their usual
sickness in their lying in; it stops fluxes, strengthens the stomach: neither
is so hot, but it may be safely given to weak people: Ten grains of a Scruple
at a time, and a dram or more to them that are stronger. The decoction of the
Herb only in wine, being either green or dry, is good against the biting of
all venomous Beasts and Serpents, and all other deadly poisons, and also
against all groaning pains of the stomach, and pains of the sides, that come
either of cold or obstructions, and for the bloody flix also: made into an
Electuary with Cresses, Rosin, and Honey, it is available against an old Cough,
and to help to expectorate rotten phlegm out of the Chest and Lungs; as also
to help them that are bursten and troubled with the Cramp. It is a special
Ingredient also in Mithridate and Treacle, as a Counterpoyson, against all
poisons and infections either of the Plague, or Pestilentiall, or other
Epidemicall diseases, as the smallpox, Measells, faint spots, or purples, and
besides it is often given, and with good success, before the fits of Agues, to
divert or hinder the access, and thereby to drive them away. It is a most
certain and known common remedy to kill the worms either in the stomach or
belly, to take a little of the juice thereof or the powder in drink, fasting.
The decoction of the dried herb with two or three roots of Tormentill sliced,
and given to those that are troubled with the blooddy flix, is a safe and sure
remedy for them. The juice of the Herb alone or a Syrup made thereof, is
profitable for many of the aforenamed griefs. The dried herb being used with a
little Honey cleanses foul Ulcers and brings them to Cicatrizing, as also
closes fresh wounds; the dried Herb made into a Cerate, or pultis, and applied
to excrescences in the flesh, as Wens and such like, helps both to constrain
the matter from further breeding of them, as also to discuss and disperse them
being grown. It being used also with Vinegar or water, and applied to the Gout,
eases the pains thereof. The green Herb bruised and laid or bound to any
wound, heals it, be it never so great.

The decoction of Wood-Sage, is good to be given to those whose Urine is
stayed, for it provokes it and Women's courses also. It is thought to be good
against the French Pox, because the decoction thereof, does provoke sweat,
digest humors, and dissolve swelling, and Nodes in the flesh. The decoction of
the Herb, rather green then dry, made with wine and taken, is accounted a safe
and sure remedy for those, who by falls bruises or bearings, doubt some vein
to be inwardly broken, to disperse and avoid the congealed blood, and to
consolidate the vein, and is also good for such as are inwardly or outwardly
bursten; the drink used inwardly, and the herb applied outwardly. The same also
and in the same manner used, is found to be a sure remedy for the Palsy. The
juice of the Herb or the powder thereof dried, is good for moist Ulcers, and
sores, in the legs or other parts to dry them, and thereby to cause them, to
heal the more speedily, it is no less effectual also in green wounds to be
used upon any occasion. Jack by the Hedge is eaten of many Country people, as
Sauce to their Salt-fish, and helps well to digest the crudities, and other
corrupt humors that are engendered by the eating thereof, it warmeth also the
Stomach, and causes digestion. The juice thereof boiled with Honey is held to
be as good as Hedge-Mustard for the Cough; to help to cut and expectorate
phlegm that is tough and hard to rise. The seed bruised and boiled in wine, is
a good remedy for the wind Colic, or for the stone, being drunk warm: the
same also given to women that are troubled with the mother, both to drink, and
the seed put in a Cloth and applied while it is warm, is of singular good use.
The Leaves also or seed boiled, is good to be put in glisters, to ease the
pains of the stone, the green leaves are held to be good to heal the Ulcers
of the Legs.

CHAP. CXXXII. Of Burnet.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), or as Gesuer has it, (...), by Nicolaus
Myrepsus, besides whom there is not any Greek Author that is known to have
mentioned it by that name. Diverse of good judgment do refer it to the Sideritis
Secunda, of Dioscorides. Some call it in Latin Pimpinella, Pampinula and
Peponella, from the likeness of the scent with that of Cucumbers; yet others
referr these names to the Saxifrage kinds of Burnet, which are ^^belliferous
plants. It is called Sorbastrolla and Sang(...)aria also of diverse, but most
usually Sanguisorba, quod Sanguineos fluxus sistat, because it stops fluxes of
blood; and it may be Bipinella, or Bipenula, because the leaves stand one
against another like wings. It is to be observed, that Pimpinella Burnet, and
Pimpernell are different plants, though some have Ignorantly taken them for the
same.

The Kinds.
There are as I take it but Four of these sorts of Burnet, 1. Common Burnet. 2.
The Ordinary great Burnet. 3. Unsavory Burnet, 4. Burnet of Canada or Great
Burnet of America.

The Form.
The Ordinary Burnet grows with many long winged Leaves, Spread upon the
ground which consist of diverse small roundish Leaves, green on the upper side,
and grayish underneath, finely dented about the Edges, set on each side, of a
middle ribe; amongst which rise up crested brown stalks a foot high, or
better, with some smaller Leaves, set in some places thereon, divided into
sundry branches, and at the tops small round loose heads, or knaps upon long
footstalk, of a brownish color, from whence start forth small purp^^sh
Flowers, and after them cornered seed: the root is small, Long, and
Blackishbrown on the out side, growing down deep into the ground, with some
fibers thereat: the Herb has a fine quick scent and taste.

The Places and Time.
The First grows wild in most places of this Land, in dry sandy ground, but
is usually preserved in gardens, to be ready at hand, when it shall need to be
used. The Second is to be found in diverse Countries of this Land, e^pecially in
Huntingdon, and Northamptonshires in the meadows there: as also near London by
Pancras Church, in two or three fields nigh unto Boobies barn, as also by a
Causie side in the middle of a field by Padd^ngton. The Third was found in
Spain, as Bauhinus says. The Last was brought from Canada, which lies as I
take it on the North part of Virg^nia, where it is natural, and is to be seen
growing in the Phy^ick Gardens, so often mentioned. They all Flower about the
end of June, and the beginning of July, and their seed is ripe in August.

The Temperature.
Both the greater and the Lesser Burnet are accounted to be of one property;
but the lesser, because it is quicker and more aromaticall, is more effectual,
being both hot and dry in the second degree, especially the lesser yet some
say, that it is cold in the second degree.

The Virtues.
Burnet is a friend to the Heart, Liver, and other principal parts of a man's
body: two or three of the stalks with Leaves put into a Cup of Wine, especially
French Wine, as all know, give a wonderful fine relish to it, and be^^des is a
great means to quicken the Spirits, refresh the heart and make it merry
driving away Melancholy. It is a special help to defend the heart, from noisome
Vapors, and from the infection of the Plague, or Pestilence, and all other
contagious diseases, for which purpose it is of great effect, the juice thereof
being taken in some drink, and the party either laid to sweat thereupon, or
wrapped and kept very warm. It has a drying and astringent quality also
whereby it is available in all manner of fluxes of blood, or humors, to staunch
bleeding either inward or outward, Laskes or Scowrings, the bloody flix, women's
too abundant Courses, and the Whites also, and the choleric belchings and
castings of the stomach, and is also a Singular good wound-herb, for all sorts
of wounds, both of the head and body either inward or outward, for all old
Ulcers or running Cancers, and moist sores, which are of hard curation, to be
used, either by the juice or the decoction of the Herb, or by the powder of the
Herb or Root, or the water of the distilled Herb; or else made into oil, or
ointment by it self, or with other things to be kept the Seed also is no less
effectual both to stay fluxes, and to dry up moist sores, to be taken in
powder inwardly, in steeled Water or wine, or the powder of the seed mixed with
their Ointments or injections.

CHAP. CXXXIII. Of Avens.
The Names.
THis Herb is not found to be known of any Greek Writer, and therefore the
Greek name is not to be expected; nor of the ancient Latins, unless it be
Geum of Pl^ny, as by good probability it seems. It is generally called in
Latin now a days Caryophyllata and Garyophyllata from the scent of the Root
so near resembling Cloves, which are called Cary^phylli: yet some have called
it Herba benedicta, of the excellent or blessed qua^ities thereof, and others
Sanamunda, from the like effects. Tragus would have it called his Nardus
agrestis, not only for the sweet scent of the Roots, but the Cordial
properties thereof. In English Avens and Herb-Bennet.

The Kinds.
The former Age knew but two sorts of Avens but ours has found out seven at
the least. 1. Ordinary Avens. 2. Mountain Avens. 3. Small Mountain Avens. 4.
The other small Mountain Avens. 5. Purple Mountain or Marsh Avens. 6. Another
Marsh Avens. 7. Cinquefoile Avens.

The Form.
Our ordinary Avens has many long, rough, dark, green winged Leaves, rising
from the Root, every one made of many Leaves, set on each sides of the middle
Rib: the three largest whereof, grow at the ends, and snipt, or dented round
about the edges: the other being small pieces, sometimes two, and sometimes
four, standing on each side of the middle Rib underneath the^: amongst which do
rise up diverse rough or hairy stalks, about a foot high, branching forth with
leaves at every joint, not so long as those below, but almost as much cut in on
the edges, some into three parts, and some into more: on the tops of the
branches stand small, pale, yellow Flowers, consisting of five leaves, like the
Flowers of Cinquefoile, but larger: in the middle whereof stands a small
green head, which when the Flower is fallen, grows to be rough and round
being made of many long, greenish* Purple-Seeds (like grains) which will stick
on your (loathes: the Roots consist of many brownish strings, or Fibers,
smelling somewhat like unto Cloves, especially those which grow in the higher,
hotter, and dryer grounds, and in the freer and clear air, but nothing so
much, or not at all in many other places.

The Places and Time.
The first is found wild in many places of this Realm, under the hedge sides,
and by the paths in some fields, and delights rather to grow in shadowy, then
Sunny places. The second is found upon diverse Mountains, as Coronos in Bohemia,
by the Springs of the River Albis, as Matth^olus says. The third and fourth,
and likewise the second, upon Mount Baldus, as Pena relates. The fifth and
sixth grow by water sides, and in the moist and wet, or marish grounds on the
Mountains. The last was found by Pena hard by Clatena, on the Rhetian Alps in
Switzerland, They flower in the Months of May and June for the most part, and
their Seed is ripe in July, at the farthest.

The Temperature.
The Roots and Leaves of Avens are manifestly dry, and something hot, with a
kind of scouring quality.

The Virtues.
The Roots of Avens in the Spring, steeped in Wine, for some continuance of
time, do give it a delicate savor and taste, which being drunk fa^^ing every
morning, comfort the heart, and is a good preservative against the Plague or
any other poison: it he peth dige^ion, warmeth a cold stoma^h, and opens the
obstructions of the Liver and Spleen. It is good also for the Di^eases of the
Chest or Breast, for pains and stitches in the lides, and to expel crude and
raw humors, from the Belly and Stomach, by its sweet savor, and warming
quality: it dissolveth congealed Blood happening by falls or bruises, and the
spitting of blood, if the Root, either green or dried, be boy^ed in Wine and
drunk; as al^o all manner of inward wounds or outward, if they be washed or
bathed therewith. The Decoction also being drunk, comfort the heart, and
strengthens the stom^^h and a cold brain and therefore is good in the Spring,
to open obstructions of the Liver, and helps the Wind-Cholick: It helps
also those that have Fluxes or are bursten, or have a Rupture: it takes away
spots or marks in the fa^e being washed therewith: The juice of the fresh Root,
or Powder of the dried Root* has the same effect with the decoction; and in
callous Ulcers with the juice of the Roots if a little Verdigrease be added, it
will avail very much. Some do use to lay the Roots dried amongst Garments* to
perfume them with the smell thereof, and to keep away moaths, etc. from them.

CHAP. CXXXIV. Of Cloves.
The Names.
HAving spoken of Avens, which are called Caryophyllata, because the Roots
smell like Croves, I shall now treat concerning Cloves themselves, which are
called of the later Greeks, (...); for to the Ancients they were unknown; and
of the Latins also Caryophillus, and Clavus because this small slender fruit,
is almost like a small Snail; and from thence also it is likely the word Cloves
came. The Tree whereon they grow is called the Clove-tree, the description
whereof is as follows.

The Kinds.
This Tree grows to be of a great and tall stature, covered with an
Ash-colored Bark, the younger Branches being more white, having Leaves growing
by ^upes one against another somewhat long and narrow, like unto the Bay Tree
that bears narrow Leaves, with a midd^e^ib, and sundry veins running
therethrough, each of them stancing on a long footstalk; the ends of the
branches are divided into many small brown sprigs, where on grows the flower
even on the tops of the Cloves themselves, which are white at first with their
Sp^igs green afterward, and lastly reddish, before they be beaten off from the
tree; and being dried before they be put up grow blackish, as we see them,
having four small tops at the heads of them, and a small round head in the
middle of them: the flower it self standing between those consists of four
small Leaves like unto a Cherry b osso^n, but of an excellent b^ew color, as
it is confidently reported, with three white veins in every leaf, and diverse
purp^ish threads in the middle, of a more dainty ^ne scent then the Clove it
self, which is a small slender fruit, almost like a small nail as I said
before being of a hot quick and sharp taste when they are fit to be gathered,
which is before they be quite ripe, but those that do abice longer on the trees
do grow some what thicker and greater, and are not of half the others goodness
being called by most Fusses, yet some call the ^^a^ks of the Cloves Fusles;
they grow of their own sowing and are not grafted. Hereout likewise comes a
certain dark red Gum, and both it and the Fusses are usually found one amongst
another.

The Places and Time.
The Clove Tree grows in diverse places of the Malucco Islands. It grows
also in Amboyna very well, and be reth plentifully, being there planted by the
Dutch, and in others places of the Indies but more scarcely, and less
fruitful than there. Eight years after it is is risen out of the ground, it
bears fruit, and so continues bearing for an hundred years together, as the
inhabitants of that Country do affirm* who beat the fruit of the Trees with
long Poles, as we do Walnuts, and suffer them to ly there upon the ground,
until they be thoroughly dried there being neither grass weeds, nor any other
Herbs to hinder the same by reason that the tree draws for its nourishment
all the moisture for a great circuit round about, so that the Cloves are the
more conveniently dried. It yields two Crops in a year, that is in June and
December, those Countries affording a double Harvest.

The Temperature.
The properties of Cloves are many and excellent, being hot and dry in the
third degree, yet some say the second, and of much u^e in meat and Medicine.

The Virtues.
The Portugal women that dwell in the East Indies, draw from the Cloves when
they be it green a certain Liquor by distillation of a most fragrant smell,
which comfort the heart, and is of all Cordialls, the most effectual. There
is also extricted from Cloves a certain Oy^e, or rather a thick Butter of a
yellow color which being chafed in the hand, smells like the Cloves
themselves, wherewith the Indians do cure their wounds, and other hurts, as we
do with Balsume. The Cloves themselves after they are dried and brought over
unto us, are used to comfort the Head, Heart, Stomach, and Liver, help the
Memory, Eyesight, and Concoction, and strengthen Nature, they break wind break
Urine, and if half a dram thereof be taken in Mi^k, they Stir up Venery or a
bodily Lust. They are good against the Plague, and any infectious disease,
against the Fluxes of the belly, proceeding of cold hu^o^s, they strengthen the
retentive faculty, and make the breath sweet, and stay vomiting also. They are
much used in the Kitchen both in broths, Sa^ces, and sticking of meat. The
Chymicall oil of Cloves is good in a Quart^^ine Ague, in long weakness, and
debility of the Stomach, (for it does take away crudity and expel wine) in
Fluxes of the belly, and very useful for the aforesaid diseases, if two or
three drops be given in beer or wine, as also for the Headache, the mould of the
head being shorn and anointed therewith, for the toothach, if a few drops be
put into an hollow Tooth with a little Lint, to clear the Eyesight, and to be
put into perfumes for Gloves, Leather, and the like, the Cl^ves themselves for
their excellent scent, serving as a special part in all sweat powders, sweat
waters, perfuming pots, etc. The powder of the dried Cloves, being put into the
eyes, takes away the Web therein. As they are hurtful for young people, and
Col^rick Complexions, so they are p^ofitable for old persons, and phlegmatic,
and such as are Rheumatick, and that in the Winter season.

CHAP. CXXXV. Of Clove-Gillo-flowers.
The Names.
ANd here it will be very proper to speak of Clove-Gillo-flowers also, both for
their name, scent, and virtues, wherein* they resemble one the other. It is
wonder that so beautiful a flower should be concealed from the Ancient
Writers, yet there is no question but they would have given it a name, had they
known it; which I cannot find that any of the Greeks did. It is called of the
latter Herbarists, Caryophylleus fl^s, of the smell of Cloves, wherewith it is
possessed, Ocellus Damascenus, Ocellus Barbaricus, and Barbarica; of some
Vetonica, Vetonica altilis, and Vetonica Superba: yet Ruellius says, that this
flower is not like to that of Vetonica or Cantabrica; and of some, Herba
tunica, in English Carnations and Clove-Gillo-flowers, and of some Pinks.

The Kinds.
So sundry and diverse are these sorts of Gillo-flowers, of such variable
Colors, and also several shapes, that it comes not within the skill of a
good Florist to name them all, every Country bringing forth new sorts; some
whereof are called Carnations, others Clove-Gillo-flowers, some Sops in Wine,
some Pagiants, or Pagion color, Horseflesh, bl^nket, purple, and white double
Gillo-flowers: many of them growing to be as big as an Ordinary Rose, which in
France and in the low Countries, whence most of them are brought, have received
particular names, as Picolomeny, The Prince of Wales, Prince of Harcourt,
Apelles, non Parell, and diverse others. There be likewise some single sorts of
these, and many more of Pincks, which I shall leave to be particularized by
some exacter Florist, than my self.

The Form.
The great Carnation Gillo-flower has a thick woody root, from which rises
up many strong joynted stalks, se^ with long green Leaves by couples: on the
top of the stalks, do grow very fair flowers of an excellent sweet smell, and
pleasant Carnation Color, whereof it took its name, being a Flesh-colors.

The Places and Times.
If the judgment of some, that our Caryophyllus and the Cantabrica of Pliny be
the same be right, it was first found out in Spain about Augustus time, and
that by those of Biscay. It is now propagated throughout all the Countries of
Europe, and further for ought I know; and is almost as famous as the Rose both
in Beauty, and smell, but much more for variety, Nature sporting her self more
in the variations of these flowers, then any other. Most of them, especially
the Carnations, will hardly endure the coldness of our Climate, and therefore
they are commonly set in Pots, and so kept from the extremity of cold by
removing them into houses or some other warm place. The Clove-Gilli-flowers and
diverse others, and also Pinks are set in Beds, and do commonly withstand the
sharpest Winters. The chief time of their flowrishing is in July, and therefore
some will have them to be called July Flowers, yet some of them continue their
flowers till the end of Summer: the seeds ripening in the mean time, which may
be sown in April.

The Temperature.
They are gallant temperate flowers, yea so temperate that no excess neither
in heat cold dryness nor moisture can be perceived in them, yet some say that
they are hot and dry.

The Virtues.
Though some of these flowers are admired for their bigness, and others for
their party colored Leaves, yet the purple Clove Gilli-flowers are de^ervedly
accounted to have the greatest Virtue in Physic. The conserve made of the
Flowers and Sugar, is exceeding Cordial, and wouderfully above measure, does
Comfort the heart, being eaten now and then, which is very good also against
the Plague or any kind of Venom. It is likewi^e good not only for the falling
sickness, Pal^y, Gideinesse, and the Cramp, but for the pestilence. Mathiolus
says, that the juice of the Flowers, and stalks being stamped and Four Ounces
of the expressed juice, being drunk by one that is infected, is a sure Remedy.
The Syrup o^ the said Flowers strengthens the heart, liver and stomach;
refreshes the vital Spirits and is a good Cordial in ^eavers though hot and
pe^i^entiall, expelling the poison and ^ury of the disease, and greatly
comforting those that are sick of any other disease, where the Heart has need
of re^iefe. Moreover the Le^ves of the Flowers* put into a glass of Vinegar,
and set in the Sun for certain days* do make a pleasant Vinegar, and very
good to revive one of a swoon, the Nostrills and Temples being washed
therewith. And is good also to preserve from the pestilence being used in like
manner. The said leaves being pickled with Vinegar and Sugar* are a pleasant
and dainty Sauce, stir up the Appetite, and are also of a Cor^iall faculty.
Both the Conserve and Syrup above mentioned may be had at any Apothecaries, and
now and then a little of either being taken does strengthen Nature much, in
such as are in Consumptions. They are used also in wounds of the head, they
draw our pieces of Bones the skull being broken, ease the Headache, and pains
of the Teeth being thereto applied.

CHAP. CXXXVI. Of Lign-Aloes.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...). Agallochum and Xyloaloe; in Latin also Xylaloes;
in English, Lign-Aloes, Wood-Aloes, or Wood of the Aloe-tree; mention whereof
is made in the five and fortieth Psalm, together with Myrrh and Cassia: so
that it may from thence be gathered, that it is not the dried juice of the
Herb-Aloes, but the odoriferous Wood of this Tree, mentioned also in the four
and twentieth of Numbers, being the Parable of Balaam, concerning the beauty of
Jacob, where he says, How goodly are thy tents O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles O
Israel* As the Valleys are they spread forth, as Gardens by the River side, as
the Trees of Lign-Aloes, which the Lord has planted, etc.

The Kinds.
Serapio reckons up diverse sorts of this wood, and Ruellius speaks of four,
yet Garcias says, that he knew but one sort of true Lignum Aloes, that grew in
India; and that the other sorts which were so called, were but Sweet-woods
assimulating it, or at most, but a wild kind.

The Form.
I cannot be so exact in the description hereof as I would, therefore I must
entreat you to accept of what follows. Garcias says, that the Tree is like
unto an Olive Tree, and sometimes greater: now an Olive growing in some places,
is found to be as big as a great Wall-nut-Tree, so that hence you may judge of
the proportion of it, but I cannot meet with any one that ever saw the Flower
or fruit, Garcias having only the Branches thereof brought unto him to see,
unless it were Serapio, who says, that it bears small Berries, like unto
Pepper, but red; yet Garcias makes some doubt thereof. The Wood is somewhat
blackish on the outside, and more gray, and somewhat discolored with Veins
within* The best is that which is knobbed, or in uneven pieces, very brittle,
and breaking short, of a bitter taste, and small scent, until it be burned; but
then it yields a most fragrant odor or smell, sweating forth an Oily moisture,
at its first putting into the fire, and that with small bubbles, which soon
vanish away; and being put into water, it will swim, though some affirm the
contrary.

The Places and time
The true Lign-Aloes grows in Malacca, and Summatra, being both in the
East Indies, in places that are very dangerous, by reason of the Tigers that
haunt those Coasts, which is the Reason why the form has been so little
mentioned by the ancient Writers, and the time not at all spoken of.

The Temperature.
It is hot and dry in the second, or as some say, in the third Degree,
astringent, and a little bitter, and of subtle parts.

The Virtues.
Those Powders and Electuaries wherein this Wood is a main Ingredient, do
strengthen all the inward parts, but e^pe^ially the heart, which it does
won^e^fully corroborate against fainting of the Spirits, and cold Di^eases of
the Heart, and in the next place the Brain which it ^^rengtheneth and dries,
and therefore is useful in the Apop^exie^ Pal^e Lethargy, and lo^e^o memory, by
stopping the defluxions of rheumatick humor, that cause the same. It he peth
Dysenteries or Lasks, and P^eu^isies and hinders swe^ting. It does strengthen a
weak and languishing stomach* takes away putre action, dries up humidity, and
expels Wind. By reason of its bitterness, it kills worms, and is put into
diverse Cordialls and Antidotes. It helps also the cold Diseases of the Womb.
The extract thereof is good for the fore-m^ntioned Diseases. It is used
outwardly in Fumigations, to dry up Rheum, and in Qui^ts ^or the same purpose.
A Fumigation thereof (some say) provokes the Flowers in Women. It is very
p^ofitab^e also, to be used in the Di^eases of the Liver and Spleen* opening
the obstructions thereof, and strengthening them if as much of the Powder of
it, as will lie on a Groat, be taken fasting, three mornings together, either
in Broth or Wine.

CHAP. CXXXVII. Of Cinnamon.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), in Latin likewise Cinnamomum, and Cinamomum, as
also Canella and Cassia, in English Cinnamon Canel and Cassia* Garcias says
that the name of Cinamomum was given by those o^ Ormus, that bought it of the
Chinese, as though it were Ch^na Amomum then which Scaliger in his notes on
him, says* Nothing could be more unfit^y or foolishly spoken; for China is but
the corrupt pronuntiation of the Portugalls for Sina, and what affinity (says
he) has Amomum with Cassia Cinamomum being so ancient a word, that we find it
in sundry ^laces of the Bib^e as Exodus 30. 23 Proverbs 7. 17. and Cantic. 4.
14. Yet some are of Opinion, that Scaliger is too quick and self-conceited, and
that Garcias his sayings may hold good.

The Kinds.
The great distance between Us, and those places where the Cinnamon grows,
has not suffered any of our rare observers of Simples, to continue so long in
those parts, as to give Us perfect satisfaction concerning the Sorts of it* so
that there is a great Dispu^e whether Cinnamon, Canell and Cassia, be distinct
things, ^r the same, Gerard is of Opinion, that Canel, and Cinnamon are the
same, and th^^ Cassia lignea is a Bastard kind thereof, being very like in
show, but in sweetness, and other circumstances belonging to Cinnamon, f^r
inferior.

The Form.
The Tree which has the Cinnamon for his Bark, has a Body about the thi^knesse
of a Man's Thigh; but that which is taken from the smaller Branches, is much
better then that which is taken from the Body, which Branches or Boughs are
many, and very straight, whereon do grow beautiful leaves, in shape like those
of the Orange-Tree, and of the color of the Bay-leaf, (not as it has been
reported) like unto the leaves of Flags, or Flower* (...)uce: amongst these
pleasant leaves and branches, come for^h many fair white Flowers, which turn
into round or black fruit or Berries, of the bigness of an Hazel-Nut, or the
Olive-Berry, and of a black color: out of which, is pressed an Oil, having no
smell, till it be chafed between the hands: It is covered with a double Bark,
the innermost whereof, is the true and pleasant Cinnamon, which is taken from
the Tree, and cast upon the ground in the heat of the Sun, which makes it turn
and fold it self round together, as may be perceived upon view thereof. The
Tree being thus peeled, recovereth a new Bark in the space of three years, and
is then ready to be disbarqued as before. That Cinnamon which has a pale
color, has not been well dried in the Sun; that of a fair brown color is
best; and that which is blackish, has been too much dried, and also has taken
some wet in the time of drying.

The Places and Time.
The chiefest places where the Cinamon-tree grows, are Zo^lan, and Malavar;
but those of Zeilan are the best, they grow in other of the Moluccaes Islands,
as Java the greater and the less, and also in Mindanoa, for the most part upon
Mountains. It grows green Winter and Summer, as do all other Trees of the
Moluccaes, and East Indies for the most part: The Bark is taken off, at
seasonable times, and not without express License from the King of the Country.

The Temperature.
Cinnamon is hot and dry in the third Degree, or hot in the third Degree, and
dry in the second. Cassia lig^ea is hot and dry in the third degree. The first
is of subtle parts, and very Aromaticall.

The Virtues.
The distilled water of Cinnamon, comfort the heart, and vital parts,
corroborateth and strengthens the Stomach, Brain, Nerves, and other cold
parts of the Body: it eases the pains of the Wind-Cholick, provokes the
Courses and Urine, hasteneth the Birth: it preventeth and corrects
putrefaction of humors, resists poison, stays vomiting, and helps
nauseousness of the Stomach: It is frequently used in Cardiack passions, or
passions of the heart, fainting of the Spirits, and in trembling of the heart:
It causes sweetness of breath, and brings a good color in the face: it
strengthens the retentive faculty of all the parts, by drying up, and
consuming the moisture thereof. It is used in the Dropsy, and Cough proceeding
of moisture. In brief, it avails in all cold Diseases of the Head, Stomach, and
Womb, and is most convenient for cold and moist Bodies, and is much used in
Lasks, or looseness of the Body, to ease the pains and frettings of the ^uts and
Intralls. The Oil drawn Chymically, prevails against the pains of the Breast,
comfort the Stomach, causes good digestion, and being mixed with some
Honey, takes away spots from the face, being anointed therewith. Cassia Lig^ea
comfort the Stomach, Liver, and all the principal parts, opens
Obstructions or stoppings, di^pe^seth gross humors, repelleth wind, provokes
Urine, and VVomens Courses, and does much faci^itate, or has^en the Birth.
Being cast on Coals, and the smoke taken at the Nose, dries up Rheums and
Catarrhs, that proceed from co^d and moist humors. Also a sustumigation
thereof, helps the pain of the Womb, and the stoppings thereof. Being mixed
with Honey, and applied it dissolveth swellings and hard tumors A decoction
hereof with VVhite-wine and Rose Water, is commended against the ^^inking of
the Arm-holes, if the pla^e be bathed therewith; and the same is good to wash
sore mouths and Gums. Both this and Cin^mon are more useful in VVinter, then in
Summer.

CHAP. CXXXVIII. Of Vipers Buglosse.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Echium (...), Alc^biadion, and Alcibion, or
Alc^b^acum of the first under thereof; who being bitten by a Viper* gathered
this Herb, and chewing it, swallowing down the juice and app^ying the rest of
the Herb to the bitten place freed him^e^f from danger. Apulcius says, it was
called (...) Theriorr^^on, Viperearad^x, an^ (...), from the form of the Seed,
which as Dioscorides says, is like the head of a Viper, and thereof took the
name Echium: yet some others say from the ef^ects in the Roots to cure the
bitings of the Serpent, or which is as likely, because the stalks are spe^kled
like a Serpents Skin: in Latin also Echium of most Authors, yet of some
Buglossum sylvestre V^perinum.

The Kinds.
The Sorts of Vipers Buglosse are twelve. 1. The common Vipers Buglosse. 2.
White flowred Vipers Bug^osse. 3. Red flowred Vipers Buglosse. 4. Vipers
Buglosse, with dar^, reddish, purp^e Flowers. 5. Red flowred Vipers Bug^osse of
Candy. 6. Spotted Vipers Buglosse of Candy. 7. Dwarf yellow Vipers Buglosse. 8.
The least yellow Bastard Vipers Buglosse. 9. The small white Vipers Bug^osse.
10. Small Spanish Vipers Bug^osse with Spurrs. 11. Hoary white Vipers Buglosse
of Candy. 12. B^ack Vipers Buglosse of Candy.

The Form.
The Common Vipers Buglosse has many long rough Leaves, lying on the ground,
from among which rise up diverse hard round stalks, very rough, as if they were
thick set with prickles, or hairs, having many black spots on them also ^ike
unto the Skin of a Viper whereon are set such like long, rough h^ir^, or
prickly sad green leaves, somewhat narrow, the middle Rib for the most part
being white, the Flowers stand at the tops of the stalks, branched forth into
many spiked leaves of Flowers, bowing or turning like the Turne-sole, all of
them opening for the most part on the one side, which are long and hollow,
turning up the brims a little, of a Purplish Violet color, in them that are
fully blown, but more reddish while they are in the Bud, and not blown open: as
also upon their decay and withering; but in some places, of a paler Purple
color, with a long poin^el in the middle, feathered or pointed at the top:
after the Flowers are fallen, the Seeds (growing to be ripe, and enclosed in
round heads) are blackish, cornered, and pointed somewhat like unto the Head of
a Viper: the Root is somewhat great and blackish, and woody, when it grows
toward Seed-time, and perishes in the VVinter.

The Places and Time.
The first grows wild almost every where. The second about the Castle-walls
of Jews in Sussex. The third and fourth in Hungary and Austria. The fifth and
sixth in Candy. The seventh and tenth in Spain. The eighth and ninth on the
Hills in the Kingdom of Naples, as Columna reports. The eleventh and twel^th
in Candy. They all flower in Summer, and their Seed is ripe quickly after.

The Temperature.
These Herbs are cold and dry of Temperature.

The Virtues and Signature.
The Roots, or Seeds of Vipers Buglosse, are very effectual to comfort the
heart, and to expel sadness and melancholy, proceeding from no external or
apparent cause. It tempers the Blood, and allayeth hot fits of the Agues. The
Seed drunk in Wine, procures abundance of Milk in Women's Breasts, eases the
pains in the Loins, Back and Kidneys. It is likewise, as you have heard, an
especial remedy against the bitings of Vipers, and all other Serpents, or
venomous Creatures: as also against Poison, and poysonful Herbs. It is added by
D^oscorides, and others, that whosoever shall take of the Herb, or Root, before
they be bitten, shall not be hurt by the poison of any Serpent, the Signature
both of the stalk and Seed, holding out much to this purpose. The distilled
water of the Herb, when it is in Flower, or his chiefest strength, is excellent
to be applied, either inwardly or outwardly, for all the griefs aforesaid.
There is a Syrup made hereof, very effectual for the comforting of the heart,
and expelling sadness and melancholy, which is made in this manner. Take of the
clarified juice of common Vipers Buglosse four pound, of fine Sug^r three
pound, of the infusion of the Flowers thereof one pound; boil these gently to
the consistence of a Syrup, and keep them for use. Having thus spoken to diverse
Simples appropriated to the Lungs and Heart, which are the Principal Intralls
of the middle Region, I shall now set down some of those which are available
for Stitches, and other distempers of the sides, before I descend into the
Abdomen or lower Region: and first.

CHAP. CXXXIX. Of Carduus Benedictus.
The Names.
NEither Carduus Benedictus, or the Blessed Thistle, or the Virtues, were known
to the Physicians of old time and therefore you must not expect the Greek name.
It is called in Latin Carduus Benedictus, and that worthily for the singular
Virtues that it has; in English, Holy Thistle, and Blessed Thistle; but more
commonly Carduus Benedictus, according to the Latin name. Some excellently
seen in the knowledge of Simples, have made it a kind of Wild Bastard Saffron,
called in Latin Attractilis, and in Greek (...), because Women in old time
were wont to use the stiff stalk thereof, pro fuso and colo, for a Spindle or
a Distaffe: It is named also Fucus agrestis, and Colus rustica, and the Women
in Greece, as Petrus Bellonius reports, call Attractylis, by a corrupt name
Ardactyla, even at this day. Diverse call it Carthamus Sylvestris, and Cnicus
Sylvestris; in English, Wild Bastard Saffron.

The Kinds.
The Sorts hereof, as you have already heard, are two. 1. Carduus Benedictus,
or the Blessed Thistle. 2. Attractylis, or Wild Bastard Saffron.

The Form.
Carduus Benedictus, or Blessed Thistle, has round, rough, and pliable stalks,
which being parted into diverse Branches, do lie flat on the ground: the leaves
are jagged round about, and full of harmless prickles on the edges: the heads
on the tops of the stalks are set with prickles, and environed with sharp
pricking Leaves; out of which stands a yellow Flower: the Seed is long, and
set with white hairs at the top, like a Beard: the Root is white, and parted
into strings, the whole Herb, Leaves, and Stalks, and also the Heads, are
covered with a soft and thin Down.

The Places and Time.
The first grows naturally in Lem^os, which is an Island of the Mediterra^ean
Sea, in the Champion grounds thereof, as Petrus Bellonius testifies. It is
diligently cherished in Gardens in these Northern parts. The second grows in
Candy, and in diverse Provinces and Islands of Greece, and also in Languedock,
and is entertained in our English Gardens. The first flowreth in July and
August, at which time it is especially to be gathered for Physical uses; for
then it will remain good a year or longer. Attractylis is very late before it
flowreth, and seedeth.

The Temperature.
As Carduus Benedictus is bitter, so it is also hot and dry in the second
Degree; and withal, cleansing and opening* Attractylis does dry, and
moderately digest as Galen teaches.

The Signature and Virtues.
By the Prickles upon the Stalks and Leaves of Carduus, are clearly signified,
that the herb it self is an excellent remedy for the Pleurisy and St^^ches
wherewith the sides are sometimes distempered, if the Decoction in posset drink
or the distilled water thereof be taken. It helps also the swimming of the
head, strengthens the memory, and is a good remedy against cea^nesse, kills
worms, provokes Urine, and the Courses, and drives out gravel, and cleanses
the Stomach. It is most excellent in Pestilent Fevers, and all contagious
Di^eases; for it expels out by sweat, all noxious or ill humors. It is very
good in any kind of Ague, either the decoction thereof being taken, or half a
dram of the Powder in Posset Drink, before the fit comes, for diverse fits, if
need require and sweat after it. It is very available likewise against Venom
and poison. Though the distilled water is useful for the aforesaid Diseases,
yet the decoction is much better. The extract thereof is good against the
French Pox, and the Quartan Ague. The green Herb bruised and applied, is good
against hot swellings, as Wildfire, Plague-Sores, Botches; and it is good also
to be laid upon the bitings of mad Dogs, Serpents, Spiders, Bees, or Wasps, or
any other venomous Creature. The Powder stops blood at the Nose, being
applied. The juice thereof clears the sight, being put into the Eyes, and
takes away the redness of them, and so does the water. Being bruised with a
little Hog's Grease, and a little Wheat mixed therewith, it cures stubborn and
rebellious Ulcers, if it be applied thereto. It is used against the Gangrene
also. For all which notable effects, it has been called Omnimorbia, that is, a
Salve for every Sore.

CHAP. CLX. Of our Ladies Thistle.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), if diverse Authors be not mistaken, being as is
generally supposed that Plant that Dioscorides mentions under that name. It
is called in Latin Carduus Lacteus, and Carduus Mariae; in English Our Ladies
Thistle, or, the Striped Milky Thistle. Some think it to be Leucacantha, or
Spina Alba of the Ancients; others take it to be Leucographis Plinii.
Brunfelfius calls it Carduus Albus, and Camaeleon; Matthiolus and Lobel,
Carduus Lacteus, some Carduus Argentatus, and Carduus Ramptarius; others
Carduus Leucographus, and Silybum and Acanon Theophrasti.

The Kinds.
Although formerly there have been but one sort hereof known to the Herbarists;
yet of late, by the diligent search, and observation of some that have been
curious, there are found of them three in all, 1. The common Ladies Thistle. 2.
Great milky Thistle of a year. 3. The small Spanish milk-Thistle.

The Form.
The Common Ladies Thistle has diverse very large and broad leaves, lying on
the ground, cut in, and as it were crumpled, but somewhat hairy on the edges,
and of a white green shining color, wherein are many lines and strakes, of a
milky white color, running all over, and set with many sharp and stiff
prickles round about; amongst which rise up one or more strong, round, and
prickly stalks, set full of the like leaves, up to the top, where at the end of
every branch, comes forth a great prickly Thistle-like head, strongly armed
with pricks, and with bright Purple Thrums, rising out of the middle of them:
after they are past, the Seed grows in the said heads, lying in a great deal
of fine soft white Down, which is somewhat flattish and shining, large and
brown: the Root is great, spreading in the ground, with many strings, and small
Fibers fastened to them: All the whole Plant is bitter in taste, and therefore
supposed not to be without good effects.

The Places and Time.
The first is frequent in many parts of this Realm, and particularly, in St.
Georges Fields near London, in great abundance. The Seed, whereof the second
and likewise the last came, were brought out of Spain, by Guillaume Boel. It is
thought that the last is the same that Camerarius says, he picked out of
Epithy^^^, and that Ranwolsius gave him, brought out of Syria, because the Seed
and Leaves are so very much alike. They flower and seed in June, July, and
August, when other sorts of Thistles do.

The Temperature.
Our Ladies Thistle is hot and dry in the second Degree, and binds
moderately, especially the Roots.

The Signature and Virtues.
There are upon this Plant also many prickles, and therefore it is good for the
Stitches of the side, and other Diseases thereof, by Signature, if the
Decoction or Powder thereof be taken. It is also very effectual for Agues, and
to prevent and cure the infection of the Plague: as also to open obstructions
of the Liver and Spleen, and thereby is good against the Jaundies. It provokes
Urine, breaks and expels the Stone, and is good for the Dropsy. The Root
is good for those that are troubled with the Lask, and the Bloody Flix: it
stays bleedings, wastes away cold swellings, eases the pain of the Teeth,
if they be washed with the decoction thereof. The Seed is held to be as
effectual, if not more, for the purposes aforesaid, as also for the Cramp, and
so is the distilled water, which besides is often applied, both inwardly to
drink, and outwardly with Clothes or Spunges, to the Region of the Liver, to
cool the distemperature thereof, and to the Region of the Heart, against
swounings and passions of it. The tender leaves having the prickles taken off,
and eaten with other Herbs, are exceeding good to cleanse the blood, in the
Springtime; and the young stalks peeled and dressed, as the stalks of the
other Chardons and wild Artichokes, are good meat, especially for Nurses to
increase their milk, which it does by Signature also.

CHAP. CXLI. Of Camomile.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), of Dioscorides: and (...) of Theophrastus; and of
some (...) of the whiteness of the flowers; an^ (...), quod Maliod(...) (...),
of the sc^^t of an Apple, or Quince. It is called by some also in Latin
Lauco(...) and Ambomis: but most generally Cham^^lum, and of some, Ch(...)illa
as it it in the Apothecaries shops. Some call the Garden C(...) be, both single
and double, C(...)lum Ronanum adoratius and nobile, thinking them to be sweeter
then the wild kind: which last, by manuring, will have a good scent as the
former. Mayweed, which is a kind hereof, is called in Greek (...) Cynanthemis,
and Cynobotane, that is, Camomilla Canina, and Canina herba; in Latin Cotula,
Cotula Fatida and Cotulan^n Fatida: in English Mayweed with a strong and no
scent; and of Country people, Mathern.

The Kinds.
Of Camomile and May-weed there be ten sorts, 1. Ordinary Camomile, 2. Naked
Camomile, 3. Double flowred Camomile, 4. Small Camomile of Africa, 5. Great
Spanish Camomile, 6. Sweet Spanish Camomile, 7. Small hoary Spanish Camomile,
8. Unsavory Mountain Camomile, 9. Stinking May-weed, 10. May-weed without any
scent.

The Form.
Our Ordinary Camomile is well known to all, to have many small trailing
branches, set with very fine Leaves, bushing and spreading thick over the
ground, taking root still as it spreads: the tops of the Branches have white
flowers with yellow thrums in the middle, very like unto Feather-few, but more
soft and gentle in handling, which give a small white seed not observed by
many, and being cast into the ground will grow as other seed does; the whole
Herb is of a very sweet scent.

The Places and Time.
Ordinary Camomile grows wild familiarly in many places of this Land, as on
Putney Heath near the Windmill, and upon Barnes Common in Surry, and else
where. The May-weed that stinketh not, grows many times amongst the Corn, as
the stinking sort very Commonly does. The Naked and Double sort grow only in
Gardens. The fourth was found by Boel in Africa by Tunis. The fifth, sixth, and
seventh in diverse places of Spain. The Eighth in sundry places of Spain also.
They all flower in Summer, but some earlier then others.

The Temperature.
Camomile, says Galen, is hot and dry, in the first degree, and of thin parts;
it is of force to digest, slacken, and rarify; it heals moderately, and
dries little.

The Virtues
The decoction of Camomile made and drunk helps all panes and stitches in the
side* the Chollick, Stone, and wind in the Belly, or Stomach, and expels
tough and clammy Phlegm, as also cold Humors, provokes sweat, brings down the
Courses in Women and provokes Urine. It is very profitable for Agues that come
of Phlegm or Melancholy, or from an Inflammation of the Bowels; and for the
Hypoc^ondres, that is, the sides and that part where the Liver and Spleen ly^,
there can be nothing more acceptable then it. The bathing of a decoction of
Camomile, takes away weariness and eases pains, to what part soever of the
body it be applied besides it comfort the Sinews, that are overstreined and
mollifieth all swellings. It moderately comfort all parts that have need of
warmth, and digesteth, and dissolveth whatsoever has need thereof, by a
wonderful speedy property. The flowers boiled in Posset drink provokes sweat,
and helps to expel colds, aches, and pains wheresoever, the (...) i^ ^n
excellent help to bring down women's courses. A Syrup made of the juice of
double Camomile says Baubi^^s: but Garden Camomile, say Pena and Lobel, with
the flowers, and white wine, is a remedy against the Jaundise and dropsy, that
comes by the evil disposition of the Spleen. The Lie, where in the flowers
have been boiled, is very good to wash the head, and to comfort both it and the
brain. It is said that a Stone which has been taken out of the body of a man,
being wrapped in Camomile will in a short time dissolve; whence it may be
gathered that it is excellent for the Stone, if the Syrup or decoction thereof
betaken, or else a dram of the Salt of it in a little white or Rhenish wine in
a morning. The Egyptians were wont to use the Oil, made of the Flowers,
against all Agues, by anointing the patient from Head to Foot therewith, which
is also very available for the external uses aforesaid. May-weed is often used
with good success, for the same purposes, that Camomile is, especially the
ordinary sort. They are both put into Glysters, but especially, Camomile.

CHAP. CXLII. Of Sweet Trefoile or Balsam.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), but whether it be (...), or (...) there is some
diversity of opinions amongst Authors. Most of the best sort take it to be
(...), of Discorides; in Latin Lotus satius or Vrbana, yet Matthiolus takes it
to be (...), Lotus silvestris, and so do Anguillara and Castor Durantes: but
Fuschius says, that the Greeks call it (...), and the Latins Frifolium
Odoratum, which is the name by which it is best known, both in Latin, and
English. For if it be gathered and kept dry in the house, it does in some sort
retain the scent, it had growing; but against rainy weather, it smells so
strong, that some have desired to lay it in their Chamber, to be as it were
their Almanac, to show them the weather. It is called of many women now a
days Balsam, for the Singular healing properties it has.

The Kind^s.
Unto this kind are referred th^se Four sorts, 1. Sweet Trefoile or Balsam, ^.
Strong Smelling Claver, 3. Strong smelling Claver of America, 4. Claver ^
America.

The Form.
The Sweet Trefoile rises up with one strong round whi^ish stalk, about half
a yard, or two foot high, spreading forth many branches on all sides, where
about are set many Leaves with long foot stalks, three always set together, of
a whitish green color, very soft and somewhat dented about the Edges, of the
scent of Fenngreek which is thought to alter seven times a day, but it is but a
fancy: at the tops of the branches stand many flowers closely set together,
each of them like unto those of Melilot, but larger, and of a bleak or pale
watchet blue color; after which come round white heads, containing dark
yellowish colored Seed: the Root is small white and threddy, perishing every
year, but rises again from the seed that shedd^th, or by being sown in the
Spring.

The Places and Time.
The first grows not wild in Italy, France, or Germany, but with them all is
sown in their Gardens, and so it is with us. And even D^oscoides says, it
grew in Gardens in his time, as not growing wild in Greece or other places that
he had heard of. The Second grows about M^^pelier and Marseilles, as Pena and
Lobel say, and is a stranger at Venice, and other places of Italy, as well as
in Germany, and with us, and only to be found in the Gardens of those which
are rare conservers of plants. The last came from America as is supposed. The
first flowreth in June and July and does always perfect his Seed; but the
other, because they flower later, do often miss to give good seed so, that we
are often to seek for them again.

The Temperature.
Galen says, that Sweet Trefoile or Garden Claver (for so Gerard calls it)
does in a mean concoct and dry, being temperare between heat and cold, to which
Gerard ass^enteth; yet Fuschius says, it is hot and dry in the third degree,
which is more likely to be the temperature of the strong smelling Claver,
called in Latin Trifolium (...).

The Virtues.
The Oil made of the Leaves and Flowers of Sweet Trefoile, is a Sovereign
Remedy for all Stitches, Aches, Cramps, lamenesse of the Joints and Sinews, for
all bruises and Burstings of Young Children, and generally all other the like
outward diseases, whether they proceed of Heat or Cold. It is wonderfully
ex(...)ed for dissolving all hard swellings, bunches, or wens in any part of
the body; as also for repressing moderately, all inflammations, and helps to
digest all corrupt and rotten fores, bringing them to maturity, and healing
them perfectly. It is admi^ed also for its rare properties, in healing green
sores, as well as Old Ulcers, as also to ease the pain of the Gout. The juice
of the green Herb, is used with honey to be dropped into the Eyes, to help the
Ulcers, that happen therein, and takes away all manner of Spots, as Pin or Haw
as also all skins that grow over them to hinder the ^ight. The distilled water
is good to wash Childrens ^eads that are broken out with scurfe or Scabs. The
Leaves are laid in Chests and Presses, to keep Moths from Garments. The
decoction of the strong smelling Claver, made in wine and drunk, eases the
pains of the sides coming by obstructions and provokes Urine, as Hippocrates
says, it helps women who after their Delivery are not well purged or cleared
of the Afterbirth, it provokes their Courses also, and helps to expel the
birth. Diverse Authors write that the Decoction of the whole plant is very
effectual against all Venomous Creatures; and that if the said decoction which
has bin applied to one that has bin bitten, be afterward applied to one that
has not bin bitten, he that was not bitten shall feel the pains of him that
was bitten, and he that was bitten, shall feel none; Nay, some write that the
decoction is very dangerous to be used by any but those who are bitten: so that
those that need not a remedy shall be sure to find a malady: but no more of
that. The Flowers Leaves or Seed either altogether or each severally by it
self, being boiled in Vinegar, and a little honey added thereto, being drunk,
is a special remedy for them that are stung or bitten by any venomous
Creature. The seed is of most force with Galen, who appoints it to be put in
Treacles, that he prescribed for diverse persons. The seed also boiled in honied
water, and drunk, is Singular good, for the Pleurisy; provokes Urine and
allayeth the heat thereof, and is good for the Strangury. It helps those that
have the Falling Sickness and is Singular good for women that have the rising
and strangling of the Mother, whereby they often seem to be dead. The same
decoction also is good for those that have the dropsy, and taken before the
fit, either of tertian or quotidian Ague, it lesseneth the fits both of heat
and cold, and by often using it does quite take them away: three drams of the
seed, or four of the Leaves powdered, and given in drink provokes Women's
monthly Courses effectually. What effects the two latter sorts will work, has
not been tried, but its thought they are near the same with the former.

CHAP. CXLIII. Of Melilote
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), quasi Mellita Lotus, that is, a kind of Lotus
smelling like Honey. In Latin anciently, it was called Sertula Campana, because
the flowers growing in the fields of Campania were used to be put into
Garlands; and Corona Regia, because of the yellow flowers which do Crown the
top of the Stalks, but some call it Trefolium Odoratum, which is the plant
declared in the former Chapter. Some also call it Trefolium Equinum or
Caballinum, because horses are said to love it, and to grow fat by eating
thereof. In English we call it generally Melilote, after the Greek; and
sometime Kings Claver, and sometimes Hearts Claver, because Staggs and Deer
delight to feed upon it.

The Kinds.
There be seven sorts of Melilote, 1. Common melilote, 2. white flowred
Melilote, 3. Italian Melilote, 4. Assyrian Melilote, 5. Egyptian Melilot, 6.
Spanish Melilot, which has spotted Leaves, 7. East Indian Melilote.

The Form.
The common Melilote has many green stalks, about half a yard high, or
somewhat more, rising from a tough, long, white Root, which dies not every
year; set round about at the joints, with small, and somewhat long, strong well
smelling Leaves, three always set together, unevenly dented about the edges:
the Flowers are yellow, and well smelling also, made like other Trefoi^es, but
smaller, standing in long spikes one above another, for an hand breadth long or
better, which afterward turn into long crooked Cods, wherein are contained,
flat Seeds, somewhat brown.

The Places and Time
The first is found in many places of this Land plentifully, as on the further
side of the ditch, on the left hand, between the foot of Heddington Hill and
Oxford, in the edge of Suffolk, in diverse places of Essex, and Huntingtonshire,
and other places more sparingly, either in the Corn-helds, or in the corner of
Meadows. The second grows not in any place of this Land natura^ly, but is
very frequent in Germany, and is only nursed up in Gardens with us. The third
came to us from Italy, and by that Italian name we call it still. The fourth is
said by Pena and Lobel, to come first from Aleppo in Syria to Venice, and from
thence to us. The fifth is peculiar only to Egypt. The sixth was found upon the
Mountains of Castile in great plenty. The last came immediately out of Italy;
yet it is supposed, that it came from the East Indies thither. They do all
flower in the Months of June and July, and their Seed is ripe quickly after.

The Temperature.
Galen says, that Melilote is of a mixed quality; for it has a little
astringency in it, and yet it does digest; for the warming or hot faculty, is
more abundant therein then the cold.

The Virtues.
The Egyptian Melilote, as Alpinus says, the Seed whereof is only used by
them, being boiled, and the places grieved someneed, and bathed with the warm
decoction, is very effectual against the pains of the sides, the Pleurisy,
and Perip^^umonia, which is an Impostume of the Lungs; as also the pains of the
Cholick, and Wind in the Belly: the windiness, or strangling of the Mother, or
any griefs thereof, to sit over the decoction thereof; and if Fenugreek, or
Linseed, or Camomile Flowers, be added thereto, it helps all Tumors, or hard
swellings thereof, to provoke the monthly Courses, and to open the obstruction
of the Veins, and afterward to strengthen the parts. And it is thought, that
our English Melilote is as good for all the purposes aforesaid, nay better, if
Mr. Culpepper mistake not, where he says, that such things as grow in England,
are fittest for English Bodies. Besides, the Compound Plaster of Melilote,
having some of the Meal of the Seed therein, is of power to dissolve hardness,
windiness, tumors and swellings both of the Spleen, Liver and Belly: as also
mightily to ease the pain of the i^ all, and to heal the Hypoch^^dria, or
forepart of the Belly, about the short Ribs, when it is stretched or crakt by
the swelling thereof: it wonderfully asswageth any other like pain and is good
for the Ricke^s. But there is another Plaster or Salve, called Melilote, which
is much used, to draw and heal all Sores and Wounds, that need cleansing, and
is made of the Juice of the green young Melilote boiled with Rosin, Wax,
Sheeps-Tallow, and some Turpentine, which if it be well made, will be almost as
green as the Herb it self, and smell very strong thereof, although it be two or
three years old. The juice dropped into the Eyes, clears the sight, and
takes away the Web, Pearl, or Spots therein: it helps also the pains of the
Ears, dropped into them; and steeped in Vinegar or Rose Water, it helps the
Headache. It also mollifieth hard Tumors and Inflammations that happen in the
Eyes or other parts of the Body, as the Seat o^ Fundament, and the privy parts
of Man or Woman, being boiled in Wine, and laid to the place; and sometimes the
yolk of a roasted Egg, or the Powder of Fenegreek, or Linseed, or fine Flower,
or Poppy-Seed, or Endive, is added unto it. The Flowers of Melilote and
Camomile, are much used in Glysters, to expel Wind, and to ease pains: as also
in Pultises, that are made for the same purpose, and to assuage swellings or
Tumors, that happen in the Spleen, or other parts. It helps Wens, after it is
boiled in water, and also running Ulcers of the Head, if it be applied with
Chalk, Wine, and Galls. It is effectual to be applied to those who have
suddenly lost their senses, by any Paroxisme: as also to strengthen the memory,
to comfort the Head and Brains, and to preserve them from pains, and the fear
of the Apoplexy, if the Head be often washed with the distilled Water of the
Herb and Flowers, or a Lie made therewith. If satisfaction enough has not been
given for easing the pain of the sides, here is a qui^t or a bag for the
purpose. Take Melilote Flowers, Camomile, Rosemary, and Elder Flowers, of each
half an handful, of Bran an handful, of Aniseed, Fennel-Seed, and Caroway-Seed
bruised, of each two Ounces: make a quilted Bag for the side, sprinkle it with
Wine, and being made hot, apply it.

CHAP. CXLIV. Of Oats.
The Names.
THis Plant is called in Greek (...) and (...), coming peradventure, and as
some suppose of (...), quod cibum significat, because in former times it was
the most usual food in many places, as Pliny testifies, which is very likely
to be true; for to this day they do so in many places, and even in some
Countries with us also, as in Wales, Lincolnshire, Lancashire, etc. not only
for Horses, Hoggs, and Pullen but for men, making both Bread, Drink, and
Pottage, as you shall hear anon. It is called in Latin Avena, and in English
Oats, and some give it the general name of Corn and Provender.

The Kinds.
There are only two Sorts of Oats, which may justly challenge any room in this
Chapter, which are the ordinary sown Field-Oats, and the naked Oats; for the
wild Oats are most truly reckoned amongst the Grasses.

The Form.
I should not have needed to trouble you with the form hereof, were it not pro
Forma, it being so well known, therefore I shall be but brief in it. The
ordinary Oats grows up with diverse tall joynted stalks and leaves, somewhat
resembling Wheat, bearing at the tops, a large spread tuft, of many pointed
Aglets, hanging down like small winged Birds, from small thred-like stalks,
which consist of a husk and a Kernel or Grain, which is small, long and round,
like Rye; but longer, and more pointed: the Root is small and threddy.

The Places and Time.
They are both sown in our Fields in sundry places, yet the naked Oats nothing
so frequent, and do love rather a cold moist ground, then either hot or dry,
and are usually, the first Seed is sown upon those grounds that were Woods,
after their stocking up. They are Summer Corn, that is, sown in the Spring,
and mowen in Autumn, or the latter end of Summer.

The Temperature.
Galen says, that Oats are somewhat cold, and drying withal, and nourish
little.

The Virtues*
Common Oats put into a linen Bag, with a little Bay Salt, quilted handsomely
for the same purpose, and made hot in a Drying Pan, and applied as hot as can
be endured, eases the pain in the side, called the Stitch, or Chollick in the
Belly. Being boiled in water, and the hands or feet of such as are troubled
with chaps, chinks, or rists, in those parts (a Disease of great affinity with
the Pocks, being called in Latin Serpigo and Impetigo) being holden over the
fume or smoke thereof, the Oats being put into a Vessel fit for the purpose:
afterward anointed with that Ointment usually applied contra Morbum Gallicum,
and then the Patient covered with Blankets, and made to sweat, it does
perfectly cure the same in six times so anointing and sweating. A Pultis made
of the Meal of Oats, and some Oil of Bays put thereto, helps the Itch and
the Leprosy: as also the Fistulaes of the Fundament, and dissolveth hard
Impostumes: the Meal of Oats boiled with Vinegar, and applied, takes away
freckles and spots in the face, or other parts of the Body. Oat-meal is usually
given in Broth, to bind those that have a Lask, or other Flux, and with Sugar,
is to good effect, given to those that have a Cough, or Cold. Oat-meal-Cawdle
is a food for those that are newly brought to bed, and for others to whom a
very spare diet is commended. I forgot to tell you in the names that they are
called Avena vesca, a vescendo, because it is used as I said in many Countries,
to make sundry sorts of bread as in Lancashire, where it is their chiefest
Bread-corn for Jannocks, Haver-Cakes, Tharffe-Cakes, and those which are
generally called Oaten-Cakes; and for the most part they call the Grain Haver,
whereof they also make Malt, and thereof make their drink, and are thereby
sustained, and live in as good health and strength of body, as those that live
on Wheat only; whereby we may well perceive, that it has a warming quality,
rather then a cold, in nourishment: howsoever, it may be cooling in Medicament.
Oat-meal is not good to be eaten raw, especially by young Maids; for it will
make them look like a Cake of Tallow, especially, if she eat it in a morning,
and drink a draught of strong Vinegar after it, which they are too apt to do.
Naked Oats are so called, because they are fit for use, as soon as they be
threshed without the help of Mill. In Norfolk and Suffolk, where they are most
plentiful: the good Houswives that delight not to have store of any thing, but
from hand to mouth, do when they want Oat-meal for their present use, go into
the Barn, and rub forth with their hands so much as will serve their turn, not
willing to provide for to morrow, but to let the morrow provide for it self, as
the Scripture says.

CHAP. CLXV. Of Valerian.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and (...). Nardus agrestis, or Sylvestris,
because it is in smell and faculty, like unto Nardus, and in Latin, Valeriana,
a multis quibus valet facultatibus. Some also call it Thericaria, because it is
a special Ingredient in Treacle, and Herba Benedicta, of Paracelsus, it is
called Terdina. The ordinary sort is generally called, both in Shops, and of
all other, Phu majus, and Valeriana major hortensis; in English, the great
Garden Valerian, and of some, Capons-Tail, and Set-wall; yet Setwall properly
is that Zedoaria, or Zerumbeth, that grows in Malaver, Calecut, and Cananor,
being places of the East Indies, and not in any of these Christian Countries.

The Kinds:
Of Valerians, there may be found these fifteen Sorts. 1. The great Valerian.
2. A Mountain kind of great Valerian. 3. Knobbed Valerian of Candy. 4.
Broadleafed wild Valerian of the Alps. 5. Small wild Valerian of the Alps. 6.
Summer Valerian. 7. Indian Valerian. 8. Narrow-leafed red Valerian. 9. Rocky
Valerian. 10. Small Valerian of a year. 11. Red Valerian. 12. Greek Valerian.
13. Small Valerian. 14. Greater wild Valerian. 15. Lesser wild Valerian.

The Form.
The great Valerian has a thick short grayish Root, lying for the most part
above ground, shooting forth on all sides, other such like small pieces, or
Roots, which have all of them many long and great strings, or Fibers under
them, in the ground whereby it draws nourishment: from the Heads of these
Roots, spring up many green leaves, which at the first are somewhat broad and
long, without any division at all in them, or denting on the edges; but those
that rise up after, are more and more divided on each side, some to the middle
Rib, being winged, as made of many Leaves together on a stalk, and those upon
the stalk in like manner, are more divided, but smaller toward the top then
below: the stalk rises to be two or three foot high, sometimes branched at the
top, with many small whitish Flowers, sometimes dashed over at the edges, with
a pale purplish color, of a small scent, which passing away, there follows
small brownish white Seed, that is easily carried away with the wind: The Root
smells more strong, then either Leaf or Flower, and is likewise of more use
in Medicine.

The Places and Time
The first is said by Dioscorides to grow in Pontus, in the wet ground of
Mountains, and other moist places; and is generally kept in our Gardens. The
second is found in Savoy, as Camerarius says. The third grew in Candy. The
fourth upon the mountains of Austria and Stiria, and so does the fifth also.
The seventh is said to come from mexico. The Eighth was gathered on mount
Baldus. The ninth Fabius, Columna found on the mountains in Naples. The tenth
grows only in the Gardens of the Curious, the natural place being unknown.
The Eleventh grows about Monpelier in France. The Twelfth and Thirteenth are
known to grow no where, but in Gardens. The two last, grow commonly in Marshes
and wet medows, by rivers and water sides in our own Country. They do all
flower in the Summer-months of June, and July, and the Indian kind sooner if it
be saved betime; and continue flowring till the Frosts come, and so does the
Summer or Annual kind also.

The Temperature.
Valerian being green has very little heat, but the roots when they are dried
are hot and dry in the first or second degree.

The Virtues
The Garden Valerian being dried, and given in drink, does take away the pains
of the sides, provokes Urine, and helps the Strangury; and the Decoction
thereof taken does the like also, and procures Women's Courses, and is used in
Antidotes. The same helps all Stranglings and Choakings arising in any part,
whether be they because of the Pains in the Chest or Sides, and takes them
away. The root boiled with Liquorice, Raisins and Annise-Seed, is Singular for
those which are short-Winded, and have the Cough, and helps to open the
passages, and to cause Phlegm to be easiely Spit out. It is given to those
that are bitten or stung by any venomous Creature, being taken in wine, and is
of special virtue against the Plague, and expels Wind in the Belly. The
green Herb and root being bruised, and applied to the head, takes away the
pains and prickings therein, stays Pheumes and thin Distillations; and being
boiled in white wine, and a drop thereof put into the eye, takes away the
dimnesse of the sight, or any Pin, Haw or Web therein. It is of excellent
property to heal any inward sores or wounds, and draws any Splintor, or
Thorn out of the flesh. The decoction of the Root of the Lesser Valerian, is
stronger to resist Poison and infections then the greater, as Matthiolus Says:
It is very profitably applied to assuage the swelling of the Cods caused of
cold or wind, if the fumes or vapors of the decoction thereof made with wine
be applied warm unto them. The water distilled from the greater Valerian, both
Herb and root, in the month of May, is Singular good to be taken fasting, for
all the purposes aforesaid; and a good and safe Medicine in time of the Plague;
it kills also the worms in the belly, and is singular good to wash either
green wounds or old Ulcers. It is of a great esteem in the Northern parts,
where they never make any pottage or broth for any one that is sick, but they
put some of this Herb therein, be the disease what it will, and is called of
them, The Poor Man's Remedy the decoction of the root being drunk when by taking
cold after sweating or over-heating of their bodies; they be troubled with the
Colic or Wind, or are otherwise ways distempered. The Roots being dried and
laid among Clothes give a good smell unto them, and the Extraction thereof is a
Singular remedy against the yellow Jaundice, and Stoppings of the Liver,
Spleen, and Womb. Wild Valerian is thought of the latter Herbarists to be good
for them that are bursten, for such as are troubled with Cramps, or other
Convulsions, and for all those that are bruised with Falls. The Leaves of
these, and also those of the Garden* are good against the Ulcers and soreness
of the Mouth and Gums, if the decoction thereof be g^^garized, or held in the
mouth. Some are of opinion, that the Roots of wild Valerian dried and powdered,
and a dram thereof taken with Wine, does purge upward and downward. The Greek
Valerian is much used to be put in Salves for green wounds, and being but
bruised and applied, it heals them.

CHAP. CXLVI. Of Stitch-wort.
The Names.
SOme take it to be the (...) of Dioscorides, that is, Tota Ossea in Latin,
and All-Bony in English so called, as is supposed by Antiphrasis, because it is
an Herb with very tender stalks, somewhat like unto Chick-weed. Others doubt,
whether this be that H^lostium or no, because Dioscorides says, his is sharp,
and this is not, which may be caused from their growing in different Climates.
Tragus calls it Eufrasia gramen, and Leonicerus, Eufrasia major: Fuschius,
Dodonaeus, and others, Gramen; Leucanthemum, which is its usual Latin name,
so called from the pretty white Flowers it bears. It is called in English
Stitch-wort, for its property in helping Stitches and pains in the sides.

The Kinds.
There are two principal sorts of Stitch-wort, a greater and a lesser, or an
earlier and a later: in each whereof, there be also some diversities, both in
respect of bigness of the Herb and Flower, and also in respect of the color of
the Flower.

The Form.
The greater Stitch-wort, has sundry, round slender stalks, rising from the
Root, scarce able to sustain themselves, but by the help of the hedges, or
other things that grow near it, with two small, long, hard, rough, and pointed
Leaves at each of them: at the tops whereof stand many small Flowers, composed
of white Leaves, standing like a Star, with some white threads in the middle:
the Root runs, or creeps in the ground, all about, with many small Fibers
thereat.

The Places and Time.
The first sort grows more usually under hedges, and under dry banks of
ditches, or the like, and flowreth a month earlier then the other, that is in
April, the other is more common in the Cornfieldsd, and elsewhere, in the more
open and Champion grounds, and flowreth not until May or June.

The Temperature.
Stitch-wort is supposed to be hot and dry in the first or second degree.

The Virtues.
This Herb is said to be of wonderful efficacy, to help stitches in the sides,
if the powder thereof be drunk in White Wind, especially if some of the Powder
of Acorns be added thereunto. Being boiled in Wine, it breaks the Stone, and
is good against the hardness of the Spleen, and Obstructions of the Liver and
Gall, it cleanses the Reins, Bladder and Passages of Urine. The Seed does
vehemently purge by Urine, and stops vomiting. It is much commended of some
to clear the Eyes of dimness, or Films, that begin to grow over the sight, to
drop some of the juice into them. Dioscorides says of his Holosteum, which
many suppose, as I said, to be our Stitch-wort, that if a Woman drink the Seed
of it three days fasting, after that she has had her natural Courses, and
that she happen to conceive within forty days after, it shall be a Man-Child:
The truth hereof I dare not be so bold as to affirm. If it be of force to cure
stitches, as the name imports, and Authors generally write thereof, I have my
purpose. It is said also, that it heals wounds, and that it is used with
other simples conducing to the like effect for the Dropsy.

CHAP. CLXVII. Of Flax.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), in Latin Linum, both which signify as well the
Herb as it grows, as the same prepared to be spun, and when it is made into
Cloth also. And its Linen is so called (...), because the finest substantial
Cloth is made thereof. It was formerly used to make Sails for Ships (but now
we make Hemp serve for that, reserving this for better uses) and therefore said
to be the thing that joined the most remote Regions together. It is called in
English Fl^x and Line.

The Kinds.
Clusius and others make mention of eleven several sorts of Flaxes, 1. Manured
Flax. 2. The more common wild Flax. 3. Broad-leafed blew wild Flax. 4. Broad
leafed yellow flowred Flax. 5. Narrow leafed wild Flax, with either white or
blew Flowers. 6. Narrow leafed wild Flax, with small Flowers. 7. Narrow leafed
wild Flax, with yellow Flowers. 8. Ever-living wild Flax. 9. The yellow shrub
Flax of Candy. 10. Chamalinum, that is, Dwarf wild Flax, with white Flowers, or
Mill-Mountain. 11. Dwaf wild Flax, with Starre-like Flowers.

The Form.
The manured Flax has a slender round pliant Stalk, about three foot high,
bes^t with narrow, long, and soft Leaves, without Order, branched at the top,
into three or four small Branches, each of them bearing two or three fair blew
Flowers, made of five pointed Leaves a piece, with some threads in the middle,
after which come found Buttons, pointed above, wherein is contained flat,
shining, smooth, brown Seed: the Root is small and threddy, perishing every
year.

The Places and Time.
The first is sown in diverse places of this Land, as well as in most Countries
beyond the Seas. It prospers best in a fat and fruitful Soil, and in moist
places especially; yet, if it be sown thick in a lean ground, it will be the
finer, though not yielding so much: nevertheless, it is said to burn up the
ground, and make it barren: and of this Opinion was Virgil, which he testifies
in these words, Vrit Lini Campum Seges. The time of sowing is the Spring, of
flowring June and July of gathering about Bartholomewtide; after which time it
is steeped in water, where the Sun comes till it will peele, and then it is
dried and braked, and then hatchelled, which being done, it is fit to be spun
at any time. The other sorts are said to grow some in France, some in Spain,
some in Germany, and some in our own Land, also as Mill-Mountain, almost every
where, Blew wild Flax, on New-Market-Heath; as also Broad-leafed wild Flax, and
thin-leafed wild Flax. They are all in Flower from Midsummer until August, and
some abide longer, the Seed ripening in the mean time.

The Temperature.
The Seed of Flax, commonly called Linseed, which is only used in Medicines, is
hot in the first degree, and in a mean between moist and dry, as some say; yet
Dodonaeus says, that it has a superfluous moisture, causing windiness, as he
instances in the Inhabitants of Middleborough in Zealand, who for want of Corn,
eat thereof, to the great endammagement of their healths.

The Virtues.
Linseed boiled in water, and some Honey put unto it, and drunk, is said to
ease the pains of the Body, as the Cholick and Stitches, and all Inflammations.
A Pultis being made thereof with Fenugreek and Mallows, is of good use to
mollify and discuss any Tumor, or hardness in any part of the Body, or of
the Mother, by fitting in a warm decoction of the Seed or to receive the hot
fumes through a Seat for the purpose. Being taken with Raisins, says Pliny, it
helps the Obstructions of the Liver, mixed with Nitre, or Salt, and
Fig-Tree-Ashes, it eases the pains and hardness of the Muscles, Sinews, and
Arteries, and used with Figs, it ripeneth and digesteth, mixed with wild
Cowcumber-Root, it draws forth splinters, thorns, nails, or any other thing
sticking in the flesh, and broken bones also. The decoction thereof made in
Wine, and applied to any fretting or running Sore, stays it from spreading
further: used with as much Cresses, it takes away the ruggedness of the nails,
and with Myrrh and Rosin, it helps Ruptures and swellings of the Cods; used
with Olibanum and water, or Mirth and Wine it helps watering Eyes, and mixed
with Honey or Suet and Wax and applied, it helps the hard Kernells, and
swellings under the Ears or Throat; it takes away also the Spots and
Blemishes of the skin, Sunburne, and other discolorings. The Oil of Linseed
(besides that it is of much use for Painters to fasten their color, either on
Cloth, Wood, Stone, Iron, or Glass, and to burn in Lamps) is good to mollify
the hardness and shrinking of the Sinews, helps the Piles, the Chaps of the
Fundament, and the hardness and pains thereof, and of the Mother; being
beaten with red-Rose-water, it is good against burnings: The Wild Flax is of
like use in most things, and more effectual in some by reason of the
bitterness: the decoction hereof with the flowers does resolve tumors, and
lenify inflammations, the arteries, also when they grow hard and stiff, and
the swellings and sores of the Grain. Mill-Mountaine is said to move the body
to Stool. Thus much being ser down, touching the sides and the distempers
thereof, I must now creep through them underneath the Diaphragma or Midriffe;
and there the first thing that presents it self is the Stomach, which is the
common receptacle both of Physic that is taken inwardly, as well as Aliment:
in both which respects, I shall treat of those Plants which are there unto
most appropriated, reserving some of them for the use of the parts below. And
because it is more cleanly to wash the Pot before the meat be put in, I shall
present you with somewhat to cleanse it, and then to strengthen it, and the
other parts of the Body.

CHAP. CXLVIII. Of Wormwood.
The Names.
I It is called in Greek (...) quasi (...) impotabile ob amaritudinem, or
ingustabile because Cattle will not ^^^d upon it. Dioscorides calls it also,
(...), a profundo (...) from its extreme bitterness, whereby it kills
Worms, and therefore is called in English Wornie-wood in Latin it is called
Absinthium.

The Kind^.
There are but three sorts hereof mentioned by ancient Writers, viz. Absinthium
Ponticum. 2. Seryphium. 3. Santonicum: yet now I find fifteen. 1. Common
Wormwood. 2. True Roman Wormwood. 3. Common Roman Wormwood. 4. Five leafed
Wormwood of Austria. 5. Unsavory Wormwood. 6. White tufted Wormwood. 7. White
tufted Wormwood with fine Leaves. 8. The Vasle sians white herb or Wormwood.
9. Hoary Mountain Wormwood. 10. English Sea Wormwood. 11. French Sea
Wormwood: 12. German Sea Wormwood. 13. Lavender leafed, Sea Wormwood. 14.
Egyptian Wormwood. 15. Worm-seed Wormwood, or Levant Wormwood.

The Form.
Seeing that the Form of Common Wormwood, is well known, I shall give you the
description of the true Roman kind: It has more slender and shorter stalks
then the Common sort, and reasonable large Leaves, yet smaller and more finely
cut in, and divided then it, but as white and hoary, both in the Leaves and
Stalks: The Flowers also are of a pale yellow color standing upon the small
Branches in the same manner; and but that, it is smaller in each part it is
altogether like it; the roots likewise are smaller, less woody, and fuller of
fibers: The smell thereof is somewhat Aromatically sweet; and the bitterness
is not so loathsome to taste as that of the former.

The Places and Times.
The first grows wild in diverse Countries especially in England; The second
grows naturally on diverse high Mountains in Italy and Germany, whence it is
brought into their Gardens, and into some of ours by them that love rare
Plants. The third grows in Hungaria, and Austria, but it is to be found now,
in diverse of our Gardens. The fourth is found only in Austria. The fifth is kept
in Gardens as a ratity, its Original being unknown; The sixth grows on the
Mountains of Austria and Stiria, and on the Mountains thereabouts; The
seventh on Mount Baldus, and on Serva one of the Belluni Mountains; The eighth
and ninth on the hills among the Valle^^ans; The tenth on the seacoasts in
diverse places of this land, as also of the Low Countries; The eleaventh near
the Sea at Marselles and by Venice also, The Twelvth in Misnia in Germany, The
thirteenth about the Coasts of the Venetian Gulf, as also in the Island of Sio.
The fourteenth is said to grow in Egypt, but Pena and Lobel doubt thereof.
Ranwolfi^s says, he saw the last growing about Bethlehem in the Land of Jury.
It grows also in other p^aces of Syria and Arabia, whence it has been
brought and made for a while to grow in these parts. They do for the most part
Flower in August, saving the two last, which coming out of warm Countries are
later then the rest with us.

The Temperature.
Common Worm-word is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third, and though
it be bitter, and cleansing, yet it is binding and strengthening, and as
effectual, if not more, then any of the other.

The Virtues.
Whether Wormwood be taken in powder, in decoction, or the juice by it self or
the infusion in Wine, it draws from the tunicles of the Stomach, and
Intestines, first Choler, then Phlegm, and also does strengthen the Stomach.
like Alees. It purges Choler, likewise from the Reins, and Liver, and that by
Urine, It does much prevail in the Green-sicknesse, Jaundise, and Dropsy, and
helps such as have obstructed Stomachs, and Livers, the Cholick, and gripings
in the belly. It cleanses the Womb and uterine parts, helps Crudities,
drives away the Hicket, stays Vomiting, brings a good Appetite, expels
Wind, and prevails in intermittent Agues and Obstructions of the Entralls, It
preserves the blood from Putrefaction, and is useful in the pestilence; s
also for preventing and resisting drunkenness, Vomiting at Sea, and killing
Worms. The Vinegar wherein Wormwood is boiled helps a stinking Breath that
comes from the teeth or gums or from corruption in the Stomach, and provokes
the terms in Women, and if it be but sleeped in the same and drunken, it
helps such as have made themselves sick with eating Mushromes or Toodstooles.
The Wine made hereof is good for all the forementioned purposes, except in such
as have Fevers. Being outwardly applied, it kills Worms in the Belly or
Stomach; the juice with honey helps dim eyes, and mingled with Niter it
helps the Quinsie, being anointed therewith. It takes away black and blew
spots in the skin, that come after falls or bruises, if it be mingled with
honey, and anointed. It helps sore, and running Ears, and eases the pain
of them, if the hot vapors of the decoction be taken-in thereat, by a Funnell
or otherwise; It is likewise effectual to ease the Toothache. Being bruised
and applied with Rose Water to the Stomach, it gives much ease and comfort to
such as have been long sick. It availes against the hardness of the Spleen,
or where there is a hot sharpe-water running between the flesh and the skin,
if it be used with Figs, Vinegar, and meal of darnell, A decoction thereof
being made, and the Temples bathed therewith helps the Pains of the Head
that come of a cold cause. Also being boiled in Vinegar, and the mouth washed
therewith, it helps a Stinking breath. Being put into Chests or Presses where
clothes are, it preserves them from Worms and Moathes. If the skin be rubbed
with the juice, or with the Oil it drives away Fleas and Gnats. It is said,
that if Children before they be three Months old, be bathed with a decoction
thereof, or their Temples, feet, and hands be nointed with the juice thereof,
and well rubbed in, they shall not be troubled nor molested with heat or cold
all their lifetime. It is also commended, being so used as before, for
preserving the body, that it shall not be infected with Scah, Leprosy, French
disease, Lice, or such like malady, except some heinous crime be to be punished
with one of these. Notwithstanding the good qualities aforesaid, the juice
offends the head by raising up Vapors which cause drowsynesse and sleepiness.
Neither is it safe to use it in the Consumption of the Lungs, falling
sickness, Arthritick pains, Apoplexy, Lethargy and continual Fevers. Where
the Stomach is hot, the use is also to be forborne, especially being inflamed.

CHAP. CXLIX. Of Myrabolanes.
The Names.
The Arabians were the first that made Mirabolanes known to the World, and
called them in general by the name of Delegi, as by the Writings of Mesue and
Serapio do appear; which some of the modern Greeks translating, gave them
the names of Myrabolanes; because (as it is likely) they thought the fruit was
like unto an Acorne; but why they should give the other word Myr^s, which
signifies an Ointment, cannot be understood by any, seeing that they are never
used in any Ointment. Yet they recaine the name Myrobalanes, which signifies
as much as Balamus Myrepsica or Glans inguentaria, the Acorne for Ointments.
They are called in English by Mr. Parkinson, Purging Plums.

The Kinds.
The Author just now mentioned, does set down five sorts of these fruits with
the several Trees whereon they grow: As. 1. The yellow Mirabolane Indian Plum.
2. The purple Mirabolane. 3. The round Mirabolane 4. The bearded or six square
Mirabolane. 5. The black Mirabolane. Their Latin Names are. 1 Citrina. 2.
Chebula. 3. Bellerica. 4. Emblica. 5. Indica.

The Form.
The Tree that bears the yellow Myrabolanes is said to grow, as great as a
Plum-Tree, having many branches, and winged Leaves on them, like unto the true
Service Tree; the Fruit is for the most part as big, as a reasonable Plum, some
what long and fully round, but having many fair ridges on the outside,
especially when it is dried, showing it to be five square, and not perfectly
round, though coming something near round; of a yellower color on the outside,
then any of the rest, the flesh or substance being of a reasonable thickness,
yet not so thick as the Chebula or Emblica, nor so thin as the Bellerica. The
stone is white, thick and very hard to break, with eminencies and ridges also
therein, and a very small long kernel lying in the middle, of an astringent
taste as the dried fruit is also, but much more then it.

The Places and Time
All these fruits grow in the East Indies Wild, and not manured, yea in diverse
Provinces, as some in Goa, and Batecula, others in Malaver and Dabul: Yet
Garzias says, that four sorts grow in the Kingdom of Cambaya, and the
Chebula in Bisnagar, Decan, Guzarate (which we call at this time Surrate) and
Bengala. Bellonius says in his book of Observations, that the yellow
Mirabolanes grow in Arabia, and Syria, and also in the plains of Jericho; but
it is thought he was mistaken.

The Temperature.
All the kinds of Myrabolanes are cold in the first degree, and dry in the
second; not only purging but strengthening the stomach.

The Virtues.
The Citrine or yellow Myrabolanes do purge Choler, strengthen the Stomach
Heart, and Liver, profit such as have the Hemorrhoides or Piles, and are proper
for such as are of a temperate heat: They are good in Tertian Fevers, or
Agues, cause a good color, and hinder old age, being often taken. The Chebulae
do purge Phlegm, quicken the Brain, and sharpen the Sight, strengthen the
Stomach after purging; They are profitable for such as have the Dropsy, and are
troubled with long continued Agues. The Emblick and Bellerick purge the Stomach
from rotten Phlegm lying therein, and strengthens the Brain, and Joints,
Heart and Liver, and bind all other loose or fluent humors in the parts of the
body, and are very effectual for the Trembling of the Heart, and to stir up
Appetite, stay Vomiting, and restrains the fury, and belching of Choler,
qualifyeth the great heat of the inward parts, and allayeth Thirst, gives ease
to those that are troubled with the Piles, by restraining the fierceness of
Choler flowing into them; and for this last effect the Citrine are most used;
as having the signature thereof. The Indies, or black Myrabolanes, do purge
Melancholy, and black or adust Choler, and therefore are available for the
Quartane Ague, the Lepry, and all Paralyticall diseases, and they cause a good
color of the face. As for their outward use, the Citrine are used in
Collyries, or Medicine for the Eyes, with the juice of Fennel or Rose Water,
and against the inflammations, and flowing of humors to the Eyes; The powder
thereof with Mastick or Rose Water is used in Ulcers to heal them and dry
them. The powder of the Kernells, is used against dimnesse of the Eyes, or to
take away the Web therein, or the powder thereof infused in Rosewater, and
dried, and then infused two or three times more, and dry them, then make it in
powder, and use it. The Bellerick stay the flowing of the Hemorrhoides and
help the falling of the hair, the affected place being bathed with the
decoction thereof, and the powder strawed on afterward, and it makes the hair
become blacker. The Chebules, and the Emblicks are often brought over unto us
preserved, whereof the Chebules are more used Physically, for such purposes as
are before set down, then the Emblicks are, which being not so harsh in taste
as the Chebules, are more used as a very pleasant and delicate preserved Plum
amongst other junkets, then for any Physical respect.

CHAP. CL. Of Groundsell.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Ergerum, quia vere senescit, the Latins call it
Senecio, quia cito senescit, because it becomes ihoary so soon. Tragus takes,
it to be the Aphaca of Theophrastus, especially the Cotton^ kind called
Petrella by Monardus Ferrariensis: but, it appears that Tra^^ was mistaken, in
that Senecio as well as Aphaca are treated of severally by Theophanstus for two
distinct herbs. It is called in English Groundsell and Grunsell.

The Kinds.
The Ancients have made mention but of one sort of Groundsell, but this latter
Age has found out Six. 1. Common Groundsell. 2. Mountain Groundsell. 3.
Myconus Spanish Groundsell. 4. Cottony Groundsell. 5. Stinking Groundsell 6.
Sweet swelling Grunsell.

The Form.
Common Groundsell has a round green, and somewhat brownish Stalk, spread
toward the top, into some branches, set with long, and somewhat narrow, green
Le^ves, cut in on the edges, somewhat like unto Rocket, or rather an Oaken
Leaf, but lesser and round at the ends; At the tops of the stalks and
branches, stand many small green knaps or heads, out of which grow small yellow
threads or thrums which are the flowers, which continue many days blown in that
manner, before it pass away in to down, and with the seed is carried away in
the wind: the Root is small and threddy, and soon perishes, but from the seed
that is shed, it soon rises up again, so that it may be seen many months
in the year, both green and in flower, and seed; for it will spring, and seed
twice in a year at the least, if it be suffered in a Garden.

The Places and Time
The first is found every where almost, as well on the tops of Walls, as at
the foot, if there be any rubbish; and in untilled grounds also, but especially
in Gardens: the second is found upon Hills and Mountains: the third was found
by Myconus in Spain, and sent to Lions: the fourth grows by Wood sides, the
borders of feilds, and upon old Walls in many places; the fiift grows in
lopped Woods of Hungaria, and Austria, as Clusius says, and in barren and
untilled places: the last was sent to, Camerarius, out of Italy, The first
flowreth almost every Month as I said before, the second and fourth do both
come somewhat near unto the other, but are not so quick in their decaying; the
fifth and sixth, do flower only in Summer.

The Temperature.
Groundsell has mixed faculties; it cools and moisteneth, and withal
digesteth, as Paulus Aegineta writes.

The Virtues
The decoction of Groundsell (as Diosecrides says) being made in Wine and
d^unelpeth the pains in the Stomach proceeding of Choler by causing the
disaffected party to Vomit, which the juice hereof taken in drink, or the
decoction of the herb in ale with some currants, gently performs. It is said
to be good likewise against the Jaundise, and Falling sickness, being taken in
Wine, as also against the difficulty of making Water, it provokes Urine, and
expels Gravel from the Reins, a dram thereof, given in Oxymel after some
walking or stirring the body: It helps the Sciatica also, and the griping
pains of the belly called the Chollick. Some ^^re it with Vinegar as a ^allet,
accounting it good for the sadness of the Heart, and to help the defects of
the Liver; It is given also by Nurses to their young Children when they are
troubled with the Frets, as they call it, which is a distemper coming cheifely
from the Nurses milk being either too Windy or too Sharp, if a few Currants and
Anniseeds be stewed therewith: It is said also to provoke Women's Courses, and
some say also that it stays the Whites which Matthiolus says cannot be, in
that the one quality is contrary to the other: The fresh herb boiled, and made
into a Pultis, and applied to the Breasts of Women that are swollen with heat
and pain, as also to the privy parts of Man or Woman, the Seat or Fundament,
or the Arteries, Joints, and Sinews, when they are inflamed or swollen, does
much ease them: and ^sed with some salt helps to disolve the Knots or Kernels
that happen in any part of the body: The juice of the Herb, or, as Dioscorides
says, the Leaves and Flowers with some fine Frankincense in powder, used in
Wounds, whether of the body or of the Nerves and Sinews does singularly help
to heal them; and so does the down of the Heads used with Vinegar, as the same
Author says; but if it be taken in drink, it will choke any one. The
distilled Water of the Herb performs well all the aforesaid properties, but
especially for the inflammations of the Eyes, and watering of them by reason of
the defluxion of the Rhe^^e into them. It is much used to be given to tame
Rabbets when they are pot-bellyed through costivenesse to make them gaunt and
healthful.

CHAP. CI. Of Radish.
The Names.
IT is called Greek (...) and (...) Rhaphanos and Rhaphanis, (...) quod facile
apparet, from its speedy growing, for it shows it self speedily, some say
within three days after it is sown. It is called in Rhaphanus, Radicula, and
Radix, which last name is given unto it, quia quam pancissimis magnitudine
cedit, because it is one of the biggest roots that is, which though it may
seem somewhat strange here in England, yet in some places beyond the Seas they
grow to be of a wonderful highness, as Fuchsius reports. Some have called
the seed hereof Bacanon, and Bacanum, and others Cacanon.

The Kinds.
There be sundry sorts of Radish, whereof some be long and white; others long
and reddish; some round and white; others round or of the form of a pear and
of a blackish color, some wild, and some tame: As. 1. Garden Radish. 2. Small
garden Radish. 3. Round Radish. 4. Pear fashioned Radish. 5. Wild Radish. 6.
Water Radish.

The Form.
The Garden-Radish sends fotth great and large Leaves, green, rough cut on
both sides with deep gashes, not unlike to the Garden Turnep, but greater. The
Stalks be round, and parted into many branches, out of which spring many small
Flowers, of a light purple color, made of four little Leaves, after which
come sharp pointed cods puffed or blown up toward the Stalk, full of a spongious
substance, wherein is contained the seed, of a light brown color somewhat
greater then the seed, either of Turnep or Cabbage: The root is gross, long,
white, and sometimes reddish without, but white within always, and of a sharp
taste.

The Places and Time.
The four first are Inhabitants of the Garden, and require a loose ground
which has been long manured, and is somewhat fat. They prosper well in sandy
ground, which is naturally cold, where they are not so subject to worms as in
the other. The fifth grows upon the borders of banks and ditches cast up, and
in the borders of moist feildes. ^ The sixth grows in ditches,
standing-waters, and Rivers. The Garden kind^ are sown in February, and March,
and so long till you come to November, but the best time for sowing them is
June, and July for then they yield most, because then they will not flower nor
seed till the next spring, when as those that are sown sooner run up to seed
presently, yet they are more set by in April and May, then afterward. The wild
kinds flower in June and their seed is ripe in August.

The Temperature.
Radish does manifestly heat and dry, open and make thin, by reason of the
biting quality that rules in it. Galen makes them hot in the third degree,
and dry in the second, and shows that it is rather a sauce, then a
nourishment.

The Virtues.
The rindes of the Roots of Radish steeped in Vinegar and Honey, mixed
together, and taken in a morning fasting, and a little after a draught of warm
water, do drive our Phlegm and other malign humors of the Stomach by Vomit,
as often as it is oppressed with them. It likewise provokes Urine, dissolveth
clutteted gravel, and drives it forth from the Reins and Bladder, if a good
draught of the decoction thereof be drunk in the morning. It is good against an
old Cough to make thine, thick and gross Phlegm which sticks in the Chest.
The distilled Water hereof is effectual for the purposes aforesaid, provoking
Urine mightily, and driving out Stones from the Kidneys. The root also sliced
and laid over night in White or Rhenish-Wine, and drunk in the morning, works
the same effect. The root stamped with Honey, and the Powder of a sheep heart
dried causes the Hair to grow in a short space. The seed also causes Vomit,
provokes Urine, and being drunk with Oxymel or Honyed Vinegar, it kills and
drives forth Worms. The Root stamped with Meal of Darnel, and a little
White Wind Vinegar, takes away all black and blew spots, and bruised blemishes
of the face. The Root boiled in Broth, and the decoction drunk, is good against
an old Cough, it moves VVomens sickness, and causes much milk. It is good
likewise for the Dropsy, the griefs of the Liver, and for the Cholick, and
griping pains of the Belly: Being eaten with Mustard, it is good against the
Lethargy, drousiness and forgetfulness. It is good also for them that are sick
with eating of Toad-stools, or Mushromes, or Henbane, or any other venomous
poison. Some eat them raw with Bread, instead of other food, but being so
eaten, they yield very little nourishment, and that faulty, and ill. But for
the most part, they are used as a sauce with meats, to procure appetite, and so
they engender blood less faulty, and serve to distribute, and disperse the
nourishment; especially, if they be taken after meat: yet howsoever they be
taken, they cause belchings, and will make the meat oftentimes to rejolt in the
stomach, as the Countryman said, that had eaten Fish fried with Lamp-Oyl.

CHAP. CLII. Of the Black Alder-Tree.
The Names.
IT is most probable, that this Plant came not under the cognitance of any
Greek Author, because it is not named by any of them that I can read of. The
Latins call it Fraugnla, quia cito frangitur, that is, the Branches ^e
brittle, and easy to break, and Aluns nigra baccif^ra, that it might be known
from the Al^^s Vulgaris, whose Bark is whitish, and the Wood more red, and
bears not Berries as this does. Tragus calls it Faulbaum, that is, foul
Tree, of the evil scent and taste. The Idea ficus nostra, sive Frangula vulg^
of L^gdu^ensis, differs not from this, although he would have it so to do. It
is called in English, the Black Aller, or Alder-tree. Of which, there is but
one kind, whose description follows.

The Form.
The Black Aller, or Alder-tree, rises seldom to be of any great bigness; but
for the most part, abides like a Hedge, Bush, or Tree, spreading into
branches, the wood of the Body being white, and of a dark red at the core or
heart, the outward Bark being of a blackish color, whereon many white spots
are noted to be seen; but the inner Bark next to the Wood is yellow, which
being chewed, will turn the spittle yellow, as much, or more then Rubarb, near
unto a Saffron color: the Leaves are somewhat like unto those of the ordinary
Alder-tree, or those of the Female Cornel, or Dog-berry-tree, but blacker, and
not so long, but rather rounder, the Flowers are white, coming forth at the
Joints with the Leaves, which turn into small round Berries, green at the
first, and red afterward, but blackish when they are thorough ripe, divided as
it were into two parts, wherein is contained two small, round, and star Seeds:
the Root runs not deep into the ground, but spreads rather under the upper
crust of the Earth.

The Places and Time.
This Tree or Shrub grows in Woods and Copses that are moist. Mr. Gerard
says, that he found great plenty of it in a Wood, called St. John's Wood, in
the way between Is^^gton and Hornsey, on the left hand of the way, and in the
Woods at Hampstead, and other places about London. It flowreth in May, and the
Berries are ripe in September, the Leaves appearing in the Spring.

The Temperature:
The inner Bark of the Alder-tree, which is of the greatest use, if not only
used in Physic, is of a purging and dry quality.

The Virtues and Signature.
The inner Bark aforesaid, which is of a yellow color, being steeped in Wine
or Beer, and drunk, causes to vomit vehemently, and cleanses the stomach. It
does also purge downward, both Choler and Phlegm, and the watery humors of
Hydropick persons, and strengthens the inward parts again afterward, even as
Rubarb does: If it be boiled with Agrimony, Wormwood, Dodder, Hops, and some
Fennel and Small^ge, Endive and Chicory Roots, and a reasonable draught taken
every morning for some time together, it is very effectual against the
Jaundise by Signature, the Dropsy and evil disposition of the Body;
especially, if some purging Medicine have been taken before, to avoid the
grosser excrements; and then it not only purges, but also strengthens the
Liver and Spleen. cleansing them from such evil humors and hardness as they
are afflicted with: I^^s to be understood, that these things are performed when
it is dry; for if it be ^ken inwardly before it be dried, the superfluous
moisture will cause extraor^^nary vomiting, pains in the stomach, and gripings
in the Belly: yet if the decoction thereof be made, and suffered to stand, and
settle for two or three days, until the yellow color be changed black, it
will not work so strongly as before, but will strong then the stomach, and
procure an appetite to meat. Being boiled in Vinegar, it is an approved remedy
to kill Lice, to cure the Itch, and take away Scabs, by drying them up in a
short time. The same is singular good to wash the Teeth, to take away the
pains, to fasten those that are loose, to cleanse them and keep them sound.
Though the inner Bark be so purgative, as you heard before, yet the outermost
does bind the Body, and is helpful for all Lasks, and Fluxes thereof; but this
also must be dried first, or else it will not work so effectually. The Leaves
are reported to be good Fodder for Cattle, especially for those that give milk,
which they breed exceedingly.

CHAP. CLIII. Of the Oily Nut-Ben.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Balanus Myrepsica, that is, Glans Vnguentaria,
which name is also attributed to Myrobolanes, only this has Troglodytes added
to it to distinguish it from them; yet Theophrastus calls it only (...),,
which signifies an Acorne, but why no body knows; neither the fruit it ^e^e,
nor shell, nor husk, being like to any of the kinds of Acornes: It is called by
Lobel, Glans unguentaria, Cathartica, Siliquata, but we in the^e days call it
more usually in Latin Nux Ben, and the Oil thereof Ole^^ ^^ Ben or as the
Ancients called it Oleum Balaen^num, and in English, The Only Nut Ben, of which
there is but one kind mentioned by any Author, therefore, in the next place, I
shall present you with.

The Form.
The Tree whereon this Nut grows, for the first two or three years springs
up, and perishes in Winter again to the root, and ^riseth again afresh every
Spring, but after it becomes three or ^our year old, it grows more Woddy:
It rises up yearly after the first, with one sleeme shooting forth branches
of ^inged Leaves, or rather winged branches of Leaves, the Bark being whitish
as the Leaves are also, but they are composed after such an order, as no other
tree is, for the branches rise up with the stem or body, divided into sundry
other smaller twigges no bigger then rushes, set with two Leaves at several
spaces distant far a sunder, ending in small points like hairs; but have no
eyes or buds, at me feet of the Leaves, as the small branches of other trees
have: The Leaves first fall away, leaving the branches bare, which then show
like unto ordinary or Spanish Broom, when it has lost the Leaves, and after
them the Stalks likewise perish unto the very stem; The root is thick, long,
White, and Tuberous, as ^^ were, yet ending in some sprayes being not much
woody, but rather fleshy and tender: It has not been known to bear flowers or
fruit in our Christian Countries, but the Nuts or fruits, such as have been
brought over to us enclosed in their husks, as also out of their husks, grow
some single, and some two together in an husk, the lower and upper end whereof
is small and sharp pointed, being about an hand breadth long in all, round and
of a dark Ashcolour on the outside, and somewhat reddish on the inside of the
substance of leather, lither or easy to bow, tugged on the out side with many
long streakes in it, but smooth on the inside: The Nuts themselves are three
square for the most part, covered with a whitish soft and somewhat tough Woody
shell, where^n the white kernel lies, which is not altogether insipid. but
somewhat sharp in taste, and oily with all, causing a kind of loathing upon the
tasting almost ready to provoke vomiting; out of which is pressed an Oil, like
as is out of Almonds, and not from the Shells or husks, as some formerly
supposed.

The Places and Time.
This Tree grows in Syria, Arabia, Aethiopia, and India, where it brings
its fruit to perfection, which it has not been known to do in Europe, no not
so much as to blossom, as I said before.

The Temperature.
The whole Nut is of a very purging quality: The dry pressing after the Oil ^i
taken out, is of a cleansing as well as of a cutting quality, and, by reason
that the moisture is taken from it, of a drying effect also: The Shells or
Husks are of an exceeding binding property, fit to be used when occasion
serves for such purposes.

The Virtues.
The Kernells of the Nuts aforesaid being bruised, and drunk with Water and
Vinegar mingled together, does purge the body from gross, and thin Phlegm
also, and thereby is helpful to those that are troubled with the Wind-Cholick
if a few Anniseeds, and Fennel seeds be put unto it; the oil that is drawn out
of the Nuts does the same also, and provokes Vomiting, and cleansing the
Stomach of much foul matter gathered therein; yet the Nut it self does much
trouble the Stomach in the mean time; but if it be toasted at the fire, it
loses much of that evil quality, oftentimes causing them to purge downwards
only: It is to very good effect also given in Glisters for the same purposes.
The Oil dropped into the Ears, helps the noise of them, and the deafness
also; a dram of the Kernel taken in Posset Drink, does soften and dissolve the
hardness of the Spleen and Liver, the remainder of the kernel after the Oil
is pressed from it helps the Itch, the Lepry, and running sores, and takes
away the ruggedness of the Skin, Morphew, dry Scabs, scarres, freckles,
wheales or pimples from the face or body, especially if it be used with Vinegar
and Niter, with which it well agreeeth and performs the Cures, much better;
it is also used with the meal of Orabus or bitter Vetch, or the meal of
Darnel: in manner of a plaster to be laid to the side to consume the spleen;
it helps the Gout also, being used in the fame manner; Used with barley meal
it comfort the Sin^wes that are pained with cold, and all Spas^^es or
Cramps; and used with Honey, it dissolveth all knots and hard-swellings. The
Oil that is pressed out of the Nuts, is also much used of Perfumers: for
although it have no sweet scent of it self to commend it; yet it is of so
excellent a quality, that being kept never so long, it will not grow rank, and
therefore it does both preserve the sweet smells of Musk, Civet, Ambergrise,
and the like, mixed with it, and keeps the Gloves, Leather, and other things
that they shall not admit of any spots, or stains; or ever grow moldy as those
things which are perfumed with Oil of Almonds, will do, then which it is much
fitter also to receive any sweet thing to be steeped in it for retaining the
scent thereof, for being utterly without sent it self, and not growing rank
by long keeping; the scent of any thing will be sooner infused, and longer
retained.

CHAP. CLIV. Of Sena.
The Names.
IT is generally held by all good Authors, that this Plant was not known to the
ancient Greek or Latin Writers, as Dioscorides, Theophrastus, Galen, Pliny,
etc: though some imagine it was. And the Arabinas, who were the first
discoverers of its Virtues, call it Sena, but Hermolaus calls it Senna. There
is a bastard kind hereof called in Greek (...), and in Latin Colutaea; of
both which I shall entreat in this Chapter.

The Kinds.
There being but two sorts of true Sena, I have added five more of the bastard
kind called Colutaea which make seven in all, As. 1. Sena of Alexandria. 2.
The Sena of Italy. 3. Ordinary bastard Sena, with bladders. 4. The great
scorpion podded bastard Sena. 5. The less Scorpion bastard Sena. 6. Small Sea
bastard Sena. 7. Ever-greene bastard Sena of Valentia.

The Form.
Sena of Alexandria which is that true Sena which is used in the shops grows
not, as is supposed, higher then a cubit with slender branches, set with many
Leaves together on a rib like unto Liquorice, being narrow and pointed, which
being dried and brought over unto us, if they be fresh, will smell very like
unto new made Hay: the Flowers stand at the tops of the branches* one above
another of a yellow color, after which come crooked thin husks fashioned
somewhat like an halfe-Moone: in the middle part whereof, (the skins of the
husks growing so close together, that they can hardly be parted) grow flat
seeds, very like unto Grape kernells, but of a blackish green color, and
somewhat flat; the whole plant perishes (as it said) every year, and therefore
must be new sown of them that will have it.

The Places and Time
The first grows (as it is generally thought) in Arabia Faelix, and in Syria
also as some say, and brought to Alexandria in Egypt, as many other things
are, and from thence transported into this, and many other Countries. The
second, as Matthiolus says, was in his time frequently sown in the Duke of
Florence, his Dominions in Italy. The third, and fourth, grow about Trent
plentifully, and are kept in many Gardens, with us, as the Physick-Garden at
Oxon, etc: The fifth grows at the root of certain hills near the Alps,
amongst the hedges and borders of the Vineyards about Danubius. The sixth
grows near the Seashore by Teracinum. The last was found by Clusius in the
fields of Salamanca, as also in the Kingdom of Granado and Valentia, in sundry
bottomes of the hil^^: the two first flower in the Summer months, but in Italy
it must not be sown until May. The rest flower, in June and July.

The Temperature.
The Leaves of Sena, which are only in use, are a little inclining toward the
first degree of heat, but more then the third in dryness; It is of a purging
faculty and that by the stool in such sort, as it is not much troublesome to
man's nature, having withal a certain binding quality, which it leaves after
the purging.

The Virtues
Sena opens the inward parts of the body which are stopped, and is
profitable, against all griefs of the principal members of the body, amongst
which, the Stomach is deservedly reckoned, and therefore it not only cleanses
it but comfort it also, especially if some stomachicall helper, as
Anni-seed, Caraway-seed, or Ginger, be put with it; for Mesue says, it hurts
the Stomach, but Monardus, and Matthiolus deny that it can do so, because Sena
has somewhat a bitter taste, partaking of heat and dryness, all which qualities
are known rather to strengthen the Stomach, then to trouble or weaken it: It
does also purge Melancholy, Choler and phlegm from the Head and Brain, the
Lungs and Heart, the Liver and Spleen, cleansing all those parts of such evil
humors, as by possessing them, ^re causes of those Diseases incident unto
them, if a dram thereof be taken in Wine or Ale, or Broth fasting: It
strengthens the senses both of sight and hearing, and procures. mirth, by
taking away the inward humor, and is useful in madness, the Frenzy, etc. It
is given also in all Headaches, and Palsies, the Falling Sickness, and foul
Diseases of the Skin, as the Scab* Itch, Leprosy, etc. It is very profitable
in the Obstructions of the Spleen, and Hypochonders, and against hard swelling
thereof: as also in Chronicall Agues, whether Quartan, or Quotidian. It causes
a fresh, quick, and lively habit of the Body, and cleanses, and purifieth the
Blood. The Lie wherein Sena and Camomile Flowers have been boiled, is commended
for weak Brains, to comfort and strengthen them, if the Head be washed
therewith: the same Lie is very profitable for the Sinews that are stiff with
cold, or shrunk with the Cramp. Sena likewise is a special Ingredient among
other things put into a bag, to make purging Ale or Beer, fit to be taken in
the Spring of the year, not only for the Diseases aforementioned, but also to
cleanse the blood from all sharp humors, mixed or running therewith. The
Bastard Sena purges vehemently; both upwards and downwards, not without great
trouble to the Stomach and Bowels, avoiding tough Phlegm and Choler: the Seed is
more forcible in each of those qualities; and therefore is said, to avail in
pains of the joints, yet it is seldom given but to strong Bodies, when no
better purgers are at hand. Theophrastus says, it fatteneth Sheep wonderfully,
and therefore much used in those Countries where he lived, but as seldom proved
in ours.

CHAP. CLV. Of Daffodills.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), in Latin Narcissus, from their Narcotick
quality, which in Greek is called (...), or of the Fish T^rp^d^, called in
Greek (...), which benumeth the hands of them that touch him, as being hurtful
to the Sinews, and bringing dullness to the Head, which property belongs to
the Narcissusses, or Daffodills, whose smell causes drousiness, as Pliny and
Plutarch affirm. And this I take to be the right Etymology of the word, though
I am not ignorant of what the Poets have written hereof, especially Ovid, who
describes the transformation of the fair Boy Narcissus, into a Flower of his
own Name, saying,

Nus(...) corpus ^rat, croc^^^ pro corpore florem
Inveniunt, foliis medium cingentibus albis.
As for his Body none remained, instead whereof they found
A yellow Flower with milk-white Leaves, new sprung out of the ground.
The Kinds.
G^rard reckons up fifteen Sorts of Daffodills, as 1. Purple circl^d
Daffodill. 2. Timely Purple-ringed Daffodill. 3. More timely Purple-ringed
Daffiodil. 4. The very hasty flowring Daffodill. 5. The late flowring small
Daffodill. 6. Primrose Pearls, or the common white Daffidill. 7. French
Daffodill. 8. Italian Daffodill. 9. The double white Daffodil of
Constantinople. 10. Milk-white Daffodill. 11. Rush Daffodill. 12. Late flowring
Bush-Daffodill. 13. The Persian Daffodill. 14. The great Winter Daffodill. 15.
Small Winter-Daffodill. The sixth sort of Daffodil is that which is most common
in Country Gardens: the description whereof follows.

The Form.
The common Daffodill has long, fat, and thick leaves, full of a slimy juice;
among which rises up a bare thick stalk, hollow within, and full of juice. The
Flower grows at the top, of a yellowish white color, with a yellow Crown, or
Circle in the middle. The Root is white, and of a Bulbus or Onyon fashion, yet
not without diverse effects by which it is propagated.

The Places and Times.
The Daffodills with Purple Coronets do grow wild in sundry places of France,
but chiefly in the Meadows of Burgundy and Switzerland. The Rush-Daffodill
grows wild in Spain, among Grass and other Herbs in some watery places. But
it mattereth not much, to seek out their places of growing wild, seeing they
are most of them to be found in our English Gardens about London, and
elsewhere. The common white Daffodill grows wild, in fields, and sides of
Woods in the West parts of England. They flower for the most part in the
spring, that is, from the beginning of February, unto the end of April. The
Persian and Winter-Daffodills, do flower in September and October.

The Temperature.
The Roots of Narcissus are said to be hot and dry in the second Degree.

The Virtues.
Besides the Ornamentall use of Daffodils for decking Garlands and Houses in
the Springtime, it has many Physical properties: amongst which, there is
none more eminent, then that the Roots thereof do move Vomit, whether they be
eaten or drunken; and being stamped and strained, and given in drink; they help
the Cough and Cholick, and those that be entered into a Ptisick. If two drams of
the Root newly gathered, be boiled in Wine or Water, with a litt^^ Anniseed or
Fennel-seed and a little Ginger, and drunk, it drives forth by sto^, tough and
clammy Phlegm, and to help all Diseases that come thereof. The same taken with
Honey, and the Seed of Nettles, purges the Disease, which causes those spots
in the Body, called Ephelis and Alphus. And their qualities in drying are so
wonderful, that they glue together very great wounds: as also rifts, gashes, or
cuts that happen about the veins, sinews, and tendons. They have also a certain
wiping, cleansing, and attracting faculty. Being stamped with Honey, and
applied Plaister-wise, they help them that are burnt with fire, and are
effectual for the great wrenches of the Ancles, the Aches, and pains of the
joints. The same stamped with Barrows-grease, and Leaven of Rye-bread,
hasteneth to suppuration, hard Impostumes, which are not otherwise easily
brought to ripeness. Being stamped with the Meal of Cocle and Honey, it draws
forth Thorns and stubs out of any part of the Body; and being mingled with
Vinegar and Nettle-seed, it takes away Lentills and spots in the face. There
are besides the sorts aforementioned, the double yellow Daffodill, and the
common yellow Daffodilly, which purge by stool, tough and phlegmatic humors,
and also waterish, and is good for them that are full of crudities; especially,
if there be added thereto a little Anniseed and Ginger, which will correct the
churlish hardness of the working. The distilled water of Daffodils does cure
the Palsy, if the Patient be bathed and rubbed with the said liquor, by the
fire, as has been proved by that diligent searcher of nature, Mr. Nicholas
Belson.

CHAP. CLVI. Of White Hellebore.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and sometimes (...) without the aspiration, quod
cibum corporis cripiat, because it deprives the Body of nourishment, in Latin
also Elleborus albus and Elleborum, and also Helleborus and Helleborum, and
Veratrum album; Veratrum, quod mentem vertat, or rather, a verando, because it
cures them that are counted mad, which were formerly called Veratores, and
Veraculi; and album, to distinguish it from the black, this being white, in
respect of that: In English it is called Hellebore and Neese-wort, because it
provokes Neesing.

The Kinds.
And of this Hellebore there are eight varieties that present themselves. 1.
Ordinary white Hellebore, or Neesing Root: 2. The early white Hellebore, with
dark red Flowers. 3. The great wild Hellebore, or our Ladies Slipper. 4. The
small white Hellebore, with a white Flower. 5. The small white Hellebore, with
blush Flowers. 6. Wild white Hellebore, with whitish green Flowers. 7. Wild
white Hellebore, with dark red Flowers. 8. Variable wild white Hellebore.

The Form.
The ordinary white Hellebore rises at the first out of the ground, with a
great round whitish green head, which growing up, opens it self into many
goodly fair large gre^^ Leaves, plaited as it were with eminent Ribs all along
the Leaves, compassing (...) another at the bottom; from the middle whereof,
rises up a strong round stalk, with diverse such Leaves, but smaller, to the
middle thereof, from whence to the top it is divided into many branches, having
many small yellowish, or whitish green Star-like Flowers, all along upon them,
which after turn into small, long, three-square whitish Seed, standing naked
without any husk to contain them: the Root is reasonable thick, and great at
the head, having a great many white strings running down deep into the ground,
whereby it is strongly fastened.

The Places and Times.
The two first sorts grow in sundry places of Germany, and Austria, as Clusius
says: as also in some Islands of Russia, where, as Tradescant the elder says,
the ordinary sort grows exceeding plentifully. And, if I mistake not, of this
sort was that Hellebore that grew in Anticyra so abundantly, that if any one
seemed to be troubled with melancholy, it was presently proverbially said unto
him, Naviga Anticyram, intimating that there was Hellebore enough to cure him:
the other sorts grow many of them in our own Land, as well as beyond Sea,
namely, the third, fourth, and sixth, especially the third in a Wood called
Helks in Lancashire, near the Borders of Yorkshire. The first flowreth before
the second* though it spring earlier out of the ground, being not in Flower
until the end of July, the rest flower about May, some earlier, and some later.

The Temperature.
The Root of white Hellebore is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
The Root aforesaid taken without preparation of the Body, works very
strongly, and churlishly, provoking extreme vomiting: yet that being dieted by
the advice of some learned Physician (without whom the meddling with it will
prove dangerous) it is good for them whose constitutions can endure the working
of it, causing much tough viscous, clammy, and corrupt humors that offend the
stomach, to be avoided; for which purpose the Oxymel Helleboratum may be
administered with least danger, a while after the Patient has eaten somewhat.
It is useful against madness and melancholy, also against the swimming in the
Head, Falling Sickness, Leprosy, Cancer, Elephancy, and soul diseases of the
Skin: as also the Quartane Ague. It brings down the Courses, and kills the
Child in the Womb: it he^ps the old Cough, Dropsy, Sciatica, Gout, Cramp,
pains in the Joints and Sinews. It kills Mice and Rats, being boiled in Milk,
or mingled with Flower, and Honey, or Butter, or boiled in Milk, and set where
Flies, Wasps, Gnats, etc. do much resort, it kills as many as touch it. It is
used also to provoke s^eesing, being put into the Nostrils, and purges the
Head of superfluous humors, and is good in the Lethargy, and such like sleepy
Diseases, especially, if some Leaves of Matjerome in Powder be put to it. It
cures the Leprosy, Scab, I^ch, and such like foul Diseases of the Skin, being
used in Hog's Grease, or mixed in Ointments. The juice of the Root dropped into
the Ears, helps the noise and singing thereof; and being boiled in Lie, and the
Head washed therewith it kills and helps the running Scabs and Sores
thereof* boiled in Vinegar, and the mouth washed therewith, it eases the
Toothache: The same decoction helps Itch, and Scabs in the hands, and
cleanses ^oul Sores and Ulcers in the Legs and other parts, and put into
Fistulaes, it takes away the hardness of them. A Pessary made thereof and put
up, brings down the Courses and dead Child. It is given in decoction in
infusion, and in substance; in decoction or infusion from a dram, to two drams*
in substance, from ten grains, to a scruple. The lesser wild sort are not known
to be used in Physic.

CHAP. CLVII. Of purging Cassia.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Cassia Nigra, from the black pods wherein it
grows, and in Latin Cassia Fistula Cassia, or Cassia solutiva: It is called
Cassia, as some think from the Greek word (...). Quod cori^c^um vocant, because
pods are like Leather; or as others conceive, from the swe^^ness of the
Flowers, like unto Cassia Aromatica, or Odorata. It is in English called
Pudding-P^pe, because the, Cod is like a Pudding.

The Kinds.
Heretofore there was known but one sort of purging Cassia; but now there is
another called Purging Cassia of Brasil.

The Form.
The purging Cassia Tree, grows to be a Tree of a large size, or bigness,
whose Wood is solid and firm, yellowish toward the sap, or outside, and
blackish like Lignum Vitae at the heart, covered with a smooth, soft, and
ashcoloured bark, very like unto the Wallnut-Tree: the Branches are not very
great, and but thinly stored with winged Leaves, consisting of eight or ten
lesser, for the most part five standing on each side of the stalk, without any
odd one at the end: the Flowers are yellow and large, many growing together on
a long stalk, and hanging down, consisting commonly of four, and sometimes of
five Leaves, with many greenish threads in the middle, standing about a long,
slender, crooked umbone or Horn, of a very sweet scent, especially in the
morning before the Sun shine upon them; but grow weaker in smell, as the Sun
grows hotter: The small Horn in the middle of the Flower, grows to be the
pod, which is first green, then purple, and afterward black, being of diverse
sizes both for length and greatness, some a foot, and some a foot and half
long, and some longer, with a hard, round, woody wrinckled shell, not very
thick, nor very hard to break, with a seame as it were, or a list all along the
back, and another small one over against it on the other side, which cau^eth it
to be easily broken into two parts by the middle, long ways and distinguished
inwardly into many skinny wood-like partitions: on both sides of which, grows
a lost, black substance, sweet like Honey, which is that part only, which is to
be used; between the said partitions, lie round and flat gristly Seed, of a
dark brownish color: the Roots are great, and grow deep in the ground: the
choice of the best Cods is, that they be moist within, and that the Seeds do
not rattle, when they are shaken.

The Places and Time.
India is conceived to be the natural place of the first, and that it was
brought thence into Syria, and Armenia, and from thence into Egypt, where they
p^ant it in their Orchards, and afterward into Arabia, where the use of it was
first discovered. Most of that which is spent in Europe, is brought from
Hispaniola, where the Spaniards have planted abundance of them: The other
grows in Brasil, whence it was brought into these parts. The first
flourishes chiefly in June and the fruit hanging upon the Tree all the year,
is gathered much about the time of the flowring; for the Tree holding his green
Leaf all the Winter, has usually both blossoms and green fruit, and ripe all
at one time. The time of the other is not yet known.

The Temperature.
Cassia Fistula is hot and moist in the first Degree.

The Virtues and Signature.
Cassia being taken with Rubarb, and a few Anniseeds and Liquorish, to correct
the windiness thereof, clean^eth the Stomach, Liver, and Mesentery Veins from
Choler and ^^egme, clearing the b^ood, and quenching the heat thereof, and is
therefore profitable in all hot Agues and Fevers. It is a^o profitable for
such as are troubled with the Pleuri^^e and Jaundi^e, or heat of the Liver,
mixed with convenient Liquors. It is good likewise for the heat of the Reins
and Kidneys, and brings forth the Stone with Gravel, being also a good
preservative against it, if it be taken with a decoction of Liquor^^e and
Parsley Roots. It is very effectual against all Rheums, and sharp
distillations, and against cholet^ck and melancholic Diseases. It is also
often used in all kinds of pectorall Diseases, as old Coughs, shortness of
breath, wheesings, and the like, if it be taken with Agarick, as some advise.
Being outwardly applied to those that have the Gout; it eases the pains
thereof, and is a good Gargle to assuage and mitigate the tumors and swellings
of the Throat. It is used in Plasters and Ointments against hot Pimples; and
other eruptions or breakings out of the Skin and to take away the roughness
thereof* It is a safe Medicine, and may be given to Women with Child, and all
other persons at any time, except to such as have moist, weak, and slippery
Bowels, yet given with Spicknard, Mastick, or H^era picra, there is little
danger, especially to the Guts, to which Cr^llius does appropriate it by
Signature, there being some simil^tude between them. The young Cods taken
whilst they are small and green, boiled a little, and then said in the shadow
a while to dry, and after boiled in Sugar, or Honey, does purge the Body, as
the pulp or black substance, and is a delicate medicine for tender and weak
stomachs, that abho^^e all other Physic; and hereof the usual quantity is 3,
or 4. Ounces, to be taken at a time by elder persons, and an Ounce by the
younger. The other sort of Cassia, which grows in Brasil, is more effectual
in purging, then that of Hispani^la; for it has been tried by experience, that
one Ounce hereof is as forcible as two Ounces of the other, and is as effectual
for all the aforesaid Diseases.

Having thus largely insisted on those simples which purge the Stomach, both
upwards, and downwards, to which purpose there^re diverse other which might be
added, (were they not treated of in the Antecedent pa^^ of this work) as Aloes,
Agarick, Asara-Bacca, the Rinds of Wallnuts, the Seeds and Flowers of Dill, the
Roots of Betony, etc. and also some of those which are reserved for the
subsequent part, as the Roots and Seeds of Orrach, the Flowers of Peaches, the
middle Ba^k of Elder and Dane-wort, the Seed of Rocket, etc. most of which are
very windy, and troublesome to the stomach, unless some corrective means be
used, I shall therefore in the next place, set down such correctors as have not
been yet handled, Anniseeds, Mastick, Cinnamon, Fennel-seed, Raisins, etc. being
already spoken to.

CHAP. CLVIII. Of Carawayes.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Caros and Carum in Latin, or Carui, as it is in
the Apothecaries Shops. Simeon Sethi, calls it Carnabadion, others Careum,
and Car^^m; which names it took, as Dioscorides says, from the Country of
Caria, from whence it was first brought. We call it Caraway, and Carawayes in
English.

The Kinds.
Most Writers have set down but one kind of Caraway, yet there being two other
Herbs that nearly resemble it, I shall put them together as others have done
before me. 1 Ordinary Caraway. 2. Mountain Caraway. 3. Meadow Caraway.

The Form.
The ordinary Caraway bears diverse stalks, of fine cut Leaves, lying on the
^round, somewhat like to the Leaves of Carots, but not bushing so thick, of a
^^^tle quick taste in them; from among which, rises up a square stalk, not so
high as the Carrot; at whose joints are set the like Leaves, but smaller and
finer, and at the top, small open tufts, or umbels of white Flowers, which turn
into small blackish Seed, lester then the Anni^eed, and of a quicker and hotter
taste: The Root is ^^hicish, small, and long, somewhat like unto a Parshep, but
with a more wrinkled ^^^k^, and much less, somewhat of a little hottish taste,
and quick also, and stronger then a Pars^ep, abiding after Seed-time.

The Places and Time.
The first, though it be sown in our English Gardens, yet it is said by
Tragus, to grow wild in Germany, in many places in the fields, and by the way
sides: the second was found on the Pyrenean Hills, and the last in the Fields,
and Meadows of Germany, as Tragus says also. They all flower in June or July,
and their Seed is rip^ quickly after.

The Temperature.
The Seed of Caraway, which is most used in Medicines, is hot and dry, as Galen
says, almost in the third degree, having withal a moderate sharp quality.

The Virtues.
Caraway-Seeds eaten alone, or mixed with any Aliment or Medicine, are very
pleasant and comfortable to the stomach, breaking Wind, and helping digestion.
Matthiolus says, in Germany they are used to be put whole into bread, and to
spice men, as they are in Italy and; and if the use of them among Us were more
frequent, those which are troubled with Wind, would receive a great deal of
benefit from them, they being also very conducible to all the cold griefs of
the Head, as well as the Stomach, the Bowels or Mother, as also the Wind in
them. The ^^mfir^ made hereof, are by some people used when they eat Apples, or
other Fruit, to break windiness of them; and to that end, they are also mixed
with those purging Medicines which would otherwise afflict the stomach by their
windiness, being one of the four greater carminative Seeds. It is said, that
the said Seeds quicken and clear the Eyesight; especially, if they be powdered,
and sprinkled upon hot Barley-Bread, the Eyes being held ^ver the Vapor
thereof. It also provokes Urine, helps the Cough, and is good against the
Frenzy, and venomous bitings. Being put into a Poultis, it takes away black
and blew spots of blows, or bruises; and with Allo^^, if helps Scabs and
Tetters, and the falling off of the hair. The Herb and Root are also in use:
the one to be eaten raw in Sallets, with other Herbs, or boiled in them, and
the other to be boiled only, and eaten as Parsneps, then which they are said
to be better, in as much as Parsneps cause Wind, but the^e break it, and are
pleasant and comfortable to the stomach, helping digestion. The Herb it self,
or with some of the Seed bruised and fried, laid hot in a bag or double Cloth
to the lower parts of the Belley, does ease the pains of the Wind-Cholick, and
is good against hot swellings.

CHAP. CLIX. Of Cummin.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and in Latin also Cuminum, and Cyminum; the
ancient Authors as Dioscorides, Theophrastus, etc. made hereof many kinds,
calling them from the sundry Countries where they grew, as Aegyptium; (...)
Syriacum, etc: Yet it is confidently held they were not differing in (...), but
in loci (...); for although one sort of seed was rough or hairy and white, and
called Cuminum Aethiopicum, which Hippocrates called Regium as the best;
another not rough or hairy, called Aegyptium: not that they were several
sorts, but that one was better then another, as the Country gave it goodness
or excellency. In English it is called Cumin, and C(...).

The Kinds.
Besides the Syrian, Egyptian, and other Cumins which many good Authors make
to be but one kind as I said before, there are three other which I shall join
to it; 1. Ordinary Cumin; 2. Small sweet Cumin of Malta; 3. Great sharp Cumin
of Malta. 4. Wild Cumin.

The Form.
Ordinary Cumin grows up with tender and low Stalks, not above half a yard
high, growing white at the last, and brancheth o^^ more, having store of Leaves
which are small and long, like unto Fennel: The Flowers are somewhat reddish at
the tops of the Stalks, which turn into small whitish yellow food, somewhat
long, and almost round, crested or straked on the rounder side, and swelling
strong; The root is small, long, and white, perishing yearly.

The Places and Time.
The three first grow familiarly in the hot Countries, as Spain, and Italy,
and the Isles of the Mediterranean Sea, whereof Malta is one, and in Syria, and
the other East Countries where it is sown; It seldom comes to good here in
England, unless the year be kindly, and then it must be sown in the middle
of the Spring, howbeit it will be late with us (though in the aforesaid
Countries it be not so) before it be ripe. The last grows plentifully in
Narbone, about A(...) Sextias, and other places of France, and is sometimes
fowne in our Gardens; but seldom comes to maturity.

The Temperature.
Galen says, that Cumin-seed is in the third degree of heat, and in the same
degree almost of dryness, and as Dioscorides says, it heateth, binds, and
dries, but Dod(...) us insisteth there against, showing that it does discuss
humors by attenuating and digesting them, and does not repress them by binding
or astriction.

The Virtues.
Cumin-seed is also another of the sour great Carminative-seeds, and therefore
it dis^olveth Wind in any part of the body, and eases the pains of the
Chollick, being boiled in Wine and drunk and is used as a Corrector, of any
Windymeat or Medicine. For one that has a Stinking breath, if it proceed of
corrupt ^umes, ris^ng from the Stomach, it may be use^ thus; Take two handfulls
o^ Cuminseed, and boil it in a pottle of good White Wind, till half be
was^ed, then streine it, ^^^ drink it (...) (...)ning, for fifteen days
together, and last at night also, half a pint at ^ime, hot or cold ^^^ helps
(...) that are bitten by Serpents taken in the same manner. The same taken in
Beete or Posset drink, is good for those th^^ are short-winded, or are
otherwise troubled with an old Cough, or the disease of the breast, to boil
the same with Figs in Wine. It is also very useful in the Dropsy called
Tympany, and in Giddiness^ of the head. If it be used often; it is said to make
the party look ^^l^, and therefore it was in great request in the time of the
Monks and Fr^^rs; that thereby their bodies might seem the more mort^fied. It
is said also, that it any one that ^^th eaten Cuminseeds, do breathe on a
painted face, the fictitious color will vanish away straight; being used in
bread or meat, it gives a re^lish to them, and therefore it both was, and yet
is in sundry places amongst the poorer sort, substituted instead of Pepper,
being pleasing as well to the Stomach as the ^ast. Boiled in Water, and they
are washed therewith, it causes the face to be cleaner and faires, so (...) it
be used now and then, for by (...) often using it causes P^le^^sso, and
therefore may be of request with those that are high colored. Being boyle^ in
Wine* and so made into a Pultis, it quickly takes away the swelling of the
Codds, caused by any Wind or Waterish humor, if it be applied thereto with
B^^ty Meal, and so it does all other cold pains or swellings. It stops
also bleeding at the Nose, being mixed with Vinegar and smelt to, and being
used in the same manner, is rest ^aineth V^miting; and if it be boiled in
Water, and the lower part^ b^thed therewith, it stays the abounding Courses
of Women; Bruised and fried with an hard Egg, and laid to the (...) of the
Neck, it eases an old headache, and stays the ^^e^me that falls into the
Eyes, or are bloud-shorten; or else the Powder mixed with Wax into the some of
a Plaster, and applied to the Eyes, will soon help it, and take it away.
Being applied to the belly, with Wine and Barley meal boiled together in the
form of a Poultis, it eases the gripings and torments of the belly. Being
quilted in a little bag, with a small quantity of Bay Salt, and made hot upon
a Bed^^n, with fire or such like, and sprinkled with good Wine Vinegar, and
then applied to the side very hot, it takes away the Stitch and pains
thereof, and eases the Plurisy. The herb and likewise the root, are of little
or no use. The seed of the Wild Cumin is also effectual against either the
Windiness of the Stomach or of the Belly and B^wells, which brings
Tormenting pains, and swellings with it, being taken in Wine, and expels
the Poison of any Ven^^^us Beasts: It is good for moist Stomachs that are
troubled with raw cr^de humors; taken with Vinegar, it flayeth the Hickcok:
and if it be applied with Honey and raisins to the face or other place that is
black or blew by strokes it will take them away.

CHAP. CL. Of Camels Hay.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), a loris et fanibus dicitur; (...), odoratus: and
of some (...) unguentarius, because it is romtimes used in Ointments; in Latin
Juncus, a jungendo. Some do call it Schaenanthes, quasi Schaenianthos, flos
junci, and corruptly in Shops Squin a^thum. Some also call it Juncus Odoratus
Retundus, to difference it from the sweet Cyperus; which is called Juncus
odoratus angulosus vel triangularis. It is also called Palea de Mecha, and
Pastus Camelorum: in English, the sweet smelling Rush, or Camels Hay.

The Kinds.
Of this sweet Rush, there be two sorts, a finer and a co^^ser, or thetr^^, and
a bastard kind, although the ancients have mentioned but one sort, which is the
finest and truest.

The Form.
The finer sort of Camels Hay growing in these parts; has many tufts or heads
of long rush-like Leaves, thick set together, one compassing another at the
bottom, and shooting forth upwards; the outermost whereof are bigger or
grosser then those that grow within, which are a foot long and better, small
round and stiff, or hard and much smaller from a little above the bottom of
them then any rush with us, of a quick and spicy taste, somewhat pleasant, and
of a fine sweet gentle scent: It flowreth not with us, yet in some places which
are the most natural to it, it bears strong, round, hard joynted Stalks,
having diverse, short, brownish or purplish husks on the top, containing within
them, mossy, whitish, short threads or hairs, wherein lies a chaffy seed; the
root is stringy or full of long fibers which are very hard, as they are brought
to us, which have the smallest scent of any other part.

The Places and Time.
They grow naturally in Arabia, Syria and Mesopotamia, and all that. Tract of
the Eastern Countries, as also in some places of Africa, whence they ^e
brought by the Merchants, and sold to our Druggists, who furnish the
Apo^^^^^i^s with them, at whose shops they may be had. It comes not to
flowr^^g in these ^older Countries, and therefore Clusius and others have
thought it an annual Plant, but assuredly it dies not every year in those
hotter parts, it flowreth in the Summertime.

The Temperature.
C^^^l^ Hay is hot and dry in the second degree having in all the parts thereof
some kind of astriction, but especially in the roots.

The Virtues.
The Decoction of the Flowers of Camels Hay being drunk, as Dioscorides
writes, is very effectual for the diseases and greifes of the Stomach, Lungs,
Liver and Reins, as also for the curing of those that spit blood. The same
Author likewise affirms that it provokes Urine and Women's (...)ses,
discusseth all Swellings and Wind, but is somewhat offensive to the head: it
gently cutteth or breaks humors and digesteth them and looseneth the
breathing places of the Veins. It is good also against Poison, and the Venom
of Serpents, and therefore it is a good ingredient in Antidotes used for that
purpose. A dram thereof taken with a like quantity of Pepper every morning
fasting for certain days together, is very effectual for those that have a
loathing in their Stomachs to meat, and is a very good remedy for the Dropsy,
and for Convulsions or Crampes: The same also is good against the Wind-Collick*
Phlegm, and raw matter in the body, or any member of the same, the powder
thereof being drunk with Wine. The decoction thereof being sat in, by women
that are troubled with the Mother, profits very much; for as Galen says it
opens obstructions, digesteth crudities, expels corrupt humors, cutteth
tough Phlegm, and consumes congealed matter in the body, and therefore it is
of excellent use, for the stopping of Urine or Women's Courses (as is said
before) taken either in drink or by fomentation, and being so applied, it also
allayeth the inflammations of the Liver, Stomach, and other parts of the body.
The whole Plant is used to be boiled in the broth of a Chickin, as very
hellpfull to ease the pains of the Womb, that Women feel after childing;
and the Powder thereof is singular good for those that are troubled with s^^^s
in their (...) or any (...) Ulcer: Being taken with Wine and Vineg^r, it is
effectual for those that have an Ulcer in their Stomach, if the Stomach or
(...)y be fomented with the decoction thereof, for so it takes away all
Inflammation therein, and ^as^th the pains that proceed from thence.

CHAP. CLXI. Of Ginger.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and in Latin Zingib^ris and Zingiber, and
Gingiber^s, and Gingiber, in English Ginger; all which words no doubt come from
an Indian Original, the plant coming from that coast, and is followed by all
other Nations, as nee^e as their Language will permit as Tobacco ^^d Hys^^ are,
the one having in Indian; the other ^n Hebrew Original.

The Kinds.
There be but two sorts of Ginger, that I can meet with, and the first is the
East India Ginger, with a white flower, and Leaves like unto a flower de Luce
having a white root. The second is the ^rasil* Ginger with the Black root.

The Form.
East India Ginger grows with Leaves, like unto the Water Flagge, or Come
Flagge: the flower is somewhat like unto that of the flower-de-luce; the pods
and seed also being not much unlike the pods and seeds of the same; the roots
do likewise spread very much underground in a fashion not much different from
the roots of the beforementioned Plant. This is the best description I can
present you with at present, it being a difficult thing to describe in words
the true proportion of those Plants whose forms we could never have the
happiness to see, having received them only from the relations of travelers,
who very much differ.

The Places and Time.
The first grows, as Garcias says, in all the Countries of the East Indies,
either planted by the root or sown of seed, especially in China and Bengala,
where it is often preserved green, and sent into the European Countries. The
black Ginger which has Reed like Leaves grows in Spain, Barbary, in the
Canary Islands and the Acores, and likewise Hispani^la near Santo Domingo. It
flourishes in the hot time of the Summer, and loses his Leaves in Winter.

The Temperature.
Ginger heateth and dries in the third degree.

The Signature and Virtues.
Oswaldus Cr^llius a great Philosopher and Hermeticall Physician in his book
of Signatures, does give the Signature of Ginger, to the Stomach* for which
questionless there is nothing better then it, whether it be taken simply of it
self, for expelling the VVind and Coldness thereof, or whether it be used in
Composition with such ingredients as are Windy and hurtful to the Stomach: For
it warmeth a cold Stomach helps digestion and dissolveth VVind both there,
and in the Bo(...)s. Being ground on a Whetstone into a fair B^son, and as
much salt put thereto, both which being well mixed and tempered with
White Wind, and the^ suffered to settle for twenty four hours, and afterward
the clearest being put into a glass, and the Eyes anointed therewith cleereth
the sight thereof, and takes away the pin and w^b therein: Being boiled in
Honey and Vinegar, and put into a tooth that is hollow, it eases the pains
thereof, and so it does likewise if it be boiled with Ground Ivy in Wine, and
the mouth held over the fume thereof, and the teeth be rubbed with the Ginger;
or else burn Ginger, black Pepper, and salt, of each a like quantity in a
linen clout, and lay a little of the Powde^ on a linen cloth, and apply it
to the Tooth. It is also very effectual to stop the Courses of (...), if it be
laid hot on coals with Bay Leaves and Savine* and the fume thereof be received
through a tunnell in a close chair. Being boiled with as much Enulacampana in
fair water to the one half, and then stamped and strained, and a third part
of Honey boiled and scummed, put thereunto, and an Electuary made of it; and a
good quantity thereof, taken morning and evening helps the Chine-Cough. The
Powder of Ginger, Liquorice, and Sugar mixed with the yolke of an egg and a
little salt, being warmed in the shell, and eaten fasting, is very good to
clear the Breast, and consequently the Voice. Being mixed with black Soap* and
anointed upon the place that is troubled with a Tetter or Ringworm, it will
kill either of them. It is very good to be used in all manner of Sawces* and
Co^ditures, for so it withstandeth s(...)ning, and corrects the rawnesse of
the Stomach* looseneth the belly and helps digestion. Green Ginger being
preserved, provokes lust, digesteth meat, warmeth the Stomach, and dries up
the moisture that comes by eating of fruit. It is good for the Phlegm of the
Lungs, the old Cough, shortness of breath, and all cold griefs; impeneth
Obstructions, helps digestion, and appetite, and expels gross humors and
Wind. Whilst the blade is fresh, it is used by the Indians in Sallets and
likewise in their broths and meats, and to these ends they cut it every
sortnight.

CHAP. CLV. Of Galanga.
The Names.
I Cannot find that this simple is so much as mentioned by Dioscorides, or any
other Greek Author, no nor by few Latin Authors, which makes me imagine that
it was not in use in Europe, till these later times, nor so much as known, so
that the Greek name thereof, may not be expected. It is called in Latin
Galanga, and by the Chinois, from whose Country it is brought to us, Lavandon,
and by them of Java, Lane^az; in English it is called Galanga, but commonly
Galingale.

The Kinds.
There be only two sorts of Galanga mentioned by Authors. 1. The greater
Galanga. 2. The lesser Galanga.

The Form.
The Greater grows to be two cubits high, having Leaves folding about the
Stalk being somewhat long, and narrow at the lower end, and pointed at the end
somewhat like a Spears head, of a sad green color on the upper side, and
paler underneath; The flower is white, but without any scent, the seed is small
and neglected; the root is somewhat great at the head, like a reed, and has
been thought by some to be a kind of Iris, being of a blackish color on the
outside, and whitish within. The lesser arises not above a foot high, having
Leaves like the Myrtle, the root is small and bunched, firm, and somewhat
tough, red both within and without, and smells a little sweet or aromaticall.

The Places and Times.
The first grows in Java, and Malaber, being Countries of the East Indies.
The other in China* concerning the time I find, not any Author that makes
mention.

The Temperature.
Galanga is hot and dry in the second or third degree.

The Virtues and Signature.
This Galanga is also set down by the aforementioned Crollins to have the
Signature of the Stomach, and from thence it has been found to be exceeding
profitable in all cold diseases of the Stomach, by helping its concoction, and
expelling Wind, and Crudities from it, and strengthening it, if it be boiled in
Wine and taken Morning and Evening. It does also very much comfort and
strengthen a moist bram, helps the Vertigo, or swimming of the Head, and avails
against the palpitation or beating of the Heart, and is very useful in the
gnawing of the stomach, and eases the Cholick, which proceeds of Wind, and
in the Diseases of the Mother, and stopping of the Urine, and has a speedy
operation to cleanse the passages thereof, from slimy phlegm, and stones
gathered therein, or in the passages at the neck of the Yard and also to wast
and consume any fleshy excrescence in the neck of the Bladder or Yard. Besides,
it not only provokes to Venery, but helps Conception; so that there cannot
be a better thing for those which desire to supply their want of Children; for
it is profitable for them that have cold Reins, and excellent for them that
have cold and windy distempers of the Womb. Being boiled in Wine, and so taken,
it helps a stinking breath, and dissolveth the hardness of the Spleen. There
be also to be had at the Apothecaries Shops, both a Powder and Electuary, whose
chief Ingredient is Galingall, both which prevail against Wind, sower
belchings, and indigestion, gross humors, and cold Diseases of the Stomach and
Liver. You may take half a dram of the powder at a time, or two of the
Electuary in the morning fasting, or an hour before meat. If Galingall be
drunk with the water or Juice of Plantane, it stops the Bloody Flux, and
strengthens nature, comfort the Brain, and helps the trembling of the
Heart. Both the sorts abovementioned, may be used to good purpose in Meats, as
well as Medicines; but the lesser is both of more use, and of greater effect,
and indeed is to be used only in all the Compositions wherein Galanga is
appointed yet, when the one is not to be had, the other may be and is used. The
best is full of small holes.

CHAP. CLXIII. Of Cardamomes.
The Names.
THey are called in Greek (...), in Latin Cardamomum, in imitation of the
Greeks, who gave it that denomination from the likeness of it to Amomum, and
the virtues thereof, it being very profitable for that Disease of the Stomach,
which is called (...), for the affinity that the veins belonging to the mouth
of the stomach, have with the heart, and because being slit in two, it
represents the form of the Heart. In Shops, Grana Paradisi. In English,
Cardamomes, after the Greeks, but commonly Grains, or Grains of Paradise.

The Kinds.
Whosoever shall observe the Cuts in Gerard, may collect from thence, that
there are five sorts of Cardamomes. 1. The greater Cardamomes of the Arabians.
2. The greater Cardamomes of the Shops. 3. The middle sort of Cardamomes. 4.
The lesser Cardamomes. 5. The least Cardamomes.

The Form.
Cardamomes grow by the report of the learned, upon an Herby Plant of the
height of one Cubit, not unlike in substance, to the Herb that bears Ginger:
whereupon does grow a great Cod or Husk, in shape like a Fig, when it grows
upon the Tree; but of a russet color, thrust full of small Seeds or Grains, of
a dark reddish color, as may be plainly seen when it is divided, and of a very
hot taste.

The Places and Time.
They grow in all the East Indies, from the Port of Calecute unto Cananor; it
grows in Malavar, in Joa, and diverse other places. They spring up in May,
being sown of Seed, and bring their fruit to ripeness in September.

The Temperature:
Cardamomes are hot and dry in the third Degree, having in them an astringent
faculty.

The Virtues.
The Seeds called Cardamomes, or Grains of Paradise, are generally received to
be of admirable efficacy for that distemper of the stomach, called the Cardiack
passion, in which it is very prevalent: and indeed the Cods, wherein the Seed
is contained, have some similitude with the stomach. It is also very useful,
when the stomach is not able to perform the Office of digestion, or when the
appetite has any need of provocation, and likewise for the suppressing of
vomiting, when either of them proceed of a cold cause, if so be it be only
chewed in the mouth, and so it draws forth watery and phlegmatic humors,
both from the Head and Stomach. It is in like manner profitable against the
Falling Sickness, the Sciatica, the Cough, resolutions of the Sinews, Ruptures,
pains of the Belly, killing of Worms, and provoking Urine, being drunk with
Sack; and so it not only comfort and warmeth the weak, cold, and feeble
stomach, but helps the Ague, and riddeth the shaking fits. A dram of
Cardamome-Seed, drunk in Wine, with as much Bark of Laurel, breaks the Stone,
and being mixed with Ale, wherein Time and Parsley have been boiled, and then
strained, it is a good remedy for the Chollick. It is a good Spice for Women,
that are troubled with any grief, particularly belonging to that Sex. It
provokes Urine, when it is stopped, or passes with pain, resists poison,
and the sting of Scorpions, and other venomous Creatures. It expels Wind
powerfully from other entralls, as well as the stomach, eases those that by
falls or beatings, are bruised and broken, and those that are tormented with
the Sciatica or Hip-Gout; and being boiled in Vinegar, or sleeped therein and
used, it is good against Scabs and Tetters. The Powder of it put into the nose
comfort the feeble brain; or if it be put with the Oil of Musk, in an
Eggeshell, till it boil, and then anointed therewith. It is said by some, to be
the chief of all Seeds.

CHAP. CLXIV. Of Pepper.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), either a (...) coquo, quia calor ejus
concoctricem facultatem adjuvat, because it helps concoction, or from (...)
Ignis, because of the eminent heat that is therein; In Latin Piper, In English
Pepper. Some call the Pepper of Aethiopiae, Piper Aethiopia, Piper Aethiopicum,
Amomum, Vita longa, and Cardamomum, whereof they hold it to be a kind.

The Kinds.
Of Pepper there be these five sorts mentioned by Authors. 1. Black Pepper. 2.
White Pepper. 3. Long Pepper. 4. Pepper of Aethiopia. 5. Matthiolus his Pepper.

The Form.
The Plant that bears the Black-Pepper, as also the white, grows up like a
Vine among bushes and brambles where it naturally grows; but where it is
mannured, it is sown at the bottom of the tree Gausel, and the Date Trees,
whereon it takes hold, and climeth even to the top, as does the Vine, ramping
and taking hold (but not with tendrells as the Vine does) of any other thing it
meets withal: It is full of Joints, and shoots forth fair, and somewhat
large Leaves, one at a Joint, being almost round, but ending in a point,
greener above and paler underneath, with a great middle ribbe, and four other
ribbs somewhat lesser, spreading from it two on each side, and smaller veins
therein also unto the edges, which are not dented, but smooth and plain, not
thick, but somewhat thin, and set on a pretty long footstalke: The Fruit or
Pepper it self grows at the same Joint, but opposite to the Leaf, and not
between the Stalk and the Leaf, as some have falsely set it down, round about
a long Stalk, somewhat thinly set along thereon: The root has sundry Joints
creeping in the ground, with fibers at the Joints,

The Places and Time
Black and White Pepper grow in the Kingdom of Malavar, and that very good: in
Malaca also, but not so good; and also in the Island Sunde and Cude; there is
great store growing in the Kingdom of China, and some in Cananer, but not
much. Pepper of Ethiopia grows in America, in all the tract of the Country,
where Nata and Carthago are situated. These Plants rise up in the beginning of
the Spring, and the fruit is gathered in August.

The Temperature.
It is hot and dry in the third degree or near the fourth, of an heating or
dissolveing quality.

The Virtues.
The Black-Pepper is most in use, and is good in sawces to give a good taste to
meat, to provoke appetite, and help digestion; but they are all used to warm
cold Stomachs, and to consume crude and moist humors therein, or distilling
from the Head: They also help to break and dissolve Wind in the Stomach or
Bowels, to provoke Urine, to he^p the Cough and other diseases of the breast,
and are effectual against Poy^on and venomous bitings, either of Serpents or
other Vermin, and are therefore put into Antidotes. ^reacles, and other
pre^ervative. The same drunk before the ^t of a Fever or Ague in Posset Drink,
or laid to or anointed outwardly with Oy^e, abareth the rigor and shaking
thereof, and wastes the swelling of Quinsy, if it be taken with Honey. That
Pepper which is taken inwardly, must not be beaten very small, for fear of
inflaming the blood, and other profitable humors of the body, but in outward
applications, there is no danger; The Powder thereof snifted up into the nose
provokes sneezing, and purges the brain of all superfluous moisture, and so
it does likewise, if it be eaten with Raisins. It he peth also the dimnesse of
the sight by consuming the Pin and Web or any other excrescence that shall
molest it. It does very much strengthen the Nerves and Muscles consuming the
watery moisture that causes shaking in them by its heat, and therefore it is
that Macer says thus of it. For an Ague,

Quodque movere solet frigus periodica febris
Compescit, febris si sumiturante tremorem.
It does assuage the fits that Agues make,
If that you use thereof before you shake.
It dissolveth the Kings-evill, Kernells, Wens, Hard cold swellings, and
draws forth Thorns, Shards and Splinters, if it be applied with pitch. A
Cawdle made with Vine-Leaves, hard Eggs, and Pepper, stays the bloody Flix;
and the Powder of long Pepper, and the roots of Cinckfoile, drunk in Ale
eases the Chollick. It eases the Toothache being tied in a Clout, and chewed
on. It is best for moist and co^d Constitutions, but in dry bodies it consumes
the seed, and burns the blood, if it be immoderately used.

CHAP. CLXV. Of the Nutmeg-Tree.
The Names.
IT was not known to the ancient Greek Writers, Dioscorides or Theophrastus, no
nor to Galen or Pliny, for although some have thought it might be Galen his
Chrysobalanos, yet they are far away therein. The latter have called it (...)
in Greek, from the sweet scent that it yields; and in Latin Nux Aromatites;
and Nux Myristica for the same reason; and Nux Moschata, as if it were a Moscho
which we call Musk in English. The Mace that grows also upon this Tree is
called in Latin Macis, but in Banda where they grow the Nutmeg is called
Palla, and the Mace Bunapalla.

The Kinds.
The Nutmeg-Tree, and so likewise the fruit are of two sorts, as has been
exactly observed by Clusius, and by him called Mas and famina, the Male and the
Female; which last is that which is most in use with us, and therefore take its
description as follows.

The Form.
This Tree is said to be very great, and as tall almost as our Peare-Trees,
spreading many branches which are green* whilst they are young, having fair
broad Leaves ^et thereon somewhat like unto the Orenge-Tree-Leaves, set on a
short stalk unequally on the branches, and abide always green thereon: The
fruit (for the Flowers have not been observed) grows at the end of the young
branches which are as big as Peaches, standing singly for the most part on a
thick fat stalk having an outward thick husk furrowed in the middle, which
divides it self into two parts, and growing ripe opens it self, showing
the Nut within, covered with the Mace cut into several pieces, as it were of
an orient crimson color at the first opening, but is afterward changed by the
air to be more dead, and yellowish as it is when it is brought to us, besides
which it is covered also with a black thin hard shell, which being broken, the
Nutmeg it self appears.

The Places and Time.
They both grow in the East Indies, but especially in an Island called Banda
(whence some have called the Nut Nux Bandensis) and in the Islands of Molucca
also, though not so good as the first, as neither be they that do grow in
Zeilan. The time of flouring is not specified, but the fruit is ripe in
September.

The Temperature.
Nutmegs are hot and dry in the second degree, and somewhat astringent. Mace is
hot in the second degree and dry in the third.

The Virtues.
Nutmegs do not only heat, but strengthen the Stomach that is cold and weak,
especially the mouth of the Stomach, withstand Vomiting, and take away the
Hicket. It is good likewise against the pain and windiness of the belly, and
stoppings of the Liver and Milt, and being patched or dried at the fire, it
stops the Laske, especially being taken with red Wine. It is also very
profitable for the Mother, Kidnyes, and Bladder, helps them that piss by
drops, especially when the grief comes of a cold cause, and is good for other
secret griefs both in Men and Women. The powder thereof mixed with the Oil of
Mints, and the forehead and temples anointed therewith, is good against the
coldness of the head and dullness of the memory. It is used in Cordialls, and
wholesome receipts against coldness of the Liver, stopping of the M^lt, the
Dropsy, Vomiting, Headache, Swellings, Bloody Fluxes; it comfort the Veins
and Muscles of cold and old people, it makes the breath sweet, and helps the
trembling of the Heart, it breaks and expels Gravel from the reins and
bladder, especially being first steeped in the Oil of sweet Almonds. Being
taken last at night in a Cawdle of Almonds or Hempseed, it procures sleep,
and is the best Spice of all other, for students, being taken in drink. Nutmegs
condited, as they may be had at the Apothecaries, are excellent also for
Students, being very comfortable both to the Head and Stomach. The Oil hereof
does likewise comfort the Stomach that is cold, but the frequent use thereof is
not good, especially for those which are of a sanguine complexion. Mace is in
Virtue almost like to Nutmeg, and does stop the Laske, the bloody Flux, and
women's Flowers. It helps the trembling of the Heart, and is much better for
all cold griefs, then Nutmegs: the Oil of Mace laid on the Stomach cures the
infirmity thereof, and the wambling, and disposition to Vomit. The powder of a
Pomegranate, large Mace, long Pepper and Sugar, being drunk with Posset Ale or
Malmsey or other broth sodden together, is an approved remedy for the black
Jaundies. Being used in Meats it causes such as are lean to grow fat, and is
good for cold Husbands that would have Children, as Nutmegs also are, and in
broths or milk: it is very good to be drunk against Spitting of Blood,
Fluxes, Vomit, and the Chollick. Oil of Mace is good for the Cough.

CHAP. CLXVI. Of Coriander.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and (...), and so in Latin also Corion, and
Corianon; but usually Coriandrum, being derived from the Greek word (...) which
signifies that kind of noisome Worm, which breeds in some Walls and
rotten-Wood, and is called a Wall-louse or puny in English, whose stinking
smell, Coriander does much imitate. We in England call it Corionder and
Coliander.

The Kinds.
Though former Ages would allow of but one sort of Coriander, supposing there
had been no more, yet these aftertimes have testified that there are three
sorts of it. 1. Ordinary Coriander. 2. The lesser sweet Coriander. 3. The
stinking Coriander.

The Form.
The ordinary Coriander is a very stinking herb, having a round stalk, full of
branches, which are about two foot in length when they are at their full
growth, whose Leaves at the first coming up are somewhat broad, very like unto
Parsley, which afterward are smaller and finer, every one then the other up to
the top, where stand small loose Vmb^lls of white Flowers, turning into round
striped hallow seed, of a whitish yellow color, when it is ripe; and of a
pleasant scent or savor when it is dry, but not before. The root is hard and
of a Woddy substance but dies when the seed is ripe; which being suffered to
fall, will increase mightily.

The Places and Time.
The two first, seeing their natural places are not yet manifest, are said no
where to be found wild, but are by us now, as they were by the Ancients
formerly, sown in Gardens. The last was sent from Barcinona to Lions, by
Myconus to Molinaus, who has set it forth in Historia Lugdunensi. They do all
flower in Jun^ and July, and their seed is ripe about the later end of August.

The Temperature.
The green and stinking Leaves of Coriander are cold and dry, very naught,
unwholesome and hurtful to the whole body, if they should be taken inwardly,
and so are the seeds as long as they are green, but being steeped in Vinegar
and dried, or only dried, they are moderately hot and dry, and very convenient
for several purposes as you shall hear.

The Virtues.
Simeon Sethi, with whom many other learned Authors do agree, affirms that
the Seed of Coriander is mavelous good for the Stomach, not only retaining
the food until it be thoroughly digested, but withal does strengthen and
enable it to do the same. The prepared seeds being covered over with Sugar as
comfits and taken after meat, are of great efficacy to close up the mouth of
the Stomach, to stay Vomiting, help digestion, to repress Vapors, that
ascend from the Stomach to the Head, and are likewise good for those that are
troubled with Rheumes. The same do very much prevail against the Gout, being
taken in some small quantity before dinner, upon a fasting Stomach, and after
dinner, and after Supper the like, without drinking, within two or three hours
after. The seeds only being taken in Wine do bring forth Worms, stop the
Laske, and bloody Flux, and all other extraordinary issues of blood. It
resists forcibly, the pains of the Wind Chollick* and the stopping of Urine.
It is said that for so many seeds as are drunk thereof so many days shall the
Courses of that ^oman that drinks them cease, as the following verses do also
intimate;

Xenocrates inquit, totidem cessare diebus
Menstrua, quot mulier Coriandri grana vorabit.
The powder of the seed cast upon Meats causes them to digest the better, and
with sweet Wine it moves lust and increases the natural seed, if it be taken
moderately, but too much use of it breeds the Phrensy and raging, and is
hurtful for such as have the headache, falling sickness, and swimming of the
Head. The said powder boiled with Rue in water of Mints, and held in the mouth
after it is cold, helps the Uvula or Palate of the mouth being fallen down,
the juice of the herb taken inwardly, is deadly both to man and beast, yea the
smell only of the herb kills Fleas, if it be laid where they are. The green
herb boiled with Crumbs of Bread or Barley meal, consumes all hot swellings and
inflammations, and with Bean meal dissolveth the Kings evil, Wennes, and
hard Lumps. The juice of the Leaves mixed and labored in a leaden Mortar, with
Ceruse, Litharge of Silver, Vinegar and Oil of Roses, cures St. Anthonies
fire, and takes away all inflammations whatsoever.

CHAP. CLXVII. Of the Orenge-Tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), the fruits whereof, as is thought, were known
unto the Ancients, and by them called Aurea mala Hesperidum, because in those
days they grew hardly any where else; and were therefore guarded by a
watchful Dragon which Hercules slew, and brought with him some of the said
fruit, which is by diverse Latin Authors called Aurantia a corticis color
aureo; and by others Arantia* ab Arantia oppido Achaiae* and by some Pomum
Narrantium; by Dodonaeus, Anarantium; and by Lobel, Malum aureum, which name is
most suitable to them being Golden apples indeed. The flowers of the Orange are
called Napha, and the Ointment made of them, Vnguentum ex Napha.

The Kinds.
There are five sorts of Orange Trees. 1. The ordinary Orenge-Tree. 2. The Wild
or Crab Orenge-Tree. 3. The Apple Orange. 4. The Orange without Seeds. 5. The
dwarf Orenge-Tree.

The Form.
The grafted or ordinary mannured Orenge-Tree grows to a great stature* the
lower part of which as also of the greater branches are covered with a rough
bark but those which are lesser and younger, have a smooth green bark whereon
are set some few sharp, but short thorns. The Leaves are very like in form to
those of the Laurell-Tree, but may be easily distinguished, if they be bruised
between ones finger, for then they sent forth a sweet smell, like unto the
peele of the Orange, and likewise by being full of small holes; the Flowers are
whitish, and of a very strong sweet scent. The fruit hereof is round with a
thick bitter rind, of a deep yellowish red color* having under it a soft
white loose substance, and under that the juice is contained in small skins,
which in some is less sower then others. The seeds of it do somewhat resemble
those of the Lemmon.

The Places and Times.
All the sorts above named do grow in the Coasts of Italy and the Islands
thereabouts, but especially in Spain about Sivil, where the best Orenges grow,
and are called by us Civil-Orenges, under which name the Women in London that
sell any, comprehend the rest calling them all so, be they what they will.
There be also Orenge-Trees that grow in England in the Gardens of the Earl of
Northumberland at Sion-house near Brainford, and of the Lord Lambert at
Wimbleton. They hold their Leaves always green and bear blossoms, green and
ripe fruit all the year through; but here in England the fruit will be two
years, before it come to perfection. And to make it do so, the Trees must be
set in great Boxes full of earth, so that they may be removed into the house in
the Wintertime.

The Temperature.
Orenges are not wholly of one Temperature: for the rind is hot in the first
degree, and dry in the second; the juice of them is cold in the second degree,
and dry in the first. They are colder or hotter according to their sweetness
or sowreness for the sowrer the juice is, the colder it is; and the sweeter,
the more hot.

The Virtues
Orenge-Peele is as useful in Physic as any part thereof, though it be
commonly cast away as if it were good for nothing, yet it does warm a cold
Stomach very effectually, helping to break the Wind that molesteth it, and
causes cold Phlegm to be voided from thence. And being condited or preserved
with Honey or Sugar it warmeth the Stomach, mendeth a stinking breath, and
helps digestion, and is used in Banquets with other sweetmeats, being also
very effectual for the strengthing of the Heart, and Spirits. The juice, and
inner substance where the juice is, is very good against all contagions and
corruptions of the air, the Plague, and other hot Feavours; it comfort the
Heart, and especially the Mouth of the Stomach, and helps the weakness
thereof. It is also profitable against the trembling of the Heart, pensive
heaviness, and Wambling of the Stomach; it restrains Vomiting, and takes
away loathing in Agues and such like diseases, it quenches thirst, and so does
the Syrup thereof. The seeds withstand all Venom and Poison, and are
effectual also to kill and expel Worms. The Ointment that is made of the
Flowers is often used to anoint the Stomachs of those which are troubled with a
Cough, making the cold raw Phlegm to expectorate, and warming and comforting
diverse other places of the body. The distilled Water of the same Flowers is
very odoriferous, and therefore fit for perfumes: Besides it is good against
contagious diseases to drink thereof at sundry times, it helps also the cold
and moist infirmities of the Mother. Such simples as serve both for the
correction of Meats and Medicaments being thus treated of, I shall in the next
place write of those that are more alimentall, and therefore not improper to be
mentioned here, beginning with fruits, and then proceeding to Roots and Herbs.

CHAP. CLXVIII. Of the Apple Tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and the fruit (...), in Latin Malus and Malum,
Pomus and Pomum, which in English is an Apple.

The Kinds.
To reckon up the diverse sorts of Apple Trees, and their fruits, would take up
more room then we allot for a whole Chapter. I shall therefore set down only
some of the principal. 1 The Summer Peare-maine. 2 The Winter Peare-maine. 3.
The Summer Queening. 4. The Winter Queening. 5. The Jennetting. 6. The
Pome-water. 7. The great Pippin. 8. The small Pippin. 9. The Harvy Apple. 10.
The Gillofloure. 11. The Marigo^d. 12, The John Apple. 13. The Paradise Apple.
14. The Wilding or Crab: of which there is the Town Crab, the greater and
lesser white Crab, the small Hedge Crabbe.

The Form.
For formality sake only, I shall tell you that the Apple Tree does genera^ly
spread his Arms and Branches more then the Peare-Tree, but rises not to that
height: the Leaves are somewhat round yet pointed at the end, and dented about
the edges, being green both above and below; the Flowers are White with some
Red many times mixed with it, especially about the edges. The Fruit is of
diverse sizes, forms, colors, tastes, etc: within which being ripe, be diverse
black Kernells; the Root goes straight down with some branches running aslope.

The Places and Time.
All the sorts aforesaid, and a great many more, grow either in Orchards as
being mannured, or else Wild in Woods and Hedg-rowes, especially in Kent,
Gl^cester and Herefordshire, where they make abundance of Cydar. They commonly
Flower about April, and the fruit of the Summer kinds is ripe about the
beginning of July, and the rest in September, or thereabouts.

The Temperature.
Apples are cold and moist in the first degree, as Mr. Elliot an ancient
English Author alleges. Howbeit, there is great difference in Apples, for
some be sweet, some be sour, some be bitter, some harsh, some be of a mixed
temperature, both sweet and sour, etc: The sweet and bitter Apples are
inclining to heat, the sour and harsh are cooling, and therefore good when the
Stomach is weak by the distemperature of Heat.

The Virtues.
Though Apples eaten before they be ripe, or afterward immoderately and
without preparation, are very unwholesome, yet being gathered when they be full
ripe, and eaten with discretion, they are very commodious to such as have hot
Stomachs, to strengthen the same, and to make good digestion, and if they be
offensive to any through windynesse, they may be corrected with Ginger, Caraway
Comfits, Fennell-seed or the like, how ever the danger will be the less, if
they be roasted, baked, or stewed, either of which ways they may be presented
at the Table or elsewhere. They are also profitable in hot diseases, both of
the Stomach and Heart, qualifying the heat of each with their pleasant
moisture. Being roasted and eaten with Rose Water and Sugar, and those of the
pleasanter kinds, as Pippins and Pearemaines, they are helpful to dissolve
Melancholy humors, to expel heaviness, and procure Mirth, and are good
against the Pleurisy, if three or four grains of Olibanum be roasted in one of
them, and so eaten. And if they be roasted and eaten with the Juice of
Liquorice and Sugar, morning and evening, two hours before meat, they
wonderfully help those that are troubled with the Cough, or any pain in their
Breast. They are also good for those that loath their meat or are given to
Casting. The Pulp of four or five roasted Pomewaters labored in a Wine quart
of fair water, till it be like Lambs-Wooll, and drunk last at night cures
those that piss by drops, and helps all other diseases proceeding of the
difficulty of making Water, at the second, if not at the first taking. The
aforesaid Apples give the denomination to that Ointment called Pomatum, which
is of much use to soften and supple the roughness of the skin, and take away
the chaps of the lips, hands, face or other parts. The Juice of Pippins and
Pearemaines are used also in compositions to mend the qualities of Medicines
that are dry, as S^rapium ex pomis regii saporis, Antidotum ex Granis Cocci
Baphici, id est, Confectio Alkermes, which last is a mighty strengthner of the
Heart and Spirit Vital. The Pap of an Apple with Rose Water applied to the
Eyes does quench the burning and takes away the redness of them. An Apple
roasted in the Embers, and mixed with butter and honey, or the yolke of a boiled
egg, and applied is good to ripen any Impostume whatsoever; being fried in
Virgins Wax and eaten as hot as they can be suffered, they stay the bloody
Flux. The Blossoms of Apples are not only the most convenient food for Bees,
as being of a very delicate smell, but are also useful for those which are
troubled with a red Nose and face, they being distilled in Balneo Mariae, and
the face washed morning and evening with the Water. The Leaves boiled and given
to drink in hot Agues and where the heat of the Liver and Stomach causes the
Lips to break forth, and the Throat to grow dry, harsh, and surred, it is very
good to wash and Gargle it withal, and to drink down some. Cider which is the
juice of many Apples pressed forth is of singular good use in the heat and
faintings of the Stomach, and against Casting or Vomiting, a Posset being made
therewith, or some of it taken by it self. It is of great use at Sea in long
Voyages, and is more desired then Perry by Vintners, who since French Wine has
been so scarce, mingle it with a little French Wine, and sell it instead
thereof. The juice of Crabs which we commonly call Verjuice, applied with wet
clothes to such places as are burned and scalded, cools, heals, and
draws the fire out of them. A rotten Apple applied to Eyes that are blood
shotten or enflamed with heat, or that are black and blew by any stroke or
fall, all day or all night, helps them quickly. The distilled water of good
sound-Apples, is of special good use to expel Melancholy, and to procure
Mirth: and that of rorten ones cools the heat and inflammations of sores,
and is good to bath soul and creeping Ulcers, and to wash the face to take
away spots freacles, or other discolorings of the face. The inner yellow
bark, either of Apple Tree, or Crab-Tree boiled with Allom, causes those
things that are put thereinto, to be of an yellow color.

CHAP. CLXIX. Of the Peare-Tree.
The Names.
THat which is mannured is called (...) in Greek, and sometimes (...) with a
double (...) and in Latin Pirus and Pyrus, because of the similitude of its
form with that of a Pyramid. The Wild-Peare, is called (...) in Greek, as
being of no use having its derivation from a privativa, and (...) Utor, and
indeed is of very little use: yet Dioscorides says, that (...) is is a
particular sort of Wild-Peare, and that the general name is (...) in Latin
Pirus Sylvestris, and Pyraster or Piraster. The Wardens are called V^lema.

The Kinds.
There are says a late Author, 400 or 500 several sorts of Pears, and
consequently of Peare-Trees, so that to set them all down would be very
tedious, yet I shall not think it amiss, to name a few. 1. The Jennetting
Pear. 2. St. Jeames Pear. 3. The Windsor-Peare. 4. The Burgamet-Peare. 5. The
Quince-Peare. 6. The Bishops-Peare. 7. The Katharine-Peare. 8. The
Green-field-Peare. 9. The Winter-Peare. 10. The Warden. 11. The Choke Pear.
12. The Hedge-Peare. 13. The Lowsy Hedge-Peare. 14. The Crow Wild-Peare.

The Form.
The Peare-Tree is for the most part higher then the Apple Tree, having boughs
not spread abroad, but goweth up in height: the Body is many times great, and
the Wood of a yellow color, the leaf is somewhat broad, finely nicked on the
Edges, green above, but somewhat whiter underneath; the Flowers are white, the
fruit is for the most part long, and in form like a Casting-Top; but in
greatness, color, and taste, very much differing among themselves having
contained in them black kernells when they be ripe: The Root grows after the
same manner, as that of the Apple Tree does.

The Places and Time.
The mannured kinds are Planted in Orchards, and Gardens, both as Standards and
Wall-Trees. The biggest that ever I saw of them growing against a Wall was in
the Garden of the Earl of Northumberland at Sion, near Brainford, whose
branches extended themselves after a very wonderful manner. The Wild sorts are
found in Woods and Hedges in Kent, Worcester, and Herefordshire. The Flowers do
for the most part come forth in April, the leaves afterward: Pears are not
all ripe at one time, some of them being ripe in June, some in July* others in
August, and diverse in September, and later.

The Temperature.
Pears are also said to be cold and moist in the first degree, and have in
them a binding quality, and an earthy substance; the Choak-Peares and those
that are harsh, being more earthy, and the sweet ones less.

The Virtues and Signature.
When Pears are unripe and raw they engender Wind, and so cause the Colic;
but if they be roasted, baked or stewed, they are not unwholesome. And eaten
after meat being ripe and well gathered, they close up the mouth of the Stomach
and forti^^e digestion. Being boiled with a little Honey they help the Stomach
very much that has any pains or oppression therein. The sweet and lushious
sorts do help to move the belly downwards more or less, and therefore may be
eaten moderatly that by those are costive: Those that are harsh and sour do on
the contrary part, bind the belly as much, and therefore are good to be eaten
of those that are troubled with the Laske or bloody-Fluxe, but with moderation
also, for all excess is dangerous. The Ward^n is cheifely, yea only admitted
to be taken by those that are sick and aguish, being first baked, stewed or
roasted in that it has no a^^riction therein to breed obstructions which are
the utter enemies to putrid Fevers: and indeed it deserves commendation above
all the rest, both because it may be preserved longer, and is more ami^able to
the nature of man. Pears applied outwardly, are effectual for hot tumors, and
green wounds* if they be laid to at the beginning, and so are the Leaves, for
they close and heal new wounds, but more especially Wild Pears, and their
Leaves. The Perry that is made of these Pears is a special Cordial, chearing
and reviving the Spirits, making the Heart glad as Wine of Gr^pes, and this it
may be said to do by that Signature which some Pears have; It is also
profitable for long life as well as health, for it has been observed that
those that drink Per^y and Syd^r daily or frequently as their common drink are
generally healthy persons, and long lived: It is of special use at Sea, in
long Voyages to mingle with their fresh water. Pears being boiled in fair
Water* with Rose Water and Honey, and then drained through a Cloth or
Colender, and afterward dried in an Oven after a Batch of bread, may be kept
all the year being an excellent repast. Some are preserved in Sugar, as other
fruits are, and served in banquets, amongst other sweetmeats, or dried up
after they are preserved, and so put amongst other dry candyed Junkets. The
Wood is smooth, close and firm, and serves for many uses as to make Moulds
and Prints, to express the figure of a Plant or any such thing, to make
Rulers, Pistol ^^ocks, etc: when no fitter wood can be gotten.

CHAP. CLXX Of the Peach-Tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and (...), in Latin Malus Persica and Rhodacina:
the Nectarin which has much affinity with it is called by Matthiolus and
Casalpi^^s, Nucipers ca, because it resembles the Wall-Nut in the round smooth
outer rind, and the Peach in Meat, substance, and stone* A^g(...)v^^ calls it
P^rsic^ Nux, for the same Reason and Pliny, Nuciprunum.

The Kinds.
Of Peaches there are diverse kinds. I shall mention only. 1. The White Peach.
2. The Red Peach. 3. The D'avant Peach. 4. The Yellow Peach. 5. The Nut-m^g
Peach. 6. The N^wington Peach. Of Nectarius, I find three sorts. 1. The Roman
red Nectarin. 2. The Yellow Nectarin. 3. The green Nectarin.

The Form.
The Peach-Tree never grows to any great bigness, but is planted either by
it self or against a Wall, but yet spreads branches reasonable well, from
whence spring smaller reddish Twigges, long and narrow Leaves, nicked on the
edges somewhat like unto those of the willow, and of a bitter taste; the flowers
be of a light purple color, after which follows the fruit, which has a
chink ^^ cleft on the one side being otherwise very round. Some are much
smaller then others, as also differing in color and tastes, as russet, red, or
yellow, waterish or firm, with a frize or cotton all over, with a rugged
fu^rowed great stone within, and a bitter* kernel within that.

The Places and Time.
Some suppose that these Trees had their Original from Persia: but there is no
Author I know that makes positive mention thereof. Most of them are nursed up
familiarly in diverse Gentlemen's Gardens throughout the Land, but especially by
those G^rdi^ers that live near the City of London, which they are ready
(...)ll to those that want them. They flower in April, or thereabouts, and
their fruit i^ ripe in September.

The Temperature.
Peaches be cold in the first degree and moist in the second, but the kernells
be hot and dry.

The Virtues.
Peaches eaten moderately (for so we are to use all fruits as I said before)
are by the approbation of the learned Physician Dioscorides very profitable for
the Stomach, and also to cool and loosen the belly, especially if those that
eat them are of hot constitutions; but then it will not be amiss according to
the advice that is given in Schola Salerni to take a cup of Wine or strong
drink with them, for there it is said, Persica cum musto, vobis datur ordine
justo, and so (no doubt) they are less dangerous. The best time of eating them
is before meals, as Gal^^ shows, and not after meat (as our manner is in
England) for being eaten after meat they swim uppermost, and so both corrupt
themselves and also other meats; whereas being eat before, they mollify the
belly as is said already, provoke appetite, and qualify the distemperature of
Choler in the Stomach. Leonicerus says, they may be eaten in burning Fevers,
and Pliny commends them also for the sick. The Kernells of the stones do
wonderfully ease the pains and wringings of the belly, through Wind or sharp
humors, and are with other ingredients very admirable for the Stone. The Milk
or Cream of the said Kernells being drawn forth with some Vervaine Water, and
applied to the Forehead and Temples does much help to procure rest and sleep
to sick persons wanting it, and so does the Oil that is drawn from them, if
the places before mentioned, be anoint^d therewith; Used in the same manner it
helps the Megrim, and all other pains in the Head. The same Oil put into
Clysters, eases the pains of the Wind-Chollick; and anointed on the lower
part of the be^^y, it does the like; and dropped into the ears, it eases the
pains of them, and so does the juice of the Leaves. If the Kernells be bruised
and boiled in Vinegar until they become thick and applied to the Head, it
marvel^ously procures the Hair to grow again upon bald places, or where it is
too thin, which is signified by the down that grows upon the fruit. The
Leaves of Peaches bruised and laid on the belly, kills Worms, and so do they
also being boi^ed in Ale and drunk, and open the belly to boot; and after they
are dried, they discuss humors* The powder of which being strewed upon fresh
bleeding wounds stays their bleeding and closes them up. The Flowers steeped
all night in a little wine, set in a warm place, and then strained forth in
the morning, and drunk fasting does gently open the belly, and mo^e it
downwards; and if you would have them work more powerfully, do but after the
straining put in as many more flowers, and then strain it again: do this five
or six times, and afterward add as much Sugar to the Liquor, as will be
convenient to bring it to the consistence of Syrup, and take two spoonefulls
thereof, and it will purge the belly so effectually that there is neither
Rubark, Agarick, nor any other purger comparable to it, for it purges waterish
humors mightily, and yet without grief or trouble either to the Stomach or
lower parts of the body. A conserve made of the said Flowers, provokes
Vomiting, and spends Waterish and Hydropick humors likewise, by the
continuance thereof. The Liquor that droppeth from the Tree being wounded, is
given in the decoction of Coltsfoot to such as are troubled with the Cough or
shortness of breath, by adding thereto some sweet Wine, and putting some
Saffron also therein; It is good for them that are Hoarse or have lost their
voice; it helps also all defects of the Lungs and those that Vomit or spit
blood. Two drams thereof given in the juice of Lemmons, or of Radish, is good
for them that are troubled with the Stone. The Nectarin nor any part thereof is
used Physically that I read of, yet it has a firmer substance, and a more
delectable taste, and therefore is as wholesome, i^ not wholesomer to be eaten,
then the Peach.

CHAP. CLXXI. Of the Aprecock-Tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), in Latin malus Armeniaca, happily because it came
first out of Armenia, in English Abrecock or Aprecock-Tree. The fruit is named
(...) and of diverse (...) or (...), which be words corrupted from the Latin
word Praecox or Praecoquum signifying soon ripe, it being one of the first
ripe fruits. It is called also in Latin Chrysomelon id est Malum aureum and
malum Armeniacum, and by some Bara ^occa. It is called in English Aprecock, as
I suppose from the Latin word Praecox.

The Kinds.
I am not yet assured that there are any more then two sorts of Apricock-Trees
1. The greater Apricock-Tree. 2. The lesser Apricock-Tree.

The Form.
The Apricock-Tree is greater then the Peach-Tree, and has a bigger body and
lasts longer, if it be either grafted or inoculated; It has great, broad,
and almost round Leaves, but pointed at the ends, and finely dented about the
edges, the Flowers are made of five white Leaves like unto those of the
Plum-Tree, but somewhat larger; the fruit that follows is round, save that it
has a cleft or open furrow in the middle, somewhat like unto a Peach, of a
pale yellowish color on the outside as well as on the inside, and a little
reddish on the side in most, yet whiter in some, in substance firmer, and
closer then any Plum whatsoever, having within it a smooth flattish stone, and
within that a sweet Kernel.

The Places and Time
These Trees do seem by their name to claim Armenia for their natural place;
but whether they do grow there of their own accord, I am not yet resolved. From
what Coast soever they came, they are now no strangers in England; but are
planted frequently in almost every Gentleman's Garden, where there is a Wall for
them to grow against, without the help of which they seldom bear fruit. They
flower commonly in March, and their fruit is ripe about St. Jamestid^ or sooner.

The Temperature.
Apricocks are also cold in the first degree and moist in the second, but not
so moist as Peaches.

The Virtues.
Galen accounts Apricocks better then Peaches, and certainly he was not
mistaken, for they are not so soon corrupted in the Stomach, and therefore
must needs be the wholesomer fruit of the two. They are also more pleasant to
the taste, yet being over ripe they are apt to putrify and swim in the
Stomach, if they be taken as commonly they are after meals, but being eaten
first, they descend easily and cause the other meats to pass down the sooner,
rather to the benefit then detriment of the body. Some say they have no use in
Physic, but are wholly spent as a Junket either fresh and green, or dried,
preserved, or candied, (all which ways they are pleasant to the body, and
healthful) to sort with others for the same purpose. But Avicen says, that
the infusion of dried Aprecocks it profitable in sharp Feavours: and Matthiolus
that famous Commentator upon Dioscorides, tells us that the Oil, which may be
pressed out of the Kernells of the Stones, as the Oil of Almonds is made, is
very effectual against the inflamed Piles or Hemorrhoides, the tumors or
swellings of Ulcers, the hoarsenesse of the Voice, the roughness of the Tongue
and Throat, and likewise the pains in the Ears: and that five ounces of the
said Oil taken with one Ounce of Muscadine drives forth Stones, and Gravel
out of the Bladder, and kidneys, and helps the Colic. The Virtues of the
Leaves of this Tree, are not yet found out.

CHAP. CLXXII. Of the Plum-Tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and in Latin Prunus; the fruit (...) in Greek,
and Prunum in Latin; in English Plummes and Prunes, which have also names from
the Countries, in which they grow. Those which grow in Syria, near Damascus
are called Pruna Damascena, Damsons, Damasins or Damask Prunes; those that grow
in Spain, Hispanica, Spanish Prunes or Plums; so those of Hungary are called
Hungarica, or Pannonica; and those of France, Gallica Pruna.

The Kinds.
The sorts of Plum-Trees are exceeding numerous, and therefore I shall wave the
trouble of setting down any more then those that follow. 1. The Damson-Tree. 2.
The Myrabol^ne Plum-Tree. 3. The Almond Plum-Tree. 4. The Musle Plum-Tree. 5.
The Violet Plum-Tree. 6. The Permorden Plum-Tree. 7. The Lammas Plum-Tree. 8.
The Wheaten Plum-Tree.

The Form.
The Plum-Tree for the most part rises to be a tall Tree; the body and arms
whereof are covered with a rugged Bark more or less, the younger branches
being smoother, the Leaves are somewhat long, and broad, and rounder then those
of Cherries, for the most part, yet of very different sizes among themselves:
The Flowers are made of five white small Leaves, somewhat like, but less then
those of the Aprecock: The fruit differs in form, some being Ovall, some
Pearfashion, some Almond-like, and some round; in color, some being red,
green, or black, and some white or yellow; and in taste, some sweet, some
sower, and some of a mean between both, wherein is contained a small smooth
flattish Stone.

The Places and Time.
Several of these sorts of Plums do grow both as Standards and Wall-Trees in
diverse Gentlemen's Gardens about London, and in the Country also; especially the
Dams^n Tree, and the Wheaten Plum-Tree. They do commonly blossom in April, and
give their ripe fruit in Summer, some sooner, and some later.

The Temperature.
Plums are cold and moist in the second degree, having an Astringent quality as
long as they are sharp and sour, but when they are through ripe and sweet they
are of a contrary operation.

The Virtues.
The goodness of Plummes may be collected from their substance, for those
whose flesh is firm are less hurtful then those that are soft and tender,
because they are not so apt to corrupt in the Stomach, and that is it, which
makes Damsons more wholesome then the rest; for those which are so very moist
fill the body with waterish and corrupt blood. But all Plummes as well as other
fruit are then best, when they are preserved with Honey or Sugar, which takes
from them their superfluous moisture, and then there are made of them many good
D^shes for the Table, and delicates for banquets throughout all the year; which
are profitable both for the sick and healthful to relish the mouth and
Stomach, to procure an appetite and a little to open the belly, to allay
Choler and cool the Stomach, which effects are likewise wrought by that dried
fruit which is sold at the Grocers under the name of Damask-prunes, when they
bestewed and eaten, and if a little Sena Rubarb or the like be stewed amongst
them, it makes them the more purging, and of a greater use to be taken by
those that have weak Stomachs; for so they cast out choleric humors, and are
good in Fevers and other Choleric and hot diseases: and somewhat to this
purpose, is that in Schola Salerni. Infrigidant, laxant, multum prosunt tibi
pruna. which is thus Englished by Mr. Austen in a Treatise of fruit trees.

Plums cool, and loose the belly very kindly;
No way offensive, but to health are friendly.
Where he seems, to attribute these qualities to Damsons fresh gathered, but
whether fresh or dried and afterward stewed, they may be eaten to the
aforesaid end. The Leaves of the Tree boiled in wine is a good decoction to
wash and gargle the mouth and throat, and to dry up the flux of Rheum that
falls down to the palate, gummes* or Almonds of the Throat. The gum that
comes out of the trees being drunk in wine, is good against the stone, and
will serve as a Glue to fasten any thing withal. The said Gum or the Leaves
boiled in Vinegar and applied kills Tetters and Ringworms and also the
Leprosy.

CHAP. CLXXIII. Of the Cherry-Tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and the fruit (...), in Latin Cerasus and Cerasa.
In most other plants and fruits, the Latin name is derived from the Greeks: but
in these the Greek from the Latin, for Athenaeus and Pliny write that after L.
Lucullus had overcome Mithridates, he brought this Tree from Cerasumpta in
Pontus into Italy, and gave it the name C^rasus from the place whence he had it.

The Kinds.
There are many sorts of Cherries, but I shall make mention but of some of
them, 1. The May Cherry, 2. The Early Flaunders Cherry, 3. The Late Flaunders
Cherry, 4. The Black Heart Cherry, 5. The Red Heart Cherry, 6. The Great Bearing
Cherry of Mr. Millen, 7. The Ordinary Cherry. 8. The Prince Cherry, 9. The Duke
Cherry, 10. Birds Cherry, 11. The Common Black Cherry-Tree, 12. The Red Grape
Cherry-Tree, 13. The least wild Heart Cherry-Tree, 14. The Wild Cherry-Tree.

The Form.
The Cherry-Tree rises up to a reasonable height and greatness, spreading
well and somewhat thick, the Leaves are near unto those of the Plum-Tree for
Form, but somewhat longer in most, and dented about the Edges; the Flowers come
forth two or three or four at most at a place or Joint together, every one on
his own Footstalk: consisting of five whire Leaves with some Threads, in the
middle, after which come Round Berries green at first, but Red or Black when
they are full ripe; of a mean bigness and pleasant taste, with a hard white
small stone within it, whose Kernel is somewhat bitter but not unpleasant.

The Places and Times.
Diverse of these Sorts are inhabitants in the Gardens of those that love
variety of pleasant fruit, and several others also, growing either as
Standards or Wall-Trees. The ordinary Cherries grow most familiary in Kent, and
there are abundance of Black Cherries grow in Harfordshire, but the Birds
Cherrie grows wild in Kent, as also in Westmerland and Lancashire where they
call it the Hedge-berry-tree. The least wild Heart-Cherry-tree grows near
Stockport, and in other places of Cheshire, where the County people call it the
merry Tree. The Wild Cherry-Tree grows in a wood by Bath. Most of them Flower
in April, bringing forth their fruit, some sooner and latter, in the months of
May, June, and July.

The Temperature.
Cherries be cold and moist in the first degree.

The Virtues.
Cherries eaten before meat, loosen the Belly very gently, but many of them
nourish but little, and are hurtful unto moist and unhealthy Stomachs,
especially the small Cherries which do often Breed Agues and other Maladies.
The Red sour Cherries do likewise loosen the belly, and are more wholsesome
and convenient for the Stomach, for they do partly comfort, and partly quench
Thirst. The Black sour Cherries do strengthen the Stomach more then the rest,
and being dried, they stop the Laske. Some Authors speak much in the
commendation of Cherries, and amongst the rest the Compilers of Schola Sal^rni
as may appear, by their following verses.

Cerasai si ^^medas, tibi confert grandia dona,
Expurgant Stomachum, nucleus Lapide^ tibi tollit,
Et de carne sua sanguis critque bonus.
That is to say, Cherries purge the Stomach, and the Kernells of the Cherry
stones, eaten dry or made milk, breaks the stone in the reins o^ bladder, and
that which no fruit in a manner else does, the substance or meat of Cherries
ingendereth very good blood, and comfort and fatteth the body. Ruell^^s also
^aith, they breed good humors in the body; and another says that they increase
and comfort the Liver, which they may be said to do by S^gnature, and that
those which are t^^t and sharp, close the mouth of the Stomach, and make the
better and Speedier cigestion. They are likewise allowed by the German Doctors
to such as have Feverish, hot and Thirsty diseases; in that they cool
strengthen and stir up appetite to meat. But let no body be to bold with them
hereupon, lest they Surset, which may be easily done, and therefore in those
Countites where they abound, they are eaten with bread and butter to prevent
Surfeiting. There is also made of Cherries a Liquor called Cherry wine which in
the Summer is pleasant and healthful and more proper for that season then hot
wines. They are useful to boil in brothes and drinks and so they may be given
without danger even to those that are sick, as those which are preserved may.
The Gum of the Cherry-Tree dissolved in Wine and drunk, is good for the Gravel
and the stone, the excoriation of the Throat, Lungs and Breast, the Cough, and
hoarsenesse, as also to amend the color and sharpen the Eyesight. The
distilled water of Black Cherr^es having the stones bruised with them, is good
to be powered into the mouths of them that have the Falling Sickness, as often
as the Course of the fit does trouble them, and is effectual to provoke Urine,
to break the stone expel the gravel and break VVind.

CHAP. CLXXIV. Of the Goosberrie-Bush.
The Names.
IT is not yet resolved whether this Shrub were known to the ancient writers or
no; some would have it to be the (...) of Theophrastus, which is somewhat
improbable, because he makes no mention of any prickles that grow thereon,
which so accurate an Author as he was, could hardly omit. The latter writters
call it in Latin Grossularia, because they are somewhat like Gross^s, small
green Figs. It is called also Uva crispa, and Uva Crispina, because the Leaves
seem to be crisped or curled; In some Countries of England, it is called the
Feaberry, in others the Dewbery, and in some the wine berry-bush, but most
commonly the Gooseberry, and the fruit has the same denomination.

The Kinds.
There are some sundry sorts of Goosberries, some of which I shall mention, 1.
The Common Goosberrie, 2. The Red Goosberry, 3. The blew Goosberry, 4. The
hairy or prickly green Goosberry, 5. The great Dutch Goosberry.

The Form.
The Goosberry-Bush is a Shrub of three or four Cubits high, set thick with
sharp prickles; it is likewise full of branches, slender woody and prickly:
but the lower part of the stalks are smooth. The Leaves are cut with deep
gashes into diverse parts, somewhat like those of the vine, of a very green
color, the Flowers are very small, of a whitish green, with some little purple
dashed here and there, the fruit is round, growing Scatteringly upon the
branches, green at ^he first, but waxing a little yellow, when they come to
maturity, full of a winy suyce, somewhat sweet in taste, when they be ripe, in
which is contained hard ^eed of a brownish color, which may be seen through
the skin; which though it be thick at first, does afterward become
transparent, the Root is woody, and not without many strings annexed thereunto.

The Places and Time.
The sorts abovenamed with diverse others do grow in many Gardens about London
in great abundance, whence they are carried into Cheap Side and other places to
be sold. The Leaves commonly appear in March, and the flowers not long alter;
the fruit is ripe in June and July.

The Temperature.
The Berries of this bush before they be quite ripe, are cold and dry, and that
in the latter end of the second degree, and also binding.

The Virtues.
Goosberries are used in the Month of May and June, either to make sauce for
green Geese, to stew with Mutton, and the like, or else to make Tarts, or to be
eaten, after they are scalded, with Rose Water and Sugar: all which ways they
provoke appetite, and cool the Vehement heat of the Stomach, and L^^er. They
are sometimes boiled in broth, and so they do not only make it plea^^nt to the
taste, but render it very profitable to such as are troubled with an hot burning
Ague. They are very much desired by Women with Child, and by young Maidens
also, whilst they be unripe; but surely they profit not the former, unless it
be to stay their longing; nor the latter, unless it be to breed the
Green-Sicknesse, for they stop the Courses, except they happen to be taken into
a cold Stomach and then they do but trouble and clogg the same. The Ripe
Berries, as they are Sweeter, so they are less offensive to the stomach, yet
they are eaten more for pleasure, then for any proper or special effect for
any disease; but by reason of their lubricity or sliperinesse, they easily
descend out of the Stomach without any trouble; however the safest way of
eating them is, when they are pre^erved with Sugar. The Decoction of the Leaves
cools hot Swellings and inflammations, as also St. Anthonies fire. The young
and tender Leaves eaten raw in a Sallet, break the Stone, and expel Gravel
both from the Kidneys and Bladder. Too much of the fruit will breed Crudities,
and Consequently Worms.

CHAP. CLXXV. Of the Barbery-bush.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), a spinarum acuminatis Cuspidibus, from the sharp
prickles wherewith nature has armed it, from whence the Latins call it
Oxyacantha Galeni (there being some difference between Dioscorides and Galen
concering this plant) which is the name used in the Shops at this day; yet some
call it Berberies of the corrupted name Amyrberis by which Avicen calls it, and
from thence is the English word Barberies, derived.

The Kinds.
Though all Barbery Bushes have the same form as to the stature, Leaves, and
Prickles, so that there may seem to be but one sort, yet because they bear
three several sorts of fruits; Authors make three sorts of them, 1. The
Ordinary Barbery-Bush 2. The Barbery-Bush, who^e berries are thrice as b^g as
the former, 3. The Barbery-Bush, whose berries are for the most part without
stones.

The Form.
The Barbery-Bush shoots forth many Slender Stems or stalks from the root,
sometimes to a great height covered with a smooth whitish rind or bark, being
yellow underneath next the wood; which is white, easy to break, and pithy in
the middle, set full of sharp small white thorns, three at every leaf almost
which are somewhat small and long; finely dented about the Edges, and of a
fresh green color; the Flowers come forth at the joints with the Leaves, many
standing on a long cluster, yellow while they are fresh, which turn into small
long and round berries hanging down in long bunches upon a small stalk, white
at the first, but very Red when they are through-Ripe* of a sharp sour taste,
able to set their teeth on edge that eat them: the Root is yellow and spreading.

The Places and Times.
It grows not only in many of the woods in Austria, Hungary, France; but in
England also, in some hedges and borders of fields. Especially at a Village
called Iver two miles from Cole-brook, where there be diverse hedges con^^^^ing
of nothing else but Barberie-Bushes; yet in most places they are not found but
in Gardens, Orchards, and Closes, adjoining to some dwelling house or other.
The Leaves and Blossoms come forth in April and May, and the fruit is ripe in
September and October.

The Temperature.
The Leaves and fruit of the Barbery-bush are cold and moist in the second
degree, and, as Galen also affirms, they are of this parts and have a certain
cuting quality.

The Virtues.
The green Leaves of the Barbery-bush stamped and made into sauce, as that made
of Sorrel called Green Sauce, does cool hot Stomachs, and those that are
vexed with hot burning Agues, and procures Appetite, cooling the Liver, and
repressing sour belchings of Choler. The fruit is much more cooling and
binding, quenching thirst and restraining Chollerick and pestilentiall Vapors,
and is of very good use in Agnes that proceed from such causes, if either the
Conserve of the depurate juice or the Syrup thereof be taken with the Syrup of
Violetts: The said juice also, or the berries themselves, either conserved or
preserved, is often used for those that loath their meat, to procure an
Appetite, and repress the force of Choler, rising from the Liver thereinto,
and that which passes into the bowels procuring sharp laskes, as the bloody
flux, etc. It helps likewise to stay Women's Immoderate courses, and if it be
taken with a little Sowthernwood-water and Sugar, it kills the Worms in the
body. It is good also for those that Spit blood, to fasten loose teeth,
strengthen the gums and cool the inflammations of the palate and throat, if
the Conserve be dissolved in water, mingled with a little Vinegar, and a gargle
made there of, and stays Rheums and distillations upon those parts. It
helps likewise to dry up moist Ulcers and to soder up green; The said
depurate juice called Wine of Barberies serves to dissolve many thing
Chimically. The inner yellow bark of the branches or root has the Signature of
the yellow Jaundise, and therefore is with good success given unto them that
have it, being boiled and drunk; The same laid in steep in white Wine, for the
space of three hours purges wonderfully as it is said.

CHAP. CLXVI. Of the Curran-Tree.
The Names.
IT is more then probable that this Plant was not known to the ancient Greek
writers seeing there is no Greek name for it, that we can learn. It is called
Ribes and Ribesius frutex from some Analogy it has, both in respect of the
berries, and also in the properties with the Ribes of Serapio, and not that it
is the same. Gesner, calls it Ceanothus levis, but it is accounted by diverse
to be a kind of Grossularia, who therefore call it Grossularia Rubra, and
Grossularia ultramarina. Bauhinus calls the white sort Grossularia hortensis
margaritis similis. The black sort is generally called Ribes fructu nigro, in
English Black Currants, as other are Red and White; but the White are called
Gozell in some parts of Kent.

The Kinds.
Of these kind of Currants, which are none of those which are sold at the
Grocers, there be four sorts of Trees. 1. The ordinary red Curran-Tree. 2. The
great red Curran-Tree. 3. The white Curran-Tree. 4. The black Curran-Tree.

The Form.
The stem or stock of the Curran-Tree has a very thin outer bark, which in
the red and black Curran-Tree is brownish; but in the white it is whitish all
of them being green underneath; and are about the bigness of a good great
staff, wholly without thorns on any branch, whereon grow large cornered
blackish green Leaves, cut in on the edges into five parts, somewhat like a
Vine-leafe, but a great deal less; The Flowers, come forth at the joints of
the Leaves, many together on a long stalk, hanging down about a fingers
length, of an herby color, after which follow round berries, all green at the
first, but afterward as they grow ripe they tend to their several colors,
and are then clear and transparent; the red are of a little pleasant and tart
taste withal, the White more Winy, and acceptable, but both the Leaves and
Fruit of the black, have a kind of strong evil sent, but yet are wholesome
although not so pleasant as any of the former, and are eaten by many; the root
is woody and spreads diversely.

The Places and Time.
All these sorts have been found, growing naturally wild some in Savoy, and
Switzerland, as Gesner says, and some in Austria as Clusius: whence they have
been trasplanted into our English Gardens, where they bear well. They flower
in the beginning of April, and their fruit is ripe in June and July, continuing
on the bushes long after they are ripe, before they fall or are withered.

The Temperature.
All these sorts of Currants are cold and moist, and that in the first or second
degree, and somewhat astringent.

The Virtues.
The red and white Currants when they be ripe are very profitable to allay the
heat and fainting of the Stomach and to quench thirst, and to provoke an
appetite, and therefore are safely permitted in hot and sharp Agues, for the
juice of them tempereth the heat of the Liver and blood, and the sharpness of
Choler, and resists putrefaction: It takes away likewise the loathing of
meat, and the weakness of the Stomach by much Vomiting, for it closes the
mouth thereof and represseth the distemper whereof it is caused. It is said
also to stop the laske that proceeds of Choler, and the bloody fl^xe, and
that it is useful for the Cough, especially the dried juice or Rob thereof,
which is made after this manner. Take of the juice of Currants clarified twelve
pound boil it half away, and add to the remainder old White Wind five pound;
consume the third part over a gentle fire, taking away the scum (as you ought)
let the rest settle and streine it, and with three pound of Sugar, boil
according to Art, till it be something thicker then new Honey; And being thus
made you may take a little on the point of a knife, as often as you have
occasion to use it for any of the purposes aforesaid. The black Currants be used
in sauces, and so are the Leaves also by many, who like the taste and sent of
them, though others do not. I might proceed further in declaring at large, how
that the fruit of the Raspeberry bush, the Service-Tree, the Cornell-Tree, the
Filberd, Hazel, and Chest-nut-Tree is used for food rather then Physic: but
because few of them, or any other that I have omitted, have any eminent Quality
profitable to the Stomach I shall only name them here, and if occasion serve
treat of them in the following part, as I have done of some other in the
foregoing. Only, I shall not think it amiss to specify that most sorts of
Grain, as Wheat, Rye, Barley, Beans, Pease, Oats, Rice, Lentills, etc. are
useful for food: and so are diverse Roots, as Turnips, Carrets, Parsneps,
Potatoes, Skirrets, Onyons, Leeks, Garlic, Radishes etc: to which may be added
Melons, Pepons, Cucumbers, Artichokes, etc: as also diverse herbs, as Cabbage,
Coleflowers, Beets, Lettice, Spinach, Asparagus, Chervaile, Alexanders,
Buglosse, Borage, Tarragon, Bawme, Mint, Sage, Sorrel etc: some whereof are
profitable to the Stomach, whereas others by reason of their windiness are
obnoxions thereunto, unless they be eaten with discretion after they be
corrected by the fire, and have some Pepper strewed upon them to expel the
Wind; It will be needless to mention them again to tell you which of them
stand most in need of correction; for that every good Huswife can tell; but, if
any one desires further to be resolved, he shall find most of them handled
dispersedly in this book. I shall now descend to the Liver; for thither is the
Chyle conveyed through the Meseraick veins for sangufication, and comes next
to be rectifiod.

CHAP. CLXXVII. Of Rubarb.
The Names.
I Find no Author that sets down the Greek name of this Simple, and I
suppo^e the reason is because it is of later invention, it being not that Pa^^,
which Dioscorides mentions, but brought out of China, and called so from the
River Rha, on whose banks it is said very plentifully to grow. The Common
Latin name is Rhabarbarum, the reason whereof whosoever desires to know may
read much thereof in Parkinsons Herball, and be unresolved when he has done.

The Kinds.
Of Rubarb, there be six sorts. 1. The True Rubarb. 2. Bastard Rubarb. 3.
Monks Rubarb. 4. China Rubarb. 5. The broader Elecampane leafed Rubarb. 6. The
narrower Elecampane leafed Rubarb.

The Form.
The True Rubarb rises out of the ground in the Springtime with a great round
brownish head, which opens it self into sundry Leaves one after another,
very much crumpled together at the first, and brownish, but after they have
spread themselves to a very large round compass, they become smooth, being
supported by a brownish stalk, of the thickness of ones Thumb, when they are
at the biggest, and about half a yard in length; the Leaf also from edge to
edge, being near the same breadth; of a sad or dark green color, of a fine
sour taste, exceeding that of the Garden or Wood-sorrell, amongst which there
arises, though not every year, a strong thick stalk about a foot higher then
the Leaves that grow below, and like unto them; but lesser at every joint up to
the top, and among the Flowers which be white, spreading forth into many
branches, and consisting of five or six small white Leaves a piece, hardly to
be discerned from the white threads in the middle, after which come brownish
three square seeds like unto those of other Dockes, whereof it is a kind: The
root, which will grow to be very great, is of a dark brownish or reddish
color on the outside, with a pale yellow skin under it covering the inner
substance or root, which being pared away, the root appears of so fresh and
lively a color, with fresh colored Veins, running through it, that no Rubarb
whatsoever can excel it, which being dried carefully by the gentle heat of a
fire, and every piece kept from touching one another, it will hold its color
well, and is commended by those that have made trial of it.

The Places and Time.
The first as it is reported grew in Thracia, whence it was brought to Venice
and from thence to us, the seed being sent by Dr. Lister to Mr. Parkinson who
husbanded it so well that it grew, and in two or three years brought forth
much seed, by which he furnished many of his friends. Yet I find it growing
very rarely, and that in no great quantity, not remembering, that ever I saw it
before the writing hereof, but only in the Physic Garden, at Oxon, and in the
Garden of one Cudymion Campion of Wansworth in the County of Surrey: The second
grows naturally upon the hills not far from Caria in Germany, as also near
Friburg in Switzerland, and on the Mountains in Austria, and grows also
plentifully in many of our Gardens, where it is sown. The th^rd, grows about
Lausann^ in Savoy, as Tragus says, but only in Gardens with us: The fourth
grows in China, as the name expresses, and is that (as the Apothecaries
pretend) that is made use of in shops, because they may have the greater price
^or it, although that of England is as effectual for many purposes: The fifth
is to be found on Mount Baldus, near Verona in Italy, and on the hills in
Switzerland, and the last came out of Italy also. These sorts flower in June,
and the seed is ripe in July. The Roots which are for use must not be taken
up, till the Stalk and Leaves be quit withered and gone, which will be in
October, for should they be taken before, or after the Leaf begins to put
forth, they would lose much of their color.

The Temperature.
Rubarb is hot and dry, in the second degree, of a mixed substance, partly airy,
thin and purging, partly gross and earthy, whereby it is binding and drying.
The Monks Rubarb, which is also dry but cooling, is not so frequently used as
formerly, since the Bastard Rubarb has been so plentiful.

The Virtues.
Rubarb is so effectual for the Liver, that it is called the Life, Soul,
Heart, and Treacle of the Liver, purging from thence Choler, Phlegm, and
watery humors and is therefore useful in Choleric, and long continued
Feavours, in the Jaundies, Green sickness, Dropsy, Stoppings of the Liver, as
also against the hardness thereof, and intemperate coldness, being taken of
it self made into Powder and drunk in a draught of White Wind fasting, after
it has been steeped therein all night, or put among other purges as shall be
thought convenient. It is likewise good against the Windiness, Wambling, and
Weakness of the Stomach, and all pain thereof, the Crampe, gnawing and
griping of the Belly, Kidneys, and Bladder, the Ach of the Breasts and Mother,
the Sciatica, spitting of blood, Sobbing, Hicket, the bloody Flux, and Lasks,
and all Stingings, and venomous bitings, one dram thereof being taken in
Hydromel or Honyed Water. The Powder taken with Cassia dissolved, and a little
washed Venice Turpentine cleanses the Reins and strengthens them afterward,
and is very effectual to stay the running of the Reins or Gonorrhea. It is
also given for pains and swellings of the Head, for those that are troubled
with Melancholy, and helps the Gout. The Powder of Rubarb taken with a little
Mummia, and madder Roots in some red-Wine dissolveth clotted blood in the
body, happening by any fall or bruise, and heals burstings, and broken parts as
well inward as outward: The Oil likewise wherein it has been boiled, works
the like effects being anointed. It is used to heal the Ulcers that happen in
the Eyes and Eyelids, being steeped in White Wind or any other convenient
Liquor and then strained, as also to assuage swelling and inflammations: and
applied with Honey or boiled in Wine, it takes away all black and blew spots
or marks that happen therein. Whey or White Wind are the best Liquors to to
steep it in, and thereby it works more effectually in opening Obstructions
and purging the Liver and Stomach; many do use a little Indian Spiknard as the
best Corrector thereof. The Seed of Bastard Rubarbe eases the gnawing and
griping pains of the Stomach, and takes away the loathing thereof. The Root
of it helps the Ruggedness of the Nails, and being boiled in Wine it
helps the King's Evil as also the Swellings of the Kernells of the Ears. It
helps them that are troubled with the stone, provokes Urine, and helps the
dimnesse of the sight. It is also used in opening and purging Diet Drinks,
with other things to open the Liver, and to cleanse and cool the blood. The
Root of Monks Rubarbe purges likewise, but not so forcibly as either of the
former. The Seed thereof contrarily does bind the belly, and helps to stay
Laskes and the bloody flux, and so does the root of the true Rubarbe, if it be
toasted at the fire, and drunk with Plantane water, or thick red wine. The
distilled water thereof is very profitably used to heal Scabs as also foul
ulcerous sores and to allay the inflammations of them. The juice of the Leaves
or roots, or the decoction of them in Vinegar is used also as a most effectual
remedy to hea^e Scabs and running Sores. The two last sorts of Rubarb are
seldom used, their qualities being more astringent then opening.

CHAP. CLXXVIII Of Turmerick.
The Names.
IT is in uncertain whether this Drug were known to the Grecians or not, there
being no positive Greek name for it upon record: some think it to be the
Cyperus Indicus of Dioscorides, because it has the same color and ta^^, the
root being like Ginger; but why he should referr it to a Cyperus, is somewhat
strange, the root of that having no such form, color, or taste. Garcias and
Christopherus Acosta call it Crocus Indicus, but the Common Latin name is
Curcuma, borrowed as is most probable from the Arabians, who call it Curcum,
yet this is not the Curcuma of Serapio or Avicen as Matthiolus has well noted,
which is no other then the greater Celandine whose root is yellow, and
therefore the Apothecaries in former times took it for Curcuma, and put it into
the Composition called Diacurcuma. I find but one sort thereof, and therefore I
shall proceed to the description.

The Form.
Turmerick bears larger and thinner Leaves then Millet, and of a paler green
color, which afterward when the stalk is grown up, do likewise encompasse one
another thereupon up to the top; What flower or seed it bears I find no
mention. The Root is somewhat like Ginger, in form but of a yellow or Saffron
color within and without, yet it is not so flat as Ginger but rounder, hot in
taste, and bitterish when it is dry, though being fresh the bitterness thereof
cannot be so easily perceived, by reason of the moisture that is in it.

The Places and Time.
I find not that Turmerick grows any where but in the East-Endies: but that
i^ does there the names above mentioned do clearly intimate. I can say nothing
of the time, having not yet met with any Author to direct me in this particular.

The Temperature.
Turmerick is hot and dry in the second, or as some say in the Third degree.

The Signature and Virtues.
If all Roots Flowers and Barks that are yellow, do cure the yellow-Jaunders by
Signature, as it has bin found experimentally by those who have made trial of
them, then certainly Turmerick cannot choose but do it, it being so eminently
yellow; And therefore they do well, that use it for the yellow Jaundise, which
is a distemper commonly proceeding from the Liver, so that if it be good for
the one, it must be consequently for the other, as also for the obobstructions
of the Gall, which is the receptable for that yellow choler, which causes the
Jaundise when it cannot be admitted. It is very effectual likewise to open the
Stoppings of the Stomach, Womb, and Bladder, and is very good in the Dropsy,
and Green sickness, for it opens all manner o^ obstructions, and he^peth to
bring down Women's courses. It is of very good use also in o^d and inveterate
griefs and sicknesses, and that evil di^po^ition of the body, called Cachexia
which is, when the who^e nourishment of the body is sent to feed some
predomin^nt humors: Neither is it good for men only, but for Horses,
especially when they are troubled with the Yellowes, as the expert Farrier can
tell you. It is used outwardly to take away the hair, and is put into those
Medicines that are made for the Eyes, and for the Itch, and Scab, if some juice
of Oranges and the Oil of the C^car or Indian Not be mixed with it as Gartias
says. It is much used to color d^shes cups and such ^ike Woodden-Vessels
instead of Saffron. The Indians use it much both to color and season their
meats, and broths, as we do Saffron in ours, it being cheaper and easier to be
had amongst them.

CHAP. CLXXIX. Of Agrimony.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) et (...) Eupatorium and H^patorium and so the
Latins call it also, the first name being given unto it from King Eupator who
first ^ound out the Virtues of it the other from (...) Jecur qui^ Hepati
pracip^e med^tur, because it is a chief he per to the Liver; It is also called
Agr(...)nia of diverse, which is the name whereby it is best known in Shops.
Some or her names are also given unto it, as Marmorella, Concordia, Ferraria
and Lappa in^ersa, because the seeds which are rough like burres hang
down-wards. It is called in English Agrimony and Egrimony.

The Kinds.
There be diverse sorts of Agrimony, Seven whereof I shall present you with 1
Common Agrimony 2 Sweet smelling Agrimony. 3 Bastard Agrimony 4. Hemplike
Agrimony. 5. The broader Hemp^ike Agrimony of America, 6. Narrow leafed
Hemplike Agrimony of New England. 7. Common water Agrimony. 8. Water Agrimony
of New England.

The Form.
Common Agrimony has diverse long Leaves made of many, set upon a Stalker some
greater, other smaller, all of them dented about the edges green above,
somewhat grayish underneath and hairy withal, from amongst which does arise a
hard round hairy brown stalk about the height o^ half a yard or more, with
some smaller Leaves upon it, set here and there; toward the top whereof grow
many small yellow Flowers one above another in long spikes, after which come
many rough heads of seeds hanging downwards like to small burres, which when
they be ripe will catch hold and stick upon Garments, or upon any hairy Beast,
that shall rub against them: The Root is black long and somewhat woody, abiding
many years, and shooting a fresh every Spring being also of an indifferent
good smell.

The Place and Time.
The first grows in diverse pastures and ditches, hedges, and highway-sides,
throughout the Land; the second is not so common with us, being a retainer only
with those that are curious, but is natural to Italy in many places; the third
Columna sound about Naples; the fourth is found by the brinkes of ditches and
in other moist places n and sometimes in upland grounds: the fifth and sixth
came to us from New England and Virginia; the seventh in shallow ponds and
plashes of water, and such places as have bin overflown by Winter floods; the
last came from New England, but grows very strongly in our gardens. They all
flower about July, and the S^^d is Ripe toward the latter end of August.

The Temperature.
Agrimony is hot in the first degree, but temperate in respect of dryness, so
that though it does moderately bind yet it (...) and scowreth and is of subtle
parts.

The Virtues.
Not only the Greek name of this Heth, but also the continued consent of
ancient and modern Writers backed with daily experience, do sufficiently
testify, that it is appropriated to the Liver; both for the opening the
obstructions thereof, and then for cleansing and strengthening it; so that
there is no plant so (...)raly applicable for all diseases that proceed from
the Liver as this. For it helps the Iaundis^ both black and yellow being
boiled in Wine or Water, with other ingredients that correct and strengthen the
Liver as Horehound Elecampone, Buglosse, Rubarb, Lign-Aloes, etc. And so
likewise for the several kinds of Dropsies it is frequently used in Diet
Drinks. It is good also for the Bowels and heals their inward woundings
bruises or hurts, and qua^i^^eth a^l inward distempe^ that grow therein being
boiled in wine and drunk; and so it is effectual for those that are stung or
bitten by Serpents, and helps them that have soul troubled and bloody waters,
making them to piss clear very ^peedi^y and is useful in long continued
fluxe^ of the Liver, e^pecially in old people: It is good (...) the Srangury,
and helps also the Colic, the p^th the Coug^ and c^e^n^th the Breast. A
d^light of the Decoction taken before the fit of an Ague first removes ^ and
afterward rids it quire away the Leaves and Seeds (...) the bloody flux being
taken in Wine. The Roots or Leaves boi^ed in Wine help such as have the Palsy.
It is accounted a good Herb as questionless it is against the Spleen being
stopped, as also against the Pestilence and biting of a mad Dog. The Leaves and
root are good for those which are troubled with the Green Sickness. The
distilled water of the Herb is good for all the said purposes, but works not
altogether so effectually as the Decoction thereof. Being stamped with
Hog's Grease and applied, it helps old Sores Cancers, and inveterate^ Ulcers,
for it cleanses them, and afterward heals them; and so it draws forth,
the corrupt ^^ater that sometimes happens to gather under the Nails, and
eases the aching, and makes the ^ailes to grow again in case they come off.
Being used after the some manner, it draws forth thorns, Splinters of Wood
or such like, when they are gotten into the flesh. The juice dropped into
impostumated ears causes them to send forth that which oppr^sseth them, and
being mingled with Vinegar it takes away warts being laid thereunto. The
distilled water cures Ulcers and (...) of the mouth and throat being gargled
or washed therewith. The Hemplik^ ^grimour it good for many of the purposes
aforesaid, and further it provokes Urine, and the natural Courses of women,
and boiled with Fumitory in Whey and drunk, it helps Scabs and the Itch which
proceeds of salt and sharp humors, especially if the juice be ^ixed with
Vinegar, and the outward parts be bathed therewith. The Ju^ce being drunk, is
held to be very effectual for curing the Leprosy, if it be taken in the
beginning, and to kill the Worms, if the Leaves be but steeped in drink and
taken. The ^moak of the herb being burnt, drives away Gnats, Plyes, Wasps, etc:
If Country people give it to their Cattle, when they are troubled with the
Cough, or broken-W^nded, it will cure them; and it is said that Dear being
wounded cure themselves by eating hereof. Mr. Culpepper who seldom hit the
Nail on the head as to the matter of Plants, attributes the Virtues of
Water-Hampe to Water Agrimony, which are two distinct things, as those which
are acquainted with simples can easily tell.

CHAP. CLXXX. Of Liver-Wort.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Lichen, either because of its virtue in curing the
Tetter or Ring-Worme* which the Greeks call Lichen, or for that it does as it
were ^ick those stones whereon it grows, (...) signifying to sick. It is
called also Lichen, in L^tine and also Jecoraria; either from the simi^itude
that the (...) thereof have with the Fibers of the Liver, which is the
Signature thereof or else from helping the diseases of the Liver, or both. Some
call it He^patica but that name is more u^ually understood of the noble
Liver-Wort which is prized more for p^e^ure to the senses; then for helping any
disease.

The Kinds.
Though the Common Liver-wort be that which is of most use yet I shall
according to my custom give you all the sorts thereof; which are seven. 1
Common ground Liver-wort. 2. Small-ground Liver-wort. 3 Cluster-headed
Liverwort. 4 Liver-wort with a hooded head. 5. Small Liver-wort with skinny
Heels. 6. The smallest Liver-wort without Stalks. 7. Cork, or Archal, or
Darbyshire Liver-wort.

The Form.
The Common-Liver-wort grows close and spreads much upon the ground and
stony places, which many sad green Leaves, lying, or rather as it were
sticking flat one unto another, very unevenly cut in on the edges and crumpled,
from among which rise small slender Stalks, an inch or two high at the most,
bearing small start-like flowers at the tops: the Roots are very fine and small
whereby it lives.

The Places and Time.
They all grow in moist and shadowy places; sometimes upon the ground as the
Common sort does in the Garden of John Smith by Adderbury Churchyard:
sometimes at the heads of Springs, as it does at Runghill-well in the Mill-mead
of the Town aforesaid: and sometimes upon the stones of the inside of Wells, as
it does in the Physic Garden at Ox^n. Corck or Archall grows upon the
Freestones of the Mountains in Darbyshire. It is green all the year long and
brings forth its Flowers oftentimes in June and July.

The Temperature.
Liver-wort must needs be cold and dry, and somewhat binding; for the growing
in moist places, makes it col, and upon stones makes it dry and astringent.

The Signature and Virtues
That rare discoverer of Signatures Oswald Crollius, treating of those plants
that are pro^^table to the Liver, by Signature, sets down this both for the
^mi^itude, the Fibers of this Plant and those of the Liver have one with
another, and the eminent Virtues it has in all distempers of the Liver, and
therefore is put into Dyet-drink with Maiden hair, Agrimony, Hart's-tongue etc:
to cool and cleanse it, as often as occasion serves, and he^peth also
inflammations in any part and the yellow Jaundise likewise; Or being bruised
and boy^ed alone in small beer and drunk, it cools the heat of the Liver,
and Kidneys and helps the running of the Reins in Men, and the Whites in
Women. It is likewise very good in the Hectic Feavour and in all other
Feavours and Agues proceeding of Cho^er, as also in the Scab, Tetter, and all
other unkind heates proceeding from the Liver as Whiteloves, blaines blisters
etc: taking away the cause of them if it be taken inwardly; and boiled in
Posset Drink and taken, it helps bleeding at the nose, which being suffered
to cool, quenches the inflammations of the Tongue. Being stamped with
Hogs-greafe, and applied, it heals all manner of Sores, but especially
Tetters, Ringwormes and other fretting Ulcers, for which it is a singular
remedy. The water wherein it has been boiled being Gargled in the Mouth
stops Rhe^^e.

CHAP. CLXXXI. Of Succory.
The Names.
UNder the title of Succory, three sorts of Plants are comprehended, viz:
Cichory, Endive, and Dandelyon, differing not so much in operation as in form,
all which are called (...) in Greek by one general name* yet for distinction
sake common Succory is called in Greek (...), because as it seems it grew wild
there; and that which has broad Leaves Pliny names Hedypnois; and the
bitterer, Dioscorides calls (...) which signifies bitterness, in Latin
Cichoreum and Cicorea, Inty^us and Intybum, all which words are used
promiscuously, both for Succory and Endive, but commonly they are
distinguished; Dandelion is called Dens Leonis in Latin, from the likeness
the jagged Leaves have with a Lions tooth, as also Taraxacon.

The Kinds.
The subdivision of these three sorts put together will make ten. 1 Garden
Succory. 2. Broad Garden Succory. 3. Yellow Succory. 4. Wild Succory. 5. Common
Garden Endive. 6. Curled Endive. 7. Meadow Endive. 8. Wild Endive. 9. Dandelion.
10. Succory Dandelion.

The Form.
Common-Garden Succory has broad Leaves somewhat hairy, not much unlike to
Endive, but narrower and many times deeply cut in on the edges, amongst which
do rise up stalks, upon which are placed the like Leaves but smaller. The
sta^ke divides it self toward the top into many branches, whereon do grow
little b^e^v Flowers consis^ing of many small Leaves, after which follows
white seed. The Root is toug^, long, and white of color, continuing many
years; from which as from every part of the Plant does issue forth, white
bitter and milky jui^e: the whole Plant is of a bitter taste likewise.

The Places and Time.
The two first are commonly sown in Gardens, yet it is said likewise that they
grow by high way-sides, and in untilled and barren ground; but I suppose that
is meant only of the wild sorts, though Gerard affirm it of those of the
Garden. The two first of Endive which are the fifth and sixth in the Catalogue
of the Kinds* are also Inhabitants of the Garden, and no other place that I can
find; If it be sown in the Spring, it quickly comes up to Flower, seedeth in
harvest* and afterward dies; but if it be sown in July, it remains till
Winter, and then if it be taken up by the roots, and suffered to lie two
hours, till it be so tough that it may be wrapped very close together; and
afterward buried in the Earth with the roots upward it is called Whited
Endive, and may be taken up at convenient times, and used in Sallets all
Winter. The sorts of Wild-Endive being the seventh and eighth grow wild in
sundry places in England, upon untilled barren grounds especially in chalky and
stony places, flowring in August. The ninth and tenth are found almost in every
place, and Flower almost at all times, but especially in March, if the cold
weather hinder them not.

The Temperature.
Endive and Succory are cold and dry in the second degree, but the VVild-sorts
of them as also of Dandelion are somewhat dryer, than those of the Gardens, and
cleanse, and open more by reason of the bitterness, which is joined with them,
and in some cases are more effectual,

The Virtues.
The Leaves of the Garden kinds are used both for Meat and Medicine, for they
may be boiled and eaten with Butter and Vinegar, either by themselves, or with
other Herbs, as Lettice, Spinach, etc. or chopped into brothes as other
Pot Herbs are. The Whited Endive is the most rare, and that may be eaten,
either raw in Sallets, or boiled in broth as aforesaid. Both Endive and Succory
any ways used, as long as they be green, do cool the heat of the Liver, and
by a special property do strengthen it, and open the obstructions thereof, for
which virtues they do deserve to be much esteemed; For it is a great
preservation of health to have the Liver temperate and unstopped, seeing it is
the place, whither the nutriment is sent from the Stomach to be wrought and
disposed of, for the good of the whole body, so that if this part do not
rightly perform its offiice, which is cheifely to convert the purer part into
blood, and to send away the rest by those conveyances which are destinated for
the purpose, all things will not go well. It is effectual also to help the
stopping of the Gall, yellow Jaundise, lack of sleep, stopping of Urine, hot
burning Feavours, and great heat of the Stomach. A handful of the Leaves or
Roots boiled in Wine or Water, and a draught thereof drunk fa^^ing, d^iveth
forth Chollerick and Phlegmatic humors, helps the Dropsy, and those that
have an ev^ll disposition in their bodies, by reason of long sickne^^e, evil
diet, etc. whereby the nutriment of the body is converted into some predominant
humor to the great prejudice of the rest. A decoction either of Succory Endive
or Dandelion or of all three made with Wine and drunk is very effectual
against long lingering Agues; and a dram of the seed in Powder, drunk in Wine
before the Fit of an Ague, helps to drive it away, and is also available for
the Faintings, Swooning and Passions of the heart, outwardly applied, they
serve to allay the sharp humors which are the cause of fretting Ulcers, hot
Tumors, and Swellings, and Pestile(...) Sores, and wonderfully help not only
the redness and inflammations of the Eyes but the dimnesse of the sight also.
They are also used to allay the pains of the Gout. The distilled Water of
these Herbs are effectual for all the purposes aforesaid, and being taken
Morning and Evening, helps the straightness and stopping of the Breast, and
is good for Women with Child, to strengthen them and their senses, and
likewise for Children that are troubled with Headache proceeding or Heat; The
said water, or the juice or the Leaves bruised, is very effectual for Nurses
Breasts, that are pained with abundance of Milk, allayeth Swellings,
Inflammations, St. Anthonies fire, Pushes, VVheales, and Pimples, especially
used with a little Vinegar; as also to wash Pestiferous sores.

CHAP. CLXXXII. Of Alecoast and Maudlin.
The Names
IT will not be improper to put these two herbs together, because they have
some affinity both in their flowers names and properties; The first is called
in Latin Costus hortorum (for its Greek name I never met with) to distinguish
it from the Indian Costus, which is a Root from whence the electuary
Cariocostinum has its denomination. It is also called Balsamita major or Mas,
Mentha Grae^a, Saracenica Officinarum, Salvia Romana, Herba lassulata, Herba
Sanctae Mariae. In English Costmary, and Alecoast, Maudlin is called in Greek
(...), quasi, non senescens, because the flowers gathered in a fit time wax not
old nor decay by age; in Latin Costus hortorum minor, Mentha Corimbifera, and
Eupatorium Mesue, whence it may be gathered that it is good for the Liver,
though it be nor the true Eupatorium.

The Kinds.
The sorts of both put together are in all, six. 1. Ale Coast or Costmary. 2.
Common Maudlin. 3. White Maudlin. 4. Small Maudlin. 5. Purple sweet Maudlin. 6.
Fennel leafed Maudlin.

The Form.
Alecoast is a sweet herb bearing many broad and long pale green Leaves,
snipped about the edgsevery one upon a long foostalk among which rise up many
long green round stalks with such like leaves on them, but lesser up to the
top, where it spreads it self into three or four branches, every one bearing
an umbel or t^ft of gold yellow flowers, somewhat like unto Tansy flowers, but
lesser, which turn into small heads containing small flat long seed; The root
is somewhat hard and stringy, and being divided may be thereby propagated.

The Places and Time
The three first are found only in Gardens with us, yet they have been found
natural in diverse rough untilled places of Tuscany, in Italy, and Narbone in
France; the three last grow in dry rocky and barren grounds. They do all
commonly flower about the months of June and July.

The Temperature.
Alecoast and Mandlin are both of them hot and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.
^o^th these Herbs are very effectually used by those that are troubled with
evil cold and weak Livers, for to them it is very freindly; and therefore it
is very profitable for those that are fallen into a continual evil disposition
of the whole body, called Cachexia, as has been formerly said, proceeding from
the coldness of the Liver; especially if a dram of the juice being first
clarified, and afterward boiled to its due thickness, which is something
thicker then Honey, be taken every morning. It helps the Rickets, and Worms
in Children, provokes Urine, and gently (without purging) disburdens the body,
of Choler and Phlegm; it is good for the coldness of the Mother,
strengthens the Stomach, and stays Vomiting, and so does the juice being
drunk in Wine. The Conserve of the Leaves made with Sugar is of very good use
to warm and dry the brain and open the stopping thereof, and to help Rheumes,
and distillations taken in the quantity of a bean. Either of the herbs alone,
or with Parsnip-seeds boiled in Wine and drunk, cures the griping, and
torments of the belly or guts, as also the flix. It is profitable for the
greifes of the breast and Lunges, it breaks Imposthumes, and draws evil
humors from the eyes and other parts. Being boiled either in Wine or Whey, and
drunk, it is good for them which have taken any thing which is too Narcoticall,
as Opium, Hemlock or the like, and for biting of Serpents, especially if one
dram of the Powder of the root thereof be taken in Wine, with the like weight
of the seed of Wild Parsnips. The decoction thereof is good for Women to sit
in, to provoke sweat, to bring down the terms, and to ease the pain that
comes by the retention of them. The decoction of the flowers is good for many
of the purposes aforesaid; as also to open the obstructions of the Milt,
Kidneys, and Bladder, to take away the skurfe, and scab wherewith the head is
infested, if it be washed therewith; and so it kills the Lice thereof. Being
put into Ale, it gives thereunto a very pleasant taste* (as it does to all
Sallets and Sawces, wherein it is used) and therefore as I conceive is was
called Alecoast.

CHAP. CLXXXIII. Of Dockes.
The Names.
IT is celled in Greek (...) quod valet exinanire vel ventrem levare, because
the decoction thereof looseneth the belly. It is also called in Latin Lapathum
and Ramex, Some of the kinds hereof are called in Latin Oxylapathum
Hippolapathum and Hydrolapathum, from the form, bigness, and place where they
grow. Bloodwort which is also a kind of Dock, is called Lapathum Nigrum, of
some, and Rubrum or Rubens by others, Sanguis Draconis herba also, and Lapathum
sangineum from the bloody color wherewith the whole Plant is possessed.

The Kinds.
The sorts which I shall put under this little are nine, though there be diverse
others that might be referred unto the same. 1. The red Dock. 2. Sharppointed
Dock. 3. The smaller pointed Dock. 4. The Common Wild Dock. 5. The round Leafed
Dock of Africa. 6. The great water Dock. 7. The lesser Water-Dock. 8. The
strong sented Sea-Dock. 9. Blood-wort.

The Form.
The red Dock sends forth many tough and narrowish green Leaves, very much
pointed at the ends, among which rises up a suffe hard stalk, two or three
foothigh, set with the like Leaves, but smaller still up to the top, something
like unto sorrel, but that it is neither so tender nor sower, being rather of
a bitterish taste, and has the stalk branched forth toward the top into
sundry large sprigges bearing small reddish flowers and brown triangular seed
after them: The root is great long, and many times forked, being blackish on
the outside, and somewhat reddish, and yellowish within, abiding many years,
but sometime spoiled with extremity of Winter.

The Places and Time.
The four first are most commonly found in moist Meadows, and sometimes in
upland grounds also. The fifth in Africa near Sophia. The sixth and seventh
by sides of running streams in diverse places of this land. The eighth grows
by the Sea side not far from Mompelier. The last is found wild in some
places, but not so commonly as in Gardens. Most of them rise up at the spring
of the year, flower in June and July, and their seed is ripe in August.

The Temperature.
All Docks are generally cold, some more and some less, they do all of them
dry, but not after the same manner; yet some think them to be dry in the third
degree.

The Signature and Virtues.
The reddish and yellowish color of the inside of the roots of diverse Docks,
do signify that they are good for hot Livers, and the Jaundise; the red that is
in them representing the Liver, and the yellow, the Jan^dise: and therefore
blood-wort is most effectual for the first, and the Dock, which has the
yellowest root for the second, and for both these purposes they are used with
other things to be put into Ale or Beer, especially the roots which have an
opening quality in them, fit to loosen and make the belly soluble, to open
obstructions, and to cool and cleanse the blood. The decoction of the seed made
in Wine or Water and drunk, helps the wambling pains of the Stomach*
venomous bitings and the bloody flix. The root boiled in Wine, and drunk is
also good for the Jaundise, provokes Urine and the terms, and breaks and
expels the Stone and Gravel. The same boiled in Vinegar or bruised raw,
heals all Scurfs, Itch, Manginesse, and other festering, and corroding
Scabbs, the place being anointed or bathed therewith, and the substance of
them being stamped; and applied boiled or raw, dif^usseth kernells and
swellings behind the Ears, helps the hardness of the Milt, the Kings-Evill,
and stops the too much flowing of Women's courses being applied to the
Matrix. The distilled Water of the Herb and Roots being brought into a
consistence by being mixed with other proper ingredients works the same
effects, and of it self it cleanses the skin of Freckles, Morphewes and all
other Spots and discolorings therein. Blood-wort is as wholesome a Potherb as
any that grows in a Garden, though it be in these days used only by those few
which know it to be so.

CHAP. CLXXXIIII. Of Sorrel.
The Names.
IT is called (...) in Greek, from (...) signifying sharp, because it is sharp
both in taste and form: and some Latin writers call it Oxalis, after the
ordinary Greek name, for it has others also, as (...) because it may be said
Metaphorically to pierce the tongue like a Raisor with its sharpness; of Galen
it is called (...), that is Acidum lapathum, or Acidus Rumex sour Dock because
it is so very like a Dock in several respects: other Latine-writers call it
Acetosa and Acedula, for its sharpness; Rumex hortensis Sheep Sorrel is
called Lapatiolum and Acetosella by diverse.

The Kinds.
The Sorts of sorrel besides Wood sorrel which I have entreated already, are
Sixteen. 1. Ordinary Sorrel. 2. Great Sorrel of Germany. 3. Round leafed
Sorrel. 4. Tuberous rooted Sorrel. 5. The greater bulbous Sorrel. 6. Small
Mountain round leafed Sorrel. 7. Creeping Sorrel with broad Leaves. 8. Candy
Sorrel. 9. Sorrel of Naples. 10. Marygold Leafed Sorrel. 11. Indian Sorrel.
12. Indian Sorrel with swollen husks. 13. Mountain Welsh Sorrel. 14.
Sheep Sorrel. 15. The smallest Sorrel. 16. Tall narrow leafed Sorrel.

The Form.
Sorrel has tender green Leaves long and full of juice, broad and forked as
it were at end toward the foot-stalke, as those of Spinach and Mercury are, of
a sharp sour taste: the stalks are slender, bearing purplish long heads,
somewhat, like those of the Dock described in the former Chapter, whereof it is
a kind; wherein lie three-square shining brown seed, like, but lesser then the
other: the root is smaller then any of the Docks, but the strings thereof go
further into the earth then of any other herb, sometimes to the depth of three
Cubits, as the Lord Bacon witnesses in his natural History; it abides a long
time without decaying, having green Leaves all the Winter, except in the very
extremity thereof, which often takes away all or most of its Leaves.

The Places and Times.
The ordinary Sorrel grows commonly in Gardens, and so does the Sorrel with
round Leaves. The tuberous kinds grow in some places near unto the water side,
and the sheep Sorrel grows in upland grounds where Sheep use to frequent.
The two last grow in some sandy and gravelly grounds, and upon the banks of
some ditches; As for the rest, their places are most of them set down in their
titles. All of them flower and seed in May and June, except the Indian sort
which flowreth not till July, and their seed is ripe in August.

The Temperature.
Sorrel is cooling and drying in the second degree, and by its sowernesse
cutteth tough humors.

The Virtues.
The juice of Sorrel in the Summertime is a profitable sauce in many meats
and pleasant to the taste, especially if some Sugar be added thereunto; It
cools an hot Stomach, moves appetite to meat, tempereth the heat of the
Liver, opens the stoppings, and preventeth the walling thereof; and is
effectual in all hot diseases to cool any inflammation, and heat of blood in
Agues, Pestilentiall or Choleric, or other sickness and fainting rising from
heat, and to refresh the Spirits being almost spent with the violence of
furious or fiery fits of Agues, and to quench the thirst in them, for which
there is nothing better then Sorrell-Posset drink, which may be made by putting
the juice to milk when it begins to sees. The Leaves eaten in the morning
fasting, in the time of Pestilence do m^rvailously preserve from infection, but
much more the conserve thereof which is good for all the purposes aforesaid.
The seeds thereof brayed and drunk with Wine and Water, are very wholesome
against the Chollick, and fretting of the Guts; it stops the hot Fluxes of
Women's Courses, or of humors in the bloody Flux or Flux of the Stomach, and
helps it when it is annoyed with repletion. The roots also in Decoction, or
in Powder is effectual for the said purposes, and further it helps the
Jaundise, and expels Gravel and the Stone from the Kidneys, and a decoction
of the Flowers made with Wine and drunk helps the Black Jaundise, as also the
inward Ulcers of the body of Bowels. The Leaves wrapped up in a Wort Leaf and
roasted under the Embers, and applied to any hard Impostume or Tumor, Botch,
Boil, or Plague sores both ripeneth and breaks it and discusseth Kernells in
the Throat, if applied in time. The juice with a little Vinegar is profitable
to bathe those places which are troubled with the Itch, Tetter, Ringworm, St.
Anthonies fire, etc: The distilled Water of the herb is of much good use for
all the purposes aforesaid killing Worms and resisting Poison.

CHAP. CLXXXV. Of Beets.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and (...), Teutlon and Seutlon, ab impulsu, quod
facile excrescat, because it comes up within few days after the sowing, and
afterward grows very fast until it attain to its bigness, which in ^ome
hot Countries will be three foot in length, and of a great breadth. It is
called Beta in Latin, quoniam Figuram Luerae Graecae C dum semine turget,
refer videtur, because the figure of it being in seed is somewhat like the
Greek Letter Beta, as Columella has it. It is called also Sicula, and Sicla
by some because it is supposed that it was first brought out of Sicily, viz.
The White Beet. In this place for want of a fitter I shall speak of Spinach,
because it deserves not a Chapter by it self, Ob raritatem in usu medico,
which made the Greeks call it (...), being seldom used in Physic, yet amongst
Sallets and Pot Herbs there be few more common. Some Latin Authors call it
Spinachia, and Spinaccum; others Spanachia, supposing it grew originally in
Spain, and Olus Hispanicum.

The Kinds.
There be nine sorts of Beets, and but three of Spinach, with put together will
make up a Dozen. 1. The Common white Beet. 2. The Common red Beet 3. The Common
green Beet: 4. The Roman red Beet. 5. The Italian Beet. 6. Prickly Beets of
Candy. 7. Sea Beets. 8. Yellow Beet. 9. Flat stalked Beet. 10. The greater
Spinach with Prickly Seeds. 11. Thelesser Spinach with prickly Seeds. 12.
Spinach with smooth seeds. Spinach sometimes bears no seed, but that is only
by accident.

The Form.
The Common white Beet has many great Leaves next the Ground of a whitish
green color; the stalk is great strong and ribbed or crested, bearing great
store of Leaves upon it up to the very top almost; the Flowers grow in very
long tufts, small at the ends, and turning down their heads, which are small
pale greenish yellow burres, giving cornered prickly seed: the root is great,
long, and hard when it has given seed, of no use at all, but abides the
former Winter with its Leaves upon it, as also the other sorts do, perishing
commonly the second Winter.

The Places and Time.
All the sorts of Beets except the yellow kind which Gesner says, is to be
found about Durachium and Alexium Cities of Macedoina, do grow in our Gardens,
some by their names express whence they came thither, and so do the kinds of
Spinach. The Beets flower not the first year, but having continned one Winter
green, they then give their flower in the beginning of July, and their seed is
ripe in August. Spinach sown in the Spring seedeth within two months after;
but if it be sown in the Autumn, it seedeth not till next Spring, continuing
green all the Winter.

The Temperature.
The White Beet is temperate in heat and moisture, but the other sorts are dry
and all of them abstersive by reason of the nitrous quality that is in them.
Sp^nach is evidently cold, and moist almost in the second degree.

The Virtues.
All sorts of Beets eaten too frequently do become nauscous to the Stomach* and
therefore their seldom use commends them most, yet they are very good against
obstructions and stoppings of the Liver, and do greatly he^p the Spleen,
e^pecially the juice of them, which is also good for the Headache, and
Swimmings therein, and turnings of the Brain, if it be conveyed up into the
Nosthrills, for then it does gently draw forth Rheum, and purges the Head,
and consequently eases the pains of the Eyes, and the Inflammations thereof,
i^ it be app^ied to the Temples. The white Beet does loosen the belly much, and
provokes Urine, and is also effectual against Venomous Creatures. The juice
thereof with Honey dropped into the Ears causes the pains and noise thereof
to cease, and snuffed up into the Nose, recovereth the want of smelling, if the
fault lie therein. The broth of the Root and Leaves scowreth away Scurfe,
Scales, and Nits of the head, and eases the pain of kibed heels, and helps
Freckles and Spots, if they be first rubbed over with Saltpeter, and so it
helps the falling of the Hair* and cures running sores that spread abroad
wasting the flesh as they go, as also burning out of Wheales, burnings,
inflammations, and such like. Spinag^ is of much use amongst the Cooks though
of but little amongst the Doctors; yet some say that used in Broth or Pottage,
it makes the belly soluble, eases pains of the back, opens the breast, and
strengthens the Stomach.

CHAP. CLXXXVI. Of Smallage.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Heleoselium from (...) signifying a Marsh, and
(...) Apium, that is Parsley; because it is a kind of Parsley, growing naturally
in Marshy places, and for the same reason it is called in Latin Paludapium,
Apium Palustre and Apium rusticum. In Shops, it is called Apium absolutely, and
without any addition, where they follow the Arabian Physicians, for the most
part, who give it no other name but (...) being a general word, as Apium also
is: some have thought fit to add to each an Epithet to distinguish of what
sort it is. In English, it is called Smallage and Marsh Parsley, for the reason
above mentioned.

The Kinds.
There be but two sorts of Smallage which I read of 1, Ordinary Smallage. 2.
Sweet Selinum or Smallage.

The Form.
Ordinary Smallage grows with green, smooth, and glittering Leaves, somewhat
like unto those of Parsley, but much bigger; from amongst which rises up a
pretty handsome hollow chamfered stalk, adorned with diverse Leaves, like unto
the former, but lesser, up to the top almost; where its small white Flower^,
put forth themselves in large tufts or ^mbells, which turn into smaller seed
then that of Parsley: the root is somewhat great, short, and thick, with
abundance of black strings annexed thereunto. The who^e Plant is of a very
strong sent, somewhat like Coriander, neither is the taste of it being raw, ever
a white pleasanter, yet after it has endured the correction of the fire, it
becomes much more tolerable.

The Places and Time.
Though Smallage does oftentimes grow in Gardens, and that very prosperously,
yet the natural place thereof is in wet and marish grounds, whence it was
first brought, and is still to be found in diverse places: The natural place of
the second is not known, for though it be common in Greece and Italy, yet it
grows not without sowing and replanting. They Flourish, both when the Garden
Parsley does, the stalks likewise not coming up the same year as they are
sown but the next, and then the seeds will be ripe in July and August.

The Temperature.
Smallage is hot and dry in the end of the second degree, of a bitter taste, and
consequently op^ning obstructions.

The Virtues.
Though Parsley be more edible then Smallage yet Smallage is of greater force in
many things then it, for it is much more availeable in opening the
obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and in rarifying thick flegmes, and
cleansing it, and the blood withal, and therefore the use thereof amongst
other herbs, as Watercresses, Alexanders, Cleavers, Ne^tle-tops, Elder-Buds,
etc. being chopped and boiled in Pottage in the Springtime, is not to be
despised, though happily some squeamish Stomachs will refuse them, which regard
more the pleasing of their palate then pre^erving of their health; And though
Women are more subject to squeamishness then men, yet they have less reason
to condemn this herb, for it makes their natural Courses to flow, and
therefore is good for the Green sickness; it provokes Urine also, and is
singular good against the yellow Jaundise: Neither is it without very good use
in long and lasting Agues, if the juice thereof be taken, especially if it be
made into syrup. The same juice being put to Honey of Roses, and Barley water
does perfectly cure the malicious and venomous Ulcers of the Mouth, and of the
Almonds of the Throat, if the part be washed or gargled therewith: it helps
also all other foul Ulcers and Wounds which happen to the outmost parts of the
body, clensing and healing them, if they be washed therewith: Being mingled
with Honey, it is very profitable for exulcerated Cancers, keeping them from
put refaction, and preserving them from strinking, if not healing them. The
Leaves boiled in Hog's Grease, and made into the form of a Poultis takes away
the pain of Felons and Whitloves on the fingers, and ripeneth and heals
them. The seed is especially used to break Wind, to kill Worms, and to help a
stinking breath. The root is held to be good for all the purposes aforesaid,
and to be stronger in operation then the herb, but especially to open
Obstructions, and to rid away an Ague, the juice thereof being taken in Wine or
the decoction made in the said Liquor. The smeet Smallage is eaten with great
delight as a Sallet, wherein both the Leaves and Roots may be used either raw
or boiled. It may also be fried, and eaten with meat, as Parsley oftentimes is,
or the dried herb may be powdered and strewed upon Meat: but the Venetians,
with whom it is in great request, do either eat it raw after it is whited with
Pepper, and Oil, or else a little boiled or stewed. The Herb and Root do warm
the Stomach, causing it to digest meat, and expel Wind, but the seed much
more; The Root is to be scraped and sliced, and so eaten with Oil and Vinegar.

CHAP. CLXXXVII Of Cleavers.
The Names.
IT has gotten many Gree^ names as (...) Aparine, and so it is called in
Latin also; (...) because the seed of it is like a Navel; and (...)
Phil^^^hropos, quasi hominis am^ns, because it is apt to stick upon those men's
clothes which come where it is, and it is called (...) for the same reason,
also (...) and (...). Pliny calls it Lappa minor, saying it is Lappaginis
specus, because the seeds be rough like little bunes, and therefore he calls
it also Asperugo. It is called in English Goos-beiriffe, Gooseshare,
Goosegrasse, Cleavers (or Clivers) because they cleave close to garments, etc:
and in so Countries they call the seed Beggar lice.

The Kinds.
To this sort there be only three Plants that may be referred. 1. Common
Clevers. 2. Smooth Goos-grass. 3. Purple-floured Clevers. The Common Cleavers,
has diverse rough square stalks, not so big as the tag of a point but full of
joints, and lying low upon the ground, unless it meet with a hedge or bush,
and then it climeth two or three yards high sometimes; at every of the joints it
shoots out a branch besides the Leaves thereat, which are usually six, set in
a round compass like a Star or the Rowell of a Spur, like unto the smallest
Madder; the flowers are very little and white, pearking on the tops of the
branches; the seeds are small round and hollow in the midst, in manner of a
Navell, set by couples for the most part: the root is tender and full of
stringes. The whole Plant is rough and by its ruggedness takes hold on men's
vestures and woollen garments as they pass by, and being drawn along the
tongue it fetches blood.

The Places and Times.
The first grows not only by Hedges and Ditches in most places of this Land,
but also in the Cornefields, where it does sometimes domineere, especially
amongst the Pease, which are many times almost, if not altogether, choked by
it; and sometimes in Gardens where it is a troublesome inhabitant, if the seed
be suffered to shed. The second was brought out of Spain, and the last is a
stranger also. They flower in June and July, and the seed being ripe in August
sows it self against the next year, for the old root perishes.

The Temperature.
Goose-grasse, as Galen says, is moderate hot and dry, and somewhat of thin
parts.

The Virtues.
Clevers with such simples as are mentioned in the beginning of the former
Chapter, or alone by themselves being chopped into Water-gruell and well
boiled, be very wholesome to be eaten in the Spring at their first coming up,
for cleansing the blood, and strengthening the Liver, and fitting the Body for
the season that follows, by purging away those excrementitious dregs, which
the Winter has bred in them; especially from those whose bodies are fat and
gross. The distilled water drunk twice a day, helps the yellow Jaundise, and
the Decoction of the herb will do the same, and also stay Laskes and bloody
Fluxes: the juice which is pressed out of the seeds, Stalks, and Leaves, is
good to defend Venom from the hearts of those that are bitten by Venomous
Beasts, if it be drunk in Wine. A handful of Cleavers boiled in a quart of Ale
with a little pared Liquorice, and some Currants to the one half, and then
streined, may be successefully drunk morning and evening for the Cough, and
removing Phlegm from the Stomach; It is also used to stay bleeding, the juice
or bruised Leaves being applied to any green Wound, and not only to stop the
blood, but to close up the Lips of it, and the powder of the dried herb strewed
thereupon does the same, and likewise helps old Ulcers. The herb stamped with
Swines-grease, and applied to any part that is troubled with the Kings-evill,
or any other Kernel or Wen, wastes it away, and also helps those that have
their Paps swollen through curded-Milke. Being bruised and laid a soake in
Spring Water four and twenty hours, it is a good remedy for Scabs or such
like Sores, if they be bathed with the said water. The juice dropped into the
Ears, takes away the pain of them. Dioscorides reports that the Shepherds
of his time did use ^he branches hereof to take hairs out of Milk, and so may
our Milk-maides, if they want a Strainer.

CHAP. CLXXXVIII. Of Chick-Weed.
IT is called in Greek (...), because it delighted to grow in Woods and shadowy
places, uch as the Greeks call (...); and from thence comes the Latin name
Alsine. Some of the Ancients called it Hippia: We call it Chickweed and
Chicken-weed, because Chicken, and Birds love to pick the seed thereof.

The Kinds.
I shall give you the sorts of Chick-weed as they are marshalled in the
Catalogue of British Plants, there being at least twenty. 1. Great Water
Chick-weed. 2. Berry bearing Chickweed. 3. Chick-weed like long leafed
Scurvy-grasse. 4. River-Chickweed. 5. Germander Chick-weed. 6. Fountain
Chickweed. 7. Speedwel Chick-weed. 8. Ivy Chickweed or small Henbit. 9. Great
Henbit. 10. Mouse Ear Chickweed. 11: Great Chick-weed. 12. Sea Chick-weed. 13.
Middle Chick-weed. 14. Fine Chickweed. 15. The least Chick-weed. 16. Creeping
Water Chick-weed. 17. Srone Chick-weed. 18. Right Chick-weed. 19. Upright
Chick-weed with jagged Leaves. 20. Round Leafed Chick-weed or Water Purslane.

The Form.
Chick-weed brings forth many Flexible branches full of Joints, which would
appear to be three or four foot-high, if it had any bush or such like thing,
whereon it might take hold, as sometimes it has; but commonly wanting somewhat
to uphold it through the weakness of its stalks, it lies on the ground, so
that it seems not so long; at every joint stands two smooth tender Leaves,
of a fresh green color, one against the other; from which on both sides come
forth other branches, joynted and set with Leaves in the same manner; the
flowers which grow on the top of the branches be white, much like the flowers
of Stitch-wort but lesser; in whose places succeed long knops but not great, in
which the seed is contained: The root consists of fine little Strings like
hairs. Though there be many Chick-weeds of different forms, yet if you break
any of them gently, you may easily perceive a certain Sinew in the midst of
them, which will declare it to be of this sort.

The Places and Time.
Chick-weeds some grow among bushes and briars, old Walls, gutters of houses,
and shadowy places; some in Woods and by water-sides; and others upon
Mountains and rocky places. Some of them are green all the Winter, sending
forth their flowers in the beginning of Spring and their seeds quickly after,
others are later, not flouring till June and July.

The Temperature.
Chickweed is cold and moist, and of a waterish substance; and therefore it
cools without any binding or astriction; as Galen says.

The Virtues.
As those herbs hitherto appropriated to the Liver, are for the most part to be
used inwardly, so Chick-weed may be applied outwardly to the Region of the
Liver, the herb being bruised or Clothes or Spunges dipped in the juice
thereof; which may be renewed when they be dry to the great relief of those
that are greived with the heat of the Liver, for it does cool it wonderfully.
The Decoction also taken inwardly cools and tempereth the blood inflamed in
Agues, the heat of the Stomach and Liver breaking out into the Lips, procures
Appetite being lost or become weak, is used in Hectic Feavours, and asswageth
the heat of the back and Urine. It is also effectual for the Jaundise, if it
be stamped and streined into stale Ale or White Wind, and drank first and
last, for five days together. The Leaves boiled with Marsh-mallow roots in
Water, till they be very soft adding thereunto some Hog's Grease, Powder of
Fenugreeke and Linseed, do make a very good Pultis to be applied to Swellings
or Impostumes for the ripening and breaking of them, to take away swellings o^
the Legs or of any part, to case members that are shrunk up, to comfort
Wounds in Sinewy places, to defend foul malignant and virulent Ulcers from
Inflammation during the cure, and to dissolve those swellings that will not
willingly be digested or come to suppuration; Being boiled in Vinegar and Salt,
it is good against the redness in the Face Wheales, Pushes, Itch, Scabs, St.
Anthonies fire, etc: and so is the juice either simply used or boiled with
Hog's Grease only and applied, which also helps Cramps Convulsions and
Palsyes. The Juice or distilled-Water is of much good use for all Heat and
Redness of the eyes, if some of it be dropped into them, as also into the
Ears to ease the pain of them; and is of good effect to ease the pains,
heat, and sharpness of blood in the Piles, and generally all pains in the
body that arise of Heat. The juice s^^ffed up into the Nose P^rgeth rotten
filth from the Head, and drunk with Honyed-Wine or Water, it purges the Belly
and is good for the Stone in the Kidneys and the Dropsy. It has all the
Virtues of Pellitory of the Wall, and of Purslane too, (saving only that it is
not used with meat) and therefore it helps the Toothache being boiled in
Vinegar, and the mouth gargled therewith. Little birds in Cages (especially
Linnets) are refreshed with it when they loath their meat, and the lesser sort
is called Passer^na by some.

So much for the Liver in particular. The Diseases usually proceeding there
from are the Jaundise and the Dropsy: For the former it will be needless to
enlarge particularly, because there is scarcely a Simple appropriated to the
Liver, which will not serve for the Jaundise, especially the yellow. And
therefore I shall proceed to those that have a more specific Virtue for curing
the Dropsy: for many there be more effectual for that purpose, then any yet
spoken of, and most of them are remedies for the Jaundise also.

CHAP. CLXXXIX. Of the Elder.
The Names.
IT is called by Dioscorides and other Greeks (...), because it is a lover of
the Brinks and shadowy banks of Rivers and Ditches, as the most learned
suppose, and this name is retained by Paracelsus and the modern Chymist^, in
whose Writings there is frequent mention of Granorum Acts. In Latin it is
usually called Samb^^us from Sambyx the first finder of it, yet some think that
it should rather be called Sabucus from the likeness that the musical
Instrument called Sabuck or Sambuck has with its hollow and pith-emptied Rods.
The English call it the Elder-Tree* the Scot, Boor-Tree or Bore Tree, perhaps
because the pith being done forth, it seems as if it were bored.

The Kinds.
Matthiolus and others speak of Eight kinds thereof. 1. Ordinary Elder. 2.
White berried Elder. 3. Jagged Elder. 4. Red berried Elder. 5. March Elder. 6
The Golder Rose, or Rose Elder. 7. Wall-wort Dane-Wort or Dwarf Elder which is
called in Greek (...) i. e. humilis Sambucus, in Latin Ebulus. 8. Jagged
Wall-Wort.

The Form.
The Elder-Tree which in figure is somewhat like the Ash, sends forth its
Branches very plentifully: covered with a Grayish or Ashcoloured Bark as to the
outward view, under which there is another of a green color, and under that
next to the Wood, one that is yellow and succulent, within which is contained a
white and Fungous Pith: the Leaves are somewhat like those of the Wall-Nut-Tree
but less, consisting of five and seven upon a Stalk a little nicked about
the edges, of a fair sad green color, but smelling somewhat rank and strong:
From the tops of the branches do Spring many broad Tufts or umbells of Flowers,
which by their ^all give place to small round berries, first green, then
ruddy, lastly of a black, dark purple color, full of a purplish Winy juice,
containing in them some small flat Seeds or grains; the Root is great and
thick, spreading far about: of all Wild Plants it is the first that puts
forth his Leaves, and the last that sheddeth them.

The Places and Time.
There is not a Town, nor scarcely a field where the first grows not, being
Planted commonly for Moundes, because of its speedy growth: The Second was
found by Tragus in the Woods of Germany: The Third grows wild on hills in
watery Woods: The fourth is not found but in the Gardens of the curious. The
fifth is found by waters sides, and in moorish grounds. The sixth is nursed up
only in Gardens. The seventh grows wild in many places as in the Abbey
Orchard at St. Albans, in the feilds between Bloxham and Milton in Oxfordshire,
and in diverse other places: most of these sorts Flower about Midsummer, but
Dane-wort, because it rises out of the ground every year flowreth not so
soon; The Fruit of the former is commonly ripe in August; that of the last,
not before September.

The Temperature.
Elder is hot and dry in the second and third degree, and Danewort would be of
the same quality, if it were not somewhat hotter.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Pith of the Elder being pressed with ones finger does Pit, and receive the
Print of them therein, as the Legs and Feet of Hydropick persons do; therefore
(says Crollius that excellent Author in his book of Signatures) the juice of
Elder, and the Distilled-Water of Jews-Ears (which I have treated of in the
seaventy eight Chap ^ of this work upon another occasion, though they never
grow but upon the Elder-Tree) are profitable in the Dropsy, which is a Disease
for the most part Caused by Coldness of the Liver; because the Blood-making
Faculty being vitiated and corrupted, many watery humors fall into the Abdomen
or belly between the skin and the flesh; for the removing of which, Elder is of
great Virtue: For, not only the juice and Water of Jews-Ears^, but that of the
Flowers, as also the berries green or dry, are often given with good success
to help the Dropsy, by evacuating great plenty of waterish Humors: the bark
of the Root also boiled in Wine, or the juice or distilled water thereof two
Ounces being taken fasting and two hours before Supper works the same
effect, yea more readily then any of the former; the juice of the root taken,
provokes Vomit mightily and purges the Watery humors of the Dropsy, but not
without trouble to the Stomach. The yellow middle or, if you will, the
undermost bark is commended by its Signature for the Yellow Iaunndise, by the
said Crollius; which must therefore be sleeped in Wine, with one or two
Jewes-Eares; of which strained, drink a good Draught, morning and evening: The
distilled Water thereof, or a Syrup made of its juice may be used to the same
purpose: For besides that they Open the Belly and Evacuate hurtful humors, the
Medicines prepared of this Bark, have great Virtue to open all Obstructions.
Six drops of the Spirit of Elder-salt taken in broth is commended in the
Scurvy. The decoction of the Root in Wine cures the Biting of Venomous beasts,
as also of a mad Dog, and mollifyeth the hardness of the Mother, if Women
sit therein; and opens the Veins, and brings down the Courses; the berries
boiled in Wine, perform the same effects; the Hair of the Head or of any other
part washed therewith, is made black: The juice of the green Leaves applied to
the inflammation of the Eyes asswageth them: and the Leaves boiled till they be
tender, then mixed and beaten with Barley meal asswageth inflammations* ^n any
other part, helps places that are burnt with fire or scalded with Water,
cures fistulous Ulcers, being laid thereupon; and eases the pains of the
Gout, being beaten and boiled with the tallow of a Bull or Goat, and ^^id warm
thereto. The Powder of the seeds first prepared in Vinegar and then taken in
Wine half a dram at a time for certain days together, is a mean; to abate
and consume the flesh of a corpulent body, and to keep it lean. Should I give
you all the Virtues of Elder at large, I should much exceed the usual Limits
of a Chapter, and therefore I shall only give you a Breviat of them and refer
you to that learned piece of Dr. Mart^n Blockwich called the Anatomy of Elder,
where you may satisfy your self perfectly of every particular. There is hardly
a Disease from the Head to the Foot, but it cures; for besides the Virtues I
have already mentioned, it is profitable for the Headache, for Ravings and
Wakings, Hypocondriack Mellancholy, the Falling Sickness, the Apo^^exy and
Palsy, (...)rrius, To^^h-ach, Deafness, want of smelling, Blemishes of the
(...) and Head Diseases of the mouth and Throat, the infirmities of the Lungs,
H^^sting, and Hearsenesse, the Pleurify and Ptisick, Women's breasts being sore,
swooning and P(...)esse, in Feavours, the Plague, Pox, Measles, Diseases of the
Stomach, the Worms and other Diseases of the Gutts, the Hemorrhoides, the
Stone, Diseases of the Matrix, etc: Neither is there any part about this Tree
without its use. The Leaves, Berries, Seeds, Root, and Barks, I have already
spoken of. Of the flowers are made conserves, a Syrup, and Honey, Water, and
Spirits, Vinegar, and Oxy(...), a Wine, Oil, etc: The young shoots boiled like
Asparage^, and the young Leaves and Stalks boiled in fat broth draws forth
mightily Choler and tough Phlegm, and so do the tender Leaves eaten with Oil
and Salt: The VVood serves to make Skewets for Butchers, and diverse other
things. The Pith in the middle of the Stalks being dried, and put into the
holes of hollow and fistulous Ulcers that are ready to close, opens and
dilateth the Orifices: whereby injections may be use and other remedies applied
for the cure of them, and may be used to keep open Issues instead of a Pease.
It is said that if a Horse that cannot stale be stricken gently with a Stick
hereof and some of the Leaves be bound under his Belly, it will make him stale
quickly. It is said also, that if a branch hereof be put into the trench where
a Mole is, it will either drive him forth, or kill him there: The Mountain or
Red-berried (...) has the properties that the common Elder has, but much
weaker. The Marsh Elder is of the like purging quality, with the common sort,
especially the be^^ies or juice of them. The Danewort is not only more
powerful then the Elder, for all the forementioned purposes, but has
particular Virtues that are not in the other, or at least are nothing so
prevalent. The juice of the root of Danewort, applied to the Throat, heals
the Quinsy or Kings-Evill: the Fundament likewise is stayed from falling down,
if the juice thereof be put therein. The Powder of the Seeds taken in the
Decoction of Ground Pine with a little Cinnamon, to the quantity of a dram at a
time is an approved remedy, both for the Gout, Joynt-Aches, and Sciatica, and
also for the French disease: for it eases the pains by withdrawing the humors
from the places affected, and by drawing forth those humors that are fluent,
peccant, and offensive: and so does the Powder of the Root used as aforesaid.
Wine, wherein the root has been steeped a night, seldom fails to drive away
an Ague at the second taking. An Ointment made in May with the Leaves hereof,
and May-butter, is highly esteemed by many, as a sovereign remedy for all
outward pains, Aches, and Cramps, in the Joints, Nerves, or Sinews, for
starcknesse and Lamenesse, coming by cold or any other Casualty, and generally
to warm comfort and strengthen all the outward parts being ill affected; as
also to mollify the hardness, and to open the obstructions of the Spleen, the
greived parts being anointed therewith.

CHAP. CLXXXX. Of Soldanella.
The Names.
NOtwithstanding the dissimilitude that this Plant has with any of the
Cole-worts, yet it is called in Greek (...) by Dioscorides and others, whom the
Latins following have called Brassica marina, not without great oversight in
both: Neither are some of our English Writers to be excused, who follow their
Authors to the very heels, and call it Sea Cole-wort. But some Latin Authors
considering the unreasonablenesse of the former name, have called it Soldana,
Soldanella a consolidando, and Convolvulus marin^^: in English Sea-Bind-weed,
and Sea-With-wind, because the branches are winding, the Flowers like to the
small Bind-weed, and it grows naturally upon the Seacoasts. It is called
also Sea-bells; the Flowers being like Bells, and some call it Seafole-foot,
for the likeness of its Leaves, and those of Coltsfoot, and Scottish
Scurvy-grasse, because they use it in steed thereof.

The Kinds.
To this kind it will not be amiss to refer these three sorts. 1. Soldanella
or Sea-bind-weed. 2. The greater Soldanella or Sea-bind-weed. 3. The greater
Mountain Soldanella.

The Form.
Sea-bind-weed has many slender brownish green branches, trailing and lying
upon the ground, beset with small round Leaves, not much unlike those of Asara
bacca, but smaller, betwixt which Leaves grows sometimes one, and sometimes two
at a Joint; At the stalks come forth Flowers growing but one in a place, of a
perfect Bell-fashion, and of a bright red Carnation color, much like unto
those of the small Bind-weed, whereof it is a kind, only it is a little larger;
the Seeds is black, and grows in round husks: the Root is small and long,
spreading it self a little way, and then rising up again, as the other
Bind-weeds do: Any part thereof being broken, sends forth a whitish water of
a bitter salt and unpleasant taste, which the Leaves also have.

The Place and Time.
The First grows plentifully upon the Sea Coasts, both in England, and
elsewhere, especially near unto Lee in Essex, at Mersey in the same County, in
most places of the Isles of Thanet and Sheppie, and in many places along the
Northern Coast: The Second grows both wild in desert places, and is received
into Gardens, also in Syria, according to Ranwolfius, and is to be found upon
the Coasts of Naples, according to Imperatus: the last grows on the Snowy
Hills of Hungary, as Clusius says, and upon the Mountains of Wales, not far
from Cowmers meare in North Wales, as Gerard says. The two first flower in
June, and their seed is ripe in August: the last flowreth not till July upon
the cold Mountains, but sooner in those Gardens where it is nursed up.

The Temperature.
Soldanella is hot and dry in the second degree, being of a bitter taste, and
consequently of an astringent qua^itie.

The Virtues.
There is not a better herb in the World for the Dropsy, then Soldanella (which
the shops call Br^ssic^ marina or the Sea-Cole wort) though very improperly as
I have said, and because there is another Plant to which that name coth
particularly belong (for being taken inwardly, it is very powerful in purging
down all kind of waterish and Phlegmati^k humors, which are the cause of a
Dropsy) Doscorides and others write, that it is an enemy to the Stomach, and
therefore advise that it be boy^ed in the broth of fat meat and drunk, to
hinder the strength of its working, and they say also that it is dangerous for
those that have not strong bodies: but though that wrought so vio ently which
grew in their C^imate, yet that which we use in England, is a most safe
Medicine, and may be given to Children and weak Persons. Howsoever it is
usually given in the broth of a Cock with Ra^sins, and Ann^seeds, in Powder and
Pills with Cinnamon Ginger, Anniseeds, Mastick or Sugar, as also with Rubarb and
Cubebs, for Rubarb is counted an excellent con^o^t for it. The juice also, not
pressed but iss^ing forth of its own accord when it is broken gathered and
dried, and afterward re^ented or made soft, and laid as a P^ainer to the
bottom of the belly draws forth watery Hydropick-humours by se^ge; And least
the^e two u^es should not be sufficient it has al^o an excellent property, not
only to open the obstructions of the L^ver, but to strengthen the same also.
The Powder of the Leaves mixed with Cinnamon Ginger and Sugar, is an excellent
remedy against the Worms. The Leaves may be eaten after the manner of
Scurvy-Grasse to purge the belly. The Powder of the Herb is of very good use to
bring or raise up flesh in ceep and hollow Ulcers, he^ping also to heal them.
The Mountaine-Soldanella is good to con^o^i^ate Wounds, and he^p the Sciat^ca
and ^out.

CHAP. CLXXXXI. Of Bryony.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), V^tis alba, and V^talba, not that it is a Vine,
but because it is somewhat like one; as also (...) a (...) signifying to put
^orth because it puts forth many branches, which c^amber upon the adjoining
bushes growing by them; it is likewise called (...) because formerly ^ome u^ed
the ^eeds or grains to get off Hair growing in those places it should not. In
Latin, of some V^t^cella of others Rorastrum, Apiast^llum, and Uva Tam^n a;
but of most V^tis alba, and Bryonia; in English Bryony, White-Bryony
Wh^te-VVild-Vine: the Grapes or Berries that grow thereon being called
Te^ter-berries, because they are effectual to kill Tetters. The black Bryony is
called S^gillum Sancta Maria, out Ladies Signet.

The Kinds.
Though there be but two sorts hereof growing naturally in England, yet I find
there be others of this kind growing beyond the Seas. 1. Common White Bryony or
Wild Vine. 2. Common White Bryony, with black-Berries. 3. Black Bryony with
black-fruit in Clusters. 4. Candy White Bryony with double Berries. 5. Black
Bryony with single red Berries. 6. Common black Bryony, or our Ladies Signet.

The Form.
The Common White Briony brings forth diverse long and tender Stalks, with
many clasping tendrells, by which it catches hold and clambereth on those
things which are next it. The Leaves are broad, and somewhat rough, divided
after the same manner as those of the ordinary Vine are, but more hairy and
whiter of color: The flowers be small, and white, growing many together
toward the tops of the branches, consisting of five small Leaves a piece, laid
open like a star; the Berries which succeed them, grow in little Clusters,
but not so near one to another as Grapes do, green at first, but red when
they be ripe. The Root sometimes grows to the bigness of a Child of a year
old, so that it has been by some cut into the form of a Man, and called a
Mandrake, being set again into the Earth; It is of a white yellowish color,
extreme bitter, and altogether of an unpleasant taste.

The Places and Time.
The first grows on banks under hedges, and sometimes as a Weed amongst
Pot Herbs. The second in Germany, Bohemia, etc: The third is mentioned by
Dioscorides and others, but its place is not certainly known. The Fourth in
Creet. The fifth in Germany, by a Village named Huningen. The last in very many
places in our own Land in Hedg-rowes and Coppices. They flower in May, or
thereabouts, and bring forth their ripe berries in Autumn, yet those of
Germany and Candy are not so forward as ours, and seldom bring their berries
to ripeness in our Country.

The Temperature.
White Bryony, which is of greatest use, is in all his parts hot and dry,
exceeding the third degree, especially of heat, of great force in cleansing and
scouring, by reason whereof it purges and draws forth not only Choleric and
Phlegmatic humors, but watery also.

The Signature and Virtues
Because Bryony is said by Crollius to have the Signature of the Dropsy,
therefore I have appropriated it thereunto. And indeed, though being taken
alone it purges the belly with great violence, troubling the Stomach and
burning the Liver, yet being corrected by adding unto it Ginger, Cinnamon,
Quince or such like, it is very profitable therein, for it draws away Water
abundantly, both by Vomit and stool, a scruple or two of the Powder of the
dried root with a third part of Cinnamon and Ginger, being drunk in a little
White Wind; The juice decoction, Syrup, and Electuary, may be used for the
same purpose. Now because every one knows not the way of gathering the juice,
I shall here set it down: In April make a deep overthwart cut or gash into a
Briony root, taking away the Earth first from it; put in a Goose-quill, a
little under the slit, sloping the quill at the end, which you must thrust into
the root: but first make a hole with your knife to get in the quill, and so you
may gather great store of the Water of Briony, placing a receiver under the
quill, for the making of the compound Water of Briony, a spoonful whereof
taken by those that are troubled with fits of the Mother eases them, it
potently expells the Afterbirth, and cleanses the Womb exceedingly. It is
likewise profitable in the Falling Sickness, Palsy, Apoplexy, Swimming of the
Head and other diseases of the Brain by a specific Virtue, that it has in
drawing away Phlegm and Rheumatick humors, that oppress those parts. It
provokes Urine, and cleanses the Reins and Kidneys from Gravel and Stone,
opens the obstructions of the Spleen, and consumes the hardness and swe^ing
thereof. A scruple of the Root in Powder, being taken in White Wind brings
down Women's Courses, but is not to be used by Women with Child for fear of
abortion. An E^ectuary made o^ the Roots with Honey o^ Sugar is ^ingula^ good
for them that are short-Winded, troubled with an old Cough, pain in the fides,
and for such as are hurt or brui^ed inwardly, by any fall, for it ^issolveth
and expels the clo^ted or congealed blood. The Root is good against the
biting of any V^^tmous Creature, and kills Worms in the body. It is good in
the K^ngs-Evill, the juice being taken with equal parts of Wine and Honey. The
Faecula or Dregs thereof are u^ed for the aforesaid Diseases, five or ten
grains being taken at a time. It also scowreth the Skin, and takes away
Wrinkles, Freckles, Sun-burning black-markes, Spots and Scarres of the Face, if
it be boiled in Oil till it be consumed, and so it takes away black and blew
spots, which come of Stripes or Falls, and dissolveth new swellings. The Root
bruised and applied of it self to any place where the bones are broken,
helps to draw them forth; Being stamped with Wine, and applied, it breaks
Boiles, and helps Whit-loavs that grow about the Roots of the Nails. It
cleanses the skin from the Morphew, Leprosy, all running Scabs and Manginesse,
if a bath be made thereof, or the juice applied thereunto. The berries may be
used for the same purpose, and the distilled Water* though not so strong as the
former, is used for Freckles and Spots in the Face. A Pessary made of the Root,
brings down the Courses in Women, and brings forth the Afterbirth, and
Dead-Child; and a Bathe made hereof cleanses the Womb, the party sitting
therein.

CHAP. CLXXXXII. Of Mechoacan and Jalap.
The Names
MEchoacan is of later Invention, and therefore has no Greek name. It is
called in Latin Mechoacanna, Mechoacana, Mechoaca, Mechoaca Peruviana,
Mechoacanum Indicum because it is brought from a place in the Province of New
Spain, called Mechoacan, near the Ci^ty Mex^co, as also Rhabarbarum album,
and Rhabarbarum Mechoacanum, to distinguish it from Rubarb, to which it is like
in effects, which caused the name; in English it is called Mechoacan, Mechoaca,
and Indian Briony, because the Root of it has some likeness, with that or
White Briony. Jalap also came from the Indies, and has its name from a place
there called Chelapa or Calapa: It has gotten many other names besides, most
of which are derived from the former, as Gelapum, Gelapo, Jalapium, Jalapa,
Jalappa, Jalappium, Gialapa, Mechoacanna nigra, Salapa, Xalapa, Zaqualtipan,
Rhabarbarum, nigrum, and Brionia, Mechoacan nigricans. It is called in English
Jalap or bla^k Mechoacan.

The Kinds.
Of these Mechoacans there are three sorts mentioned by Authors. 1. The
Mechoacan of Peru. 2. The Wild Mechoacan. 3. Black Mechoacan or Ja^ap.

The Form.
The Mechoacan of Peru, as it grows in these parts, sends forth long
branches of a dark grayish color winding about whatsoever is next them, and
therefore Poles are set for them to run upon; The Leaves are somewhat
broadpointed at the ends like unto those of black Briony, saving that they are
thinner and harder in handling, seeming so dry as if they had no juice in them:
The flowers (which are many, and stand in long clus^ers) are of a sullen yellow
color in the Indies, of the bigness of an Orange flower, in the warmer
Countries of Europe of a dark whitish color, but with us it was never known to
flower by reason of the coldness of the Climate; the Root grows to be as
great as any Briony root almost, without either taste or smell, having Circles
in it when it is cut, as may be perceived by the dry root, which is brought
over to us, and may easily be brought into powder.

The Places and Time.
Concerning the Place and Time, I need add no more than what I have said in
the names and description.

The Temperature.
Both white and black Mechoacan are hot in the first degree, and dry in the
second consisting of an airy substance, and subti^e parts, as also of an
earthly quality.

The Signature and Virtues.
Mechoacan as well as Briony has the Signature of the Dropsy and is found to
be very useful therein, for it draws away wate^ and ph^eg^e and also
^^rengtheneth the Liver, and inward parts, working without any hurt^ull
qua^ity, mo^estation or griping, contrary to Briony, and mo^^ other purgative
Medicines so that it may be given to old men, Children, Women with Chi^d, and
weak persons without any offense; Notwithstanding* it is not of that e^^eeme
it was at its first coming amongst us, though the Virtues are the same, so much
do people regard the novelty more than the goodness of a thing. It is also
profitable in a long continued Headache, clensing the brain and Nerves, and
purging those Rheumatick distillations and humors that are in them; It helps
all pains whatsoever in the Joints, and those of the Bladder, and Reins, by
provoking Urine and by that faculty which it has in expelling Wind, it eases
the Cholick, and the pains of the Mother, by tempering the cold humor which
is a cause thereof. It is likewise effectual in the Falling sickness,
Catarrh, Rheum, Diseases of the Breast in old Coughes shortness of breath,
Jaundise stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, having, as it is said, all the
Virtues that are either in Agarick or Rubarb. It is commended also in the
French Pox Kings evil, Scurvy and Gout, and helps inveterate Agues, whether
Quotidian or Tertian. It does much con^^ce to the purging of tough undigested
humors in the Stomach, and Breasts of Children. It may be administered diverse
ways but the best is to give it in White Wi^e, ^^r ^o it works most
effectually: It may be given to a Child, the do^e of the powde^ed Root not
exceeding a scru^le or a scruple and half; but to persons of ^eares, a dram or
two wi^^ not be too much: yet care must be taken that it be not used in hot
diseases, neither is it convenient for hot and dry bodies, or those that are
subject to be bound, for though it purges at the first, it causes the body to
be more costive afterward. Jalap purges Phlegmatic Choleric and
Melancholic, but chiefly watery humors, and that more strongly then the
former, and therefore it is no less profitable in the dropsy, and helps the
Green-sicknesse, a dram thereof being taken in Wine with a little Ann^seeds and
Ginger to correct the nauseousnesse, whereby it troubles the Stomach and
inclines it to Vomit.

CHAP. CLXXXXIII. Of Broom.
The Names.
IT is uncertain whether this Plant were known to the Grecians, unless it
were the (...) of Dioscorides, which is much doubted by diverse Authors. It is
called in Latin Genista, and Genesta, a genuum flexilitate from the
flexiblenesse thereof, or rather quia genibus medeatur dolentibus, because it
helps the pain of the knees, or, quod facile generet, speciemque propaget,
because it is easily increased, and not to be destroyed where it takes a
liking. It is called in English Broom. Some call the Spanish Broom, Spartum.

The Kinds.
The sorts of ordinary Broom, Candy, and Spanish Broom, etc: (diverse whereof we
have in our Gardens, and elsewhere) are fourteen. 1. Our ordinary Broom. 2.
Small or low Broom. 3. Island Broom. 4. White Broom. 5. Dwarf Broom. 6. Dwarf
Broom of Candy. 7. Common Green-weed or Diersweed. 8. Spanish Green-weed. 9.
Base Broom of Germany. 10. Spanish base Broom. 11. Bastard Spanish Broom. 12.
Ordinary Spanish Broom. 13. The small Spanish Broom with yellow Flowers. 14.
The greater white floured Spanish Broom.

The Form.
Broom is a Bush or shrubby Plant having stalks or woody branches about the
bigness of a man's thumb, from which do spring slender twigges, cornered,
green, tough, and easy to be bowed, many times divided into smaller branches:
about which do grow little Leaves of an obscure green color, and brave yellow
Flowers, which falling off give place unto certain Cods, of a green color at
first but afterward black, like unto those of the Common Vetch, in which do
lie flat hard seeds, being somewhat brownish, and lesser then Lentills. The root
is hard and woody sending forth diverse times another Plant of the color of an
Oaken Leaf, in shape like unto Bastard Orchis, called Birds-nest, having a
root like a Turnep or Rape, whereupon it is called Rapum Genistae, Broomrape,
or Orobanch.

The Places and Time.
It may be discovered by the Titles in what Countries every one of these grow
naturally, and therefore I shall say no more then I have done concerning their
places: only that which is called Island Broom grows in an Island of Tuscany
called Ilua, and the rest which speak not themselves outlandish, are of our
own Country. All of them flower in the Summer months, some earlyer, some
later, yet they perfect their seeds before Winter, the Spanish kinds being
somewhat later then the other.

Th Temperature.
The Twigges, Flowers, and seeds of Broom are hot and dry, in the second
degree; they are also of a thin essence, and are of force to cleanse and open,
especially the seed, which is dryer, and not so full of superfluous Moisture.

The Virtues.
The juice or decoction of the young Branches, or the Seed or Powder thereof
taken in drink, purges downwards, Phlegmatic and watery humors, and
therefore it is profitable for those that have the Dropsy, especially if it be
used with Wine, yet in other infirmities it is better with Water. There is also
made of the Ashes of the Stalks, a Lie with White or Rhenish-Wine, which is
highly commended by diverse for the Dropsy, and likewise for the
Green-sicknesse; but it must not be used too often for fear it fret and hurt
the entralls. It is effectual likewise for those that are troubled with the
Gout, Sciatica, and other pains of the Joints, and sides, helps the
swellings of the Spleen, cleanses the Reins Kidneys, and Bladder of Gravel
and the Stone engendered therein, and hinders it from ever coming again,
sending forth the cause thereof by Urine, which it provokes abundantly. The
constant use of the Powder of the the Leaves, and Seeds does cure the Black
Jaundise, being taken in wine, and the Seeds and Flowers being any ways taken
do much preserve from the Gout and Stone. The Flowers being made into a
Conserve or preserve with honey or Suggar, and eaten often, do much consume the
King's Evil. The distilled water of the Flowers, is profitable for the foresaid
purposes, helps surfets, and alters the fits of Agues being taken with as
much of the water of the lesser Centaury, and the party laid to sweat. It is
most excellent to help the King's Evil, if one ounce of the water be taken
morning and evening for a months space, or longer, if need require. The tops or
flowers of Broom bruised and mixed with Hog's Grease cure the pains of the
Knees, the Gout and any bruise or swelling by reason of humors, falling down
thither. The Flowers also bruised and mixed with Honey and Roses, or the white
of an Egg beaten together and applied, consume the hard Swellings of the
King's Evil. The juice of the young branches, or the young branches themselves
bruised, or the Flowers made into Ointment with Hog's Grease, or boiled in the
same, or in oil for a little space, and laid to the sides that are pained
either by the Wind, as in Stitches and the like, or in the Spleen, eases them
in once or twice usiing it. The same boiled in oil is a safe and sure medicine
to kill Lice, and other Vermin, breeding in the Head or Body, and being
applied to the Sciatica or Hip-gout helps it. The juice alone, or mixed with
honey, and applied, cures green wounds and putrified Ulcers. The Flower and Tops
being bruised and applied help the biting of Serpents, and Venomous Creatures.
The oil distilled from the roots and seeds is very useful to take away spots,
freckles and deformities of the skin. The young buds of the Flowers being
pickled are a sallet of great delight, serving all the year which do help to
stir up an appetite to meat, to help Obstructions of the Spleen, and to
provoke Urine. The Broom Rape is commended by some to be as good as Asparagus,
taken when they are young and eaten either raw or boiled, but they are somewhat
bitter. The decoction thereof in wine is thought to be as effectual to avoid
the stone in the Kidneys and Bladder and to provoke Urine as the Broom it self.
The juice thereof is Singular good to cure as well green wounds, as old and
filthy sores and malignant Ulcers. Being put into oil Olive and set in the Sun
for certain days, it takes away all Spots, Lentiles, Freckles, Pimples,
Wheales, and Pushes from the face or any part of the body, being anointed
therewith. All the lesser sorts have the same qualities; and may be conducible
to the same diseases, but some stronger, some weaker. But the most effectual
of all the Brooms is the Spanish kind, which has not only all the properties
aforesaid very exactly, but others also. It purges both upwards and downwards
especially the seed, which being taken to the quantity of a dram in Meade or
honyed water, purges by vomit, as Hellebore does, yea without trouble or
danger. An Oxymel or Syrup made of the Flowers, Seed, and Vinegar often used,
breaks and heals all Impostumes of the Spleen, by causing the corrupt
matter to void it self, and draws humors from the Joints.

CHAP. CXCIV. Of the Ash-Tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and of some (...), in Latin Fraxinus, quia facile
frangi^ur, because the boughs of it are easily broken. The seed or rather the
inner kernel thereof is called Lingua Avis, and Lingua Passerina, from the form
thereof, being like unto a Birds Tongue; in English Ash-Keyes, and of some
Kitkeyes and Peter keys. The Tree is called the Ash because its, bark is of
the color of Ashes. The wild Ash, which I here add because of its name, is
very probable to be the (...), or Fraxinus montana of Theophrastus, which Pliny
calls Ornus; of some Orneoglossum, Fraxinus sylvestris, Fraxinea arbor,
Fraxinus aucuparia, because Boys and Fowlers use the Berries as Baits to
catch Blackbirds, Thrushes, etc. In the English, the Wild Ash, but more
generally Traxinus bubula the Quicken-Tree.

The Kinds.
There be no more sorts then what I have already mentioned, viz. 1. The Common
great Ash, 2. The wild Ash, or Quicken-tree.

The Form.
The Ash commonly rises up with a straight body, sometimes to a very great
thickness, but commonly of a middle sise, and is covered with a smooth bark of
a grayish color; spreading reasonable well, and bearing long winged Leaves,
consisting of others, which stand by couples, one over against another, the
uttermost only being excepted, which stands alone: all which are long,
narrow, gentle, of a pale green color, and dented about the Edges; at sundry
joints, with the Leaves, comes forth a bunch of flowers, and after them a
bunch of seeds, commonly called keys, tasting somewhat strong and hot in the
mouth; there be sometimes small round Balls called Apples growing therein, but
not in every place: The timber of it contrary to the branches, is strong and
tough; and therefore is much used in Coaches, Carts, Ploughes, and other
instruments of Husbandry, but especially to make Pikes for Soldiers.

The Places and Times.
The Ash, for its usefulness both for Timber and Firewood, is planted
generally throughout the whole Land, both in high and Low grounds, yet
experience tells us that it thriveth best in moist low grounds, and by meddow
sides. The Quicken-Tree grows in the Woods by High-Gate, and in diverse other
parts. And particularly, amongst Trees in the walk between Shaford and
Gorehambery. The Balls or Apples of the Ash come forth in the end of Winter,
the leaves and flowers of both, in the Spring; and the seed and fruit is ripe,
in September.

The Temperature.
The Leaves and Bark of the Ash-Tree are dry and moderately hot; the seed is
hot and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.
There is scarce any part about the Ash but is good for the Dropsy: The Leaves
and Bark with the tender Crops boiled in Wine, and drunk, are excellent for it,
for they purge Water; and so does the Water that is distilled from the Leaves,
Bark, or Seed. The young Roots also boiled in Ale, and a draught thereof
drunk morning and evening, is profitable for the same. The said Leaves and
Bark, boiled in Wine and drunk, do likewise open and comfort the L^ver and
Spleen, and ease the pains and Stitches of the sides, and so will they do
being boiled in Oil, and applied to them outwardly: and being used in the same
manner, it is singular good against the biting of the Viper, Adder, or any
other venomous beast, to which purpose the seed may also be drunk in Wine
according to that Verse of Serenus, Fraxineum semen cum Bacchi rore b^bendum
est. The Leaves and Bark are reported to stop the Belly, and being boiled with
Vinegar and Water do stay Vomiting, if they be laid upon the Stomach. Three or
four Leaves taken in Wine every morning constantly, does make those lean
which are fat; and keeps them from grossnesse which begin to wax fat; and so
does the distilled Water of the Keys, a small quantity taken every morning.
The Decoction of the Leaves in White Wine, helps to break the Stone, and
expel it, and cures the Jaundise. The seeds having their Husks taken off,
prevail against Stitc^^s and pains in the sides proceeding of Wind, and the
Stone by provoking Urine; They are commended also for the Rickets, to increase
natural seed; to stir up bodily lust, especially being powdered with Nutmegs,
and drunk. The Lie, which is made of the ashes of the bark, cures those Heads
which are Leprous, Scabby, or Scaled, being bathed therewith. The Leaves of the
Wild Ash boiled in Wine are good against the pains in the sides, the stoppings
of the Liver, and asswageth the bellies of those which have the Tympany or
Dropsy.

CHAP. CLXXXXV. Of the Sassafras, or Ague-Tree.
The Names.
THe use of this Ingredient is of late Invention, therefore it were in vain to
seek for the Greek name. It is called in Latin Sassafras, which is also the
French and Spanish name; but why they called it so, is unknown: yet the French
were the first that discovered the Virtues of it to the Christian world. For at
their being near the Florida, they got Agues and Swellings in their Legs,
which as I conceive was the Dropsy, and other diseases, by lying on the ground,
and intemperate diet, which they used; for which they could get no cure until
they had learned the use of this Tree from the Natives; who call it Pavame and
Winanke: All other Countries call it Sassafras, and amongst them the English,
who call it also the Ague-Tree, from its Virtue in healing the Ague. There is
hereof but one kind, and therefore I shall proceed to the description.

The Form.
The Sassafras-Tree grows up with a straight Trunk or body, smooth and void
of boughs till it be of a reasonable height, covered with a thick bark of an
Ashcolour, which is of a very hot quick taste; toward the top come forth many
goodly branches, spreading themselves into a round figure or compass whereon
do grow green Leaves, somewhat like those of the Fig Tree, but much lesser; of a
sweet smell when they be green, but much more when they be dry, somewhat
resemb^ing the smell of Fennel of a very sweet taste also. The Flowers ^re
small and yellow, made of threads, very like unto the Male Cornell-Tree, from
whence proceeds the fruit, which grows clustering together, yet set in
small cups upon long footstalkes: the Roots are not very large, neither of any
great depth, but are covered with a Bark, somewhat redder then that of the Tree,
and are of more force and efficacy then any other parts of it, yet the rest are
also of very great use.

The Places and Time.
This Tree grows in most parts of the West Indies, especially about the Cape
of Florida, which is not far from Virginia. It keeps green all the Winter
and Summer long, but at what time it flowreth and brings forth its ripe
fruit, I have not yet learned.

The Temperature.
The boughs and branches of Sassafras are hot and dry in the second degree;
the ri^d is hotter, for that it enters into the third degree of heat and
dryness, as may be manifestly perceived in the decoction.

The Virtues.
It is to be observed, that not only those things, that purge watery and
Phlegmatic humors, are profitable in the Dropsy, but those also which have
any eminent faculty in drying them up, as Sassafras without dispute has ^ and
therefore it is used with very good success in the disease aforesaid, four
O^nces thereof being first sleeped four and twenty hours in a gallon and
half of Water; and afterward boiled to the one half, and then strained, may
be given to the quantity of a good draught, morning and evening, for certain
days together: for there is not any thing, which will remove such an
inveterate disease as the Dropsy at once taking. The said Decoction is very
effectual also to open the stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, and is
profitable in all cold di^eases, and particularly those cold Rheumes that fall
from the Head upon the T^^th, Eyes and Lungs; warming and drying up the
moisture and strengthening the parts afterward and therefore is available in
Coughs, and other cold diseases of the Breast, Stomach and Lungs, stays
Vomiting, comfort the weak and feeble Stomach* c^^sing a good appetite
therein by consuming windiness, which is the chiefest cause of crudity and
indigestion, and makes sweet a stinking breath, but especially the Decoction
of the root: The fame is commended likewise for its Virtue in expelling the
Gravel and Stone, wherewith the Kidneys are many times afflicted, for
provoking Urins and Women's Courses: And as for those Women which are barren by
reason of the moisture of their Wombs, it so warmeth, heateth, and dries the
same, that it causes them to conceive speedily; It is of good use also in
Fevers and tertain and quotidian Agues, that are of long continuance, as is
already intimated. It is generally used in all diseases that come of cold raw
thin and corrupt humors, as the French disease, and the like, for which
distempers it is used in Diet-drinkes with other things and may be given in
Powder from a scruple to two scruples. The Smell of the Wood or Root expels
the corrupt and evil Vapors of the Pestilence.

CHAP. CLXXXXVI. Of Palma Christi.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Cici and Croton, because the seed of it resembles
a living Creature, which is wont to be in Sheep, and other Cattle called a
Tyke. It is called also Ricinus in Latin for the same reason; yet it has
other names as Palma Christi from the Leaves and Root, which do very much
imitate a hand, and Cataputia major of the Apothecaries, because of its
properties, which are conformable to the Spurges, the Oil whereof is by them
called Oleum de Cherva and Oleum Cicinum. This is held by Expositors, to be the
Plant mentioned in Jonah, under the name of a Gourd. It is called in English
Palma Christi, or great Spurge, in Hebrew Kik and Kikaijon.

The Kinds.
There are but three sorts of this Great Spurge left upon record by Authors. 1.
The more or^inary Palma Christi or great Spurge. 2. Palma Christi of Syria. 3.
Palma Christi of America.

The Form.
Palma Christi has a great round hollow stalk rising to the height of seven
or eight ^oot of a bluish green color. The Leaves are great and large
fashioned like the Leaves of the Fig Tree, but greater; resembling the hand of
a man with the Fingers spread abroad, of a dark green colo^r on the upperside
but whitish underneath, the flowers are button-like, standing on the tops of
the branches which fall away without bearing Seed; but a little lower, there
break forth other Heads which are rough and three cornered, and contain within
them a seed like a Tyke, of an hot fiery taste, out of which, in those
Countries where it is natural, is pressed out the aforementioned Oil.

The Places and Times.
The first grows in Spain, and other hot Countries to a very great bigness,
and abides many years, but the coldness of our Climate will not admit of any
large growth, because it perishes every year with us, yet I have seen ^t in
Mr. Balls Garden by Sio^ house, seven or eight foot-high looking more like
unto a Tree then an annual Plant. The second grows in Syria and Egypt; and
the third in America in G^lisc^ a Province of New Spain, from whence the Oil
used in Shops is brought unto us. Those that flower with us do it in August,
but their seed does seldom come to perfect ripeness in this Country.

The Temperature.
The seed of Palma Christi is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues and Signature.
Though the seeds of Palma Christi are not to be taken rashly by reason of
their violence in purging; yet, advice being first had, they may with Anniseed
or Fennelseed be given to strong and able bodies, that are troubled with the
Dropsy, Joynt-aches, Gout, and Sciatica, because they draw Water and Phlegm
very strongly from the remote parts, the Powder of three of them being taken in
Whey or New Milk. The same may be boiled in the broth of an old Cock, and taken
for the same purposes. The Oil is used in Glisters to open obstructions, to
ease pains of the Cholick and windiness of the Mother, and so it does if the
places greived be anointed therewith, and some few drops thereof taken in a
little Chicken broth that is fat: It wonderfully helps the cramp being gently
rubbed on the places greived therewith, for it causes the Sinews that were
shrunk to be stretched forth: The Stomach, belly or leftside where the Spleen
lies, being anointed therewith, are eased of their pains and obstructions
thereby: It kills the Worms in Children, a drop or two thereof being given
in Milk or fat broth, or the lower part of the belly being anointed therewith,
and so it takes away the hardness of their Bellys: It helps also all Scabs
and running sores of the Head, and being dropped into the Ears, it cures
deafness, and the pains and noise therein: It mightily cleanses the skin
from all manner of spots and blemishes, as also the deformities of scarres and
of the Pox. The green Leaves bruised and applied of themselves or else with
Barly-Meale assawage the Inflammations as well as the swelling of the Eyes, and
the swellings also of Women's Breasts after Childing and in case they want Milk,
they are good to procure it, being applied thereunto. The juice of the Leaves,
applied to any Wound that is caused by any splinter, Iron, or Arrow-head,
draws them out, if any such be in it. The said Leaves have the Signature of
the Hands, and therefore are available for the pains of their, or any other
Joints, according to Crollius.

CHAP. CLXXXXVII. Of Glasse-wort.
The Names.
IT is supposed that this Herb was not known to any of the Greek writers, for
we find it not so much as mentioned in any of their works. The Arabians, who
probably were the first that took notice of it, called it Kali, which name is
taken up by the Latin Authors. The ashes, whereof Crystal Glasses are made,
is called Soda, Alumen Catinum, or Calinum: The Salt, which is extracted out of
the Ashes, is called Sal Kali, and Sal Alkali, which being mixed with a
certain kind of Sand, and boiled in a furnace there arises a Scum called
Axungia Vitri, in Latin, and in English Sandiver; The English name of the herb
is Glasse-wort, and Saltwort but the Inhabitants of the Seacoasts call it
Crab-Grasse and Frog-Grasse.

The Kinds.
Of this Glasseworth therefore be four sorts. 1. Great Glassewort, with
Snailelike seed, 2. Small white Glassewort. 3. Glassewort of Egypt, 4. Joynted
Glassewort.

The Form.
The great Glassewort rises up with a big round, fleshy stalk like unto
Purslane two foot* high or there abouts, divided into many branches, whereon do
grow many thick long fleshy Leaves, pointed at the ends growing without Order,
sometimes but one or two, and sometimes more standing at a place, and indeed
most commonly here and there also, dispersed upon the branches come, forth small
brownish heads, turned round like snailes, wherein lie small round seed; the
Root is somewhat long with many fibers thereat, and perishes commonly after it
has given its seed.

The Places and Time.
The first, grows in diverse places of Syria, Africa, Italy and Spain, by the
Sea sides of its own accord, and very large fields thereof, are sown in
Provence, and Gascoine, for the abundant profit that is made of it. The second,
grows in the same Countries, and in those which are colder also, not only by
the Sea, but by the salt pits that are remote, both in Saxoni^ and also in the
Western parts of our own Land. The third is known to grow no where but in Egypt
unless it be upon the Western Shores of Naples. The last, grows as well upon
our own Coasts in many places as in other Countries by the Sea side, and by the
lakes of salt water in Saxony, and other places of Germany. They all flourish
in the Summer; those that perish give their seed in August and sometimes later,
but the last continues all the Winter.

The Temperature.
Glassewort is hot and dry: the Ashes are both dryer and h^tter, and that eve^
to the fourth degree, having in them a caustic or burning quality.

The Virtues.
The Powder of any of the before mentioned sorts, or the juice which is much
better taken in drink, does purge downwards, by that cleansing quality which it
has, Phlegmatic, waterish, and adust or melancholic humors, and therefore it
is often used for a speciaill remedy for the Dropsy. It is also effectual to
provoke Urin^, to expel the dead birth, as also to open the Obstructions of
the Liver and Spleen, and so consume the hardness thereof, but there must be a
care that it be not taken in too great a quantity, for then it is very
dangerous. It is many times mixed with those things which are used as
corrosives to consume proud Spongy Superfluous flesh, that grows in foul and
virulent Uleers. The Ashes of it being burnt are very sharp and biting, like a
Caustic, and the Lie that is made thereof is so strong, that it will fetch off
the skin from the hands or other parts of them that use it unadvisedly. But if
it be used discreetly; that is, applied very sparingly, or mixed with somewhat
that mamy correct it sharpness, it may do good in cleansing the skin from
spots, freckles, Morphewes or the like. Of the same Ashes also made into lie,
being boiled with Oil, was used to be made our ordinary Soap, which being
spread upon a piece of thick coorse brown paper, cut into the form of a
Shoo-sole, and bound to the bottoms of their feet, which have casually lost
their Speech, will bring it again within a little time, after the applying
thereof, if they be recoverable, as has been pro^ed: but the Soap which we now
use, is made with cheaper Ingredients. It was used to be put into Castle or
rather Castile Soap, for it came first out of Spain, the Castilians being the
inventers thereof. Sandiver works much to the same effect with Kali, and is
often used, I mean the powder thereof, to be blown in Horses eyes, or, being
dissolved, squirted into them, to take away the skin that begins to grow
there and dimm the sight. It serves also to dry up running sores and scabs,
Tetters, Ring-worms and the like, and to help the Itch, if the foul parts be
washed with the Water, wherein it is boiled.

CHAP. CXCVIII. Of Spurge Laurel.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Daphnoides, a Lauri Foliorum Similitudine from
the likeness it has with the Bay Tree. It is called in Latin Laure^la, quasi
pu filla Laurus, because of the smallness of it. In English, Spurge Laurel,
both because it purges, and to distinguish it from the Bay Tree, or rather
from the Cherry-Bay-Tree which is of diverse called the Laurel Tree.

The Kinds.
There be but two sorts, which may properly be referred to this kind, 1. Spurge
Laurel, 2. Candy Spurge Laurel.

The Form.
Spurge Laurel rises sometimes but with one, but Commonly with more Stemmes
of a cubit high or more, very tough and pliant, and covered with a thick
whitish bark, whereon are* set many long, smooth, thick somewhat broad and
shining dark green Leaves, somewhat like unto Bay Leaves, but lesser, smoother
softer, and not with hard veins therein as Bay Leaves have. The Flowers come
out toward the tops of the Stalks, and at the Joints with the Leaves, many set
together, which are somewhat long and hollow, ending or spreading into four
small Leaves, of whitish, yellow, green color, which give place to small
round, and somewhat long black-berries when they are ripe, wherein lies a
white kernel. The Root grows down deep into the ground, and spreads
likewise tough long white strings somewhat woody. Both Leaf and Flower, both
Bark and Root are very hot and sharp in taste, heating the mouth and throat of
any that shall taste them: It keeps its green Leaves all the Winter, as all
other Bay-Trees do, even in the coldest years.

The Places and Times.
The First grows wild not only by the Lake of Geneva, as Gerard, or rather
D^don^ns does affirm, and in other places beyond the Seas, but in our own
Country also in diverse places, and particularly between the Hedge, and a
footpath that leads from St. Albans to Park-Street, The other was sent out of
Candy as the title testifies. The first flowereth very early in the year, even
in January or February and sometimes before, if the winter be mild; The berries
are ripe about May or June; when the other flowereth or bears fruit is
uncertain, seeing it has not put forth either in this Country.

The Temperature.
Spurge Laurel is of a very hot and biting Temperature.

The Virtues.
It is reported of this Plant, that if the Leaves be gathered with ones hand
tending upwards, it causes vomiting, if downwards it causes purging, but how
true it is, I cannot affirm; for I never knew it taken inwardly: yet I find
upon Record, that the Leaves purge slymy phlegm, and waterish superfluities,
and are therefore good for the Dropsy, and that fourteen or fifteen of the
Berries do the like. Notwithstanding they are said to purge very violently
inflaming and heating the Throat, and wringing the Stomach of whosoever shall
take thereof, and drives them into diverse dangerous diseases: howbeit this
seems to be spoken of the inconsiderate use thereof; for it is said that if
it be taken advisedly it purges phlegm, from the Stomach, and oftentimes by
vomit also, it procures Women's Courses eases the pains of the Cholick and
being chewed in the mouth it draws down from the Head and Brain, much corrupt
matter that would offend it. And if there be any that understand not, what is
meant by the word advisedly* let them know that it is to be taken after one of
these or the like ways. The Leaves must be steeped twenty four hours in good
strong Vinegar, and then dried, and their powder drunk in wine, with Anniseeds
and Mastick, or else boiled in Whey of Sweet milk of broth or a Capon and so
taken, the dose not exceeding two scruples or one dram. The Oil wherein the
fresh Leaves and Berries have been boiled being strained, and the belly
anointed therewith, loosneth it, and helps the Colic; and being anointed
on the back and reins provokes Urine, and helps the Piles. Besides, the
Berries may be put into a Cataplasme for the Dropsy, with Barley and Bean meal
Fenugreek, root of Wallwort. Woormwood, and Origan; all which are to be sodden
in wine and laid over the whole body. The Flowers also used in a Glister are
much commended for the said disease, which is to be made thus. Take flowers of
Laurel two drams, roots of Polypody* Agarick, of each a dram and half, Dodder
three drams; sees them in wine or water, till the Third part be consumed, then
take of the Liquor of that decoction one pound, of Benedicta Laxativa, half a
dram, of Electuarium nidum two drams and a half, Honey of Roses one ounce,
Oils of Rue, Camomile and flowered Luce; of each one ounce; of Sal Gemmae a
dram and a half; Commixe them all, and make a Gli^^er.

CHAP. CXCIX. Of Toad Flax.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Osyris as Fuchsius says, in Latin Pseudolinum,
and Li^aria, from the resemblance of its Leaves, with the true Line or Flax*
and Urinalis and Urinaria, from its effects in provoking Urine. Some have
called it Esula adulterina from the resemblance it has with a small kind of
Esula or Spurge, yet they may easily be distinguished, if the stalk or Leaves
thereof be broken for one has milk, the other has not, according to that old
verse, Esula lactescit; si^e lacte Li^aria ^rescit. Some have taken it to be
the AntirrhiAntirrhinum of Pliny, and indeed it seems to be a kind of
Snapdragon by its flowers* yet others will rather have it to be Osyris both of
Pliny, D^oscorides and Galen, whereunto it does in many things agree. There is
a kind hereof which is called Scoparia, and Herba Studiosorum because Scholars
heretofore swept their Studdies with beesomes made thereof, and Belv^de^e of
the Italians for the glorious show that the flower of it makes. Some call it
Wild-Flax in English, but that name does more properly belong to another kind,
it is called also Toad-Flax because Toads will some times shelter themselves
amongst the branches of it, and Flax-weed; in Sussex, Gallwort.

The Kinds.
Though there be many sorts of Flax-weed I shall trouble you but with ten of
them. 1. Great Toad-flax. 2. Sweet purple Toadflax. 3. Variable Toad-flax. 4.
Toad-flax of Valentia. 5. White Toad-flax. 6. Purple Toad-flax. 7. Bushy
Toad-flax. 8. Golden Toad-flax. 9. Broom Toad-flax. 10 Sparrowes Toad-flax.

The Virtues.
The common Toad-flax is well known to have diverse stalks, full fraught with
long and narrow b^ew A^h colored Leaves, without any footstalke at them, like
unto those of Flax, but the stalks are not so long, from the middle of which
up to the top come forth the Flowers which are many, of a pale yellow color,
of a strong unpleasant scent, with deep yellow mouths like the flowers of
Snapdragon: the seeds which are blackish and flat are enclosed in round heads,
the Root is somewhat woody and White, especially the maine down right one, with
many fibers thereat, abiding many years; shooting forth roots every way round
about, and new branches every year.

The Places and Time
Some of these sorts are wild, some grow only in Gardens, the expressing of
their particular places would be to little purpose, seeing none but the
ordinary sort grows naturally in our Land, for as much as I can learn. They
flower from June till the end of Summer, some of their seed being usually ripe
toward the end of August.

The Temperature:
Toad flax is hot and dry as may be perceived from its bitterness and also
from the faculty it has in provoking Urine.

The Virtues.
The Common sort of Toad-flax, whose description I have set down, is that which
is most used in Physic. It provokes Urine, both when it is stopped, as also in
those that are troubled with the Dropsy, to spend the abundance of those watery
humors by Urine, which it draws down wonderfully; helping also to wash the
Reins and Uritory parts from Gravel or Stones gathered therein, and this it
does, if the decoction of the Herb both Leaves and flowers in Wine be taken and
drunk; And so it does somewhat move the Belly downwards, opens the
obstructions of the Liver and helps the yellow Jaundise, expels Poison,
provokes Women's Courses, drives forth the Afterbirth and Dead-Child. The
distilled Water of the Herb and Flowers is effectual for all the same
purposes, and in especial being drunk with a dram of the powder of the seeds
or bark of the root of Wall-wort, and a little Cinnamon for certain days
together, is held to be a singular remedy for the Dropsy, to spend the Water
and humors: the juice of the herb or distilled Water dropped into the eyes is a
certain remedy for all heat, inflammations and redness in the Eyes. The
juice or distilled Water put into foul Ulcers, whether they be cancrous or
fistulous, with tents rouled therein, or the parts washed or cleansed herewith
by the spirting of it into them, clears them thoroughly from the bottom, and
heals them up safely; The same juice or water does likewise cleanse the skin
of all manner of deformity, as the Lepry, Morphew, Scurfe, Wheales, Pimples, or
any other spots or marks therein, applied of it self or with some powder of
Lupines; for which purpose Pliny says that the Women of his time made a kind
of soap of it. Culpepper says, that being laid in the Water that Chickens
drink, it relieves them when they are drooping.

CHAP. CC. Of Organy or Bastard Majerom.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Origanus; concerning the Etymology of which word
there be diverse opinions: Some will have it so called from (...) signifying a
Mountain, and (...) Gaudium, because it joyeth very much in Mountainous and
craggy places; others from (...) to see and (...) to clear, because it
clears the Eyes; others will have it to come from (...) to be cold; from
whence comes (...), which by adding* unto it becomes (...); but then it must be
by Antiphrans too, for it is not cold but hot. It is called (or rather surnamed
Heracleot^cum from Heraclea a City of Pontus where is grows plentifully)
O^it^s because Asses, and Tragoriganum, because Goats are mightily taken with
it; of diverse, Cunila, in shops Origanum Hispanicum, in English Organy and
Bastard Marjerom from the likeness it has with the true.

The Kinds.
Authors make mention of diverse sorts hereof, but those that are best known in
these days are four. 1. Organy or Bastard Marjerom. 2. White Organy of
Greece. 3. The greater White Organy. 4. Wild Organy.

The Form.
Bastard Marjerom rises up with diverse hard, round* reddish green stalks
spreading forth into branches, whereon are set sundry Leaves by couples at the
Joints, being somewhat round and of a whitish green color very like unto
Marjerom, but larger, whiter, and harder or rougher in handling; at the tops of
the branches stand such like scaly heads as Marjerom has, but longer, from
whence come small whitish purple flowers, and afterward small brownish seed.
The whole Plant is of a sweet smell and sharp biting taste like unto Marjerom,
but that it is higher, hotter and sharper.

The Places and Time.
It is very likely that not only Greece, but Candy, and Spain do naturally
bear these so^ts of Bastard Marjerome, but which of them is more proper to this
or that place is uncertain. It is commonly about the end of August or
beginning of September, before they put forth their tops or heads in our
Country, so that their Flowers, or at least their Seed, ^eldome come to
maturity with us.

The Temperature.
All the Sorts of Organies do cut attenuate or make thin* dry and heat, and
that in the third degree, as Galen says, who affirms that the First is o^
more efficacy then the Third, and the last which is sold in Shops, then either
of them.

The Virtues.
The Decoction of Organy in White Wine is given with very good success to
those which have the Dropsy, the Virtue thereof lying not ^o much in the
purging as in the drying quality of it. It is given also with Figs for the same
purpose as also to them that are bursten or have a rupture, and to those which
are troubled with Convulsions or Cramps. The dried Herb or juice taken in
Honeyed Water purges downwards Melancholy and Choler^ck humors without
danger. It is used with Honey as a Lohoc or ^icking Medicine* against an old
Cough and the Stuffing of the Lungs. The Decoction thereof is very profitable
to those that have the Itch, or are Sc^bbed and Mangy, and those that have
Jaund^se are much helped by it, if they take it, whi^est they be in a bath made
thereof: also the same with a few Cloves and Sugar he^peth those which have the
Hickets exceedingly, opens the Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and Womb,
and an other stoppings, provokes Urine and Women's Courses, and is good for
such as have four belchings, or be troubled with a squeamish Stomach: The same
is good also for those that are bitten with Serpents or Venomous Beas^s, and
for such as have taken Hemlock or Opium: With Syrup of Vinegar it is good for
those that have taken Poison, or the root of Cholchicum Ephemeron The juice of
the green Herb heals the swellings of the almonds of the Ears and the
Ulcers o^ the Mouth; it draws forth Phlegm by the Nostrils, if it be infused
in the Oil of Flowerdeluce, and being used with Milk, it eases the pains of
the Ears. The Powder thereof mixed with a little Saltpeter and Honey, made
into the manne of a thin electuary, and the teeth rubbed often therewith, will
make the^ white and firm. It is used in Spain for the seasoning of Anchoves,
for it ^iveth to them an excellent relish, being made up therewith. Time may
be used ^or the same purposes, when the other cannot be gotten: Both which,
with Penniroyal, Calamint, and such other dry herbs, being strewed both upon
and under those which are afflicted with Hydropicall humors, are very
profitable for them; for it is mavelous to see how much these dry them up,
whilst the parties are asleep.

These are the Simples, I have judged most proper for the Liver, and in
particular for the Dropsy, to which I might add these which follow, Sagapenum
which is the Gum of Ferula when it grows in Media, as I have said already in
the Chapter of Fe^^ell Giant, the pills whereof are profitable in the said
disease. Turbith, which is a root brought from beyond Sea, and purges Water
very violently, Elaterium, which is the juice of Wild-Cucumbers dried, does the
same; Euphorbium, Spurge, Coloquintida, Carthamu^, Thymaelea, Mezereon, etc:
are violent purgers, so that though they be appropriated to the Dropsy, yet I
shall not commend them unto ordinary people, but desire them to leave them to
those that are very skillfull; and content themselves with those I have
purposely spoken to, at large: Besides which, there be others also profitable,
as Agrimony, Betony, Dancus, Dodder, Fumitory, Rose-Mary, Sage, Dill, Rue,
Camomile, Bays, Juniper, etc: Some of which I have treated of already, and
shall treat of the rest, when I shall come to the parts, to which they are most
appropriate. I pass now to the Spleen which is the seat of Melancholy, and
therefore must be purged, as also opened and strengthened.

CHAP. CCI. Of Dodder.
The Names.
THat Dodder which grows upon flax is that which I mean to treat of
principally. It is called in Greek (...), and (...) by the latter Greeks (for
by the Ancients it was not taken notice of, as far as I can understand,)
because tanquam cassis vel r(...) illud implicat, it tangleth about it like a
net. It is called in Latin also, Cassuta and Cassyta, and P^dagra Lini, and in
Shops Cuscuta.

The Kinds.
Though there be but one sort of Dodder, which grows upon Flax, yet there is
a lesser sort also, which grows upon diverse plants, and takes its
denomination from them. That which grows upon Time is called Epithymum, that
upon Savory Epithymbrum, that upon Nett^es Epiurtica, that upon Marjerom
Epimarjorana, that upon the Bramble Epirubus, and in English Laced Time, Laced
Savory, etc.

The Form.
Dodder rises out of the ground, shooting forth threads or strings grosser or
finer, as the property of the Plants whereon it grows and the Climate do
suffer, creeping and spreading on that Plant whereon it fasteneth, be it high
or low: These strings have no Leaves at all upon them, but wind and interlace
themselves so thick sometimes that it is ready to strangle it, which after they
have got good hold, break off at bottom receiving nourishment still insensibly
from the Plant* whereon it is twisted like unto Ivy, and thereby partaketh of
the nature of the same plants. Wheresoever it grows, it puts forth clusters
of small Heads or Husks, out of which start forth whitish Flowers, which
afterward give small pale colored seed, somewhat flat and twice as bigg as
Poppy seed.

The Places and Time.
I have observed little Dodder to grow upon Flax or Time here in England, which
makes me suppose that the Dodder of Flax, and so of Time, which are most in use
and sold in the Apothecaries Shops, are brought from beyond the Seas, for every
climate does not bring them forth alike. Those which have been most observed in
our Land are that of Nettles, which grows plentifully in Somersetshire, and
that of Tares or Pulse whereon it grows so abundantly in some places, that
the Country people call it Hellweed because they know not how to destroy it. It
has been found upon Fern, and other herbs upon Hampsted Heath* and upon the
Grass likewise upon Black Heath in Kent. It flowrisheth cheifely in July and
August.

The Temperature.
Every one of these Dodders do participate somewhat of the nature of the plant
whereon it grows; and therefore Dodder of Flax is hot in the first degree,
and dry in the second, Dodder of Time is hot and dry, in the third degree, etc.

The Virtues.
Though the Dodder of Flax is that which is most frequent in Shops, yet because
that of Time is more proper for the Spleen, I shall speak to that first. It
purges Melancholy and adust choler from the Spleen and Hypochonders and
therefore it avai^es against Melancholy, as also Phlegm from the Brain and
Heart, and is therefore very pro^^table in old and inveterate pains of the
Head, Swimming of the head, Madness, faintings, and the Quartam Ague. It is
very effectual also for Hypochondriack passions, Schirrues or hardness of the
Spleen, and windiness thereof, stopping o^ the Kidneys; and is very useful in
the Scab and Itch, Leprosi^, Elephancy, malignant Ulcers and Cancers as also
the French Pox. It clean^eth also the blood very much from Melancholy and adust
humors, it is profitable in the Jaundies, in opening Stoppings of the Gall, and
Avicen commends it against the Cramp. Neither is it of a purging quality only,
but strengthens also both the Liver and Spleen, and helps Childrens Agues,
if a little Worms-Seed be put to it. If it be used in any decoction, it must be
put in last, for it will not endure long bo^^ing. Dodder of Flax is very
profitable in Stoppings of the Liver, Gall, and Spleen, cleanses the blood
from Melancholy, and is useful in the Jaundies, provokes Urine, and cleanses
the Veins of Choleric and phlegmatic humors, especially if it be taken with
wormwood and Anniseeds. If half a pint or less of the decoction be taken with
half an ounce of Sugar, it cures Children of the Agues. The seeds drunk with
Wine and Sage ease the Sciatica or Hipgowt. The distilled water being taken,
helps the distempers of the Liver and Lungs, by cleansing and strengthening
them: it also cures the Jaundies, expells the Stone of the Bladder, eases
grippings in the Belly, brings down the Courses in Women, helps swellings
about the Navell, and cures Agues in Children, the quantity of two ounces,
being taken by them, but more to those that are stronger. Dodder of Nettles and
Broom have an especial quality in provoking Urine where it is stopped or
hindered; That which grows on Tares though it be most frequent about London, is
not good, for Tares are hard of Digestion, bind the Belly and breed thick and
Melancholy blood, and so does their Dodder. That which grows upon Brambles
and Hopps, is special good for old Fevers and the Jaundies.

CHAP. CCII. Of Black Hellebore.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and sometimes without the aspiration (...),
because too much of it robs the body of its nourishment by its violent
purgation. It is called also in Latin Helleborus niger, and Veratrum quid
^e^^em vertat, because it makes the senses of mad folks to return unto them;
a it did the Daughters of Praetus, whom Melampos a Shepherd or Southsayer
(whi^^ you will) cured of their madness herewith; and because he was thought
to bring it into use, it is called Melampodium. In English it has the name of
black Hellebore and Christmas-flower, because it flourishes about that time,
if too much cold weather do not hinder it. There is a bastard kind hereof is
called (...), Pseudohelleborus and Veratrum nigrum adulterinum, Bastard black
Hellebore; as also Consiligo, Bearefoot, Setterwort, and Settergrasse, because
Husbandmen use to make a hole and put it into the Ear or Dewlap of their
cattle which they call Pegging or Settering.

The Kinds.
To this kind Eight sorts may be referred, 1. The true black Hellebore or
Christmas Flower, 2. Bastard black Hellebore or Bearesfoot, 3. Tresoile Prickly
leaved Bearesfoot, 4. The greater bastard black Hellebore or Bearsfoot called
also Setterwort, 5. Fennel Leafed bastard black Hellebore, 6. The greater
purging Sanicle-like Hellebore, 7. Small purging Sanicle-like Hellebore, 8.
Matthiolus his bastard black Hellebore.

The Form.
The true black Hellebore, has sundry green Leaves rising from the root, each
of them standing on a thick round stiff green stalk about an hand breadth high
from the ground, having sundry divisions or cuts in some many, some fewer,
bluntly, nicked from the middle of the Leaf, to the pointward on both sides,
looking somewhat like the Leaves of Noble Liverwort at a distance. From whence
upon sundry stalks, not much unlike those of the Leaves, do arise one Flower
only, or at most but two, on a stalk, consisting of five white round large
leaves, somewhat like to a single white Rose, yet sometimes dashed with purple
and sometimes altogether so, with many pale yellow Thrums in the middle,
standing about a green head, which after grows to be the seed vessel wherein
is contained round blackish Seed. The roots are a number of brounish black
strings, which run deep into the ground, and are fastened to a thick head,
about the bigness of ones finger.

The Places and Times.
The first grows in Germany, France and Italy, and in Greece, and in several
places, particularly in the Island of Anticyra where it grew so plentifully
heretofore, that if any man was sad or Melancholy, they would presently say
Naviga ad Anticyram intimating that there was Hellebore enough to purge him of
that humor, which by often use grew into a Proverb. It is very rare amongst
us even in our Gardens, yet I have seen it in the Garden of the Lord Lambert at
Wimbleton in the County of Surrey. The second grows in some woods in
Northamptonshire and in some other places of this Land. The third grew at Delft
with Corvinus, and then at Rome. The fourth grows in the borders of stony
fields and grounds, and on rocky hills by the Mosella and the Rhine; The fifth
near Vienna in Austria, and both the Hungaries. The sixth on the Hills of
Germany. The seventh on Mons fructus, near the Alps, as also on the Pyrenaean
Hills. The last in the low grounds of the forest of Essens not far from
Jupiters Hill. The first flowreth in December and January, if the weather be
mild, otherwise it will be February first. The second in February or March, and
so does the third and fourth; their seed being ripe in May. The fifth in April,
the other in May and June.

The Temperature.
(...)k Hellebore is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues and Signature.
If this Hellebore be so effectual for Melancholic dull and heavy persons, as
questionless it is by Signature, then it must needs be good for the Spleen
from whence the Melancholy humor proceeds, purging from thence and from the
blood not only Melancholy but burnt Choler, and thick and viscous phlegm from
the Head, Entralls, and other remote parts: and therefore it is useful in the
pains of the Head, swimming, and giddiness thereof; in the Apoplexy,
madness, Falling Sickness, Hypocondriacall affects which are distempers of
that part of the belly, under the Short ribs where the Spleen lies proceeding
from Windynesse^ which sometimes flies up to the brain and causes a kind of
Frensy or Madness. It is very beneficial in the quartane Ague and erratick
Fevers, as also against the Dropsy Scab, Leprosy, Cancer, Scald head or
Scurfe, Elephancy, and such ^ou^ diseases of the skin. It is profitable against
pain, and noise of the Ears, and against stubborn and contumacious diseases.
It is counted as an Antidote against the Leprosy, Scab, Tetter, or Ring-Worm,
hardness and swelling of the Spleen, old quartan Agues, pains of the Joints,
Apostumes, and the Kings-Evill. It quickens the Brain and senses, provokes
Urine, and brings down the courses in Women. It has an excellent faculty to
draw away whatsoever is mixed with the blood causing it to corrupt, and is
profitable in a long continued Jaundise, and other evil dispositions of the
Liver and Gall. Neither is it without great efficacy, to cure those that seem
to be possessed with the Devil for by taking black Hellebore, the Melancholy
humor which is called the seat of the Devil, is drawn away; and therefore it
is called by some Fuga Daemonum. It is useful also in the pains of the Belly,
in the Gout, Sciatica, Cramp, or Convulsions, pains and aches of the Joints
and Sinews, the Consumption of the Lungs and whole body. If the Root be taken
in powder, in infusion or decoction, or in broth if it be steeped in Vinegat
twenty four hours and then dried again; yet that of our own Country needs not
any preparation, the mildness of our C^imate abating and correcting the
Churlishness and violence thereof: but if any one receive any harm by the
taking thereof, let him drink Goats milk, or, if that be not to be had, the
milk of a Red Cow, yet the Extract thereof being altogether without danger, may
more safely and with as good if not better success be given for the diseases
before mentioned. It is outwardly used against the Leprosy, Morphew, Scab,
Itch, Warts, and Pushes of the skin, being boiled in Vinegar and bathed
therewith. The Powder put into Fistula's and hollow Ulcers does soon heal
them, and the root it self consumes dead Flesh, if it be put into a wound where
it is. A decoction thereof helps the Toothache, and the sores of the mouth;
being gargled and being put into the Ears, it helps the noise thereof. The
Root used as a Pessary provokes the terms exceedingly and a piece thereof put
into an Issue, keeps it open, and draws out corrupt humors. A Pultis made
of the Root with Barley meal and and wine, is good to be applied to the bellies
of such as have the Dropsy, and may be app^yed to any sores either in the
groine, or under the arm, arising in the time of pestilence, and being put
upon the swollen Hemorrhoides it cleanses them. The bastard kind called
Bearesfoot, kills the Worms, a little of the powder of the dried Leaves
being given in drink or broth, or in Raisins as Worm-Seed commonly is. The Root
serves to rowell Cattle, and to cure them of the Cough.

CHAP. CCIII. Of the Tamarind, or sower Bean-Tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Oxyphoenix; in Latin Palmula acida, and
Tamarindus, that is, the Indian Date-Tree: for Tamar in Arabic signifies a
Date to which Indus is added, because it comes from the East Indies, but both,
of them very unfitly; for it may plainly be perceived that it is nothing like
the Date-Tree. It is called also Dactylus Indicus of the word Dactylus which
signifies a finger, which the fruit does fitly resemble, being crooked like
unto a bended finger; In English, the Tamarind, and of Parkinson the sour
Beane-Tree, because the fruit is sour and like the Cod wherein the Kidney
Bean grows. The fruit is call Tamarindi, in Latin; and Tamarinds, in
English.

The Form.
The Tamarind-Tree grows to be as great as a Plum-Tree with many branches,
thick set with pale green winged Leaves, having always an odd one at the
end, which do dilate and contract themselves at the coming and going away of
the Sun. The flowers are somewhat large and white, consisting of eight Leaves,
smelling very sweet, having four small white threads standing in the middle
about a little knob, which afterward grows to be the fruit, which is like a
Kidney-Beane-cod when it is ripe, but much larger, wherein is contained a black
substance or pulp, amongst which the seed lies, having diverse strings running
through it; of a sharp sweet taste, very pleasing to the Palate and Stomach;
the seed is square and somewhat flat.

The Places and Time.
This Tree is by most supposed to grow in India, yet others say, it grows in
Arabia whence the fruit is brought into the Indies; It continues green all
the Winter, but at what time it gives its flowers and ripe fruit, is not
recorded.

The Temperature.
Tamarinds are cold and dry in the second degree, or in the beginning of the
third.

The Virtues.
The two former Simples being hot are to be used in cold affects of the Spleen
and therefore I have set down this next which is cold, which may be used in the
hot distempers thereof; for the Pulpe of Tamarinds opens the Obstructions of
the Spleen, as well as Liver, and taken with Borage Water, it quickneth the
Spirits, dulled by Melancholy, and somewhat mitigateth the fits of the Phrensy,
and Madness. It purges Choler, and adust humors, and is therefore beneficial
in acute Fevers, stays Vomiting, cools Inflammations of the Liver and
Stomach, and also of the reins and back, and helps the running of the Reins.
It is profitable against all breakings out of the skin, which arise from heat
of the blood or from Salt or sharp Water running between the flesh and the
skin, Scab, Itch, Leprosy, and such like: It does stay all Rheumes and
distillations, being taken with some Sugar: and the Water of Maiden-haire: It
does exceedingly quench thirst, if an Ounce thereof be dissolved in fair
Water, and a little Sugar mixed therewith, or taken of it self, expels hot
or burning Agues, and procures an appetite. It is excellent in Erysipilas or
Wildfire, bleeding of the Nose, arising from Choler, and Women's fluxes, as
also the Yellow Jaundise. Both Leaves and Pulpe applied outwardly do cool all
hot Inflammations, and Wheales, Pimples, and such like.

CHAP. CCIV. Of Spleene-Wort or Milt-Wast.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and (...), Asplenium and Splenium, as also (...)
Scolopendrium, and Scolopendra; the two first Names being given unto it quia
Splenem juvat because it helps the Spleen, the later from the likeness it
has with that rough Creature called the bear Worm, which Anglers sometimes
use. Theophrastus calls it (...) for the likeness it has with Fern; as
also (...) which Galen translateth Mula herba; The Arabians call it Ceterach
which is the name, by which it is best known in shops; but it is called also
Spleene-wort, Milt-wast, and Scale-ferne. The rough Spleene-wort is called
Asplenium silvestre, Asplenium magnum, Scrutiopteris, Lonchitis aspera Longina,
^t Calabrina. In English, Rough Spleene-wort or Milt-wast.

The Kinds.
I think I may without falsehood reckon up Nine sorts of Spleene-wort, the Mules
Fern being a kind thereof. 1. Smooth Spleen-wort. 2. The greater rough
Spleen-wort. 3. The smaller rough Spleen-wort. 4. Bastard rough Spleen-wort. 5.
Island rough Spleen-wort. 6. The greater Mules fern. 7. The lesser Mules
fern. 8. Strong Mules-ferne. 9. Mules-Ferne with divided Leaves.

The Form.
Spleen-wort has many Leaves which after they attain to their full growth
want but little of a span long, jagged of cut upon both sides, even almost to
the middle ribbe, every Cut or jagge being as it were half round, (whereby it
is known from the rough Spleen-wort which is slashed on the edges quite to the
middle ribbe) not one cut over against another, but one besides the other, set
in several orders, being slippery and green on the upperside, and of a dark
yellowish roughness underneath, which is conceived to be the seed: at its
first coming up it foldeth and rouleth it self inwards as Fern commonly does,
with many hairs growing on the outside, so that it looks like unto the rough
Bear Worm, before remembered: the root is small black and rough, much platted
or interlaced, having neither stalk nor flower.

The Places and Time.
The first grows as well upon Stone walls as Rocks, and in moist and
shadowy places of this land, especially in the Western parts, at Bristow,
Bath, Wells, and Salisbury, on Framingham Castle-Walles, on the Church of
Beckensfield in Barkshire, Strowd in Kent etc: The second grows in the moist
Moors of Italy: the third and fourth in moist Groves both there and in
Germany, and with us upon Hampsteed-Heath: the fifth in Ilva, an Island of the
Tirrhene Sea. The natural places of the four last are shadowy Rocks and moist
hollow places, where little heat of the Sun comes. They all continue green
both Winter and Summer.

The Temperature.
These plants are hot and dry in the first degree, of very thin and subtle
parts.

The Signature and Virtues.
The learned Crollius amongst the Signatures of parts, does set down Ceterach
which is the first kind above mentioned, to have the Signature of the Spleen,
and that therefore it is profitable for all the diseases and infirmities
thereof, especially those that cause it to grow big* and there it is called
Miltwast; for it diminishes it not only in men, but in beasts also: for
Vitruvius says that the swine in Candy, where there is store thereof, by
feeding thereon were found without Spleens: and it is said also that when Asses
are oppressed with Melancholy they eat thereof, and so ease themselves of the
Swelling of the Spleen. It is effectual also for the yellow Jaundise, and
consequently for the stoppings of the Liver, and to stay the Hicket, which is a
distemper which happens not seldom to the mouth of the Stomach. It helps the
Srangury and Stone in the Bladder, causing it to moulder and pass away without
any great pain* but the use of it in women hinders Conception, and is
therefore to be avoided by them that desire Children. If a dram of the dust
scraped from the Backside of the Leaves be mixed with half a dram of Amber in
powder, and taken with the juice of Purslane or Plantain, it will help the
running of the Reins speedily. It helps Melancholy diseases also, and those
which rise from the French disease, if the herb and root be boiled and taken:
but they must not be boiled very long, for then the strength will evaporare,
especially of the Leaves. The distilled water is good against the Stone both in
the Reins and Bladder, and the Lie made of the Ashes thereof, being drunk for
sometime together, helps Spleenetick persons; for which purpose the herb may
be boiled a little and applied warm to the Region of the Spleen.

CHAP. CCV. Of Hart's-tongue.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Phyllitis, quasi foliosa, because it has many
long Leaves growing without any stalk, which name is sometimes given it by the
Latins; but they call it also Lingua Cervina, from the similitude it has with
an Hearts-Tongue which is the name that the English have taken up. In former
times the Apothecaries called it Scolopendrium; but that error is now
sufficiently manifested, and left.

The Kinds.
The sorts of Hart's-tongue which I find mentioned by Authors are three, 1.
Ordinary Hearts-Tongue, 2. Iagged Hearts-Tongue, which is also called Finger
Fern, and Finger Hearts-Tongue, because the tops of the leaves thereof are
divided into parts, like unto the Fingers of a man's hand, 3. Branched
Hearts-Tongue according to Alphinus.

The Form.
Ordinary Hearts-Tongue has diverse Leaves rising from the Root, every one
several, which at their first springing up, are crumpled and fo^ded, as
Spleenwort and Fern are at theirs, but after they have spread themselves to
their full proportion, they almost a foot long, smoth and green above, but hard
or with little sap in them and straked on the back overthwart, on both sides of
the middle rib, with small and somewhat long brownish marks; the bottoms of the
Leaves are a little bowed on each side of the middle rib, somewhat narrow with
the length, and somewhat small at the end: the root is of many black threads,
folded or interlaced together.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in shadowy places, and moist stony valleys in the Western
parts, and is much planted in Gardens in every Country, by those that have
delight in Physical herbs. The second grows upon Ingleborough hills, and
diverse other mountains in the North of England. It bears no flower, but is
green all the year long, bringing forth new Leaves in the Summer time.

The Temperature.
Hearts-Tongue is of a binding and drying faculty, but whether it be hot or
cold is set down by few, and those disagree concerning it.

The Signature and Virtues.
Crollius writes also that Hearts-Tongue has the Signature of the Spleen, as
indeed it very manifestly has, being in Figure somewhat long as the Leaf of
this herb is. Neither has it this Signature for nothing, for there is no
Simple whatsoever, that is more effectual for all the Diseases of the M^lt
then this is, for if it be loose or too much opened, this brings it to its
right temper, and so likewise if it be swollen hard or stopped, the decoction
thereof in Wine, being drunk and the herb it self after it is boiled, laid to
the greived place. It is also commended against the hardness and stopping of
the Liver, and against the heat both of it and the Stomach. It is very good
likewise to stop lasks and the bloody Flix, Spitting of blood, the Terms, and
all other Fluxes. Posset drink made of the Milk, wherein it has been boiled,
drunk warm, or sodden in water, till the Third part be boiled away, and
afterward streined, and one part thereof drunk with two parts of good white
wine, it expels the Stone and Gravel. The like quantity of Hearts-Tongue,
Knot-grasse, and Comfrey Roots being boiled in Water, and a draught of the
decoction drunk every morning, and the Materials, which are taken out thereof,
applied to the place is a notable remedy for such as are burst. It is
profitable also in the Jaundise, Kings-Evill and against the bitting of
Venomous beasts. The herb or juice applied does cleanse Wounds and Ulcers very
wonderfully. The distilled Water is commended by diverse, against the passion of
the Heart to stay the Hicket, to help the Falling of the Palate, and to stay
the bleeding of the Gummes, if the mouth be gargled therewith. Mr. Culppeper
commends the Syrup thereof for strengthening the Liver, which may be allowed
of: but the hardness of his belief as to the growing of it green all the
year, shows him to be one very little versed, concerning the times of Plants,
and silly also in doubting of that which he himself says Authors, (much more
skillfull then himself) do affirm.

CHAP. CCVI. Of Fern.
The Names.
THe Male kind is called (...), and (...), Pteris and Pterion without any
composition, the Leav^s thereof being like unto the wings of birds. Nicander
calls it (...), and (...), it is Fil^x mas in Latin. The Female is called in
Greek (...), and (...), Thelypteris and Nymphaapteris, In Latin, F^lix Foemina;
in English Brake and Common Fern. There is a third kind which is called in
Latin (for it had no Greek name) Osmunda Regalis, of the Singular properties
therein: it has other Latin names also as Filicastrum, Filix florida or
florescens, Filix palustris or Aqua^^ca. etc. It is called in English, Osmund
Fern, Osmundum the Waterman, Osmund Royal, and St. Christophers herb.

The Kinds.
Under the general appellation of Fern are comprehended these seven sorts, 1.
The Common male Fern, 2. The prickly male Fern, 3. Sweet smelling Fern, 4.
Common Female Fern, 5. Dented Female Fern, 6. Sharp Female Fern, 7. Osmund or
Water Fern.

The Form.
The Common Male Fern sends forth diverse hard rough unbranched stalks of
winged Leaves, naked toward the bottom, for a little space; but afterward
has many Leaves on each side, up to the tops with one at the end, not fully
opposite, each of them being deeply nicked on the Edges; of a pa^e green
coulor, hard and without sap, broadest at the bottom and smallest toward the
Top. It has no flower, yet Mr. Parkinson affirms that it has seed growing on
the back side of the Leaves, in the form of certain brownish small spots, by
the falling of which it is increased, and so are all other sorts of Ferns and
Capillary herbs, whereby it appears that they were in an Error which held that
it had no seed, not knowing, or at least not taking notice of the place in
Genesis, Chap. 11. 12. The root hereof is made of many thick black threads,
descending from a brown scaly thick head.

The Places and Time.
The first grows on Heathes and open places of hills, and sometimes in woods,
and shadowy places by the sides of fields, more or less in every Country of
this Land; the second grows in the like places also, but very rarely, the
third in the Forest of Savernake in Wiltshire. The fourth grows more
frequently then the male on barren heaths and shady hedge-sides etc. The fifth
and sixth grow rather on moist rocks, in the shaded hills; the last grows on
bogs, moors, and watery places, in several Countries of this Land, as on
Hampsted heath, and by an hedge-side in a meadow on the left hand of the way
that goes from St. Albans to Windridge, etc. The Leaves of all these sorts
peri^h commonly in the Winter, but shoot up new from the root in the Spring,
which at their first rising are brownish and folded round. The seed of the
former six, which grows on the back side of the Leaf, is ripe about
Midsummer; but the seventh has a long bush of small and more yellowish green
scaly Agletts, as it were, which are accounted as the Flower and seed, grow in
up in July, or there abouts.

The Temperature.
Fern is of a hot and dry quality, and also bitter and somewhat binding.

The Virtues.
The Roots of any of the above named Ferns, being bruised and boiled in Meade
or honeyed water, abateth the swelling and hardness of the Spleen, and kills
both broad and long worms in the belly. The green Leaves eaten are said to
open the belly, and move it downwards, purging both cholick and watery humors,
but it troubles the Stomach and causes barrenness in Women. The Roots being
bruised or boiled in Oil or Hog's Grease, makes a very good ointment to heal
wounds, punctures, or pricks in any part, which is good also against bruises,
and strengthens those bones which are either broken or out of Joint, and
gives much ease to the Cholick, and Splenetick diseases, if the parts greived
be anointed therewith, especially those of the water Fern, whose decoction may
be taken inwardly for the same purposes. It restores strength to the Sinews; a
basket full of the Leaves being boiled in good store of Water, and every part,
at least that which is afflicted, bathed therein, and therefore may be good for
the Palsy, which is a resolution of the Sinews. The powder of the root used in
foul Ulcers dries up their malignant moisture, and causes their speedier
healing. It is excellent good for the Rickets in Children, a diet drink being
made of it, and other capillary herbs, and given often. It is an Ingredient in
the Ointment called Unguentum Agrippa, which is good to anoint the Bellies of
such as have the Dropsy. The smoke of it being burned drives away Serpents,
gnats, and other noisome Creatures from those places which are molested with
them. I read that in Warwickshire, the good Houswives use the Female Fern
instead of Soap, making it up about Mid-Summer in balls, which when they will
use, they burn until it become bluish, and then lay it a side to dissolve
into powder like Lime, which will do the deed. In France as in Duchy of Main,
etc. a kind of a thick or dark colored green glass, is made of the Ashes of
Fern, and the like might be done in England, if it be not put to that use
already.

CHAP. CCVII. Of Capers.
The Form.
IT is called in Greek (...), and Capparis also in Latin, we in England call
them Capperis, Caper, and Capers, according to the Greek and Latin which all
Nations: follow as near as their Dialect will permit yet Gaza the Interpreter
of Theophrastus calls it Inturis, and Pliny seems to think it was the
Cynosbatos of Dioscorides, which was indeed the bastard name thereof in those
times. Hereunto is added Capparis, fabago, sive Leguminofa Bean Capers.

The Kinds.
Unto this kind there may, without any great breach of affinity, be referred
these five sorts 1. Rough Leaved Thorny Capers, 2. Thorny Capers with pointed
Leaves, 3. Egyptian Capers without thorns, 4. Great Capers of Arabia; 5. Bean
Capers.

The Form.
The Caper is a prickly shrub sending forth diverse long weak trailing woody
stalks, lying round about upon the ground, unless they be propped up, which
are full of sharp prickly thorns like hooks as the bramble, at each joint
whereof come forth two round Leaves like those of Asara Bacca, opposite one
unto another, from whence Springs also a small round head upon a pretty long
footstalke: for the flower, which being gathered before it open and pickled up
in Barrels with great Salt, is the Caper in use amongst us, but being let alone
puts forth four white sweet smelling Leaves, with four other green ones as
the husk wherein they stand, having many yellowish threads, and a long pestle in
the middle, which grows to be the fruit, and is, when it is ripe, long and
round, like any Olive or Acorn, containing diverse hard brown seeds like unto
Grape-kernels. The root is long and woody, and covered with a thick bark or
rind which is much used in Physic.

The Places and Times.
The two first grow in Italy, Spain, and some parts of France without
manuring; but that with pointed Leaves is not so frequent as the other. The
third grows in Egypt as the title declares, the fourth in Arabia, the fifth
in the Low Countries. The stalks of the two first perish every Winter,
shooting forth new Stalks and Leaves in the Spring, and Flowring shortly
after, but their fruit is not ripe until September; the other two have the
same times of flowring and fructifying, but keep their old Leaves, yet shooting
forth some fresh ones every Spring: the last flowereth and seedeth in the end
of Summer.

The Temperature:
The bark of the root of Capers consists of various qualities, for first it
is extreme bitter, next sharp, then sower; by the bitterness it cleanses,
purges, and cutteth; by the sharpness it heateth, cutteth and digesteth; and
by the Sowernesse it contracteth, thickneth, and binds. The Capers themselves
are hot, and of thin parts.

The Virtues.
Galen, whose skill in Physic was inferior to none, says, the bark of the
Roots of Capers, is a Medicine above all others available for the hardness of
the Spleen, whether it be applied outwardly of it self, or mixed with other
things to anoint the place, or the roots boiled in Vinegar or Oxymel, and taken
inwardly, or the powder of the root mixed with the said Decoction and taken:
for it is certain that it purges gross and Slimy humors, not only by Urine
but by Stool also; and many times it brings away with it congealed and
corrupted blood, and thereby gives much ease, to those that are troubled with
the Gouts or Palsies, with the Sciatica or Hipgout, weakness of the Sinews,
and for women that have their Courses Stopped to procure them. The same, made
in a Pultis and applied, is an especial Remedy to help foul Ulcers, for it
cleanses and dries them mightily, and is also good for hard Swellings under
the Ears and the Kings-Evill. It draws also from the Head, and other parts
those offensive humors, which are the Original cause of the Rickets, Ruptures,
Convulsions and Cramps, and thereby gives much ease. The said Roots boiled in
Oil and dropped into the Ears, eases the pains, and kills the Worms
breeding in them. The Capers being washed from the Salt and steeped in Vinegar
and so eaten, are both meat and Medicine, for they cause appetite, open the
stopping of the Liver and Milt, and consume cold Phlegm in the Stomach, being
boiled in Vinegar, they help the Toothache, and so does the dried Bark of the
Root, which decoction serves also to cleanse all manner of filth of the sk^n,
all filthy sores and white scurfe and hard-swellings. The Oil that is made of
Capers is of very good use against the pains of the sides and Spleen, against
Hypocondriack Melancholy, the Rickets, etc: the afflicted part being bathed
therewith by a good fire. The three last sorts are of very little or no use
amongst us.

CHAP. CCVIII. Of the Tamariske-Tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) from (...) signifying infinitus, from the
abundance of little Leaves wherewith it is adorned. In Latin also Myrica and
Tamarix, but of diverse Tamarisus, which comes from the Hebrew word Tamarik
signifies Abstersio, quia magnam abstergendvim habet of its great force in
clensing,

The Kinds
Heretofore there were only two sorts of Tamariske known, one great and bearing
Galls, the other small and bearing none; but now there are five sorts found
out, which belong to this kind. 1. The French or finer leafed Tamarisk. 2. The
German or broader Leafed Tamarisk, 3. White Tamarisk, 4. Egyptian Tamarisk
which bears Galls. 5. Sea Tamarisk,

The Form.
The French, or finer Leafed Tamarisk, which I take to be that which grows
most ordinarily in England, attaineth not to any great bigness in this Country
(though in others it is said to have the bigness of a great thick and
tall-Tree) with many spreading slender branches, whose Bark is somewhat thick
and rugged, of a dark reddish color; the younger shootes being reddish at the
first, green afterward, and blackish when they are dry, but the Leaves as long
as they be growing are of a whitish green color crisped as it were, somewhat
like unto Heath but finer and smaller: The flowers grow spike fashion being
purplish at the first, but white when they are blown open, consisting of five
Leaves a piece, which turn into down with the small seed in them, and falls
away, as that of the Willow and Poplar does.

The Places and Time
The first grows by the Rivers sides, and in other moist and gravelly places,
not only in Narbone, and about Mompelier in France, but in diverse parts of
Spain also. The second grows in Germany, as well near unto the River of
Rhene, as about that of Danubius, yet not without some difference. The third
did grow in the Garden of one Mr. Ward at his house at Boram in Essex. The
fourth in Arabia, Egypt and the places thereabouts. The last grows upon the
Sea Coasts in Flanders. They flower about the end of May or in June, and the
seed is ripe, and blown away in the beginning of September.

The Temperature.
Tamarisk, as Galen says, has a cleansing and cutting quality, and manifestly
drying; it is also somewhat astringent or binding, especially the fruit and
Bark.

The Virtues.
The Root or Leaves, or young branches of Tamarisk being boiled in Wine or
Vinegar, and drunk, and applied outwardly also is a very powerful remedy
against the hardness of the Spleen. The Leaves boiled in Wine, and drunk,
drives forth Melancholy, helps Spitting of Blood, and the excessive flowing
of the terms, the bleeding of the Hemorrhodiall Veins, and other Fluxes, the
Jaund^se, and all other griefs that come of Obstructions. The Root sodden with
Raisins and drunk, helps the Lepry, because it cleanses and heals the Milt
whereof the Lepry comes. The Bark and Leaves boiled in Wine, and the Mouth
and Teeth gargled therewith, helps the Toothache; and being dropped into the
Ears, it helps the pains thereof, and is good for the redness and watering
of the Eyes. The said Decoction is also good to wash those that are subject to
Nits and Lice, and being mixed with a little honey, it is effectual to stay
Gangrens and fretting Ulcers. A Bath made by boiling a good quantity of the
Leaves in store of Water, being sat in by those Women whose Matrix is in danger
of falling down through looseness, fasteneth it, and the ashes of the Wood
applied to the place stops the excessive flowing thereof. The Wood is said
to be so powerful to consume the Spleen, that those Hogs which have been
served in Troughes made thereof have been found without Spleens: and therefore
it is more then probable that if those which are Splenetick, should constantly
drink out of Cannes, Piggins or Cups made thereof, they would find it
effectual for their Disease. The Ashes of the Wood made into a Lie with Water,
is of good use for many of the purposes aforesaid, as also to help those
blisters which are raised by burning or scalding of fire or water. The
Egyptians use the Wood hereof to cure the French disease,, Leprosy, Scabs,
pushes, Ulcers, and the like, It is available also to help the Dropsy, arising
from the Hardness and Obstructions of the Spleen, as also for Melancholy, and
the black Jaundise that arises thereof, especially the Bark with the Barks of
Ash and Ivy infused in Beer or Ale, and drunk. Some in cases of necessity use
Heath or Ling instead of Tamarisk.

CHAP. CCIX. Of Germander.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Chamaedrys, which in English is as much as a
dwarf Oak the Leaves of it being somewhat like to those of the great Oak In
Latin Trissago and Trixago, and of some Querculaminor, yet Chamaedrys is more
frequent then either of them in shops or elsewhere: in English Germander, or
English Treacle. Tree Germander is called (...) in Greek and Teucrium in
Latin, a Teucro inventore from one Teucer which first found out the virtues of
it; in English Tree Germander, and upright Germander.

The Kinds.
Of both these kinds we may reckon Eighteen sorts. 1. The common Germander. 2.
Great Germander. 3. Germander, of Naples. 4. Jagged Germander or with fine cut
Leaves. 5. Thorny Germander of Candy. 6. Mountain Germander. 7. Rock
Germander. 8. The greater Bastard Germander. 9. The smaller Bastard Germander.
10. The least Bastard Germander. 11. Common Wild Germander. 12. Narrow Leased
wild Germander. 13. Jagged base Germander of Austria. 14. Wild Spanish
Germander with fine ^ut Leaves. 15. The more common Tree Germander. 16. Tree-
Germander of Candy. 17. Tree- Germander of Spain. 18. Unsavory-Tree Germander
of the Alps.

The Form.
Common Germander shoots forth very many branches, lying on the ground, which
are tough, hard and woody, spreading themselves here and there; whereupon are
placed small Leaves, sni^^ about the edges like the teeth of a Saw, and
therefore of some called Serratula, though improperly, resembling the shape of
an Oaken Leaf, as I said before. The flowers are of a purple color, very
small, standing close to the Leaves toward the top of the branches. The seed
is little and black, the root slender and full of strings which by spreading
themselves a great way round about, cause it to be very plentiful in a short
space where it is once set.

The Places and Time.
To set down the places of all the sorts abovenamed would be to little purpose
seeing that none of them grow naturally in England save the Eleaventh sort
which grows almost every where: I shall therefore refer you to the Gardens
of those that delight in Varieties of this Nature, where it is probable you may
find many of them. Some of them flower in June and July, and some later.

The Temperature.
Germander is hot and dry almost in the third degree, of thin parts, and having
a cutting quality.

The Virtues.
All these sorts of Germander as well the Wild as those that grow in Gardens,
and the Tree- Germander, as the other, either green or dry, used inwardly or
applied outwardly are of great efficacy to help the distempers of the Spleen,
especially the hardness thereof, by taking the Decoction of the green herb,
and so it not only procures Urine to those that can hardly make Water, but
helps those also that are falling into a Dropsy, if it be taken in time. It
is good also against the Diseases of the Brain, as pains of the Head, Falling
sickness, Melancholy, Lethargy, Palsy, Gout, and for those that are sottish
through the dullness of their Spirits. A dram of the seed taken in Powder
does purge Choler, by Urine, and is thereby good for the yellow Jaund^se, and
to kill the Worms, and so are the tops of them when they are in flower,
steeped a day and a night in a draught of White Wine, and drunk in the Morning.
It is commended against the Plague and Pestilence, as also against Poison and
against the pains of the side, it cures both Tertian and Quartaine Agues, as
also the Cramp, if the Decoction thereof be taken for some days together. It
brings down the Terms, helps to expel the Dead-Child, and taken with
Vinegar it wastes the Spleen, with Honey, and it is good for Coughs. It is
effectual likewi^e against Venom and the stinging of Venomous Creatures being
bruised and applied; used with Honey it cleanses old and foul Ulcers; and the
juice mixed with Honey, and put into the Eyes takes away their dimnesse, and
moistness, the juice also dropped into the Ears, kills Worms therein. The
decoction thereof stays the Whites in Women, if they sit in a great quantity
thereof, while it is warm, and so it eases the passions of the Mother. Being
boiled in Vinegar, and applied to the Stomach with a lttle Leaven, it stays
Vomitings, that rise not from hot causes. The Leaves of Germander with the
seeds of Nigella quilted in a Cap, and worn on the heads of those that are
troubled with Catarrhes or distillations of cold raw and thin Rheum helps
them: Being boiled in Lie with Lupines, and the Head washed therewith, it
takes away the Dandraffe or Scurfe thereof; stamped and applied to bruises, it
helps them speedily.

CHAP. CCX. Of Calamint.
The Names
IT is called in Greek (...) Calaminthe, quasi bona and utilis Mentha, of its
goodness and profitablenesse. The Latins keeps the name Calamintha.
Apothecaries call it Montana Calamintha, Calamintum, and sometimes Calamentum
montanum. It is called in English, Calamint, Mountain Mint, and Mountain
Calamint.

The Kinds.
Of this kind which is distinct from Nep or Catmint, though some have
confounded them together, there be five sorts, 1 Common Calamint. 2. The
greatest Calamint or Mountain Mint. 3. Spotted Calamint. 4. Small Calamint. 5.
Field Calamint, with whorled Coronets.

Common Calamint, is an herb seldom rising above a foot high, with square
hoary and woody stalks, and two small hoary Leaves, set at a Joint, about the
bigness of Marjerom, or not quit so big, a little dented about the edges, and
of a very quick scent, as the whole herb is; From the middle of the Stalk
almost, even to the top, do stand at certain distances many pretty flowers,
which are small and gaping like to those of Mint, and somewhat of a pale blush
color, after which succeed small round blackish seeds: The root is small and
woody, with diverse small sprigs spreading within the ground, which abides
many years.

The Places and Times.
The first grows on Heaths, and upland dry grounds in many places, and
particularly in the way between Gravesend and Canterbury, and so does the
second, if my Author mistake not both which brought into Gardens prosper very
well. The third is found upon certain Hills in Lumbardy, and in sundry places
of this Land, but seldom spotted: The fourth grew of seed that was sent from
Candy: The last grows in diverse places of our own Land, and particularly by a
Hedge side, at the foot of Shootover-Hill, over against Sr. Henry Bathes
picture, on the other side the highway. They all flower in July, the seed
ripening quickly after.

The Temperature.
Calamint is hot and dry almost in the third degree, of a fierce biting taste,
and of a thin substance; it wastes away thin humors, and rarifyeth those that
are thick.

The Virtues.
The Virtues which Dioscorides and the Physicians of his time did give unto
Calamint are these: the Decoction thereof drunk, brings down Women's Courses,
and provokes Urine; It is profitable to those which are bursten, and those
which are troubled with Convulsions and Crampes, shortness of breath, pains
of the belly and Stomach proceeding from Choler: It helps the yellow Jaundise
also, and stays Vomiting, being taken in Wine, and taken with Salt and Honey.
It helps those that have the Leprosy, if it be taken inwardly, and Whey drunk
after it: The Leaves stamped and applied with Wool as a Pessary to the privy
parts of a Woman do draw down the Courses, and ease pains of the Mother, but
it must be avoided by those which are with Child, for it kills the birth. It
drives Venomous Creatures of all sorts out of those rooms, wherein it is
either burnt or strewed; It takes away the black and blew spots of the face,
making black Scars to become well colored, if the green herb be boiled in
Wine, and applied, or the place washed with the decoction. Being applied to the
Hucklebone by continuance of time it spends the humors which cause the pain
of the Sciatica. Thus far, Dioscorides. Besides which Virtues, Physicians of
later times have found out, that it not only opens the Obstructions of the
Spleen and Liver, but also that it is of great validity to cure the hardness
of the Spleen, the Decoction of the Herb, the Powder called Diacalaminthes or
the Compound Syrup of Calamint being used. It is also very profitable for
those that are troubled with the overflowing of the Gall, the Tertian Ague, and
old Cough. I have known some good Houswives make use of it, to lay amongst
their salted Meat in hot Weather, when it is subject to stinking, and indeed it
will recover that meat which through the heat of the Weather has got a touch,
which some in plain English call stinking, if be not too far gone, the
branches hereof being laid amongst it.

CHAP. CCXI. Of Poley Mountain.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Polion from its hoarinesse, for (...) signifies
hoary and ndeed the Plant somewhat resembles the hoary hairs of a man's head,
but the tops or heads much more. It is called Polium also in Latin, and all
other Nations come as near the Name as their Dialect will permit; And because
it commonly grows upon Mountains it has sometimes the Epithet (...) joined
to it in the Greek, but more usually Montanum in Latin. We in English call it
Poley and Poley Mountain.

The Kinds.
And of these Poleys, there many be reckoned nine sorts. 1. Our ordinary Poley
Mountain. 2. Small Spanish upright Poley Mountain. 3. Small French Poley
Mountain. 4. Creeping purple Poley Mountain. 5. The smallest creeping white
flowred Poley Mountain. 6. Spike Leafed Poley Mountain. 7. Candy Poley, with
hoary broad Leaves. 8. Upright narrow leased Candy Poley. 9. The small African
dwarf Poley.

The Form.
The ordinary Poley Mountain is a small low Plant having diverse white or hoary
round hard branches, scarce a foot high, whereon are set diverse long and small
hoary Leaves, overlaid as it were with a yellowish white Down, somewhat dented
about the edges, with two always set together on the stalks, as they g^ow up;
at the tops whereof grow forth whitish or hoary yellowish heads, thrusting out
many small pale colored flowers, and in some places more yellow, standing in
hoary husks; the seed is small and blackish, which it seldom perfecteth in
our Land, and therefore we slip the branches, which being set will grow very
well, as often as we desire to increase it; the whole plant smells sweet,
somewhat strong and quick withal.

The Places and Time.
These Plants grow not naturally in England, and therefore I shall refer you
to the Gardens for them, as the Physic Garden at Oxford, and that at
Westminster, where you may find diverse of them; They do most of them flower in
July, and August, yet some later then others.

The Temperature.
Poley is dry in the third degree, and hot in the end of the second, of a
loathsome bitter taste.

The Virtues.
Though this Simple be not commonly to be had in the feilds, nor in every
Garden, yet at the Apothecaries shop it may be had at no great expense. It is
very effectual to free all the inward parts, from obstructions, especially the
Spleen and Liver, which it does through the bitterness wherewith it is
qualified, it being the nature of all bitter things to open Obstructions.
Neither does it only open the stopping of the Spleen, but helps all other
diseases thereof, or proceeding from it, as the swelling thereof, the Jaundise
and the Dropsy, being boiled in Vinegar and Water, and the Decoction thereof
drunk. It is also of wonderful efficacy to resist Poison, and therefore it is
always put into Mithridate, Treacle, and all other Antidotes or
Counterpoysons, and to help those that are stung or bitten with Venomous
Creatures, the Decoction of the herb being drunk whilst it is warm, nay it is
so Antipatheticall to all Vermin, that the fumigation or smoke thereof being
burnt, drives them away, and so does the herb being strewed or laid in those
places that are subject thereunto. It moves the belly, and brings down the
feminine courses, and does consolidate or soder up close the Lips of cuts or
wounds, if it be applied to them green; and being dry, it heals grievous
sores or Ulcers, and this the lesser kind does best perform, which is that
also which is used in Mithridate, Venice Treacle, and the like: Notwithstanding
all these good qualities it troubles the Stomach and causes some pains in
the head sometimes.

CHAP. CCXII. Of Lupines.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Thermos, in Latin Lupinus. Plautus called
Lupinus Aurum Comicum, because in his time they were used instead of money, in
such Comedies as had any show of payment in any Scene thereof. But that they
were not used for Current money upon other occasions, may be gathered from that
Verse of Horace.

Nec tamen ignorent, quid distant ara Lupinis,

Which shows that Counters and Counterfeit moneys, were easily to be
distinguished from true and Current Coin. In English, they are usually called
Lupines after the Latin Name, yet some call them Fig-beanes after the Dutch
name, because they are flat and round as a Fig that is pressed; and others,
Flat-beans for the same reason. Some have called the yellow Lupine Spanish
Violets, and other foolish names have been given it, as Virginia Roses, and the
like.

The Kinds.
There be Eleaven several sorts of Lupines, 1. The white-Garden Lupine, 2. The
greater blew Lupine, 3. The lesser blew Lupine. 4. The smallest blew Lupine, 5.
The blew Sea Lupine, 6. The spotted white Lupine. 7. The yellow Lupine, 8. The
Arabian Lupine, 9. A middle sort of great blew Lupine, 10. Blush flowered
Lupine, 11. Lupinus, flore obsoleto.

The Form.
The white Garden Lupine rises up with a great round stalk, hollow and
somewhat woolly with diverse branches, whereon grow upon long Foot-stalkes many
broad Leaves divided into five, seven, or Nine parts or smaller Leaves, equally
standing round about, as it were in a Circle, of a whitish green color on the
upper side, and more woolly underneath: the Flowers stand many together at
several Joints, both of the greater stalk, and the branches like unto Beans,
and of a white color in some places, and in others of a very bleak blew,
tending to white; after the flowers are past there come in their places long
broad and flat rough Cods, wherein are contained round and flat seed, yellowish
on the inside, and covered with a rough white skin and very bitter in taste, the
roots are not very great, but full of small fibers, whereby it fasteneth it
self strongly in the ground, yet perishes every year, as all the rest of these
kinds do, which differ little from this but only in the color of their
Flowers, for which they are cheifely desired.

The Places and Time.
All the sorts above named do grow in the Gardens of those that are curious
Lovers of these delights here in England, but the first came from Greece, where
it was anciently cherished for food, the Great blew Lupine from Caramania
beyond Persia, the lesser blew and the yellow sort from Spain. They flower in
June and July, and their seed is ripe quickly after.

The Temperature.
Lupines by reason of their bitterness, do open, digest, dissolve, and
cleanse, but being steeped some days in water they lose their bitterne^^e.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Lupine is said by Crollius to have the Signature of the Spleen, and
therefore the decoction therefore is profitable for those that are Splenetick,
to which may also be added Rue and Pepper, that it may be the pleasanter and
more effectual. The said Decoction helps to kill and expel all manner of
Worms, if it be drunk in a Morning fasting, and so does the Meal hereof taken
with Honey, or with Water and Vinegar, or tempered with an Ox gall, and laid
to the navell whilst the party is fasting. Though taken often, and without
preparation they breed gross and rude humors, being hard of digestion, and
slow in passing through the belly; yet being steeped and afterward dried,
beaten, and taken with some Vine^ as, they cleanse the Stomach, help digestion,
and provoke Appetite. The decoction aforesaid provokes Urine and Women's
Courses, and i^ it be taken with Myr^he it expels the dead Child. A
decoction or Lie made with Lupines, with Wormwood, Centaury and Bay Salt added
thereto, stays the spreading and running of a Gangreen, being applied thereto
very hot with Cloth or Tow. The simple decoction thereof cleanses all
Scabbes, Morphew, Cancers, Tetters and creeping or running Ulcers and Sores;
and boiled in Lie it cleanses the Head from Ulcers, Scurfe, etc. It also
cleanses the face and takes away the marks that the Pox do leave after their
healing, and all other marks and black and blew Spo^^ in the skin, especially
if the Meal of Lupines, the Gall of a Goat, some juice of Lemmons, and sugared
Allo^^ be made into the form of a soft ointment, and the face anointed
therewith going to bed, as many women know very well. The said Meal being
boiled in Vinegar, and applied, takes away pimples, and discusseth hard
swellings, breaks Carbunkles and Impostumes: the burning of the husks,
drives away G^ats, Flies, etc.

To these which help the Spleen might be added many other, as the Orebus or
bitter Vitch Wall flowers, Time, Coltick Spicknard, etc. But these are reserved
for other parts whereunto they are also serviceable; Many also of those handled
in the aforegoing part of this work, are effectual for the diseases of this
part, but because it stands not with our convenience, to treat of every thing
that is good for every part, when we come to every part that it is good for,
for then we must treat of the same thing over and over again. Therefore the
Reader is desired not to be over Strict, in censuring these Appropriations
because of the diversity of virtues wherewith every plant is endued: and
because every part may share of the benefit proceeding from some of them. And
now I shall proceed to the Reins, and give you some that may be properly
referred to them, as also for the Bladder and Stone, because most of these
plants which are good for the one, are good for the other, and because the
Strangury and Difficulty of making Water proceeds sometimes from the
indisposition of these parts, and sometimes the indisposition of these parts
proceed from the Stone, that is; the Difficulty of making water, sometimes
causes the Stone, and sometimes the Stone causes Difficulty of making water. I
shall speak of all those together, which rectify the Reins and B^^dder,
provoke Urine, help the Stone and Strangury, without any Transition, all I have
finished what I shall hold necessary for all the purposes aforesaid.

CHAP. CCXIII. Of Asparagus.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Asparagus, and according to the Atticks (...)
Aspharagus, yet, by its Etymology which is either quia ex asperis virguetis
ligitur as Varro, or quod in aspera vitgulta nascitur, as Pompeius the
Grammarian would have it, it seems to have its original from the Latin,
which many other Plants have, being afterward made Greek by some of the Later
writers in that Language. Galen says, that the first budding of any herb that
was used to be eaten after it sprung from the seed, was called Asparagus, as in
Cabbage, Lettice, etc. But that being most usually eaten at that time has got
the name peculiarly to it self. It is called also (...) in Greek (...), because
it provokes lust; and Corruda in Latin, from Corruo because it quickly
decyayeth after it is ripe; and Sperage, Asparagus, and Sparagus in English.

The Kinds.
There be five sorts of Asparagus, 1. Garden Asparagus; 2. Sea or wild
Asparagus with thicker Leaves, 3. Wild Asparagus with sharp Leaves, 4. Prickly
Rock Asparagus, 5. Asparagus with cruel sharp thorns.

The Form.
Garden Sparagus rises up at the first, with diverse whitish green scaly heads;
very brittle or easy to break while they are young, which afterward rise up
into very long and slender green Stalks, some bigger and some lesser, according
to the growth of the Roots, and the fertility of the ground wherein it is
planted, but commonly of the bigness of an ordinary riding Wand at the
bottom, and as high as a man almost; on which are set dive^s branches of green
Leaves, shorter and smaller then Fennel to the top; at the Joints whereof come
forth, small mossy yellowish flowers, which turn into round berries g^een at
the first, and of an excellent red color like unto beads of Coral, when they
are ripe; wherein are contained black seeds of an exceeding hardness. The
roots are dispersed from a spongious head into many long thick and round
strings, whereby it sucketh much nourishment out of the ground and sends
forth many heads therefrom.

The Places and Time.
The first grows usually in Gardens but it is supposed to be the same with
the second, which grows in many low Meadows of this Land; both in Essex
Lincoln and Gloucestershire and that the alteration is made only by
transplanting. The third grows in stony and rocky places near Salamanca in
Spain. The fourth in many stony and ragged places both in Spain, Portugal,
and Candy: the last is very plentiful in the rough and uneven ways about
Lisbone. The bare tender shootes of Sperage, Spring up most familiarly in
April and then it is that they are most fit for Sallets. They flower in June
and July, and bear their berries late in the year.

The Temperature.
The root of Garden Sparagus as also of the wild, do cleanse without any
manifest heat or dryness.

The Signature and Virtues.
The buds, branches, or Roots, of Asparagus, especially of the wild, being
boiled in Wine do provoke Urine being stopped, yea even in those which are
troubled with an hardness or Difficulty to make water, or the Strangury when
it comes by Drops, and to expel gravel and the stone, out of the Kidnyes,
which it does by the Signature, which the hardness of the seed holds forth;
and helps all other pains in the Reins and Back, being taken inwardly, or
the Back and the Belly bathed therewith. Being boiled in White Wine or Vinegar,
it is good for those that have their Arteries, loosned, or are troubled with
the Hip-gout, Yellow-Jaundise, Falling Sickness, the Mother, dimnesse of
sight, and the Toothache, if it be gargled in the mouth warm. The same also
heals the pains of the breast, Stomach and bowels, and taken every morning
fasting for certain days together, it stirs up bodily lust, both in Man and
Woman. The seed is held to be very effectual also for the purposes aforesaid,
especially if a good quantity of the Roots, and it, be boiled in good store of
Water, and put into a large vessel where a man may stand or sit up to the
middle at least, for so it has been found effectual against the pains of
the Reins, and Bladder, the Mother and Cholick, and generally against all
those grievous torments that happen to the lower parts of the body, neither is
it less effectual to supple, stiff and benumbed sinews, or those that are
shrunk by Cramps or Convulsions, and to help the Sciatica. The first shootes
or heads of Asparagus are a Sallet of as much esteem with all sorts of
persons, as any other whatsoever, being boiled tender as they will quickly be,
and eaten with butter, Vinegar and Pepper, or Oil and Vinegar, as the Cook can
tell you better then I.

CHAP. CCXIV. Of Parsley.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), which is in Latin, Apium horteuse, the Epithet
being added to give it a specificall difference from the other kinds, all which
are comprehended under the general title of Selinon or Apium both in the Greek
and Latin, yet because this kind is of greatest and more familiar use then any
of the rest, it is so called, as also Parsley in English: but though this be
the usual acception amongst those I have already mentioned, yet among the
Arabians Apium is our Small age, as has been well observed, and this is their
Petroselinum.

The Kinds.
Though the name of Parsley does contain diverse and sundry sorts of herbs,
yet being here strictly taken, w^e may not refer any more then four unto it.
1. Common Garden Parsley. 2, Curled Parsley. 3. Virginia Parsley. 4. Candy Stone
Parsley.

The Form.
Common Garden Parsley is so well known, that I need not describe it, but that
it is a thing of Course so to do; It has many stalks of fresh green Leaves
divided into sundry parts; first into three parts or Leaves, and then each of
them into three, somewhat round, and finely snipt about the edges; the stalk is
about a Cubit high, slender, and somewhat chamfered, at the top whereof the
flowers growing in white umbells do present themselves, after which comes the
seed which is small and of a hot and sharp taste, the root is white and long,
and well scented with somewhat a rugged bark perishing after seed time.

The Places and Time.
These do all grow in Gardens only in our Land, and indeed that is not worthy
the name of a Garden, that is without the common sort, which grows naturally
in Germany as Fuchsius writes; the second is of the Island of Sardis; the
third came from Virginia, as its name denotes; the last from Candy. It may be
sowed early, for it is long in coming up, which serves the Kitchen especially
the first year, and the next runs up to seed, perfecting it in August, but
that of the last is ripe sooner.

The Temperature.
Parsley is hot and dry in the second degree, the seed is hot in the second
degree and dry almost in the third, the root is also of a moderate heat.

The Virtues.
Though Parsley have many considerable Virtues, yet it is no less eminent for
provoking Urine, which it does mightily, for breaking the Stone, and ea^ing the
tormenting pains thereof in the Reins, then for bringing down Women's Courses
and for breaking Wind both in the Stomach, to which it is very comfortable, and
also in the bowels; and therefore it is requisite for those that are troubled
with any of the indispositions aforesaid, not only to use the herb in meat and
brothes, and raw also by it self or mixed with a few other herbs, but the root
also which may be boiled and eaten like Parsneps; and especially the seed, the
decoction whereof in Wine is very effectual for the purposes aforesaid. The
same is profitable for the yellow-Jaundise, the Falling sickness, and the
Dropsy. The root of Parsley opens the obstructions both of the Liver and
Spleen, and therefore is usually put amongst those herbs and roots that move
the belly downwards, and is one of the five opening Roots. The seed is
effectual against Poison or Venom, and therefore it is put into
Counter-Poysons for that purpose, as also against the danger that comes to
them that have taken Litharge; it is also used amongst other things that serve
for the Cough, and being boiled in White Wind, it helps to bring away the
Birth and Afterbirth. The Leaves of Parsley eaten after Onyons Leekes or
Garlic, takes away the offensive smell of them, and suppresseth the Vapors
that offend either the Head or Eyes, and being cast into a Fishpond where the
Fish are sick, it cleanses and cures them: The said Leaves laid to the Eyes,
that are inflamed with Heat, or are swollen, does much help them if it be used
with bread or Meal; and being laid to Women's hard Breasts, that come to be so
by the curdling of their Milk, it does abate the hardness quickly; If it be
fried with butter and applied, it takes away those black and blew spots or
marks which come by knocks, bruises, falls, etc: and the sooner it is used,
the more effectual it will be; The juice thereof dropped into the Ears, with
a little Wine eases the pains thereof. The distilled Water of the herb is
much used by Nurses, which they give their Children for the Frets, that is
against Wind or griping in their bellies or Stomachs.

CHAP. CCXV. Of Marsh-Mallowes.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Althaea, quasi Medica Latin dici posset, of the
healing and remedying many diseases from (...) which ^^gnifies to hea^e o^
cure, as also (...) and (...) Ibiscus and Ebiscus, and (...) H^b^scus with the
aspiration: it is called also in Latin Althaea and H^biscus, Ar^stalthaea and
Bismalva, because it is twice as good in effect as the other sorts a^e: in
Eng^i^h, Marsh-Mallow, and Moorish Mallow, because it grows in Marshes and
Moors; and White Mallow from the color of the Leaves.

The Kinds.
Of this kind of Mallows there be ten sorts. 1. Common Marsh Mallows. 2.
Marsh-Mallow of Hungaria. 3. The strange Rose Marsh-Mallow. 7. Ever green
Marsh-Mallowes. 5. Yellow Marsh-Mallowes. 6. Camerarius his white Indian
Marsh-Mallow. 7. Red flowred Marsh-Mallow. 8. Shrub Mal^ow with a white or
purple flower. 9. Tree Marsh-Mallow of France. 10. Shrub Marsh-Mallow of Candy.

The Form.
Common Marsh-Mallowes have diverse soft hoary white Stalks rising to be three
or four foot-high spreading forth many branches, the Leaves whereof are soft
and hoary or woolly, somewhat lesser then Mallow Leaves, but longer pointed, cut
for the most part into some few divisions, but not very deep; The flowers are
somewhat like unto the common sort of Mallows, yet not altogether so big nor so
red; but commonly white or tending to a blush color, after which come such
cases and seed as the other has; the Roots are many and long shooting from
one head, of the bigness of a thumb or finger, very pliant, tough, and ben^ing
like Liquorish, of a whitish yellow color on the outside, but whiter within.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in most of the Salt-Marshes from Woll-wich, down to the Sea
both on the Essex and Kentish shore, and is brought from thence into diverse
Gardens where it prospers well; the second in Hungary, as the title shows:
the third in Africa, the fifth in many places of Italy, in wet grounds: it is
uncertain whether the sixth came from the Indies, or Italy; the seventh is to
be found near Anguilara in Italy: the eight grows in diverse places both of
Spain and France, the ninth in Province of France: the last in Candy, whence
diverse have been brought to us, and planted in the Gardens of the curious; as
the eight sort is in the Garden of Mr. Ball by Sion house. They flourish in
July and August and continue flouring till the frost kills the stalks, but the
root continuing sends forth new ones the next spring, at which time the
Roots are fittest to be taken up for use.

The Temperature.
Marshmallows are moderately hot but dry in the first or second degree, being
endued also with a mo^lifying or softening Nature; the roots and seeds, are
more dry an^ of thinner parts.

The Virtues.
For fear that either Asparagus or Parsley or the parts of them should through
often use by too much c^eansing or heat, cause any Excoriation or other
distemper, in any of the parts as they pass along, as possibly they may, and
so likewise diverse that follow, I would desire those that shall be afflicted
with any of these diseases, to take notice that Marsh Mallows by the slimy
viscous juice wherewith they abound, are of excellent use to remedy the
Excoriations or frettings in those or any other parts, as the Gutts, Reins,
Bladder, Yard etc. Neither is this the only excellency that it has in this
case, but it is effectual as any whatsoever for the Stone: for it opens the
straight passages and makes them slippery, whereby it may descend easily out
of the Reins and Bladder, and to ease the torturing pain coming thereby: the
Decoction or the Syrup thereof being taken, which is good also for the
gripings of the belly, the Diseases of the Breast and Lungs as Coughes,
Hoarsenesse of the Throat and Voice, Pleur^sy, and the like. It is likewise
very beneficial to those that are troubled with Ruptures, the Sciatica, the
Cramp or Convulsion of the Sinews. The dried roots boiled in Milk and drunk,
are good for the Chine-Cough. The roots boiled in Wine are good for such as
have fallen, and bruised themselves, and for those that have any bone or member
out of Joint, and for such as have any swelling pain, or ache in the Muscles,
Sinews, or Arteries of the Body, and cures such as are stung with Bees or the
like, and the distilled water is good for the foresaid purposes. The Leaves and
Roots, are effectual in decoctions for Glisters to ease the griping of the
Belly, and the pains of the Kidnyes and Bladder. Being boiled in Wine and
applied, they help Impostumes of the Throat, the King's Evil, and those Kernells
behind the E^r^s, as also Inflammations and swellings in Women's breasts. The
Muccilage of the Roots and of Lin-seed and Fenygreek put together, is much used
in Pultis^^, Ointments, and Plasters, that serve to mollify and digest all
hard tumors and inflammations, and to ease pains in any part of the Body. The
seed green or dry, mixed with Vinegar cleanses the Skin of the Morphew, and
all other discolorings thereof. The Root boiled in Vinegar and holden in the
mouth eases the Toothache. The Leaves laid to with Oil, help burnings and
Scaldings, and are good against the bitings of Men and Dogs, and against the
stinging of Bees and Wasps. The Ointment of Marsh Mallows either simple or
Compound does mollify heat and moisten, and is very useful in the Pleurisy,
and other pains of the sides and breast. The Dose of the Syrup, is a
spoonful or two in Milk, Posset drink or Wine, which being taken in a Morning
fasting, is most effectual for all the griefs aforementioned.

CHAP. CCXVI. Of Goats Thorn.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Tragacantha, from the sharp form of the bush,
whose thorns as it grows do represent a Goats beard. It may be called in
Latin Spina Hirci, but it is known better by the name of Tragacantha, which
name also is given to the Gum which is gathered from the roots being cut or
broken in the heat of Summer. The Apothecaries call it Gummi Tragacanthae, in
Latin; and Gum Dragant in English. There is a kind hereof called (...) in
Greek, because it joys in places where water is, and (...), because it is
profitable to the Nerves or Sinews.

The Kinds.
Bauhinus has made five sorts of Goats Throne, adding Pimpinella Spinosa, or
Thorny Burnet for one which does not properly belong to this kind, and
therefore I shall set down but four, 1. The true Goates-thorn, 2. Poterion, or
the small Goats-Thorne, 3. The yellow Syrian Goats-Thorne, 4. Purple Syrian
Goats-Thorne,

The Form.
The true Goats thorn is a small bushy plant, rising up with many tough woody
stemmes not much above a cubit or two-foot high, divided into many slender
branches covered with hoarinesse, set with diverse long white thorns in a
double row, amongst which rise up diverse Leaves which being small long, and
round, like unto a little wing are set over against one another on each side of
a middle rib, abiding all the Winter, yet falling off at such times as the
Spring does bring fresh ones. At the tops of the branches, amongst the Leaves
come forth the Flowers, which are of a whitish yellow color fashioned somewhat
like unto the Flowers of a Trefoile, after which come small short upright white
Cods wherein are contained small whitish cornered seed. The root is very great
and long, spreading much and far in the ground, which being broken or wounded
with some Iron tool yeildeth a certain liquor, which by the heat of the sun is
presently turned into a tough pure shinning white gum, shrivelling up it self
into small crooked pieces, tasting somewhat sweet.

The Places and Time.
Though the two first grow in Candy and about Marselles, and Mompelier in
France and the two latter in Syria, yet the Gum, that we are to make use of, is
to be had at every Apothecaries shop. In their natural places they flower and
seed in the beginning of Autumn, but with us they do neither, being very
choice and tender to keep.

The Temperature.
Gum Dragant which is that part of the plant which is easiest to be come by in
England, has an Emplastick or daubing quality, by reason whereof it dulleth or
allayeth the sharpness of the humors, and does also somewhat dry.

The Virtues.
Besides March Mallows, the Gum of the Goats thorn called Tragacantha or
Gum Dragagant is also good against the fretting of the Urine either in Reins
or Bladder or any other of those cleansing Medicines, which are given to
provoke it; a dram thereof being dissolved in sweet wine and drunk, especially
if some Harts-horne burnt and washed; and a little of the best Allom be mixed
therewith, and so it is available for the growing pains in the Guts and bowels
also. It is likewise when it is dissolved often mixed with pectorall Syrupes
honey, or juice of Liquorish to help the Cough or Hoarnesse in the Throat, salt
and sharp distillations upon the Lungs, being taken is an Electuary, or put
under the tongue gently to distill down, and so it takes away the roughness
of the tongue, which happens in many diseases. The said Gum is also used in
Medicines for the Eyes, to allay the heat and sharpness of hot rheumes falling
into them: and being mingled with milk, it takes away white spots growing in
the black of the Eyes, the itching also of them, and whe^^es and scabs that
grow upon the Eyelids. Being somewhat torrefied or dried ^^ the ^^re; and
mixed with the juce or Wine of Quinces, and used in a G(...)er it is good
against the bloody Flix; Being boiled in Wine with Stechads and drunk, it
warmeth and cleanses the breast and Stomach and bowels being afflicted with
any cold, the Cholick the stopping of the Milt and Urine. It cleanses the face
and makes it white if it be steeped a night in Rose water, and in the morning,
a little Borace or Champhire be put thereto, and the face be washed therewith.
It is very effectual for the sores and chaps of the Mouth, Lips and Hands and
also for Ulcers in any part being dissolved in Rose water, strained, some white
starch mixed therewith, and the place anointed; the Muccilage mixed with Honey
does the same, and is good for the Leprosy. The powder of it, is profitable for
those that have broken a vein or are troubled with the Cra^p, if it be taken
in broth. Besides these Physical uses it serves to make artificial beads of
which Bracletts are compo^ed, and it is used many times as a kind of Starch or
Glue to bind or stiffen things withal, and to make Gentlewomens hair lie in
order. The roots of the Poterion boiled in Wine and drunk are profitable
against the poison of the red Toad, and being made in a Pultis and applied to
any of the Nerves or Sinews that are wounded, cut, or hurt, does heal them and
so^^er them together, are also all other kinds of Wounds and Cutts; the said
decoction of the Roots in Wine a also effectual for the said purposes to be
drunk, and for inward Wounds or Veins that are broken. Gum Arabic is
effectual for many of the purposes aforesaid but especially for defending the
Reins and Bladder from those frettings that cause bloody Urine.

CHAP. CCXVII. Of Spiknard.
The Names.
IT is called (...), Nardus in Greek from Naarda a City of Syria, near unto
Euphrares, as Lobel does conjecture, and (...) quasi Nardi Spica; which is the
general Name of the Indian sort: called also Nardus Indica, to put a
distinction between it and the Celtick and Mountain Spicknard. The Celtick
Spiknard is supposed by very good Authors to be the Saliunca that Virgil makes
mention of in his Eclogues, which is more likely, because the Vallesians in
whose Country it chiefly grows, call it Selliga.

The Kinds.
There be Eight sorts of Spiknard, 1. Mountain French Spiknard, 2. Mountain^
French Spiknard with tufted Flowers, 3. Knobbed mountain Spiknard, 4. Long
tuberous Mountain Spiknard, 5. Bastard French Spiknard, 7. Indian Spiknard, 6.
Italian Spiknard, 8. Unsavory Spiknard.

The Form.
Mountain French Spiknard creeps upon the ground, under the loose Leaves and
moss, with small long and hard slender roots, covered with many short small
dry Leaves like Scales; sending forth in diverse places, as it creeps and
spreads here and there, small blackish fibers, whereby it is nourished, at
the head whereof stand sundry small buttons or heads from which spring many
small narrow and somewhat thick green Leaves not divided or dented at all,
smallest at the bottom, and broadest toward the end, which change yellow in
the end of Summer; amongst these Leaves rise up sometimes more and sometimes but
one slender stalk without any Leaves thereon, at the top whereof stand many
small whitish flowers, like unto the smallest sorts of Valerian, every one upon
a slender foot-stalk which afterward bring small seed like unto them also; the
whole plant is sweet and more aromaticall then the Indian Spicknard, hotter
also and sharper in taste then any other sort.

The Places and Time.
It may be gathered by the names of most of them, to what Country they are
natural; and therefore I shall trouble you no farther with the places. They
all* flower and flourish in the summer months of June, July, and August; some
earlyer, and some latter then others.

The Temperature.
Dioscorides says that the true Indian* Spiknard is of an heating and drying
faculty, and there is no doubt but the other sorts are so likewise, seeing they
agree very much in their properties or virtues.

The Virtues.
All the sorts of Spiknard but especially the Celrick or French Spicknard, are
of very good use to provoke Urine, and to ease the exceeding great pains of
the Stone in the Reins or Kidnyes, if they be drunk with cold water; and so
they are profitable to those that have a loathing of their meat, swellings or
gnawings in their stomachs, as also for them that are Liver grown, and for them
that have the yellow Jaundise. It dries up the Flux or humors both in the Head
and breast, and is a special Ingredient in Mithridate, and other Antidotes
against vemone and poison. The decoction used as a Bath for Women to sit in or
over, in a seat fit for the purpose, takes away the Inflammations of the
Mother; but to women with Child it is forbidden, because it procures much
disquiet* and may force^ their Courses beyond either their time or convenience.
The Oil made thereof does both warm those places that are cold, and makes
the humors more subtle that were thick and congealed before, digesteth those
that are crude and raw, and also moderatly dries and binds those that were
too loose or flexible; and hereby works powerfully in all the cold griefs
and windiness of the Head and brain, of the Stomach, Liver, Spleen Reins and
Bladder, and of the Mother. Being ^nu^^ed up into the Nostrills, it purges the
Brain of much Rheum gathered therein, and causes both a good color and
favor to the whole body. Being steeped in Wine for certain days and
afterward distilled in Balneo cal^do, the Water hereof is very useful in all
cold indi^po^itions of the Members, taken inward^y or applied outward^y* for it
co^n^o^ten the brain, helps to stay thin distillations, and the cold pains
of the Head, as also the shaking of the Palsy; It helps also all passions of
the Heart, as faintings and (...)ning^* (...) the Co^lick likewise, two or
three spoonefulls being taken. It is commonly laid up in a new earthen Vessel
for Eye Medicines, being first made into Powder, and then into round Cakes or
trochiskes with Wine, which being conveniently applied repress and stay the
humors that offend them. Being drunk with Wine, it helps those that are stung
or bitten by any venomous Creature.

CHAP. CCXVIII. Of the Sweet Smelling Flagge.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and (...) Acorus and Acorum quia (...) medetur
because it he^peth to clear a dim Eyesight, which names are used in Latin
also, yet some have given it others as Radix nautica, Singentiana or unguentis
petita. And because this is used commonly for Calamus Aromaticus by the
Apothecaries though they be different things, the one being a Flagge, and the
other a Reed, I shall put them together. It is called Calamus Aromaticus and
odoratus, which in my judgment signify the same, though Parkinson makes a
difference; but the result of his discour^e is that Aroma is a Drugge that has
a strong smell, no matter whether it be sweet or no: and he instances in Myrrh
and Galbanum, in which signification Odor is also taken, for we have commonly
bonus Odor, and malus Odor, a sweet and a stinking scent, according to the
Epithet, that is joined with it: and I believe this may be a reason of those
suppositions that the Ancients counted those things sweet, which are not sweet
to us. This is that Calamus, mentioned in the 30 of Exodus, verse 23.

The Kinds.
Though Acorus and Calamus Aromaticus may not properly be said to be of the
same kinds, yet I shall put them together, and one more. 1. The sweet smelling
Flag or Calamus of the Shops. 2. The supposed true Syrian or Arabian
Aromaticall Reed. 3. Matthiolus his Aromaticall Reed.

The Form.
The sweet smelling Flagge has many Flaggy long and narrow fresh green
Leaves, two foot long a piece, yet many times somewhat brownish toward the
bottom, the one rising or growing out of the side of another in the same
manner that other Flagges or Flowerdeluces do, thin on both sides and ridged or
thick in the middle, the longest for the most part standing in the midst, all
of them smelling very sweet, which dye every year, (yet when they are dead
they keep their smell) new ones rising in their steed the next Spring; after it
has grown three or four years in a place, it puts forth a round head like
unto the Catkin of the Hasel-nut-Tree, growing upright, of a length and
thickness of one finger, of a purplish green color, out of which shoot forth
pa^e whitish flowers, consisting of four small Leaves a piece; nothing so well
sented as the Leaves, falling away quickly without giving seed: the root is
thick and long, somewhat like to that of the Garden Valerian, of a sweet sent
and and somewhat a bitter taste.

The Places and Times.
The first grows in Turkey, as also in Russia, and the places thereabouts
naturally in moist places, whence it has been brought into a few of our
Gardens. The second in Egypt, as also by the lake of Gennesareth in Judea, and
in diverse places also of Syria and Arabia. The third is suppo^ed by Matthiolus,
and others, to grow in India, Syria, and Judaea; The sweet smelling Flagge
bears its Catkin, in July or August.

The Temperature.
The Roots of Acorus are hot and dry in the second degree, and of thin and
subtle parts:

The Virtues.
The decoction of the roots of the Sweet smelling Flagge, being made with Wine
and drunk, does not only provoke Urine, but is also very profitable for all the
diseases of the Reins and Bladder, cleansing and wa^^ing all the superfluities
in them, without any hurt or danger, it helps to ease the pains of the
sides, Liver, and breast, as also those of the Colic and Cramp; it recovereth
those that are bursten and bitten with Venomous Creatures, and wa^eth the
Spleen. The Root is very much used in diverse Electuaries and Anti^otes against
all Venom Poison and infection, as in that called Diacorum Mithridate, etc:
Being taken fasting every morning for some time together it is a special
remedy for a stink^ng breath. A dram of the powder of the Root with as much
Cinnamon taken in a draught of Wormwood wine is singular good to comfort and
strengthen a cold weak Stomach. The whole Roots preserved either in Sugar or
Honey are effectual also for the same purposes, but these that are preserved
green are more desired, then those that being dry are steeped, and afterward
pre^erved. The juice dropped into the eyes dries the Rheumes therein, and
clears the sight, taking away films or such like that may offend them. The
hot fumes of the decoction made in Water, and taken in at the mouth through a
Funnel, are excellent to help them that are troubled with a Cough. The Roots
bruised and boiled in Wine, and applied warm to the Testicles that are
swollen, dissolveth the Tumor and eases the pains; it likewise mollifyeth
hard swellings in any other part of the body. It is used amongst other things
to make sweet Powders, and Water. Calamus Aromaticus, if the true can be had,
is as good if not better, for many of the purpo^es aforesaid, and is moreover
avaleiable to procure Women's Courses and to remedy the fits of the Mother.

CHAP. CCXIX. Of Cyperus or English Galanga.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Cyperus, from the round form of the Root, which
is like a small Box or Vessel, in Latin also Cyperus and Juncus triangularis
and angulosus, to distinguish between it, and the Juncus laevis or vulgaris,
ordinary rushes. It sometimes bears four square stalks, and then it is called
Juncus quadratus. In English, many do call it Gallinga or Gallingale, because
the roots of one sort of it are somewhat like to those of the small Gallinga.
It is called also as commonly Cyperus and sweet Cyperus, after the Greek and
Latin names.

The Kinds.
To this kind may be referred these five sorts. 1. The more common round rooted
sweet Cyperus. 2. The greater Assyrian sweet Cyperus. 3. The lesser, Assyrian
round rooted sweet Cyperus. 4. The ordinary sweet Cyperus, or English Galanga.
5. The most delicate sweet Cyperus or Rush-nut.

The Form.
The more common round rooted sweet Cyperus shoots forth many heads of long
and narrow Leaves somewhat ridged in the middle; every lease seeming thereby to
be three square of a sweet scent; amongst these Leaves rise many smooth square
Stalks about three foot high, stuffed with a white pith without any knot or
joint therein unto the tops* where there stand a few short Leaves and many
small panicles or chaffy green spikes of small Leaves above them, which after
contain within them the seed; the root is composed of many long and round
blackish brown small roots fastened together by long strings of the bigness of
small Olives, of a sweet scent even while they are green, but much more when
they are dry, and of a bitter taste somewhat like unto Galanga,

The Places and Time
None of these sorts grow in England unless it be in the Gardens of those that
delight in rarities, in the Physic Garden at Oxford, Westminster, etc. Yet if
you need there is no doubt but the druggist can furnish you with them. They
flower or carry their bushy tops in August with us, except the fourth sort
which gives his tusted head in the end of July most commonly.

The Temperature.
The Roots of Cyperus are hot and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.
The Roots of Cyperus boiled in Wine and drunk, (for they are much more
effectual then the Leaves) are very profitable for the Reins and Bladder, for
it provokes Urine, helps to break the Stone in the Bladder, by the cutting
quality that it has, yet without sharpness, and brings down Women's Courses
also. The Roots of Cyperus, and Bay berries of each a like quantity, beaten to
Powder and made up with the Urine of a Boy under years, and laid upon the
belly or those that have the Droply, does help them very much; and both of them
boiled in Wine and drunk often, while the other is used outwardly, does work
more effectually. It is good for the fretting pains and strangl^ngs of the
Mother, i^ the parts be bathed with the decoction thereof, or if the party sit
over the sumes, or in the decoction* thereof. The Powder thereof is an
especial Remedy for all Ulcers, yea spreading and devouring Cancers, that by
their overmuch moisture hardly admit of any cure, and by the astringent quality
it has it helps all sore Mouths whatsoever. Alpinus says, the Egyptians
do much use the powder of the Roots, and ashes of them, to cure the Ulcers both
of the mouth and secret parts, and to drink the decoction of them to comfort
and warm the Stomach, brain, Lungs, Sinews, arteries, and the womb of those
that are distempered though cold or moisture, or both, being taken sometime
together, for it warmeth and strengthens the natural vigor of the Spirits,
and is therefore comfortable to those that by long sickness are much spent in
the health of their bodies. It helps and strengthens digestion pocureth
warmth to the blood, and a good color to the face; it helps those, that have
strong or stinking breaths, the said decoction being made in Wine and drunk.
The long sweet ^perus is not altogether so effectual as the former; yet may be
used for it, the quantity being increased, when the other cannot be gotten; but
the chief use of it is, to make sweet powders, and perfumes for Garments,
Gloves, etc. to perfume Chambers also, being burnt with Cloves and Bayleaves.
The Rush Nuts called Trasi which are cried up and down the Streets in Spain as
Orenges and Lemmons are in England, are for the most part spent in Junkets,
rather then used Physically, yet they are found to be good both for the pains
of the breast and sides, if a Cream be made thereof and drunk, and therefore
are very profitable for those that have a Cough, to help to expectorate the
Phlegm, the same also drunk mitigateth the heat of Urine, and allayeth the
sharpness thereof; and being taken with the broth of fat flesh, it furthereth
Venereous astions. The decoction thereof, hot steel being also quenched in it,
helps the Dysentery or flux.

CHAP. CCXX. Of Hops.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and (...), Bryon and Bryonia, by the modern
writers, because the Leaves and running branches are somewhat like Briony; for
by Ancients it is not remembered, which is somewhat strange, seeing it is a
plant so useful. It is called in Latin Lupulus and Lupulus Salictarius and
reptitius, quia salit and reptat per arbores, vel quia scandit salices, because
it climbs upon Sallows, and other trees, which name is used by all our modern
writers except Lobel, who calls it Vitis Septentrionalium the vine of the
Northern Regions because they put Hops in their drink.

The Kinds
The Sorts of Hops may quickly be reckoned up for they be but two, 1. The
manured Hop, 2. The wild Hop.

The Form.
The manured Hop rises up at the first with diverse great brown heads, like
unto Asparagus, but larger; which afterward spread into rough Branches and
climb upon great high poles that are set for them to run on, having many hard
and rough dark green Leaves on them, cut into three or five divisions, somewhat
like unto ^ramble Leaves, and dented likewise about the Edges: At the tops of
the Branches, which hang down again for the most* part, come forth many scaly
heads, being as it were a small number of yellowish green Leaves, growing t^ick
together; from among which come forth the Flowers of a whitish yellow color,
which being past and the heads changing their color to be somewhat whitish
yellow, they are then fit to be gathered to keep, and then there is a small
round seed found there in; the root is great at the head, shooting forth many
blackish strings which take fast hold of the ground. The Scaly heads which are
put in beer are of strong smell, by which the goodness of them may be
discerned.

The Places and Times.
The first grows in Flanders, and diverse other places besides, whence the
beads are brought into England and sold; but they are no ways comparable to
those which grow with us, in great plenty also, in diverse places, but
especially in Kent and Essex, where there be men of good worth, whose estates
consist in Hop-grounds. They delight in low moist grounds, where they may have
moisture enough, yet they will not endure overmuch; and therefore they are
planted upon hillocks to preserve them from drowning. The second grows
amongst bry^rs and thorns, in hedge-rowes and other places in most Countries
of this Land, of its own accord* and it is supposed to be the same with the
former, but only that the ordering and manuring of that, makes it larger. They
Spring not up until April, and flower not until the latter end of June, yet
the heads are fit to be gathered about the end of September.

The Temperature.
The Heads which are most commonly called Hops are hot and dry in the second
degree, and so are the Leaves also, both of them being of an opening and
cleansing faculty.

The Virtues.
The decoction of the tops of Hops as well of the wild as the manured, is very
powerful to cleanse the Reins from Gravel, and to provoke Urine, which
likewise opens the obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, cleanses the Blood
and looseneth the belly. The roots also work the same effect, but they are
hotter and not so moist as the former. As they cleanse the blood, so
consequently they help to cure all manner of Scabs, Itch, and other breakings
out in the body; as also all other Tetters, Ring-worms, or spreading sores, the
Morphew, and all other dis(...)urings of the Skin. The decoction of the Flowers
and Tops are given with good success to those that have drunk any deadly
poison; the same being put in baths for women to sit in, takes away the
swellings and hardness of the Mother; and is good for those that can very
hardly make their Water because of the Strangury, or the like. Half a dram of
the seed beaten to powder and taken in drink kills the worms in the body and
brings down Women's Courses and expels Urine. A Syrup made of the juice
and Sugar, cures the yellow Jaundise, eases the Headache that comes of heat,
and tempereth the drought of the Liver and Stomach, and therefore it is very
profitable to be given in long and hot Agues that rise of Choler and Blood. The
juice of the Leaves dropped into the Ears cleanses the corrupt sores therein,
and helps the stench arising from the corruption of them. The greatest use
that is made of the heads of the Hops is to put them in Beer, to alter the
quality thereof, and to preserve the body from the repletion of gross humors,
which Ale being a thicker ^iquor does engender, of which it was said, Nil
Sp^ssius est dum bibitur* nil clarius dum mingitur, unde constat multas faces
in ventre relinqui. It is drunk thick, it is pissed out thin, whence it
appears that many dregs are left behind.

CHAP. CCXXI. Of Knot-Grasse
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Polygonum, quod multis gen^bus crescit, because of
its many joints; which name most of our Latin writers follow, yet there be
some that call it Seminalis, Sanguinalis, Sanguinaria and Proserpluaria from
its stanching of blood, and ceeping upon the ground. It is called in the shops
of Italy and other places Corrigiola and Centinodia, of the several properties
to correct the heat of the Stomach, and Body, and from creeping upon the
ground. In English Knot-Grasse, Swines grass, because Swine delight to feed
thereon, in the North Country of diverse Birds-tongue of the form of the Leaf:
some also call it Pink-Weed, and some Nine Joints of its great number of Joints.

The Kinds.
The sorts which may more properly be referred to this kind are fourteen, 1.
The greater Common Knot-Grasse, 2. The Lesser Common Knot-Grasse, 3. Sma^l
short leafed Knot-Grasse 4. Stoney Knot-Grasse, 5. The greater Sea Knot-Grasse,
6. The Lesser Sea Knot-Grasse, 7. White Mountain Knot-Grasse, 8. Mountain
Knot-Grasse, with Stone crop Leaves, 9. Spanish Knot-Grasse, 10. Small
Knot-Grasse of Mompelier, 11. Candy Knot-Grasse, 12. Lobels Knot-Grasse, with
Mother of Time Leaves, 13. Germans Knot-Grasse, or Knawell, 14. Another German
Knot-Grasse.

The Form.
The greater Common Knot-Grasse shoots forth many long slender branches full
of Joints, lying upon the ground with diverse long narrow Leaves thereon, one
for the most part at a Joint; whereat especially from the middle of the
branches upwards come forth the Flowers which are so small that they can very
hardly be perceived; in some of a white, in others of a purple color, running
afterward into very small square seed, somewhat like unto that of Sorrel. The
root is reddish long and slender, with many strings thereat, abiding diverse
Winters, yet the Leaves perish in the Autumn, and are renewed in the Spring.

The Places and Time.
The two first sorts grow every where both by the foot-wayes in the fields,
especially at the ends of those Lands whereon Winter corn grows, and
sometimes by the sides of those Highways and old walls. The third grows
upon higher grounds, and upon Hills and Mountains. The fourth in the same
places also in the more stoney parts thereof. The fifth and sixth by the Sea
side in diverse places. The seventh in France and Spain. The eighth in Naples.
The Ninth about Mountains in France that are near the Sea. The thirteenth
about Chipnam in Wiltshire, as also in Germany by the way sides, where the last
grows also. They are in flower, and seed, all the Summer long.

The Temperature.
Knot-Grasse is cold in the second degree, or else in the beginning of the
third, yet it is of a binding quality, which signifies that it is dry.

The Virtues.
A dram of the powder of Knot-Grasse taken in Wine for many days together is
singular good, to provoke Urine when it is stopped, as also when it passes
away by drops, and with pain, and when it is hot and sharp also; and withal
to expel wonderfully the Gravel or Stone in the Reins or Bladder. Being
shred and made into a Tansy with Eggs and eaten, it greatly prevails against
the Gonorrhea, or runn^ng of the Reins also, and the weakness of the Back
coming by means thereof. The juice or decoction thereof, is most effectual to
stay any bleeding at the mouth and to cool and temper the heat of the blood or
of the Stomach, and to stay any flux of the blood or Humors, either of the
belly or womb; as the Bloody flux, Women's courses, both white and red pissing
of blood, etc. The juice, given before the fit of the Tertian or Quartaine Ague
comes, not only hinders it for the present, but drives it quite away as it
is said; being boiled in wine and drunk, it helps those that are stung or
bitten with Venomous Creatures, and the same is very effectual to stay all
defluxions of Rheumatick humors falling down upon the Stomach, and kills
worms in the belly or Stomach, and eases all inward pains that arise of
heat, sharpness and corruption of blood and Choler, and is good for inward
wounds. The distilled water taken by it self or with the powder of the herb, or
seed, is very effectual to all the purposes aforesaid. The juice hereof
stays the bleeding of the Nose, being applied to the forehead and Temples, or
to be snuffed up in the Nose; the same cools all manner of inflammations as
St. Anthonies fire, or any other breaking forth of heat, all hot swellings and
Impostumations, all eating, fretting or burning* sores and fistulous Cancers,
or foul filthy Ulcers being applied or put into them, but principally for all
sorts of Ulcers and sores in the privy parts of Men or Women, restraining the
humors from following them, and cooling and drying up the hot and moist
inflammations that are apt to wait upon such sores in such places,. It helps
all fresh and green wounds also, by restraining the blood, and quickly closes
up the Lips of them. The juice dropped into the Ears, helps them
wonderfully, although they are foul and have running matter in them, and
helps the Inflammations of the Eyes being put therein. The Sea Knot-Grasse is
not effectual as is thought for the griefs aforesaid, because the saltness,
which it is supposed to acquire by its nearness to the Sea, makes it hotter;
yet where penetration and not cooling is required, it is more forcible then any
other. The smaller sorts come nearer to the temperature of the Sea kind, then
of the Land; yet they serve to provoke Urine and expel the stone and Gravel
by Urine; and so does Knavell, where the other is not to be had, which is
scarcely in any part of this Land.

CHAP. CCXXII. Of Parsley Pert or Parsley Breakstone.
The Names.
IT may called be in Greek (...) as it is in Latin Polygonum Selino^des: I say
it may, because I find not any Greek or Latin Author that treates of it, being
unknown to all the transmarine Doctors before Lobel came to us, who called it
Percepier Anglorum, which first word Percepier is derived from Percepierre,
signifying in French, as much as L^thon-tribon in Greek, Saxifraga Petrifindula
an obsolete word, and C^lculum frangens in Latin which is Pierce-stone or
Break-stone in English, and Anglorum is added, because it is thought to be
peculiar to our Country. Some call it Parsley-Pert, and de^ive it from P^tra,
but it is more properly Parsley Break-stone, because of its eminent ^aculties to
that purpose.

Though there be but one sort hereof which might have been placed amongst the
other Knot-grasse, whereof it is a kind, yet because it is somewhat different,
and is peculiar to our Country, I have given it a Chapter by it self.

The Form.
Break-stone Parsley grows with many Leaves spread upon the ground, each
standing upon a small long foot-stalke, and being as broad as the nai^e of a
man's finger or thumb, very much jagged on the edges, which makes it to seem
somewhat like unto a Parsley leaf, whereof came the name, but of an overworn or
dusky green color, from amongst which there rise up weak and slender stalke^
about two or three fingers long, set full of the like Leaves but smaller up to
the tops, that almost no part of the stalk can be seen; amongst these Leaves
come forth very small greenish yellow flowers, scarce to be discerned, where
afterward grows the seed as small as that of the Knot-grasse. The root is
very small and threddy abiding diverse years, if it grow in a place that is
likes.

The Places and Time.
Parsly-pert grows in those fields that are plowed up for Corn, both at the
same time with the Corn, and also when they are fallow, in most Countries of
this Land that ever I came into, though Gerard and Parkinson, make as if it
were a Plant growing in few places. It is to be found all the Spring, Summer,
and Harvest even from April to the end of October, yet it must be in several
places for that which grows in the open and Sunny places will flourish first,
but that which is shadowed will continue longest.

The Temperature.
It is as I conceive of the same Temperature with Knot-grasse.

The Virtues.
Parsley Break-stone has not its name for nothing, for it is found to be a
singular remedy to provoke Urine when it is stopped wholly, or passes away by
drops with pain, or unsensibly without pain, expels store of Gravel in
those that breed it, and the stone also in the Reins or Kidneyes, in washing
it down by the abundant passage of the Urine, and helps also to expel it out
of the Bladder, if it be not grown too great for the passages, and if it be, it
is very probable that the abundance of Urine brought down into the Bladder by
the Virtue of it even whilst it abides there, will work so much upon the stone
therein confirmed and grown great, that it will wast by degrees, by causing it
to be avoided in Gravel with the Urine. And that it may perform these
operations with the better success, you may take of the juice of the herb
about three Ounces, and mix it with so much White Wine as is fit to make a
Posset, the drink whereof taken in a pretty quantity morning and evening, to
which you may if you please add Mother of time, and some Camomile, which is a
good way: Or you may boil the Herbs aforesaid in Wine* or if that cannot be
had in Water, and drink it, (but I hope you will have the wit to streine it
first:) The powder also of the dried herb to the quantity of a dram or less,
in White Wind or in other drink where Wine is wanting taken first and last for
diverse days; and the distilled Water drunk with a little Sugar in the same
manner works the forementioned effects and so does this Composition which
came originally from a poor Country man who with good success ministered it to
diverse sorts of people. Take of the dried herb of Parsly-pert and Mous-eare,
Bay Berries Turmarick and Cloves, the seed of the Burdock, the seed of Hep or
the Bryar berries, and the seeds of Fenugreek, of each one Ounce; of the Stone
in an Oxes Gall twenty four grains weight, let all these be beaten into fine
Powder and kept in a dry box or pot, to use upon occasion: whereof the quantity
to be taken at a time is from half a dram to a dram as the age and necessity
of the patient shall require. There be diverse who conceiving themselves
inclined to the stone, eat it familiarly as a Sallet Herb, and pickle it up
also like Sampire to eat in Winter when the green herb cannot be gotten.

CHAP. CCXXIII. Of Saxifrage.
The Names
IT is called in Latin Saxifraga or Saxifragia (for to the Greek Writers it
was altogether unknown as far as we can gather, they having left no name for
it) from its efficacy in breaking the Stone, in England Saxifrage and
Breakstone. So much for the names in general (...), there being (...) that do
it also though not so effectually. I shall speak of them more particularly in
the kinds.

The Kinds.
Because the best Saxifrage that is grows in England, I shall trouble you with
no foreign sorts, we having nine or ten sorts of our own which for their
Virtues not for their forms I shall put together. 1. English Saxifrage so
called because it grows more plentifully in England then in any other
Country. 2. Mr. Goodrers Marsh-Saxifrage so called because he first discovered
it in a marshy place. 3. Lobels West-Country Saxifrage because L^b^l found it
in the Western parts of this Land. 4. White Saxifrage so called from the
color of the flowers, to distinguish it from the former. 5. Golden Saxifrage
from the Golden color of the Leaves. 6. The greater Burnet Saxifrage, so
called because it has Leaves somewhat like Burner. 7. The middle Burnet
Saxifrage. 8. The lesser Burnet Saxifrage. 9. Sax^frage with Chickweed Leaves.

The Form.
English Saxifrage, White Saxifrage, Golden Saxifrage, and burnet Saxifrage be
of so different Forms, that it will be necessary that I describe them one
after another.

English or Meadow Saxifrage which is known to diverse by the name of Meadow
Parsley grows with many very green winged Leaves somewhat like unto those of
Fenne^, but thicker and broader; so like unto Meadow Hart-wort of Mompelier that
it made Parkinson join it next thereunto; from amongst the said Leaves ri^e up
diverse cre^ed stalks of a Cubit high, having thereupon diverse smaller stalks
of winged Leaves also finely cut, but somewhat harsh to the feeling and bearing
at the top spoky rundells or umbells be^et with white flowers tending a little
to yellow which give place unto seeds like unto the Common Fennel ^eed, both
for form and greatness, but of a browner color and small taste; The root is
thick, black without, white within, and of a good savor.

White Sax^frage grows with diverse round faint or yellowish green Leaves,
but grayish underneath, spread upon the ground, unevenly dented about the
edges, and somewhat hairy, every one upon a little footstalke, from whence
rises up a round brownish hairy green stalk, about a foot-high with a few
such like round Leaves as grow below but smaller, somewhat branched at the top,
whereon stand pretty large white flowers of five Leaves a piece, with some
yellow Threads in the middle standing in a long crested brownish green husk,
which being past there arises sometimes a round hard head, biforked at the top,
wherein is contained small blackish seed: the Root is compact of a number of
black strings, whereunto are fastened many small reddish grains, or round
roots about the bigness of Pepper-cornes, which are used in Medicine, and
called by the Apothecaries white Saxifrage seed, and is that which is truly
meant by, though not so truly said of it.

Golden Saxifrage is most like unto the before described, yet it differs
therefrom in that the Leaves are not hairy, but somewhat thicker and of a darker
green color; amongst which rise up Stalks in handful high with such Leaves
on them as grow below two at a Joint, but three at the top of all, whereas also
at the Joints do come forth very small gold yellow flowers, not easily
observed, and seldom seen with them, because they fall away so quickly, after
which come small round heads wherein is contained small round reddish seed; the
Root is comp^^ed of a number of small strings or Fibers.

Burnet Saxifrage grows up with diverse stalks of winged Leaves set one
against another each being somewhat broad, and a little pointed and dented
about the edges, of a sad green color; at the tops of the stalks stand
(...)s of white flowers, after which comes small and blackish seed: The root is
long and whitish.

The Places and Time.
The first grows almost in every Meadow, and therefore it is called Meadow
Parsley, yet it sometimes grows in up and ground; the second was found by Mr.
Goodyer, on a boggy ground below the red Well of Welling borough in
Norhamptonshire; the third by Lobel between Chipnam and Marleborough, in the
Highway between London and Bristow, on a Chalky Hill; the fourth grows very
p^entifully in a field immediately below the Abbey Orchard, at St. Albons an^ in
many other places: the silt in moist and marish places about Bath and W^lles,
and in the Moors by Boston and Wisbich in Lincolneshire: the sixth, seventh,
and e^ght, grow in diverse Meadows and Pastures-grounds of this Land: the last
grows upon barren hills, and sometimes upon Walls. The first flowreth from
the beginning of May to the end of August; the second and third ^omwhat later;
the fourth in April or May at the furthest, when it is gathered for that which
is called the seed as well as to distill, for it perishes soon after; the
fifth in March and April; the rest, about July, and their Seed is ripe in
August.

The Temperature.
All the aforementioned sorts are hot and dry in the third degree, except the
Golden Saxifrage which is cold of temperature, as the taste declares.

The Virtues and Signature.
The seeds and roots of Saxifrage or Meadow Parsley boiled in White Wind, and
the d^^oction drunk, breaks the Stone in the Bladder and Kidn^es hell(...) the
strangury and cau^eth one to make Water freely, which also brings down Women's
Courses, and expels the Secondine and dead Child. The root dried and ma^e
into Powder, and half a dram or a dram taken with Sugar comfo^teth and warmeth
the Stomach, cures the gnaw^ngs and griping pains o^ the belly caleth the
Cholick also, and expels Wind. The Cheshire Women put it amongst the R^mnes
that they put into their Cheese as a Countryman of theirs reports. The
distilled Water is much in use with Nurses to give unto their Children against
the stopping of their Urine, and to ease the griping pains in their belly
which they usually cal^ the Frets. It is used outwardly in Bathes, and
Fomentations, to provoke Urine, and to ease the pains of the Belly, proceeding
from Wind. The seed or rather the root of the white Saxifrage cures the Stone
by signature as the learned Cr^llius has observed, and is singular good
against the strangury and stoppings of the Kidneys and Bladder, the Powder of
them being drunk in Wine or the decoction made of them. The distilled Water of
the whole herb roots and flowers, which is as effectual in a manner, is
familiarly taken by those that have need thereof, for any of the purposes
aforesaid, as also to cleanse the Stomach and Lungs from tough and thick Phlegm
that troubles it, and causes it more easily to be avoided. It is not
probable, that the Golden Saxifrage has any operation upon the Stone, because
of its insipide taste, unless it be by a specific Virtue, yet I mentioned it
because it is esteemed as a rarity. The Burnet Saxifrages, have the same
properties that the others have, both in provoking Urine, and easing the pains
thereof, as also in expelling Wind, and helping the Cholick, the roots or seed
being used in Powder, decoction, or any other way, which are likewise
effectual for the windy pains of the Mother, to procure Women's Courses, to
break and avoid the stone in the Kidneys, and to digest cold viscous and tough
Phlegm in the Stomach, and is an especial remedy against all kind of Venom.
The roots hereof dried are as hot as Pepper, and may be used for the same,
being much more wholesome as Tragus says. The same in Powder, with the Powder
of the Seeds and Sugar, purges the brain, helps the Toothache, restores
lost speech, and is good for Convulsions, Cramps, Apoplexies, and cold fevers,
and so is the distilled water wherein Castoreum has been boiled, which is
profitable also for the Palsy, and many other cold griefs. The same drunk with
wine and Vinegar cures the Plague, and being holden or chewed in the mouth, it
preserves from the Infection, when the air is corrupted. The seed made into
Comfits like unto those of Caraway are effectual for all the purposes
aforesaid, and so is the distilled water sweetened with Sugar though not in so
powerful a manner as the former; which water also beautifieth the face, by
cleansing it from all Spots and Freckels, and leaving a good color. The juice
of the Leaves does the same, and being dropped into the grievous wounds of the
Head, or any other place, dries up the moisture and heals them quickly. The
distilled water alone, or with Vinegar, being put into the eyes clears the
sight exceedingly. I conceive I have given to every sort its due properties,
notwithstanding I find all or most of them attributed to Saxifrage in general,
and no doubt, when one sort is not to be had, the other may serve as
substitutes, they being promiscuously used by diverse.

CHAP. CCXIII. Of Dropwort.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), because it is in flower when the Vine is, the
word signifying the Flower of the Vine, and (...), from the whiteness of its
flowers. In Latin Filipendula from the form of root, which is composed of
diverse tuberous pieces hanging together with black strings like threads, yet
some write Philipendula following Nicholaus Myrepsus (...), without taking
notice why it is called Filipendula. It is called in English also Filipendula
and the same Filipendula and Dropwort, because it helps pissing of by Drops.

The Kinds.
I think it will not be amiss to give you the varieties of Dropwort, (though
the Common Filipendula, be that which is most used in Physic,) which are
Fourteen in all, 1. Common or Ordinary Filipendula, 2. Another great
Fhilipendula, 3. Small Filipendula, 4. The most ordinary great Dropwort, 5. A
smaller sort of Dropwort, 6. Candy Dropwort with starr like heads, 7. Candy
Dropwort with fruitful heads, 8. Lobels Narrow Leaved Enanthe or Dropwort, 9.
Lobels Hemlock like Euanthe or Dropwort, 10. Marsh Dropwort, 11. French
Dropwort, 12. Small Rush like Enanthe or Dropwort, 13. Fine small Dropwort of
Africa, 14. Water Dropwort.

The Form
Ordinary Filipendula or Dropwort shoots forth diverse long winged Leaves,
each of them consisting of many small Leaves of different sises, set on each
side of a middle rib, and each of them dented about the Edges, somewhat
resembling Burnet and Wild Tansy or rather Agrimony, or rather participating
somewhat of each, but differing in somewhat from every one of them, as being
harder in handling. From amongst the said Leaves, rise up one or more stalks
about a Cubit or two foot high having some such Leaves thereon as grow below,
and sometimes also divided into other branches, spreading at the top into many
white sweet smelling Flowers, consisting of five Leaves a piece with some
threads in the middle, standing together in a tuft or umbel upon a small
footstalk; the seeds are small and black, whereupon depend many little knobs or
black pellets, somewhat like unto those of the female Peony but smaller.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in diverse places of this Land both upon and about St.
Vincents Rock by Bristow, and in a meadow near Sion house by Brainford and by
the hedge sides or under bushes in dry fields and medows. The second on the
tops of very cold mountains. The third in stony rough grounds about Mompelier.
The places of the rest are ^ome in our own Lands, some in others as may be
perceived by their names. The ninth grows in the wet and moist furrows of the
plowed Lands belonging to Underbrick, Commonly called Battersey near London:
and by the foot-way-side between Greenwich and Eltham about a mile from Colonel
Blunts hou^e toward Eltham: The last grows about the house which was
formerly the Bishop of Londons at Fulham. The Filipendul^as, flower in June and
July, and their ^eed is ripe in August; but the rest flower and seed, somewhat
later.

The Temperature.
Dropwort is hot and dry in the third degree, opening and cleansing, yet
alittle binding.

The Signature and Virtues.
The roots of several of the sorts of Dropwort, consisting of round tuberous
pieces, which do somewhat resemble the Stone in a man's Bladder, do sign fie
that it is an excellent Remedy for the Stone, and indeed it is so, for it not
only helps mightily to break and expel the Stone either in the Kidneys or
Bladder, and to bring away the Gravel, but is also very effectual to provoke
Urine, to help the Strangury or pissing by Drops, and all other pains of the
Reins or Bladder, which are either forerunners or Symptoms of the Stone,
whether you use the Flowers Leaves or Seed but the Roots are most effectual,
as having the Signature, either taken in Powder or in a decoction, with White
Wine, whereunto a little Honey is added. The same brings down women's Courses,
helps to expel the Afterbirth, and is good in the Dropsy, Jaundise, and
Falling Sickness. The roots made into Powder and mixed with Honey into the
Form of in Electuary, does much help them whose Stomachs, are swollen, breaking
and dissolving the wind, which was the cause thereof, as also is very
effectual for all diseases of the Lungs as shortness of breath Wheesings,
hoarsnesse of the Throat, and the Cough, and to bring away cold phlegm
therefrom, or any other part thereabouts. Being used in Broths it helps the
Ache of the Back and Kidneys and also other distempers thereof, as also of the
Bladder and Urine. The said Knots of the Roots being dried and made into powder
are effectual for Fistul^es and hollow sores both inward and outward, being
and bruised before they be dry, and applied to the swellings of the Pills or
Haemorrhoides it helps them, and so do the Leaves which may be used, if the
root to be be not gotten. Diverse of other sorts provoke Urine, and help the
Strangury also. But the Hemlock Dropwort is in all cases to be avoided; for
those that have seen the experience of it, do affirm that being taken in sharp
sawces it does well nigh poison, and those that eat of it, have bin made giddy
in their heads, pale in their faces, and to stagger and reel like drunken Men.

CHAP. CCXXV. Of Gromell.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Lithospermum which signifies as much as
Stony-seed, for the seed is very hard like a Stone; in Latin also
Lithospermum, and Gorgonium, Aeginochos, and Heraclea; in Shops Milium Solis
and Granum Solis, as some think, because of its glistering, when the Sun shines
upon it, but Serapio says, it should be called Misium Soler because the
seeds, being like those of Millet, did grow upon the Mountain Soler. It is
called in English Gromell, Pearle-Plant, and L^chwale. Jobs Tears, which I
intend to treat of also in this Chapter as being Lithospermi species, a kind of
Gromel, be called in Latin Lachryma Job and Jobi, and Lachryma Christi; of
some Diospyros or Jovis Triticum, the Leaves hereof being like the Blades of
Corn. The Italians when they first had it, called it Lachryma simply,
afterward Lachryma Christi: and since, every Country has added some or other
Epithet thereunto, most of which are made use of in English, some calling it
Jobs Tears, some Moses Tears some Jobs Drops, or Moses drops, Christ's Tears,
Our Ladies Tears; and some Gromel Reed, because Gesner calls it Arundo
Lithospermos.

The Kinds.
To this kind may be referred these nine sorts. 1. Great upright Gromell. 2.
The greater creeping Gromwell. 3. Small wild Gromell. 4. Umbelliferous Gromell.
5. Small Gromel, with tu^ted tops like Alkanet. 6. Small Corn Gromel. 7. The
small Germane Gromell or Sparrowort. 8. French Gromel with Flaxen Leaves. 9.
Job's Tears.

The Form.
Great upright Gromel which is that which usually grows in Gardens rises up
with diverse, upright, slender, woody, hairy, brown and crested stalles, very
little or not branched at all, whereon do grow without order, long, hard,
rough, sharp pointed narrow green Leaves; at the tops of the stalks stand
diverse small white flowers, in rough brown husks, wherein after they are past,
is contained a white hard, stony, round, shining seed, like unto Pearls; the
root is long and hard or somewhat woody, with diverse branches and fibers
thereat, which perishes not every year, as the stalks do.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in Gardens as I said before, whither it was brought out of
Italy or the parts of France next unto it, where it grows wild. The second
and third grow wild in many places of our Land in barren grounds, whether
tilled or untilled, and sometimes in those which are fruitful also; The fourth
grows, as Lobel says, in the descent of the Valley of Ostia, in Piedmont.
The sixth, as the same Author affirms, grows in Corne-grounds by the way
from Bristol, to Bath; The seventh in the Corne-feilds of Germany. The eight
about Mompelier in France: The last grows naturally in Candy, Rhodes, Syria,
and other Eastern Countries, being brought thence into our Gardens where it
grows well. The Gromels do all flower from Midsummer to September, the seed
ripening in the mean time; but the seed of Jobs Tears seldom come to
perfection with us, unless it be sown betimes, and the Summer prove very hot.

The Temperature.
The seeds of Gromel are hot and dry in the second degree and so are those of
Jobs Tears.

The Signature and Virtues.
The seeds of Gromel by their stony hardness, have given our Forefathers to
understand that they are of singular force to break the Stone and to avoid it,
and also the Gravel, either in the Reins, or Bladder; and if it be made use of
in these days it will be found as effectual as any other Seed or Herb
whatsoever, for the said purposes; as also to provoke Urine, being stopped, and
to help the Strangury, being bruised and boiled in white Wine or Broth, or the
powder of it drunk in raw White Wind or in broth or the like, but the most
pleasant, safe, and effectual way is to make a Barley cream with the Kernells
of the four greater cold seeds, and the seeds of Gromel by boiling them in
Barley water, and to take thereof in the morning fasting for three days
together, when you are troubled with any of the aforesaid griefs. The said
seeds being bruised and laid to steep all night in White Wind with some
Fennel, Parsley, and Sena, and then boiled in a stone Vessel, strained, and
sweetened with Sugar, and drunk the next morning, is a good medicine to purge
Phlegm and Choler, to open and cleanse the Reins and Bladder, and to expel
wind exceedingly. Two drammes of the seed in Powder taken with the Milk of a
Woman is very effectual to procure a speedy delivery to such Women as have
sore pains in their Travel, and cannot be delivered as have been found true by
diverse, as Matthiolus says. Being mixed with other ingredients it helps the
Running of the Reins. The Herb it self (when the seed is not to be had) being
boiled in White Wind, and the decoction thereof, or else the juice of it, being
drunk works the same effects, but not so powerfully nor speedily, and a Bath
wherein some of it has been boiled, being sat in, is much commended for an
outward remedy. Of Jobs Tears, the most exquisite Crollius, who takes notice
of the former also, says thus, Lacrhyma Jobbaa ad deturband^s calculos nunquam
satis landata, that is, Jobs-Teares can never be sufficiently commended for
expelling the Stone: and then doubtless it performs the other effects,
usually annexed, if the Powder or decoction of the seeds be taken as aforesaid.
The said seeds are used by Papists beyond Sea to number their Prayers, and by
others for beads, Bracelets, etc.

CHAP. CCXXVI. Of Onions.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and (...), according to the Poets, (...), because
the Ancients were wont to shut their Eyes, as often as they eat them, lesf they
should make them Water. It is called in Latin Cepa and Cepe from Caput, as
some think, because of the greatness of their head, and Unio because the root
is single not giving off-setts for increase, as other bulbous roots do. The old
writers have given it Sirnames from the place where it grew as Cypria, Sardia,
Cretica, Samothracia and Ascalonia from whence comes our English word Scallions
which are set Onyons, the lesser sort whereof are by some called Chibouls from
the French name S^boula.

The Kinds.
There be diverse sorts of Onyons; half a dozen whereof I shall here present you
with, 1. The Ordinary flat white Onyon, 2. The long white Onion, 3. The flat
red Onion, 4, The long red Onyon, 5. The Strasborough Onion whose outside only
is red, 6. St. Omers Onion called by some but corruptly St. Thomas Onion.

The Form.
The Onion (for the description is general,) has diverse long green hollow
Leaves, seeming half flat; amongst which rises up a great round hollow stalk,
bigger in the middle then any where else, at the top whereof stands a close
round head, covered at the first with a thin skin which breaks when the head
is grown, and shows forth a great Umbell of white Flowers, which turn into
black seed; but then the head is so heavy that the stalk cannot sustain it, and
therefore it must be upheld from falling to the ground lest it rot and perish;
the root of every one is round, in some greater, in some lesser, in some
flatter, in others longer, in some sharp and strong, in others milder and more
pleasant, some being so pleasant that they may be eaten as an Apple.

The Places and Time.
All the sorts of Onions are Inhabitants of the Garden, and prosper best in
that ground, which is well dug and dunged. I know not whether they grew
naturally, or in Gardens about Ascalon, a City of Judea; but that they were
formerly very plentiful in those parts, I am verily persuaded. Those that are
sown for store should be sown in February, or before the latter end of March at
the furthest, in the increase of the Moon, and are to be gathered about August,
when the blades begin to be flagged toward the roots. Those which are for seed
must be set at the same time when the former are sown, yet it seldom comes to
perfection in our own Country, most of the seed we use coming from beyond the
Seas.

The Temperature.
Onions are hot and dry in the fourth degree, as Galen affirms. The juice is
of a thin watery substance, and if it be taken in any great quantity it is rank
poison, but the rest is of thick parts and may be eaten with little or no
danger.

The Signature and Virtues.
White wine wherein a sliced onyon has been steeped all night being drunk in
the morning, and the party walk an hour after it, is a good Remedy for the
Stone; which its Signature does demonstrate as Crollius notes, as also to
provoke Urine, and Women's Courses. They are used also to provoke Appetite ease
the pains of the belly, and to help the bit^ng of a mad Dog, or other venomous
Creatures, especially if it be mixed with a little Honey and Rue. The water,
wherein sliced Onions have been steeped all night, kills the worms in
Children: Being roasted under the Embers and eaten with Honey and Sugar and
Oil, they help an old Cough by cutting the tough Phlegm and causing it easily
to be Spit forth. It is counted by many a good preservatiue against infection
to take Onions fasting, with bread and Salt; but I dare not subscribe to their
Opinion, because they do rather draw then expe^l Corruption, and therefore
their external use seems to be better, especially if a great Onyon being
made hollow and the place filled up with good Treakle be roasted well under the
Embers, and, after the taking away of the outermost skin, be beaten together
and applied to any Plague sore, or putrid Ulcer, for so it is likely to be a
Sovereign Remedy. Being sliced and dipped in the juice of Sorrel, and given
to one that is sick of a Tertian Agne, to eat, it takes away the fit in once
or twice so taking them. The continued use, especially of the seed thereof,
increases the natural seed, and stirs upbodily lust. The juice ^nuffed up
into the Nostrills purges the Head and helps the Lethargy, and is good also
for scalding or burning by fire, Water, or Gunpowder, and being used with
Vinegar it takes away all blemishes, Spots, and marks in the skin, and dropped
into the Ears, eases the pains and noise in them. Applied also with Figs
beaten together with them, it helps to ripen and break I^postumes and other
Sores, especially being first roasted in Embers, stamped with Salt Rue and
Honey, and so they are good for the biting of a Mad Dog, being laid thereunto.
The luyce of Onions mixed with the decoction of Pennyroyall, and a Cloth wet
therein and applied, eases the Gout. The juice mixed with Honey, and a bald
Head anno^nted therewith, causes the hair to grow again. They provoke the
Hemorrho^des or Pills being laid unto them either by themselves or stamped with
Vinegar. They help Kibes, being roasted and applied with Butter or H^gs-grease.
To tender and delicate Bodies young men and choleric persons, the too often or
immoderate use is many times hurtful especially if they be raw, for they breed
ill humors in the Stomach, in flame the blood, increase thirst, cause
drowsiness and the headache, hurt the sight, and dull and disturb the memory
and understanding by their sharpness and windiness, yet unto the Bodies of
laboring Men, who receive some benefit by earning their bread with the sweat
of their brows, they are seldom offensive, so true is that of the Poet, Labor
omnia vincit Improbus; the humors that they breed in others, being in them
spent by their hard Labor.

CHAP. CCXXVII. Of Winter Cherries.
The Names.
IT may be called in Greek (...) for it is a kind of Solanum; nay, in Latin,
it is called Solanum Halicacabum; and Vesicatorium by Pliny, either of the
Bladder wherein the Berry grows, or of the Virtues against the diseases of
the Bladder and Stone. The Arabians call it Alkakengi, which name the Shops
retain. Brunfelsius calls it his Saxifraga quarta, terming it Rubra; for
which Epithet there is more color then for Filipendula that it should be so
called. It is called Winter Cherry in English, because it flourishes in the
Winter, and the fruit is like a Cherry.

The Form.
I find but three sorts of Winter-Cherryes, that which is called Halicacabum
Petegrinum or the Black Winter-Cherry perishing at the very first approach of
Winter; and therefore, and for other reasons ought not to be so called. 1. The
Ordinary Winter-Cherry. 2. Virginian Winter Cherries. 3. Upright Indian
Winter-Cherries,

The Form.
The Winter-Cherry sends forth a stalk which grows to be a Cubit or two
foot high, whereupon are set many broad and long green Leaves, somewhat like
unto the Leaves of Nightshade, whereof it seems to be a kind, as I said
before, but larger; at the joints whereof come forth whitish flowers, made of
five Leaves a piece, which after turn into green berries enclosed with thin
skins or bladders, which change to be reddish when they grow ripe, the berry
being likewise reddish, and as large as a Cherry, wherein are contained many
flat and yellowish seeds, lying within the Pulpe. The root runs or creeps
in the ground, sometimes as big as ones little finger, shooting forth at
several Joints in several places, whereby it quickly overspreadeth a great
compass of ground.

The Places and Time.
Though the first be only to be found in Gardens (or in other places whither it
has been cast forth from thence) here in England, yet in some Countries it
grows naturally by the hedge sides in moist and shadowy places: the second
came from Virginia, the last grows also in the West Indies. They flower in
August, and are fittest to be gathered in October, (yet some of them continue
longer) and being strung up they may be kept all the year to be used upon
occasion.

The Temperature.
VVinter Cherries are thought to be cold and dry, and of subtle parts. The
fruit Opens, but the Leaves do only cool, and therefore are good in
inflammations.

The Virtues and Signature.
Having given you several Plants that had the Signature of the Stone, I come
in the la^t place to show you one or two that have the Signature both of the
stone and bladder which the VVinter Cherry does very much re^emble, and is
therefore of great use by opening the Uritory parts, and drawing down the Urine
to provo^e it to be avoided plentifully, when it is stopped; and is good also
to expel the Stone and Bladder out of the Reins, Kidneys, and Bladder,
helping to dissolve the Stone, and avoiding it by greet or Gravel, sent forth
in the Urine: it helps much also to cleanse inward Impostumes or Ulcers, in
the Reins or Bladder, or in those that avoid a bloody or foul Urine, two or
three handfulls of the berries being bruised and put into two or three Gallons
of new Wine or Ale, as soon as it is tunned up there to continue till the Wine
or Ale be sit to be drunk, but the decoction of the Berries in Wine or Water is
the most usual way to be taken, yet the powder of them taken in drink or
broth, is held to be more effectual. It helps the yellow Jaundise also by
opening the passages of the Gall and Liver, and expelling it by Urine. The
diuilled Water of the Fruit or the Leaves together with them, or the berries
green or dry distilled with a little Milk is effectual for all the purposes
before specified, if it be drunk morning and evening with a little Sugar, and
in special against the heat and sharpness of the Urine. The other Plant,
whose fruit bears the Signature of the Stone in the Bladder, is the Bladder
Nut-Tree which is therefore said to be effectual to help those which are
troubled with the Stone in the Bladder, but because it is without any other
Virtue, unless it be to provoke Venery, as some affirm, having withal diverse
evil Qualities, whereby they are loathsome and overturne the Stomachs of them
that eat them, I shall pass it by without any description at all, only tell
you that it is called Nux Vesicaria in Latin and supposed to be the
Staphylodendron of Pliny. Some call it Pistacium Germanicum, because they call
it by the same name they do the Pistake, whereof Scaliger takes it to be a
kind. So much I thought good to say of it, because it grows in Gardens and
Fields in diverse places of this land.

CHAP. CCXXVIII. Of Dogs-grasse or Quich-grasse.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Agrostis that is Gramen simply (...) because it is
of most use. In Latin Gramen Caninum and Gramen Caninum medicatum by Lobel,
following Pliny herein, who first called it Canaria quasi a Cani^^^inventa,
because Dogs when they are sick at the Stomach do naturally eat hereof, fall
to their Vomit, and are well; and therefore others have called it Cynagrostis
and Dens Canis from the form wherein it first appears. We call it in English
Dogs-grasse, because Dogs feed thereon, Quich-grasse, and Couchgrasse from the
nature of the roots which ly so close in the ground, that they cannot be got
out, unless the ground be broken up with a Spade. The Latin word Gramen is
derived a Gradiendo from spreading it self, for it will over^^^ne a place
speedily.

The Kinds.
You may guess by the several sorts of Quich-grasse, what a huge number of
Grasses there be in all, this being a subordinate kind, and yet has sixteen
under it. 1. Common Quich-grasse. 2. Quich-grasse with a more spread Panickle.
3. The lesser Quich-grasse with a sparsed tuft. 4. Low bending Quich-grasse. 5.
Low bending Quich-grasse of Mompelier. 6. A small sweet grass like
Quich-grasse. 7. Common bulbed and knotted Quich-grasse. 8. Knobbedgrasse with
a small round spike. 9. Double bulbed. 10. The bulbed Grass of Aleppo. 11. The
Sicilian Bulbed Grass. 12. Sea spiked Dogs-grasse or Quich-grasse. 13. Sea
Quich-grasse. 14. Sea Dogs-grasse with long roots. 15. Sea spiked Dogs-grasse
of Mompelier. 16. Rough Sea Dogs-grasse.

The Form.
Common Quich-grasse is well known, both by Gardiners and Husbandmen, to creep
far about under the ground with long white joynted Roots, and small fibers,
almost at every joint, very sweet in taste (as the rest of the herb is) and
interlacing one another: from whence shoot forth first one, and afterward
many fair and long grassy Leaves, small at the ends and cutting and sharp at
the edges; the Stalks are joynted like corn with the like Leaves on them, and
a long spiked Head, with long husks on them, and hard rough seed in them.

The Places and Times.
The first is too common both in Gardens and Ploughed feilds for the Gardeners
and Husbandmens store, though not for such Physicians, as Mr. Culpepper; who
holds half an Acre of it worth five of Carrots or Corn: the second and third
are nothing so frequent, and are more natural to sandy and chalky grounds: the
three next are likewise found in feilds, that have been Ploughed, but ly fallow
at present; The seventh is found in some Ploughed Feilds and Meadows of this
Land; the eighth near Basil, the ninth in Spain, the tenth near Aleppo, the
eleaventh near Verona; the three next on our Seacoasts, especially in Kent,
the fifteenth, about Mompelier and Narbone, the last about Venice. They
flourish most in the Summer, but their Roots endure the hardest Winters.

The Temperature.
Dogs-grasse is cold in the first degree, and moderate in coldness and
moisture, but the seed is much more cold and dry, of some tenuity of parts, and
somewhat harsh.

The Virtues and Signature.
All the sorts of Grass especially those of Quich-grasse, are very effctuall
to open the passages of Urine being stopped, as also to wast the gravel of the
Stone in the Bladder, and the Ulcers thereof, but that sort which is knobbed is
held to be most proper, because it has a kind of Signature: And if I should
say that some of the other sorts cure the Worms by Signature, I should not say
amiss; for the roots of some of them are very like those beds of Worms which
we sometimes see voided from men, the juice thereof mixed with Honey and the
Powder of Southernwood, and taken in drink; for Children, the juice mingled
with an Oxe-Gall and a cloth dipped therein, and laid to the Navell, will be
sufficient: and for this purpose the Dogs also eat it who after the taking
thereof have been observed to void many. Being boiled in white wine and drunk,
it opens the Obstructions of the Liver and Gall, and eases the griping
pains of the Belly and Inflammations. The Roots bruised and applied are very
effectual for Consolidating Wounds. The seed does more powerfully expel
Urine, and stays the Lask and Vomitings. The distilled Water by it self or
with a little wormseed kills the Worms in Children. The way of using it for
the diseases of the Reins and Bladder, which I forgot to express after the
Signature, is only to bruise the Roots and having well boiled them in white
wine, to drink the decoction, yet after the benefit of making Water is
obtained, the decoction must be made in water.

CHAP. CCXXIX. Of Butchers Broom.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Oxymyrsine, which is as much as Acuta Myrtus in
Latin, and Prickly Myrtle in English; as also (...), Myrtus Sylvestris; (...)
Myrtacantha, Myrtus Spinosa, (...), murina Spina, and of Theophrastus (...),
Centromyrrhine. Pliny says; that it was called in his time Chamaemyrsine, and
Acaron or rather Aceron which is one of the Bastard Names, by all which we may
gather that it was taken for the wild Myrtle but falsely, for that which was
accounted so, amongst the Ancients is like unto the manured kind with prickly
Leaves; and therefore Pliny mis^ooke, when he attributed the faculties of the
one to the other. It is called in Latin Ruscus and Ruscum, and in Shops
Bruscus, and of some Ruscus Bruscus by Onoma^opaeia, because of the Russeling
noise it makes, when it is moved; and of some, as Marcellus says, Scopa
Regia. We call it in English Knee-holme Knee^^lver, Kneeholly, Pettigree, and
Ruscus Bruscus.

The Kinds
Butchers Broom at its first coming up sends forth thick whitish short
Shoots, somewhat like unto those of Asparagus, but greater; which thing to be
about a foot high are spread into diverse green branches, which are a little
crested, tough, p^^ant, and flexible; whereon are set somewhat broad and almost
hard Leaves, sharp and prickly pointed at the ends, of a dark green color and
somewhat like unto Myrtle Leaves, two for the most part set at a place very
close or near together; about the middle of the Leaf on the back or lower
side, from the middle Rib, breaks forth a small whitish green flower,
consisting of four small round pointed Leaves, standing upon little or no
foot-stalk; in the place whereof comes a small round berry, green at the
first; and red when it is ripe, wherein are contained two or three white, hard,
round seeds. The Root is thick, white and great at the Head, and from thence
sends forth diverse thick, white, long, tough strings.

The Places and Time
Butchers Broom grows plentifully in diverse Copses Heaths and wast grounds of
this Land, especially upon Hampsted Heath, four miles from London, and in
diverse parts of Kent, Essex and Bark-shire where Holly-bushes grow, for under
them they are oftentimes found. It shoots forth its young Buds in the Spring,
the berries being ripe in or about September, and the branches or Leaves
abiding all the Winter.

The Temperature.
The Roots of Butchers Broom which are of greatest virtue and use are
temperatly hot, and dry also in a mean, with a thinness of Essence.

The Signature and Virtues.
Though Butchers Broom cannot be said to have the Signature of the Reins and
Bladder, or the Stone in them, yet it may as well be said to have the Signature
of that pricking pain that is left in them, as often as the Stone or Gravel
moves, just as if thorns were put into the passages of the Urine, as Carduus
Benedictus, to signify its efficacy in curing the pains of the sides, by the
prickles that grow thereon: and therefore the Decoction of the Roots made with
Wine is very profitable to open Obstructions, to provoke Urine, and to amend
the strong smell thereof, it being one of the sive opening or diureticall
Roots, expressed in the London Dispensatory: for it helps to expel Gravel
and the Stone, and consequently from those tormenting pains which seem as if
those parts were peirced through with Needles. It is also of great operation in
the Strangury, brings down Women's monthly Courses, and being taken with some
Honey or Sugar, it cleanses the Breast of Phlegm, and the Chest of much
Clammy humors gathered therein. The same effects are attributed to the Leaves
and Berries by Dioscorides. The juice of the Leaves taken with Sugar, helps
Spitting of blood, and cleanses the Womb. Half a Ounce of the Roots with the
like quantity of Annise-seed and Fennel-seed made into powder, and half an
Ounce of Sugar mixed therewith, and as much of it taken in posset drink or
white wine, as will lie on a Shilling, is very available against Wind and
gripings of the Belly. The decoction of the Roots drunk and a Pultis made of
the Berries and Leaves being applied, are effectual in knitting and
consolidating broken Bones or parts out of Joint. The juice thereof takes away
the stink of the mouth and Gums, being washed therewith; and the powder of the
root cleanses wounds and preventeth a Gangrene being strewed therein. The
Leaves stamped and boiled with Rose Water and a little Wine, and applied unto
the secret parts of a man, helps the Inflammations thereof. The young shoots
are in some places eaten in Sallets, after that manner as Asparagus are. The
full grown branches were formerly used to make Beesoms to sweep the house,
whence it was called Scopa Regia: but now it is used by few unless it be
Butchers who make clean their stalls and defend their meat from the flies
therewith, which is the reason why it is called Butchers Broom. It has been
used to preserve Martlemasse-beof and Bacon from the mice eating, and so it may
be still by those that have the command of both. The most effectual way of
using it in the Diseases of the Reins and Bladder, is to boil the Roots of it
and Parsley, Fennel, Smallage, and Grass of each a like quantity in White
wine, and to drink the decoction, respect being had to the strength of the
Patient; otherwise it is possible, that so many cleansing things may make some
Excoriation, or fretting in the passages of the Urine, these many diureticall
roots being put together.

CHAP. CCXXX. Of Chervill.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Chaerephyllum, either because it delights to
grow with many Leaves, or because they cause joy and gladness: which name the
Latins partly follow, it being called Chaerophyllum by Columella, and is
likely to be the Carophyllum of Pliny; but the most common name it has is
Cerefolium or Ch^rifolium, being a mongrell Word composed both of Greek and
Latin. It is called in English by no other name that I know, then Chervill;
for Myrrhis, Sweet Chervill, and Sweet Cicely is another plant which I have
already treated of, different from this in many respects, as I could show, if I
thought it needful but I think what I have said, may suffice.

The Kinds.
Of this Chervill I find but two sorts, 1. Garden Chervill. To which I may add
Shepheards-needle, or mock Chervill.

The Form.
The Garden Chervill does at the first coming up somewhat resemble Parsley, but
after it is better grown, the Leaves are very much cut in, and jagged,
resembling Hemlocks, so much that some have mistaken one for the other, (yet
they may easily be distinguished if you smell unto them) being a little hairy
and of a whitish green color, and sometimes turning reddish in Summer, with
the Stalks also. It rises above half a yard high, though Parkinson say but
half a foot, bearing white Flowers in spotted Tufts, which turn into long and
round seed, sharply pointed at the ends and blackish when they are ripe, of
sweet taste but of no smell, whereas the herb it self smells reasonable well,
which Hemlock does not: The root is small and long, and perishes every year,
yet being once sown and suffered to seed, and that seed suffered to sow it
self, it will put you to no further trouble unless it be to weed it out, lest
it encroach upon its neighbors territories.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in Gardens, and is a good Sallet herb at the first coming
up, yet after a while it grows strong and unpleasant. The second grows wild
in Vineyards and Orchards beyond the Sea, and in diverse places of our own Land.
The last is to be found in most Corne-Fields in England. If that of the Garden
be sown early the seed will be ripe in June, and Jluy, which being suffered to
^^ll, or sown again presently, will rear up a new Crop for Autumn-Sall^^s; the
other two, flower early and seed accordingly.

The Temperature.
Chervill is of a temperate heat and moderate dryness, Shepherds Needle is hot
and dry in the later end of the second degree.

The Signature and Virtues.
The sharp pointed seeds of Chervill and Shepherds-Needle may be said to
signify the Virtues they have in easing the pricking pains of the Stone in
the Reins and Bladder, for the juice or distilled water of either of them
being drunk, is good for the Back and Bladder, provokes Urine mightily, and
freeth the inward parts from Obstructions; and the Chervil taken in meat or
drink, works the same effects being taken either as meat or Medicine, for it
may be and is often eaten as a fallet whilst it is young, pleasing the Palate
with its good rel^ish, and warming the Stomach also, and therefore it is very
much u^ed amongst the French and Dutch in L^blollies of stewed herbs, in the
eating whereof they much delight. Tragus says, it is a certain remedy to
dissolve congealed or clotted blood in the body, and so it does likewise the
blood that is caked by any bruises, falls, or the like. It is also held very
effectual to send down Women's Courses and to help the Pleurisy and prickings
of the sides, which it does by Signature also, and to provoke sleep sweetly,
the decoction being taken. The wild Chervill bruised and applied dissolveth
Swellings in any part of the body, and takes away black and blew marks
happening by bruises or blows, in a short space, and also eases the Colic
and pain of the belly. Both Dioscorides and Galen do say, that Scandix or
Shepherds-Needle is good both for the Stomach and Belly, being either eaten raw
or boiled: Being made into drink and taken, it is good for the Nephriticall
diseases before mentioned, as also for the Liver, and binds a loose Belly:
The seed being taken with Vinegar presently stays the Hicket, and used in an
Ointment, it helps the parts that are burnt with fire. Pliny says that the
root of P^cte^ V^^ris which is the Latin name of this Horb being beaten with
Mallows draws forth Spli^^ers, or any other thing sticking in the flesh,
which is signified by the se^ds which are like unto Splinters.

CHAP. CCXXXI. Of Brooke-Lime.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...); in Latin Anagallis Aquatica, because it is a
kind of Pimpernel, commonly growing by the Water sides, and in the Water, where
it is not deep. It is called also (...) from the German word (...). Diver^
Authors have taken it to be Si^^ of Dioscorides, but very e^^oniously, that
being our Water Pars^^p, and not much unlike the Garden Pars^^^ this whereof we
now treat being more like on Purslane as you shall here an one, yet that also
has its name (...) (...) calcul^^que (...), from the Virtue it has in those
distempers we are now upon, and therefore for want of a fitter place, I shall
put them together in this Chapter.

The Kinds.
Of Br^^ke-Li^e and Water-Pars^ep, there he Ele^en form, 1. Common Brooke-lime.
2. The greater Brooke-lime. 3. Great Water Pimpernell. 4. Small round leafed
Water Pimpernell. 5. Lobels third Water Pimpernell. 6. Long Chick-weed leafed
water Pimpernell. 7. Narrow leafed water Pimpernel. 8. The greater Water
Parsnep. 9. The lesser Water Parsnep. 10. Another Water Parsnep with narrow
Leaves. 11. The quick or impatient Cresse.

The Form.
Common Brooke-lime grows with flat thick stalks, which are round, and
parted into diverse branches, having on them thick smooth and broad Leaves,
somewhat like unto those of Purslaine, but of a deeper green color, set by
couples upon the stalks: The flowers grow upon small long tender foot-stalkes
which thrust themselves out of the bosom of the Leaves; of a perfect blew
color, not unlike in sorme to the Leaves of the Land-Pimpernel, consisting of
five small round pointed Leaves a piece; shortly after which comes the Seed,
whose form has not been observed: The Root is white, low, creeping with
fine strings fastened thereunto at every joint.

The Places and Times.
The three first and the fifth are often found in our own Land, growing in
small standing Waters, the fourth and seventh in Germany in the like places,
the eight in Germany, the ninth in diverse pooles, and watery ditches of our own
Land; the two last have been found with us also. They do all flower in June,
and July most commonly, giving their seed the next Month after.

The Temperature.
Brooke-lime and Water Pimpernel are both of a moist faculty as Tragus says,
yet others say dry. Water Parsnep is also of a heating faculty.

The Signature and Virtues.
Crollius says that Purs^ane which I appropriate to the Teeth has the
Signature of the Reins, and I know not why I may not as well say that
Brooke-limes, whose Leaves are not unlike those of the former, may have the
same. I am sure that all Authors that write of it say, that it is very
effectual to break the Stone in the Reins and Bladder, and to pass it away
by Urine, which it provokes also being stopped, to help the Strangury, and
the inward Scabs of the Bladder, the Leaves being stamped and strained, and the
juice given to drink in Wine. It helps likewise to procure VVomens Courses,
and to expel the Dead Birth, and is very profitable in the Dropsy. It is many
times used with Watercresses and other things in Diet drinks, to purge and
cleanse the blood from those ill humors that would overthrow the health
thereof, especially if it be taken in the Springtime when the blood is most
active, and so it is very helpful for the Scurvy also, and therefore Country
people when they cannot easily get Scurvy-grasse do use Brookelime instead
thereof. Being fried with Butter and Vinegar and applied warm, it helps all
manner of tumors and swellings and St. Anthonies fire also, if it be often
renewed. The herb boiled makes a good fomentation for Swollen Legs, and the
Dropsy. The Leaves boiled and stamped in a stone Mortar with the powder of
Feny-greek, Linseed, the roots of Marsh Mallows and some Hogsgrease unto the
form of a Pultis, takes away any swelling in the Legs or Arms which is also
powerful in defending Wounds, that are ready to fall into Apostemation, that
no humor or accident shall happen thereunto. Farriers use it likewise about
Horses to take away swellings, and to heal the Scab, and other like diseases
in them. Water parsnep provokes Urine and Women's Courses, and breaks and
expels both the Stone in the Kidneys, and the Dead birth.

CHAP. CCXXXII. Of the Havv-thorne.
The Names.
IT being so much controverted by Authors concerning the true Greek name of
this Shrub, I shall not undertake to decide it but p^^e it by without giving it
any. The La^ine name h^th also been in di^putation, but ^^e ^o^t judicious of
these later times have determined that the Spina appendix Pl^^^^ which he
sometimes calls Spina simp^y can be no other then this Haw thorn which is
called also in English Hedg-thorne, White-thorne, May, and May bu^h because our
ordinary sort commonly flowreth in May, never after, though sometimes before.

The Kinds.
Antiquity was acquainted but with one sort hereof, yet now there be three
taken notice of. 1. The ordinary Haw-thorne. 2. The ^ow Haw-thorne. 3. Englands
Haw-thorne, which is in all parts like the common sort, but that it flowreth
twice in a year, to the great admiration of some wise and judicious men.

The Form.
The Common Haw-thorne usually grows to be but a Shrub or Hedg-bush, with
diverse shootes, arms, and branches, whereon are set in ^ivers places sharp
thorns and fair shining Leaves, somewhat broad, and cut in on the edges into
diverse parts; the flowers are many standing together, coming forth both at the
^op of the branches and the upper joints with the Leaves, on^^^^ng of five
white Leaves a piece with diverse white threads in the middle tipped, with red and
of a very pleasant sweet scent, after which come the fruit being roundish
berries, green at the first but of a lively red color when they are ripe,
consisting of a soft sweet and certain whitish seed; the root grows deep
into the ground, of a very hard and durable substance.

The Place and Time.
The first grows generally throughout the whole Land where any Hedges be, the
second in German^ in some of the Gardens of those that love rarities, not
differing from the ordinary kind, save that the fruit thereof is as yellow as
Saffron; the last at Glastenbury Abbey, and in Whey-street or rather High Street
in Rumney Marsh, and near unto Nautwich in Cheshire, by a place called
White-green. The two first flower in May, and their fruit is ripe in September
or thereabouts, the last both in May and about Christmas sooner or later as the
temperature of the weather will permit, having at the same time both green and
ripe berries.

The Temperature:
The Leaves, Flowers and fruit of the Haw-thorne are supposed to be drying and
binding.

The Signatures and Virtues.
The powder of the Berries or the seeds in the Berries being given to drink in
Wine, is gen^rally held to be a singular good Remedy against the Stone, which
is signified by the Stones or seeds which they cheifely consist of, and so it
is reported to be good for the Dropsy The flowers steeped three days in Wine,
and afterward distilled in Glass, and the water thereof drunk, is a Sovereign
Remedy for the ^leurisy, and for inward tormenting pains, such as those of the
Stone are, which is also signified by the prickles that grow on this Tree. The
water of the Flowers distilled after the ordinary way stays the Flux or Lask
of the belly: the seeds cleared from the down, bruised and boiled in wine and
drunk, perfo^meth also the same effect. The said distilled water of the Flowers
is not only cooling but drawing also, for it is found by good experience, that
if Clothes and Spunges be wet in the said water, and applied to any place
whereinto thorns, Splinters, etc. have entered and be there abiding, it will
notably draw them forth, so that the Thorn gives a medicine for its own
pricking, as many other things be^ides do, if they were observed. The Bark
stamped with Red Wine, and fried with Boares grease and applied hot, works
the effect before mentioned. The ripe Berries are the best sustenance that many
birds have in the Winter, and they are good food for Hoggs, and therefore the
Swineheards do beat them down for them. The Wood has many convenient uses as
making of Mounds. If you would have a living Mound, plant the Setts; if a dead
one, make a hedge with them, and it will out last two that is made of any other
wood; and though it be troublesome to lay on the fire, yet it will burn
excellent well, and last longest of any fuel, especial the Roots.

CHAP. CCXXXIII. Of the Lemmon-Tree.
The Names.
IT is not likely that either this Tree, or its fruit, were known to the
Ancient Greeks or Latins, there being no mention of it in any of their
writings; but by modern Authors, and in these days it is called Malus Limonia,
and the fruit Limons. The Spaniards, amongst whom it is most plentiful, call
the tree Limera, and the fruit Limas; All other Nations follow the Latin, as
near as their Dialect will permit.

The Kinds.
Of Lemmon-trees, I find six sorts upon record, 1. The ordinary Lemontree, 2.
The thin rinded sour Lemmon, 3. The round Lemmon-tree, 4. The greater sweet
Lemmon-tree, 5. The Sivill Lemmon, 6. The wild Lemmon-tree.

The Form.
The Lemmon-tree in hot Countries where it principally delights, grows to the
stature of a lusty tall tree with great arms and slender branches, but in this
Land it is content with the compass of a box filled with earth, which standing
upon legs may be carried up and down; so that you may conceive it does not
attain to the bigness of that in hotter Countries; the branches are armed with
long and greenish thorns, the Leaves are long and somewhat like unto that so^t
of the Bay Tree Leaves, which is commonly called the Laurel, ^ented about the
edges, with a show of very small holes in them, but less then the Oren^e
Leaves have, of a very good sent; the flowers grow at the Leaves all along the
branches, being somewhat longer then those of the Orange, ma^e of five think
white Leaves with some threads in the middle, and of a sweet sent also: the
fruit that follows is somewhat long and round, with a paller yellow rind, the
Orange or Citron, somewhat uneven or rugged, somewhat bitter in taste, but of a
sweet smell: the pulpe is white and lesser in quantity then eirher of the
other, in the middle whereof is contained a more soft spungy pulpe* fullpulp of
sower* juice* it has such like seed as the Citron amongst it, but smaller and
somewhat longe^, if it be heedfully marked, though they may seem both alike at
first sight.

The Places and Time.
Spain is the place which furnishes us with Lemmons, yet we have some of the
Trees growing in our own Land, as at Zion house by Brainford, and at W^mbleton
house in the County of Surrey. The Trees in Spain are seldom seen without ripe
fruit, and half ripe, and small young and green, and blossoms all at once, and
those with us have the same but not so frequently, yet are always green.

The Temperature.
Lemmons are not wholly of one temperature; for the rind is hot in the first
degree, and dry in the second; the juice of them is cold in the second degree,
and dry in the first.

The Virtues and Signature.
The Lemmon with the prickles wherewith the tree is fortified do not altogether
insignificantly express the Stone in the Reins and Bladder, and the prick^ng
pains that do accompany it, and therefore an Ounce and half of the juice of
unripe Lemmons being taken with a little Malmesy helps to cleanse and expel
the Stone out of the Kidneys. Or if the party grieved do but drink the juice of
Lemmons next his heart in a morning three times in a week, he shall find it of
good effect, (and I think it would do no body else any great harm,) if he take
it in a Cup of White or Rhenish wine with Sugar, and so it strengthens the
heart, stomach and head, resists poison, expels Melancholy, and makes the
breath sweet. It likewise kills and drives forth the Worms of the belly,
both from men and Children: If an Angel of Gold, of the same weight or pure
leaf Gold, be steeped four and twenty hours in three or four ounces of the
said juice being very pure, and some of it given in a Cup of Wine, with a
little powder of Angelica Root, unto any infected with the plague, though
dangerously sick, (if there be any hope or likelihood of recovery,) it will
help him. The said juice is singular good to quench thirst in hot Fevers, and
so is the Posset drink made thereof. It is of good use likewise at Sea in long
Voyages to put into their Beverage, to keep them from the Scurvy, whereunto
Seamen and passengers are subject, if the Voyage be long; and to quench their
thirst, when they come into hot Countries. The water that is distilled in
Glass, from the inward pulp or substance of the Lemons provokes Urine,
breaks and expels the Stone being drunk, clears the Skin from all
Freckles, Spots, and other marks in the face or in any part of body; helps
also the running Scab, and kills Lice in the bead, the worms in the Hands or
Nose, and pushes and wheales in the skin. The rind or peele of the Lemmon being
put into Tarts and Sawces, gives unto them an excellent relish, and does
correct the Stench of the mouth whether it come by taking Tobacco or otherwise,
especially if it be dried. It may safely be used to all purposes which the rind
of the Citron is, coming somewhat near to it in properties, though in a weaker
degree. The seeds of these are likewise almost as effectual, as those of
Ci^rons to preserve the Heart and Vital Spirits from poison, to resist the
infection of the Plague or Poxes, or any other contagious disease, to kill the
worms in the Stomach, provoke women's courses, cause a^^rtion, having a
digesting and drying quality, fit to dry up and consume moist hu^ors both
inwardly in the body, and outwardly in any moist or running Ulcers and Sores.
The juice of the said fruit is very necessary for Dyers, who spend much thereof
in striking sundry dainty colors, which will never be well done without it;
and is used also by Laundresses to get Iron mouldes and all manner of s^ain^s
out of the purest Linen, for which they find it very effectual. Though some
perhaps may covet after the sweetest Lemmons, because they are more delicious,
and grateful to the Palate, ye^ for any of the purposes aforementioned as also
to make Lemmon Beer, the sour Lemmon is most proper, being more ^ooling in
Physic and operative for other businesses, because it is more abstersive.

CHAP. CCXXIIII. Of the Cypress Tree.
The Names
IT is called in Greek (...) and (...) Cyparitt^s and Cyparissus, either (...),
because the branches of it grow so eaven that one would think it were formed by
Art; or from Cyparissus, who as it is said was turned into the Cypress tree;
or from the City Cyparissus, near unto which a great multitude of these trees
do grow. Some imagine that the Gopher (...), whereof the Arc of Noah is said
to be made, was the Wood of this Tree; and indeed there is some probability for
it, there being no Wood whatsoever so durable or less subject to rottenness,
though it continue in a wet or damp place; as appears by what Thevet
reports, who saw, (as he says) at Damiate in Egypt a Cypress Chest, that
was dug tenfoot out of a moorish ground not having one jot of corruption
about it, though it is thought to have lain there many years. It is called in
Latin Cypressus, either from Cyparissus, or from the ^and Cypr^s where they
grow plentifully. Virgil makes mention of Fro^^ (...)re^, which the
Commentator conceives was this Cypress tree, which was used in those days,
and is in these, by the gentiler sort at funerals, to signify that the
remembrance of the present solemnity ought to endure a long while. The fruit is
called in Greek (...), In Latin, Pilula Cupressi, Nuces Cupressi, and Galbuli;
in shops, Nuces Cupressi: In English Cypr^sse Nuts, or Clogs. This Tree was
formerly dedicated to Pluto, which might be a reason also, why it was used at
funerals.

The Kinds.
The sorts of the Cypress tree are said to be three, 1. The Ordinary Cypress
Tree, 2. The wild Cypress Tree, 3. The Cypress Tree of America.

The Form.
The Ordinary Cypress Tree has a long thick and straight body, whereupon many
slender branches do grow, which do not spread abroad like the branches of other
Trees, but grow up with the body, yet not equally, so that it imitateth the
fashion of a Spi^e Steeple, being broad below and picked toward the top: the
body and arms are covered with a reddish bark; the Leaves are ever green, but
lose much of their Verdure in winter, which the next spring restores, being
somewhat long, slender and flattish round, parted very much, and somewhat
resembling Savin^, of a res^nous sent and strong taste; the flowers are small
and yellow, growing here and there amongst the boughs; after which comes the
fruit, which is close and hard at first, of a russet brown color, but cloven
and opening into many parts when it is ripe, in which is contained small
brownish seed: the root spreads much, but not very deep.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in Eastern Countries, and in many of the Isles of the
Mediterranean Sea, as Rhodes, Candy, formerly called Creet, where it grows
very plentifully of its own accord, bea^ing ripe fruit from September almost
all the Winter. The second by Jupiter Ammons Temple, and in other parts of
Cyr^ne; the last in the Northern parts of America. I speak of the natural
places* for there be but few that are Ignorant, how familiar they are now in
mo^^ Gar^ens about London.

The Temperature.
The fruit and Leaves of the Cypress Tree are dry in the third degree, having
neither heat nor bitting sharpness; yet by its adstringency, it does resolve
and consume humidities in putrid Ulcers.

The Virtues.
The Leaves of Cypress boiled in sweet wine or Meade does help the Stangury
and difficulty of making water, and the powder of the Leaves with a little
Myrrh and wine, helps those fluxes that fall on the Bla^der, and provokes
Urine, being stopped. The said decoction helps the Covgh* and shortness of
breath, if it be taken in a small draught diverse mornings fasting, and so it is
good for the fluxes of the belly or stomach bleed^ngs and Spitting of bl^od as
also the Rupture, if some of the fresh Leaves be well bound to the place, which
thing the fruit or Nuts do perform more effectually. The Leaves bruised and
said unto fresh wounds, does not only stan^h the extraordinary bleeding of
them, but consolidateth them also; and used by themselves, or with Barley meal
it helps St. Anthonies fire, creeping Ulcers, and Carbun^les, the sores and
Ulcers of the privy parts in man or woman, and the inflammations of the Eyes,
and applied to the Region of the Stomach, it much comfort and strengthens
it against castings and other passions thereof, proceeding from sharp
defluxions thereon. Being beaten with some dry figs, it mollifieth the
bardnesse of tumors, and of the Testicles, and consumes the Polypus, which is
a troublesome excrescence growing in the Nose; the same also boiled in Vinegar,
and made up with the Meal of Lupins, causes rugged nails to fall away, and
helps the Toothache, if the decoction only be often gargled in Mouth; the
same also takes away the Morphew, freckles, and other Spots of the skin. The
Nuts boiled in Wine, and the Hair washed therewith, causes it to grow black;
and if the Ashes of them be mixed with the powder of a Mules hoof, and the
Oil of Myrtles, it will stay the falling of it. The small raspings or fillings
of the Wood, taken in Wine provokes Women's Courses, helps venomous bitings,
and procures a good color; and the Wood or any other part thereof being
burnt, drives away g^ats, and other such like troublesome Flies, and is
destructive to all manner of Vermin, whether the Leaves be laid amongst any
kind of seeds to keep them from being eaten with Worms, or the Wood in
Wardrobes to preserve Garments from Mothes; and therefore Chests and boxes made
thereof are extremely desired by those that have them not, and highly prized
by them that are possessors of them: the Wood it self which is of a reddish
color is so firm and durable, so free from corruption and Worms, that it is
not hurt by rottenness, cobwebs or any other infirmities that often happen to
other kinds of Wood. The Oil wherein the fruit or Leaves have been sodden,
does strengthen the Stomach, ^tayeth Vomiting, the flux of the belly or Lask,
and cures the excoriation or going off, of the skin from the secret parts.

CHAP. CCXXXV. Of Kidney-Wort, or Venus Navel-Wort.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Cotysedon from the likeness it has with a Sawcer
or Navel; and therefore the Latins do not only call it Cotyledon, or Umbilicus
Veneris, but Acetabulum also, which signifies a Sawcer. It is also call Scatum
cali, Scutellum, Terrae Umbilicus, Hortus Veneris, and Herba Coxendicum. In
English Navel-wort of the Earth for its figure, Venus Navel-wort quia contecta
genitalia nudat, et ad amatoria utitur, as Dioscorides says; Hipwort, for that
it eases the pains of the Hippes and other Joints; and Kidney-wort, because
it helps the Kidneys; and Wall Penniwort, because the Leaves are as round as
a Penny, and not much broader.

The Kinds.
To this kind may be referred these five sorts. 1. Ordinary Kidney-wort or Wall
penny-wort. 2. Spotted Kidney-wort or the Princes Feathers. 3. Small
Kidney-wort with poundish Leaves. 4. Small Kidney-wort with party colored
Flowers. 5. Marsh Penny-wort.

The Form.
Ordinary Navel-wort, for that is the most usual name that I know, has many
thick fat and round Leaves, every one having a short footstalke fastened about
the middle thereof, and a little unevenly waved sometimes about the edges; of a
pale green color, and somewhat hollow on the upper side like a Spoone or
Sawcer, from among which one or more tender smooth hollow stalks arise almost
half a foot high with two or three small Leaves thereon, not so round as those
below, but somewhat long and divided at the edges: the tops are sometimes divided
into long branches, bearing a number of pendulous flowers, set round about a
long spike one above another, which are hollow like a little bell, of a whitish
color, after which come small heads, wherein are contained small brownish
seed; The root is round like an Olive, and most usually smooth, yet sometimes
rugged or knobbed, grayish without, and white within, having many small fibers
thereat.

The Places and Time.
The first grows plentifully in diverse places of this Land as at Northampton,
Bristoll, Bath, and Oxford, especially about Merton College there, both within
and without, upon the old Garden Wall, that is next the feilds; and in other
places upon mud walls and amongst the stones, and sometimes about old Trees;
the second in Portugal, the third and fourth upon the Rocky and Stony places
of the Switzers, and upon the hill called Hortus dei near Mompelier: the last
in wet grounds Marshes and Bogges, and patticularly in a Va^e or Bogge
belonging to Stow-Wood near Oxford. The first flowereth about the beginning of
May, quickly perfecting its seed, and then perishing till September, a^out
which time it springs up afresh, and abides all Winter, the second about the
middle of May, the three next in June and July, and their seed is ripe in
August.

The Temperature.
Ordinary Navel-wort is moist and cold somewhat astringent and a little bitter
withal, whereby it cools, repelleth, cleanses, and d^scusseth: the other
sorts are held to be cooling, and somewhat more binding, except the last, which
is hot and not to be used.

The Virtues and Signature.
To drink the juice or the distilled Water of Kidney-wort in a small quantity
of White Wine, is of very great operation to heal sore Kidneys, torn or
fretted by the Stone, or exulcerated within, with a deal of ease; and so it
provokes Urine, and is available for the Drop^y, helps to break the stone as
also to cool those parts that are inflamed by the pains thereof, and to ease
the wringing pains of the Bowels, and the Bloody Flux. Some say that Roots
and Leaves eaten, in substance works the effects aforesaid; and if I should
say they do it by Signature, I think it would be no false doctrine, for the
Root has the figure of the stone, if you observe it. The said juice or
distilled Water being drunk is very effectual for all inflammations and
unnatural heats, to cool a fainting hot Stomach or a hot Liver, or the
Bowels, as also for Pimples, Redness, St. Anthonies fire, and other outward
inflammations, if the bruised Herb be applied outwardly, or the place bathed
with the juice, or the distilled Water thereof. It is also singular good to
cool the painfullnesse of the Piles or Hemorrhoidall Veins, the juice being
used as a Bath unto them or made into an Ointment; It is no less effectual to
ease the pains of the hot Gout and Sciatica, which is a pain in the Hips, and
for this reason it is called Herba Coxendicum or Hip-wort; and it is also
available for the inflammations and Swellings of the Cods. It helps the
Kernells or Knots in the Neck or Throat, called the Kings-Evill; heals Kibes
and Chilblaines, if they be bathed with the juice or anointed with an Ointment
made thereof, and some of the Skin of the Leaf laid upon them; It is also used
in green Wounds to stay the blood, and to heal them quickly. Those that have
consecrated the Forehead to modesty, the Ear to Memory, the Knee to mercy,
have assigned the Navel to be the Seat of Luxury or Love; and therefore the
Leaf hereof, having the Signature of the Navel, is very prevalent in things
belonging to Love. I need say no more of the other sorts, than what is
expressed in the Temperature.

CHAP. CCXXXVI. Of Kidney-Beanes.
The Names.
IT is called by Dioscorides (...), which is the same with Smilax h^rtensis in
Latin, quod Smilacu modo conscendit, because it climbes like a Bind-weed; by
Theophrastus and others (...), or as some write (...) Dolichus or Dol^c^s,
which many Latin Authors also follow; of some (...) and (...), because of
their length. It is thought also to be the (...) of Dioscorides, or as Galen
writes it (...), whence it is that it is called Phasiolus and Phaseolus in
Latin. It is called the Kidney-Beane in English, because it represents a
Kidney; and the French-Beane, being, as it is very probable, brought over to us
out of France.

The Kinds.
Of the many sorts hereof I shall trouble you, but with four. 1. The white
Kidney Bean. 2. The scarlet Kidney-Beane. 3. The upright Kidney-Beane. 4. The
Indian Kidney-Beane.

The Form.
The French or Kidney-Beane rises up at the first, but with one St^lke; which
afterward divides it self into diverse branches, which are so weak that they
will lie upon the ground, unless they are sustained with sticks or poles,
whereon with their winding and Claspers they take hold; upon these branches
grow forth at several places long foo^stalkes, with every of them three broad,
round, and pointed green Leaves at the end of them, toward the tops whereof
come forth diverse flowers, made like unto Pease Blossoms, of the same color
for the most part that the fruit will be of; that is to say, either white or
yellow, or red or blackish, or of a deep purple, but white is the most usual;
after which come long and slender flat pods, some crooked, and some straight,
with a string as it were running down the back thereof, wherein are contained
flattish round seed made to the fashion of a Kidney; the root is long, and
spreads with many Fibers annexed to it, perishing either before or with the
first frosts.

The Places and Time.
Authors make no mention whether these Kidney-Beames be natural to any place
or not, yet I conceive by their name that they come out of France to us, though
happily that may not be the natural place: the last came from the East Indies,
whereof there be several sorts; as likewise in the West Indies, all which it
were endless to recite. They may be set about the later end of April or the
beginning of May, and their fruit will be ready to eat, about the later end of
July, or the beginning of August.

The Temperature.
The Kidney-Beane is hot and moist in the first degree, easy of digestion and
free from that Windiness, that is in other Pulse.

The Virtues and Signature.
Though there be no other Virtues tending to our present purpo^e expressed by
any Author, then that this Bean eaten with its shells as the common manner is,
do provoke Urine, yet having so perfect a Signature of the Kianeys as it has,
it is con^eived that it has more in it then so. And therefore it is desired of
those that are Practitioners in Physic, and others that have oc^asion, to take
it into consideration, and to try whether it has not some excellent faculty to
cure the diseases of the Kidneys. It also moves the Belly, enlarges the
breast which is straightened with shortness of breath, engenders Sp^rme, and
inciteth to Venery, especially if Sugar, Ginger, and Gal^nga be added
thereunto; yet the usual way o^ eating them is to take them while mey are
young, and boil them shells and all, only the ends cut off, and the strings
taken from them, and then putting a little Butter and Vinegar to them, they
make a dainty dish, far exceeding the ordinary Beans in savor: or if this
way be not so pleasing to some men's Palates, they may be stewed or fried.
Matthiolus says, that if the green pods be chewed in ones mouth, and applied
to any place that is bitten by an Horse, it is a present Remedy: he says
further that the Italian Dames make a Water of the pods and seeds of these
Beans, with a fresh Gourd, crummes of Bread and Goats Mill^pistilled
together, which they used, to make themselves look fair and (...)able. It is
said that the fish called Scarus (which is somewhat like a Barbell) is so much
delighted with the Leaves of Kidney* Beans that though they are very difficult
to be taken with a hook and line, yet if their Weeles or Bownets be baited
therewith, they will eagerly rush into them, and it is probable that other fish
would do so likewise, if trial were made thereof, Since the writing of the
pr^mises, I find in Mr. Culpeppers English Physician enlarged, that these
Beans being dried and beat to Powder are as great strengthners of the Kidneys
as any simple whatsoever; neither is there (says he) a better remedy then it,
to ^revent the Stone or to cleanse the Kidneys of Gravel or Stoppage, a drachme
at a time taken in White Wind. The Scarlet colored Beans, in regard of the
glorious beauty of their color, being set near a Quick-hedge, will bravely
adorn the same by oliming up thereon, to the admiration of the beholder.

CHAP. CCXXXVII. Of the Oak.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), which is a general word for all Trees that bea^e
Acornes, as the Latin Word Quer^us also is, yet they are both particularly
attributed to this tree (...), which is that the Greeks commonly call (...), id
est latifolius, from the breadth of the Leaves, to distinguish it from some
other sorts of this kind. Dodonaeus calls it Hemeris Quercus quasi sativa and
urbana; and we may English it the Tamer Oak, the other sorts being accounted
more wild then this. The Acorne is in Greek (...) and the Cup (...), in Latin
Glans, and the Calix Cup glandis, and Cupula Glandis of the Apothecaries.

The Kinds.
Though there be no great difference of Oaks in England, yet in other
Country* they va^y so much, as to make five distinct sorts, which I shall only
name unto you. 1. The broad Leafed Oak. 2. The strong or Gall Oak. 3. The
sweet Oak. 4. The male bitter Oak. 5. The female bitter Oak.

The Form.
The Oak is a mighty Tree, covered with a thick rough Bark full of chops and
clifts, sending forth arms and boughs of a huge bigness, which disperse
themselves far abroad; the Leaves are bluntly indented about the edges, or
rather cut in or gashed, smooth and of a shining green color, whereon is
often found a most sweet dew, somewhat c^ammy, and upon diverse of them are found
growing certain exc^e^^ences called Oak Apples. It beats small yellowish
mossy flowers, standing close together upon ^ong stalks, which wholly fall away
in the beginning of the Spring. The Acornes grow upon short stalks, two or
three for the most part joined together, who^e outer rind or skin is of a
yellowish green color, the lower part whereof stands in a small rough hollow
cup, the kernel whereof cleweth in two* and is of a reasonable sweet taste. The
roots are great, spreading far and deep: The Timber or Wood is the most
serviceable of all other, especially for the building of ships and houses, yet
the outer part which is called the Sap is not so durable, as the innermo^ which
is called the Heart, as every one knows.

The Places and Time.
The first is that of our own Land, but the others are more frequent in Italy,
Spain, and other hot Climates. Their long Catkins or bloomings come forth
early in the Spring, and fall away for the most part, before the leaves do come
forth; the fruit or Acornes are not ripe until Ostober.

The Temperature.
The Leaves and Bark of the Oak and the Acorne cups do bind and dry very much,
and are somewhat cold withal, but the Acornes themselves are neither so cold
nor so much binding.

The Signature and Virtues.
The fruit of the Oak or Acornes separated from the Cups do much resemble the
Stone in the Bladder and therefore they not only provoke Urine and break the
stone, but are an especial remedy for the exulceration of the Bladder and
pissing of blood, caused by the force of poisonous herbs, and corroding
medicines, as also the virulency of Cantharides being eaten, if the decoction
of them and the bark made in Milk be taken; The Powder of Acornes drunk in
Wine, are good to help stitches, and pains of the sides, especially if the
powder of Bay Berries be mixed therewith: The inner bark of the Tree and the
thin skin that covers the Acorne, are most used in Phy^ick to stay the
spitting of blood, and the bloody (...): the decoction of the Bark and Powder
of the Cups, which are much more binding then any other part, do stay vomitings
or cast^ngs, spitting of blood, or bleeding at the Mouth, or other flux of
blood in Man or Woman. Lackes also and the inv^luntary flux of natural seed:
The fume of the Leaves, helps the strangling the Mother and the bruised
Leaves Soder up wounds and keep them from Inflammation. The distilled water of
the Buds is also good to stay all manner of Fluxes in Man or Woman, to cool
the Body in pestilentiall and hot burning Fevers, for it resists the force
of the infection: as also to cool the heat of the Liver, break the Stone and
in the Kidneys, stay Women's Courses, and to assuage all manner of
Inflammations, being used inwardly or outwardly; and the decoction of the
Leaves does the like. The water that is found in hollow places of old Oaks is
very effectual against any foul or spreading Scab. Though the Acornes were
formerly used for food, yet our Age being able to subsist without them, I shall
leave them for the Hoggs to seed upon.

CHAP. CXXXVIII. Of Bucks-horne Plantaine.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Coronopus, from the similitude it has with the
foot of a Crow, which name the Latins do hold, as also Cornu cervi or
cervi^um, and Herba stella; both of them from the posture of the Leaves. It is
called Sanguinaria or Sanguinalis, and Harenaria; the first from its verture in
stopping blood, and the last from the place of its growing: We in English call
it Bucks-horne, Harts-horne, and Bucks-horne Plantaine, because the Spiky
heads, are like those of Plantaine.

The Kinds.
The sorts hereof, though growing in different Climates, may, without breaking
any great square, be brought within the compass of one Chapter, and then the
total sum will be but five, 1. Common Bucks-horne Plantaine, 2. Prickly
Bucks-horne, 3. Small Sea Bucks-horne of Naples, 4. The small hairy Sea
Bucks-horne, 5. Upright and creeping Bucks-horne or Wart-Cresses.

The Form
Common Bucks-horne Plantaine, rises up at first with small, long, narrow
hairy, dark green Leaves like Grass, without any division or gash in them; but
those that follow are gashed in on both sides, the Leaves into three or four
gashes, and pointed at the ends, resembling the Knaggs of a Bucks-horne, and
being well grown lie round about the root upon the ground in order one by
another, thereby resembling the form of a star: from among which rise up diverse
hairy stalks, about an hand breadth high, bearing every one a small long spiky
head, very like, unto those of the common Plantaine, having such like bloomings
and seed after them; the root is single, long, and small, with diverse fibers
annexed thereunto.

The Places and Time.
The first usually grows in dry sandy grounds, as in Tuttle fields by
Westminster, and without the Walls of Greenwich Park, on that side that the way
lies from thence to Eltham, and in diverse others places of this Land, yea, it
is sown in the Gardens of those that know the Physical use of it in some
places of this Country, where it grows not naturally, yet I have not known it
eaten as a Sallet herb any where with us, though in Italy and France, it is
frequently so used. The second grows on the rocks in the Island Prochyta. The
third in many untilled grounds in the Kingdom of Naples, near the Sea side; The
last grows in moist Countries of this Land, on the foot banks and under
Walls and by high way sides, especially in those places where Hoggs frequent,
arising as i^ supposed out of their dung, which is the Reason why it is called
Harenaria and Swines cresse. They all flower and seed in the summer Months,
their green Leaves abiding all the winter.

The Temperature.
Bucks-horne is of a binding, cooling, and drying faculty, as the Common sort
of Plantaine is.

The Virtues and Signature.
Bucks-horne Plantaine, boiled in wine and drunk, is very effectual to help
those that are troubled with the Stone in the Re^nes or K^dneys, not that it
breaks the Stone or expels it, but by cooling the Heat of the parts and
strengthening the Reins and Back. It stays likewise all bleedings and
eruptions of Blood, whether at the Mouth or Nose, whether by Stool or Urine,
and helps the laske of the bowels and belly, and the Dysentery, or bloody
Flux. It helps much also those that have weak Stomachs, that are so much
given to casting or Vomiting, that they cannot retain their Meat; and this the
Herb does well, but the root more effectually. The said decoction drunk, and
some of the Leaves applied to the place hurt, is an excellent Remedy for the
b^ting of the Viper or Adder, which is supposed to be one and the same. It
helps those that are troubled with the Colic* and is held profitable for
Agues to weaken their fits and take them away, the Leaves being briused and
laid to the Sides of them that have them; and the Leaves and Roots beaten with
some Bay Salt and applied to the Hand-wrists, works the same effects. The
Herb boiled in Ale or wine, and given for some Mornings and Evenings together,
stays the Distillations of hot and sharp Rheums falling into the Eyes from
the Head, and helps all manner of accidents that happen to the Eyes. Wart
Cresses, which are called in Latin Coronopus R^ellii; and Nasturtium
Verrucarium, because the seed of it bears the perfect Signature of the Warts
upon a man's hand, will consume and take away Warts in a short time, the herb
being bruised and applied; and so it stops bl^^ding most effectually, having
all the Virtues which are attributed to the former.

CHAP. CXXXIX. Of Sampire.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) or (...), and sometimes (...), Crithmum which is
the usual Latin name also; yet Petrus Crescentius calls it Crethmum, and
Rincum marinum. It is also called Feniculum marinum, which name the Italians
and French follow, as near as their Dialect will permit; in shops Creta marina,
especially beyond Sea. In English Sampier and Sampire, because it grows upon
rocks; and Sea Fennel, because it somewhat resembles our ordinary Fennel.

The Kinds.
To this kind may be referred these four sorts, 1. Ordinary Rock Sampire, 2.
The greater Rock Sampire, 3. Thorny Sampire or Sea Parsnep, 4. Golden Flowered
Sampire.

The Form.
Ordinary Rock Sampire grows up with a tender green stalk, not above half a
yard or two foot high at the most, branching forth almost from the very
bottom, and stored with sundry thick almost round and somewhat long Leaves, of
a deep green color, sometimes three together and sometimes more on a stalk,
being full of sap, and of a pleasant hot or spicy taste; at the topps of the
stalks and branches stand Umbells of white flowers and after them come large
seed bigger then Fennel, yet somewhat alike: the root is great white and long,
continuing many years, and is both of a delightful and pleasant smell and
taste.

The Places and Time.
The first grows on the Rocky Cliffes at Dover, Winchelsey, by Rye, and about
Southampton, and the West, and North West of England; but especially in the
Isle of Wight, where there is so great plenty that it is gathered, (yet not
without danger) for some have ventured so far upon the craggy precipices that
they have fallen down and broken their nets', so that it might be said they
paid. For their sauce; and afterward being pickled up, is sent to London and
other places. The second grows likewise upon Rocks that are moistened, if not
sometimes overflown with the Sea water. The third, near the Sea upon the sands
between Whitstable, and the Isle of Thanet, by Sandwich, and by the Sea near
VVestchester. The last in the miry Marsh in th Isle of Shepey, by the way from
the Kings Ferry, to Sherland house. Rock Sampire flourishes in May and June,
and must be gathered to be kept in pickle in the beignning of August. They all
flower and seed in the end of July and August.

The Temperature:
Sampire is conceived to be hot and dry in the second degree, and of a
cleansing or scouring faculty.

The Virtues.
Of all the Sawces, (which are very many,) there is none so pleasant, none so
familiar and agreeable to man's body as Sampire, both for digestion of Meats;
breaking of the Stone, and voiding of Gravel in the Reins and Bladder. It
provokes Urine also, and Women's Courses, and prevails against the Jaund^se
the Leaves, seeds, and Roots being boiled in Wine and drunk, and so it opens
the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and all other stoppings of the
intralls whatsoever, from whence and from ill digestion, mo^^ of the diseases
whereunto the frail Nature of man is subject, are caused; so that it is great
pity, that it is no more in use. It is very pleasant both to the Taste and
Stomach, not only by the Saltness but by the Spicynesse in it likewise,
whereby it is very available to whet a dull Stomach. It is eaten raw as well as
boiled by those which live where it grows; but the best way is to boil it in
water till it be tender, and then pickled up in a Barrel with a convenient
Liquor made of Vinegar, Water, and Salt, it will be fit for ones own occasions
at any time, or to present to a friend as usually it is, or to sell.

CHAP. CCXL. Of Fraxinella or False white Dittany.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Chamaemelium, which signifies as much as Fraxina
humilis, or the low or dwarf Ash, because of the resemblance of its winged
Leaves to those of the young Ash, and therefore it is called in Latin
Fraxinella, being a diminutive of Fraxinus: Yet some do call it Dictamus albus
or Dictamnus albus, and Diptamus albus, to distinguish it from the Dictamnus
Creticus, which is a far differing Plant. Some would have it to be Tragium of
Dioscorides, but besides other differences it yields no juicy Milk as
Tragium is said to do; We in English do either call it Fraxinella and Bastard
Dittany from the Latin Dictamus, being also a corrupted word but it is more
properly to be called False white Dittany then Bastard Dittany, because there
is another Plant to which the name of Pseudo dictamnus does more properly
belong, and therefore a distinct Epithet is necessary to avoid confusion.

The Kinds.
But if this Fraxinella be called False white Dittany, it must not take its
denomination from the flowers, for of the four sorts there is but one that has
a white Flower 1. Fraxinella with a reddish Flower. 2. Fraxinella with a red
Flower. 3. Fraxinella with a white Flower. 4. Fraxinella with an Ash colored
Flower.

The Form.
Fraxinella is a very goodly Plant, rising up with diverse round hard brownish
stalks near two foot high, the lower parts whereof are furnished with many
winged Leaves, somewhat like unto Liquorice or a small young Ash-Tree,
consisting of seven, nine or eleaven Leaves set together, which are somewhat
large and long, hard and rough in handling; the two first of a dark, but the
two later of a fresher green color, and of an unpleasant strong or resinous
sent; the upper parts of the stalks are furnished with many flowers, growing
spike fashion at certain distances one above another, consisting of five long
Leaves a piece, whereof four that stand on the two sides are somewhat bending
upwards, and the fifth hanging down, but turning up the end of the leaf a
little again, having in the middle a tassell of five or six long threads that
bow down with the lower Lease and turn up also the ends again with a little
freese or thrum at the end of every one; after the flowers are past, arise
hard, stiff, rough, clammy husks, horned or pointed at the end, four or five
standing together somewhat like the seed Vessels of Columbines, but greater,
thicker, and harder, wherein is contained round, shining, black seed, greater
then any Columbine seed by much; the root is white, large, and spreading many
ways under ground, if it stand long; the whole Plant is more pleasant to the
sight, then to the smell.

The Places and Time.
The natural places of the sorts aforementioned are in diverse parts both of
Germany, and Italy; and that with the white flower, about Frank-ford: yet they
grow with us in our Gardens, as in the Physic Gardens at Oxford, and that at
Westminster, and in the Gardens of diverse others that are delighted with
rarities of this Nature. They flower in June and July, and their seed is ripe
in August.

The Temperature.
The Root of Fraxinella or the false white Dittany is hot and dry in the second
degree; it is of a wasting, attennating, and opening faculty.

The Virtues.
A dram or two of the powder of the roots of Fraxinella taken in wine or broth,
is very much commended against the Strangury, provokes Urine, breaks the
Stone in the Bladder, and drives it forth, and so does the seed taken in the
quantity of a dram. The same are very effectual to open obstructions, to bring
down Women's Courses, and to cleanse that which is soul and contagious. It is
also a very great preservative both against Poison and the Venom of Serpents,
and other Poysonfull Creatures, and against the Pestilence, and other
contagious diseases, and is good to kill the Worms of the belly. It warmeth
and cleanses the matrix, expels the dead Child, and Afterbirth, if the
part be fumigated with it and Penniroyall, or taken in Wine: it eases the
pains or torments in the inward parts or bowels, and heals inward hurts,
and wounds: it is much commended against the Epilepsy or falling sickness, and
other cold griefs of the head and brains, and is held to be of great use
against the French disease, to use it with the decoction of Guai^^m or
Pock-wood. The Leaves and the juice thereof taken after the same sort works
the same effects, though not so powerfully, and being applied outwardly it
draws Thorns and Splinters out of the flesh.

CHAP. CCXLI. Of Allheale.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek, (...) Panaces or Panax, because it is a Panacaea or
remedy for many diseases, which names are in use also amongst the Latins. Some
call it Panax Herculeum, supposing Hercules to be the first founder of it, but
others would rather have it Panax Heracleum from Heraclea a City in Candy: and
though the name Panaxris referred to many p^ants as Origanum Sylvestre
Centaurium magnum, etc. yet to this only (...). It is called in English
Hercules Allheale, and Hercules Wound wort, and Allheale simply.

The Kinds.
To this Kind may be referred these seven sorts, 1. Ordinary Allheale of
Hercules, 2. The true Allheale of Hercules, 3. American Allheale of Hercules
(supposed to be the true Laserwort) with shining Leaves, 4. Costus-like
Allheale, 5. The Hungarian Allheale of Hercules, 6. The Cluster berry Allheale
of America, 7. Sweet sented Allheale of America.

The Form.
Hercules Wound-wort spreads many large winged Leaves round about upon the
ground, most of them two foot long, consisting of four, five, or six couples of
rough winged Leaves, set one against another, on a round great foot-stalk,
furrowed on the upper side, each of them likewise consisting of three or four
couple of rough, but large fair fresh yellowish green Leaves, and one at the
end; all of them finely dented about the Edges, tasting a little hot and
biting, and yiedling forth a yellowish juice in the Summer, called Opopanax,
much more gummy, hot, and bitter then the Leaves; from which rises a strong
great round green stalk, four or five foot high or more, with some joints and
Leaves thereat and a few branches toward the top, breaking forth into small
yellow umbells of flowers, which afterward give whitish yellow, flat, short
seed. The root is somewhat great and grows deep into the ground.

The Places and Time.
The first is thought to grow in some Places of Italy, but I am sure it did
grow in the Physic Garden at Oxford, and does still, if I be not mistaken, as
also at the Physic Garden at Westminister, and in some other Gardens. The
second grows in Naples, as Matthiolus says, on the Apennine-hills also, and
the Sea Coasts by Siena. The third came from America, is the name of it
imports. The fourth, as Matthiolus says grows on Mount Garganus in Apulia.
The fifth in Tartaria and Hungaria. The two last in America. They all flower
and seed in the end of Summer.

The Temperature.
The juice or Gum, which is of greatest use, is hot in the third degree and dry
in the second, being of a heating, mollifying, and digesting quality; the bark
of the root is heating and drying likewise, but in a meaner degree, having
withal a little cleansing property.

The Virtues.
The juice or Gum of Allheale, which it is called in shops, and of many
writters also, Opopanax being drunk in honeyed Water or Wine, helps the
Itchings, and sores in the Bladder, and is good for the Strangury also, and
difficu^ty in making water. It is endued with a special property also to purge
thick and clammy Phlegm from the more remote parts, as the Brain, Nerves,
sensitive parts, joints, and breasts, and therefore it is profitable for any
cold d^sease incident to any of those parts, as in the Palsy, weakness of
sight, old Cough, shortness of breath, Sciatic^, and in other kinds of Gout.
It is good for Convulsions and Cramps, as also against Windiness in the Sides,
Belly, Womb, or in any other places, and therefore it helps Stitches, the
hardness of the Spleen, the strangling of the Mother, brings down VVomens
Courses; and brings away also the Mola or Lump of flesh bred in the Womb. It
expels worms, helps the biting of a ^ad D^gge, and is good against the
poison of other venomous Creatures; Dissolved in Wine and given, it helps the
Dropsy; and taken in Vinegar, one hour before the Fit comes it takes away the
cold Fit of an Ague, e^pecially if some of it be dissolved with the juice of
Smallage and Oil of Dill, and the ridge of the back anointed therewith. It is
good after falls and bruises to dissolve any congealed blood e^pecially in Cold
bodies, and where no Fever is. Being dissolved wi^h Vinegar and the juice of
Smallage, and applied to the Region of the Spleen softeneth the hardness of it,
and a plaisterg made thereof dissolveth the Kings-Ev^ll, and hard Nodes of the
Joints, as also any Plague sore, botch, or Bile, especially being dissolved in
Vinegar and applied with the pulp of Raisins in the Sun, it ea^eth any kind of
Gout. If the mouth be washed with a decoction of Vinegar made with it, it
eases the pain in the Teeth, or if it be a hollow tooth, let it be stopped
with a piece. Some commend it against the dimnesse of sight, being mixed with
other things. It is very availeable to cure old Ulcers and Fistulaes, and to
breed good flesh, especially where the bones are bare and naked, and that by a
peculiar Virtue. It is applied with good success to the biting of any Venomous
Creature. Thus you see that Allheale has not its name for nothing. The Gum is
to be had at any Apothecaries shop, but if the Root can be got more easily,
that may serve. By this time I suppose I have Sufficienly handled those plants
that make for the benefit of those parts appointed, for the making a separation
between the Blood and the Urine, which are the Reins, and for the reception of
the Urine thus separated which is the Bladder, with the pipes of conveyance
from the former to the latter, which are the Ureters: so that you may find
somewhat that will help the distempers of each of them, as also for the Stone
and Gravel, afflicting every of them, and likewise for the Strangury and
Dysary though they be treated of in gross. To which purposes, there be diverse
others that are very effectual as Golden Rod, Sanicle, Saracens Confound, etc.
For the Ulcers in the Reins and Bladder; the Cherry and Plum-Trees, because
the Stones of each are effectual for the Stone in a man's body by Signature:
the Junipet, and Bay-Trees, whose Berries also are much commended for the same,
and other plants besides those, whose Roots are Diureticall: But as I have
spoken to some of the former, toward the beginning of this work, so I have
reserved some for those parts yet to be spoken to, and therefore I shall say no
more of them in this place, but proceed to the Gutts, which are ordained for
the better concoction of the Chilus sent from the Stomach, and the digestion
thereof; as also for the conveyance and expulsion of the Excrements, and
because there be diverse diseases that breed in the Gutts, as the Cholick,
Worms, etc. Excoriations, Dysenteries, etc. I shall speak of those Simples
which make for their Welfare, all in a Lump.

CHAP. CCXLII. Of the Bay Tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Daphne quia (...), quod ^sta valde sonat; for
nothing does more crackle or make a noise then it; in Latin Laurus, which some
will have to come from Lavo, id est, purgo, saying, that it is excellent to
purge the blood; others a verbo Laudis, because it was given only to those
that were praise worthy* and therefore the Ancients called it Laudea, but since
the d has bin taken out and r has bin put instead thereof, so that now it is
as well L^^rea as Laurus, though the later be more common. The Berries are
called (...), in Greek; and Bacca Lauri, in Latin.

The Kinds.
There are to be reckoned up five or six kinds of Bay-Trees, 1. The greater
Bay Tree, 2. The lesser Bay Tree, 3. The strange Indian Bay, or Cassia, or
Lignea of the West Indies, 4. The wild Bay Tree, 5. The Rose Bay, 6. The
Laurel which is the same with the Bay-Cherry.

The Form.
The Bay Tree oftentimes shoots up with many suckers from the Root, showing
it self like unto a tall shrub or Hedge-bush, yet sometimes it grows to be a
substantial tree, spreading its arms and branches reasonable well, the tops
whereof are sometimes reddish, but most usually of a light or fresh green
color, when the stem and elder boughs are covered with a dark green bark,
the Leaves are somewhat broad and long pointed as it were, at both the Ends,
hard, full of veins and sometimes crumpled on the Edges, of a dark green
color, smelling somewhat sweet but of a bitter taste, and always abiding
green; the flowers grow many together, which are sometimes of a whitish green
color, and sometimes yellow and mossy, and turn into Berries that are a
little long as well as round, whose shell or outermost peele is green at the
first, but black afterward, wherein is contained an hard bitter kernel
parting into two parts; the root spreads under the ground and grows deep
also.

The Places and Time.
None of these Bays grow naturally in England, but are either wholly planted
with us, or else raised of Suckers, or by sowing the berries; so that we have
the first and second many times growing in gardens, and Court yards; the fourth
and fifth are not so common, yet they are to be seen in the Gardens of some
that love rarities. The last is very frequent in our London Gardens. The
natural place of the first, is in diverse places of Narbone in France, Spain,
and Italy, and in other warm Countries, where it grows very great, but
especially near the Sea. The Rose Bay grows also in Italy, Spain, Greece,
and many other places; the last came from Constantinople at the first. The
first and second, flower much about the same time which is in May, yet hardly
perfecting their fruit till October, or November; the time of the third is not
expressed; the fourth flourishes most in April and March, yet sometimes it
flowreth in December and January; the fifth flowreth not till July; the last
may flower in May, and have ripe seed fruit in August or September in the hot
Countries, but in this it does not very usually flower, much less fructify,
yet sometimes it does.

The Temperature.
The Berries and Leaves of the Bay Tree, says Galen, are hot and dry, the
Berries somewhat exceeding the Leaves, the bark of the Root is less sharp and
hot, but more dry, being also endued with some astriction.

The Virtues.
The Powder of Bay Berries mixed with Honey and taken as other Lohocs or
licking Medicines are, or else taken in Raisins as Aloes and Wormseed sometimes
are, is an excellent Remedy for that disease called the Cholick, which is a
continual passion of one of the great Guts called Colon, after which follows
a a difficulty of voyding the Excrements, and an exceeding torment in those
parts proceeding from W^nd. The said Powder taken after the same manner is good
against a Consumption, Straitensse of breath, and all other infirmites of the
breast, coming of Rhewme; they likewise help the Meagrim, and mightily expel
wind both in young and old: yet it is more frequently given by Nurses to
Children to cure them of that griping pain of the belly called the Frets,
which is nothing but wind, causing them to be very unquiet; they provoke Uine
also, are very effectual for the Stone, as also to help the Ventosity or
windiness of the Mother, and to kill the worms. They are a good Antidote too
against the bitings and stingings of any Venomous beasts, and against all
manner of Venoms and Poisons, and therefore they are put into Mithridate,
Treackle, and such like Compositions. They warm a cold Stomach, also cause
concoction of raw humors, stir up a decayed appetite, take away loathing of
meat, open the stopping of the Liver and Spleen, bring down women's Courses,
cause a speedy delivery, and expel the Afterbirth, so that they are dangerous
to be taken by Women that have not gone their full time, yet they are good
against Cramps, and the drawing together of Sinews, if the powder of them be
taken in White Wine. The oil which is made of them, or the juice pressed out
of them, cures black and blew Marks that come by blows, digesting and
wasting away the congealed blood, that is gathered together in any place: it
takes away Scabs, and wheales in the skin, and helps the Itch also,
especially if a little Quicksilver be tempered therewith till it be mortified:
it comfort all cold griefs of the Joints, Nerves, Arteries, Stomach, Belly,
and Womb, so that it helps Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, Aches, tremblings
and benummednesse, in any part; weariness also and pains of the Limbs,
wherewith they are many times afflicted, which use to travel through wet and
dirt, by anointing the part affected, therewith. Some of the said Oil or the
Decoction of the Berries, is very convenient to be put into such Clisters which
tend to the breaking of wind, and easing the torments of the wind Cholick,
which it performs even to admiration. The said Oil or juice of the Berties
helps the ach and deafness of the Ears being dropped thereinto. The Leaves
may be used to many of the purposes aforesaid, yet the ordinary use of them is
to boil them in Beer, as also to dress fish with, especially Eeles, leaving a
dainty relish, helping to warm the Stomach, and digesting those crudities
which they are apt to breed of themselves. A bath of the decoction of the
Leaves and Betries, is of great advantage in women's diseases both for the
Mother, and other diseases of the Womb, as the Stopping of the Courses, etc.
And so likewise for the diseases of the Bladder as the Strangury, etc. All
these Virtues belong to the common Bays, which besides their Ornamentall uses
they perform; the three last serving only for the pleasure of those, that are
taken with the rarity of them, and not for any Physical use that I can learn,
and therfeore I shall say no more of them.

CHAP. CCXLIII. Of Holly.
The Names
IT is called in Greek (...) Agria by Theophrastas, and seems to be derived
from (...) immitis vel ferox, because of the abundance of prickles wherewith it
is commonly armed. Gaza, the interpreter of Theophrastus, calle^ it Aquifolium
in Latin, yet Agrifol^um is a word no less, but rather more in use then the
former, as being somewhat more agreeable though at best it be but a Mongrell
word. We call it Holly or Holme, and Hulver, in English.

The Kinds.
There may be said to be three sorts of Holly. 1. The Holly-Tree without
prickles. 2. The Holly-bush with prickly-Leaves. 3. The Holly bush with yellow
Berries. Yet there be some that affirm that with, and that without prickles to
be the same, having prickles when it is young and low, but when it grows old
and becomes great, it loses all the prickles, except that at the end, and
sometimes that also.

The Form.
The Holly that grows naturally in the fields does seldom exceed the
bigness of a Bush, yet being p^anted in Orchards or Closes, as I have many
times seen it, it grows to the bigness of a lusty-Tree, all in one entire
body, and not sending forth many shoots from the root, as those which grow
natu^ally, usually do; the outer bark whereof is not of so dark a green
color, as that of the lesser bushes, but inclining rather to white, having
under that another which is white also; the Leaves are set on the stalks and
branches on short foot-stalkes, being somvvhat broad, hard, thick, and long,
smooth, shining, and of a very fresh yellovvish green color, not cut round
about the edges into round notches or dents, and every point of them very sharp
and prickly as those of the Bushes are, but even on the edges, and vvithoug any
prickles, unless perhaps there be one at the end, the flowers grow close to
the stalks, many of them coming out together round about, near unto the foot
of the Leaves, each consisting of four whitish Leaves with four threads in the
middle; standing about a green round head, which grows to be small red
berries, with a little Crown at the top in which is contained four small
three-cornered seeds, with hard shells, but sweet kernells within them, though
very small. The root goes deep into the ground.

The Places and Time.
The first, as is said, is planted in Orchards and Closes in Oxfordshire, and
other places, where very little or no Holly grows wild. The second grows
very plentifully in diverse Woods and Hedg-rowes in the Counties of Buckingham,
Hartford, and Surrey, and other places. The last grows in Wilt-shire by
VVarder Castle which belongs to the Lord Arundel. They all flower in June,
but the berries grow not until the end of October or after, being in their
greatest beauty about Christmasse because of the berries, the Leaves also
abiding green all the Winter.

The Temperature.
The Berries of Holly are hot and dry, and of thin parts helping to break Wind,
as Dodonaeus says.

The Virtues and Signature.
It will not be amiss in this place to take notice of the different, nay
contrary operations of diverse Simples, which will purge when they are fresh,
and green, and bind when they be dried, as may be instanced in Holly berries;
ten or twelve of which being fresh, and taken inwardly do help the Colic,
purging also by stool gross, clammy, and phlegmatic humors, which they may
very well do by reason of their moisture and slipperynesse, but being dried,
and so deprived of their former lubricity, they bind the belly and stay
Dysenteries and Fluxes, being beaten to Powder and drunk either in Wine or
Broth, which the dried Bark does also perform, and that more effectually. The
decoction of the Roots, but especially of the Bark of the Root, as Matthiolus
says, being applied by way of somentation to those places that have been put
out of Joint, does help them much both to mollify and discuss the hardness
and tumors which they are subject to, and also to consolidate the broken bones.
An handful of the Berries boiled in a Pint of Ale to the one half, which
being streined and a little Butter put thereto, is a good remedy for the Stone
and stoppage of Urine, five or six spoonfulls thereof taken at once; and this
it may be said to do by the Signature which may be gathered from the hardness
of the seed. The powder of the Leaves dried in an Oven and the pricks taken
off, being drunk in Ale, is commended against the Stitches and pricking pains
of the side, which the prickles growing on the Leaves do also signify. The Sap
or juice that droppeth out of the Wood being laid on the fire, being dropped
into the Ears of those which are inclined to deafness, removes that
infirmity. The Birdlime that is made of the Bark of Holly by putting it into a
hole made in moist foggy ground, and covering it with boughs of Trees and some
earth over them till it be rotten, and putrified, which will be within a
fortnight, being afterward beaten in a Mortar, it will become thick and
clammy, so that the filthiness being cleared therefrom by often washing, and a
little Oil of Nutts added thereto, it will be as good as that which is made of
Misseltoe* and being applied with the yolke of an Egg to any place that has
any thorn, prick, or Splinter, therein, it draws it forth, but it is
dangerous to be used inwardly, lest it should glue the Guts together, by its
extraordinary clamminesse; The lesser branches may be used to adorn Houses and
Churches also, at Christmas, as well in this as in the former age without any
superstition at all; these that are of a bigger and longer size are very
necessary for Carters to make Whips, and the same may be used as Riding-rods,
as is known to every one; But that which may seem a little strange, is this.
One, that I knew, had a Holly-Tree growing in his Orchard of that bigness that
being cut down, he caused it to be sawed out in Boards and made himself
thereof a Coffin; and if I mistake not left enough to make his wife one also:
Both the parties were very corpulent, and therefore you may imagine the Tree
could not be small.

CHAP. CCXLIIII. Of Juniper.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Arceuthos or Arceuthis (...), id est (...) says
the Etymo^ogist, quia celet noxam, but then sure^y it must be by Antiphrasts,
for certainly there is no plant that has more apparent P^ickles then it. It is
called in Latin Juniperus, quod juniores and novellos fructus pariat. because
it brings forth new fruit before the old be ripe, which will not be perfected
in less then two years ^pace. Some would have it come from (...) Ignis,
either because of the Pyramicall form of the Leaf, or because, as some say,
the Wood being kindled and raked up in Ashes will keep fire a year and that
the Coals thereof are very hot may be gathered from the fifth verse of Psalm
120 where a question being made, What should be the reward of a false Tongue?
The Answer is, Sharp Arrows of the mighty, with Coals of Juniper intimating
them to be the hottest of all Coals. The Berries as well as the Tree are
called (...) in Greek, and sometimes (...) Arceuthides: In Latin, Bacca
Juniperi, and Grana Juniperi; and the Gum that issues out of the wounded roots
is cal^ed Vernix or Vernia, quasi veris ros, because it is most plentiful in
the Spring, it is called also Lachryma Juniper; and Sandaracha, yet there is
another kind of Sandaracha which is taken out of Mines, and is a kind of
Orpment.

The Kinds.
I think I should not trangresse, if I should make six sorts of Juniper. 1. The
Common Juniper. 2. The low or Mountain Juniper. 3. The great Sclavonian
Juniper. 4. West Indian Juniper. 5. Barren Juniper. 6. Creeping Juniper.

The Form.
Juniper, in some places rises up to be a Tree, yet in most parts of our
Country it seldom exceeds the height of two or three foot, but spreading it
self near the ground the branches come, to be of some substance, which are
easyer to bend then to break; being covered with a reddish bark which often
cleaves and falls away, but the Leaves, which are very small and long, of a
bluish green color somewhat like to those of Furse, yet not so large nor so
prickly, do constantly endure. The flowers are very small, yet may be perceived
to be of a yellow color by the dust that falls from them, after which come
small green Berries, not ripening fully till the second year, which then will
be somewhat like a Pepper-Corne. Though the Juniper Tree in hotter Countries
send forth the forementioned Gum, yet our shrubs are not found to have any, as
far as I can understand.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in Germany, Italy, Spain, and in some places of Kent also
in the form of a Tree, but in most places of our Land, as by Beechen-Tree in
Oxfordshire, in the high ways about Amersham, Stoken Church, and Beaconsfeild
in Buckinghamshire, it exceeds not the dimensions above specified; It grows
also in many other places as upon Finchly Common without High-Gate, etc; the
second grows on the Rocks and Stony places of the Alps, as Clusius says:
the third on Mount Taurus in Syria, as Bellonius: the place of the fourth may
be understood by its name, the fifth grows in sundry parts of this Land, the
sixth upon the Rocks near Kilmadough. They flower commonly in the Spring about
May: but the fifth brings only yellowish threads for flowers without any
berries succeeding, the rest perfect them after two Summers and one Winter, and
not before, as I have already said.

The Temperature.
Galen says, that Juniper is hot and dry, and that in the third degree; the
Berries are as hot, but not altogether so dry: the Gum is hot and dry in the
first degree, as Scrapio says.

The Virtues and Signature.
The fruit or berries of Juniper being boiled in Wine or Honeyed Water and
drunk, is an effectual remedy for the Grip^ng, and VVindinesse of the belly
commonly called the VVind Chollick, but especially the Chimicall Oil drawn
from the berries, or the Wood, four or five drops thereof taken in a Morning
in Broth or Beer, and ten or a dozen of the ripe berries eaten every Morning
fasting, are good for the same purpose; and the same Oils be very prevalent
against the Iliack passion, if the parts be anointed therewith. The Leaves and
young tender branches, or the juice of them, or of the berries, or the berries
themselves taken in Wine, are very effectual against the biting of Vipers or
Adders, as also against the Plague or Pestilence, or any other Infection or
Poison: the same also is profitable against the Strangury, and Stopping of
Urine; and is so powerful against the Dropsy, that the very Lie of the Ashes
of Juniper being drunk, cures the disease; It provokes the Terms, helps the
Fits of the Mother, and strengthens the Stomach exceedingly; The berries are
good for the Cough, shortness of breath, and Consumption, Ruptures also,
Convulsions and Cramps: They give safe and speedy delivery to Women with
Child, they strengthen the Brain, help the Memory exceedingly and fortify the
Sight by strengthening the Optic Nerves, and are beneficial to the other
Senses, as also to the Heart, being drunk in Wine or the decoction of them in
Wine taken, and so they are excellent good for all sorts of Agues, especially
the Quartane, they help the Gout and Sciatica, and strengthen all the Limbs of
the Body; they break the Stone also, procure Appetite being lost, and are
excellent good for the Palsy, and likewise for the Falling sickness. The Gum
is used to stay cold Distillations, and Catarrhes that fall upon the Eyes and
Lungs, the Head and Nightcap being fumigated therewith, or the said Powder
strewed upon Flax and quilted therein. The Powder mixed with some Oil of
Roses, and Myrtles, heals the Chaps of the Fundament, Kibes also, and
Chilblaines on the hands and feet; being mixed with the white of an Egg, and
applied to the Forehead it stays bleeding at the Nose, and the same being
burned, and the Fumes thereof taken through a Funnel upon an aching Tooth takes
away the pain; it is effectual also in moist Ulcers, and Fistulaes and weeping
running sores, to dry up their moisture. Though the Wood of our Juniper is not
so substantial as to make Rafters and Beams of Houses, as that of some
Countries has been said to do, the Rafters and Beams even of Diana's Temple
being of it because of its durability and sweetness, yet being burned it
yields a very sweet scent, which freeth from infection, and drives away all
Norsome Serpents, Flies, VVaspes etc: The Gum of Juniper in Powder taken in
Wine does stay Vomitings, inward bleedings, and spitting of blood, VVomens
Courses also, and all other Fluxes of the Belly, it helps the Piles, and
kills Worms in Children. The Ashes of the Wood or Bark made into a Lie with
Water, does cure all Itches, Scabs, Pustules or other Eruptions in the skin,
yea and the Lepry also, if the places be bathed therewith.

CHAP. CCXLV. Of the Olive Tree,
The Names.
IT being manuted, is called in Greek (...), and Olea Sativa in Latin, and
sometimes Urbana: The Berry is called (...) also in Greek, and Oliva, in Latin:
but being pickled they are called Colymbades; and before that, Drupae and
Drupetes. The Oil has both the same Greek and Latin name with the Tree, and
though it be applied to all Oil in general, yet to this only (...), the Foot
whereof is called Amurca in Latin. The wild Olive Tree is named in Greek
(...), and (...), in Latin Oleaster, Olea Silvestris, Cotinus, and Olea
Aethiopica, because it grows very frequently in Aethiopia.

The Kinds.
Some have set down ten sorts of Olives, and some again have reduced them only
to these two kinds. 1. The manured Olive Tree. 2. The wild Olive Tree.

The Form.
The manured Olive Tree grows bigger or lesser according to the constitution
of the Climate, wherein it is; having diverse arms and branches full of thick,
fit and sharp pointed Leaves, with short footstalkes under them, greenish above
and whitish underneath, somewhat like unto those of the Willow but lesser and
shorter, yet never falling off the Tree, of a bitter taste, and somewhat sharp
withal. The Flowers be white, and very small, after which come round and
somewhat long berries green at first, changing pale afterward, then purplish,
and lastly black; yet some are white when they are full ripe, wherein is an
hard stone: the Olives having been awhile gathered, are ground in a Mill, and
then pressed for their Oil.

The Places and Time.
The hottest Climates produce the fairest Olive Trees; for in Spain, Italy,
and the Mediterranean Islands; they grow tall and great, and bear very
plentifully in case they be within threescore Miles of the Sea, and not
otherwise as some write: whereas in this and other cold Countries, they are so
far from bearing fruit, that they will hardly withstand the Winter Frosts, if
they be any thing fierce; yet I have seen them by the great diligence of the
Gardiners preserved both at the Physic Garden at Oxford, and at Wimbleton in
the Lord Lamberts Garden. They flower in their natural places in June and
July, yet their fruit will not be ripe till November or December, and sometimes
and in some places not till January, ^^ February.

The Temperature.
Ripe Olives be moderately hot and moist. The unripe are dry and binding; and
consequently the Oil that is made of them. The green Leaves do cool and bind.

The Virtues and Signatures.
Oil Olive commonly called Sallet-Oyle is, of all simple Oils, the most
excellent (as being of greatest use, and commonly that which is p^escribed for
Compositions) and that Excellency consists as much in easing and defending
Gutts, as any thing whatsoever, for whether it be used inwardly or outwardly,
it is of great advantage to them. For those that are troubled with the Chollick
or Iliack Passions, it may be eaten with White bread in Sops instead of Butter,
and so it looseneth the Belly more than Butter, but if that will nor prevail
take it with an equal quantity of Rhenish or White Wine and drink it; or e^se,
if the taste of the Oil cannot be endured, as many times it cannot, then male a
Glister with Wine and Oil, which being put up, is very e^^ectuall to help the
Passions aforesaid. Raw yarn being boi^ed in Ashes and Oil, and app^yed to the
Navell and Reins, or an handful of White Salt, boiled in a pint of Oil, and
two or three handfulls of black wool dipped therein, and bound hot to the
Navell and bottom of the Belly, works the same effects. It is most
effectual against all poisons, but especially against those that do exulcerate
and eat holes in the Gutts, interposing it self and defend^ng them by its
stippernesse, so that the poison cannot work upon them, but makes it pass
away without any prejudice: and therefore it is a common Remedy for those that
have eaten Ratsbane or any other deadly poison, to give them a draught of Oil
which not only preserves the Gutts, but the Stomach also, if it be got no
lower, causing it to be conveyed upwards or downwards: but there is not
altogether so much danger of the stomach, as the Gutts, because it meets with
somewhat else to hinder its operation, which by that time it has overcome, it
descends from thence; and because the tunicles of the small Guts are not so
thick as those of the Stomach. It is of much use in Sallets and other Sawces
with Vinegar, being very grateful to the palates of some, though others refuse
it; and for this purpose the sweetest is best yet for Medicines the older it
is, the better it is, both to warm any part and to discuss any thing that
needs it, and therefore it is a principal Ingredient in all Salves, that are
for curing of wounds and Scarres which Crallius says it does by Signature. The
Oil of unripe Olives called Omphacinum whilst it is fresh, is most welcome
also to the Stomach, strengthens the Gums, and fasteneth the teeth, if it be
applied with Wool or a White Cloth, and being given to those that are much
given to swering it helps them. Pickled Olives are used as a sauce, and so
they do not only (...) up appetite, but also strengthen the Stomach; and being
eaten with Vinegar they loose the Belly. Being burned, beaten and applied unto
Wheales, they stay their further increase and hinder them from rising, cleanse
foul Ulcers, help the Gums that are loose and Spongy and fasten loose teeth;
and being dried only and applied to ^retting or corroding Urines, does stay
them and takes away the Scarres or Carbundles and plague s^res. The Leaves
stamped; or the juite of them applied with Vinegar are of good effect to cool
all hot Impostumes and Cholorick Inflammations and sirollings. (...) Arthonies
fire, fretting and creeping Ulcers, Cancers in the flesh or mouth. The same
applied with honey does cleanse Ulcers, and assuage all other tumors and
swellings; they are good against all Ucers Inflammations, and Impostumes of the
mouth and Gums of Children, especially being washed with the decoction thereof.
The juice of them stops the Terms and all other fluxes of blood, taken
inwardly or applied outwardly: it is good also for the Redness, Inflammations
and Ulcers of the Eyes, to be put into Collyries, and Medicines for the same,
and to cleanse the Ears from corruption, and so do the Leaves and juice of the
Wild Olive* which are effectual for all the purposes aforesaid. The Water that
issues from the green Wood, when it is laid upon the fire, helps to heal
the scurfe and foul Scabs in the Head or elsewhere. The Olive Stones being
burned are used for the said purposes, as also to stay foul preading Ulcers,
and being mixed with fat and meal* they take away the ruggedness of the
nai^es. There be diverse Virtues that are referred to the foot or dregs of Oil,
but because they are not commonly to be had, I shall omit them; as also those
of the Gum, because neither of them are brought us now adays as being grown
out of use. I shall only add concerning the Oil aforesaid, that a litt^e of
it drunk in warm Water, or a feather dipped therein, and put into the throat
will pro^^re an ease Vomit and without danger; and some commend four ^poonful^s
of Ol^e, and as many of Sack for the like purpose. And for burning and scalding
there i^ not the ^ike Remedy, a piece of Lawn being first sowed about the part,
and Oy^e and Snowwater said thereon.

CHAP. CCXLVI. Of Coloquintida, or the Bitter Gourd.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and that because (...) it moves the Belly as also
(...) ^^cua picra, and of Hippocrate^ (...) and (...) Sicuones and Sicues. In
Latin Colocynthis, and Cucurb ta Sylvestris a Cucumere ut al^qui volunt, yet
others make a di^^eren^e betwixt them. It is called also Fell Terrae, and Mors
Plantarum because it imbitters all herbs that grow near it, or kills them: In
the Apothecaries Shops Coloquintida, in English Apple of Coloquintida, and the
Bitter Gourd.

The Kinds.
The sorts hereof that are upon Record are four. 1. Coloquitida* or the bitter
Gourd, 2. The greater Coloquintida, or the bitter Gourd, 3. The long bitter
Gourd, 4. Pear fashioned Coloquintida, or Bitter Gourd.

The Form.
The B^tter Gourd grows much after the manner of a Cucumber or Melon, having
diverse rough hairy Leaves thereon, lesser and somewhat longer then those of
Cucumber, but more divided and cut in on the Edges, every division being
notched round about. At the joints with the Leaves which grow but one together,
come forth Flowers of a yellow color, like unto those of the Melon, but
somewhat smaller, with tendrells also or twining stalks, whereby it takes
hold of whatsoever it touches, to the endangering of the life thereof, if it
be a vegetable; the fruit that follows is small and round, not much differing
from a reasonable Apple in proportion; of a green color at the first, but of a
brownish yellow, when it is ripe, the shell being as hard as any Pompion or
Gourd, which is usually parted from the white pulp, before it be quite ripe,
being very light spongy or loose, and of an Extraordinary loathsome bitter
taste; wherein is contained six rows of very white hard seed, not exceeding that
of the Cucumber for bigness nor coming near the pulp, either in the
bitterness or forciblenesse in working. The root is not very great, but
stringy; seldom withstanding the first onset of Winter Weather.

The Places and Time
The first is said to grow naturally in Barbary, in those parts which are near
unto the Mediterranean Sea, as also without the mouth of the Straights near
Sancta Crux, and other places thereabouts; but that which we have in Shops is a
Merchandise b^rought out of Syria, Egypt, and Arabia where it is planted, as it
is with us, by those that are curious. The other sorts have bin sound in Spain
and Italy, and so may they be in England, if any one will take the pains to
get the seed, and sow it; but then they Flower late, and hardly bring their
fruit to per^ection.

The Temperature.
Coloquintida is hot and dry in the third degree, of a very bitter taste, and of
a purgative quality.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Celles or rows wherein the seeds of Coloquintida are contained do somewhat
resemble the Celles of the Colon, which is the Gutt that detaineth the
Excrements, and therefore it is of wonderful operation to purge that Gut,
which is the seat of the Chollick, and is commended for the same, whether it
proceed from phlegm or wind. And though it be dangerous for Women with Child,
Children, and old persons, yet it may be taken by those that have strong, and
rustic bodies, without any danger of excoriation, or other evil accident,
being corrected with Oil of Roses, Gum Tragacanth, and Ginger: for the Oil
with its slippernesse will make it the sooner to pass away; the Gum will
^eni^^e the sharpness; and the Ginger will help the griping and tearing
pains, which it causes being taken alone, so that a due proportion of each of
these made up into Tr^ches or Pills with Rose Water work better, then if
Bdellium or Massick or such astringent things were added; as there be in those
Troches called Trochisci Alhandall, Handall being the Arabic name for
Coloquintida: Which being so ordered as I have prescribed, purges also thick
phlegm and viscous humors, the Choler both green and yellow, as also water
from the most remote parts as from the Brain and the Membranes thereof, from
the Nerves, Muscles, Joints, Lungs, and Breast, and therefore it is profitable
for any kind of Hea^-^ch, Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Swimming of the Head,
and in Fluxes of Rhew^e flowing to the Eyes, the cold Gout, Sc^atica, or
Hip-Gout and other pains of the Joy^^s, and Sinews. It helps also the
Jaundise, and is good for putrid and rotten F^^vers, for an Old Cough, the
straitness of the Chest shortness of the breath, and above all these the
Chollick and the Dropsy, being taken either in Gl^sters or Suppositories. The
decoction of Coloquintida made with Vinegar eases the pa^ue o^ the Feeth, if
they be washed therewith. The powder mixed with the Gall of an Ox, and Honey and
said to the belly of one that has the Worms, not only kills the Worms, and
makes them to avoid, but oftentimes purges the Belly also. Being steeped in
Vinegar it takes away all discolorings of the skin, as the Morphew and Lepry,
dry scurse and Scabs, if the places affected be often rubbed therewith. Pure
Oil that is heated in an Apple of Coloquinda after the seeds are taken out,
being dropped into the Ears, takes away the pain, and noise and kills the
Worms in them. And is said to make the hair black which was not so before, and
to keep it from falling, as also from growing ray. A Bath made of Coloquintida,
and the feet and other parts fomented, brings down the Courses in Women. The
juice boiled with hog's grease and applied to the Hip-Gout eases the Sciatica.
The Dose in powder is from five grains to ten, or fifteen, but it is more safe
to take it for all the purposes aforesaid in a Glister made after this manner.
Take of the Pulp of Coloquintida two drams, Camomile flowers an handful,
Anniseed, Cumminseed, of each half an Ounce, make hereof a decoction in fair
Water, and in a pint of it being strained dissolve Honey of Roses and Oil of
Camomile, of each three or four Ounces. Now if any one should ask, how can a
Glyster purge the whole Body? I answer that the Glyster moistning the whole
Colon, does by the twigs of the Arteries draw noisome humors from the whole
Trunk. The seeds will kill Ratts and Mice, who delight to feed upon them, and
the decoction with Wormwood sprinkled in a House that is troubled with Flea^,
does utterly destroy them.

CHAP. CLXVII. Of Bind-weed.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) to distinguish it from the Kidney-Beans which is
called (...) Smilax hortensis. In Latin also Smilax levis, from a Maid of that
name, who pining away for the love of Crocus was turned into this flower
(according to that verse of Ovid) and he into Saffron.

Et Crocum in parves versum cum Smilace flores. It is called also Conv^lval^s
and Volubilis, quia crebra revolutione vicinos fructices, et herbas implice^,
because it rouleth or windeth it self about whatsoever is next it; and for the
same reason, it is called Funis arborum, but Campanella is given to it, because
it has a flower like a little Bell. There is one chief sort hereof called of
some Campana Lax^ra, or Campana carule^ of others Convolvulus, Caeruleus Major,
five Indicus, and Fl^s Noctis, because its chiefest beauty is in the Evening,
Night, and Morning: of some, Nil Av^eeunae, another is called in Greek (...)
Helxine Cissampelos ab (...) trahere vel harere and (...) quasi Vit^alis. five
Hedera Viti^ea, because this Helxine should be known from Pellitory called also
Helxine: this most commonly growing in Vineyards, creeping up upon the Vines
with a Leaf like lvy; it is called also Malacocissos, quasi mollis hedera,
Orobanche, Ervania, Convolvulus niger, etc: In English, Bindweed, With-wind,
and of some, Divelsgut.

The Kinds.
To this smooth kind of Bindweed which is here to be understood (for of the
Prickly kind we shall treat elsewhere), there may be referred these fifteen
sorts. 1. The greater blew Bind-weed or Bell-flower. 2. The greater purple
Bindweed with cornered Leaves. 3. The American Bind-weed. 4. The Arabian o^
Egyptian Bind-weed. 5. The blew Bell flower of Virginia. 6. Mallow leased
Bind-weed. 7. The common small Bind-weed. 8. Lavander leafed Bind-weed. 9.
Small purple Bind-weed. 10. The African Bind-weed. 11. The least African
Bind-weed. 12. The blew Spanish Bindweed. 13. Black Bindweed. 14. Branched
black Bind-weed of Candy. 15. Small black Bindweed.

The Form.
The greater blew Bind-weed or Bell flower, though but a Weed as the name
imports, is taken into Gardens for the goodlynesse thereof, where it rises
with many long and winding branches, climbing and winding it self contrary to
the course of the Sun upon any thing of substance that is near it. It has many
great fair round Leaves, pointed at the end, somewhat like a Violet Leaf in
shape, but much greater, of a sad green color: the flowers which come forth,
at the joints of the branches where the Leaves are ^et, on pretty long
footstalkes two or three together, are at first long, somewhat like a finger,
and of a pa^e whitish blew color, but afterward they become broad like Bells,
of a deep a ^ure tending to purple, very g^orio^s to behold; the flowers being
past, the stalks whereon they stood bend downwards, sending fo^th husks with
three or four black seeds a piece of the bigness of a Tare, or thereabouts;
the roots are s^^ingy, and perish every where, at the first approach of Winter.

The Places and Times.
Though the two first came to us out of Italy, yet they are conceived to be
natural only to the East Indies: The name of the third te^^ifieth whence it
came, and so does those of the fourth, fifth, tenth, eleaventh, twelveth, and
fourteenth; the sixth is found in many places of Spain, the seventh, and
ninth in sundry Countries of this Land, as the eighth likewise is about Dunmow
in Essex; the thirteenth is that which is too common in every field and garden,
and the last grows about Drayton near Portsmouth. They flower toward the
latter end of Summer, especially the greater sorts, and therefore their seed is
seldom perfected with us.

The Temperature.
The Bind-weeds are most of them hot and dry in the first or second degree.

The Signature and Virtues.
The most renowned Crollius, in his Book of Signatures records, that
Bind-weed or With-wind growing in the Corn by its turning and winding does
very much resemble the turnings and windings of the Guts, and that therefore
the d^coction thereof made in White Wine is a very singular remedy for those
that are afflicted with the Colic, purging and voiding sorth raw thick
Phlegmatic and Melancholic humors, and killing and driving sorth both flat
and long Worms out of the Belly, yet not without some trouble to the Stomach,
which sometimes causes Vomitings. The Mallow Leafed Bind-weed, as Clusius
says, is used in Portugal, as an herb of singular effect to heal all sores or
wounds. The Leaves of the black Bind-weed called Helxine Cissampelos stamped
and streined, and the juice drunken, does also loosen and open the belly
exceedingly, and so do the Leaves and Herb in Powder, if it be drunk in Wine or
any other Liquor. The Leaves being bruised and laid to hard tumors, and Knots
in the Flesh dissolveth and consumes them, as Galen says. It is said
likewise, that if those places which you would have to be void of Hair be
anointed with the juice hereof, presently after the Hair is plucked up by the
Roots, it will not suffer it to grow there any more. Some of the greater
sorts, as also that with Leaves, like Lavander where they naturally grow are
rather a Plague then a pleasure to whatsoever grows with it in the feildes,
yet the beauty of their flowers has caused them to be received into Gardens,
where they are very delightful to the Eyes of those, which love to feast
themselves even with the varieties of those things, which the Vulgar call
Weeds, and indeed there is a great deal of prettynesse in every one of them,
if they be narrowly observed, yet diverse of them are so pernicious to Corn,
and other things of greater use and value by their strangling qualities, that
the names above mentioned have not been given them without some reason.

CHAP. CCXLVIII. Of Centory.
The Names.
IT is divided into two kinds, a greater and a lesser which might be treated of
in two distinct Chapters; yet for their names sakes, and somewhat for their
qualities I shall join them in one, though of different forms. The greater is
called in Greek (...) Centaurium magnum which is generally affirmed to have
received its name from Chiron the Centaure, who healed himself herewith after
that he had wounded his foot by the fall of one of Hercules's Arrows out of
his hand when he received. Hercu^es as ^i^ ^ue^, and therefore of some was
^a^ed (...). It has formerly though falsely been called Rha Pont cum and u^^^
instead thereof, that being a kind of Ruba^be. The lesser is ca^^ed (...) in
Greek Centaurium parvum and minus in Latin, and Centaurea as also ^^r^s for
the extraordinary bitterness thereof, and Febr^fuga of cu^ing Fea^^ ^^^gh that
name properly belong to another Plant cal^ed Feave^ew; of ^^^e also Multirad^x
but why I know not. Dioscorides says, it was cal^ed Lim^^n, and Pliny
Libad^o^, because it ^oveth to grow in moi^^ places, yet in our Country it
loves to grow in dry places also. It is called in English, Small Century and
the lesser Centory.

The Kinds.
Of these two kinds above named there be Eleaven sorts, four of the greater
and seven o^ the lesser. 1. The Common Great Centory. 2. The Pyrenean great
Centory. 3. The great Centory of Portugal. 4. The great yellow Centory. 5. The
red ordinary small Centory. 6. White flowered Centory. 7. Small spiked Centory.
8. Small yellow Centory. 9. Small yellow thorough leased branched Centory. 10.
Small yellow unbranched Centory. 11. The least yellow Centory.

The Form.
Though I have set the greatest Centory foremost for his greatness sake, yet
the lesser being tha^ at whose Virtues I cheifely a^^e, take the description
thereof as follows. The red ordinary small Centory grows most commonly but
with ^^^ round, and somewhat cre^^ed stalk, not above half a foot high at
most, that ever I saw, branching forth at the top into many sprigs, and some
also from the joints of the stalks below: At the extremities of the branches
there stand, as it we^e in an Umbell or tu^t diverse small flowers of a pale red
color tending to a Ca^^tion, consisting of six but usually of five small
Leaves, somewhat like unto those of St. John's Wort, which in the day time, when
the Sun shines, open themselves, and toward the evening shut themselves
again; after which comes the seed in little short Husks in for ^e like unto
Wheat Corns, but much lesser. The Leaves are small and somewhat round like unto
those of St. John's Wort but lesser. The root is small and hard.

The Places and Time.
The first and third grow upon the Alps and Mount Baldus; the name of the
second will discover its place; the fourth is a natural of Mount Baldus also:
the ^^ft is found almost every where in fields, pastures, and woods, as in a
field by Oxford highway from Baubury not far from Beechen Tree, and in a
place called New-pa^^ure in the Common fields of Adderbury East, not far from
the high way side and in some of Walton grounds, which are on the other side
the River Charwell, and other places that I could name: the sixth is not so
frequent, the seventh about Mom^e^^er, and near unto Pado^ upon the Euganean
Hills; the eighth in a field next Sr. Francis Carew's house in Kent, at
Beddington near Croyd^^, and in many other places, where the other sorts are
sometimes found, and removed into the Gardens of the curious, where some of the
greater sorts may be also seen: They do all flower about July, and give their
seed in August, only the Portugal kind is seldom brought to flower in our
Country much less to seed.

The Temperature.
The great Centory is hot and dry in the third degree. The lesser is hot and
dry in the second degree, and very bitter.

The Virtues and Signature.
Both the Centories are commended for gripings in the Belly yet because the
lesser it most effectual to that purpose, I shall set down the Virtues
thereof. The decoction thereof being made in Wine. Ale, or posset drink, is
very available in several diseases of the Belly, as the Chollick, Costivenes,
Worms, and the like, purging Phlegm and Choler and provoking Sweat. It is
given with very good success to those that are perplexed with Agues, for it
opens the stoppings of the Liver, Gall, and Spleen helping the Jaundise,
which the yellow sort does by Signature, for that especially purges Choler as
the white does Phlegm and Water; and the Red cleanses the Blood makes thin
both it and the humors, by the cleansing and bitter qualities. It is useful in
the Sciatica, helps those that have the Dropsy, and the green sickness, for
it brings down the Courses of women. It helps also to avoid the Dead Birth,
and helps the pains of the Mother, and is very effectual in all pains of
the Joints as the Gout, Cramp, or Convulsions. Being boiled in White Wine or
Ale with Liquorice and strained and drunk Morning and Evening it opens the
Obstructions of the Chest and Lungs, and a little Sugar Candy added it is a
good Remedy against Hoarsnesse and the Ptisick. The decoction of the tops of
the Stalks with the Leaves and flowers which are most in use, being taken
inwardly, and the boiled Herb that is taken forth applied ovtwardly, helps
both the pains of the sides, and hardness of the Spleen. A dram of the
powder thereof taken in Wine is a wonderful good help against the bitting and
poison of any Venomous Creatures. Being boiled in Water and drunk, it provokes
Appetite, cleanses the Stomach and Breast purges the Back and Reins, and
heals whatsoever is amiss in them. The juice of the Herb mixed with a little
Honey is good to clear the E^^s (...) Dimnesse, mists, or Clouds, that hinder
the sight, and is singular good ^or green or fresh wounds, and also for old
Ulcers and Sores, to close up the one, and to cleanse the other, and perfectly
cure them both, although they be fistulous and hollow, the green Herb
especially being bruised and laid to. The decoction thereof being dropped into
the Ears, cleanses them from worms, cleanses ^he foul Ulcers, and
spreading Scabs of the Head, and takes away Freckles, Spots, and Marks in the
skin, being washed therewith. The greater Centory, is appropriated especially
to Wounds, because it helps those that spit blood, or bleed much at the
Mouth, two drams at the Root (in powder) taken in Wine or Water. Neither is the
Root but the whole Plant very available also in all sorts of wounds and Ulcers
to dry, sodder, cleanse and heal them, and should be a principal Ingredient
in all Wound drinks and Injections. Yet it is effectual in many other Cases
also, for the Roots thereof being steeped in wine and drunk or the powder
thereof given in wine is good for such as have the Dropsy or Jaundise, or are
troubled with the stoppings of the Liver. It is also used for Ruptures,
Crampes, and Pleurisies and for an old Cough, shortness of breath and other
diseases of the Lungs, Gripings in the Belly, and pains of the Mother. Being
scraped and put up as a Pessary it procures women's Courses, and causes the
Dead Birth to be avoided; the juice thereof used after the same manner works
the like Effects. It helps the Strangury and pissing by drops, as also the
Stone, if the decoction or Powder thereof be taken and the juice injected; The
decoction or juice of the Root or a dram of the powder thereof drunk, and the
wound washed therewith, takes away the pain and danger of the bitings or
Stingings of Venomous Creatures. It helps to sharpen the Eye sight, if it be
steeped in Water, and dropped into them.

CHAP. CCXLVIII. Of Lovage.
The Names.
IT has no Greek Name that I can meet with. It is called in Latin Levisticum
which is the proper and only Latin Name thereof, Ligusticum being a far
different plant, although some being deceived with the vicinity of the name
have taken them to be both one.

The Kinds.
As the Names of Lovage are but few, so the sorts are not many; for of it I
find but two, 1. Ordinary Lovage, 2. The Lovage of Germany.

The Form.
Ordinary Lovage has many long and great stalks of large winged Leaves,
divided into many parts like Smallage, but much larger, of a sad green color,
smooth and shining, every Leaf being cut about the edges, and broader forward
then toward the Stalk: The Stalks that arise from thence are diverse, and of
different proportions, according to the goodness or badness of the Soil
wherein they grow, as also to their time of continuance: for though in a fat
soil where it has grown long, they attain unto the height of five or six
foot, yet if the ground be barren, or the herb but newly set, they seldom
exceed three or four, answerable whereunto is the bigness of them, being green
and hollow, set with lesser leaves then those that grow below: toward the tops
of these, come forth other smaller branches, bearing at their tops large Umbels
of yellow Flowers, which turn into flat brounish seed, somewhat like the seed
of Angelica. The root grows large both in length and thickness, being of a
brownish color without side, and white within. The whole Plant smells
strong, and in taste is both hot, sharp and biting.

The Places and Time.
Both the sorts are Inhabitants in the Gardens of those that love Physical
herbs especially, and sometimes in the Garden of those that understand it not:
the first being common to diverse Countries, the second proper to Germany, yet
neither of them are found wild in any part of Europe, if they be any where
else. The root in continuance of time spreads much, for it endures long and
sends forth every year new stalks, which hold the Flowers in the end of
July, and the seed in August.

The Temperature.
Lovage is hot and dry in the third degree, and is of thin parts also.

The Virtues.
Half a dram of the dried Root of Lovage in powder, taken in Wine, does
wonderfully warm a cold Stomach, helping digestion, and consuming all
superfluous moisture and raw humors therein, as also in the Guts, and
therefore it eases all inward gripings and pains, both of the Stomach and
Belly, as also by dissolving wind and expelling it effectually: which is an
utter enemy to them both; and it is commended for resisting poison and
infection, that may assault either of them, or any other part. The said Root
boiled in Wine or Barly-water, cleanses the Lungs, opens the passages of the
Urine, provokes Women's Courses mightily, and heals inward Wounds; Being
bruised in a Mortar before it be dried, and steeped for twelve hours in fair
Water, then strained, and two or three spoonfuls drunk first and last, morning
and evening, asswageth any drought or great desire to drink, when no ordinary
liquor will do it: and this it performs by a specific property, for the Root
is well known to be hot. To drink the Decoction of the herb for any sort of
Ague, and to help the cold pains and torments of the Body and Bowels, coming
of cold, was not long since, a known and much practiced Remedy, but the present
Age, which forgets every thing that should do it goood, knows none such, as
far as I can under-stand. The seeds drunk in White Wind fasting, either in
powder, or boiled therein and strained, does purge both upwards and downwards,
and being used in Glisters, it eases the Gout in the feet. Being steeped a
night in Wine, or else boiled therein and drunk, it provokes the Terms, and
expels the Dead-child, and likewise opens the stoppings of the Spleen; but
because the seeds be very strong, the like weight of Annise and Fennel may be
mixed with them to qualify them. And to be brief, the seeds are as effectual
to all purposes as any other part of it, and works more powerfully in Women's
diseases. The distilled water of the herb, helps the Quinsey in the Throat,
if the Mouth and Throat be gargled and washed therewith, and helps the
Pleurisy being drunk three or four times; Being dropped into the Eyes it takes
away the redness and dimnesse of them; It likewise takes away the spots or
freckles of the Face. The Leaves bruised and fried with a little Hogs-lard, and
laid to any botch or boil, will quickly break it; and being boiled in water and
bathed therein, it provokes Urine, expels the Stone, and heals the inward
parts; Being applied three or four times with Rue and Honey, to the Knees of
those that are troubled with pain in them, it is a good expedient for the
removing thereof; The people of Germany and of this, and other Countries also
in former times used both the Root in Powder, and the seed to season their
Meats and Brothes, and found them as effectual to comfort and warm the
Stomach: but now a days, whatsoever is not far fetched will hardly please:
The green roots pickled with salt and vinegar are a good sauce for those that
are troubled with wind: but if they be preserved with sugar, they are more
acceptable to the Palate.

CHAP. CCXLIX. Of Tansey.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Athanasia, peradventure from (...), signifying
sine morte, or non moriens, that is, immortal: because the yellow Flowers
gathered in due time, will continue very lively a long while: It is also called
Athanasia in Latin and Tanacetum, corruptly taken, as Fuschius imagines, for
Tagetes, or Apuleius his Arthemisia Tragantes: yet I conceive it more probable
to come, though not without some corruption, from Athan^sia, it being called in
French Tanaisie and Athanasie, from whence our English word ^ansey came without
doubt.

The Kinds.
Of Tansey there be these seven sorts. 1 Ordinary Tansey. 2 Double English
Tansey, or curled Tansey. 3 Party-colored Tansey. 4 Woolly Tansey. 5 Small
white Tansey. 6 Mountain Tansey. 7 Unsavory Tansey.

The Form.
Though ordinary and curled Tansey be two sorts, yet one description may serve
them both, for either of them have many hard green Leaves, or rather wings of
Leaves, many small ones, being set one against another, all along a middle rib
or stalk, and snipt about the edges, in one sort the Leaves stand closer and
thicker, and somewhat crumpled, which has caused it to be called double, or
curled Tansey, and in the other, more thinner and straglingly set, like as
those of the wild Tansey are. It rises up with many hard stalks, bearing at
the tops of them certain clustered tufts of gold, yellow flowers like Buttnos,
as Camomile, Feaverfew, and Maudlin do, which being gathered in their prime
will not quickly wither: the seed is small and as it were chaffy: the Root
creeps under ground and shoots up again in diverse places; The whole herb is
bitter in taste, and of a strong smell, yet very comfortable to the Senses.

The Places and Time.
All the sorts abovementioned are cherished in Gardens, either for their
Virtues or their rarity, howbeit many of them are not without their natural
places of growing; for the first grows by the hedges and ditches sides, and
in the borders of fields in diverse Countries beyond the Sea: The fourth grows
about Mompelier and other places: The fifth grows in diverse places both of
Germany and Italy: The sixth upon the Alps amongst the Switzers: The last also
grows in diverse Countries beyond the Seas: The Root endures long, sending
forth its green Leaves in March and April, and its Flowers in June and July,
and sometimes later.

The Temperature.
Tansey is said to be hot in the second degree, and dry in the third: That
without smell is hot, and dry, but in a lesser degree then the former.

The Virtues.
The Decoction of the ordinary Garden Tansey, or the juice thereof drunk in
Wine, or Beer, is very profitable to dissolve and expel Wind in the Stomach,
Belly, or Bowels, and to kill and expel the W^rmes, and so does the seed,
which is a singular and approved Medicine for the same, in what sort soever it
be taken; and therefore it is that Tanseys were so frequent not long since
about Easter, being so called from this Herb Tansey; though I think the Stomach
of those that eat them late, are so squeamish, that they put little or none of
it into them, having altogether forgotten the reason of their Original, which
was to purge away from the Stomach and Guts the Phlegm engendered by eating of
Fish in the Lent Season (when Lent was kept stricter then now it is) whereof
Worms are soon bred in them that are thereunto disposed, besides other humors
which the moist and cold constitution of Winter most usually infects the body
of Man with; and this I say is the reason why Tanseys were, and should be now
more used in the Spring then at any other time of the year, though many
understand it not, and some simple people take it for a matter of superstition
so to do. The Decoction before mentioned is a singular remedy for all the
griefs that come by stopping of the Urine, helps the Strangury, and those
that have weak Reins and Kidneys, procures Women's Courses, and expels the
windiness of the Matrix: If it be bruised and often smelled unto, as also
applied to the lower part of the Belly, it is very profitable for such Women as
are apt to miscarry in Childbearing, to cause them to go out their full time.
It is also used against the Stone in the Reins with good success, especially
if it be given to Men. Being boiled in Sallet Oil after it has been stamped,
it is very good against the pain and shrinking of the Sinews by the Cramp or
other distemper, if applied to the part affected. It is said also, that the
Root preserved with Sugar is profitable for them that have the Gout, if they
take thereof fasting for many days together. It is one of the six things that
are reckoned up in Schola Salerni to be good for the Palsy, and not without
reason; for it avoideth phlegm and dries the Sinews, by whose resolution the
Palsy is caused.

CHAP. CCL. Of Lavender-Cotten:
The Names.
IT is doubted whether the Greeks had any knowledge of this Plant, yet some
have called it (...), as if they had, and their reason is, because the Leaves
thereof are somewhat like to the Leaves of the Cypress Tree. It is also called
Chamaecyparissus in Latin, but diverse of the most judicious of the Latin
Writers take it as Matthiolus does, to be the true Abrotanum faemina of
Dioscorides and Sancolina; we call it generally in English Lavender-Cotten.

The Kinds.
There are nine sorts hereof to be reckoned up. 1 Ordinary Lavender-cotton. 2
Great Lavender Cotton. 3 French Lavender Cotton. 4 Fine Lavender Cotton. 5
Rosemary Leafed Lavender Cotton. 6 Small Rosemary Leafed Lavender Cotton. 7
Small green Lavender Cotton. 8 Creeping Lavender Cotton. 9 Strange Lavender
Cotton.

The Form.
The ordinary Lavender Cotton has many woody, but brittle branches, hoary, or
of a whitish color, whereon are set many Leaves, which are little, long, and
apiece, dented or notched upon every edge, and whitish also; at the tops
of the branches stand naked Stalks, bearing on every one of them a yellow head
or Flower like unto Tansey, or Maudeline, but greater then either of them, of a
gold yellow color, abiding so a along time upon the Stalks, and being kept
dry likewise, after which comes small dark colored seed; the Root is woody,
and spreads abroad with many hard fibers. The whole Plant is very comely to
behold, especially if it be artificially ordered, of a strong sweet scent, but
no way displeasing, unless it be in the taste, which is bitter.

The Places and Time.
Though none of the forementioned Plants grow naturally with us, yet many of
them are to be found in the Gardens of those that are curious Conservers of
rare Plants; howbeit, it will not be amiss to tell you, that the first grows
of its own accord in Germany. The second in diverse places of Narbone in
France. The fourth, fifth, and sixth about Salamanca in Spain. The last is
supposed to come from Egypt, the places of the rest are not yet known. They do
all or most of them flower in July and August.

The Temperature.
The seed of Lavender Cotton, and so likewise the herb is hot and dry in the
third Degree.

The Virtues.
Every Woman also can tell, that Lavender Cotton stamped and strained with
Milk, and taken fasting after it has been a little warmed by the fire, is an
excellent expedient to kill and expel Worms out of the Stomachs and Bellies,
both of children and elder persons also, but the seed is accounted of greatest
force; notwithstanding when that cannot be had, the herb may be used as
aforesaid. Matthiolus says, that half a dram of Lavender Cotton, taken in a
little of the distilled Water of Fetherfew, every morning fasting for ten days
together at the least, is a very profitable Medicine for Women that are
troubled with the Whites, to stay them. The Leaves drunk with Wine seven days,
helps the yellow Jaundise, the obstructions of the Liver and Kidneys, and is
good against the Sciatica. It is a good medicine against the poisons of all
Serpents and venomous Beasts, being taken in the manner aforesaid, and being
only strewed or burnt in such places, as are frequented with Vermin, it
drives them away with the smell thereof; and therefore it is not altogether
inconvenient to set it in Flower-pots amongst other things. Clusius says that
in Spain about Salamanca they use the decoction of the Spanish kinds, to take
away the Itch and Scabs in whomsoever have them, and he advises that Caution
be used in giving it; yet I suppose it is rather to be bathed with, then taken
inwardly. But it is used more frequently with us, to be put amongst other hot
Herbs, either in Bathes, Ointments, or other Medicines, to help those that are
bursten, or troubled with Cramps or Convulsions of Sinews, to provoke Urine,
and bring down women's courses, and generally it works the same effects, and
may be applied to all the diseases that Southernwood is appropriated; and
therefore I shall refer you to it, to be further informed concerning its
Virtues, lest I justly seem to be Tautologicall. But there is an use, wherein
this exceeds that of Southernwood, and that is to make Knots, Trailes, and
other Compartiments in the Gardens of Noble Personages; for besides its gentle
aspect, it abides green all the Winter, and will with cutting, be kept in as
even proportion, as any other herb may be, yet it must be removed every third
year, that is, taken up and set again, otherwise it will grow stubbed and dry.

CHAP. CCLI. Of Carrots and Parsneps.
The Names.
IT will not be amiss to join these two sorts in one Chapter, as I suppose:
because they are so agreeable in their Names, Natures and Virtues. The first is
called in Greek (...), and so may the second; for it is as probable that the
derivation thereof comes from (...) the stalk of Briony, the Roots of each
growing after the same manner, as that it should come from (...) the Grape, to
whose purplish color, when it is almost ripe, one only sort hereof is
resembled; and therefore Dodonaeus, and Fuscbius say, that some in their time
called them both Stapbylinus. And so in Latin, the word Pastinaca, which
comes a Pascend^, quia corpus alat, does agree with the one, as well as the
other; for they are both nourishing, yet differ in this, because the Root of
one is reddish, and the other is white; the one has narrow Leaves, and the
other broad; and therefore they are commonly divided into tenui folia and
latifolia. Of that with narrow Leaves, there is a wild sort called (...) in
Greek, and Daucus, Daucum and Daucium in Latin, and Dauke in English, to
distinguish it from another sort of wild Carrots, which is properly so called,
of all which I shall say somewhat in this Chapter.

The Kinds.
Though there be many sorts of Carrots, and more of Dauke, yet I shall only
mention five sorts of the first, one of the second, and two of the Parsnep,
which are eight in all. 1 Common yellow Carrots. 2 Wild Carrots. 3 Wild Carrots
of Naples. 4 Prickly wild Carrots of Naples. 5 Wild Carrots with hairy Stalks.
6 The true Dauke of Candy. 7 Garden Parsnep. 8 Wild Parsnep.

The Form.
The wild Carrot (which is of more use in Physic, though less known then the
Common sort) grows in a manner like that of the Garden, but that the Leaves
are whiter and rougher, as the Stalks likewise are, which bear large spoky
tufts of white flowers, with a deep purple spot in the middle, which are
contracted together, when the seed begins to grow ripe, so that the middle
part being hollow and low, and the outward stalks rising high, makes the whole
Umbel to show like a birds nest. The Root is small, long, and hard, being also
somewhat sharp and strong, and therefore unfit for Meat.

The Places and Time.
The first is that which is sown by the Gardiners in every Country, in Gardens
or Fields, chosen out for the purpose, whose soil must be loose, and well
manured, if not new broken up. The second grows in most places of this Land,
as well in Pastures, as by sides of fields, and untilled places. The third and
fourth in Naples. The fifth in Germany. The sixth in Candy. The seventh is
nursed up in Gardens. The last grows in the Marshes by Rochester. The first
are sown in April, or sooner, and will be ready for the pot about July or
August, never seeding the first year if they be good, but the secon^: All the
rest do flower and seed about the end of Summer, except the Gar^^ Parsnep,
whose seed is ripe about the beginning of August, the second year after its
sowing, for if they seed the first year, they are good for nothing, and are
called Mad Neepes by the Country people.

The Temperature.
The Roots of Carrots and Parsneps are temperatly hot and somewhat moist, but
the seeds are hot and dry almost in the third degree.

The Virtues.
The seed of every one of the before mentioned sorts, are very carminative,
that is, powerful to expel wind, and therefore they are very effectual to
ease the torments and gripings of the Belly, and to cure the Colic, but
especially that of the true Dauke of Candy, next the wild Carrots; and if
neither of them can be gotten, the seeds of either of the other Carden sorts
may be used in steed thereof, either in Powder or in Decoction. The seed of the
true D^^cus is likewise very useful to help the Strangury, to provoke Urine
and Women's courses, to expel the Dead birth, and to help the strangling of the
Mother, and remove those stitches that afflict the sides. Both it and the Roots
powdered, and drunk in Wine, are very profitable for those that have received
any grief or hurt by any venomous Beast whatsoever, as also to resist any other
venom or poison, and the Pestilence: The same also put into Pultises does ease
tumors and swellings in any part, and being mixed with honey, it helps old
and inveterate Coughes. The seed of the wild Carrot is commended for all the
purposes aforesaid, as also for helping to break and expel the Stone in the
Kidneys, to cure the Dropsey, and those whose Bellies are swollen with Wind; it
provokes venery and helps conception. The Roots of the manured Parsneps and
Carrots are of a sweet pleasant taste, by which they stir up the appetite, and
therefore the Carrots are usually eaten with Beef, as well without, as with
butter all the time of the Autumn; but the Parsneps being dryer, are more
commonly buttered, and serve as a dish by themselves upon Wednesdayes and
Fridayes, when hot meat is not so familiarly provided, and so they are good for
a Consumption, and provoke Venery; yet if there be no other provocation
thereunto, no body shall need to fear the eating of them, if so be they do it
with moderation; for by the immoderate and too often use of them, their
nourishment will become vicious, because they are somewhat windy, whence you
may observe that the Roots and Seeds of many things are not endued with the
same qualities.

CHAP CCLII. Of Spignell.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and (...), perhaps from the smallness of the
Leaves, in Latin also Meum, and Meum Athamanticum, either from Athamantes the
son of Aeolus, supposed to be the first discoverer, or from the Hill Athamantes
in Thessaly, where the best was formerly thought to grow; for it was sometimes
usual with the ancient Writers to name the places of Plants, not because they
grew in no other, or were a distinct sort by themselves, but because they were
better then the common sort; and for this reason, and for no other, Pli^y calls
it also Meum Macedonicum, and Hispanicum: It is called in English Spignell or
Spicknell, of some Mewe, or Baldmony, or Bearewort.

The Kinds.
To this kind these five sorts may not unfi^ly be referred. 1 Ordinary
Spignell. 2 Small Spignell. 3 The Preservative Spignell of Candy. 4 Italian
Bastard Spignell. 5 Mountain Spignell of Germany.

The Form.
The ordinary Spignell, rises up with sundry long stalks of Leaves exceeding
finely, cut like unto hairs, smaller then those of Dill, set thick on both
sides the stalk, of a light or yellow green color, and of a good sent: from
amongst which, rise up round stiff Stalks with joints, having a few Leaves at
them, at the tops whereof grows an Umbell of pure white flowers, at the edges
whereof sometimes will be seen a show of reddish or blush color, especially
before they be full blown, which give place unto little roundish seed which are
of a brownish color; the Roots are thick and long in respect of the Leaves
growing out from one head, which is hairy at the top, of a blackish brown
color on the outside, and white within.

The Places and Time.
The first grows naturally in Westmerland, Yorkshire, and other Northern
Counties, and has been brought from thence into our Southern Physic Gardens;
the second in Savoy, the third in Candy, the fourth in Italy, the last in
Austria, and as some have affirmed at the bottom of St. Vincents rock by
Bristoll over against the hot Well, where it cannot be seen but when the Tide
is down. They flower in June and July, and yield their seed in August.

The Temperature.
The Roots of Spignell are hot in the third degree, and dry in the second.

The Virtues.
The dry Roots of Spignell being made into powder, mixed with Honey, and taken
after the manner of an Electuary or licking Medicine, not only consumes all
windiness in the Stomach, but descends into the Guts, and eases the griping
pains of the B^lly: It is excellent also against all Catarrhes, Rhewms and
Aches of the Joints, as also any phlegmatic or watery humor, falling upon the
Lu^ges: Being boiled in wine or water, and drunk, it mightily opens the
stoppings of the Kidneys and Bladder, provokes Urine and bodily lust, eases
and helps the Strangury, and consumes all windynesse and belchings of the
Stomach, yea it is so effectual for the Strangury, that being laid
Plaisterwise up the Bellyes of those Children that have it by inheritance, it
causes them to make water very freely. I^ is also very available to bring down
Women's Courses, and to help the griefs of the Mother, but should too great a
quantity thereof be taken, it would cause the head to ache, by the Vapors that
it sends thereunto, and therefore the safest way for the last purposes would
be to sit over the decoction thereof: The said Roots which are the only parts
of the Plant in use, though the seed be very aromaticall, are accounted very
effectual against the sting or biting of any venomous Creature, and therefore
it is a maine Ingredient in Mithridate, and Venice Treacle, which are especial
Antidotes, both for that and many other of the purposes before mentioned.

CHAP. CCLIII. Of Bishops-weed.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and (...), as is supposed from the smalnesse of
the seed, which in some sort imitateth Sand, and in Latin Ammi and Ammium, yet
the Shops call it Ammios or Ameos, in the Genitive case, diverse call it Cuminum
Aethi^picum, because the seed is somewhat like to that of Cummin, and in that
it grows frequently in Aethiopia: It is called also Cumi^um Regium, or Cummin
Royal for its excellent properties, in English Ameos or Ammi, of some Herb
William, Bull-wort and Bishops-weed.

The Kinds.
Though the true Ammi or Bishops-weed is not extant in any part of Europe, yet
therebe three sorts that learned men have referred to the same kind for some
affinity betwixt them. 1 Common Bishops-weed. 2 Bishops-weed of Candy. 3 Small
Bishops-weed.

The Form.
Common Bishops-weed rises up with a round straight stalk three or four foot
high, beset with diverse small, long and somewhat broad Leaves, cut in diverse
places, and dented about the edges, growing on both sides of a long foot stalk
one against another, of a fresh green color, somewhat like unto Skirret Leaves,
having sundry branches on them: at the tops whereof come forth small Umbels of
white flowers which turn into small, round and brown seed, a little bigger then
Parsley-seed, and not so big as Anni-seed, of a quick hot scent and tall; the
Root is white and fibrous, perishing every year after it has given its seed,
from whence it rises up again the next year, if it be suffered to fall to the
ground.

The Places and Time.
The first grows naturally in the next field beyond Green Hithe, in the way
as you go to Gravesend by the hedge fide, and in diverse other places both of
England and Wales: the second was sent from Candy, yet it grows also upon the
Mountain Garganus in Italy, according to Matthiolus: the last was brought from
Alexandria in Egyt, but was first brought thither out of Arabia; All which
being nursed up in some of our Physic Gardens do flower and seed reasonable
well, if the year prove kindly, and not otherwise. Their time of flowring is in
June and July, and that of seeding is about the latter end of August.

The Temperature.
The seeds of Bishops-weed, which are chiefly in use, are hot and dry in the
later end of the third degree, being of thin parts, somewhat bitter in taste,
and sharp withal.

The Virtues.
The seed of Bishops-weed is another of the four lesser hot seeds, evermore
commended for breaking Wind, and therefore it cannot but be of wonderful
efficacy to ease the Colic, and other torments and pains in the bowels,
seasing upon Men, either when they make water or go to stool, being taken in
Wine, and so it provokes Urine, and Women's Courses, and is good against the
bitings of Serpents: It is used with good success in those Medicines that are
made of Cantharides to qualify the poisonous and corroding operation of those
flies upon the Vrit^ry part, which they chiefly affect, so that they may be
received into the Body without any danger. Being beaten very fine, and mingled
with honey, it dissolveth and scatters congealed blood, and takes away black
and blew marks, which come by stripes or falls, if it be applied to the
affected part in manner of a Plaster; And being drunk, or outwardly applied,
it abateth the high color of those, which by drinking, or any other
distemperature are disguised therewith: causing the redness of their Faces and
Noses to depart, and a more comely color to succeed it. It cleanses the
Matrix, whether it be given with Raifins after the same manner, as Wormseed is
given to children, or the fumes thereof, and Rossin mixed together, and
received thereinto. These are the virtues which Dioscorides ascribes to the
true Ammi, with every one of which the Bishops weed before described, is by
Dodonaeus said to be endued. The Egyptians do make much use of the seed of the
Egyptian, or Arabian kind to provoke Venery; for which purpose, it is said to
be very powerful.

CHAP. CCLIV. Of ENGLISH Worm-seed.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Myagrum, and (...), Melampyrum, as Dioscorides
says, and of some (...), Myagrium, but indeed these names belong rather to the
gold of pleasure, then to this, which is but referred to that, and more usually
called in Latin Camelina, sive Myagrum alterum amarum; The word Myagrum
signifies as much as Muscipulum, sive Muscarium, and i^ attributed to gold of
Pleasure, because the seed being oily, has such an emplastick, or clammy
quality therein, that it arresteth the Flies that settle thereon; but whether
our English Worm-seed has any such property, I do not affirm. Mel(...)iron
signifies black Wheat, because growing many times amongst wheat, the Ancients
thought the wheat had degenerated into it, but that there should be any such
Metamorphosis in Plants, is now clearly discovered to be an error. That which
is here called English Worm-seed, others call it Treacle wormseed.

The Kinds.
Gold of Pleasure, whereof English Worm-seed is said to be a sort, has six
others to be joined with it. 1 English Worm-seed. 2 Garden gold of Pleasure. 3
Wild gold of Pleasure. 4 Stinking gold of Pleasure. 5 The greater one grained
gold of Pleasure. 6 The lesser one grained Myagrum. 7 Round podded like Myagrum.

The Form.
English Worm-seed rises up with one or more upright stalks, about two foot
high, branching toward the top, and thick set with long and narrow green
Leaves, somewhat like unto those of the single Wall-flower, but smaller, and of
a whiter green color; at the tops of the stalks and branches, come forth very
small pale yellow flowers, consisting of four leaves a piece, somewhat like
unto those of the Wall-flower, but much smaller, even more then half: which
af^erwards give small long Cods, containing within them very pale colored
seed, of a very bitter taste; the Root is small and woody, perishing every year
after it has given its seed, which seed being suffered to shed, rises again
the next year without any more ado, and in a short time, will so overcome the
place of its abode, that it will not easily be destroyed.

The Places and Time.
The first grows naturally in diverse places of this Land, and is either
therefore called English Worm-seed, because it is proper to our Country; or
else, because our Country folks do make use of it for the Worms, to which end
they bring it into their Gardens, where being once sowed, they are for ever
furnished. The second is natural to some places of Italy, yet in others, they
sow it in their Gardens for pleasure, as we do, and in their fields also, for
the profit that is made of the seed, and the oil that is pressed therefrom. The
third is common in Germany, in all their flax grounds almost. The fourth
grows in the sandy grounds about Basil. The fifth by Padoa, on the E^gonean
Hills. The two last by Mompelier. They all flower in the summer Months, and
their seed is ripe about August.

The Temperature.
English Worm-seed, as is conceived, is hot and dry in the later end of the
third degree.

The Virtues.
Though some refuse our English Worm-seed, and prefer that which is brought out
of the Eastern Countries, because it is not altogether so bitter and unpleasant
as ours is, yet doubtless it is as effectual, if not more, to kill the Worms
in Children, yea, and in elder persons also; the seed being a little bruised
and given in drink, or any other way, and this is the chief, if not the only
use that it is put to. The Oil of the seed of Myagrum, or Gold of Pleasure
serves, as Dioscorides says, to make smooth the skin that is chapt, or rugged
in any part of the Body; and as Pliny, and others say, to cure the Ulcers of
the mouth, if it be therewith anointed; but the more vulgar use of it in
Germany, and other places where it is very plentiful, is to serve the poor
for their Tables; and the richer sort for their Lamps; as also to make soap,
being compounded with a certainlye, made of ashes. The said oil is very like
unto the true oil of Sesamum, being ^o^ and causing thirst, if it be drunk, as
the other does, and therefore may be used for the same ends and purposes. The
wild gold of Pleasure, is in quality somewhat like unto the former, but
bitterer, yea so bitter, whilst it is green, that no Creature will taste
thereof; yet being ripe and dry, it becomes so acceptable to small birds, as
Linnets, Finches, and the like to seed upon, that nothing can be more. The
other sorts are not known to be used to any purpose.

CHAP CCLV. Of Leekes.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Prasum, in Latin Porrum, which is of the
Masculine Gender in the plural Number, according to that old verse,

Dat rastrum rastros, porrumque facit tibi porros.

It is sometimes found to be of the Masculine Gender, in the singular number
also, but not often.

The Kinds.
There be diverse sorts of Leeks, four whereof I shall here set down. 1 The
common Leek, both set and unset. 2 The Vine Leek. 3 The Leek with a cloven. 4
Chives, Cives, or wild Leeks.

The Form.
The common Leek comes up like unto an Onyon, but that the Onyon brings up
his seed with it green, hollow like Leaves, flattish on the one side, and with
a ridge or crest on the backside, of a smell and taste, somewhat like unto the
Onyon also; if they be suffered to grow uncut, whether they be removed or not,
then, in the second or third year after their sowing, they will send forth a
round and slender stalk, even quite throughout, but not hollow or bigger in the
middle like the Onyon, bearing at the top, an head of purplish flowers, and
black seed after them, so very like unto Onyon-seed, that it is hard to
distinguish them. The Root is long and white, with abundance of white Fibers
hanging thereat.

The Places and Time.
The natural places of none of the aforesaid sorts are any where expressed, as
I can find, except the Vine Leek, which grows by it self in Vineyards, and
near unto Vines in hot Regions, whereof it took its name; but are planted in
Gardens in other Countries, as well as in England, especially in Egypt, where
they were formerly in great estimation. There Leeks may be sown in March and
April, and then they will be fit to be removed in September, the ground being
first prepared with Cow-d^ng, that they may grow the bigger. Cives being once
planted, do continue many years, suffering the extremest cold of the Winter.
The Vine Leek bears its green leaves in Winter, and withers away in the
Summer.

The Temperature.
Leeks are hot and dry in the third degree, and of very subtle parts,
especially their juice.

The Virtues.
Though Leeks eaten raw, do yield very bad nourishment; hurt the eyes,
engender black melancholy blood, and are therefore most hurtful for those
that are inclined thereunto, as also for those that are Choleric, because it
increases that humor also, cause terrible dreams, hurt the Sinews through
their sharpness, as also the teeth and gums, yet after they are boiled, all
the evil qualities are taken away, so that they are profitable both for meat
and medicine; Pottage made with them are very wholesome, not only for those
that are oppressed with phlegm, but for those also that are afflicted with the
Chollick, or the Stone. But for the Chollick they be more effectual, being
used thus. Take unset Leeks, blades and all, chop them small, boil them in good
White Wind, with May Butter, or other fresh Butter, if that be not to be had,
until the Wi^e be in a manner wasted away, then lay them abroad between a
clean linen cloth plaisterwise, and so apply them to the Belly of the Patient,
as hot as he can endure it, which being cold apply another, and this do, if
need be, three or, four times together, and he shall assuredly be eased
thereby. And for the Stone take unset Leeks, in the Month of June, shred them
small, and distill them, sun the Water for a month or two, and drink morning
and evening a good draught, for this looseneth the Costive belly, helps the
pain of the Hips, purges the Kidneys and Bladder, provokes Urine, and
expels the Stone: For which purpose, some cut Leeks in small pieces, dry
them in an Oven, or against the Fire, and make them into powder, which they use
oftentimes in their drink. Besides the seeds are very effectual to kill Worms
in children, and so are the Leeks themselves, the blades being stamped with
vinegar, and applied to the stomach of the Patient, as he sits in his warm
bed; Or else stamp unset Leeks, Rosemary and Plantane, of each a like quantity,
sees them in Malmsey, and apply them to the Navel. They are also held to free
the Chest and Lungs, from much corruption and rotten phlegm, that sticks
fast therein, and hard to be avoided; as also for them, that through hoarsnesse
have lost their Voice; if they be either takeen raw, or boiled with broth of
Barley, or some such other supping, fit and conducing thereunto, and being baked
under hot embers, they are an excellent remedy against a surfeit of Mushromes.
The green blades of leeks, being boiled and applied warm to the Hemeroids or
Piles, when they are swollen and painful, do cause an abundance of ease. The
juice drunk with honey, is profitable against the bitings of venomous beasts,
and likewise the leaves stamped and laid the^eupon. The same juice with
vinegar, Franckinsence, and milk or oil o^ R^ses dropped into the ears,
mitigateth their pain, and cease the noise in them. Two drams of the seed,
with the like weight of Myrtle berries, being drunk, stops the spitting of
blood, which has continued a long time. The same p^t into Wine not only
preserves it from sowring, but also corrects that which is sour and brings
it right again, as diverse report. It is also recorded, that the juice thereof
being drunk, is very available for the bleeding at the Nose, and at Mouth, but
care must be had, that it be not taken in too great a quantity, for then it is
rank poison, especially if it be taken alone, and therefore it is best to mix a
little of it with wine or beer, and so take it. If they be boiled, and eaten
often by such Women as are young, and yet have no children, it will make them
fruitful, and it increases lust in men. The juice of unset L^eks is very much
commended for green wounds. They have been formerly of freq^ent (...) for food
in this, as well as in other Countries, especially in Lent time; but no^
forsooth our dainty Age is grown so fine mouthed, that they are eaten only b^
those poorer sort, and scarcely by them, yet the Gentlemen of Wal^s have them
in great regard, both for their feeding, and to wear in their Ha^s upon S^.
David's day; yea, In Russia, Muscovy, and Turkey, the very Nobility do observe to
have them among their dishes at their Tables.

CHAP. CCLVI. Of Horse Reddish.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin (for it has no Greek name, that I can find) Raphanus
Rusticorum, and by Lobel, Raphanus Rusticanus, by Matthiolus, Raphanus Vulgaris
and Rusticanus, by Dodonaeus, Raphanus Magnus and Radicula magna, by
Brunfelsius, Armoracia aut Raphanus, by Tragus and Gesner, Raphanus major,
Cordus upon Dioscorides and Leonicerus calls it Thl^spi majus and magnum, and
Baubinus was partly of his mind, for he calls it Raphanus Rusticanus, Thl^spi
alterum Dioscoridis, so great is the diversity of Authors concerning the name
of this Plant, which could never have happened; if Dioscorides, or any of the
Ancients had set it down. Yet there is but one sort hereof, and therefore I
shall pass to the Description.

The Form.
Horse Radish rises out of the ground with long Leaves, narrow also, and very
much cut in on the edges, or as it were torn into many parts, of a dark green
color, with a great rib in the middle, but after these have bin up a while,
others follow which are greater, rougher, broader, and longer, whole and not
divided as the first; but only somewhat roundly dented about the edges: It
seldom bears flowers, but when it does, the Stalk whereon they grow is
great, rising up with some few lesser Leaves thereon to the height of three or
four foot, spreading at the top many small branches of whitish flowers,
consisting of four Leaves a piece, after which come small pods like unto those
of the lesser Shepherds purse, but seldom with any seed in them; the root is
long and thick, white of color, in taste sharp and biting the tongue somewhat
like Pepper.

The Places and Time.
Mountain Radish, for so it is sometimes called, is chiefly planted in
Gardens, where it joyeth most, in a moist and shaddowy place, yet it grows
naturally in diverse parts of this Land as at Namp-^wich in Ch^shire, in a place
called the Milne-Eye, and also at a small Village near London called H^g^^don
in the field, next unto the farm house by the way leading to Kings* land: I^
so seldom bears seed or flowereth, that some have affirmed that it bears
neither, yet sometimes it does flower in July or August, and the seed is ripe
in September, but the common way of propagating it, is by the root: for it
shoots up diverse heads, which may be parted for increase, either in the
Spring or Autumn.

The Temperature.
Horse Reddish is hot and dry in the third degree, being of a drying, clensing
and somewhat digesting quality.

The Virtues.
Of all things that are given to Children for the Worms, Horse Reddish is not
the least effectual, for it kills and expels them, whether the juice of
the green root, or powder of the dry root be given in Wine or other convenient
liquor or an Ointment be made thereof, and the Belly of the Child be anointed
therewith. The Leaves boiled in Wine with a little Oil Olive added thereunto,
and laid to the grieved parts in manner of a Pultis, do mollify and take away
the hard swellings of the Liver and Milt, and being applied to the bottom of
the belly, is a remedy for the Strangury, and so are the Roots sliced thin, and
eaten with meat as a sa^^ce, having some vinegar put thereto, as also for the
chollick: It is also a good remedy in strong Bodies for the Cough, Tissick, and
other diseases of the Lungs, as also to procure Women's courses that are
stopped, being boiled in honey and vinegar into an Electuary: it also is often
given before the fit of the Quartan Ague to alter the course, which it does by
provoking vomiting and sweating; the juice given in drink, is held to be very
effectual for the Sc^rvey: The Root bruised and laid to the place grieved with
the S^iatica gout, Joynt-ach, or the hard swelling of the Liver and Spleen,
does wonderfully help them all: And if any think or find it too strong for
their stomachs, or that it hurts their head, or causes sharp and sower
belchings, the distilled Water of the Leaves and Roots may be taken with a
little Sugar, for all the purposes aforesaid, without any disturbance at all.
The Root is commonly used amongst the Germans, and sometimes by Gentlemen with
us also for sauce to eat Fish with, and other Meats, as Mustard is, and so it
heateth the Stomach, more, and causes better digestion then Mustard,
notwithstanding whatsoever some have written, as if it were too strong for
ordinary Stomachs.

CHAP. CCLVII. Of Sumack*
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and (...), from the red, or Scarlet color of the
seed, which is therefore called (...) signifying no more but Red* Pliny calls
it also Rhus in Latin, saying that it has not any pure Latin Name, yet Gaza
translateth it Fluida, supposing it to come from (...) fluo, for no reason at
all. Some call it Rhus simply without any Epither, as Matthiolus etc. Others
with one, as Rhus Coriaria, because the Coriers use it about their Leather, and
Rhus Obsoniorum, because it is used about sauce, the shops call it Sumack, and
so do We in English.

The Kinds.
To this kind may be referred these five sorts, and not improperly. 1 Coriare
Sumack. 2 Virginian Sumack. 3 Myrtle leafed Sumack. 4 Venice Sumack. 5 Sweet
Gall.

The Form.
Coriars Sumack grows in our Gardens to be two or three yards high, spreading
sundry branches with larg winged Leaves, that is, having many set on both sides
of a middle rib, somewhat like unto Elder, which are soft and hairy, with a red
sinew running through the middle of every of them; at the ends of the branches
come forth large spiked clusters of whitish Flowers, which afterward become
reddish, round, and flat seed like unto Lentils, with an outward skinny husk.
The Root is hard and woody, not growing very deep nor much spreading; the Wood
is whitish, but dies black.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in Syria, Pontus, Italy, and Spain, where for its profit, it
is carefully manured: the place of the second may be known by its name: the
third grows about Mompelier, and diverse other places: the fourth in Savoy,
and on the Apenine Hills, the last by old Windsor Park-Corner, in Suss^x,
Hartford-shire, and Kent, as well as beyond the Sea. They flower for the most
part in July, and their seed is ripe in Autumn.

The Temperature.
Both the Leaves, fruit and seed of Sumack, are cold in the second, and dry in
the third degree, being also of a very binding quality.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Reddish color of the seeds of Sumack, did teach those that found out the
Virtues of Plants by their Signatures, that it is good for the bloody fl^x,
which is a distemper of the Belly with exulceration and excoriation, so that
blood is voided, whereunto great pains with gripings are joined; and upon this
account it is prescribed generally by all those that meddle with the cures of
diseases, as also for stopping all other Fluxes of the Belly, the inordinate
Courses of Women, the Whites also, and all other Immoderate Issues of blood
whatsoever: the Leaves being either boiled in Wine, and drunk, or the seed
eaten in Sawces with Meat, or the decoction set in some convenient place, as
the Case of a Close Stool, whence the fume may powerfully ascend into the
bodies of those, that are thus diseased; and the said decoction makes the Hair
black, that is washed therewith: The leaves and seeds may be used several
other ways for the said Fluxes, as in Broths, Baths, Gilsters, etc. The said
decoction of the Leaves and Seed in Wine, does also close up the Stomachs of
those that are much given to vomiting, and being mixed with vinegar and a
little honey, it is good against Gangrenes and Cankers. The juice that is
gotten out of the dried Leaves by boiling them in water, being kept boiling
till it have the consistence of Honey, helps the roughness of the tongue and
throat, and performs all those effects, for which, Lycium is commended; The
seed is likewise boiled in Water, and the decoction thereof evapored to the
thickness of honey, as the former, is more effectual then the seed it self;
The juice of the green Leaves dropped into the ears, dries up the moisture,
and running of them; The seed beaten, and boiled into a Pultis, and applied to
any inflammation, or hot Imposthume, cools them much, and does also take away
the pain, and black and blew marks, that come of bruises and blows, as also
the frettings and gallings of the skin; the same also, applied with the fine
powder of Oaken ^oales, helps the Hemeroids or Piles, when they bleed too
much; It is singular good also to be applied to Ruptures, both inwardly and
outwardly, and to stay defluxions of hot and sharp Rhewmes into the eyes, and
against other destillations of the head and want of sleep. The decoction of the
seed is good to wash the mouth, both to fasten loose teeth, and to heal putrid
and rotten Gums; and the Gum that sometimes issues out of the tree, is good
for the ach of hollow teeth, being put thereinto. The said Leaves are so
astringent that they may be substituted instead of Acacia. Though the Virginian
Sumack, be kept only as a rarity or ornament to a Garden or Orchard, yet it is
conceived that if trial were made it might work some of the foresaid effects.
The leaves of Coggygria or Venice Sumack, are sold in the Markets of Spain and
Italy, for great sums of Money unto those that dress Spanish Leather, for
which purpose they are very excellent, as those of the Coriars Sumack also are;
the Woods, especially of the Roots of every of them are a Commodity that Dyers
make much use, some of them dying black, some yellow, and some red. The Gall is
by the bitterness and harshnesse, found to be both drying, and discussing, and
is very effectual to kill Worms in the Belly or Stomach; but it works much
upon the brain, causing evil accidents thereunto. It keeps Mothes from
Garments and woollen Clothes, giving unto them a good sce^t, and therefore it
is much used to be laid in Wardrobes, Chests, Presses, and the like. The Myrtle
leafed Sumack and the Venice, are almost as effectual as the first, and may be
used for the purposes aforesaid, but then the quantity must be augmented, for
they are weaker*

CHAP. CCLVIII. Of the Myrtle.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and (...), from Myrsine, an Ath^nian Maid, whom
Pallas loved, yet because she overcame her in running, she killed her for envy,
and from her dead body sprung up this tree, which Pallas loves equally with the
Olive, as the story says; but Pena thinks it to be so named, because the
fresh berries thereof do contend with Myrrh in their sweet savor. It is
called in Latin Myrtus, and in English Myrtle, from the Latin, which other
Nations imitate also. The Apothecaries and Druggist call the Berries Myrtilli.

The Kinds.
There be ten sorts of Myrtles at the least. 1 The greater leafed Myrtle. 2 The
smaller leafed Myrtle. 3 The greatest open Laurel Myrtle. 4 The strange broad
leafed close Myrtle. 5 The usual broad leafed Myrtle. 6 The strange narrow
leafed Myrtle. 7 The Spanish wild Myrtle. 8 The small white Myrtle. 9 Box
leafed Myrtle. 10 Double flowred Myrtle.

The Form.
The greater leafed Myrtle rises up to be three or four foot high, though
seldom more with us, growing after the manner of a small bush, with many
branches; the eldest whereof, as also the Stem are encompassed with a bark of
a dark color, that of the younger is green and sometimes red, especially at
the first shooting forth, whereon are set many fresh green Leaves, of a sweet
smell and pleasant aspect, so very like unto the leaves of the Pomegranate tree
that grows with us, that they are often taken one for another, being somewhat
broad and long, pointed at the ends, and abiding always green: At the joints
of the branches where the leaves stand, come forth the flowers upon small
footstalk, each of them being made of five small white leaves, with threads in
the middle of the same color, of a very sweet smell also; in the hot Countries
where they are natural (but not in ours) certain berries which are black, when
they be ripe, succeed the flowers, wherein many white crooked seeds are
contained; The Root disperseth it self into many branches.

The Places and Time.
All the sorts of Myrtles grow in Spain, Portugal, Italy, and other hot
Countries, in great abundance: yet in ours, unless they be kept in pots, and be
removed from the extremity of heat and cold, they will not live, for they abide
not the excess of either, as we may gather from those Hemisticks of Virgil and
Ovid, Amantes frigora Myrtos, and Metuentem frigora Myrtum, as loving shadow to
defend them from the heat, and shelter to cover them from the cold, so that in
the Winter we commonly keep them within doors. They flower very late with us,
not until August at the soonest, so that they want time to perfect the fruit,
but in their natural places, they flower in May, and their fruit is ripe in
September.

The Temperature.
Galen says, that the myrtle is endued with contrary qualities, that is, with
a cold and earthy, and a warm and thin, and therefore it powerfully binds and
dries.

The Virtues.
Because the Physicians do commonly join sumak and myrtle in their
Compositions, therefore I have set them next to one another in this Book of
simples, and indeed they are alike effectual for all effusions of blood, at
what part soever both in Men and Women, the dry rather then the dried Leaves
being beaten and boiled with water and drunk, and so it is good against
Catarrhes, falling to any part of the body, the Whites in Women, moist Ulcers,
and fretting or creeping sores. The fruit with the seed is good for the
tremblings and passions of the heart, resists the danger that might happen by
the sting of Serpents, the bitings of venomous Creatures, or by poysonfull
Mushromes; Being drunk in Wine, it helps a stinking breath, cures the
diseases of the bladder, and provokes Urine: the same heated with wine,
heals all Ulcers that are hard to cure, and so it is good for blancs,
wheales, and other breakings out of the skin: The decoction is good for Women,
to sit in or over that are troubled with the falling down of the Mother, and
is good also for the falling down of the fundament, and the piles: Being mixed
with Sallet-Oyle, or Oil of Roses and Wine, and applied, it helps the
swelling of the Cods, the Impostumes of the fundament and Saint Anthonies fire.
The decoction of the Leaves is good for the resolution of the Arteries and
Joints, and other weaknesses incident thereunto, to sit in the same as in a
Bath, or else to bath that part only which is most amiss, and so it helps to
consolidate those bones that are broken or out of joint, which will otherwise
hardly be cured: It helps the soreness of the Nails, and the rising of the
skin about them, if the powder of the dried leaves be cast thereon. The juice
of the leaves has the same effects, whether it be taken out of the fresh
Leaves, or from the dry, by sprinkling them over with Red Wine, and is safely
used where there is need of any binding Medicine, either to heal the Ulcers of
the Mouth or of the privy parts: the same also helps watering eyes, or those
that begin to loose their eyesight, by reason of any filme or skin growing
over it, especially if it be laid on with parched Barley Meal. The decoction of
the Berries makes the hair black, and keeps it from falling, it cures all
the evil sores of the head, and cleanses the same from scurfe and scals,
being often washed therewith, and helps them that are bursten. The Syrup of
Myrtls is good for the Cough and exulceration of the Lungs. The powder of the
dried Leaves helps the stinking sweat of the flanks and arme-pits, and the
sweating of the Cardiack passion; The juice condensate of Myrtles is also
commended, as a good substitute for Acacia. The excrescence called Myr^^danum,
is of greater force to dry and bind, then either leaf, juice or seed.

CHAP. CCLIX. Of Cistus.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and (...), Cistus and Cistbus also, in Latin, as
if there were no p^re Latin Word to express it, yet some call it Rosa
Sylvarica, but we in English, call it Cistus. The undergrowth or excrescence of
the Cistus; whereof, I mean to entreat of also in this Chapter, is called in
Greek (...), and Hypocistis is the Latin Name, both for the Plant, and the
juice drawn from it.

The Kinds.
It is not mine intention to muster up the whole family of the Cistus's, which
is very numerous: but only to name such as may be most for the edification of
my Countrymen; Let them therefore know that there be hereof two principal
sorts. 1 That which bears the sweet Gum Ladonum, and is called Cistus Ledon.
2 That which bears no Gum. That which bears no Gu^ is divided into the Male
and Female. To this kind may also be referred, 1 Common Dwarf Cistus, or
little Sun-flower. 2 White Dwarf Cistus, or little Sun-flower, at every one of
which I shall touch in this general Description.

The Form^.
Both the Gum Cistus, and the other kinds, are woody shr^bs, full of branches
of three or four foot, some have long and narrow Leaves, as the Cistus L^don:
others broader, rough, uneven, wrinckled, somewhat downy, and almost like the
Leaves of Sage, as the Male Holly Rose; The flowers grow at the tops of the
branches, like unto the wild Rose, yet such, as very quickly fade, perish and
fall away; In their places come up little heads or knops, somewhat round, in
which is contained small seed; the Roots of them all are woody.

There grows up sometimes under the Cistus where it is natural, a certain
Excrescence, with diverse upright stalks, covered with small Leaves, thick set
thereon, scarce a foot high, having many flowers at the tops full of juice, in
fashion like unto the Nossel of a wooden Candlestick, which pass away, leaving
seed as small as dust in the hard heads or seed Vessels, which is unable to
produce the like Plant.

The Dwarf Cistus sends forth sundry weak and small branches, yet hard and
almost woody, lying for the most part upon the ground, round about the Head of
the Root, whereon are set by couples many small and somewhat long Leaves, a
little soft or hairy, with other small Leaves also growing between them; at the
tops whereof stand three or four flowers, composed of five round pointed Leaves
a piece, with some threads in the middle, of a pretty scent in some places, but
of little or none in others, after which comes the seed, which is small, and
contained in small round heads: it has a hard, woody, brownish Root growing in
time to be somewhat great, but not very long, and divided into small branches
at the lower end.

The Places and Time.
The first which is the Gum Cis^us grows naturally in Italy, France, Spain
and other hot Countries: and so do the second, which is the Male Holly Rose,
(growing also in the Physic Garden at Oxon) and the third which is called the
Female: The two last grow in diverse places of this Land, as in Stew Wo^d, near
Oxon, and in diverse of the parts thereabouts, as also in Kent, yet that with
the White-flower is very rare. They all flower in the Summer, some earlier then
other by a Month, most whereof are so soon fading, that their flowers endure
but a day or two, perfecting their seed quickly after.

The Temperature.
The Ladanum that is gathered from the Leaves of the Gum Cistus is hot in the
later end of the first degree, having also a little astrictive or binding
quality; It is likewise of a thin substance, and therefore it softneth, and
with all does moderatly digest and also concoct, as Galen says. The Cistus's
without Gum do dry almost in the second degree, and yet are of a temperate
heat. Hypocistis is much more binding then any other part of any Cistus. The
Dwarf Cistus's are also drying and binding.

The Virtues.
That which I especially aim at in this Chapter is the Hypocistis, whose
condensate juice is a most certain, safe, and sure Medicine to stay all fl^xes
of blood or humors, that is to say, the Lask and bloody flux, spitting of
blood, and Women's extraordinary courses, and therefore do I speak of it first.
It is also mixed with those things that are applied to the Stomach to stay
vomitings, and to strengthen it, when it is grown weak, as also with those
things that strengthen the Liver, to be used inwardly or outwardly: It is also
available for clammy moist humors that fall upon the joints or sinews, thereby
causing a weakness and solution of the Nerves; Being used inwardly for the
Piles it does wonderfully help, for it dries, binds, and corroborateth the
parts, It is also put into great Antidotes against Poison and the Pestilence,
not for any property it has to resist the venom, but to contemperate and
strengthen the Body. This is also a very good substitute for Acatia. Ledonum
also drunk with old Wine, stays the Lask or Flux of the Belly, and eases the
griping pains thereof, proceeding from sharp and Chollerick humors, and is
very good for all sour belchings, and provokes Urine. It is very effectual
for the hardness, and other diseases of the Mother, to ease the pains thereof,
and to heal those Ulcers that happen therein by taking of the fume thereof
underneath, or applying the substance thereof in a Pessary. Being made up with
Storax and honey in a Lohock or Electuary, it is very profitable for the cough
of the Lungs, though it has been of long continuance. If it be used in an
Ointment with Myrrh, oil of Myrtles, and Wine, it stays the falling of the
hair. It helps also the pains in the ears, being used with some oil of
Roses. Being dissolved in Wine, and those places washed therewith that have any
scar or deformity thereon, it does wonderfully alter the color and evil sight
thereof, and makes them to be well colored again. Either the Gum or the
Leaves and branches boiled in Lie, and the head washed therewith, does cleanse
it from Scabs, Scurfe or D^ndraff growing thereon, and cures also all running
and watering sores and Ulcers in the Legs, or other parts of the Body. The Oil
made thereof works the like effects, and is also good for any hardness or
ach, to anoint the breasts of those that are much troubled with a cough: A Tent
dipped therein, and put up into the Nose is a good remedy for the Pose or
Polypus, as also for the falling sickness, the backbone being anointed
therewith. The Pomanders, Chains and Bracelets that are made of Ladanum,
Cub^bs, Mace and Greek-pitch are effectual to warm the brain, and to dry up
all cold Rhewmes and defluxions thereof, being worn about one. Both the Male
and the Female Cistus are also effectual to strengthen the Belly and Stomach,
both against scowrings and vomitings, whether with blood or without, of what
sort soever they be, and also to stop Women's Courses flowing inordinately, the
Leaves and young shoots or buds, but especially the flowers being steeped, or
gently boiled in red Wine and drunk: The same, that is the Flowers, do quickly
heal any burning or scalding, being applied in a Searecloth, and being bruised
and laid to any green wound, i^ closes the lips thereof, and restrains the
bleeding thereof. Old and filthy Ulcers being washed with the decoction of the
Leaves and young Shootes boiled in Wine, are dried up and healed thereby; for
though they be cank^ous, eating or spreading, it will wonderfully and quickly
stay those fretting moist humors which follow them: The distilled Water of the
Leaves and Flowers is of the like efficacy, and may be applied to any part, as
often as there is any need of drying, binding and strengthening. The Dwarf
Cistus is likewise commended for all manner of Fluxes, the decoction of the
Herb and Root being taken, which is also very effectual to wash sore mouths,
and the Ulcers that happen in or about the privy parts of Men or Women: It is
no less profitable in other Ulcers of the B^dy or Legs, which are long kept
from healing by the falling down of moist and sharp humors, then the other
Cistus, and so likewise for green wounds. It is also effectual for any
burstings, as C^mfr^y, and likewise for the strengthening of weak joints, or
any binding property, whereunto any Comfr^y may be applied. Besides, it quickly
heals the biting or stinging of any venomous Creature, being bruised and
applied thereunto, especially if the party bitten or stung, take also of the
juvce or the decoction thereof in Wine: the distilled water of the Herb is held
to beautify the skin of the Face, by taking away Freckles, S^nburn, Morphew,
etc. from thence, and cleanses the hands or other part of the body being
discolored.

CHAP. CCLX. Of the Black-Thorn or Sloe-Bush.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Coccymelea agria, and (...), agriococymelea, and
the fruit (...), agriococcymelon, because ^^ is a kind of a wild Plum, as the
Bullets also is. They of Asia call it (...), piumnum, as Galen says, whence
happily the word Prunum may be derived, and therefore the Tree or B^sh may be
called Prunus sylvestris in Latin, and Prunellus; yet Virgil in the fourth
book of his Georgicks, calls it Spinus in these words -- Et spinus jam pruna
serentes: We call it commonly the Sloe-Tree in English, and the fruit Sloes.

The Kinds.
Though there be but one sort of Sloes, yet there be four sorts of B^lleis,
which it will not be amiss to set down here, because they do not much differ.
1 The Shepway Bulleis. 2 The ordinary black Bulleis. 3 The ordinary white
Bulleis. 4 The flushing B^lleis, to which I shall also add another wild Plum
which some call Skegges.

The Form.
The Black-Thorn never grows to the greatness of a Tree, but always abides
as a hedge bush, yet in some places higher then other, rising up usually with
diverse stems from the Roots, branched forth into many boughs armed with good
store of strong, short, and sharp thorns, set with and besides the small da^k
green leaves, finely dented about the edges, whereon do grow at the time of the
year, many very white Flowers composed of five leaves, after the same manner as
they do on other Plum-Trees, with diverse white threads tipped with yellow in the
middle, after which follows the round fruit, which continues green a long
while, yet at length becomes black, but never very big, of an exceeding
harsh taste, before they are ripe, yet afterward the harshnesse is somewhat
abated. The Root is great and woody, spreading under ground, and shooting forth
again in diverse places.

The Places and Time.
The Sloes and Skegges grow in Hedges and Copses of most parts of this Land,
being oftentimes planted to make the divisions and fences of enclosed places,
only the Bulleis are commonly found nearer home in Orchards or Closes. They
all flower early, as in March, or April, be the weather never so hard, yet
ripen not their fruit till the Autumn frosts have bitten them.

The Temperature.
All the parts of the Sloe Bush are binding, cooling, and drying.

The Virtues.
The juice of the fruit of Sloes, being also a Substitute of Acacia, and more
often used then any other in most of our Apothecaries Shops, must be likewise
effectual for all kinds of Lasks and Fluxes of blood, both in Men and Women,
or else it would not be used insted thereof, yet diverse conceive that the
condensate juice of Sumack or Myrtles, is more answerable to the qualities of
Acacia, then that of Sloes, which has only the binding quality thereof, and
therefore better: but indeed it were to be wished that Substitutes were not so
much affected; for certainly they cannot but be deficient or excessive in some
quality or other, and that the things themselves, which we want only through
our own negligence, might be more diligently sought after. The decoction of
the Bark of the Root or more usually the decoction either fresh or dried,
performs the like effects, and helps to ease the pains in the sides, bowels
and guts, that come by overmuch scowring or loosnesse. The conserve is also of
very much use, and most familiarly taken for the purposes aforesaid. The
distilled water of the flowers steeped one night in Sack, and drawn therefrom
in a body of glass, is a most certain and approved Remedy to ease all manner
of gnawings in the Stomach, the sides and bowels, or any griping pains in
either of them, to drink a small quantity when they are troubled therewith.
Good store of Sloes stamped and put into an earthen pot with new Ale, and so
drunk, helps the pain of the breast, and the decoction of the Bark in water
being, drunk, is good against pissing in Bed. The Bark boiled in water till it
be black and thick with Rye meal and Honey added thereunto, is available to
consume the dead flesh which keeps wounds oftentimes from healing, and cures
the Cankers being applied. The Leaves are good to make Lotions, to gargle and
wash the mouth and throat, as often as they are troubled with swellings, sores,
or Kernels, and to stay the distillations of Rhewme into the eyes, or other
parts, as also to cool the heat and inflammation of them, and to ease hot
pains of the Head, the Forehead and Temples being bathed therewith. The
distilled water of the green Berries is also used for the same effects, and so
is the water that is distilled from the Flowers only. The Moss that grows on
the Black Thorn, draws Prickles and Thorns out of the Flesh, and this it may
be said to perform by the Signature which is represented by the Thorns
growing on the Bush.

CHAP. CCLXI. Of the Bramble.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Batus, in Latin Rubus and Sentis, and also
Ve^res, whereof Ovid makes mention, speaking how the Hare hides himself from
the Dogs therein, after this manner,

Aut lepori, qui vepre latens ^^stilia cernit Ora canum.

Of diverse it is called Cynosbatus, but not properly says one, for Cynosbatus
is generally taken for the wild Rose, though there be diverse that would have
the wild Rose to be Cyn^rrhodos, and this Cynosbatus, and this is most
consonant to Reason. It is called by us in English, the Bramble or the
Black-Berri-bush, and the fruit Black-Berries, which the Greeks call (...),
which some have made Vatina in Latin, id est Mora Rubi, they are called in
Shops Mora bali, and of some Mora bassi.

The Kinds.
All the sorts that are referred hereunto, are nine. 1. the common Bramble o^
Black-berry-Bush. 2. the small lower ground Bramble. 3. sweet mountain Bramble
or Raspis. 4. the Dew-berry or Winberry. 5. the stony Bramble or rock Raspis.
6. our English Knot-berry. 7. the Welsh Knot-berry or Lancashire Cloudberry. 8.
the Knot-berry of Norway. 9. another Knot-berry of Norway.

The Forms.
The common Bramble shoots forth many ribbed branches of a very great length,
yea so long sometimes, that they by reason of their weakness also bend to the
ground and sometimes take root again, all thick set with sharp and crooked
thorns, with leaves likewise growing upon long and prickly Footstalk by three
and three together, which are hard and as it were crumpled, having small pricks
under the middle ribb, of a dark green color above, and grayish underneath,
which seldom fall away till the extremity of the Winter be past (as the
Countrymen do observe) and the new be ready to succeed them: the flowers come
forth very plentifully at the end of the branches consisting of five whitish
leaves, dashed with a little carnation, with small threads in the middle which
gives place to the fruit, standing every one at some little distance, and is
made up of several small grains set together somewhat like unto the Raspis or
Mul-berry, of a perfect black color and sweet taste, when they be ripe but till
then they are first green, and then reddish, harsh and very unpleasant, the
root grows to be very great and full of knots.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in every hedge almost; the second by hedges and wood-sides,
and sometimes amongst the ploughed lands in diverse parts of this Land; the
third grows on hills and in high grounds; the fourth is frequent in Cheshire,
York^shire, and Lancashire; the fifth in the rocky and stony places of
Huntingdon and Nottinghamshire and in diverse parts of Kent, and the Islle of
Thanet; the sixth upon Ingleborough Hill, which is one of the highest Hills in
England, vea so high that it seems at least to touch the clouds, and
therefore some call the fruit thereof Cloudberryes, as they do the next, whose
places may be discovered by their names* as the two last may also be. They all
flower about July, and their berries are ripe* in September, or thereabouts.

The Temperature.
The Buds Leaves, flowers, fruit and root of the Bramble, are all of a great
binding quality, especially the unripe fruit, and that more when they have been
kept a while then when they are fresh.

The Virtues and Signature.
The flowers and unripe fruit of the Bramble are of very great use and pros^
also for those that are vexed with the bloody flux, Lask, and weakness^ of the
parts coming by either of them, which is signified both by the color of the
berries when they are red, and also by the crooked thorns which will cause the
blood to follow no otherwise then the Exulceration of the G^^s which
accompanies the blo^dy fl^x, and by the same signature it helps the spitting
of blo^d, if the decoction thereof be drunk. The B^ds, Leaves and Branches
whilst they are green, are of good use in the Ulcers and p^^rid sores of the
Mouth and Throat, and for the Q^insy, and likewise to heal other fresh wounds
and sores; The decoction or powder of the Root being ^^ken is good to break or
drive forth Gravel and the Stone in the Reins and Kidneys. The Leaves as well
dry as green, are good to make Lotions both for sores of the Mo^th and also of
the secret parts. The decoction of them and of the dried branches do much bind
the Belly, and are good for the too much flowing of Women's Courses. The Berries
or the Flowers are a powerful remedy against the poys^n of the most venomous
Serpents and to help the sores of the Fundament and the Piles, whereof they may
be said to have the Signature. The juice of them boiled with honey is very good
against all hot Ulcers and swellings of the mouth, G^^s, Uvula or Palate and
Almonds of the ^hroat. The said juice mixed with the juice of Mulberries do
bind more effectually, and help fretting and eating sor^s, and Ulcers
wheresoever. The same being taken alone or mixed with Hypecistis and Honey, is
a remedy for Heart burning as some call it which is a gnawing of the Stomach
through Choler, as also for the Passions of the heart, and faintings.

The distilled Water of the Branches, Leaves and Flowers, or of the fruit, is
very pleasant both to the smell and taste, and may be given to those that are in
h^t Fevers and other distemperature of heat in the Body, as in the Head, Eyes,
Liver, Hands, etc. and also for the purposes aforesaid. The Leaves boiled in
Lie, and the head washed therewith, does not only allay the itching thereof,
but the mattering and running sores also, and makes the hair to become black.
The powder of the Leaves strewed upon Cancrous or running Ulcers, are very
effectual for the healing of them. The condensate juice of the Leaves, as also
of the Berries may be kept all the year to be used for any of the aforesaid
purposes as often as occasion shall serve. The People of Norway use their
Knotberry against the Scurvey, and other crude putrid and melancholy diseases,
wherewith they of those parts are afflicted, so that we may therein admire the
wonderful wisdom and providence of God, who has ordained, to grow in every
Climate, Remedies for those diseases whereunto it is subject.

CHAP. CCLXII. Of Teasel.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Dipsacus, from (...), sitio, either by
Antiphrasis, because they are seldom or never dry, or else because the Water
that stands in the Concavity of those Leaves that encompasse the Stalks being
drunk causes thirst. It is also called from the concavous leaves that contain
Water like a Bas^n, (...) Lavacrum Veneris, Venus Ba^^^, it being, as I
suppose, a piece of Religion amo(...) the Ancients to entitle those pretty
things which bear any resembl^nc(...) any utensill for the adorning or
cleansing of the body to Venus, as Specul^m (...)ris, Venus looking glass,
Pecten Venerus, Venus Comb, as also those parts w(...) men much respect, as
Capillus Veneris, Maidenhair, and Vmbilicus Veneris, V(...) Navelwort, etc. Yet
some would have it to be Labrum Veneris, because Whores are as ready to be
kissed as the those hollow Leaves to receive the Rain, and afterward to card
and tear the estates, if not the bodies of their followers, which the heads of
this Teasel are apt to do, and Carduus Veneris for the like reason. It is also
called Carduus Fullonum, Fullers Thistle, because Cloathworkers and Fullers use
the manured kind hereof named D^psacus sativus, the others being called
Dipsacus sylvestris, and Virga Pastoris.

The Kinds.
Though Teasel have so many names, yet it has but four sorts. 1 The Garden or
manured Teasel. 2 The wild Teasel. 3 Wild Teasel with jagged Leaves. 4 The
Shepherds Staff or Red.

The Form.
Garden Teasel sends forth very larg and long leaves, somewhat like unto
these of Lang de beef or Wild Buglesse, but greater, of a pale green color,
somewhat rough and hard, dented about the edges, set on the backside of the
middle rib with many short prickles, from which rise up stalks of the height of
three or four foot, armed likewise with prickles, with joints at several
places, which are encompassed with too lesser leaves so joined together
thereat, that they hold the falling rain or dew in them like unto a Basin, by
which difference it may easily be distinguished from any other Plant, as I have
expressed in my Art of Simpling: from between the Leaves and the Stalks of each
side come forth prickly branches also, every one of which bears a long round
head like a Brush, that they cleanse bottles with, having hooded and somewhat
whitish flowers, first about the middle and afterward at the ends, in the
several cells whereof, being whitish when they come to perfection, are
contained somewhat long, small and whitish round seed, the middle many times is
hollow, and contains several little white Worms like Maggots: the Root is
white, long and somewhat great, set with diverse fibers thereat, perishing
annually, but rises plentifully from its fallen seed.

The Places and Time.
Fullers and Cloathworkers sow the first in their own Gardens, and cause it to
be sown by others for their use; the second grows very frequently in most
parts of this Land as well in the highways, where there be ditches and rilles
of water, as in dryer places; the third in some places of Germany; the last in
diverse places of England, and particularly by Saint Albans in the Horse-way
that goes from the Abbey Parish to St. Stevens. They all flower in June and
July, and the first will be fit to gather for the aforesaid use in the latter
end of August, when the seed of the other will be ripe also.

The Temperature.
Galen writes that Teasel is drying in the second degree, and has withal
some cleansing faculty.

The Signature and Virtues.
The hollowness that is in the midst of the Teasel head, with the worms
therein, does somewhat represent the fundament and the worms thereof, and
therefore the Roots being bruised and boiled in wine till they come to a
consistence and then put into a brazen or copper box, and afterward spread as
a salve, and applied to the fundament, does heal the chaps, rifts, Canckers,
and Fistulaes thereof, as Dioscorides says, who further affirms that it is
profitable for the taking away of Wens and Warts, as the water contained in the
concavity of the Leaves is also said to do, which is likewise commended for red
eyes and spots of the Face especially under the eyes. The Leaves applied to the
Forehead and Temples qualifieth the Frensy or Madness by the cold and dry
quality, which some suppose to be in them, and the juice of them put into the
ears, kills the worms in them. The distilled water of the Leaves is
effectual to cure the Scurvey, which causes rottenness of the Mouth and
Gums, takes away the redness of the eyes, and such Mists as darken the sight,
being but dropped thereinto, and helps creeping sores, Shingles, Pimples and
hanging Worts in the Fundament, or elsewhere. The said distilled water is often
used by Women to preserve their Beauty, and to take away redness and
inflammations, and all other heats and discolorings. The roots stamped with
Danewort, sodden in Wine and drunk, helps the Dropsy, and the Gout also, if
they be boiled in red Wine, and drunk morning and evening for nine days
together. Being boiled with Plantain in Rainwater, and some quantity thereof
drunk with Sugar, morning, noon and night, helps the spitting of blood. Two
drams of the powder drunk in a Porringer full of Pease broth, stops the
immoderate Flux of Women's Courses, and so it does being stamped and boiled in
vinegar, and applied under the Navel, and being only stamped and applied, it
is good for those wounds that are moist and hard to heal, and also for the
Cancker of the Yard. The said powder being drunk in good Wine, stops all
manner of Fluxes, and is a remedy for the Excoriations of the belly and other
parts. That the small Worms found in the heads of the Teasel worn about the
neck or arm in a thin Lease, do cure the Ague, is certainly a Fable. The first
as I said is only used by them that dress Cloth, to raise the Wool thereof
with the crooked Prickles of the head, making it fit that their Shearers may
cut it smooth, and yet a Nap may be left thereon, but the other sorts are as
useful in Physic, especially the second.

CHAP. CCLXIII. Of Rice.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and (...) as Theophrastus says, in Latin also
Oryza that as well as other Nations following the Greek, as near as their
Dialect will permit. There being but one kind hereof, I shall pass to the
Description.

The Form.
Rice comes up in a manner like unto wheat, but that the stalks seldom exceed
a yard in height, and the Leaves are much thicker, which come forth at the
joints, as those of the Reed do, at the top whereof grows a bush or tuft,
spiked, yet spread into branches, sending forth purplish blossoms standing a
part each from one another, after which comes the seed enclosed in a brown
straked husk, and an awn or beard at the end of every one of them, as Barley
has, which beink husked or hulled is very white, blunt at both ends, but not
altogether so big or long as Wheat: The Root is like unto that of other grain,
perishing every year after it has brought its seed to its full bigness, as
other Grain does.

The Places and Time.
Rice is usually sold here in England by the Druggists, and others that deal
in the like Commodities, but it is brought to them by the Merchants out of
diverse parts, as the East Indies, where it is their chiefest food, as you shall
hear anon, from Syria, Aethiopia, and Africa, and not only from thence, but
from Spain, Italy and Germany, to all which places it was brought from the
East Indies, where it grows most naturally in Fenny and waterish places,
being sown in the Spring, and gathered about the middle or end of Autumn.

The Temperature.
It is somewhat binding and drying, but otherwise it is very temperate,
scarcely exceeding in heat or cold.

The Virtues.
The use of Rice is very much commended by the Physicians of all Ages to stay
the I as^s and Fluxes of the Belly, as well as the Stomach, and is prescribed
by those even of later times for the same purpose, as also for the Hemorrhoides
or Piles, especialiy if it be a little parched before it be used, and
afterward boiled in Milk wherein hot Steel or hot Stones have been quenched.
But if that be not sufficiently effectual for the Flux, there may be pottage
made thereof after this manner. Take a good handful of Oaken bark, and boil it
in a gallon of running Water to the(...) half, or thereabouts: then straining
it, and suffering it to cool, take half a pound of Jordan Almonds, and beat
them in a Mortar with Hulls and all on, afterward strain them with the
aforesaid Water, and so with Rice make Pottage. O(...) it blanched Almonds be
stamped with Rosewater and strained into Rice broth, pottage or milk, it is
also very good for the Flux, and so is the Flower or Meal taken either in a
Potion or Glister. The ordinary sort of Rice pottage, made with Rice well
steeped and boiled in Water, and good Milk, and spiced with S^gar and Cinnamon,
is very pleasant and easy of digestion, and is thought to increase the natural
seed, as Matthiolus writes. The fine flower hereof mixed with yolks of eggs,
which being fried with fresh butter, and eat morning and evening, helps the
bloody Flux. The same is put into Cataplasmes that are applied to repel
humors, that fall to any place, and may be conveniently applied to Women;
breasts to stay Inflammations, but it must be at the beginning: Being boiled in
running Water, and the face washed therewith, takes away pimples, spots, and
other deformities thereof. It is without question very excellent and wholesome
food, for the East Indians, whose general feeding it is, do live more free
from sickness, and longer then others that meddle not with it, sometimes they
boil the grain till it be plump, and tender, but not broken, having a little
green Ginger and Pepper and Butter put to it, and sometimes they boil the
pieces of flesh, or Hens, and other Foul cut in pieces in their Rice, which
dish they call Pillaw, being as they order it an excellent and well tasted
Food; They have many other dishes, wherein Rice is an ingredient, as in
Catcheree, Dupiatc^ and Mangee-real as the Portugals call it, which signifies
as much as Food for a King; They eat it likewise with their Fish, and please
themselves much therewith. When Sr. Thomas Row was sent Ambassador from
England to the Great Magul, he and Mr. Terry his Chaplain were entertained by
Asaph Chan, the greatest Favorite in all that Empire, the Ambassador had
threescore and ten dishes, Asaph Chan threescore, Mr. Terry fifty, in most of
which were Rice presented, some white, some yellow, some green, some purple, as
also in their Jel^ies and Culices. The meaner sort of people also eat Rice
boiled with their Green-Ginger and a little Pepper, after which they put Butter
into it, but this is their principal dish, and but seldom eaten of them,
being to them as Rost-meat is to poor folks amongst us. And so much for the
great estimation that Rice has in the East Indies, which is indeed the
wholesomest grain that grows, though not so much in use amongst us.

CHAP. CCLXIV. Of Flix-Weed.
The Names.
IT has no pure Greek name set down by any Author, that I can find, yet those
Latin names that it has obtained, are many of them composed of Greek, as well
as Latin, as Pseudonasturtium sylvestre, Sophia Chirurgorum, and Thalietrum or
Thalictrum, but not truly, for that name belongs to the Rubarbe that grows
in our Meadows. It is called Pseudonasturtium sylv^stre, because it pertaines
to the Family of the wild Cr^sses, but why it is called Sophia Chirurgorum, I
know not, unless it be the Sophia Paracelsi, wherewith the Paracelsians
pretend to do wonders in uniting broken bones, and healing old sores: yet,
though the matter be disputable, it is generally called and known by the name
of Sophia Chirurgorum. In English it is called Flix-Weed, from the Virtues that
it has to cure the Flix.

The Kinds.
And because Flix-weed is said to be of the Family of wild Cresses, I shall
add one or two more thereunto, so that there is 1 Common Flix-weed. 2 Broad
leafed Flix-weed. 3 Narrow leafed wild Cresses. 4 Spanish wild Cresses.

The Forms.
Flix-weed rises up with a round upright hard stalk, half a yard, or two foot
high, but seldom more, spread into sundry branches, whereon do grow many
Leaves, of an overworn grayish green color, sinely cut, and divided into a
number of fine jagges, like unto those of the Wormwood, commonly called Roman;
The Flowers which are small, and of a dark yellow color, do grow in a spiked
fashion upon the tops of the spriggy branches, after which come very small long
Pods, with much small yellowish seed in them. The Root is long and woody,
perishing every year, yet if it be suffered to seed and shed, it will not fail
you of many appearances for one, the next year.

The Places and Time.
The three first, grow very frequently by Hedge-fides, Highways, upon old
Walls, and amongst rubbish in most places of this Land, especially the first;
The last has been found only in the Kingdom of Valentia in Spain; They Flower
from the beginning of June to the end of September, the seed ripening in the
mean while.

The Temperature.
Flix-weed is said to dry, without any manifest sharpness or heat.

The Virtues.
And whosoever shall drink the seed of Flix weed in Wine, or the Water of a
Smiths Forge, wherein Iron and Steel have been often quenched, shall find by
experience that it has not its name for nothing, for it is of excellent use to
stop the bloody Flix, the Lask, and all other Issues of blood; The Herb it self
boiled in either of the said liquors, and drunk, performs the like effects,
no less powerfully then Plantain or Comfry, as also to consolidate Bones that
are either broken or out of joint. The j^yce thereof drunk in Wine, or the
Decoction of the Herb drunk, does kill the Worms in the Stomach or Belly, and
the Worms which sometimes breed in putrid and filthy Ulcers. The said Herb
being bruised, or the juice thereof being put into Ointments and Salves, does
quickly heal all sores, how soul or malignant soever they be, and therefore it
would be taken into especial notice by those good people, who delight in
curing the Wounds and Maladies of their Neighbors. There may be also a Syrup
made hereof, which is admirable good to be used inwardly, when any of the
former occasions shall require. The distilled Water of the Herb is not
altogether so effectual for the purposes aforesaid, yet for those whose
Pallates will not brook any of the former Medicines, this may be taken, it
being a little clearer, and therefore more acceptable.

CHAP. CCLXV. Of the Pilewort.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and Chelidonium minus in Latin, for what reason
I know not, it being like unto the Chelidonium majus or greater Celandine,
neither in nature or form. It is called also Hirundinaria minor, as some have
supposed, because it springs when Swallows come in, and withers at their
going away, but this is true in neither, for it flowrisheth long before their
coming, and departs presently after. But the names of Ficaria and
Scrophularia minor are more propper unto it, because the Roots not only
re-resemble those kernels of the Fundament called the Piles, and those hard
swellings that sometimes sease upon the neck and other parts, but is very
powerful to cure them. In English it is usually known by the name of Pilewort,
as it ought to be, yet it has been also called the lesser Celandine, and
Figwort, from the Latin names.

The Form.
Pilewort or Celandine the less, grows with many pale round green leaves,
spread as it were upon the ground, by reason of their weak and trailing
branches whereon they are set, of a fat, smooth, and somewhat shining aspect,
marked in some places, though not often, with black spots, from amongst which
rise up diverse small yellow flowers, consisting of nine or ten very narrow
Leaves, upon their slender footstalk, somewhat like unto those of Crow-foot,
as the seed also is, it being set upon a head after the same manner. The Root
is composed of diverse small kernels of the bigness of wheat Corn, or bigger,
hanging to the body by a small string or fiber, and having another such a string
at the end also, all which are of a whitish color.

The Places and Time.
It grows in most parts of this Land, that are not ploughed up, if they be
any thing addicted to moisture, or overshaddowed, either with Walls or Trees,
as in Meadows, and Pastures, by Highway side^, by Ditches, Wall sides, Hedges,
Trenches, etc. It comes forth about the beginning of March, and flowreth not
long after, it begins to fade in April, and is so far gone in May, that the
Roots thereof can scarcely be found, therefore be sure you look for it in its
due season.

The Temperature.
Though Pilewort have not that acrimony and sharpness which Dioscorides and
Galen affirm to be in theirs, yet those that have succeeded them do agree, that
howsoever it has the properties thereof.

The Virtues and Signature.
The most profound Crollius in his Book of Signatures, has observed that
Pilewort has the perfect Signature of the Hemorrhoides or Piles, or such like
excrescences that appear in or about the Fundament, and therefore he says,
that not only the decoction being drunk is a profitable remedy for the said
evil accidents, but being hung about the neck, so that it may lie against the
Mouth of the Stomach, it performs the same, and so it does being made up into
an oil, Ointment or Salve, as also helps the kernels about the ears and
throat, called the Kings Evil, or any other hard Wens or Tumors, as Mr.
Culpeper says, he proved upon his own Daughter which had the Kings Evil, and
delivers it for an extraordinary secret. The juice taken from the Roots and
put into the Nose, purges the head, and the decoction thereof with a little
Hon^y put into it, and gargled in the Mouth, does the same effectually, and
does purge and cleanse the breast of phlegm, or any other tough humors that
do offend; It also helps a running Itch, and those Nails of the Fingers and
Toes, that grow deformed and scabbed. The Piles themselves being bathed with
the juice mixed with the Patients Urine, or with Wine, draws them together
and dries them up, and takes the pain quite away. The distilled water of the
Leaves and Flowers, that have the spots and marks upon them, is an admirable
remedy to cleanse the Faces of those are tanned, freckled, or otherwise
accidentally spotted, and this it does by Signature, as the aforesaid Crollius
has also recorded.

CHAP. CCLXVI. Of Water-Betony.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin (for the Greek name is no where expressed) Betonica
Aquatica, and Aquatilis most commonly, yet there be that call it Ocymast^um
majus, Clymenon, and Scrophularia, the likeness of the Plants causing the
interposition of Names, as being mistaken one for another; And so likewise in
English some have called it Brownwort, which is the same with Scrophularia or
Figgewort, but usually it is called Water-Betony, and of some Bishops-Leaves
and Brook-Betony.

The Kinds.
The sorts hereof are quickly reckoned up, for they are but two. 1 The greater
Water-Betony. 2 The lesser Water-Betony.

The Form.
The greater Water-Betony, which is most common, rises up somewhat like
Figwort, but many times higher, with square hard greenish stalks, and sometimes
brown, set with such like dark broad green Leaves, so very like unto those of
Figwort, that they have been often mistaken one for another, being also dented
about the edges, but with rounder notches, by the diligent observance whereof
they may be distinguished, in that respect somewhat resembling the Wood-Betony
Leaves, yet of a larger Sise, and two for the most part set at a joint; At the
tops of the branches, and likewise at the joints, where the Leaves come out
from the middle of the Stalk upwards, come forth many round bellyed Flowers,
which being fully blown, are open at the brims, yet divided into two parts, so
the uppermost is like a hood, and the lowermost like a lip hanging down, of a
dark red color, which passing away, there succeed round heads, which is small
and of a brownish color. The Root consists of a great number of fibers, or
stringes, which being fastened to the bottom of the stalk, feeds it with
sufficient nutriment in the Summer, but not in the Winter, for then the stalk
perishes.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in our Land as frequently as any Plant whatsoever, by Brooks
and other Watercourse, but is seldom found for from the Water side, unless
it has been purposely removed into a Garden or so; The second grows in the
like places of Germany about Basil, and will abide in Gardens, if it be brought
thither for rarity sake. They flower in July and August, and their seed is ripe
sh^rtly after.

The Temperature.
It is said that Water-Betony is hot and dry, but the operations that proceed
therefrom, do speak it rather to be of a cold quality.

The Virtues.
Mr. Langbam, a well experienced and industrious Practitioner of Physic, in
his Garden of Health, does in diverse places of that Chapter, which he writes
concerning Water-Betony, commend it for the Piles or Hemorrhoides whether the
Root be eaten, or stamped, and applied thereunto, or the Leaves and Seed-cases
bruised and applied outwardly likewise, or the Powder of it drunk, or strewed
thereon. The Leaves, Stalks, Seed, Root or Juice, are likewise good to wast
and dissolve any other swelling or hardnesses, in any part whatsoever being
stamped with Vinegar, and applied Morning, Noon and Night. The leaves only
stamped and applied to old rotten, corrupt, spreading and fretting sores, and
Pocks, heal^th them, and Canckers also, being applied with Salt. The juice
being pressed forth of the whole herb and drunk, helps those that spit blood
or are troubled with any Flux or excess of Flowers, or bleeding at the Nose,
and drives out the botch in the Throat. A dram of the seed drunk in Wine, is
effectual to expel all sorts of Worms out of the Belly or parts adjacent,
and so it is a remedy against venomous bitings. The said seed taken in Wine
with Myrrh and Pepper is very good for the Sciatica. The Leaves or Seed-cases
bruised, and applied unto fresh sores, heals and skinneth them, and so it
does rotten sores, swellings, and Lepry, and so does the juice of the whole
Herb and Root taken in May, and kept in a close glass for your use, which must
be ordered in this manner, as often as need is: Take thereof with Wax and Oil
of each a like quantity, which boiled till it be an Ointment, will be fit for
the purpose. The juice boiled with a little Honey, and tents dipped therein,
are very effectual to cure such sores as are dressed therewith, whether they be
old or fresh, and is good for bruises and hurts, whether inward or outward. The
herb alone sodden in Spring Water, quenches all unkind heats without danger,
and exceeds all other Medicines for the Lepry, Scab, Itch, Boyles, Wheales,
Pushes, etc. and the stamped Leaves and Cream are used for the same purposes.
The distilled Water of the Leaves is available for many of the like uses, as
also to bath the face and hands that are discolored by the sun, or have any
spots or blemishes thereon, as also for any redness or high color of the
face. The said Water, or the juice of the Leaves mixed with a little Brimstone
and Saltpeter, takes away the ach of the eyes, and the seed mixed with honey,
and applied to the forehead, stops the running of them, and the juice of it,
and Comfrey removes the dullness of them.

Those parts which serve for Nutrition being thus spoken to, as also those that
are subservient to them; I shall now, without saying any thing more of such
Plants as might be referred to the last Transition, pass unto those parts
which are ordained for Generation, and first I shall speak of such Simples as
provoke Lust. Secondly, of such as abate Lust. Thirdly, of such as provoke
Women's Courses. Fourthly, of such as stop Women's Courses. Fifthly, of such as
help the Disease called the Mother, and other effects of the Womb. Sixthly, of
such as are profitable for Ruptures. And Seventhly, of such as help the
Diseases of the Privy Members, to every of which Heads I shall appropriate
diverse Plants, and speak to them in order. And first to those which provoke
Lust, of which there may be some occasion to persons that are married, and
destitute of Children, single persons having more need to observe the next head
then this.

CHAP. CCLXVII. Of the Artichocke.
Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Scolymus, of Dioscorides (...), Cactos, of
Theophrastus, and (...) and (...), Cynara and Cinara, of diverse others, which
last name is by the Poets derived either from (...) Canis, because when King
Locrus enquired of the Oracle where he should build a City, the Oracle
answered in that place where he should be bit by the Leg with a Wooden Dog, who
hurting his Leg with a wild Articoock as he passed by, understood that that was
the Wooden Dog, which the Oracle meant, and so he built the City there where
it grew. Or from Cinara, who being a fair Maid, was turned into an Artichock.
It is called also in Latin Cinara, and so one would have it to be originally
so, deriving it a Ciner^, either because it delights to be danged with Ashes,
or because the Leaves are of an Ash color.

The Kinds.
There be several sorts of Artichocks. 1 The red Artichock. 2 The white
Artichock. 3 The French Artichock. 4 The Thistle Artichock. 5 The Chardon. 6
The wild Artichock of Candy.

The Forms.
The Artichock has diverse great, large, and long hollowed Leaves, much cut in,
or as it were torn on both the edges, of a whitish green color: from whence
rises up a strong thick and round stalk, covered many times with a thin skin
like unto down, bearing at the top one scaly head, somewhat like unto a Pine
Apple at first, but afterward the scales become more separated, yet in the
best kinds they stare not much, being either of a reddish, brown, whitish, or
greenish color, in some broad at the ends, in others sharp, or prickly, after
the said head has been suffered to stand a long while; in some there will
break forth at the top thereof many bluish purple thrums or threads, under
which grows the seed amongst the choaky or downy substance in the middle of
the head, and under that the edible substance which is most commended; The Root
spreads it self in the ground reasonable well, yielding diverse heads of
Leaves or suckers, whereby it is increased, if so be the head be cut of before
it flower, otherwise it will hardly abide the next Winter.

The Places and Time.
The two first have been so long planted in Gardens, that their natural place
is no where expressed by any Author. The third seems by its name to have been
brought out of France to us, but whether it grows there naturally, I dare not
affirm. The fourth is to be found about Mompelier. The fifth is planted much
about Brussels, the last is a natural of Candy, as its names declares. They are
commonly propagated by Suckers, which being clipped of and replanted in
February, March, or April, do the same year sometimes or the next at least,
bear good heads, but then care must be taken to secure them from the cold, by
raising little hills about them close to the Leaves, and likewise by laying a
Colewort or Cabbage Leaf upon the Top of every one to defend the Apple from
those frosts, which happen in March and April, when they begin to run to head,
and are ready to be eaten in May and June, and will flower in the end of
Summer, if they be suffered to stand, and the seed will be ripe shortly after,
but then the Root will be in danger of perishing, which otherwise would endure
many years.

The Temperature.
Some have supposed Artichocks to be hot and dry in the second degree, but to
me they seem very temperate.

The Virtues.
Artichocks have been in all Ages counted to be very lusty Meat, and are
certainly found to be so in ours, or else they would not be so much desired by
lucurious persons, to whom I commend them not, but rather to those which are
married, and cannot so far use the act of generation, as to have the benefit of
Children, for they procure bodily lust both in Men or Women, whether they be
well boiled, and eaten with Butter, Vinegar, and Pepper, or the boiled bottomes
put into Pyes and Baked, and so they are very restorative, and strengthen the
Stomach, and though they increase seed, yet they stay the involuntary course
thereof called Nocturnall pollution; Some write that the young buds of
Artichocks steeped in Wine, and drunk, (I mean the Wine, not the Artichocks)
does the same, and provokes Urine exceedingly, purging away thereby the rank
and rammish savor of the whole Body, but especially of the arme-holes, if the
Decoction of the Root having the Pith taken out, being made in Wine, or the
distillation thereof bruised and distilled in Wine in an Alembick be taken. The
young shoots may be boiled and eaten as Asparagus so may the heads while they
are yet very small buds, but it is more profitable to let them grow to be more
substantial. The Chardon which is whited like Endive, and then sold in the
Winter, is eaten raw of diverse with Vinegar, Oil, and Pepper, but be sure
there be salt too, or else it will not be right.

CHAP. CCLXVIII. Of Sea-Holly.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Eryngium, from (...), to Vomit, as some have
fab^lously supposed, who say, that a Goat cropping a branch of Sea-Holly makes
the whole flock to follow him till he have vomited it up, or till the
Heards-man has given him somewhat to cause him so to do. The Latins follow
the Greeks in this, as they do in many other names, be the cause of their
denomination right or wrong, and call it Eryngium also, from whence the Shops
do corruptly call it Iringus and Eringo. In English it is termed Sea-Holly,
because diverse of the sorts are prickly, somewhat like Holly, and for that they
commonly grow upon the Sea Coasts.

The Kinds.
Dioscorides makes but one sort of Eryngium, but diverse others have been
discovered since his time, so that there is 1 Ordinary Sea Holly. 2 Upland
Sea-Holly. 3 Hungary Sea Holly. 4 The small smooth bastard Sea-Holly. 5 Small
bastard Sea-Holly of Spain.

The Form.
The ordinary Sea-Holly comes up with Leaves, which at the first are soft and
gentle, yet as they grow older, they become very hard and prickly, being
crumpled about the edges, with here and there a sharp point sticking forth, of
a bluish green color, standing every one upon a long foot-stalk, from whence
rises up a round and strong stalk, yet somewhat crested, having several
joints and leaves set thereat, being more divided, sharp and prickly: the
branches which rise from them have likewise other smaller branches, bearing
several bluish round prickly heads with many small jagged prickly leaves,
growing like a star, out of which come blew flowers with whitish threads in the
midst: The Root is but about the bigness of a man's finger, yet of an
extraordinary length, set with ringes or circles toward the upper part,
brownish on the outside, but white within, having some pith in the middle, and
of a very pleasant taste.

The Places and Time.
The first grows upon the Sea Coasts in every Country, and is sometimes
brought into the Gardens of those that love varieties: the second is very
frequent in Franconia and also in Narbone in France, even in the midland
Country: the name of the third discovers its place: the fourth has no other
place set down but the Garden of John Mutton, but it is conceived to come out
of some hot Country because it flowreth late; the last was found by Clusius at
the foot of certain Hills near Salamanca in Spain. Some of them flower in the
end of Summer, and give ripe seed about a Month after, but others flower so
late, that they cannot perfect their seed.

The Temperature.
The Roots of Eryngium or Sea-Holly which are most in use, are temperate in
respect of heat, of somewhat a drying and cleansing faculty.

The Virtues.
The Roots of Sea-Holly commonly called Eryngo Roots, after they be condited or
preserved with Sugar, are exceeding good, not only to restore those that are
consumed and withered with age, and which want natural moisture, but for all
other sorts of people that have no delight or appetite to V^nery, so that it
amendeth the defects of nature in those that stand in need thereof, and some
there be that do, though I doubt that these Roots are abused by many that need
them not, as many of this sort also are, but how to help that is past my skill.
The decoction of the Root in White Wine being drunk is very effectual to open
the Obstructions of the Spleen and Liver, and helps the yellow Jaundise, the
Dropsy, the pains in the Loins, the wild Chollick, provokes Urine, and
expels the Stone, and procures Women's Courses. The continued use of the
Decoction for fifteen days taken first and last morning and evening does help
the Strangury, the pissing by drops, the stoppings of Urine, and the Stone, and
all defects of the Reins or Kidneys; and if the said drink be continued
longer, it is said that it perfectly cures the Stone, yea that experience has
found it so, and is good for the French Pox. The Roots bruised and applied
outwardly help the Kernels of the Throat, commonly called the Kings Evil; and
being taken inwardly as well as applied to the place stung or bitten by any
Serpent, causes it to heal speedily. If the Roots be bruised and boiled in old
Hog's Grease, or salted Lard, and applied to broken Bones, Thorns, etc.
remaining in the flesh, does not only draw them forth, but heals up the place
again, gathering new flesh where it was consumed. The juice of the Leaves
dropped into the ears, helps the Imposthumes therein. The distilled water of
the whole Herb, when the Leaves are young, is profitably drunk for all the
diseases aforesaid, as also to cause Mirth by driving melancholy from the
heart, to help Quartane and Quotidian Agues, and those that have their Necks so
drawn awry, that they cannot stir them unless they move their whole Bodies.
The young and tender shoots are eaten of diverse where they grow plentifully,
being almost as available to provoke Lust, as the Roots.

CHAP. CCLXIX. Of Potatoes.
The Names.
IT is not probable that I should show you by what names the ancient Greek and
Latin Writers did call these kinds of Plants, they being as I suppose known
to neither of them, being brought of later years from the Indies, so that I
hope it will be sufficient to tell you how the Modern Writers have called
them. Clusius calls the Spanish Potatoes, which are those in most request now
amongst us, Battata, Camotes, Amotes and Ignanes, or as some write it Inhames.
Those of Virginia are called Battata and Battatas Virginiana sive
Virginianorum, Papas, Papus and Pappus. Those of Canada which we in English
call Jerusalem Artichocks, because the Root being boiled is in taste like the
bottom of an Artichock, are called by Pelleterius, Heliotropium Indicum
tuberosum, by Columna, Flos Solis Farnesianus, sive Aster Peruvianus tuberosus.
The Names and Kinds being thus mixed together, I shall proceed to the
description of those that are called Spanish Potatoes, because they are most
for our purpose, as being most respected.

The Virtues.
The Spanish Potatoes rise up with many long branches, which by reason of their
weight and weakness lie trailing on the ground, whereon are set at several
distances, broad, and in a manner three square Leaves, somewhat like unto those
of the Winter Cherry, of a dark green color, the two sides thereof being broad
and round, and the end pointed reasonable close together; The Roots (for we
have not read either of the seed or flower) are firm, sweet and very many, like
in shape and form unto Asphodell Roots, but much greater and longer, of a pale
brown color on the outside, but white within, set together at one head.

The Places and Time.
The Potatoes, which we call Spanish, because they were first brought up to us
out of Spain, grew originally in the Indies, where they, or at least some of
this kind, serve for bread, and have been planted in many of our Gardens,
wherein they decay rather then increase, but the soil of Ireland does so well
agree with them, that they grow there so plentifully that there be whole
fields overrun with them, as I have been informed by diverse Soldiers which
came from thence; The Names of the second and third do sufficiently speak their
places, yet it will not be amiss to tell you that the last came from Canada,
and not from Jerusalem, notwithstanding some ignorant people that have them
growing in their Gardens with us, call them Artichocks of Jerusalem. The first
bears its green Leaves all the Summer, which perish with the Stalk at the
first approach of great frosts; The second thrusts forth its Leaves in the
beginning of May, the flowers bud forth in August, and the fruit is ripe in
September: The last flower about the latter end of Summer, and the Roots are
fit to be taken up from the time that the Stalk is withered, until it spring
again, which is the greatest part of the Winter.

The Temperature.
The Leaves of Potatoes are hot and dry, as may plainly appear by the taste,
but the Roots are of a temperate quality.

The Virtues.
Which way soever Potatoes be dressed they comfort, nourish and strengthen the
Body, procuring bodily lust, and that with greediness. Some only roast them
under the Embers to take away their windynesse, and then eat them after they
are peeled; Others having roasted them and peeled them as before, put them into
Sack with a little Sugar or without, and so they are delicate to be eaten. They
are used also to be baked with Marrow, Sugar, Spice, and other things in Pyes,
which are a costly and dainty dish for the Table; And some there be that
preserve and candy them, as they do diverse other things; and so ordered they
are very delicate, and fit to accompany other sweet Meats, when a Banquet is
presented. The Virginia Potatoes may be dressed after any of the aforesaid
ways, but they are not altogether so delicate as the former. The Potatoes of
Canada, called Jerusalem Artichocks as I said, were of great account when they
were first received amongst us, but by reason of their great increasing they
are become common, and consequently despicable, especially by those which think
nothing good unless it be deer; but if any one please to put them into boiling
Water, they will quickly become tender, so that being peeled, sliced and stewed
with b^tter and a little Wine, they will be as pleasant as the bottom of an
Artichocke.

CHAP. CCLXX. Of Skirret.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and Sisarum and Siser in Latin, being the sa^e
Root which Tiberius the Emperor so much loved, that he commanded it to be
conveyed unto him from Gelduba a Castle in Germa^^ standing about the River
Rhene, as Pliny reports; diverse of the later Herb^rists do call it Servillum
or Chervillum and Servilla, and we in English Skiriet and Ski^wort, they being
much mistaken who think Siser to be a Parsnep.

The Kinds.
There be but two sorts of Skirrets, and one of them must be fetched as far as
Egypt. 1 The Common Skirret. 2 Skirrets of Egypt or white Carrots.

The Form.
The Common Skirret has sundry stalks of winged leaves, which are composed of
many others, oppositely set upon a middle rib, and every one snipt about the
edges, somewhat like unto those of the Parsnep, but that they are smaller and
further set a sunder, being also smoother and greener, from amongst which
rises up the stalk, not much above half the height of the Parsnep, bearing at
the tops umbels of white flowers, which afterward turn into small dark seed,
somewhat bigger and darker then Parsley-seed; The Root is composed of diverse
small long lesser Roots, meeting together in one head like the A^phodill,
banched out and uneven or rugged, of a whitish color even on the outside, but
more white within, having in the middle of the Root a long small hard pith or
string, which no other Root that either has been or now is edible has besides
it.

The Places and Time.
The natural places of the first is in Narbone, which is almost forgotten
through its long continuance in Gardens, where the second grows not, being
found wild in Egypt by grand Cairo, as Ra^wolsius says Some sow them of seed
amongst their Onions in February or March, which is as good always for them as
for Parsneps, for then they will not hinder one another, the Onyons being to be
drawn betimes, and then the Ski^rets may have the full use of the ground in
Winter, which by the February following will be fit for use, some of them being
broken off to be used for food, and some to be planted again for increase,
which bring forth plentifully every year, if the ground be good; They flower
and seed the second year like as the Pasnep does, but somewhat later, but they
must not be removed at all.

The Temperature.
The Roots of the Skirret which are only in use, are moderate in heat and
moisture.

The Virtues.
Though the Roots of Skirrets be but of indifferent nourishment, yet because
they be easily concocted, yield a reasonable good juice, and are somewhat
windy, they have been judged effectual to provoke lust, and experimentally
proved so to do, being either baked in Pyes, as Potatoes after they have been
boiled, peeled, and pithed, or else stewed with Pepper, Butter and Salt, and so
eaten, or as others use them to roll them in Flower, and fry them in Butter,
after they have been boiled, peeled, and pithed; either of which ways they are
more pleasant, and more provocative then Parsnep, as all agree that eat them.
They may be also eaten cold with Vinegar and Oil, being first boiled and
dressed in manner aforesaid. The juice of the Roots drunk with Goats milk
stops the Laske; the same drunk with Wine is effectual for windiness in
the Stomach, and the gripings of the belly, and Hicket as some say. It does
somewhat respect the Kidneys and Bladder by moving Urine, and a little to
consume the Stone and Gravel in them. The Egyptian sort is eaten by those of
that Country, as familiarly as any other root whatsoever.

CHAP. CCLXXI. Of Pease.
The Names.
THis sort of Pulse is called in Greek (...), Pisum from Pisa being the name of
a place where they grew very plentifully, and (...) or (...) with an ^, which
last way of writing seems to agree most with the Etymology, for it is thought
to be derived (...), because it is covered with a Coat or Hull, which is more
eminent in this, then in any other seeds; It is called in Latin Pisum and in
English Pease and Peason.

The Kinds.
There be diverse sorts of Pease, nine whereof I shall reckon up, and add unto
them two sorts of Ciches, 1. The Rouncivall. 2. The green Hasting. The Sugar
Pease. 4. The spotted Pease. 5. The gray Pease. 6. The white Hasting. 7. The
Pease without skin. 8. The Rose Pease. 9. Fulham Pease. 10. White Chiches. 11.
Red Chiches.

The Form.
Pease do always come up with long, weak, hollow and brittle whitish green
stalks branched into diverse parts, putting forth at every joint where it
parts, one broad, round leaf, compassing the stalk so that it comes almost
through, in some sort like unto Thoroughwax; the Leaves are winged, that is,
they consist of diverse small Leaves set together at a middle rib, of a whitish
green color, with claspers at the end of the Leaves, whereby it catches hold
of whatsoever stands next it; the Flowers come forth from between the Leaves
and the stalks two or three together, yet so divided that they stand every one
upon a several footstalke, which are either wholly white, or purple, or mixed
white and purple, or purple and blew; the fruit comes forth in long and
somewhat round Cods, whereof some are longer, some are shorter, some thicker,
and some slenderer, the fruit it self also differing, some being round, some
cornered, some small, some great, some white, others gray, and some spotted;
the Root is small and quickly perishes after it has done bearing.

The Places and Time.
Some of these Pease grow only in Gardens, and are supported with stakes and
bushes; some of them are sown in the Fields by Gardners, and are gathered to
sell green in the Markets; the gray Pease are sowed by Husbandmen to feed their
Cattle with; the Fulham Pease, which came first out of France, is so called,
because the grounds about Fulham near London do bring them forward soonest:
the Rose Pease, which is sometimes called the Scottish Pease should be brought
out of Scotland by its name. The Chiches are very frequent in Spain; but I
know not whether they grow there naturally. They Flower and seed all the Summer
long, sooner or later, according to the time of their sowing.

The Temperature.
Pease, especially when they are young are of a mean temperature, as most other
things are which are used for food; they are less windy then Beans, but pass
not through the Body so soon as they.

The Virtues.
A dish of young Pease are very pleasant to all sorts of people, but especially
to young Women, who either are or would be with Child; for they help both the
generative and procreative faculty very much, and therefore they do not only
eat of them themselves, but commend them to their Hasbands, notwithstanding
they are eaten, but not with so much desire, by all other sorts of people. They
are also used to make Pottage, wherein many do put in Mints, Parsley, or some
other such hot herbs, to give it the better relish, and they be used to the
same purpose when they be ripe and dried, especially in the Lent season. The
said dried Pease are much used in long V^yages at Sea, both for change, and
also because they are not so salt as those things that lie in powder, and are
no inconsiderable food in bestedged Cities and Garrisons, nor in poor Folks
houses, being first steeped in running Water. Being sodden in Water and a Lie
made therewith, helps spreading sores of the Head, the spots of the Face, and
other discoloring of the skin; the same decoction mixed with Honey and Barley
meal, helps spreading sores, that are hard to cure; being boiled in water
with Or^bus, and applied to any swellings or aches, it helps them; the broth
wherein they have been boiled is good, take Purgations withal, to cleanse the
Stomach that is raw, through cold and moist humors, whether of the white or
gray, but especially the gray; the Pottage made of them is good for the
Strangury, and to take Sena withal morning and evening for the Ague, and
Rubarbe for the Jaundise; the powder of them being made very fine stops
bleeding at the Nose. The Cloth that is spotted or stained being laid a soak in
the Broth wherein Pease have been boiled, and then washed in River Water and
dried, becomes clean and spotless. The white Ciches also boiled and stewed
are a dainty dish, of a very good relish and nourishment: they increase bodily
Lust as much or more then any other sort of Pulse, and as it is thought help
to increase the Seed, and also Milk in Women's Breasts. The red Ciches have a
cleansing faculty, whereby they provoke Urine, and break the Stones in the
Kidneys, the Cream of them boiled in Water being drunk, which olso moves the
Belly downwards, provokes Women's Courses as well as Urine, and increases both
Milk and Seed; one Ounce of Cicers, two Ounces of French Barley and an handful
of Marsh mallow Roots washed clean and sliced, being boiled in the broth of a
Chicken, and four Ounces taken in a morning without eating any thing within
two hours after, is a good remedy for a pain in the Sides.

CHAP. CCLXXII. Of Rocket.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Euzomon, ob gratiam, non ob suavitatem, in jure
and obsoniis condiendis, for its savory, not for its sweet taste in seasoning
Meat and Broth, and Eruca in Latin, quia velicando Linguam quasi erodat,
because if it be eaten alone raw, it is so corrosive that it will make the
tongue barn, which is no token of sweetness (which commonly accompanyes
temperate things) but of much heat and strength.

The Kinds.
There are thirteen several sorts of Rocket mentioned by Authors. 1 Roman
Garden Rocket with white seed. 2 Great Garden Rocket. 3 Great Rocket of
America. 4 The more Common wild Rocket. 5 Small ill smelling wild Rocket. 6
Small wild Rocket of Mompelier. 7 Small hoary wild Rocket. 8 Blew flowred
Rocket. 9 Narrow leafed wild Rocket. 10 English Sea Rocket. 11 Candy Sea
Rocket. 12 Square Codded Rocket. 13 Italian Sea Rocket.

The Forms.
The more common Wild Rocket is most effectual for the present purpose, and
therefore omitting the Description of those that be before it, I shall only
describe that: it has long, narrow, and very much divided Leaves, with slender
cuts and gashes, or jags on both sides of the middle rib, of a sad overworne
green color when it grows on the ground, but when it grows upon high walls
as I have often seen it, they are of a fresh, though somewhat dark green
color; from amongst which, rise up diverse stiff Stalks about a foot high
sometimes, set with the like Leaves, but smaller and smaller as they grow
nearer to the top, branched from the middle into diverse lesser stalks, bearing
sundry yellow Flowers on them made of four Leaves a piece, as the others are,
which afterward yield small reddish seed in little long pods, of a bitter and
hot biting taste, somewhat like unto that Milk which is burnt too, as they call
it, and so are the Leaves. The Root is small, but somewhat woody, enduring
diverse years, if I mistake not.

The Places and Time.
The two first have been Inhabitants of the Garden so long that their natural
places are forgotten; the third came from that part of America called Canada:
the fourth grows very plentifully about the Abbey of St Albans on every side,
upon the Walls thereof, and diverse other Walls thereabouts that are of any
standing, it being either the nature of the Mortar thereabouts to produce it,
or else the seeds are carried upon them by the wind, or rather by Birds; some
of the other grow with us also, but diverse of them belong to others Countries,
so that we have them not, unless it be in the Gardens of some that are
curious; they flower about June and July, and their seed is ripe in August.

The Temperature.
Rocket is hot and dry in the third degree, and therefore it is seldom eaten
alone, unless it be in some cases.

The Virtues.
All the sorts of Rocket, but especially the wild kind which I have described,
are very effectual to quicken and stir up Nature where it is dull, or not
sufficiently active for generati^n, upon which account it was very famous in
Virgils time, who in his Poem called Moretum, makes mention of it in these
Words; Et Venerem revccans Eruca morantem; and is so likewise amongst the
modern Italians, who call it Rocket gentle, by which Epithet some understand
any thing that makes one quick, and ready to jest lasciviously, as this herb
does; yet some will have it to be so called because it is more pleasant and
gentle in taste then the wild kind which is more strong and efficacious; it
serves also to help digestion and provokes Urine exceedingly; the herb
boiled or stewed and some Sugar put thereto, helps the Cough in Children,
being often taken; the Seed moves to Venus as much or more then the Herb, and
is also good against the biting of the Shrew Mouse, and other venomous
Creatures, and it expels the Worms out of the Body; being taken in drink it
does away the ill scent of the Arm^pts, increases Milk in Nurses, and wastes
the Spleen; being mixed with Honey and applied, it cleanses the skin from
Spots, Morphew, and other discolorings thereof, and used with Vinegar it
takes away Freckles and redness in the Face, and other parts; and with the
gall of an Ox, it amendeth foul Scars, black and blew Spots, and the marks of
the small Pocks. The roots boiled in Water and then stamped and applied,
helps any grief that comes of Ruptures, Splinters, Fractures, or unplacing
of joints. The Leaves are fittest to be eaten with Lettice, Purslaine, and such
like Sallet herbs to take away the coldness of them; for being eaten alone,
they heat too much and cause the Headache.

CHAP. CCLXXIII. Of Mustard.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Napy, by Aristophanes and others that use the
Attick Dialect, but more commonly (...) Sinapi, (...), because it is offensive
to Eyes, making them water, if any one be too busy with it. It is also called
in Latin Sinapi and Sinapis in imitation of the Greek, in English Senvie, but
most commonly Mustard.

The Kinds.
To this Kind six sorts may properly be referred. 1 Ordinary Mustard. 2 Broad
leafed Mustard. 2 Small wild Mustard. 4 Small Mustard of Mompel^r. 5 Wild
Mustard of Naples. 6 Sea Mustard of Egypt.

The Form.
The ordinary Mustard grows up with many long rough Leaves, jagged with
uneven and unorderly gashes, somewhat like a Turnep, but a great deal lesser,
of an overworn green color and sharp taste, from whence arises up a stalk
two or three foot high, which divides it self into several branches, whereon
do grow diverse pale yellow Flowers in a great length together, which turn
into small and long Pods, wherein is contained blackish seed inclining to
redness, of a fiery sharp taste, much exceeding that of the Leaves; the Root
is tough and white, running deep into the ground, with many small Fibers
thereat, perishing yearly, yet if it be suffered to shed the seed, from thence
it will sow it self without any more ado.

The Places and Time.
The first, though it be sown by diverse for their private uses in their
Gardens and O^chards, yet the same is found wild also abroad in many places,
especially in G^ociste^shire about T^wxbury, where they grind it, and make it
up into ball^, which are brought to London and other remote places, as being
the best that the world affords; The second grows in Gardens only; But the
third is found in the borders of fields, and also in the low rills and furrows
of them; The three last are strangers to us, as their names do declare. They
all flower in July and their seed is ripe in August.

The Temperature.
The seed of Mustard, which we chiefly use, does heat and make thin, and also
draw forth, being hot and dry in the fourth, as Galen says; but the other
smaller sorts are not so hot.

The Virtues.
The seed of Mustard taken either by it self, or with other things, either in
an Electuary or Drink, prevails mightily to stir up bodily lust, by the heat
which it causes, b^ing a great help to remove that deadness and st^pefaction
that possesses the seed and members of generation, is those which are of cold
constitutions. It is also of good effect to bring down Women's Courses, for the
falling Sickness, the Lethargy, drousy or forgetful evil, to ^se i^ both
inwardly and outwardly, to rub the N^strils, Forehead, and Temples, to warm and
quicken the Spirits; for by the fierce sharpness it purges the brain by
sneesing, and drawing down Rhewme and other viscous humors, which by their
residence there become very offensive, or by their distillation upon the Lungs
and Chest, procure coughing, if it be first beaten, and then made up into
little balls with honey, and one or two be swallowed down fasting every
morning, not only helps the former distempe^s, but cleanses the breast so
effectually, that if those that are addicted to singing, take thereof, it will
clear their Voices very much in a short time; It strengthens the heart,
resists poison, warmeth the Stomach, helps digestion, provokes Appetite,
eases the continual pain of the Spleen, sides and belly, wastes the Quartane
Ague, and if used for some time, quite cures it; The Dec^ction of the seed
being taken in Wine, which used as a Gargle, sends up the Palate of the Mouth
being fallen down, and it also dissolveth those Tumors and Swellings which
sometimes gather about the Throat, if a plaster, wherein pretty store of the
powder of this seed is mixed, be applied, and so it helps the Sciati^^, and
other Aches of the joints, by discussing the humors which cause them; Being
applied in like manner to the Sides, Loins, or Shoulders which are grieved with
any Ach or pain, it draws forth the cause which does evacuate it self by
Blisters, and by that means helps them. It is also used to help the falling
of the hair, and being chewed in the Mouth it oftentimes helps the
Toothache; Being bruised, mixed up with honey, and applied, or else made up
with Wax, it takes away the Marks, and black and blew spots of bruises, or the
like, the roughness and s^^bbednesse of the Skin, as also the Leprosy and
Lowsy Evil; it helps also the Crick in the Neck, by which it is so drawn
awry, that the liberty of breathing is well nigh taken away; The distilled
Water of the Herb, when it is in flower, is much used, not only to drink
inwardly for the diseases aforesaid, or to wash the Mouth when the Palate is
down, and to Gargle the Throat, but outwardly also for Scabs, Itch, or other
like infirmities, and cleans^th the Face from Morphew, Spots, Freckles and
other deformities. The Oil of Mustard, which is made by infusing four pound of
grownd Mustard Seed, with four pound of Oil, for ten days together, and then
straining it, is good for the griefs of the Reins, Palsies, Gouts, Stitches
and Swellings. The seed hereof, with good vinegar added thereunto, being
grownd, is that Sauce that we eat both with Fish and Flesh, especially if it be
salt. It is excellent for such whose blood wants clarifying, to stir up
appetite in those whose Stomachs are weak through Age, or any cold disease,
but it is naught for Choleric people. And if there be any one that does not
think the ordinary Mustard or Sauce delicate enough, or less pleasing to the
palate and Stomach, let them take of Mustard seed two ounces, of Cinnamon half
an ounce well beaten, which being made up into Balls or Cakes with honey and
vinegar, and dried in the Sun, will be fit to keep a long while, until use
shall be made thereof by relenting it with a little Vinegar, for so it is
presently made into a sauce very well worth commendation, and the same way the
balls of Te^xbury Mustard are relented, which of so simple a Sauce has not its
Parallel.

CHAP. CCLXXIV. Of Cotton.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and (...), Xylum and Gossipium, I know not for
what reason, yet the Latins follow the Greeks in this as they do in many other
things, without examining the cause of the name, much less imposing a better
of their own, but in truth it happens so in all other Languages. Serapio
calls it C^to from whence comes our English word Cotton, and B^mbax, as it
is also called in the Apothecaries shops, from whence the word Bombast comes.

The Kinds.
The sorts of Cotton are four. 1 The Tree of fine Cotton. 2 The Bush of lump
Cotton. 3 Thorny Indian Cotton. 4 The long leafed Cotton of Java.

The Form.
The bush of lump Cotton which I conceive that to be that whose seeds are most
frequent in the Apothecaries Shops, and therefore it is that I choose rather to
give you the description thereof, rises out of the ground with an upright
stem of about a Cubit high, divided from the lowest part to the top into
sundry small branches whereupon are set disorderly certain broad Leaves, cut for
the most part into three sections or parts, and sometimes more, somewhat
indented about the edges, not much unlike those of the Vervain Mallow but
lesser, softer and of a grayish color, amongst which come forth the flowers
standing upon slender foot stalks, the brims and edges whereof are of a yellow
color, and the middle part purple, somewhat in fashion like a Bell-flower,
after which comes the fruit, wherein is contained the seed wrapped up in a
great lump of fine white Cotton, of the bigness of small pease, in shape like
the Trettles or Dung of a Coney, sticking close together in two rows, with
white sweet kernels within them. The Root is small and single, with a few
fibers thereat, and of a woody substance, as all the rest of the Plant, yet it
perishes every year as soon as it has perfected its seed.

The Places and Time.
The first is natural to Asia the greater, and the East and West- Indies, and
has been brought into Asia the lesser, Egypt, and some Christian Countries,
but as ^^rarity: The second is more frequent both in the lesser Asia, Egypt,
and diverse parts thereabouts, as also in Cypr^^, Candy, and other Islands of
the Mediterr^^ean Sea; The names of the two last speak their places. The lump
Cotton is sown about the later end of April, and then it will be ready to be
mowen or reaped about August or September; for if it be suffered to stand any
longer then its due time, it casts forth its Wool and Seeds upon the ground.

The Temperature.
The seeds of Cotton are said to be hot and moist, and the Wool or Cotton it
self to be hot and dry.

The Virtues.
Of all the seeds I have yet mentioned, there is none more absolutely
effectual not only to increase the seed of generation and natural strength,
but also to stir up bodily lust then this of Cotton, which may be had at any
Apothecaries shops; It is also used to lenify the harshnesse of the Throat, to
help those that are short winded, by opening the Passages, whose obstruction
was the cause thereof; and those also that have sharp distillations upon the
Lungs, so that it is also a good remedy for the Cough; for it not only dries
up the Rhewme, but causes tough phlegm to be easily expectorated or avoided:
It is used likewise in gripings and gnawings of the Stomach and Guts, yea,
though they come by poison, and are good also in all hot (or I should rather
think in cold) Agues. The juice of the Leaves is good for the Lask of young
Children, and for the gnawing and grinding in the belly. The Ashes of the
Cotton Wool being being burned, is very admirable to stanch the bleeding of
Wounds, and is used in rest^ictive Medicines, as Bole Armoniack is, for which
it is more effectual. The oil pressed out of the seed, does make the skin to
become exceeding smooth, taking away Spots, Freckles, and other blemishes
thereof. Some do think, and that not without good reason, that the Byssus of
the Ancients is the Wool of the Tree of fine Cotton, of which the Byssina ^ela
or fine white Callicoe Cloth that comes out of the East Indies is made. Common
experience tells us also, how profitable Cotton Wool is to make Fustian
Cloth, Stockings, Gloves, and diverse other necessaries, and it is the best Wool
that can be to put in an Inkehorn.

CHAP. CCLXXV Of the Fistick Nut.
The Names.
IT has gotten diverse Greek Names, or rather the same Name diversely altered;
for though (...), Pistacia be the ordinary Name, yet Nicander in one place calls
it (...), Phistacia, and in another (...), and Possidonius writes it (...); It
is called in Latin Pistacia, Pistacium, and of some Nux Pistacia, and the Tree
is thought to be the Terebintbus Indica of Theophrastus; We call the fruit in
English Pistackes and Fistick Nuts, and the Tree the Fistick Tree.

The Form.
The Tree which bears the Fistick Nuts, grows to be of a reasonable large
sise in the hot Countries, though but very slender in ours, dispersed into
sundry branches, whose bark is of a dark russet color; the leaves are winged,
five or seven growing commonly on a stalk, the odd one standing always at the
end, each whereof is broader and larger then those of the Ash, but not so sharp
pointed, smooth almost, shining with diverse veins therein, and of a pale
yellowish green color, from amongst which do come forth many white flowers set
together on a long cluster, and consequently the fruit which are somewhat long
and round Nuts bigger then Filberds, pointed at the ends, with a rough outer
shell somewhat like unto the outer shell of an Almond, but tough and hard to
break, yet cleaving into two parts, and smooth and white on the inside thereof,
having a full green Not or kernel within, filling the whole shell, the rind
and peeling whereof is thick and red, the kernel being sweet to smell unto,
pleasant in ^ast and altogether inoffensive.

The Pl^ces and Time.
The Fistick Tree grows naturally in Bactria and other parts near unto the
East Indies, being brought from thence into Persia, Arabia, Syria, and Egypt as
also into the warmer coasts of Italy and Naples, where they thrive and prospe^,
bringing forth their flowers in May, and their ripe fruit in September, or
thereabouts.

The Temperature.
Fistick Nuts are of temperature hot and moist.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Kernels of the Fistick Nuts may be sade to have the Signature of the
Testicles, or rather the Nut of the Yard, as Cr^llius says, and therefore the
^ating of them being condited or made into Comfits, or otherwise is as
cond^cible for the increasing of seed, and stirring up of V^nery, as the
Kernels of the Pine Apples are, being very little inferior in goodness to
them; Whether they be eaten or drunk they be friendly to the Stomach, and yield
to the body no small nourishment, for they make even those bodies which are in
a Consumption to recover strength; They are good against the stingings and
bitings of Serpents, and other venomous Creatures, by reason of the thin
Essence and little bitter substance that is mingled with the sweet in them, and
for the same ca^se they ^pen the Obstructions of the Liver, and are good also
for the Chest and Lunges, concocting, ripening, and expelling the raw humors
that many times offend them; There is also a little astringent quality in them,
whereby they strengthen both the Liver and Stomach, to be put either in Meats
or Medicines; They also remove sand and gravel out of the Reins or Kidneys
and assuage their pain, and are also good for Ulcers.

CHAP. CCLXXVI. Of the Chestnut Tree*
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and (...), Castana, and Castan^a, but m^st
usually Castanea in Latin, and so is the fruit which is also called (...), and
(...), in Latin Sardianae glandes, and ^opima. Sou^e have called it Euboida or
Euboica, and Heracle^t^ca, because as it should seem they grew plentifully in
those parts, and Gaza translating Theophrastus, calls it Avellana Nux, but
improperly, and Ageloc^us, as Athenaeus says, called it Mo^a, and Amo^a:
Though Pliny seems to make the Tarentina, Salariana, Meterano, Cor^liana
Balanitis, etc. to be diverse sorts hereof, yet indeed they are only the
diversity of places, which cause this difference of Names.

The Kinds.
There are four especial sorts of Che^nuts. 1 The ordinary Chestnut. 2 The
Horse Chestnut. 3 The Dwarf Chestnut. 4. The Chestnut of Peru. 5 Purging Chestnuts
of America.

The Form.
The ordinary Chestnut Tree grows very tall and high, bearing great, long,
rough and wrinkled Leaves, dented about the edges, putting forth at the time of
the year diverse long Catkins or bloomings, somewhat like the Oak, but of a more
greenish yellow color; the Fruit grows between the leaves and the branches
toward the end of them, enclosed in three several Husks, the outermost
whereof is whi^ish and prickly like an Urchin, which opens it self when it
is ripe, and shows the Nut, being flat on the one side, and round but flat on
the other, whose shell or husk is smooth, brown, and shining a little on the
outside, but hairy within, tough also and not easy to break, under which
lies the kernel covered with a thin reddish bitter skin or peeling, which is
of a firm substance and white, sweet and pleasant in ^aste, formed somewhat
like a Heart, the wood hereof is tough and of a brownish color.

The Places and Time.
The First grows upon Mountains and in Woods usually, yea there be diverse
Woods in England, which have few Trees in them but Chestnut Trees, one whereof
is within a mile and a half of Feversham in Kent, yet these that grow in the
warmer Countries produce greater Nuts; the Second grows naturally in Turk^,
and is entertained in diverse of our Gardens, that pretend to rarities, and
indeed i^ is a stately Plant; the Third grows upon Pilates hill, which is not
far from Lions in France; the two last in the West Indies: the Catkins show
themselves in March, the Leaves in April, and immediately after the Flowers,
but the Fruit is not ripe until the Autumn.

The Temperature.
Chestnuts are neither hot nor cold, but in a mean between both, yet they ar^
very dry and binding.

The Signature and Virtues.
Every one will be ap^ enough to discover the Signatures that this Nut bears,
and so likewise of diverse others that tend to this purpose, so that a small
hint will be sufficient. It is not ordinarily delivered, that this Nut should
stir up Venery; only Langham in his Garden of Health mentions it for that
purpose, which is more then probable, if the much nourishment they afford, and
the windiness going along with them (both which qualities are very conducible
hereunto) be considered. The meal of these Nuts made into an Electuary with
Honey is said to be very profitable for those that are troubled with a Cough,
spitting of blood laske, or any Flux of blood in Man or Woman, but especially
the inner skin that covers the kernel, if the decoction thereof in Wine or
Water, or the powder thereof be taken in some convenient Liquor. The way to
remedy the windiness of them in part (for it will not totally be consumed) is
first to prick them through the husk with a penknife or bodkin, and then
roast them under the embers or hot ashes, and so they yield commendable
nourishment; yet if they be eaten immoderately they cause the Headache, are hard
of digestion and bind the body. The powder of the said Nut kernels being dried
and applied with Barley Meal and Vinegar does cure unnatural blastings, and
swelling of the Breasts. Being stamped with Honey and Salt and applied to the
biting of a mad Dog, it freeth it from doing harm, and heals it. The Horse
Chestnuts in Turkey and other Eastern Countries where they grow plentifully, are
given to Horses to cure them of the Cough, shortness of breath, and other
diseases, whence it had its name. The other three sorts are of very little
note, and therefore I shall say nothing of them.

CHAP. CCLXXVII. Of the Tree of Cacao and Chocolate.
The Names.
IT is called by the West Indians, amongst whom it was first known, and not in
any part of the Christian world till after the discovery of Am^rica, Cacao sive
Cacavate, besides which name it has received none either Greek or Latin; in
English it is called, The Pear-bearing whol^ome Almond Tree; the Confection
wherein the Cacao is the maine ingredient, is in the Indian language called
Chocolate, being compounded of A^e as some say, or as others, A^le, which in
the Mexican Language signifies Water, and Choco the noise that the Water
(wherein the Chocolate is put) makes when it is stir^ed in a Cup, until it
bubble and rise unto a froth; it may be called in English A compounded or
Confectioned drink, yet it is better known by the names of Chocolate and
Chocoletto, for so it is usually called.

The Kinds.
There are two sorts of Cacao. 1 The common Cacao, which is of a gray color
inclining toward red. 2 Patlaxte which is broader and bigger, white and more
drying, whereby it causes watchfulness, and therefore is not so useful as
the ordinary, the description whereof, though imperfect, take as follows.

The Form.
The Tree of Cacao is of a mean size, so delicate and tender that it must be
defended from the S^n, and therefore other Trees are first planted, which being
grown up to that height, that they may be fitted and plashed like an Arbor*
the Cacao Tree is then set; for if it should be set before, it would perish
through the extreme heat of the Country where it grows; what bark, Leaves or
Flower it bears is not set down by any Author that I have met with, but the
fruit is said nearly to resemble the form of a Pear, or Pear fashioned Gourd,
wherein are contained ten or twelve kernels, somewhat bigger then A^mands,
blackish without, with brownish ash-colored veins within, very sweet and
pleasant in taste to the Indians, yet to strangers it is bitter and unpleasant.

The Places and Time.
They both grow in diverse parts of the West Indies, especially in or about
^uatimale, whence they have been brought into Hispaniol^, where they are
plentiful, as may be gathered from some of the Relations of the Commodities of
that Island and Jamaica, lately come from thence; they delight only in warm
and we^, yet shadowed places; their time is not expressed; yet it is said, that
after they have gathered the Fruit, they break the outer rind, and lay the
inner fruit upon Mats to dry in the Sun, until the moisture within them be
consumed, and then they keep them both for Meat and Merchand^se.

The Temperature.
The Cacaoes or Kernels of the aforesaid fruit are of different parts; first
they are very cold and dry, and should therefore be restringent and
obstructive, yet they are so far partakers of heat and moisture, that if they
be skilfully grownd and mixed together, both the restringent and obstructive
faculty is corrected.

The Virtues.
The Confection made of Cacao called Chocolate or Chocoletto which may be had
in diverse places in London at reasonable rates, being taken in substance, or,
as is more usual, relented in Milk, is of wonderful efficacy for the
procreation of Children; for it not only vehemently incites to Venus, but
causes Conception in Women, and hastens and facilitates their delivery, and
besides that, it preserves health, it makes such as drink it often to become
fat and corpulent, fair and amiable; it is an excellent help to digestion, it
cures Consumptions and Cough of the Lungs, the Plague of the gu^s and other
Fluxes, the green Sickness, Jaundise and all manner of Inflammations,
Opilations and Obstructions; it quite takes away the Morphew, cleanses the
Teeth and sweetneth the breath, provokes Urine, cures the Stone and Strangury,
expels poisons, and preserves from all infectious diseases; these and diverse
other Virtues have been found in it by diverse noble Personages, who by some
continued use thereof have received much benefit thereby, every day producing
new and admirable effects in such as drink it. The particular ingredients of
the Confection, their qualities and virtues, the way of compounding and using
it, with the Dose or quantity that is to be taken at a time, is punctually set
down in that learned and ingenuous, though short Tract, which was written
originally in Spanish by Antonio Colminer^ of Ledesma, Doctor in Physic, and
faithfully rendered in English by my much honored Friend Captain James
Wadsworth.

CHAP. CCLXXVIII. Of Satyrions.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Sat^rium, from (...), because it was found out by
the Satyrs, who first used it to stir up lust, for which they were so
notable; it is also called (...) Orchis, which is as general a name as
Satyrium is, one kind whereof is called (...), another (...), Cynosorchis, and
Tragorchis; in Latin Testiculus Canis, and Testiculus Capri; in English
Satyrion, Orchis, Doggestones, Goatestones, Foolestones, Cullions, Standle
wort, Standerd grass, Kingfingers, Gandergosses, etc.

The Kinds.
All the sorts of Satyrions would fill a sheet of Paper, and therefore I shall
specify only the chiefest of them that grow in England. 1 The Male Satyrion
Royal. 2 The Female Satyrion. 3 Marish Satyrion. 4 Spotted marish Satyrion. 5
Creeping Satyrion. 6 Be Satyrion. 7 Butterfly Satyrion. 8 The elegant purplish
fly Satyrion. 9 Yellow fly Satyrion. 10 Scarlet fly Satyrion. 11 Fly Satyrion.
12 Bird Satyrion. 12 Dogs stones with a gaping Flower. 13 Little purple flowred
Doggestones. 14 The Male Foolstones or Crowtoes. 15 The Female Foolestones or
Crowtoes. 16 The Lizard Flower or Goats stones. 17 The Spider Orchis. 18 Spur
flowred Orchis or Red handed Orchis. 19 Humble be Orchis. 20 Lady-Traces.

The Form.
The Male Satyrion Royal has diverse large, broad, and long, smooth, green
Leaves, lying on the ground, amongst which, rises up a round stalk with some
such Leaves on it, but lesser toward the top, where grows a large head of pale
purple flowers, spotted with a deeper purple color, each Flower having a heel
of the same color behind it; the Roots are flat and broad, two joined together
at a head like unto hands, one whereof is firm, and the other loose and
spungy, as it is also in the Orchises that have Roots like Stones, altering
every year by course; for when the one rises and waxes full, the other waxes
lank, the full one sinketh if it be put into water, the la^k one swimmeth.

The Places and Time.
As the Satyrions are many, so the places are different, for some grow in
Fields and Meadows, some in Moorish grounds and Marshes, and others upon Hills
and Mountains, some of the most considerable I shall particularize unto (...)
The Be Satyrion grows in a large Close near El^feild, on the side of the
Hill, between it and Oxford; The Butterfly Satyrion has been found in
Stow-Wood, being not far from the former places; The eighth in Brodworth-Wood
in Iork^shire; The tenth in Swanscombe-Wood; The eleventh on a Hill Southwest
of Bath; The sixteenth nigh the high way between Crayford and Dartford in Kent;
The seventeenth hard by Walcot, a Mile from Barnet. They flower in the Months
of April, May, and June, some earlier, and some later then another.

The Temperature.
That part of any of these Roots that is full and heavy, is hot and moist, and
that which is spungy and light, is hot and dry, the full one seems to have
much superfluous windiness, which the lank one is without.

The Virtues and Signature.
The full and plump Roots of the Satyrion or Orchis whereof the Electuary
Diasatyrion is made, are of mighty efficacy to provoke to Venery, which they
that have Bulbous Roots do by Signature, but the lank or shrivelled mortifies
lust, so that here is a Remedy both to help Nature if it be deficient, and to
restrain it if be too luxuriant; Being boiled in Milk, especially the Goats
stones, and those other whose smell does imitate that of the seed, and eaten
with white Pepper do the same, and also nourish and strengthen those that are
in a Consumption, or have the Hectic Fever; The same Roots boiled in Wine and
drunk, stop the Flux, and being green, they consume all tumors, cleanse rotten
sores and Fistulaes, being applied, and the powder thereof being cast into
fretting and devouring Ulcers, and Sores, stays the same from further
fretting and festring; Being boiled in Wine with a little Honey, it cures the
rotten Ulcers and Sores of the Mouth, and being bruised only and applied, it is
good against inflammations and swellings. The Satyrion Royal, which is that
before described, has this particular virtue above the rest, that being
bruised and drunk in wine, it provokes Vomit, and purges the Stomach and
Belly, by means whereof it cures an old Fever, if as much as ones thumb be
used before the fit come. The flowers of Dogges-stones are also effectual to
cause, provoke, increase, and sti^ up Nature, in case she forget her self,
through the coldness of any ones constitution.

CHAP. CCLXXIX. Of Dragons.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and (...), Dracontia and Dracontium, from the
resemblance that the stalk has with the skin of a snake, which is very great,
and it is observed by Pliny, that it springs out of the ground when snakes
first begin to stir, and as soon as they retire, it retireth also: It is called
in Latin Serpentaria, Bisaria and Colubrina, but most commonly Dracunculus, in
English Dragons.

The Kinds.
There be three sorts of Dragons. 1 Great Dragons. 2* Small Dragons. 3 Water
Dragons.

The Form.
The great Dragon rises up with a bare or naked round whitish stalk about half
a yard high or higher, which is many times thick, but always smooth, and
spo^ted very much with spots of diverse colors, like those of the Adder or
Snake, bearing at the top thereof a few green Leaves very much divided on all
sides, standing upon long Footstalk, in the middle whereof (if the Root have
been long planted) comes forth a great long husk or hose, green and of a dark
purplish color on the inside, with a slender long reddish pestell or clapper
in the middle, like unto that of the flower of Cuckowpint, but greater; The
skin or filme whereof when the seed waxes big, being stretched and broken in
sunder, there appears the Fruit like to a bunsh or cluster of Grapes; The
Berries whereof at the first be green, afterward red and full of juice, in
which is contained seed, which is somewhat hard; The Root is great, round, flat
and whitish on the outside, but whiter within, with diverse fibers hanging
thereat, much like unto the Cuckowpint both in form and taste.

The Places and Time.
The two first are planted in Gardens, where they have been so long, that their
natural place is not recorded; The third grows for the most part in Fenny
places, where the Water always stands, and sometimes in Watery and marish
places. They flower in July and the berries are ripe in September.

The Temperature.
The Roots of Dragons are biting and bitter, and not without some astriction,
and therefore there is no question but that it is hot and dry, at least in the
second Degree.

The Signature and Virtues.
As it has the form, taste and temperature of Cuckowpint, so it has not only
the Signature, which will sufficiently declare it self, but the Virtues also
according to the Signature, for they are both notable for stirring up of
inclinations to copulation, being either well roasted under the embers or
boiled. Being prepared either of the said ways, and mixed with honey it does
the same, and is also good for the straitness of the Breath, dangerous Coughes
and Ca^arrhes, Convulsions, and Cramp^, by consuming tough and gross humors,
and scowring and cleansing the inward parts; The same dried and mixed with
Honey scowreth malignant and fretting Sores, that are hard to cure, especially
mixed with the Root of Briony, and takes away all white spots and scurfe being
rubbed therewith; The juice of the Root puts away all Webs and Spots of the
Eyes, and is good in Eye Medicines, and being dropped into the Ears with Oil
takes away the pain of them: The fresh Leaves are good for Ulcers, green
Wounds, and venemons bitings, drawing out the venom, or whatsoever else
hinders the healing of them, and with honey they take away the spots of the
Face, both which i^ may be said to do by Signature; With the Roots and Leaves
are made Oils, Ointments, and Plasters, excellent good to heal Ulcers, Bi^es,
Fistulaes, Pocks, Cankers, fretting and consuming Sores, and all such like
annoyances; The Fruit also cures malignant Ulcers, and consumes the Polipus
or proud flesh that sometimes grows in the Nose; The distilled water of the
Leaves has virtue against the P^stilence, or any p^stilentiall Fever, or
poison being drunk blood warm, with the best Treacle or Mithridate; The smell
of the herb drives away Serpents, and is hurtful for Women with Child, for it
will cause abortion.

So much for Plants that provoke Lust, I shall now speak of some that abate it,
and first.
CHAP. CCLXXX. Of Agnus or the Chaste Tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Agnus, which signifies Castus Chaste, from the
effects; for both the Seeds and Leaves do preserve Chastity very much; and
(...), Lugos, quasi Vimen, for its wonderful flexibility; The Latins call it
Vitex, and the Physicians and Apothecaries call it Agnus Castus, but not
without error; for Agnus and Castus signify the same, the one being the Greek,
the other the Latin Name, so that whosoever uses them both is guilty of a
great Tautology; we in English the Chaste Tree.

The Kinds.
The Chaste Tree is of two sorts. 1 Narrow Leafed Chaste Tree. 2 The broader
Leafed Chaste Tree.

The Form.
The Chaste Tree rises up higher then a Shrub, yet seldom attaineth to any
great height, having diverse branches covered with a dark color, very pleasant
and easy to be bent without breaking, like unto the Willow, with sund^y large
Leaves, cut or divided like unto those of Hemp, either into five or seven parts
or Leaves, each of them being long and narrow like unto Willow Leaves, but
smaller; The Flowers do grow at the uppermost part of the branches in long
spikes, somewhat like unto those of Lavander, growing at several spaces up to
the tops of a blush white color, after which come small round seeds of the
bigness and likeness almost of Pepper, being of a blackish gray color, and
tasting somewhat hot and strong, and therefore some have called it Piper
agr^ste.

The Places and Time.
They both grow by the Water-sides, and in the moister grounds of Italy and
Spain, and in the furthest part of France, and other hot Countries, where they
flower in July, and their seed is ripe in August; but with us where they are
planted for their rarity, as in Mr. John Danvers his Garden at Chelsey, etc.
they will hardly flower.

The Temperature.
The Leaves and Seed of the Chast-Tree, as Galen says, are hot and dry in the
third degree, and of a very thin essence or substance, sharp also and binding.

The Virtues.
Not only the Seeds of Agnus used and taken in what manner soever, do restrain
the instigations to Venery, which it must needs do by a Specific property,
seeing it is of the same Temperature with Pepper, which works contrary
effects, but the Leaves also are effectual to the same purpose; and therefore
the Athenian Matrons in their Thesmophoria did use these Leaves as Shee^s to
lie upon, thereby to preserve their thoughts, if it were possible, from
impurity. The said Seed only being drunk in Wine to the quantity of a dram,
powdered or with Penniroyall, resists the bitings of venomous Beasts, Spiders,
or the like, and helps the Dropsy, and those that are troubled with the
Spleen; it also procures Milk in Women's Breasts, provokes their Courses, and
expels Urine: The decoction of the Leaves and Seeds is very good for Women
troubled with the pain of the Mother, and the Inflammation of those parts, and
the hot fumes thereof sat over are no less effectual: Being applied to the
head in the manner of a Pultis, it eases the pains thereof; and being mixed
with Oil and Vinegar, it helps those that are troubled either with the
Lethargy or Frensy. The Leaves of Agnus, and of the Vine being stamped with
Butter and applied to the swellings of the Cods and Genitories that are hard,
dissolveth and asswageth them, and being p^t into Plasters and applied to the
Reins, it helps the Satyriasis or contin^all standing of the Yard, and so
does the seed being eaten, which also dries up the natural seed of
Generation, and therefore it must needs be an exc^llen^ Remedy for all such as
would live chaste, or desire to extinguish those carnal mo^ions, to which there
be few but are subject, and this it is said to do, it the se^ds be but carried
about one. Some mix it with Oil and Ointments, that are made to heat, mollify,
and heal the hardness or stiffness of any me^b^r, that is waxen deadish,
sleepy, benumbed or wearied, it cures also the clefts and chops of the
Fundament, being laid to with Water. Being used with Barley meal it helps
Imposthumes and with Niter and Vinegar it takes away the Freckles of the Face,
and used with Honey it helps the sores in the Mouth and Throat. It is of
singular good use for the purposes aforesaid, especially to withstand
uncleanness, but the too often use thereof causes the Headache, yet if the
Seeds be parched or fried before they be eaten, they will the less trouble the
Head, and being so prepared they dissolve the wind in the Stomach or Belly as
they do when they are fresh, but not so effectually.

CHAP. CCLXXXI. Of Hemp.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Cannabi^, (which very word the Latins also use,
as having n^ne o^ their own to ex^resse it) from (...) (says Lobel) because it
delights very much to grow near watery places, whether Springs ^r Breekes, for
so the word (...) sign fieth: Some have also called it (...) because of its
great use in ^^king Cordage: We in English call it H^mp^, and sometimes Welsh
Pa^sl^^ and N^^k weed, but these are but Nick N^mes.

The Kinds.
Though custom has caused the bar^en Hemp^ to be called the Female, and that
which bears S^^d to be the Male, yet I see no reason for it, they being from
the same Seed, and therefore must be of the same kind, howsoever there be two
sorts hereof. 1 Common Hemp. 2 Virginian Hemp.

The Form.
The common Hemp, which is that which is manured both Male and Female, rises
up out of the ground after the same manner, neither can they be distinguished,
till they come to be well grown, and then the Female, as they call it, which
is ripe, and must be pulled first, is easily known from the other, by the
fewness of its Leaves, which are smaller, and of a lighter green color then
the other, but the Male has the stronger stalks, with a more bushy head, and
greater Leaves, of a dark green color: The Female bears flowers and no feed
follows, the Male bears seed without any show of flowers, and endures
longer before it be ripe: They both rise up to be five or six foot high, if the
ground wherein they grow be rank, but not otherwise, with many Leaves set
thereon at distances, which are subdivided into diverse others, yet standing
upon one foot stalk, somewhat like unto the Leaves of Bastard Hellebore or
Bears* foot, but more dented about the edges; The seed is contained in diverse
husked bunches, coming from the bottom of the Leaves, which being prepared and
make fit to be threshed, it comes forth being almost round, with a somewhat
hard shell, under which lies a kernel of a white substance; The Roots are
made of many strong strings, which take fast hold in the ground, so that they
are very troublesome to pull up, unless the ground be mellow, or presently
after rain, yet they die and perish every year.

The Places and Time.
The first is sown in most Counties of this Land, but not so frequently in
some as in others, yet wheresoever it ^is, it delights in a well dunged and
watery soil, which must be either plowed or dug deep, or else it thriveth
not. It is sown in March or April, and rises out of the ground, within few
days after it is committed thereunto, making its way through Cloth, Shoe
Soales, or any such thing that lies over it; The Female Hemp is ripe in July,
and therefore called Summer Hemp, the Male in September, when the Winter
approaches, and therefore it is called Winter Hemp.

The Temperature.
There be some that speak Hemp to be cold and dry, but the major part of
Writers are of opinion that it is hot and dry.

The Virtues.
The Seed of Hemp used frequently, is good for those which are troubled with a
thorn in the flesh, for besides that, it consumes windiness, it does so much
disperse it, that it dries up the natural Seed of procreation therewith;
Being boiled in Milk and taken, it helps such as have a dry, and hot Cough,
as Tragus says; An Emulsion made of the Seed, is given with good success to
those that have the Jaundise, especially in the beginning of the disease, if
there be no Ague accompanying it, for it opens the Obstruction of the Gall,
and causes digestion of Choler therein; A decoction of the said Seed, stays
Laskes and Fluxes, that are continual, eases the pains of the Chollick, and
allayeth the troublesome humors in the Bowels; An Hempseed Posset, with some
Nutmeg, procures Sleep being taken bedward; The Leaves fried with some of the
blood of those who bleed exceedingly, and eaten, stays the issuing out
thereof, whether it be at the Mouth, Nose, or any other place; The juice of the
Leaves are held to be very effectual to kill worms either in Man or Beast, and
being dropped into the ears, it kills the worms that are in them, and
draws forth Eare-wigs, or other living Creatures gotten into them; The
decoction of the Root allayeth Inflammations in the Head, or any other parts,
and so does the Herb it self, or the distilled Water thereof; The said
decoction eases the pains of the Gout, the hard tumors or knots in the joints,
the pains and shrinking of the Sinews, and the pains of the Hip; The fresh
juice mixed with a little Oil and Butter, is good for any place that has been
burnt with fire, being thereto applied; Notwithstanding these Virtues, it is
said to be hard of digestion, hurtful to the Head and Stomach, and breeds
ill blood and juice, and in the body, if it be taken without discretion.
Concerning the gathering, shocking, threshing, watering, peeling or stripping,
braking, dressing and spinning of Hemp I dare not be too particular, lest I
should be contradicted by every Country Huswife, every of which does very well
know that the Summer Hemp affords most Teere as they call it, and makes the
siner Cloth for Shirts, Smocks, Aprons, Table Cloths, and such like necessary
uses, and that the Winter Hemp has in it more Hards, which being Spun, serves
for Sheets, Dresser-Cloths and the like. The Cordage that is made of the rough
Hemp, is not altogether inconsiderable, for by it Ships are guided, Bells are
rung, Rogues are kept in awe, Beds are corded, etc. Nay, the Rags of the old
Cloth that is made of Hemp, serve to make Paper, which is as useful a
commodity as any whatsoever. And if there be any one that is not sufficiently
satisfied with these uses of Hemp, and Hempseed, let them read the Works of
John Tailor, the Water Poet, who has written very much in the praise of
Hempseed.

CHAP. CCLXXXII. Of the Water Lilly.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and in Latin also Nymphaea, because it loves to
grow no where but in the Water, which the Greeks sometimes call (...), though
that word has other significations also, or rather from the Story though
fabulous (for many of purplants have received names upon such accounts) of the
Nymph which pind away for the love of Hercules, and was changed hereinto; It is
called by the Apothecaries Nenuphar; by Apuleius, Matter Herculara,
Algapalustris, Papaver palustre, Clavus Veneris, and Digitus; by Ma^cellus,
Clava H^rculis; Some have called it in English the Water Rose, as well as the
Water Lilly.

The Kinds.
Of the Water Lillies, both white and yellow, there be seven sorts. 1 The great
common white water Lilly. 2 The lesser white water Lilly. 3 Small white water
Lilly, commonly called Froybit. 4 The great white water Lilly of Egypt. 5 The
great yellow water Lilly. 6 The smaller yellow water Lilly. 7 Small yellow
water Lilly, with lesser flowers.

The Form.
The great common white water Lilly has very large round Leaves, in the shape
of a buckler, thick, fat, full of juice, and of a dark green color, which,
standing upon long, round, and smooth footstalk, full of a sponglous
substance, always flote upon the water, seldom or never growing above it:
from amongst which, there rise up from the Root other thick and great stalks,
like unto the footstalk of the Leaves, each of them sustaining one only
large white flower thereon, green on the out side, but exceeding white within,
confisting of diverse row, of long and somewhat thick, and narrow Leaves,
smaller and thinner, the more inward they be, with many yellow threads or thrums
in the middle, standing about a small head, which after the leaves are fallen
of, becomes like unto a Poppy Head, containing in it broad, blackish, Oily and
glittering seed, of a bitter taste; The Roots be round, long, and tuberous, with
many knobs thereat, like Eyes, of substance loose and spongy, of color black
without, and white within, out of which grows a multitude of strings, by
which it is fastened in the ground under the bottom of the Water.

The Places and Time.
All the sorts of Water Lillies, except the fourth, whose name shows its
place also, do grow in most parts of England, where there be any standing
pooles, great ditches, or small slow running Rivers, in every of which they are
frequent, and sometimes in large Rivers, which run pretty quick; They flower in
the Months of May and June, and their feed is ripe in August.

The Temperature.
The Leaves and Flowers of the Water Lillies are cold and moist, but the Root
and Seed are cold and dry.

The Virtues.
The Seed and Root of the Water Lilly, whether white or yellow, but principally
the yellow being boiled in Water, is of wonderful efficacy to cool, bind, and
restrain, and therefore the said decoction cannot but be exceeding good for
those who shall endeavor to preserve themselves from Lechery and uncleanness,
for it not only stops the involuntary passage of Sperme in Sleep, commonly
called Nocturnall pollution, but is so powerful in this particular, that the
frequent use hereof extinguisheth even the very Motions to venery, and so does
the Root and Seed used in meat or drink, or the Root only bruised and applied
to the genitals, or the green Leaves laid upon the Region of the back, either
of which ways it is available, also for the Gonorrhea or running in the
Reins, and the whites, or any other flux in Man or Woman, but especially if it
be boiled in thick red wine and drunk; The said Root is very good for those
whose Urine is hot and sharp, to be boiled in Wine or Water, and the decoction
thereof drunk; The Leaves do cool all Inflammations, and both the outward and
inward heats of Agues, the decoction thereof being drunk or bathed with; They
are also very effectual to expel the secondine or After birth, whereof they
have the Signature, as the learned Crolli^^ observes; Both the simple and
compound Syrupes, which are made of white water Lilly flowers, and may be had
at the Apothecaries, are fine and cooling they allay the heat of Choler,
provoke Sleep, settle the brains of Frantic persons, by cooling the hot
distemperature of the head, as they do the distempers of other parts, as the
Heart, Liver, Reins, and Matrix, proceeding of Heat, and so does the Conserve
made of the said flowers; The distilled Water of the said flowers is very
effectual for all the diseases aforesaid, both inwardly taken, and outwardly
applied, and is very much commended for the taking away of Freckles, Spots,
Sunburn, and Morphew from the skin in the Face, or any other part of the Body,
and so does the Root being stamped with Water, and applied often to the
discolored part, which being applied to Wounds, stancheth the blood, and being
mixed with Tar, it cures the naughty scurfe of the Head; The oil made of the
flowers, as the Oil of Roses is made, cures the Headache, causes sweet and
quiet sleep, and puts away all Venerous dreams, and takes down the standing
of the Yard, the Head and privities being anointed therewith, and is
profitable also to cool hot tumors and the inflammations of Ulcers and Wounds,
neither does it only ease, but also heal them.

CHAP. CCLXXXIII. Of Hemlock.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Conion, (...), a circumvertend^, because it did
so intoxicate the brain of those that took the juice thereof, that they
presently fell a staggering, or else every thing seemed to them to turn round,
but though that which grew in Greece would do so, yet that which we have, is
not so powerful; howbeit I shall not wish any one to try; It is called in
Latin^ Cicuta, which some will have to be so denominated, quod velut cutem
circumcirc^ habeat, because it is covered with a double Skin; In English
Hemlock, Hemlock, Kex, and of some Herb Bennet, though not truly.

The Kinds.
To this kind may be referred these seven sorts. 1 The common great Hemlock. 2
Foolish Hemlock or Counterfeit Parsley. 3 The greatest Hemlock. 4 White wild
Hemlock. 5 Red wild Hemlock. 6 Marsh or water Hemlock. 7 Bulbous rooted wild
Hemlock.

The Form.
The common great Hemlock grows up with a hollow green stalk, two or three
foot high, of a dark green color, and sometimes spotted, whereupon at several
joints are set very large winged Leaves, which are subdivided in many others
that are lesser, dented about the edges, of a dark green color also, branching
out it self toward the top into several umbels or spoky tufts of white
flowers, after which follows the seed, of a pale green color, and flattish,
when it is ripe; The Root is long, white, and sometimes crooked and hollow
within, the whole Plant is very unsavory, and therefore offensive to the
Senses, especially to that of smelling.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in most Countries by Walls and Hedge sides, especially in
stinking and corrupt places, and therefore it is frequently found in such
ditches which are made for the conveyance of any noisome excrements, or wherein
dead Dogs and Cats, and other Carrion is used to be cast, this poisonous Plant
drawing unto it and feeding upon the malign juice and nourishment, which those
places plentifully afford: The second is found in Gardens, as well as other
places, where it is sometimes mistaken for Parsley, by those that are ignorant
of Herbs; The third is said to be found only in Gardens about these parts; The
fourth and fifth are frequent in the moist Grounds and Marshes of France, and
besides the Waters there; The sixth is not altogether a stranger to our own
Rivers sides, especially to the Thames; The last is best known to be of
Hungaria and Austria. They differ not much in their time, for all of them
flower and seed in July or thereabouts.

The Temperature.
Hemlock is held to be cold in the fourth degree by Galen and others, yet many
are of opinion that the Hemlock that grows in England is not so cold as that
which the Ancients make mention of.

The Virtues.
Though the Hemlock that grew in Greece and thereabouts were pernicious to be
applied to the Privities for the restraining of Lust, because they made those
members to pine away, yet that which grows with us, (unless it be in a very
noisome and stinking place) is said to be a good receipt for that purpose, both
the Leaves and tops being bruised, and applied to the Genitals; The same being
applied to the Breasts of Maidens which are great and swagging, or hanging
down, causes them to be contracted and to become round and lovely, without
any danger, and repelleth the Milk of those that are oppressed therewith,
either upon the putting out of their Children to nurse, or the weaning of them.
It may also be safely applied to any Inflammations, Tumors, or Swellings in any
part of the Body, as also to St. Anthonies fire, Wheales, Pushes and creeping
Ulcers, that rise of hot sharp humors, by cooling and repelling the Heat,
especially the concrete juice which is pressed out of the Leaves and Umbels of
seed, whilst they are young and then dried in the Sun, and made into little
Balls, being afterward dissolved in some convenient liquor, as Plantain Water
or the like. The same may be used in such Medicines as are applied for the
asswaging of any extraordinary pain, which it does by the narcoticall or
b^numming faculty that it has. The Leaves bruised and laid to the forehead is
good for their eyes that are red and swollen, as also to take away the Pin and
Web growing therein, for which a small handful of the Herb, with half so much
Bay Salt beaten together and applied to the contrary wrist, for four and twenty
hours is much commended, but it must be renewed two or three times. If the Root
hereof be roasted under the embers, wrapped in double wet Papers until it be
soft and tender, and then applied to the Gout in the hands or fingers, it will
quickly help this evil: It is said the Leaves stamped and dried and made into
a Plaster, does heal all ruptures, or chappings within nine or ten days, and
being made hot between two tiles, and applied to the Legs that are swollen with
a bruise or fall, it helps them. The seeds also beaten small, and moistened
with Vinegar, and the groine and Cods anointed therewith, abateth the
inordinate appetite to Venery, helps the swelling and coming out of the
Matrix, being applied thereunto, and makes the Dugges that exceed in bigness
to become less: Being applied to the soles of the Feet, it brings down the
humors that cause the falling sickness. I am not ignorant how that Socrates,
through the accusation of Aristus and Melitus was sentenced to destruction with
a potion hereof, yet it is the opinion of the learned Dr. How (whose
endeavors for the advancement and perfection of Simpling can never be
sufficiently commended) that our ordinary Hemlock is not so dangerous to be
taken inwardly, as is generally supposed, he having made trial first upon
Beasts and then upon Men, and never found it to have any pernicious operation,
yet I go not hereby to encourage any one to make use of it rashly, and no
respect being had unto the places where it grows, without the advice of an
able Physician, and then no doubt but it may be taken inwardly for the falling
sickness, being boiled in Wine and drunk, and if it be rightly applied in a
Fever, it may very well prevent death, by procuring Sleep; And though it
should have some of those hurtful qualities which have been said to be in it,
yet it is not rendered altogether useless, for those Plants which even in
Health do bring death, in some sicknesses do prevent it; But if any one should
by tempering herewith, or by eating hereof instead of Parsley, or the Root
instead of a Parsnip, (for which they have been mistaken) be troubled with any
of those Symptoms, which it is said to cause, as the Phrensy or pertubation of
the fight, and other senses, as if they were stupefied or drunk, the best way
will be to drink liberally of the best and strongest pure Wine, which I take to
be Sack, before it strike to the Heart, and the same may be done by Vinegar, as
Tragus writes upon his own experience, especially if there be some Gentian
put to either of them. It is question less soporiferous, as apperes by
Matthi^lus his stories of the Asses which were laid so fast a sleep by the
eating thereof, that they seemed dead, in so much that the Owners of them being
loath to loose their skins, caused them to be flayed, and so lost their Asses,
as some say, which after the Hemlock had done working, stirred and wakened out
of their sleep, to the great grief and amazement of the Owners, but to the
laughter and merriment of others, to see the Asses walk without their Skins.

CHAP. CCLXXXIV. Of Camphire.
The Names.
IT is probable that Camphora was not known to the Grecians, for if it had,
surely Dioscorides or some other Writer of theirs, would have taken notice of
it. It is called in Latin Camphora, Caphura, and Capura, from the Arabic word
Cafur, so that it may be lawfully supposed that the knowledge of the thing it
self, as well as its name, came from the Arabians. In English Camphire,
Camfire, Camphor, and Camfer.

The best Kind.
Because I find but one Tree from which Camphire proceeds, as also that it is
sometimes sophisticated, I thought it not amiss to give you (as formerly the
sorts of other Plants so) the best sort of Gum that issues from this, which is
white, shining and clear as Chrstall, not full of spots, easy to be broken and
brittle, also being set on fire it burns, and is not easily quenched, and
has a strong ^cent with it also.

The Form.
The Tree that yields Camphire is of a very great size, like to a
Wallnut-Tree, whose Wood is somewhat solid and firm, and of an Ash or Beech
like color, or somewhat blacker; The Leaves are whitish like unto Willow
Leaves, neither the flower nor fruit have been observed by any that have writ
thereof, though q^estionlesse it bears both; The Gum which is the Camphire,
issues forth partly of its own accord, but chiefly by incision; It comes
forth clear and white, without any spot therein, but what it acquireth from
their foul hands that touch it, and is of a very strong scent, and of thin
parts, so that being but a while exposed to the air, both the scent and
substance vanish away: the Wood being made into several Works will smell
thereof a long time.

The Places and Time.
Some have thought Camphire to be a kind of Mineral, because it is sometimes
dug out of the Sand that lies on the Indian shore, all along that tract
which reaches from Memel to Gedan, as Scaliger affirms, yet he is not of
that opinion, but says it is a Tear or Gum of a Tree growing in India upon
the Sea Coasts, and that it falls from thence into the Sea, and is carried
into those parts by the tide. I find it not any where expressed at what time
the said Gum is to be especially gathered.

The Temperature.
It has been the opinion of diverse Physicians, that Camphire is cold and dry
in the third degree, but others esteem it to be hot, because of its bitterness
and strong scent.

The Virtues.
Though the faculty which Camphire has in extinguishing Venery be denied by
Scaliger, who writes thus. We have certain experience that Camphire does not
extinguish Venery, for says he, a young Man did the feat lustily, although he
had a piece thereof in his hand; He says also, that he tried it upon a Bitch
that went too proud, to whom he gave, and applied it all the ways he could
devise, but all in vain, for, Coivit, concepit, peperit; Yet this experience is
not sufficient, for when it is said Camphire extinguisheth Lust, it is not so
to be understood, as if by one act, or by using it outwardly once or twice it
should prevail, but it is to be often used, both inwardly and outwardly, and
then it will be found wonderful effectual to that purpose; It is also very
available for the running of the Reins, and likewise against the Whites in
Women, and also for the rising of the Mother, being dissolved in Balm water,
by the help of a blanched Almond, without which or some other Oily or viscous
thing, as a Syrup or the like, it will not, cold water having little or no
power to make it relent; It resists Putrefaction and Venom, and is therefore
frequently used in the time of the Pestilence, both to defend those that are
not infected from it, and to expel it from those that are, and to fortify the
Heart in that, as well as in Fevers, and all other contagious diseases, being
taken either in Electuary, Powder or Potion, etc. It cooles the heat of the
Liver and Back, and is good for all manner of inflammations, which it is said
to do by accident, in drawing hot vapors and humors away, and so discussing
them in the same manner, as Linseed-Oyle, Vernix, and such like, does cure
burning, for of its proper nature, it is held to be altogether hot; It helps
the pains of the Head, and the heat thereof, if it be mixed with yellow
Saunders and Red-Rose Water, and the Temples and Forehead bathed therewith; It
stops blood that flows out of the Nosthrils, if it be smelled to, and
refreshes the brain; It is used with good success against St. Anthonies
fire, and so it is against heat and inflammations of the eyes; It is good in
Wounds and Ulcers, to abate the heat in them, and is of much use among Women to
beautify their face, and is useful also for Men that are troubled with heat
and Pimples in their Faces; Being applied to the Reins or Testicles, with the
juice of Nightshade, it corrects the Lust of the Flesh when it is inordinate,
and is good for single Persons to preserve their chastity; It eases the pains
of the Teeth that are hollow, being put thereinto, and for this purpose the Oil
is very excellent; Being put into a piece of fine Linen or Taf^ecy, and hanged
about the Neck, it cures Agues, especially in Children, and that by a specific
Virtue; It is also good to recover the sense of smelling to those that have
lost it, and to preserve from infection in times of contagion; When it is set
on fire it will not suddenly quench, though it be cast into Water, and
therefore it is used with other things to make Wildfire, as they call it;
Notwithstanding the Virtues aforesaid, it is not safely given to such as have
weak Heads or Stomachs, or to such as abhor the smell thereof, for it causes
the Headache, and takes away Sleep, neither is it to be given in Choleric
diseases; And when neither of these affects do hinder, it is not safe to give
above five or six grains of it at the most, except it be in the Pestilence, or
such like disease.

CHAP. CCLXXXV. Of Tutsan.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and also Androsaemum in Latin, from the color
of the juice which is in the Flowers, resembling Man's blood, for so the Greek
word signifies; Some have called it also Dionysia, and others Siciliana, and
Herba Siciliana, because it was thought to grow no where naturally, but in
Sicily; It is called in English Tutsan, from the French, who call it Toutsaine,
and that properly, because it is an excellent Wound herb; Some call it also
Park Leaves, because it is familiar to Woods and Parkes.

The Kinds.
There be four sorts of Tutsan mentioned by Authors. 1 Common Tutsan or Park
Leaves. 2. Matthiolus his Tutsan. 3 Tutsan of Naples. 4 Stinking Tutsan.

The Form.
Common Tutsan grows up with brownish shining round stalks, chamsered or
crested, hard and woody, being for the most part, two foot high, branching
forth even from the bottom, and having diverse joints, at each of which stand
two fair large Leaves, of a dark bluish green color on the upper side, but
somewhat yellowish underneath, turning reddish toward the Autumn, yet abiding
on the branches all the Winter: at the tops whereof stand larg yellow flowers,
which give place to Heads of Seed, being at the first greenish, then reddish,
and at last of darkish purple color, when they are full ripe, wherein are
contained not only small brownish seed, but a reddish juice or liquor, like
unto blood, of a reasonable scent, but of an harsh or stiptick taste, as the
Leaves also and Flowers be, though in a lower degree; The Root is brownish,
somewhat great, hard, and woody, spreading well in the ground, and of long
continuance.

The Places and Time.
There are very few Woods, Groves, or woody Grounds, as Parkes, and Forests,
where the first does not grow, whence it is brought by diverse into their
Gardens, both because it is a gentile, and an useful plant; The second is
found about Bristow, Bath, and other parts of the West Country; The third
grows Southward of Naples, upon the Hills Cirinola; The last grows by the
Waters side in Candy, and upon Mount Baldus, as Pona says. They flower in July
and August, and the Berries with the seeds are ripe in September.

The Temperature.
Tutsan moderately heateth and dries, yet the seed is endued with an
abstersive quality.

The Virtues.
The Leaves and Flowers of Tutsan are said to restrain those fleshly Motions,
wherewith diverse are infested, not only when they are eaten, but also when
they are taken in drink, or strewed under one, but the seed much more being
tosted and rubbed, and then eat or drunk; and Mr. Culpeper says also, they are
Antivenere^ll, and I think therein he speaks truth; Castory being boiled in
the juice of Tutsan, and drunk, helps also that passion of the privy members,
called Gonorrhea, which is an excretion or shedding of the Seed or Sperme
against the Patients will, caused either by some violent disease, as the
Falling Sickness, Convulsion or Cramp, or else by some overstraining of the
body, with lifting of extraordinary heavy burdens, by which a flux or weakness
of the retentive Virtue in the spermatick Vessels is sometimes procured, and
this disease chances not only to Men but also to Women, in whom it is hard to
cure. Two drams of the seed beaten small being taken in the morning, or after
Supper, either in Meade, Wine, or fair Water, purges choleric humors, and
therefore it helps the Sciatica or Hip-Goat; The herb heals burnings by
fire, and stays the bleeding of wounds, the green being bruised and applied
for the first, or the green or powder of the dry for the second; It has
formerly been accounted, and certainly is a sovereign herb to heal any wound or
sore, either outwardly or inwardly, and therefore may be used now as heretofore
it has been in Drinks, Lotions, Balms, Oils and Ointments, for any sort of
green wound, or old Ulcers and Sores, in all which the people of former Ages
found it very effectual, though those of this do ignorantly contemn all those
that savor either of antiquity or cheapnesse.

To this Head and the purposes therein contained, do belong Nightshade,
Purslane, Henbane, Housleek, Lettice which are cold, and Rue and Calamint,
which are so hot that they destroy the seed, but having handled them already
upon other occasion, I pass now to the third Head, wherein we are to speak of
some Plants that procure Women's Courses.

CHAP. CCLXXXVI. Of Mugwort.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and Artemisia in Latin, because as Pliny has
said, so many others have believed, that Artemisia the Queen of Caria was both
the Mother and Godmother hereunto by finding out the Virtues, and giving it her
name; yet others are of opinion that it took its name from (...) Artemis, that
is, Diana, because it is chiefly applied to Women's diseases, over which Diana,
that is the Moon has much influence; It was commonly called Parthenis, quasi
Virginalis, Maidenwort, and Parthenium as Apuleius says, though now Feaverfew
be better known by that name; Some superstitious Monks and Nuns have called
Zona divi Johannis, St. John's Girdle, beleiving that St. John Baptist wore a
Girdle hereof, when he was in the Wilderness; It is also called Ma^er Herbarum.

The Kinds.
Though Pliny and others reckon but two sorts of Mugwort, there are five or six
come to the knowledge of these later times. 1 Common M^gwort. 2 Small Mugwort.
3 Fine Mountain Mugwort. 4 Fruitful Mugwort. 5 Virgini^n Mugwort. 6 Sea
Mugwort.

The Forms.
The common Mugwort has diverse Leaves lying on the ground, very much divided
and deeply dented about the edges somewhat like unto the common Wormwood, but
much larger, of a darkish green color on the upper side, but very white and
hoary underneath; from amongst which come up diverse stalks, which are sometimes
of a purplish color, seldom exceeding two foot in height, except it be in
extraordinary rank ground, whereon grow such Leaves as those below, but lesser,
branching forth very much toward the top, whereon are set so many small pale
yellowish flowers, like buttons, that they be^d again, which falling away,
there comme^h small seed enclosed in small round Heads; The Root is long and
hard, with many fibers growing thereat, whereby it takes fast hold in the
ground, yet the stalks and leaves die in the Winter, the whole Plant is of a
reasonable good scent.

The Places and Time.
The first grows plentifully, as in other Lands, so in our own, by the ways
and ditch sides, and in diverse other places; The second is found in such like
places, but not so frequently; The three next are entertained as Stran^ers in
the Gardens of the curious; The last grows about Rye and W(...)sey (...) and
in other parts of the Sea coast; They do all flower and seed in July and August
or thereabouts.

The Temperature.
Mugwort is hot and dry in the second degree, being somewhat of thin parts.

The Virtues and Signature.
There is no Herb so generally received, or more usually proved for the curing
of Women's diseases as Mugwort, whether it be inwardly or outwardly used; The
decoction of the Leaves, which are most in use, being made with Water or Wine
and drunk, provokes the courses, brings away the Birth and After birth, and
helps the inflammations and stoppings of the Mother, as also the stopping of
Urine, and is a good help against barrenness in Women, that with the red
stalks having the signature of Women's Flowers, and therefore it is endued with
very much virtue, as to provoke, so to stop and correct them, in case they be
superfluous, which a spoonful of the Syrup performs very excellently, which
is also good to retain the Matrix in its place, and to help other passions
thereof, as Coldness, Wind, Pain, etc. it strengthens the Nerve, opens the
Pores, and corrects the blood; The said decoction helps the stoppings of the
Liver and Spleen proceeding from a cold cause, and is profitable for the
Jaundise being boiled with Centory and taken; Two or three drams of the Leaves
in Powder, being drunk in Wine, helps the Sciatica, and the juice being taken
helps the biting of a Mad Dog. A decoction thereof being ^ate over, does also
perform those effects which that does which is taken inwardly though not so
vigorously, and so does the juice thereof made up with Myrrh, or the Root put
up as a Pessary; Being made up with Hogs grease into an Ointment, it takes
away Wens, and hard knots and kernels that grow about the Neck and Throat, as
also to ease the pains about the Neck, especially if some field Daysies be put
therein. The juice of the Herb, or the Herb it self being taken, is a good
remedy for them that have taken too great a quantity of Opium. A decoction
thereof made with Camomile, Agrimony and Sage, and the place bathed therewith
warm, takes away the pains of the Sinews and Cramp, and the same cannot but
be a great refreshment to those whose feet are su^bated through sore travel,
if they be bathed therein; yet I have scarce so much faith as to believe that
the Herb only carried about one should take away all sense of weariness, as
Pliny reports, and therefore I have put it amongst other Traditions in my
former Book, to which I might have added that concerning the Coals that are
found at the Roots hereof, upon St. Joons Eve, and diverse others.

CHAP. CCLXXXVII. Of Penny-royall.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and (...), Glecon and Blecon, from (...),
balatus, either because the heat thereof causes Sheep and Goats to bleat,
when they are eating of it, or rather, as Pena says, from expelling thick
phlegm from the Lunges; It is called in Latin Pulegium, and Pulejum also,
quod incensum pulices n^cat, because it kills Fleas being burned, to which
the Epithet Reg^le is added to distinguish it from Pulegium montanum, by which
name, wild Time is sometimes called; It has many English Names, as Run by the
ground, and Lurk in Ditch, because of its manner of growing, Pudding-grasse,
because it is used in Hog-puddings, and might be in Bag-puddings also, Pulial
Royal, and of some Organy.

The Kinds.
There be six sorts of Penny-royall. 1 Common Penny-royall. 2 Great
Penny-royall. 3 Thick or double Penny-royall. 4 White flowred Penny-royall. 5
French or Hearts Penny-royall, which I take to be the same with Upright
Penny-royall. 6 Round leafed Penny-royall.

The Form.
Common Penny-royall has many weak round stalks divided into sundry branches,
rather leaning or lying on the ground then standing upright, whereon are set at
several joints small roundish dark green Leaves, close by which toward the
tops of the branches, do come forth diverse rundles of small flowers, of a
purple, and sometimes of a whitish color; I he branches being broken and
thrust in the earth, which is the usual way of propagating it, (for I never
observed nor heard whether it bear any seed or no) shoot for small fibers or
Roots at the joints, as it lies upon the ground, fastening it self therein, so
that it quickly overspreadeth the place where it has once taken footing,
especially if it be moist and shady; It is of somewhat a strong but very
wholesome smell.

The Places and Time.
The first grows upon Putney Heath, as also upon Barnes Common, and in diverse
other moist and watery places of this Land, but for its usefulness it is
brought up and cherished in Gardens. The second is not so frequent as the
former, yet it is said to grow very plentifully in Essex, in diverse places of
the highway betwixt London and Cholc^ester, and in other parts thereof; The
third is said to be a spontaneall of our own Land, but taken notice of only by
the curious; The fourth grows in Piedmont, and the fifth about Mompelier in
France very plentifully; The last grew in the Garden at Padoa, but whence it
came is not recorded. They flower about August, and sometimes later.

The Temperature.
Galen says that Penny-royall is hot and dry in the third degree, and of
subtle parts, rarifying or making thin, warming and digesting.

The Virtues.
There is hardly a Country Less of sixteen years old but knows that
Pennyroyall boiled in Beer and drunk, provokes the courses, and therefore they
have recourse to it as often as occasion requires, and if it be boiled in Wine,
it will not hurt them; Neither is it only useful for Women, so long as they
continue Maids, but when they are married also, for if so be a Child should
die in the Mothers Womb, as sometimes it does, and therefore is not able to
make its way forth; The said decoction made in Wine will not only expel it,
but also the afterbirth; Taken with Water and Vinegar mingled together, it
stays the disposition to vomit, and allayeth the gnawing of the Stomach;
Being mixed with honey and salt it clears the Breast of all gross and thick
humors, and opens the passages of the Lunges, helps Cramps, purges
melancholy humors by Stool, and being drunk with Wine it helps such as are
stung by venomous Beasts; The decoction thereof is good in the Falling
Sickness, Dropsy, Jaundise, Stopping of the Urine and in the Leprosy; Being
stamped with a like quantity of Mints, and some Vinegar to it, it is profitable
against fainting and swooning, if it be either smelled thereto, or a little
thereof put into the Mouth, and so it helps the Lethargy and Falling
Sickness; And if it be carried to Sea, and used with the unwholesome and
stinking Water which Men are sometimes compelled to drink in their long
Voyages, it helps it much, and causes it to be the less hurtful; The
powder of the dried Herb, or the Ashes of it being burnt, strengthens the
Gums, being rubbed therewith, and being boiled in Wine with Honey and Salt, it
helps the Toothache; Being applied to the place that is troubled with the
Gout until it wax red, it profits very much, and so it does those that are
Splenetick or Livergrown, if some salt be added thereunto; It helps the
swelling and hardness of the Mother, if it be put in Baths for Women to sit
in, and so it helps the Itch, especially if it be boiled in Water; The green
Herb being bruised and some Vinegar put thereto, does not only take away black
and blew marks near the eyes or in any other place, but heals foul Ulcers, by
causing the matter to digest, and by cleansing them, and so it does any
discolorings that happen to the face, by fire or otherwise; It helps the
cold griefs of the joints, taking away the pains by its heat, being fast
bound to the place after a bathing, or having been in an hot house; The
distilled Water is very effectual for many of the purposes aforesaid,
especially for Women's diseases, and to ease pains in the Bowels.

CHAP. CCLXXXVIII. Of Southernwood.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Abrotonum, (...) quod conspectu tenerum appareat,
for its pretty aspect to the eye; The Latins following the Greek, call it also
Abrotonum, but more commonly Abrotanum, to which they add the Epithet Mas, to
distinguish it from the Abrotanum faemina, which the most judicious hold to be
Lavander Cotton, which I have already spoken to.

The Kinds.
There be diverse kinds of Southernwood here to be remembered. 1 Common
Southernwood. 2 Great Southernwood. 3 Tree Southernwood. 4 Unsavory
Southernwood. 5 Small sweet Southernwood. 6 Field Southernwood. 7 Hoary Field
Southernwood.

The Form.
Common Southernwood rises up with diverse small woody branches, the tops
whereof are so weak that they bend downwards again, especially for some space
after they be shot forth, but toward the end of the year they become as woody
almost as the elder Stemmes, which are commonly about two foot high, and in
time rise to be almost as high as a man, from whence do proceed many small fine
and short Leaves, somewhat like unto those of Fennel, but not so long, of a
grayish or rosset green color, somewhat strong, but not unpleasant to the
smell, and of a strong and somewhat bitter taste; from the middle almost to the
tops of the upper sprigges do sometimes stand small round yellow flowers,
hanging like little buttons, which op^n very little, and after them comes the
seed, which is smaller then that of Wormwood; The Root is woody, having diverse
strings annexed thereto, but growet hnot very deep.

The Places and Time.
The first has been so long a free Deniz^n of the Gardens that whence it had
its original Extraction is altogether forgotten; The second grows wild in
some parts of Germany, yet they usually vouchsafe unto it a station in their
Gardens; The third came originally from the L^vant, and is now distributed into
diverse places, as into England, Italy, Germany, the Low Countries, etc. The
fourth as is said, was found in Austria, Hungary, and the Coasts near
adjoining; The ^ift is found only with them that are curious; The sixth is an
Inhabitant of the Harcynian Wood in Germany, and the last has its natural
dwelling near Lintz in Austria. Many of them do flower in June and July, but
some of them later, or not at all, so that their seed is seldom seen. Some of
them, if not all, loose their Leaves in the Winter as many other Trees.

The Temperature.
Southernwood is hot and dry in the end of the third degree, having the force
both of rarifying and discussing.

The Virtues.
The tops of Southernwood, for the flowers and seed are not so common stamped
raw with water and drunk, brings unto women their monthly purgations, in case
they come not at their usual time, but stay so long, that expectation may
seem frustrated, and so it is profitable for those who cannot take breath
without holding their Necks straight up, for those that are troubled with the
Cramp, or Shrinking of the Sinews, for the Sciatica also, and for them that
can hardly make water, all which effects the flowers and seed do excellently
perform, if they can be had. Being drunk in Wine it is good against all poison
and venom, and destroys the Worms both by killing and expelling them; The
seed of Southernwood does both digest and consume all cold humors, tough slime
and phlegm, which do usually stop the Spleen, Kidneys and Bladder; The tops
boiled in Wine or Water, with Honey or Sugar, and drunk three or four times a
day, helps the shortness and straightness of the breath, by cutting the
slimy and tough phlegm that causes it, and so it is a good remedy for the
Cough, the Cardiack passion, and for many other inward griefs; The branches
being burnt, and the ashes mixed with the Oil of Palma Christi, or old Oil
Olive restores the hair, where it is fallen off, and causes the Beard to come
forth speedily, if the bare places be anointed therewith twice a day against
the Sun or Fire, which it may be said to do by Signature, the finenesse of the
Leaves somewhat resembling the Hair; The tops only being stamped with a roasted
Quince, and applied to all inflammations of the eyes, takes them away; The
Leaves boiled tender and stamped with Barley Meal, and Barrowes grease, until
it become like a salve, dissolveth and wastes all cold humors and swellings,
being spread upon a piece of Cloth or Leather, and applied thereunto; And
being stamped with Oil, and those Limbs that are benumbed with cold, or
bruised, being anointed therewith, it helps them, and takes away the
shivering fits of the Ague, by heating the body, if it be anointed therewith
before the fits do come, but especially the Back bone; If it be boiled with
Barley Meal, it takes away Pimples, Pushes, or Wheales, that rise in the Face,
or other parts of the Body; The Herb bruised and laid to, helps to draw forth
Splinters, and Thorns out of the flesh; The ashes thereof dries up and heals
old sores and Ulcers that are without, although by the sharpness thereof it
biteth sore; as also the sores that are in the privy parts of Men or Women. The
Oil made of Southernwood, being used as an ingredient in those Ointments that
are used against the French disease is very effectual, and likewise kills
Lice in the Head. The distilled Water of the Herb is said to help them much
that are troubled with the Stone, as also for the Diseases of the Spleen and
Mother. The Germans commend it for a singular Wound Herb, and therefore call
it Stabwort; It is held to be more offensive to the Stomach, then Wormwood, if
it be taken inwardly, and therefore is never used in our ordinary Meat and
Drink, and besides it will make some men's Heads to ache, yet the Herb somewhat
dried, and put into a linen bag, and laid as a Stomacher next the skin,
comfort a cold Stomach well, so that though inwardly taken it is not so good
for the Stomach as Wormwood, yet outwardly applied it is better. It drives
away spiders, and other vermin, being laid for a strewing, or burnt in such
places as they be frequent; It is said that if a branch of Southernwood be laid
under ones Bed, Pillow, or Bolster, it provokes carnal copulation, and
resists all enchantments that hinder the same.

CHAP. CCLXXXIX. Of Savoury.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and (...), Thymbron and Thymbra, perhaps from
(...) suffio, because of its odor or smell; and Thymbra also in Latin, besides
which, it has none other Latin Name as some suppose, though others make bold
to call it Satureia, either a saturando, because it is used in broth and stewed
meats, to give thereunto a good relish, and by that means causes them the
better to satisfy hunger, or from Satyrus, A Satyr, because they used it to
provoke Venery, which I cannot be so confident as to assert, seeing that I find
that it helps the disease called Satyriasis or Priapismus, which is wrought
by a contrary quality, which derivation I suppose to be rather by Antiphrasis;
Some hold it also to be the same which was called Cunila by the Ancients.

The Kinds.
The sorts of Savoury, as well those that are rare, as those which are common,
are five. 1 Winter Savoury. 2 Summer Savoury. 3 Rock Savoury. 4 The true
Savoury of Candy. 5 Prickly Savoury of Candy.

The Form.
Winter Savoury is a small low bushy herb, somewhat like unto Hyssop, but not
so high, with diverse small hard branches, compassed on every side with narrower
and sharper pointed Leaves then those of Hyssop, with which they have some
resemblance, yet this does sometimes grow with four Leaves set at a joint, so
that it may be easily distinguished therefrom, of a reasonable strong scent,
yet not so strong as that of the Summer kind; amongst which grow the flowers of
a pale purplish and sometimes whitish color, set at several distances toward
the tops of the Stalks; The Root has diverse small strings thereat, but the
body of it is woody, as the rest of the Plant is.

The Places and Time.
The first is so common that there be few Gardens without it; The second is not
so familiar, though the natural place of neither of them is remembered by any
Author that has written of this Subject, yet it is very probable that there
grew great plenty thereof in that field near unto Troy, which is said to be
called Thymbra for that reason, and from thence Apollo, one of the Patrons of
that City, was called Thymbraeus; The rest also grow wild in diverse places of
Europe, as the third upon St. Julians Rock, and the two last in Candy as their
names declare, and are cherished by those that delight in variety of Plants;
They are propagated both by seed and slipping, in the Spring time especially,
yet those which abide all Winter, are more usually increased by slipping then
sowing; They flowrish in the end of Summer, and therefore seldom perfect their
Seed.

The Temperature.
Savoury is hot and dry in the third degree, it not only makes thin, but
opens the passages.

The Virtues.
To provoke the Terms, not only the blood is to be attenuated, but the mouths
of the Vessels are also to be opened, both which faculties are in Savory, as is
but now expressed in the Temperature, and therefore it must needs be very
effectual for that purpose, being boiled in Wine or Water and drunk. It is
also commended for Women with Child, to take thereof inwardly, and to smell
often thereunto, which effect is more likely then that it should help dull and
decayed coi^ure, for that which provokes the Terms moderatly, rarifieth the
menstrous blood, making it active, and fit to nourish the Conception, which the
frequent desire and consequently the acts of Copulation do many times destroy,
besides those things which incite to Venery are commonly windy, but this
expels wind, yet I shall not be over earnest to press this opinion, because
I know that many simples have very different operations. It is also a present
help for the rising of the Mother procured by wind, the belly being fomented
therewith, it provokes Urine, and expels wind out of the stomach and
bowels. It procures a good appetite, by taking away that loathing from the
Stomach, which hinders the same: It cutteth tough phlegm in the Chest and
Lunges, and helps to expectorate it the more easily, and therefore it is not
without good reason used both for a farsing or faceting herb as they call it,
and to season stewed meat and broths, as I said before; It quickneth the dull
Spirits in the Lethargy, the juice thereof being snuffed or cast up into the
Nostrhils: The juice dropped into the eyes clears a dull sight, if it proceed
of thin cold humors distilling from the brain: The juice heated with a little
Oil of Roses, and dropped in the ears, cures the noise and singing in them,
and deafness also: Applied with Wheat Flower in the manner of a Pultis, it
gives ease to the Sciatica, or Members that have the Palsy, by heating and
warming them. It takes away the stinging of Bees, Waspes, etc. and being laid
in Chambers, it kills Fleas. It is said that if a Woman's belly be swollen, as
if she were with Child, when indeed she is not, Savery stamped and strained
with Ale, and drunk with the powder of Jet and white Amber, and the said Herb
with Hyssope and Leeks fried in fresh Butter, and applied to the back and
belly, makes her gaunt, and reduces her to her due proportion, and it is like
enough to be true.

CHAP. CCXC. Of Time.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Thymus, either (...), because it is given to
those ( qui deliquium animi patiuntur) which are apt to swound, and troubled
with giddiness of the head, or else (...) because the Ancients used to burn it
first of all in their heathenish sacrifices: Wild Time or Mother of Time, as
they call it, of which I intend to entreat also in this Chapter, is called in
Greek (...), and Serpitium in Latin a serpendo, because it is so small that it
spreads its branches upon ground, seeming as it were to creep and not to
stand.

The Kinds.
There be thirteen sorts of Time, and Mother of Time. 1 Common Garden Time. 2
The true Time of the Ancients. 3 Hoary Time. 4 Mastick Time. 5 Unsavory Time.
6 French wild Time. 7 The greater Mother of Time. 8 Rough Mother of Time. 9
Hungarian Mother of Time. 10 The ordinary small wild or Mother of Time. 11
Lemmon Time. 12 Musk Time. 13 Gilded or embrodered Time.

The Form.
The ordinary Garden Time is a small low woody Plant, with brittle branches,
and small hard green Leaves on them, having small white purplish flowers
standing with some Leaves in roundles round about the tops of the Stalks; The
seed is small and browner then Marjerome seed; The Root is wood^ and abides
well diverse Winters, if they be not too violent, and the Plants not grown too
great or woody, for then they will perish therein, and therefore the best way
is to slip it, and transplant it every third or fourth year.

The Places and Time.
The two first grow very plentifully in Spain, the one in old Castile, the
other about Sevill where they use no other, as also in Syria, etc. The third
and fourth do acknowledge no place but the Garden; The fifth and sixth are
Spaniards, the one growing by the Sea side near Alikanta, the other in old
Cast^le, as it does also in France about Narbone, whence it has its name; The
seventh is only sound in the Gardens of the curious; The eighth about Basil;
The ninth in Hungary: The tenth is frequent in most pastures of this Land; The
eleventh in many places of Kent; The two last are nursed up in Gardens only.
Most of them flower in July, or thereabouts.

The Temperature.
Time is hot and dry in the third Degree.

The Virtues.
Time being of the same Temperature with Savery, works the same effects, nay
it is somewhat more powerful in Women's diseases; for being boiled in Water
with Honey, and drunk, it not only brings down Women's monthly purgations, but
is also effectual to cause those that are in hard Labor to be delivered, be
the Child alive or dead, and then expels the Secondine or Afterbirth; The
same is good against the Cough and Shortness of breath, it provokes Urine,
dissolveth clotted or congealed blood in the Body, and kills the Worms in
the Belly; Being taken with Honey in an Electuary, it causes tough phlegm to
be easily brought away, and helps those also that are dull sighted; It is of
good use in Meat^ and Broths to warm and comfort the Stomach, and to help both
the sick and so^nd to break wina; It is very profitable in the Colic, Iliack,
and N^p^^iti^k passions, and most excellent against M^lin^^ly and St^ppings of
the Manix. Four drams of dried Time in Powder, being given fasting with S^rupe
of Vinegar, helps them that are troubled with the Gout, for it purges away
Choser and other sharp humors; and one dram thereof given fasting in Meade or
Metheglin, dissolveth the hard swellings of the B^ly; It is profitable also for
those that have swellings in their sides, and p^i^s in the Loins and Hippes;
It is likewise given to those that have pains in their Eyes, and are
blea^-eyed; The Decoction thereof dissolveth tumors or swellings, if they be
bathed therewith upon the first rising thereof; The j^yce thereof being
anointed or bathed on the place with some Vinegar, takes away loose and
hanging Warts; It helps those that have the Sciatica, applied with Wine and
Meal, and helps the sw^ll^n C^ds being laid thereto; It is used in Baths to
expel Wind, and ease the Joynt-Gout. The Wild Time or Mother of Time is more
effectual then the former to provok^ the Terms and Urine, if it be boiled in
Wine and drunk; It is also helpful to those that are troubled with griping
pains in their B^k^es, or that have Cremps, or are bu^st^n^ bellyed, or are
troubled with inflammation of the Liver; It helps the Ague, eases the
Strangury, breaks the Stone in the Bladder, stays the Hicket, and is
available for those that spit or vomit blood; Being taken inwardly or applied
outwardly, after it has been boiled in Rosewater, it helps the Headech and
Fren^y, and if you make a Vinegar of the Herb, as the Vinegar of Roses is made,
it is excellent good to be used in the Lethargy inwardly or outwardly, or both,
and to stay Vemiting. Being taken with Honey, Liquoris and Anniseeds in Wine,
it helps a dry Cough, and is comfortable both to the Head, Stomach, and
Reins, and helps to expel wind; It is a remedy against venomous brings,
either taken in drink, or outwardly applied.

CHAP. CCXC. Of Alexanders.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), because it is a kind of Parsley that exceeds all
others in bigness, (...), being a word which in composition does augment the
signification of that whereunto it is joined, as (...) also does; It is also
named Hipposelinum by the Latins, and Olus atrum, either because of its dark
green color, or because it makes the pottage wherein it is boiled to look
blackish; Galen and others have taken it to be the Smyrnium of the Ancie^ts,
but Dioscorides says the true Smyrnium is another herb, of which the present
age seems to be ignorant. It is called in English Alexanders, Alizanders, and
Allisanders.

The Kinds.
There be two sorts of Alexanders. 1 Garden Alexanders. 2 Alexanders of Candy.

The Form.
Garden Alexanders grows with diverse large Leaves which are winged, or cut
into many parts, somewhat resembling Smallage, but greater, broader, rounder,
and more cut in about the edges, of a dark green color, and somewhat an hot
and spicy taste, and a little bitter withal, from amongst which rises up one
or more round and great stalks, sometimes a yard high and better, whereon grow
diverse branches with Leaves like unto the lowermost, but lesser, at the
extremities whereof do grow large tufts or umbels of white flowers, after which
comes the seed, being of a blackish color, not full round, but straked on the
back, and of an hot and bitterish taste, as the root also is, which being great,
thick, long and blackish on the outside, but white underneath, it spreads it
self under the ground into many parts.

The Places and Time.
The first is said to be commonly sown in most Gardens of Europe where they
have it, yet it has been found wild also in some Isles about our own Land, by
Mr. WILLIAM QUICK, the seed whereof being supposed to a different kind from
that of the Garden, when it was sowed, proved to be the same; The other came
from Candy as its name does testify; They both flower in June and July, and
the seed is ripe in August.

The Temperature.
The Seed and Roots of Alexanders are hot and dry in the third degree, of a
cleansing and attenuating faculty.

The Virtues.
It is agreed on by all Authors that the seed of Alexanders made into powder
and taken in a small Cup of White Wind, either raw or boiled, is very powerful
not only in moving the Courses, but expelling the Afterbirth; The same is very
profitable also to provoke Urine and to help the Strangury, and avails
against the bitings of Serpents, and breaks wind, and is therefore good for
the Colic; The upper part of the Root and the Leaves are very useful to be
boiled together in Broth for the purgation of the blood in the Spring time, to
which may be also added Nettle tops, Elder buds, Cleavers, Watercresses, etc.
Some eat the Roots hereof raw with Vinegar, some stew them, and so eat them,
and that chiefly in the time of Lent, to help to digest the crudities and
viscous humors that are gathered in the Stomach by the much use of Fish at
that time; It does also warm any other cold Stomach, and by the bitterness
helps to open Stoppings of the Liver and Spleen; The Leaves bruised and
applied to any bleeding wound, stops the blood and dries up the sore
without any grief, and makes such tumors as are hard and scrophulous to come
to maturity and ripeness; The Roots preserved in a pickle of Vinegar and Salt,
are a very wholesome sauce with Meats, for it stirs up the Appetite,
cleanses and comfort the Stomach, and removes stoppings of the breast, and
shortness of breath; They are convenient for every Age and Constitution,
especially the Phlegmatic, and such as are subject to be stuffed up upon any
distemper; The seed has, besides what has been expressed, all the Virtues
wherewith the ordinary Parsley seed is endued, being altogether void of those
evil and hurtful qualities which are said to be in Parsley seed, and is
therefore convenient and better then the Garden sort, if it can be had; It is
given in Powder, from a Scruple to two Scruples: in Decoction, from a Dram to
two Drams.

CHAP. CCXCI. Of Anemonies.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek, (...), Anemone, (...) from the Wind, because it was
anciently believed, that these kinds of Flowers did never open themselves, but
when the wind did blow. In Latin also Anemone, and Herba Venti. We call them in
English Anemonies after the Greek name, and Wind-flowers after the Latin, but
the common people call them Emones, the wild kinds whereof are called
Pulsatill^es, which because they flower about Easter are called Pasque-Flowers,
Pasque in French signifying Easter, and Pass-Flowers.

The Kinds.
To reckon up every particular Member of this exceeding numerous Family, were
almost an Herculean Labor, and is thought would gravel the most experienced
Florist in Europe, and therefore I shall not undertake it, but mention a few of
those which are common, beginning first with the Pulsatillaes, not because they
are fittest to provoke the Terms, but because they grow in our own Land, more
frequently, I mean naturally, than the other, and yet are taken notice of by
few. 1. ^he purple Pasque-flower. 2 The red Pass flower. 3. The double
Passflower. 4. The Pass flower of Denmark. 5. The Wood Anemone or Wind-flower.
6. Anemone or Wind flower with a tuberous Root. 7. The Flesh colored Anemone.
8. The blew Anemone.

The Form.
The purple Pasque-flower has many leaves lying on the ground, somewhat rough
or ha^ry hard in feeling, and finely cut into many small Leaves, of a dark
green color almost like the leaves of Carrets, but finer and smaller, from
among which rise up naked stalks, rough or ha^ry also, for about the middle
thereof with some small divided Leaves compassing them, above which they rise
almost a span each of them bearing one pendulous Flower made of six Leaves, and
of a fine Violet Purple color, but somewhat deep withal, in the middle
whereof stand many yellow threads, set about a purple pointel; after the Flower
is past, there comes up instead thereof, a bushy head of long seeds, which
are small and hoary, having at the end of every one a small hair, which is gray
likewise; the root is small and long* growing downwards into the ground, with a
tuft of hair at the head thereof, and not lying or running under the upper
crust thereof, as the other wild Anemonies do, which is the greatest difference
betwixt them: The Plant is of no sharpness until it be bruised between ones
fingers, and then the Leaves held to the Nose will twinge the nostrills very
much.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in a close belonging to the Parsonage of Hildersham, 6 miles
from Cambridg^ the second in great abundance on a Heach toward Barneck 3 miles
from Stamford, the third grows also in England, but I have not understood the
determinate place; the fourth should be a D(...) by his name; the fifth grows
in Stow Wood two miles from Oxford: the sixth upon Cotteswald Hills, near Black
Burton, very plentifully; the two lift are cherished up in Gardens, with many
others, which are best known to them that delight therein. The ordinary time to
plant. Anemonies is most commonly in August, some of which perhaps will flower
before Winter, but most usually in February, March, or April, few or none of
them abiding until May; but if you will keep some Roots out of the ground
unplanted until February, March, or April, and plant some at one time, and
some at another, and then those that were planted in February will, flower
about the middle or end of May, and so the rest accordingly after that manner,
you may have the pleasure of these Plants all the Summer long, provided that
you keep the Roots neither too dry nor too moist, and that they be planted
where they may be somewhat shadowed.

The Temperature.
Both these sorts, as well Pulsatillaes as Anemonies, are sharp, biting the
tongue, and of a binding quality, but the Pulsatillaes exceed the other, in
that they exulcerate and eat into the skin, in case they be stamped and applied
to any part of the body, whereupon they have been taken by some to be of the
kind of Cr^wfoot, which many vagabond Villains apply to their Arms and Legs,
and pretend that they are burnt, or some other misfortune has happened to them.

The Virtues.
There is some other use for Anemonies, besides the setting forth of a garden,
for the Leaves being boiled in White* wine, and the Decoction drunk, provoke
the Terms mightily. The Leaves and Stalks boiled with clean husked Barley,
causes abundance of Milk, if Nurses eat thereof. The body being bathed with
the decoction of them, cures the Leprosy. The Leaves being stamped, and the
Juice snuffed up the nose purges the head mightily, and so does the Root,
being chewed in the mouth, for it procures much spitting, and brings away
many watery and phlegmatic humors (yea more than any Pills that are cried up
for that purpose) and is therefore excellent for the Lethargy. Being made into
an Ointment, and the Eyelids anointed with it, it helps the inflammations of
the Eyes, whereby it is apparent that the heat of the one draws out the heat
of the other, as fire will setch out the fire, when any one happens to be
burnt, if they burn the same place the second time; and besides, it clears
the sight by removing any Web, or other Spots therein. The same Ointment is
excellent good to cleanse malignant and corroding Ulcers. Both Anemonies and
Pulsatillaes are gathered to put into Flower-pots, and to dress Garlands, and
to str^w windows withal.

I might have treated of diverse other Plants under this Head, but because there
be few of them but are good for the Mother and other infirmities of the Womb, I
shall say no more of them here, but reserve them till I come to speak thereof,
which will be as soon as I have set down some of those that stop the Terms,
both which were necessary to be mentioned severally, for the more methodicall
prosecution of what we promised.

CHAP. CCXCII. Of Comfrey.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and (...), Symphy^um, and Symphitum magnum, from
the wonderful faculty that it has in binding and glewing together, insomuch
that the Latin^ are not content with the word Symphytum, which they sometimes
use, but call it also Consolida, a Consolida^d^, Consolidare being an obsolete
word, signifying to sodder, or glue together. It is also called (...), or
(...), Pectos or Pecton, but Pliny says, it was called Alus or Alum: it has
other names, as Solidago, Inula rustica, Ost^^c^llon, but the most usual is
Symphytum or Consolida major, which is in English the greater Consound,
commonly called Comfrey, and of some Knit-back and Black-wort.

The Kinds.
Some refer 4 sorts to this kind. 1. Common great Comfrey. 2. Great Comfry with
purple Flowers. 3. Comfrey with knobbed Roots, 4. Narrow Comfrey of Naples.

The Form.
The common great Comfrey has diverse very large and hairy green leaves lying
on the ground, so hairy, and prickly that it will cause an itching in any
tender part of the body, which it does but touch; the Stalk that rises from
amongst them, being about half a yard, or two foot high, hollow and cornered,
or squarish, is very hairy also, having many such like Leaves as grow below,
but lesser and lesser toward the top: At the joints of the Stalks it is divided
into many Branches, with some Leaves thereon, at the ends whereof stand many
Flowers in order, one above another, which are somewhat long and hollow, like
the finger of a glove, but much smaller, of a pale whitish color, after which
comes small black seed, the root is great and long, black without, but white
within, short or easy to break, and full of a glutinous or clammy juice, of
little or no taste at all, but of very great virtue.

The Places and Time.
The first grows generally throughout all the Land, both by Ditches and
Water-sides, and in fat and fruitful Meadows, whence for its usefulness it is
oftentimes brought into Gardens, by those that understand the least profit
that it afforded; and so is the ^ec^nd, which is not so often found as the
first, to grow naturally, though many times it be in several places; the third
grows in Gardens only with us, but is natural to the Woods of Germany,
Austria, and Hungary; the name of the last shows whence it is, they flower in
May and June, and give their Seed in July and August, or thereabouts.

The Temperature.
Comfrey has a cold quality, but not immoderate, it dries and binds in
great measure.

The Virtues.
It may be observed, that those Plants that are effectual to stop any Flux, or
inward or outward bleeding, are no less profitable for stopping of the Terms,
when they have exceeded their usual time of flowing, so that whatsoever is good
for the one is good for the other, and as I shall speak to some of them here,
to which purpose I reserved them, so I shall refer the Reader back to them,
which I have spoken to already upon other occasions, as Sheepherds purse,
Strawberries, Mirtles, Water Lillies, Plantaine, Housleek, Knotgrasse, etc. The
way of using it for the distempers aforesaid, is to boil the roots in Water or
Wine, and to drink the decoction, and so it helps those that spit blood, or
that bleed at the mouth, or that make a bloody Urine, and is very sovereign
also for all inward hurts, bruises, and wounds, and the ulcers of the Lungs:
The same also drunk, stays the falling down of Rheum from the head to the
lungs, the Fluxes of humors or blood by the belly, and stops not only the
Reds, which are the mouthly Flowers of Women, but the Whites also, which is a
continual distillation, or flux of the Matrix proceeding from abundance of
phlegmatic humors, that oppress the whole body, and therefore it may not be
stopped until those evil humors be purged; but that being done, there is not
a better remedy than this Decoction, as also for the running of the Reins,
happening by what course soever. The Syrup that is made of the said Roots is
very effectual for all inward griefs and hurts aforesaid; and the distilled
Water may be used for the same, though not so effectually, and is useful for
outward Wounds and Sores in the fleshy or sinewy part of the body wheresoever.
The Decoction of the Leaves also ^s in some sort effectual for all the said
purposes: Camerarius says, that two ounces of the juice being taken by one
that is troubled with the Lethargy, it restores him. The said Roots bruised
and applied in the manner of a Plaster to any fresh or green Wound or Cut,
helps the same immediately, by glewing the lips of them together, yea, they
are so glutinative, that they will fasten together pieces of meat that have
been cut asunder, making them all into one lump, if they be boiled in a pot
therewith, it must therefore be of especial good use in all manner of
Ruptures, the decoction or Syrup taken inwardly, and the Roots stamped, and
applied to the place in the form of a Plaster. The said Plaster is good to be
applied to Women's breasts, that grow sore by much flowing into them, as also to
stop the overmuch bleeding of the Hemorrhoides, to cool the Inflammation, and
to give ease to such pains as happen thereabouts. Being applied after the same
manner upon a piece of Leather (as it may be also in the form ^r cases to any
place that is troubled with the Gout* it takes away the pain presently, and so
it gives ease to pained joints, and profits very much for running and m^st
Ulcers, Gangren^s, Mortifications, and the like: The powder of the dried Root*
and Cynamon does consolidate the Matrix of any one when it happens to be torn
by sore travail in Childbirth.

CHAP. CCXCIII. Of Mouseare.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Myosota, from whence these Herbs are generally
called Myosotis, but two of them especially, the rest being more commonly
called in Latin P(...)sella, which is a kind of barbarous name put thereon
because of its hairyness: It is also called Auricula Muris, for that
resemblance that the Leaves have with the Ear of a Mouse, as the Greek name
does likewise intimate: Some call the greater sort Grim the Collier in English,
the middle sort Mouseare, and the lesser sort ^corpion-Mouseare.

The Kinds.
To this kind may be referred these seven sorts: 1. The Common Mouseare: 2.
Great Mouseare: 3 Codded Mouseare: 4. Common upright Mouseare: 5. Another
upright Mouseare: 6. Mouseare-Scorpion-grass: 7. Water-Scorpion-grass.

The Form.
The Common Mouseare is a low Herb creeping upon the ground by small strings,
or wires, somewhat after the manner that the Strawberry-plant does, whereby it
shoots forth and increases, each string taking root again, after it has run
but a very little way, and sending forth many small, and somewhat short Leaves,
set in a round form together, hollowish in the middle, where they are broadest,
of an hairy color all over, as well above as below, and very hairy (resembling
in many things the Ear of a Mouse) which being broken do give a white Milk;
from amongst these Leaves spring up diverse small hairy Stalks, about an
handfu^l long, coming forth at the joints of the Wires, where there grow also
diverse Leaves, but smaller than the former, one at a place, as the Flowers also
do* consisting of many pale yellow Leaves, broad at the points, and a little
dented in, set in three or four rows, the greater outermost, and the smaller
inward, very like a Dandelyon flower, but lesser, being a little reddish
underneath about the edges, especially if it grow in dry ground, turning at
length into a certain Down, which the wind carries away, with the seed to
boot: The root is small and thredy.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in most Pasture grounds of this Land, especially if the soil
be but a little sandy; the second does sometimes grow in the like places, but
more usually upon Walls, as upon Queens College wall in Oxford; the third is
also found in this Land* growing in the borders of some Fields; the fourth upon
the banks of Ditches, and in them also, if they be dry; the fifth upon dry
barren Heaths, especially upon Hamstead Heath, where it is very plentiful; the
sixth is common upon the dry banks of ditches, and the last will grow in
ditches amongst the mud, though there be some water in them; as in the ditch
between the two Waters next the Holly-bush at Oxford, by the Cawsway that leads
to Botly. They abide green all the Winter, and flower in June and July.

The Temperature.
Mouseare is hot and dry, and of a clensing, binding, and consolidating quality.

The Virtues
The juice of Mouseare in Wine, or the decoction thereof drunk, is of very
great force to stay the abundance of W^me^s Courses, as also the Whites, and
all other Fluxes of blood, whether at the Mouth or Nose, or by Stool, and all
inward bleedings also, the same is very availeable to help the Jaundise,
although of long c^ntinuance, to drink thereof morning and evening, but then
other drink must be abstained from, two or three hours after; and so it is
often used as a special remedy against the Stone, and other pains of the
Bowels: Being taken in like manner, before the Fit of a Quartane Ague, it is
said to keep back and lessen the fit very much, and by use of it to take it
quite away. The Decoction thereof, with Succory and Centory, is held very
effectual to help the Dropsy, and them that are inclining thereto, as also
the diseases of the Spleen. A Syrup made of the juice of Mouseare and Sugar,
is very useful for such are as troubled with the Cough or Ptisick, and helps
exceedingly all Ruotures or Burstings, if a spoonful or two thereof be taken
at a time The green Herb bruised, and presently bound to any fresh Cut or
Wound, does quickly bring together the Lips thereof, for it is a singular good
Wound herb, as well for outward as inward Wounds: ^he Juice or Decoction of the
green, or the powder of the dried ^erb, is most singular to stay the malignity
of spreading or fretting Cancers or Ulcers wheresoever, as well those in the
Mouth, as Secret parts of Men and Women. The distilled Water is likewise very
availeable in all the Diseases aforesaid, as also to wash Wounds, and outward
Sores and to dio the Tents and wet Cloathe^ therein, that are to be applied
thereunto. If Sheep be suffered to feed long in any such p^ace or pasture,
where Mouseare grows in any plenty, it makes them to become very costive, or
stopped, as the Sheepherds call it, and therefore they are, or should be,
careful to keep them away from such places, lest they grow sick, and lean, and
die quickly, as by the carelessness or ignorance of some young Sheepherds, they
sometimes do: If hot Iron or Steel, or any Instrument made thereof, be
quenched in the juice of this Herb, it hardens it so much, that nothing can
go beyond it: And it is said, that if it be given to any Horse that is to be
shooed, the Smith cannot hurt him.

CHAP. CCXCIV. Of Yarrow.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...). Stratiotes Chiliophyllos; Stratiotes because
^ouldiers heretofore made great use thereof to heal their Wounds, having* as
is ^upposed, learned ^he vulnerary quali^y hereof from Achi^es, that famous
Disciple of Chiron, who with one kind hereof healed the Wounds of Teleph^^
which has ever since been called Ach^llea, and is by some used promiscuously
for any sort of Yarrow, though others restrain it to one only. And (...) is
added unto it as an Epithete, to distinguish it from Water-Housleek* or Fresh
Water-Souldier, which is called Stratiotes Potam^i^s, setting forth thereby the
great number of its Leaves. And hence it is called in Latin Millefolium, a
foliorum multitudine, a certain number being put for an uncertain, but sure it
is, it has abundance. Some have also called it Supercilium Veneris, Acrum, and
Acrum Sylvaticum, in English Milfoile, Yarrow, and of some Nose-bleed, by
Antiphrasis, as I conceive, because being put into the Nose, it stays the
bleeding thereof.

The Kinds.
There be many sorts of Milfoile, both of the Land and of the Water, of each
whereof I shall put down some: 1. Common Yarrow, or M^lfoile. 2. Yarrow with a
red Flower. 3. Yellow Milfoile. 4. Achilles yellow W^undwort. 5. Achilles sweet
Woundwort, both which being most like Milfoile, are by diverse referred to this
kind. 6. Ordinary VVater-yarrow. 7. Small Water-Milfoile. 8. Hooded
Water-Milfoile. 9. Crowfoot-Milfoile.

The Form.
The Common Yarrow has many long Leaves lying upon the ground, which are
subdivided, or finely cut into so many small parts, that it exceeds the small
Leaves, even of the finest Tansey, every one of which is a little jagged about
the edges; from among which do rise up two Stalks, being round and green, with
such like winged Leaves as those below, but smaller and finer, the nearer they
grow to the tops, where stand many Flowers, which are small and White, upon a
Tuft or Umbel close together, each Flower being composed of five small
round-pointed Leaves, with a little yellowish Thrum in the middle, of smell
somewhat strong, but not unpleasant, being rubbed in the hand; the Root
consists of many long white strings, which it sends forth, both deep and
spreading.

The Places and Time.
The first is very frequent in Pastures and upland Meadow grounds, where the
second grows also, but much more rarely: The fourth, fifth, and sixth be
strangers, yet for their affinity and name-sakes I have put them down, though
they be conceived to grow in France and Italy: The four last grow in the very
Water, some more frequently than others: The hooded Water-Milfoile, has been
seldom found but about Oxford: they do all flower in June, July, August, or
thereabouts.

The Temperature.
Yarrow is meanly cold, and somewhat binding, therefore it must be somewhat dry
also.

The Virtues and Signature.
The decoction of Yarrow made in White Wind, and drunk, is an excellent remedy
for the stopping of Women's Courses also (and so it helps the Bloody Flux) or
a good quantity thereof boiled in store of Water, being made into a Bath, and
sat in or over, performs the same: It is likewise very good to close up the
stomachs of those, who, through weakness of the retentive faculty, that should
be in the mouth of the Stomach, do disgorge, or vomit up whatsoever they put
thereinto. A draught thereof drunk before the Fit of an Ague, and so for two or
three Fits together* is a good Medicine for it. The Juice of the Herb and
Flowers taken either in Goats Milk, or the distilled Water of the said Herb,
stays the running of the Reyns in men; but it will be more effectual, if a
little powder of Coral Amber, and Ivory, be put thereto. An Ointment that may
be made hereof, is not only good for green Wounds, but also for Ulcers and
Fistulaes, especially such as abound with moisture, which it may be said to do
by Signature, the many Incisions that are upon the Leaves resembling those of
Wounds, or if your fancy will have it be more like unto Hair, it stays the
shedding thereof, the head being bathed with the decoction thereof, or anointed
with the oil of it. The powder of it being dried, taken in Comfrey or
Plaintain-water, is of excellent use to stay inward bleedings, and being
strewed upon any fresh wound that will not cease bleeding, it stops it
immediately, and so it does the bleeding at the Nose, being put thereinto: The
Juice thereof put into the Eyes, take^h away the blood and redness therein,
and the root or green leaves chewed in the mouth, ease the pains of the teeth.
An ounce of powder of the dried Herb and Flowers, with a dram of fine
Bolearmoniack put to it, taken three days together fasting, in a draught of
Milk, is wonderfully commended by Matthiolus against pissing of blood. If the
Juice or the Decoction be injected with a Syringe, it cures the inward
excoriations of the Yard, coming by reason of Pollutions, or extreme flowing of
the Seed, although any Inflammation or Swelling should be caused thereby, as
has been proved by some single or unmarried persons, who have been very much
oppressed upon this account.

CHAP. CCXCV. Of Medesweet.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin, (for it has no Greek name that I can meet with)
Vlmaria, a fol^^rum Vlmi similitudine, from the similitude that is between the
Leaves of this Plant, and those of Elm, but it is better known to most by the
name of Regina Prati, which Appellation has been given unto it, because in
what Meadow soever it grows, it is more perspicuous than any of the rest, as
also for the diverse good qualities that are therein, and therefore we call it
Queen of the Meadows, as well as Med^sweet: Some have called it Barba and
Barbula Caprae, and Barba Caprin^, but not properly, these names belonging
rather to Tragopogon, or Goats-^eard.

The Kinds.
There are but two sorts hereof as yet made known, that I read of: 1. The
common Mede or Medowsweet. 2. The greater Medesweet, which is so far from being
common, that it is a great rarity, or at least esteemed so to be by those are
curious.

The Form.
The common Medesweet grows up with diverse* winged leaves, being made of
several others which are broad, set on each side of a middle Rib, being
somewhat rough, hard, and crumpled, not much unlike to Elm Leaves, somewhat
deeply dented about the edges, having also some lesser Leaves as Agrimony has,
of a sad color on the upper side, and greyish underneath, of a pretty pleasant
scent and ta^^e, somewhat like unto B^rnet: At the tops of the Stalks and
Branches, which grow to be two or three foot high, having on them diverse such
Leaves as those below, but somewhat lesser, stand many tufts of small white
Flowers, thrust thick together, which smell much sweeter than the Leaves, and
in their places being fallen comes crooked and cornered Seed. The Root also is
well scented, though somewhat woody, blackish on the outside, but reddish
within, putting forth diverse fibers, which draw unto it such nourishment, as
makes it to continue many years.

The Places and Time.
The first grows very frequently in Meadows that lie toward the Waterside,
and as often also upon the brinks of watery Ditches, and River-sides: The second
delights in the shadowy Woods, and is brought from thence into the Gardens of
those that love such strangers as these. They are found in Flower in some place
or other, all the Summer quarter, the Seed ripening in a short space.

The Temperature.
Medesweet is cold and dry, with an evident binding quality adjoined.

The Virtues and signature.
The Root of Medesweet boiled or maed into Powder, and drunk, is of great
efficacy to stay the immoderate Flux of Women's Courses, and the Whites also,
and after the same manner it helps the Bloody Flux stays the Laske, and all
other Fluxes of Blood, and is a good remedy against vomiting. It is reported,
that it first alters, and afterward takes away the Fits of Agues, if it be
boiled in Wine, and drunk, and if two or three little Leaves thereof be but put
into a Cup of Clarret Wine, it does not only give thereunto a fine relish,
somewhat like unto that of Burnet, but makes the Heart to be merry and
cheerful, for which purpose some use the Flowers also. Being boiled in Wine,
it helps speedily those that are troubled with the Colic; and with a little
Honey taken warm, it opens the belly, but boiled in Red Wine, and drunk, it
stays the Flux thereof. The Herb stamped with Mede, and applied* heals old
Ulcers that are cancerous or eaten, hollow or fistulous, for which it is very
much commended, as also to assuage Swellings, and to draw forth Pricks* and
Splinters; it is also profitable to heal Sores in the mouth, or in the Secret
parts, the mouth being gargled, and the other parts bathed with the decoction
thereof: The distilled water hereof helps the heat and inflammation of the
Eyes, being dropped into the Eyes, and so it clears the Sight also. The
Powers and Leaves, though not so often used, unless it be by a few, excel all
other herbs, wherewith houses were formerly decked up, especially the Chimneys
in the Summer time, for the smell thereof makes the heart merry, and
delights the Senses, neither does it cause the headache, or loathsomness to
meat, as some other sweet smelling Herbs do, and therefore it was in more
request with Queen Elizabeth than any other, for the purpose aforesaid. The
Germans call it Wormkraut, or the Worm-plant, because the root oftentimes
seems as if it were eaten by Worms, which is certainly the Signature
thereof, for it helps Horses of the Bot^^ and Worms, and would no doubt do
the (...) in Men, if the decoction thereof were drunk.

CHAP. CCXCVI. Of Adders-Tongue.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Oph^^gl^ss^^ of the ^ater Writers (but unto the
Ancients it is conceived to have been altogether unknown) from (...), a Serpent
or A(...)r, and (...), ^ Tongu^* because (...) of every Leaf it sends forth a
kind of Pestel, like unto an Adders ^ongue. The Latins, for the same reason,
call it, Lingua Serpentis, or Serpenti^^, usually, yet some have called it
Lingua Vul(...)ria, and L(...)ea Christ* (...) thereby the great efficacy that
it (...) to cu^^ wounds: We in English, Adders-tongue, and Adders-grasse.

The Form.
Adders-tongue rises up but with one Leaf, which with the Stalk rises up not
above a fingers length from the ground, being ^^, and somewhat thick, of a
fresh green color, formed like unto the head of a broad J^velin or P(...) or
as some will have* unto the Leaves of Water-pl^nta^^, but lesser, (...) the
bosom, or bottom whereof on the inside, rises up a small (...) about two
in^hes long* which has sometimes, but very seldom, two hea^^, and th^^ it
falls out by chance, the upper half whereof is somewhat bigger, being*
dented with small round dents, of a yellowish green color, resembling the
tongue of an Adder, or Serpent, which never shows any other Flower, yet
vanishes away without any seed that ever has been perceived; the root is
small and fibrous, abiding under ground all Winter, though the Leaves are but
of small continuance.

The Places and Time.
Adders-tongue grows in moist Meadows throughout most parts of England as ^^
a Close or Meadow near to a small Village called Barton, besides the foot-way
from Oxford to Stow Wood, and in a Close between Botley and Mrs. Batemans house
on the West side of Oxford. It grows also in a Meadow near unto the Preaching
Spi^^le adjoining to London, and in diverse other places. The time of looking
for it (if you mean to find it) must be in April or May, for though it be
somewhat long ere it come up, yet it falls quite away quickly after the
Tongue appears, especially if the weather be any thing hot.

The Temperature.
Adders-tongue is dry in the second or third degree, but temperate in respect
of Heat.

The Virtues and Signature.
The Juice of the Leaves of Adders-tongue taken in the distilled water of Oaken
Buds, is very effectual for those women who have their monthly Courses,
flowing down too abundantly, yea and for the W^ites also, though they be
otherwise very hard to be cured. Being boiled in Wine and drunk, or the powder
thereof taken in Wine, is of sin^ular operation to cure both inward and outward
Wounds, as also to help those that are troubled with any Rupture or
Burstennesse: It is very ava^^eable against all hot Fevers, inflammations of
the Liver, and all inward and outward heats: The Juice of the Leaves given to
drink with the distilled Water of Horse-tail, is a singular remedy for those
that void blood at the Mouth or Nose, or otherwise downwards* and so it is
given with no less success for all manner of wounds in the Breast or
Bowels, or any other part of the Body. The green Herb infused or boiled in Red
or White Wine, and watery eyes washed therewith, or dropped therein takes away
the watering, and cools any inflammation that comes thereby. The Leaves
mixed with Swines grease, and gently boiled and strained, is good against
Burnings, hot Tumors and Apostumes, spreading sores and Wildfire. The green
Leaves stamped in a stone Mortar and boiled in Oil Olive, till they become dry
as it were, and parched, and then strained, does make an excellent green
Balsom, not only for green and fresh Wounds, but also for old and invtterate
Ulcers, and so it does, being infused only in the said Oil, and set in the Sun
for certain days, especially if a little clear Turpentine be dissolved
therein. The same also stays and represseth all Inflammations, that rise upon
pains by any hurt or wounds: Being bound hard with a ^russe to the new Ruptures
of Children it is a sure Remedy. It is said, that if Adders-tongue be wrapped
in Virgins Wax, and put into the left Ear of an Horse, it will cause him to
fall down, as if he were dead, but being taken out, he will rise again, and be
as well as he was before: It ^^reth the bitings of Serpents by Signature.

CHAP. CCXCVII. Of small Moonwort.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Lunaria Minor, because there be many bigger, (for its
Greek name cannot be learned by any means, though it has been diligently
enquired after, and therefore it is thought by some never to have had any) a
foli^^ Luna crescentis made falcatis, the divisions of the Leaf being much
like unto an half Moon, as also, Betrytis sive ram^sa, aut racemosa, a
cap^tibus in modum r^^^mi formatis, from the spiky head thereof, which somewhat
resembles a bunch of Grapes: It is also called Lunaria Petr^^, and Taura, as
Ges^er says, because it Kine feed where it grows, they will presently go to
Bull; as some Heardsmen, where it grows plentifully have observed. Country
people ca^l it in English Vnshoo the Horse, because it is said to unshoo such
Horses as tread upon it; but Small M^onwort is its ordinary name.

Some have made diverse sorts hereof, but others, who have seriously considered
it, do conceive that the differences that are found in this plant are only
accidental, and therefore not sufficient to constitute distinct sorts.

The Form.
Small Moonwort rises up but with one dark, green, thick, and fat Leaf,
standing upon a small footstalke, not above an inch high, unless it be when it
is in flower, and then it may be said to bear a small slender stalk, about
three inches high, the upper part whereof grows out of the bosom of the said
Leaf, which is much divided on both sides, into five, sometimes seven, and
sometimes more parts on a side; yea some have thought, (and but only thought)
that it bears as many parts as there be days in a Moon; each whereof is
small next the middle rib, but broad forwards, and round pointed, resembling
therein an half Moon, as I said before, the uppermost parts or divisions,
being less then the lowest; the stalk rises above this Leaf some two inches,
bearing many branches of small long tongues, whereupon many have called it also
Opheoglossum or Adders tongue, every one being very like unto the spiky head
thereof, of a brownish color, which after they have continued a while resolve
into mealy dust, so that it is doubtful whether they may be more properly
called the Flowers or the Seed; the Root is slender, and compact of many small
threddy strings. The whole plant is but small, and not easily found, though you
pass by the place where it grows.

The Places and Time.
Small Moonwort grows in diverse places of this Land in Woods, as also upon
Hills and Heathes, as in Stow Wood, not far from a little house called
Stockers, where I have been showed it by my ingenious friend Mr. William
Brown, and in diverse parts of Kent, as about Maidstone, etc. and in Somerset
shire not far from Bathe; in Essex hard by Colchester, and in several places
of Nottinghamshire. It is seldom found before April or May, and seldom
after, for in ^une when the hot weather comes, it vanishes away.

The Temperature.
Small Moonwort is more cold and drying then Adders tongue, as may be gathered
by its astringent taste.

The Virtues and Signature.
The Leaves of the small Moonwort, boiled in Red Wine, and drank is an
incomparable Medicine to stay the immoderate Flux of Women's ordinary Courses,
and the Whites also, and being used in the same manner it stays bleeding,
vomiting and other Fluxes: It is held to be more availeable for curing of all
wounds, both inward and outward, then Adders tongue, though that be an
excellent wound herb also, for it not only helps to take away all bl^ws and
bruises, and to consolidate all Fractures and Dislocations, but it is also good
for Ruptures, yea and for the Cancers of the Breasts, whereof it has the
Signature, as the learned Crollius affirms. It is chiefly used by most with
other herbs to make Oils or Balsoms, to heal fresh or green Wounds, and other
the aforesaid purposes, for all which it it excellent good. If any ones Faith
will give him leave to believe Traditions, there are enough concerning this
Plant to exercise it, for it is said, yea and believed by many, that it will
open the Locks, wherewith dwelling houses are made fast, if it be put into the
Keyhole, as also that it will loosen the Locks, Fetters and Shoos from those
Horses feet, that go on the places where it grows, and of this Opinion was
Master Culpeper. who though he railed against Superstition in others, yet had
enough of it himself, as may appear by his Story of the Earl of Essex his
Horses, which being drawn up in a Body, many of them lost their Shoos upon
White down in Dev^nshire, near Tiverton, because Moonwort grows upon Heaths. A
pretty Conceit if you please to believe it, but I must tell you Mr. Culpeper
was very unable to prove that any Moonwort grew there.

CHAP. CCXCVIII. Of three-leafed Grass.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Triphyllum and Trifolium in Latin, and both very
properly, because it has three Leaves always joined together. Under this
title I comprehend all the Trefoiles, except the Trefolium odoratum, which I
have already spoken to, yet I am not ignorant that Dioscorides calls the
Stinking Claver, (...) simply, as if it were restrained to that sort only,
notwithstanding be confesses that it had other names; for some he says called
it Oxytriphyllon, others Menyanthe, others Asphaltion, and therefore I conceive
that the word may be generally used for all manner of Trefoiles, Claver, or
Cloverglasses, Cockheads, Hony-sackles and Medicaes whatsoever.

The Kinds.
To this Kind I shall refer these following sorts. 1. Common Meadow Trefoile
with Purple Flowers. 2. White flowred Meadow Trefoile. 3. Heart Trefoile, or
spotted Snaile Trefoile. 4. Smooth upright narrow leafed Birds foot Trefoile.
5. Great codded Trefoile. 6. Small codded Trefoile. 7. Roundheaded Trefoile. 8.
Green flowred Trefoile. 9. Strawberry or Bladder Trefoile. 10. Hop Trefoile.
11. Little yellow Trefoile. 12. The great Purple Trefoile. 13 Knotted Trefoile.
14. White Dwarf Trefoile. 15. Burgundy Trefoile, or Medick Fodder. 16.
Yellow-horn Trefoile. 17. Smooth Starry Trefoile. 18. Marish Trefoile, or
Buckes Beans. 19. Purplewort or Purplegrasse, called in Latin Quadrifolium
fuscum, being as it seems, rather a four leafed, then a three leafed grass.

The Form.
Meadow Trefoile shoots up stalks about an handful long, and sometimes longer,
round and somewhat hairy, yet for the most part leaning toward the ground,
whereon grow Leaves consisting of three joined together, one standing a little
from another; of which those that are next the ground and roots, are rounder,
and those which grow higher are longer, having for the most part in the midst,
a white spot like an half Moon; from amongst which rise up stalks of Flowers,
somewhat longer then the Leaves bearing many deep Purple Crimson flowers,
together in a tuft, rising, smaller up to the top, which turn into little cods
with small seed in them; the root spreads much, and endures long.

The Places and Time.
The two first grow more frequently in Meadows then any of the rest, yet there
be others that grow there also, some in one Country, and some in another; The
third grows in a Field between Longford and Bow, as also beyond Southwarke in
the right way from London to Croyden, and the parts adjacent; The eighth in Mr.
Stonehouse his Orchard at Darfield. The seventeenth grows in diverse Fenny and
Moorish places. The last grows in diverse Country Gardens, as well as in the
Gardens of the curious, who also entertain diverse of the other sorts. They
flower and flourish from May to August.

The Temperature.
Meadow Trefoile both Leaves and Flowers, are thought by some to be c^oling and
binding; but others think them to be of a digesting and s^ppurating quality,
and there is no doubt but the rest do in some sort follow the Temperature of
this.

The Virtues and Signature.
The Deco^tion of Meadow Trefoile, with its Flowers, Seeds and Roots taken for
some time helps Women that are troubled with the Whites, and consequently the
extraordinary overflowing of their ordinary courses, it being more then
probable, that what is availeable for the first is profitable for the second,
because the first is harder to be cured. The Decoction of the Leaves and
F^owers having some Honey put thereto, and used in a Clyster, eases the
fretting pains of the Guts, and brings forth tough and slimy humors, that
cleave to the Guts. The said Leaves boiled with a little Barrowes grease, and
used as a Pultis, takes away hot swellings and Inflammations. The juice,
especially of that which is spotted upon the Leaves, being strained and dropped
into the Eyes, or mixed with a little Honey and applied, is a familiar Medicine
with diverse, to take away the Pin and Web, (as they call it) in the Eyes, by
Signature; and so it cease the pain and Inflammation of them when they are
bloud-shotten. The said Juice is also held to be very available against the
biting of an Adder being drank, the herb also being boiled in Water, and the
place washed with the decoction, and then some of the herb laid to the hurt
place also, and so is the herb boiled in Swines grease and made into an
ointment. The herb also bruised and heated between two Tiles, and applied hot
to the Share, causes them to make Water who had it stopped before. It is held
likewise to be good for wounds, and to take away Scarres. The Burgundy Trefoile
called also Foenum Burgundiacum, Burgundy Hay, and Meddick Fodder, is conceived
by diverse to be that which Dioscorides commends for its cooling property, as
also that whose Oil, as A^icen says, is very effectual against the trembling
of the Heart. An Oil drawn out from the Seed, as it is done from Almonds, is
said to be good for the Stone. In those Countries where it grows plentifully,
it is found so powerful to fatten Cattle, that they are feign to be stinted,
lest they should grow so fat, that suffocation should ensue. If the March
Trefoile be the Isopyrum of Dioscorides, as some suppose it to be, then the
Seed thereof is good against the Cough and other griefs of the Breast, or
Chest; for, as Galen says, it cleanses and cutteth tough and gross humors,
and makes them the easier to be expectorate or spit forth; it is also good to
purge and cleanse the Liver, and to help those that spit blood. The Leaves of
Purplewort stamped, and the Juice given in drink, is very confidently
administered, and that with good success, not only to Children, but to others
also that have the disease called in English the Purples, which it does by
Signature. And if the Heart Trefolle were used, it would be found to be a great
strengthner of the Heart, and cherisher of the Vital Spirits, relieving the
body against Faintings and Swoonings, fortifying it against Poisons and
Pestilence, and defending the Heart against the noisome vapors of the Spleen,
for it resembles the heart both in form and color, and surely it has no so
eminent Signatures for nothing.

CHAP. CCXCIX. Of Moneywort.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin (for Greek name it has none, that I can meet with in
any Author) Nummularia of the round form of the Leaf, somewhat like unto
Money, and Serpentaria, because it is reported, that if Serpents be hurt or
wounded, they do recover themselves with this herb. Fuschsius calls it
Centummorbia, from its wonderful efficacy in healing Ulcers and green wounds;
and Tabermontanus would have it named Hirundinaria, because as Swallows do
usually fly close to the ground, so this Plant cleaves close to the Earth. It
is called in English, Herb two pence, Two-penny grass, but usually Money-wort.

The Kinds.
Though Moneywort seems to be of different sorts, because it grows to be of
several sizes, yet that is to be impated to the fertility or ^^^rility of the
soil they enjoy, howsoever there be two sorts thereof, 1. Common Moneywort, 2.
Small Moneywort with purplish Flowers.

The Form.
The Common Moneywort sends forth diverse long, weak and slender branches,
lying and running upon the ground, set with two Leaves, at each joint, opposite
one to another, at equal distances, which are almost as round as a penny, but
that they are a little pointed at the ends, smooth, and of yellowish green
color: at the joints with the Leaves from the middle forward. come forth at
the joints, sometimes one, and sometimes two yellow flowers, standing each upon
a small footstal^e, being composed of five narrow leaves, pointed at the ends,
with some yellow threads in the middle, which being past, there stand in their
places small round heads of Seed. The Root is small and threddy.

The Places and Time.
The first grows by Ditches, Streams and other places where the Water uses
to overflow in the Winter time, as I have observed in Christ-Church Meadow by
Oxford, and in diverse other places. The second grows in such like places, but
not so frequently, nor so plentifully as the former. They both flower about
June and July, and their Seed is ripe quickly after.

The Temperature.
Moneywort is somewhat cold but very astringent, drying and binding, as the
taste thereof does demonstrate.

The Virtues.
The Juice of Moneywort taken in Wine, or the decoction thereof is singular
good to stay the immoderate fl^wings of Women's Courses, whether it be at the
usual time, or after, for at either, the patient may hereby be brought to
great coldness, faintness of the heart, swooning, and sometimes to the
Dropsy, yea and to Death it self, so that the cure of them is to be sought
after, when they are excessive, and the Whites also, which are as dangerous, if
not more. Neither is it effectual for such Fluxes only, as I have mentioned,
but for others, whether they be Laskes, bloody Fluxes, bleedings inward or
outward, and the weakness of the Stomach, that is given to casting or
vomiting. Being boiled with Wine and Honey, it cures the Wounds of the inward
parts, and Ulcers of the Lungs, and so it prevails against that violent Cough
in Children commonly called the Chinne-Cough, but it should be the Chine-Cough,
for it does make as it were make the very Chine-bone to shake. The Flowers and
Leaves stamped are exceeding good for all Wounds, either fresh or green, to
heal them speedily, and for old Ulcers that are of a spreading nature,
especially if it be stamped and boiled in Oil Olive, with some Rosen, Wax, and
Turpentine added thereto: To wash or bath them with the Decoction, or to have
Tents dipped in the Juice, and put into them, is also effectual.

CHAP. CCC. Of Darnell.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Era, by most, yet some call it (...) Thyarus, and
(...) Zizanium; in Latin Lolium, yet Pliny calls it Era as well as Lolium:
Some call it also Triticum temulentum, and Triticum fatuum, in English Darnell,
and of some Juray and Ray. Red Darnell is called in Greek (...) Phaenix, which
name the Latins sometimes use, a seminis color Phaeniceo, from the red
Crimson color; others call it Lolium rubrum, to distinguish it from the
former, which is called Lolium simply, or sometimes Lolium album, others
Hordeum murinum, in English Wall Barley and Way Bennet.

The Kinds.
The most usual kinds of Darnell are two: 1. White Darnell. 2. Red Darnell.

The Form.
Darnell grows with sundry long, fat, and rough Leaves, which when the Stalk
rises, which is slender and joynted, are narrower, but rough still; at the top
whereof grows a long Spike, composed of many heads, set one above another,
containing two or three husks, with sharp, but short beards or awnes at the
ends; the Seed is easily shaked out of the ear, the Husk it self being somewhat
tough, so that it increases exceedingly in those places where it chances to
seed, to the prejudice of the Husband man, amongst whose Corn it grows: The
Root is composed of a multitude of fibers, continuing all the Winter, as the
Leaves also do.

The Places and Time.
Both of them grow too too frequently in the plough'd fields, both amongst
Wheat and Barley, and sometimes also in those that are fallow, to the great
grief of the Country Husbandmen, who have much ado, notwithstanding all their
diligence of weeding it out of their standing Corn, and of picking it out of
the Sheaves to make their Grain tolerable, and therefore Virgil does not
without cause call it Infaelix Lolium. They spring and flourish with the Corn
commonly, and their seed is ripe in August, as soon, if not before the Corn
they grow with.

The Temperature.
Galen says, that Darnell is hot in the beginning of the third degree, and dry
in the end of the second, whereby it attenuateth, resolves and cleanses.

The Signature and Virtues.
The seed of Red Darnell boiled in Red Wine, and the Decoction thereof drunk
stays the abundance of Women's Courses by Signature, and it is said to do the
same if it be but put into a piece of Crimson Leather or of Scarlet Cloth, and
bound unto the Thigh, or any other convenient place. It is also effectual to
stay the Lask and all other Fluxes, and restrains the sudden passing away of
Urine. The Meal of White Darnell is very good to stay Gangrenes, and other
such like fretting and eating Cancers, and putrid Sores. If the same be applied
with Salt and Raddish roots to any Leprosy, Morphew, Ringworm, or the like, it
helps it, and cleanses the skin: with quick Brimstone and Vinegar it
dissolveth Knots and Kernells, and if it be boiled in Wine with Pigeons dung
and Linseed, it breaks those Knots and Kernells that are hard to be
dissolved. A Decoction made thereof with Water and Honey, and the place bathed
therewith, is profitable for the Sciatica. If a Woman sit over the fumes of it,
Barley meal, Myrrhes and Frankincense, it is thought to help Conception, as
likewise if it be made into the form of a Plaster, and laid upon the Belly.
Being made into a Pultis with Swines grease, it draws out all Splinters,
Thorns, and broken Bones that are in any part: The Root boiled in Wine, and
drunk, after it has stood certain days, kills the Worms. Whosoever reads
these properties of Darnell, will think it to be a very virtuous Plant, but its
faults are behind, which are not a few; for besides that it pestereth
Husbandmen, as I have said, it troubles the Brain and Senses, procuring
troublesome Dreams, if the seeds happen into Bread, and if it happen into
Drink, it will make a man drunk, or giddy-headed presently. And it is so naught
for the Eyes both ways, that it was formerly proverbially objected to one that
was ill-sighted, that he had eaten Darnell.

CHAP. CCCI. Of Flower-gentle, and Blites.
The Names.
FLower gentle is called in Greek (...) Amaranthus, because the red Flower
thereof, will endure for a very long time, without any sensible decay, if it be
gathered in its right season; by which name it is known amongst the Latins,
who sometimes call it Flos Amoris, from its lovely aspect, from whence we have
it called in English Fleuramer, Flower-gentle, Flower Velure, and Velvet Flower
from its softness, but it is most commonly called Amaranthus by the Florists
of our days. Blitt is called in Greek (...), because it is quasi fatuum olu^,
unsavory and without taste, and therefore Dioscorides put it amongst those
Herbs that be (...) insipida; in Latin Blitus and Blitum, in English Blite and
Blites.

The Kinds.
Though Awaranthus be a kind of Blite, and not Blite a kind of Amaranthus,
yet because Amaranthus is better known in these days than Blite, and of more
efficacy for our present purpose, therefore I have set it in the Front. 1. The
common purple Flower-gentle. 2. The neat lesser purple Flower-gentle. 3.
Spotted or variable Flower-gentle. 4. The greater Fleuramor, or purple
Flower-gentle. 5. The green Flower-gentle of New England. 6. Crimson-velvet
Flower-gentle. 7. Crested Flower-gentle. 8 Great white Blite. 9. Small wild
white Blite. 10. Small wild red Blite. 11. Wild Blite with much seed.

The Form.
The Common purple Flower-gentle rises up wi^h a stalk a Cubit high, and
sometimes higher, which is straked or chamfered along the fame, yet toward the
Ro^t it is very smooth, and of a reddish color, dividing it self toward the
top into small branches, about which stand long leaves, broad, sharp pointed,
soft, slippery, of a green colou^, and tending to reddish; the Flowers are
long, spiky, soft and gentle tufts of hairs, many as it were growing together,
broad at the bottom, and small up at the top, Pyramid or Steeple fashion, very
brave to look upon, but without any smell at all; which being bruised, yeildeth
a Juice of almost the same color,: the seed lies scattered in the tufts
aforesaid, being small and somewhat black, but glittering; the root ^^short and
full of strings, perishing every Winter.

The Places and Time.
All the sorts of Amaranthus are strangers by Extraction, some coming from the
Eastern Countries, as Persia, Syria, Arabia, etc. others from the Western, as
New England, and the West Indies, yet some of them are pretty well naturalized,
being common in our Gardens, and the rest are to be seen in the Gardens of the
curious, as in that of John Trad^sca^^ at Lambeth. etc. The sorts of Blites are
found wild in diverse places of our own Land. The Amaranthus bears its gallant
tufts o^ sp^kes in August for the most part, yet some perfect them not until
September. The Blite flourishes all the Summer long, seeds about August or
September, and continues green all the Winter, in which it differs from the
former.

The Temperature.
Flower gentle is held to be of a binai^g faculty, and consequently to be cold
and dry, but Blite is cold and moist in the second degree.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Flowers of Amaranthus dried and beaten into power, stops the Terms in
Women and that by Signature, if it be put into Wine and Honey boiled together
and drunk, and so it is effectual for the perilous Flux of blood, and
continual pain of the Belly, with often scouring and spitting of blood,
bleeding at the Nose, and also for the Whites in Women. The said Flower boiled
in Wine, and the Decoction drunk, is available against all venomous bitings,
the Sciatica, distilling of the Urine and Ruptures: The Herb boiled in Wine,
and the Fundament fomented therewith, takes away the painful Piles; and
restrains their bleeding, and stays the often going to the Stool, the Herb
being also applied. The Root held in the Mouth cease the pains of the Teeth,
and being stamped and made into an Ointment with May-butter, it assw^geth all
Inflammations. The Herb being boiled and applied, is a speedy Remedy for any
Bruise. The dried Herb keeps Garments from the Worms and Moaths, if it be
said amongst them. Blites are used amongst the poorer sort of people in France
for food, but they yield to the body small nourishment, as Gal^n says, and by
often eating b^come obno^ious, by causing V^miting and Fluxes of the Belly,
with exceeding gripings: The Physical use of them is to restrain the Fluxes of
blood either in Man or Woman, especially the Red, which it does by Signature,
as the white sort does the Whites in Women. The White Bleet with much ^^ed,
which is therefore called All-seed of some, is a very acceptable bait unto
Fishes, as has been proved by experience: Some Old Wives will not suffer any
Blites to be put into their Pottage, for fear of hurting their Ey^ sight.

CHAP. CCCII. Of the Dragon-Tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Drace Arbor, from its strange manner of growing, as I
conceive, for being altogether unknown to D^^scorides, and the rest of the
ancient Greek and Latin Authors, there is no Greek name for it, but only for
the Gum or Rosin, which they call (...), without expressing whether it came
from Herb or Tree, or was a mineral of the Earth, and it is probable it was
because they knew not: The said Gum is sometimes called ^innabaris also in
Latin, but most commonly Sanguis Draconis, and thereupon Pliny, Solinus, and
also Monardus have set it down for a truth, that it was the blood of a Dragon
or Serpent crushed to death by the weight of the dying Elephant falling upon
him, after that he had received his mortal wound from him, and that both their
bloods mingled together was the true Sanguis Deaconis, but certainly it was so
called from the bloody color that it is of being nothing else but a mere Gum.
It is called in English Dragons tears, and Dragons blood.

The Form.
The Dragon Tree grows not like a Sugar soaf, as I said in my former Book,
but rises as high as the Pine Tree, with a great body and rugged bark, full of
chaps and clifts hearing 8, or 9, great Arms equally spreading from the trunk,
bare for a cubits length, and then thrusting forth three or four more lesser
branches, yet as thick as ones arm, bearing only at the tops of them diverse
long and narrow Leaves, joined together at the bottom, and encompassing
another, as those of the Flower de-Luce do, each of them being a cubit in
length, and an inch in breadth, but growing narrower and narrower toward the
top, till it be pointed with the thick middle rib, that runs through the
same, reddish about the edges, and sharp like the Iris Leaves, abiding always
green, as most of the trees in those parts do, from among the Leaves at the
heads come forth certain footstalk about a foot long, divided into little
branches, whereon do grow at diverse spaces (I suppose, first Flowers, though
not observed) diverse fruits or be^^ies in little clusters, each of them like
unto a small Cherry, of a sowrish or tart taste, and of a yellowish color when
they are r^p^ with a stone and kernel within them very like unto a
Cherry-stone: Out of this tree, being sl^t or bored, comes forth a thick dark
red Gum or Rosin, which hardens qu^ckly, and will melt at the fire, and flame
also, if it be cast therein, which being bruised, shows a very orient red
crimson, or bloody color; the wood of the trunk is so hard and firm, that it
will scarcely admit cutting, but the younger branches are not so hard.

The Places and Time.
This Tree gr^weth both in the ^anary Islands and in that of Madera, and in
Brasil also, where it grows to be of a goodly stature It flourishes and
grows gre^n all the year, as I have said, but the time of flowring and
trutifying is not expressed.

The Temperature.
Sanguis Draconis, or the Gum of the Dragon-tree, is in all probability cold in
the second degree, and dry in the third, and is very astringent.

The Signature and Virtues.
If all red things do stop Women's Courses by Signature, according to the
opinion of some, then certainly this Gum may be said to do it thereby, there
being hardly another Tree in the world (unless Mr. Hammonds Flesh-tree, which
some think is the same that yeildeth a red Juice; Amaranthus indeed, which is
handled in the former Chap is red all over on the outside, and so is the wood
of Brasil and Red ^aunders, but the juice of neither of them is so, whence it
is likely that the Sap, which in other plants concocteth only in the Fruit,
does in this also concoct in the Body of the Tree, which makes it the more
admirable; It serves also to restrain all other Fluxes of Blood or Humors; as
the Bloody Flux, Lasks, Whites in women, and the Gonorrhea in men, bleeding at
Nose, Mouth, or any other part, whether internal or external, being either
inwardly or outwardly used it is said also to help the Strangury. and stoppings
of the Urine, to fasten loose Teeth, and is very av^ileable for the Gums that
are spungy, or troubled with loose flesh: It is good also to stay the watering
of the Eyes, and to help those places that are burnt with fire. The Goldsmiths
and Painters of Glass use it much in their works, the one for an Enamel, and to
set a Feil under their precious Stones, for their greater luster, and the other
by Fire to strike a crimson color into Glass for Windows, or the like. Though
the Gum only be commended, yet no doubt in the natural places, or where it
grows, both bark and fruit might be applied for such like Diseases as the Gum
is put unto, they being also very astringent.

CHAP. CCCIII. Of the Beech Tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Oxya (and not (...), as some would have it)
because it is Scissima, as Gaza translates it, that is, in laminas scissilis,
apt to cleave into Trenchers, or the like, for though (...); was so long
mistaken for the Beech Tree, that Fagus became the common Latin name thereof,
and so continues, yet Dalaechampius has plainly detected it to be a kind of
Oak, whose Acrons are fitter for food than the Mast of Beech, the Etymology
thereof being (...), ab esca vel esu. The Fruit is called in Latin Nuces Fagi,
Beech-Mast, and Buck-Mast in English, because Dear delight to feed thereon.

The Form.
The Beech Tree grows to be of a great and tall stature, spreading the boughs
and brances on every side, so that it makes a very large and pleasant shadow,
if the said boughs be not lopped off to make it grow upwards, covered with a
very smooth white bark, as the body also is, so that any thing may easily be
cut thereon, whereon are placed many thin, smooth, broad Leaves, almost round,
but that they are pointed at the end, and somewhat finely dented about the
edges, of a sad green color, as long as they receive nourishment from the Sap,
but that ceasing, they presently turn yellow and fall away: The blowings or
Catkins are small and yellow, like those of the Birch Tree, but lesser, and of
shorter continuance; The Fruit is contained in a rough husk, somewhat like the
Chestnut, but not altogetther so prickly and rough brisled, which being ripe
opens it self into three parts, and shows a small three-square Nut, covered
with a smooth and soft skin, browner and lesser by much than the Chestnut, under
which lies a sweet white Kernel, but of a more astringent quality; The Roots
be few and short, in respect of the bigness of the Tree, both for breadth and
depth.

The Places and Time.
The Beech Tree delights to grow in some places more than in other; for as in
the Chiltorne Country no wood is more familiar, so in others not far from it, a
Beech Tree is a great rarity, as in Oxfordshire, where there is one growing
between Oxford and Baubury, which is so famous, that it is noted over all that
Country, and called the Beechen Tree, there being scarcely a Traveller that
goes by that way but takes especial notice of it, yea formerly many went to it
(though it be somewhat out of the way) to cut their names upon its smooth bark,
so that now it is so full of letters, that there is hardly any space left. It
bloometh in the end of April, or the beginning of May for the most part, and
the Mast or Fruit is ripe in September.

The Temperature.
The Leaves of the Beech Tree are cooling and binding, but the Nuts are said to
be hot and moist in the first degree, and yet very astringent.

The Virtues and Signature.
The Leaves, Bark, Buds, or Husks of the Beech Tree sodden in Red Wine, or
Running Water, and sitten over by Women, whose Courses do flow too abundantly,
causes them to cease, and makes the Matrix and Fundament, that are fallen
down, to return into their place: and the Decoction thereof in clean Red Wine,
with Cinnamon and Sugar being drunk, is good for the same purpose. The Leaves
take away Blisters, and that by Signature, there being many times diverse small
Bladders thereupon, and being laid to hot Swellings at the beginning, do
discuss them, and are good for Ulcers also, being boiled into a Pultis, or made
into an Ointment when they are fullest of Virtue. The Nuts or fruit are sweet,
and were in ancient times used for food, as the Poets say, but now they are
esteemed fitter for Dear and Swine to feed upon to fatten them, which it does
wonderfully, and therefore these Trees are many times planted in Parks,
Forests, and Chases, yet they are not without some use in Physic, for they
are said to break the Stone, and expel it, which may be by the Signature of
the Nuts themselves, which being burned, and the Ashes mixed with Honey, and
applied, is good for a Skald and Scurvy Head, when the Hair goes off, which
it may be said to do by the Signature of the Husks. The Water that is found in
the hollow places of decaying Beech-trees will cure both Man and Beast of any
Scurf, Scab, or running Tetters, if they be washed therewith. The Leaves chewed
are good for the diseases of the Gummes and Lips: The Wood is smooth and white,
and therefore profitable for diverse uses, as to make Cups, Dishes, and the
like; and the Ashes thereof are very good to make Glass, as Crescentius
writes.

CHAP. CCCIV. Of the Hasell-Nut-tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Nux Pontica, because it was said to be brought at
first out of Pontus into Asia and Greece, and (...), Nux tenuis, sive parva,
the Small Nut, to distinguish it from the Wall-nut. It is called in Latin
Cor^lus, and Nux Avellana, it being at first called Abellina, from the Country
where it was first taken notice of, which since has received some alteration:
Some have called it Nux Prenestina, and Heracleotica, we call the manured kind
the Filberd, and the wild kind, the Hasel Nut, Wood Nut, or Small Nut-Tree.

The Kinds.
The two chief kinds aforementioned, are distinguished or subdivided into
diverse others, as 1. The ordinary Filberd. 2. The red Filberd. 3. The long
Filberd. 4. Filberds of Macedonia, or Constantinople. 5. The great Wood Nut, or
Hasel Nut. 6. The lesser Hasel Nut. 7. Virginian Hasel Nut.

The Form.
The Ordinary Filberd-tree grows to be pretty tall and big, but seldom to
any great bulk or size, with diverse suckers or sprouts from the roots, if they
be permitted to grow, and spread into diverse branches, covered with a brownish,
speckled, thin, outer bark, under which there is a greener, bearing large or
cr^mpled Leaves, somewhat like unto those of Alder, dented about the edges, of
a sad green color above, and greyish underneath; The Catkins, which seem to
supply the place of Flowers, upon this and diverse other Trees, because they
have no other, appear presently after the Leaves are fallen off, in November,
or thereabouts, which are then firm and close, of a reddish yellow color, but
toward the Spring they become more yellow, and fall away at the coming forth
of the Leaves, or a little before: The Nuts break forth in diverse places of the
Stalks, sometimes single, but commonly in clusters, three, four, five or more
together, each enclosed in a husk, which is at first of a green color, but
afterward brown, which reaches beyond the Nuts, and is parted at the end into
sundry jags; the Nut within is much longer than the Wood Nut, yet round
withal, with a brownish thin shell on the outside, and a white peeling
covering the Kernel within, which is white and hard, and of a very sweet and
pleasant taste.

The Places and Time.
The three first are usually planted in Gardens and Orchards, but are not all
alike common, for the red sort is not altogether so frequent as the other; the
fourth should come out of Greece by its name, but it is now visible in some of
our English Gardens, as at the lower end of Mrs. Pollards Garden, by the house
where Mr. Ditchfield lives, in St. Albans. The fifth and sixth are conceived to
come of the same kind, only the fifth grows in Orchards, and so is bigger
than that which grows wild in the Woods. The name of the last speaks its
native Country. The fruit is ripe in August, or September at the farthest.

The Temperature.
Hasell Nutts newly gathered are hot and moist in the first degree, but after
they have been kept a while, they are hot and dry.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Skins that cover the Nut Kernels, being taken in Wine, to the quantity of
a Dram, are very effectual also to stay Women's Courses, especially those of
the red Filbeard, which have the Signature of them. The dried Husks and Shells
to the weight of two drammes taken in Red Wine, does the same, and stays the
Lask likewise, and so does the Milk that is drawn from the Kernells, and
likewise the Catkins: The parched Kernels made into an Electuary, is very good
to help an old Cough; and being parched, and a little Pepper put to them and
drunk, it digesteth the distillation of Rheum from the Head. A Decoction of
the inner rind of the Branches being made in small Ale, and taken first and
last for nine or ten days together, is a special remedy for the Strangury.
Nuts eaten alone in to^ great a quantity, are by no means commended, for they
are said to be hard of digestion, to fill the stomach with wind, to cause
vomiting and the Headache, especially when they be old, for then they are worse
than they are being newly gathered, yet if any one be so much taken with them
that he cannot refrain them, let him eat Raisons together with them, that so
the moisture of the one may qualify the dryness of the other, and this has
been an ancient custom, as Schola Salerni teaches in the following Verse; --
Sum^ro sic mot est uncibussociando rac^mos; as also to eat them after Fish
instead of Cheese, thereby to hinder the ingendering of Phlegm, which is thus
expressed;

Post pisces Nuces, post Carnes Caseus ^^sii. To say no more of those Simples
that are appropriated for restraining the Natural Courses of Women, as also
the Whites. I shall now proceed to those that are serviceable for the Mother,
and diverse other distempere of the Womb, amongst which you shall find but few,
which do not provoke the Terms also, and therefore I made some* Reference of
such to this Head.

CHAP. CCCV. Of Motherwort.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and Cardi^ca in Latin, because it is good
against the infirmities of the Heart, as the trembling thereof, Swounings, etc.
It was unknown to the ancient Writers, as is supposed, because there is some
clutter amongst the latter about it, for Dodonaeus took it to be a Sideritis,
Tragus to be a Wild Bawme, Bru^felsius to be a Marrubium Mas, Anguillara to be
Lycopsis, or Branca lupina, and Bauchinus calls it, Marrabium forte primum
Theophrasti, etc. But We in English call it Motherwort, and not without good
reason, for it is of great virtue to help the Mother, as well as the Heart, and
therefore some have thought that Matricaria, which is usually put for
Feaversew, would better sort with it.

The Form.
Motherwort grows with hard, square, brownish, rough, strong Stalks, rising
to be two or three foot high, and sometimes more, spreading into many branches,
whereon grow Leaves on each side with long foot-stalkes, two at every joint,
which are somewhat broad and long, rough as it were, and crumpled with many
great veins, that show themselves therein of a sad green color, and so deeply
dented about the edges, that they may be said almost to be torn or divided:
from the middle of the branches up to the top of them, do grow the Flowers
round about them at distances, in sharp-pointed rough hard husks, somewhat
after the manner of Bawm, or rather of Horehound (of which some would have it
to be a kind) being of the same form, though of a more red or Purple color,
after which come small round blackish Seeds in great plenty, which being
suffered to shed, fills all the places about it with its offspring, so that
there needs no care of propagation: The Root is compact of many small
strings: The whole Plant is of a very ^anke smell, and bitter taste.

The Places and Time.
Motherwort delights to grow among rubbish, and by the sides of Walls and
Hedges beyond the Seas in diverse places, but hardly with Us, unless it be in
Gard^ns where it has been sown or planted. It flourishes, flowreth and
Seedeth from the Spring till Winter, and then the Leaves and Stalks perish,
but the Root endures.

The Temperature.
Motherwort is hot and dry in the second degree, being also of a cleansing or
binding Faculty.

The Virtues.
There is hardly a more effectual herb for the Wemb then Motherwort, for it
not only helps the Suffocations, or Stranglings of the Mother, but is
wonderfully useful to Women in their sore Travel, the powder thereof to the
quantity of a Spoonful, being taken in Wine, and therefore it has not its
name for nothing. But because the Patient when the fit of the Mother is upon
her, is most commonly incapable of taking any thing inwardly, or of being
placed over, or in any decoction, though that also be prescribed as effectual;
therefore the best way of using it will be, by applying foments, and little
baggs thereof warmed, to the bottom of the Belly; and Share, then which there
is scarcely a more present remedy, especially if Camomile, Wormwood,
Penniroyall, Lovage, and other strongsented herbs be used therewith: The said
powder taken as aforesaid, provokes Urine and Women's Courses, and is right
good against the trembling of the Heart, the Cramp, Convulsion and Palsy, for
seeing it is a bitter herb, and consequently hot and dry, it does thereby cut,
extenuate, and discuss those gross humors that are settled in the Veins,
Joints and Sinews of the Body. And in case any squeamish palate should refuse
it because of its bitterness, it may be made into a Syrup and Conserve and so
it drives melancholy vapors from the Heart, and makes one merry, cheerful
and blithe. It is also availeable to cleanse the breast from Phlegm, to open
the obstructions and stoppings of the Entrails, and to kill all kind of
Worms in the Belly. Moreover it is commended for healing green wounds, and
serping them from impostumation and inflammation, stopping the blood and curing
them, if it be bruised and applied. It is also a Remedy against certain
diseases in Cattl^, as the Cough, Murren, etc.

CHAP. CCCVI. Of Feaverfew.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Par^henium, because it is effectual for
distempers of the Womb, to which even Virg^ns are sometimes subject, and in
Latin Matricaria, for the same reason, but it is more commonly called
Febrifuga, quia Febres fugat, from its virtue in expelling Fevers and Agues,
and thence comes the word Feaverfew, yet some call it Featherfew, and
Fedderfew. Galen says that in his time Parthenium was called Anthemis Helxine,
Linozostis, and Amaracus.

The Kinds.
There are said to be eight sorts of Feaverfew, 1. Common Feaverfew. 2. Naked
Feverfew. 3. Double Feverfew. 4. Sweet Feverfew. 5. Unsavory Feverfew. 6 Fine
leafed Feverfew. 7. Mountain Feverfew of Clusius. 8. Small Sea Feaverfew.

The Form.
Common Feaverfew grows with many large fresh green Leaves, very much torn
or cut in on the Edges: from amongst which rise up two or three hard Stalks
beset round with many such like Leaves, but somewhat smaller, at the tops
whereof stand many single flowers, upon several small footstalkes, consisting
of many small white Leaves standing round about a yellow thrum in the middle;
What Seed it bears has not been observed, but that it has Seed may appear
from hence, that wheresoever the flowers are suffered to shed, there it
increases very plentifully, yet it must needs be very small. The Root is
somewhat hard, tough, and short, having diverse strings thereat. The whole Plant
i^ of a strong smell and bitter taste.

The Places and Time.
The first grows wild by diverse Walls, and Hedges, yet it is more frequent
in Gardens, where it is little esteemed, because it requires no great tendance:
The second was found in Essex, and is now nursed in the Gardens of the curious,
as the third also is, as in the Garden of Mr. Tradescant at Lambeth etc. The
rest are Strangers, and therefore it will be to little purpose to express
their places, They are in flower the greatest part of Summer.

The Temperature.
Feaverfew is hot and dry in the third degree, or hot in the third degree, and
dry in the second, being withal of a purging, cleansing, and opening faculty.

The Virtues.
The Decoction of the flowers of Feaverfew, or the Herb it self, made in Wine,
is exceeding effectual for the diseases of the Mother, whether it be the
rising of the Mother, or the hardness or inflammations of the same, especially
if a little Nutmeg or Mace be put therein, and drunk often in a day; and so it
brings down Women's Courses also with speed, and warmeth those parts oppressed
by stoppings or cold, as also helps to expel the dead Child, and the
Secondine or Alter-birth; To sit over the hot fumes of the Decoct^on of the
herb made in Water or Wine, is likewise effectual for the same purposes, and
sometimes when the Patient is in her fit of the Mother, and cannot be made to
sit orderly, nor take any thing inwardly, the boiled herbs may be applied
warm to the privy parts. The Juice hereof, with the Juice of Motherwort, being
drank in old Ale with gross Pepper, is also a good Medicine to prevent the
fits of the Mother. A decoction thereof taken with some Sugar or Honey helps
the Cough, and stuffing of the Chest by Cold as also to cleanse the R^ines and
Bladder, by expelling the Stone from them. The powder of the Herb taken in Wine
with some Syrup of Vinegar, purges both Choler and Phlegm, and is
availeable for those that are pursie or short winded, as also for those that
are troubled with Melanchol^ or Sadness. It is very effectual for all pains
in the Head coming of a cold cause, the herb being bruised and applied to the
Crown of the Head, and particularly for the Swimming of the Head: It is also
very good against the Wind in the Stomach being taken inwardly, and so it is
frequently given before the fits of Agues: the herb being also bruised with a
few Corns of Bay Salt, and applied to the Wrists. It i^ likewise profitable in
the Dropsy, and helps such as are impotent as to the matter of precreation,
if it proceed of a cold or moist cause, for it is hurtful to very hot and dry
bodies: and if any one chance to take too great a Dose of Opium, it is a good
remedy to prevent the danger that may ensue: Being bruised and heated on a
Tile, after it is moistened with a little Wine, or fried with a little Oil and
Wine in a Frying pan, and applied warm to the Stomach, and Belly, helps the
griping pains of Wind, and the ^holick. The distilled Water is useful to
take away Spots, Freckles, and other deformities of the skin.

CHAP. CCCVII. Of Catmint or Nep.
The Names.
IT is thought that the Greeks had not the knowledge of this Herb, because we
find no Greek name for it upon Record; but though they might not have the
happiness to enjoy the benefit of so useful a Simple, yet the Latins, who
have added much to what has been derived unto them, do call it Mentha
Cattaria, and Cataria or Cattaria simply, Mentha felina, and Herba Catti,
because Cats do seed upon the Branches or Leaves thereof with a great deal of
greediness, and delight much to rub themselves against it, and to wallow and
tumble thereon, yet it is said, as I have formerly expressed in my Book called
The Art of Simpling: If you set it, the Cats will eat it. If you sow it, the
Cats cannot know it. The Apothecaries call it Nepeta, and indeed that name is
best known every where.

The Kinds.
S^xe sorts of Vep are reckoned up amongst Authors, 1. Common Garden Nep. 2
Middle sized Nep 3. Small Nep. 4. Small Mountain Nep, or Catmint. 5. Strong Nep
with broad Leaves. 6. Strong Nep with narrow Leaves.

The Form.
Common Garden Nep rises up with Stalks about a Cubit high being four square,
with a kind of boarinesse upon them, full of Branches, bearing at every joint
two broad Leaves: somewhat like unto Bawme, but longer pointed, softer, whiter
and more hoary, nicked about the Edges, and of a strong sweet scent. The
flowers grow in large tufts upon the tops of the Branches, and underneath them
also on the Stalks, many together of a whitish Purple color. The Roots are
composed of many long Strings or Fibers, by which it is strongly fastened in the
ground; the Leaves abiding all the Winter, unless the Weather be too violent.

The Places and Time.
The first is sometimes found to grow upon the rough banks of Ditches, by Hedge
sides, and common ways, but more commonly in the Gardens of those that know
the use of it, as the second also does, though less frequently. The rest are
Spaniards by descent, yet they refuse not the entertainment of our Gardens,
where they are used with much civility by those which love varieties of strange
Simples. They all flourish by and after the Spring, flower in July and August,
and their Seed is ripe in September.

The Temperature.
Nep or Catmint is hot and dry in the third degree, and of thin parts.

The Virtues.
The decoction of Catmint is not only effectual for the wind and pains of
the Mother, or the rising thereof, but warmeth and comfort the coldness of
the womb, and dries up the overmuch moisture thereof, which is many times
the cause of barrenness, so that the frequent use hereof brings it to a right
temper, and consequently makes diverse Women to be joyful Mothers of Children,
which otherwise might live under reproach upon that account. It is also very
available to provoke Women's Courses, by which it is no small help to the
breeding of Children, for though at that time they come not down as they do at
others, yet the Menstruous blood being stirred up, is conveied with more
activity and vigor, for the nourishment of the Child. It is likewise exceeding
useful for the pains of the Head that come from any cold cause, as Catarrhes,
and thin Rheumes, and for the giddiness thereof also, and I think it may be
observed without any error, that those things that are good for the Womb, are
good for the Head likewise, there being a kind of Sympathy or fellow suffering
between them. It is likewise of especial use for the windiness of the Stomach
and Belly, and is effectual for Cramps, or cold Aches to dissolve the Cold and
Wind that afflicts the part, and to bring warmth and comfort thereunto
afterward, and is used for Cold, Coughs, and Shortness of breath: It is a
present remedy for them that are bursten inwardly, by means of some Fall
received from an high place, or for any other bruises, if the Juice be given
with Wine or Meade. A Bath made thereof only, or with some other convenient
Herbs, and sat in up to the Navel, or the hot fumes thereof being sat over,
brings down Women's Courses, helps Barrenness, and warmeth those parts: The
green herb bruised and applied to the Fundament, there abiding for two or three
hours, eases the sharp pains of the Piles, and the Juice also is effectual
for the same purpose, being made up into an Ointment and applied. A Decoction
thereof in Spring Water is commended to wash the Head, and to take away the
Scabs thereof, and may be as effectual for other parts of the Body also. The
distilled Water may be used for diverse of the aforesaid purposes.

CHAP. CCCVIII. Of the Burdock and Butter-bur.
The Names.
IT will not be amiss to speak of both these together in one Chapter, because
they be both good for the Mother. The Burdock is called in Greek (...), Arcium,
as also (...), Prosopium, or Prosopis, because the broad Leaves hereof were
used in old time to cover the faces of those, which would not be known when
they acted any thing in the Theaters, and for this reason it was also called
Personata in Latin; The Shops call it Bardana, and Lappa major, in English,
The great Burdock and Clot Bur. The Butter bu^re is called in Greek (...),
Petasites, from (...) extendo, because of the extraordinary breadth of the
Leaves* and so the Latins call it: in English it is named Butter-burre,
perhaps because some Country Huswives wrap their Butter in the broad Leaves
hereof, when they carry it abroad in hot Weather.

The Kinds.
Both Burdock, and Butterburre make but five sorts, 1. The Common Burdock. 2.
The Rose Burre. 3. The Woolly headed Burre. 4. The small Burre called Xanthium.
5. The Butterburre, which has most need to be described.

The Form.
Butter-burre does send forth its Flowers before the Leaves, in the same manner
that Coltsfoot does, of which some reckon it to be a kind, which stand upon a
thick Stalk about a foot high, beset with a few small Leaves, or rather
piec^s, spiked fashion, and of a blush or deep red color, quickly falling
away, after which the Leaves will begin to spring, which being full grown, are
larger and broader then those of the Clot burre, being somewhat thin and almost
round, whose thick red Foot-stalkes being about a foot long, stand very near
unto the middle of the Leaves, which are divided on that side which is nearest
to the Stalk, of a pale green color above, and hoary underneath. The root
spreads much under ground, yet in some places it is no bigger then ones
finger, though in some it be much greater, blackish on the outside, and white
within, of a bitter and unpleasant taste.

The Places and Time.
The first grows by Ditches and High way sides, in diverse places of this
Land, nay, I think I might have said in every place; the second on the Banks
side between the Horse Ferry, and the Neat house near London; the fourth in the
Highway leading from Draiton to Iver, two miles from Colebrook, as also between
Tidenham and Chepstow, in the Foot way. The third is supposed to grow near
Lipswick in Germany. The last delights in moist places near unto River sides,
and upon the brinks and banks of Lakes and Ponds almost every where. The
flowers and Burres come forth in July and August, and the seed is ripe in
September. The Butter-burre flowreth in February or March, but the flowers with
the Stalk will be withered and blown away (within the space of a Month) before
the Leaves appear, which is commonly in April.

The Temperature.
The Leaves of the Burdock do cool and dry very moderately, but the root is
something hot. The Butter-burre is hot and dry in the second degree, and of
thin parts.

The Virtues.
The Leaves of the greater Burdock are said to be of great efficacy for
bringing the Matrix into its right place, whenever it shall be out of it, for
if it be fallen down, the Leaves laid upon the Crown of the head will draw it
up, and if it should rise higher then is meet, as oftentimes it does, if it be
laid to the Soles of the Feet it fetches it down, and being applied to the
Navel it suffers it to stir neither way, so that it must needs be an
excellent remedy for suffocations, etc. The said Leaves are good to be laid
upon old Sores and Ulcers, and being applied on places troubled with the
shrinking of the Sinews or Arteries, they give much ease, as also to the Gout.
Being bruised with the White of an Egg, and applied to any place burnt with
fire, it takes out the Fire, gives sudden Ease, and heales it up afterward,
and so it does Kibed heels. The Decoction of them fomented on any fretting sore
or Cancer, stays the corroding quality, but then it must be afterward
anointed with an Ointment made of the same Liquor, Hogsgrease, Nitre, and
Vinegar boiled together: The Juice of them, or rather the roots themselves
given to drink with old Wine, does wonderfully help the bitings of Serpents;
and the Root beaten with a little Salt and laid on the place, suddenly eases
the pain thereof, and helps those that are bitten by a mad Dog. The Juice of
the said Leaves taken with Honey provokes Urine and remedieth the pain of the
Bladder, and the seed is much commended to break the Stone, and to cause it to
be expelled by Urine, and is often used with other Seeds and things to that
purpose, as also for Stiches in the side, and the Sciatica, being drank many
days together. The roots may be preserved with Sugar, and taken fasting or at
other times for the said purposes, and for Consumptions, the Stone and the
Lask. A dram of the Roots taken with Pine Kernells, helps them that spit
foul, mattery, and bloody phlegm, by reason of an Ulcer of the Lungs or the
like. The root clean picked and washed, stamped and streined with Malmsey,
helps the running of the Reins in Men, and the Whites in Women, and
strengthens the back, if there be added thereto the yolks of Eggs, the powder
of Acornes and Nutmegs brewed and mixed together, and drunk first and last. The
young Stalks being peeled and eaten raw with Salt and Pepper, or boiled in the
broth of fat Meat, is not only pleasant to be eaten, but increases seed, and
stirs up bodily Lust. The roots of the Butterburre taken with Zedoary and
Angelica, or without them, are of great force against the Suffocation of the
Mother, provoke Women's Courses, expel Urine, and kill the flat and broad
Worms in the Belly. The said Roots are by long experience found to be very
available against the Plague and Pestilentiall Fevers, by provoking Sweat; and
if the powder thereof be taken in Wine, it also resists the force of any
other poison. The Decoction of the Root in Wine being taken is singular good
for those that wheese much, and are short-winded. The powder of the Root does
effectually heal all naughty Ulcers, or fretting Sores, and running or moist
wounds, the powder being cast into, or on them. An Oil made of the said Root,
is good against all shaking and cold Fevers, being applied before the Fit, it
scoureth away all the filthiness of the Skin, and is good for the extreme
coldness of the joints and Sinews. It is said to cure the Farcion in Horses,
being given inwardly, or applied outwardly.

CHAP. CCCIX. Of Arach or Orach.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and (...), quod (...), because is comes up and
grows great very speedily; it is called also (...), Chrysolachanum, from the
yellow flowers which it bears; for which reason it is called Aureum Olus in
Latin, but the Latin name by which it is best known, is Atriplex, yet that
which we principally aim at in this place, is that stinking sort which Cordus
calls Garosmus, because it smells like the stinking Fish called in Greek
(...), some call it Vulvaria for a like reason, but most Atriplex olida, or
foetida, in English, Stinking Arach, and Notchweed. Dogs Arach, Geats Arach,
and Stinking Motherwort.

The Kinds.
There be several sorts of Arach, of which we shall reckon up about a dozen,
1. The white Garden Arach. 2. The Purple Garden Arach. 3. The red berried
Arach. 4. Wild Arach with small Berries. 5. Wild Arach with flat Roselike
Berries. 6. Stinking Arach. 7. Creeping Sea Arach. 8. Narrow leafed Sea Arach.
9. The greater common wild Arach. 10. Narrow-leafed wild Arach. 11.
Goose-foot or Sowbane. 12. Wild Arach, with so much Seed that it is called
All-seed.

The Form.
The white Garden Arach has diverse Leaves, standing upon their several
Footstalkes, broad at the bottom, ending in two points like an Arrow, with two
feathers at the head, and small pointed at the end of the Leaf, of a whitish
yellow green color, and as it were strewed over with Flower or Meal,
especially while they are young; the Stalk likewise is Mealy, or rather Sandy,
bearing many branches with small yellow flowers on them, which turn into small
leafy Seeds: the rest grows somewhat deep into the ground, with many small
Fibers fastened thereto, yet it fades away as soon as it has born seed.

The Places and Time.
The two first are known to grow in no other place but in Gardens; the third
came out of Spain as it has been supposed; the fourth from a hill of Narbone
in France: the fifth grows under the Walls of Mompelier; the seventh and
eighth upon the Sea coasts of our own Land almost every where; the seventh was
found about Rochel; the sixth grows usually upon the Dunghills, yet it is
taken into some Gardens of note; the rest are found by Walls, Hedges, and
Ditches, in diverse places of this Land. They flower and seed from June till the
end of August.

The Temperature.
Garden Arach (...)old in the first degree, and moist in the second,
participating of ^ watery quality a^^ost wholly, with little earthy parts
therein, and less astr(...)*

The Virtues.
The Garden, but especially the stinking sort of Arach, is recorded to be of
great operation in the distempers of the Mother, the Juice of the first being
(...)rted into the pr^^y parts of Women with a Syrle^g, the other being rubbed
and held to the Nostrills, that the smell thereof might cause the Womb (which
flies from whatsoever is noisome, and follows that which is sweet and
pleasant) to return into its place, and therefore those that are subject to
this disease must avoid the smelling unto sweet things, but not their
contraries. And taken inwardly, it is commended as an Universal Medicine for
the Womb, both easily, safely, and speedily curing any disease thereof, as the
fits of the Mother, Dislocation, or falling o^^ thereout; It cools the Womb
being overheated, which is said to be a cause of hard Labor in Childe-birth.
It makes barren Women fruitful, cleanses the Womb if it be foul, and
strengthens it exceedingly; it provokes the Terms if they be stopped, and
stops them if they flow immoderately, and all this it might be said to do by
Signature; and therefore it were good for those that are usually troubled with
distempers of this nature, to have always by them a Syrup^ made of the Juice
of this herb and Sugar, for that is best, unless it be to cleanse the Womb, and
then Honey is better. It kills also the Worms that breed in the Sores of
Horses, and other Cattle. But to return to the Garden Arach. It may be boiled
and eaten as other Sallet herbs are, and so it opens the Belly, and makes it
soluble, which it does by that nitrous quality that it has, and so it does
being used as a pot-herbe in broth. The Seed being drunk with Mead or honyed
Water, is a remedy against the Yellow Jaundise, whence it is also thought to be
good to open the stoppings of the Liver, and the herb eaten helps the heat
thereof. The said Seed boiled in water without any Salt, having some oil of
Nuts put thereto, causes an easy Vomit, and sometimes purges also: It is
said to be profitable for those that have taken Cantharides, and it stands
with reason, the lubricity or oylinesse of it hindering the corroding quality
of them. The Decoction of the Herb being drunk, and the Herb it ^el^ being
applied outwardly, is an excellent Remedy for Swellings in the Throat: It
cools both Apostumes, and St. Anthony's Fire, and dissolveth Tumor, being
applied thereto, either fresh or boiled; Being applied with N^^ar and Vinegar,
it eases the pains of the Gout, and cures rough and scabbed Nails, by
loosening them without pain, and so it does being boiled with Honey. The Sea
Arach ^^ of like property with that of the Garden, only being somewhat
sa^^ish, it purges more, and helps those that have the Dropsy. The common
wild Ara^^^es are near as cold as the Garden sorts, but more drying, serving
chiefly for Inflammations; being applied outwardly thereunto; but Goosefoot is
held to be much colder, and therefore more warily to be applied, being held to
be dangerous, if not deadl^ to be taken inwardly, for it is certainly known
that it has killed (...).

CHAP. CCCX. Of Laserwort, and its Assa faetida.
The Names.
LAserwort is called in Greek (...) Silphium, in Latin Laser and Laserpitium,
in English Laserwort, Magydare. The Gum that issues out of the same is called
Lacer, but that which is gathered from those plants that are gathered in Media
and Syria, is called Assa and Asa, by the Arabian Physicians, from whence our
Apothecaries have many of their names; it has faetida added to it, to
distinguish it from another sort thereof, which is called Assa du^cis, which is
sweeter than the other, yet both of them very strong scented, insomuch that the
Germans call the former Teuffelzdrech, that is, Diaboli stercus, Devils-durt,
or dung.

The Kinds.
Besides the Laserwort of the Ancients, there be two others: 1. The true
Laserwort of the Ancients: 2. French Laserwort: 3. Alpinus his Laserwort.

The Form.
The true Laserwort of the Ancients is said to grow with a Stalk as big as
Ferula or (...) Giant, the Leaves are like unto the common Smallage, and of an
unpleasant savor. The Flowers grow at the tops of the Stalks, tuft-fashion,
like Ferula, or Fennel, which being past, there succeed broad and flat Seeds,
like Angelica seed^, of a good savor, and of the color. The Roots are many,
coming from ^ne head or chief root, and are covered over with a thick and fat
bark, there flows out of them, being scarrified or cut, a strong liquor,
which being dried is very medicinable: that which grows in Cyrent and Africa,
is said to send forth Laser, and Assa dulcis, and that which grows in Media
and Syria, sends forth Assa salida, as I said before.

The Places and Time.
The first grows not only in the places already expressed, but also in
Armenia and Lybia, and other Eastern Countries; the second was found about
Marsell^^ in France; the third was first taken notice of in Cardinal Bemb^'s
Garden. Those that grow of them in this part of the world do flower about
Midsummer.

The Temperature.
The Laserwort is said to be hot and dry in the third degree, but the Assa
faetida, which is only brought to us in these days, does somewhat exceed the
Leaves and Roots in heat.

The Virtues.
Assa faetida, if it be but smelled unto, is very profitable for women that are
troubled with the rising of the Mother, and diverse other diseases of the Womb,
and therefore it were requisite, that those that are so troubled, should wear
it about their Necks, being sewed in Silk, Linen, or some such thing. It
brings down the Courses of Women, and expells the Secundine, or Afterbirth,
being taken with Pepper and Myrrh. It is useful in Diseases of the Breast,
Nerves, and Brain, and being taken in a Egg that is soft, it helps
Hoarsenesse, and given with Oxymel, it helps the Cough, Jaundise, and
Dropsy. Given with Vinegar of Squilles, or Wine and Honey boiled together, it
helps the Falling Sickness. Being given in Wine or Angelica-water, it helps
against Venom and Poison of venomous Beasts, where any are stung therewith. It
cures the Quartane Ague, and Fea^ers of long continuance* taken with Oxymel or
Syrup of Vinegar, it dissolveth coagulated Milk in Women's Breasts, it kills
Worms, and expels Wind. It is used also to take away loathing, for which it
is effectual, as appears by the story of one that for a trial tasted thereof
in a cold time of the year; and after a little walking, he found himself
possessed both in his Head, Arms, and Body, with a gentle Sweet, and shortly
after he found his body better disposed to his dinner, than at other times
before, and digesting it better, and for this purpose it is commonly used by
the Indians, as also to strengthen the weakness of the Stomach, and to provoke
to Venery. If it be mingled with Rue, Niter, and Honey, it breaks Carbuncles,
and Pestilentiall Sores, being thereunto applied, and in the same manner it
helps Corns, and draws them forth. Being applied with Garlic and the
White of an Egg, it helps Felons and Whiteflawes of the Fingers. It clears the
Sight, and helps Suffusions or Spots in the Eyes, being mixed with Honey and
dropped in. It cures the stinging of venomous Beasts, being applied, and the
swelling of the Spleen, being laid on as a Plaster. A Perfume thereof, and of
Goats horn, is not only good for the Mother, but prevents or much mitigates
the Fit of the Falling Sickness, if the party's head be held over it when the
Fit is a coming. It helps the Toothach, being put into an hollow Tooth. It is
exceeding powerful to expel Wind, not only in Men, but also in Horses, when
they are over-subject thereunto. These are the virtues of Assa faetida, which
is the true and only Laser or Laserpitium of the Ancients, as Garcias says,
and that it is so accepted generally by the Arabians in India, who say they err
mightily that make them differing. It is given from half a Scruple to a Dram in
powder, if it be very dry, but if not, it must be dissolved in Honey or Wine,
and so taken; yet Women with Child, and such as have very hot and dry bodies,
must avoid it. The Assa dulcis is now a days quite lost and forgotten, being
not brought into these parts; neither are the Salks, Leaves, or Roots of
Laserwort to be seen with us. The Virtues of the two last are not yet
discovered, that I can find.

CHAP. CCCXI. Of Cow-parsnep.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and (...), Sphondyllum and Spondylium, being
derived, as some think, from Spondyle, which signifies a Fly of a very
stinking smell, like unto this Herb; Tragus, Cordus, and others, call it Branca
Vrsina, and Fuchsius, Acanthus vulgaris, sive Germanica, and therefore the
Apothecaries in high and low Germany, did commonly use it in Clysters instead
of Beares-breech: It is called in English Cow-parsnep, and Meadow-parsnep, but
some Country people call it Hog-weed, because Hogs feed upon it with a great
deal of greediness.

The Kinds.
There be five sorts of Cow-parsneps, some of which have been made known to the
world but of later days: 1. Ordinary Cow-parsnep: 2. The great Cow-parsnep of
Germany: 3. Jagged Cow-parsnep of our own Land: 4. Small Mountain Cow-parsnep:
5. Smooth Mountain Cow-parsnep.

The Form.
The Ordinary Cow-parsnep grows with diverse large, spread, rough, winged
Leaves, lying either upon the ground, or else touching it within a very little,
yet sometimes they stand more upright upon their long, thick, and roundish,
hairy Footstalk, parted commonly into five divisions, the two couples
standing each against other, and the odd one at the end, each division or leaf
being almost round, yet cut into the edges, somewhat deeply in diverse of them,
but not so deep in others, of a whitish green color, and of somewhat a strong
scent; from amongst the Leaves rises up a round crested hairy Stalk* two or
three foot high, with some few Joints, and Leaves thereat, like the former, but
lesser, branched also at the ^op, whereon diverse Umbels of somewhat large and
white flowers do commonly stand, yet sometimes they are a little reddish; after
which comes the Seed, which is flat, whitish, thin, and winged, two of them
being always joined together: The Root is long and white, somewhat like to
that of Henban^, growing down into the ground with two or three long strings
thereat, having also somewhat a strong and unpleasant smell.

The Places and Time.
The first grows not only in the corners of Meadows and in the borders of
Fields, but in the Meadows and Fields themselves, many times amongst the Corn,
whence the Husbandmen pull them forth and bring them home to their Hogs, being
very acceptable to them, as also to other Cattle, neither do they count their
Hay or Straw much the worse if it be amongst them, it being good Fodder for
Cowes (and therefore called Cow-parsnep) as well as for other Cattle; the
second is an Inhabitant of Germany; the third being of our own Land was found
by Dr. Bowl in Shropshire; the fourth on the Alp^s of Austria; the fifth and
last on the Alps of Basil: They do all flower in July, and seed in August.

The Temperature.
Cow-parsnep is of a manifest warm Temperature: The Seed, as Galen says, is
of a sharp and cutting quality.

The Virtues.
The Seed of Cow-parsnep being either boiled in Wine and drunk, or powdered, and
so taken therein, is commended as a good Remedy for Women's passions of the
Mother, and so it cleanses the Belly from tough phlegmatic matter, abiding
therein, and eases them that are Liver-grown. The smoke also of the Seed b^ing
burned and received underneath, is effectual for the Mother, and being burned
under the Nose, it helps such as are fallen into a deep sleep, or have the
L^t^argy. The Root being boiled in Oil, and the Head rubbed therewith, he^p^th
not only those that have the Lethargy, or Drowsy Evil, but those that have the
Frensy, or Waking Evil, if I may so call it, notwithstanding they are so
contrary, and those that of a long time have been troubled with the Headache,
if it be likewise used with Rue, and so it is good for Ringwormes and Tetters,
the ^unning Scab and the Shingles. The Seed is effectual for those that are
troubled with a Cough, or shortness of Breath, the Falling Sickness, or the
Jaundise. The Root is of the like quality, and available for the said purpose,
and besides, it is of great use to take away the hard callous skin that grows
on a Fistula, if it be scraped upon it. The Leaves are profitable to consume
and dissolve cold swellings, if they be bruised and applied thereto. The Juice
of the Flowers being dropped into the Ears that are full of Matter, and run,
cleanses and heals them. ^he poor people of Polonia and Lit(...)ia do boil
the Seeds and Leaves hereof in water, and by putting a little Yest or Barm
thereunto, make of it a Liquor, which they drink as familiarly as we do Beer.

CHAP. CCCXII. Of Birth-wort.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) quasi (...), because it is good both to facilitate
the Birth, and to purge all impurity that may be in the Womb after delivery.
The Latins following the Greek do likewise call it Aristolochia, besides which
it has none other Latin name, but those which are corrupt, yet coming thence
also as Pistolochia and Aristologia. In English it is called Birth-wort from
the effects before mentioned.

The Kinds.
There are eight sorts hereof reckoned up by Bauhinus in his Pinax, though
perhaps not translated Verbatim. 1. The more ordinary round rooted Birth-wort.
2. Another round rooted Birth-wort. 3. The true long rooted Birth-wort. 4.
Spanish long Birth-wort. 5. The running rooted Birth-wort. 6. Spanish climing
Birth-wort. 7. The bushy rooted Birth-wort. 8. Ever-green bushy rooted
Birth-wort of Candy.

The Form.
The more ordinary round rooted Birth-wort sends forth diverse long, trailing
square Stalks, a foot long, or thereabouts, with few or no branches, but with
many round yellowish green Leaves, full of veins, standing at distances
without order, every one upon the short foot-stalk: At every joint with the
Leaves from the middle of these Stalks upwards, comes one long hollow Flower,
small at the bottom, but broader at the top, with a long piece or slippet, as
it were, at one side of the top bending down, both of them almost of a deadish
yellow, or somewhat brownish color, and somewhat blackish purple on the
inside; the Flowers being past, there come in their places small, round, and
somewhat long fruit of diverse sizes, but commonly about the bigness of a
Walnut, when the green shell is peeled off; which being ripe, opens it self
into three parts, and shows the Seed, which is somewhat flat and round, lying
in order within it, being separated into Cells by certain skins: the root is
round and tuberous, somewhat like to that of Sowbread, both in form and
operation.

The Places and Time.
I find none of these growing naturally in England, but that with the long
Root, which is said to grow beyond Reding, yet diverse others of the sorts are
to be found either in the Physic Garden at Oxford, or in Dr. Howes Garden at
Westminster, or in Mr. Tradescants Garden at Lambeth, being brought thither
either mediately or immediately from their natural places: the three first
growing as well in France about Mompelier, as in Spain and Italy; the next
three in Spain, as also in Candy, the seventh delights in the stony Olive
yards of Provence and Spain; and the last in Candy. In the warmer Countries
they flower and seed betimes, as in the months of May, June and July, but with
us they flower not until the middle or end of July, and their fruit does
hardly ripen before the Winter.

The Temperature.
The Roots of Birth-wort are hot in the second degree and dry in the third,
according to some; and hot in the third degree, and dry in the second*
according to others; the round has less earthy Substance, and more tenuity of
part^, and therefore more effectual in most Diseases.

The Signature and Virtues.
The learned Crollius, in his book of Signatures, does take notice of the
(...)mblance that is between the root of round Birth-wort and the Womb, and
(...) ^t is not altogether strange, if it be excellent for Women that have gone
out (...) full time, especial^y when they are in Travel, for it causes an
easy and speedy delivery, whether the Chi^d be alive or dead, expels the
Afterbirth, and all other impurity of the Womb, and provokes the Courses, so
that it must needs be an acceptable Herb to such Women as understand the
Virtues of it. It is also effectual to purge Phlegm, and then Choler, and that
without any trouble or commotion to the Body, for it discusseth windynesse,
which all other purging Medicines do usually cause, and therefore it avails
much in the diseases of the Brain^, Nerves, Breast, Stomach, Guts and Spleen:
It profits likewise in the Falling Sickness, Cramp, Convulsion, Ruptures,
shortness of Breath* pain of the Side, Hicket, gnawing of the Stomach,
Choll^ck, swelling of the Spleen, and especially if they come of Phlegm or
Wind. It is used with good success in the Joint Gout, against Venom and
Poison, against cold Agues, and against Stopping and Rebellious humors, that
are the cause of long Agues. It kills Worms, and resists putrefaction, and
is good against the con^usions of the Nerves and Muscles, if it be given with
Syrup of Vinegar, Mede or Honyed water. It is used also in old rotten and
malignant Ulcers, especially being mixed with the powder of the roots of
Flower-de-luce and Honey, for being thus used it cleanses and heals them. It
cures Ulcers of the secret parts, if they be washed with the Decoction thereof.
The Powder hereof does cleanse the Teeth, and make them white, being rubbed
therewith. It eases the Gout, being mingled with Honey and Salt, and applied.
It draws out Thorns and Spl^^ters of Bones that are broken, being applied
with Turpentine. It helps the biting of venomous Beasts, being boiled in Wine
and laid on, and so does the powder thereof being mixed with the juice of Rue,
and applied to the Wound. Being mingled with the powder of Aloes, Lime, or
Chalk, and Honey, and made into an Ointment, by adding a little Wine, it cures
the Cancer and Polyppus in the Nose, if Tents dipped therein be put into the
Nostrill. The powder thereof tempered with Honey, cures the Ulcers of the Mouth
and Gummes. The fume thereof, or the powder in a quilted Cap, stays all
Fluxes and Distillations of thin Rheum from the Head. It is held to be so
excellent for Wounds in the Head, and elsewhere, that it is an usual saying,
That without Birthwort, no Surgeon can perform any great cure. A Pessary
made hereof, and with Myrrh, provokes the Terms in Women, but let such a^ are
with Child, and have not gone their full time, by no means meddle with it, lest
it cause abortion. The distilled Water hereof is useful against creeping
Ulcers and Pustules of the Genitalls, both in men an women, being therewith
washed, or linen clothes dipped in the same* and laid on the place all night.
The long Birth-wort is almost, yet not altogether, so effectual as the round,
for all the diseases aforesaid, whether inward or outward, and some hold the
running kind to be so also.

CHAP. CCCXIII. Of Mercury.
The Names.
I Mean not here to treat of that Herb that the Country people call Mercury, in
Latin Bonus Henricus, which some take to be a kind of Dock, but of those sorts
of Mercury which are more p^operly so called. French Mercury is called in Greek
(...) Linozostis, and (...) Mercurii Herba, and though (...) Parthenium be the
name, which is usually given to Feaverfew, yet because this is also good for
Women's diseases, it was formerly so called, as diverse other Herbs tending to
the same purpose were. The Latins following the Greek; do call it Mercurialis,
because as Pliny says, it was found by Mercury* Dogs mercury, which is also a
kind hereof, is called in Greek (...) and (...) Cynaea and Cyn^crambe, which
signifies as much as Brassica Canina, that is, Dogs-Cabbage, but because it
has no agreement with any Cabbage, therefore some have chose rather to call it
in Latin by the name of Mercurialis Canina, propter ignobilitatem, and other
Mercurialis Sylvestris. The Childs or the Childing-Mercury, which is another
sort hereof is called by the Greeks (...) and (...) Phyllum and Eleophyllu^,
quasi Oleaefolium, because the Leaves are like unto those of the Olive.

The Kinds.
The kinds are sufficiently declared in speaking of the names, and therefore I
shall say no more of them, only that every sort has a Male and Female.

The Form.
French Mercury, for so it is called, though it grow in other places besides
France, rises up with square green Stalks full of joints, a cubit high, or
thereabouts, with two Leaves at every joint, and branches likewise from both
sides the Stalks, with fresh green Leaves, somewhat broad and long withal,
about the bigness of the Leaves of Basil, finely dented about the edges. In
the Male, at the joints toward the tops of the Stalks and Branches, come forth
two small round green Heads, standing together upon a short foot-stalk, which
growing ripe are the Seeds, not having any Flower: In the Female the Stalk is
longer, spike-fashion, set round about with small green Husks, which are the
Flowers, made like small branches of Grapes, which give no Seed, but abide long
upon the Stalks without shedding. The Root is composed of many small Fibers,
perishing every Winter, and rising again the next year of its own sowing, if
the seed of the male be permitted to shed, and so the ground will be for ever
furnished with both sorts of it, for they both rise from the Seed of the Male
in the same manner as Hemp, and could not be distinguished one from another,
but by their Seed and Flowers.

The Places and Time.
The French Mercury grows as well wild in diverse places of the English
Dominions, as by a Village called Brookland, in Rumney Marsh in Kent, and by
the Seaside in the Isle of Wight, as in Gardens, where it is sometimes sown;
The Dogs-Mercury grows by the Hedge-sides in most places of this Land also,
the Female being not so frequent as the Male, but the Child's or
Childing-Mercury, grows wild about Mompelier in France, and in Spain and
Italy, and is a Sojourner in some of our Gardens. They all flourish and seed in
the Summer, save the Childs Mercury, which flowreth so late with us, that it
hardly bears ripe Seed.

The Temperature.
Mercury is hot and dry, yet not above the second degree; it has a cleansing
faculty and a digesting quality also, as Galen says.

The Virtues.
Hipocrates, whose skill in Physic was incomparable, as appears by his learned
Aphorisms, does very much commend the use of the French Mercury for Women's
diseases, for if it be applied to the Secret parts by way of fomentation, it
eases the pains of the Mother, and if the Decoction thereof be used, it
procures the Terms and expels the Afterbirth, as also for the Stangury,
and diseases of the Reins and Bladder, the decoction thereof with Myrrh or
Pepper being taken inwardly, or the Leaves applied outwardly, or both: He used
it also for sore and watring Eyes, and for Deafness, and pains in the Ears, by
dropping the juice thereof into them, and bathing them afterward in White
Wine. The decoction of the Leaves, or the juice of them taken in broth or
drink, with as much Sugar put to it as will sweeten it, purges choleric and
watrish Humors. The decoction thereof made with Water and a Cock chicken, is a
most safe Medicine for the hot fits of the Ague; ^t also cleanses the Breast
and Lungs of Phlegm, but a little offends the Stomach; The juice or distilled
water thereof snuffed up into the Nostrils, purges the Head and Eyes of
Catarrhes and Rheums. Two or three ounces of the distilled water with a little
Sugar put to it and drunk in the morning fasting, is used by some as a good
Medicine to open and purge the Body of gross, viscous, and m^lancholy humors.
Matthiolus says, that both the Seed of the Male, and Flowers of Female Mercury
boiled with Wormwood and drunk, cures the Yellow Jaundise in a speedy manner:
The Leaves or the Juice rubbed upon Warts, takes them away: The Juice mingled
with some Vinegar helps all running Scabs, Tetters, Ringworms, and the Itch.
Being applied in manner of a Pultis to any Swelling or Inflammation, it
digesteth and spends the humors, which were the cause thereof, and so
helps it. It is frequently used with other things to evacuate the Belly from
offensive humors, being given in a Clister. Though Dog-mercury he less used,
because it is more common, yet it may serve to purge waterish and melancholy
Humors, in the same manner as the former, and also for other the said uses. It
is said of Childing Mercury, that if the Male thereof be taken by a Woman three
days together after conception, and that her Courses be past, she shall bring
forth a Male Child, but if she take of the Female, it shall be a Girl, and the
same is said of the French Mercury, but my Wife never tried either of them.

CHAP. CCCXIV. Of Madder.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) and (...) Etruthrodanum, and Eruthedanum from the
red color of the root, and Rubia Tinctorum in Latin, because Dyers make use
thereof to color Wool, as Leather-dressers also do to color their Leather,
which is the name that the Shops use also, yet Nicander calls it (...)
Schyrium in Greek, and others call it Rub^a in Latin, without any addition.

The Kinds.
There be six kinds of Madder growing in our ownd Land: 1. Red Madder,
commonly called Garden Madder: 2. Wild Madder: 3. Wild Madder with long Leaves:
4. Sea Madder: 5. Dwarf Madder: 6. Little field Madder.

The Form.
The manured or Garden Madder shoots forth many Stalks, which stand upright
at their first coming up, and so likewise if they be kept cut, but if they be
permitted to grow, they become long, weak, and trailing upon the ground a great
way, unless they grow by some hedge, and then they will climb thereon, being
apiece, very rough and full of Joints, at every of which come forth diverse
long, and somewhat narrow Leaves, standing about the Stalks somewhat like the
r^well of a Spu^, being very rough also; near unto the tops whereof do come
forth many small pale yellow Flowers, after which come small round heads, green
at the first, and reddish afterward, but black when they are ripe, wherein are
contained the Seed; The Root is not so great as long, creeping very far, as
well downwards as about the surface of the Earth, fat, full of substance, and
of a red and very clear color, whilst it is fresh.

The Places and Time.
The first, though it be commonly manured for the great profit that is made
thereof, yet it grows wild, not only upon S. Vincents Rock near Bristoll,
and in the Hedges about Ruthland in Wales; the second is natural also to some
parts of this Land, and so is the third, which grows in diverse places of
Dorset-shire; the fourth grows likewise in our own Country, and so do the two
last. They flower in June and July chiefly, and the Seed of all of them is ripe
in August, or thereabout, except the Sea* kind, which seldom perfecteth its
Seed with us.

The Temperature.
Madder roots are hot in the second degree, and dry in the third, and have an
opening quality, and also an astringent property.

The Virtues and Signature.
The Decoction of Madder made in Wine and drunk, does not only bring down the
Courses in Women, and provoke Urine, but brings away the Birth and
afterbirth, cures the Jaundise, opens the stoppings of the Spleen and Gall,
and ^iminisheth the Melancholy humor: The same taken as aforesaid, or in
powder, dissolveth congealed blood in the Body, and is good for such as have
bruised themselves by any great fall, and is very much used in vulnerary or
Wound-drinks, for which purpose the color of the root speaks it to be useful.
It is profitable also for such as have the Dropsi^, Palsy, Sciatica, or
Hip-gout. The Seeds of Madder taken with Vineg^r and Honey, helps the
swelling, and hardness of the Spleen. It is used also to amend or help the ill
color of the Face, and it helps Ulcers of the Mouth, if to the Decoction
there be added a little Alome and Honey of Roses. The Juice of the Root, or
Decoction thereof, is given to such as are hurt with venomous Beasts, and
preserves the Body from putrefaction, and is very good for those that have the
Itch or Scab: The Roots bruised, especially whist they are fresh, and applied
to any part that is discolored with Freckles, Morphew, the White Scurf, or
such like deformities of the Skin, cleanses them thoughly, and takes them
away, especially if Vinegar be mixed therewith; or the Powder of the Root mixed
with a little Juice of Garlic, Oil, and a little Honey, cures any Itch, Scab,
or foulness of the Skin, being anointed therewith. The Juice of the Root
dropped into the Ears, mitigates the pain of them. The Roots applied as a
Pessary, or the powder of the Root made up with Oil of Savin, and applied,
brings away the Birth, and Afterbirth. By the reason that the Leaves and Roots
do die a red color, some have mistaken the effects thereof, supposing that it
provokes Urine so much, that it causes blood* to come forth, when as the red
color of the Urine proceeds from no other cause, but the color of the Root,
as Rubarbe will cause it to look yellow. The Decoction of Madder, given with
that great composition called Triphera, is singular good to stay the Reds in
Women, the Hemorrhoides, and the Bloody Flix, which it may be said to do by
Signature, as has been approved by diverse experiments, so that the contrary
effects herein are manifest, the one being opening, and the other restringent;
and it is said to be useful against untimely birth, though the common opinion
be, that it must not be given to women with child, nor often to such as have
hot and dry bodies, and then the Dose must not exceed two Scruples, if it be
given in Powder, nor half an Ounce, if it be given in Decoction. The Roots are
good traffic amongst the Dyers, as well as the Apothecaries, as having a
special property to strike a lively red color upon their Wool and woollen
Cloth, and the Curriers and other Leather-dressers, color their Leather
therewith.

CHAP. CCCXV. Of Dittany.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) by Dioscorides, and (...) by Theophrastus, and by
others (...) and (...), being derived, as some suppose (...), a pariendo,
because it is exceeding helpful to Women in their pains of Child birth, not
only by allaying them, but by furthering their delivery, as the Authors but
now mentioned do testify. It is also called (...), that is, Pulegium
Sylvestre, but it is called by most Latin Writers Dictamnus, or Dictamnus
Creticus, Dictamum or Dictamnum Creticum; and the bastard sort is called
Pseudodictamnus, Pseudodictamus, and Pseudodictamum.

The Kinds.
Concerning that kind of Bastard Dittany, called Fraxinella, in Latin, I have
already spoken, and told you that it was improperly so called, and therefore I
shall here set down those that better deserve the name, and they are three; 1.
Dittany of Candy; 2. Bastard Dittany; 3. Another Bastard Dittany.

The Form.
Dittany of Crete or Candy, for so it is now called, has diverse hard and
brownish, yet somewhat hoary Stalks rising from the root, set full of Leaves,
two standing together one against another, all along the Branches, which are
broad, and thick, and almost round, so hoary, white, and covered over with a
wooly down, that they seem not at all to be green; at the tops of the Branches
come forth scaly heads, purplish on the outside, and paler on the inside,
from among which come forth gaping Flowers, of a pale purplish color, and
after them small brownish Seed; the Root consists of many blackish strings or
Fibers, from a harder long Root; the whole Herb is of a quick or fiery scent,
especially if it be fresh, and of a hotter taste, for it decays in keeping,
yet it will retain its virtue a year, or longer.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in the Isle of Crete or Candy, and therefore called Creticus,
which by elder times was supposed to be the only place in the world; but
Clusius says, that it was signified to him, that it was found also in the Isle
of Sardinia* with lesser and whiter Leaves than those of that of Candy, and
exceeding sweet withal, and is sown in some few of our Gardens, but seldom
endures the coldness of our Winters, and then it must be carefully covered;
the second grows near Pisa and Ligorne, in the Florentine Dominions, and is
frequent in the Gardens of Italy; the last in the Island Corigo. Some have
thought that the first bears neither Flower nor Seed, but not without error,
for it is found to bear both in its natural soil, though in our cold Climate
it seldom flowers, and then it cannot often seed. The second is late before it
flowreth, so that it seldom perfecteth its seed. The last is so great a
stranger, that its time is not known.

The Temperature.
Dittany both that of Crete, and of the Bastard kinds, is hot and dry in the
third degree.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides, Theophrastus, and the general consent of Writers do confirm
that the Leaves of Dittany being made into Powder and drank, with Water or
Wine, causes speedy deliverance and easy, though the Child be dead, and out
of due course, and expels the Afterbirth, and it is said that Dittany,
Vervaine and Hyssope of each one handful, being stamped, and drank by a Woman
when she is in travail, saves both the Woman and Child, though they be both
in danger: It povokes Women's Courses, and is profitable for those that are
troubled with the Dropsy, or swelling of the Spleen. The Juice drank with Wine
is a present remedy for those that are bitten or stung by any Venomous
Creature: nay, the Herb is so effectual against the poison of all beasts that
are venomous, that the very smell drives them away: The powder being mixed with
Honey and taken, eases the Cough and kills Worms, and a Decoction thereof
taken, is profitable for the Jaundise A P^ss^^y made of the Juice and the
Powder, brings away the dead Child, and after birth being applied. A Bath or
Decoction made thereof, and used all over, cures the ^aundise. The Juice mixed
with the Powder, helps the Uvula being ^allen, if it be anointed therewith;
and the Juice being mixed with Woman's milk, and dropped in the ^ares that are
pained, eases them. The Roots of Dittany and Ac^r^s made into powder, and
snuffed up into the Nostrills, purges the Brain: The Powder of Dittany and
Castor mixed with the Juice of Rue, and put up into the Nose, is good for those
that have the falling Sickness. It draws forth Thorns and Splinters out of
the feet or other parts, being applied thereto; and if a weak Member be but
rubbed with the Juice thereof, it strengthens the same. The Juice is a present
remedy for all wounds made with Iron, being put therein, both mundifying and
cleansing the same, especially those that are made with Venomous Weapons. The
same has a purging faculty, being anointed or applied with Barley Meal. The
distilled Water thereof cannot but be useful for many of the aforesaid
purposes, and besides it is commended against the Pestilence, if three ounce^
be drank Morning and Evening, and against Venom, if six ounces thereof be
drank; and three ounces thereof taken in the morning are profitable against
the Stone. Though Dittany be good for Women in Labor, yet Women with Ch^ld
must avoid it, because it will make them miscarry; neither is it for hot,
choleric and dry bodies, nor to be much used in hot seasons: but when it is
needful the Dose of the powder is from a scruple to a dram. It is a report of
ancient standing, and contradicted by no Author that ever I read, that the Wild
Goats and Dear in Candy, when they be wounded with Arrows, do drive them
forth by eating this herb, the cure also ensuing thereupon.

CHAP. CCCXVI. Of Pepperwort or Dittander.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Lepidium, as some think quod (...), id est,
maculas in cute delet, because it takes Spots and Scarres out of the Skin, or
as others think, (...), quod acrimonia urenti ulceret, because it is hot in
taste, yet not so hot as to exulcerate. It is called also Lepidium in Latin,
but it is as well, if not better known by the name of Piperitis, for so it is
called because of its heating quality like unto Pepper, yet neither the
Piperitis that Pliny mentions, nor the Lepidium of Dioscorides are the same
with this, that of Pliny being a kind of Pepper called Siliquastrum, and that
of Dioscorides being the Sciatica Cresse called Iberis, or Cardamantica. We
call it in English Dittander and Pepperwort, and some Dittany, but falsely,
that being another plant which I have spoken to in the foregoing Chapter. There
is a kind hereof called Scarrewort, after the Greek name, either because it
makes a mark in the hand or him that shall hold it, or because it takes away
all manner of ^carres, as I said before.

The Kinds.
There be three kinds of Dittander. 1. Common Dittander or Pepperwort. 2.
French Dittander, or Scarrewort. 3. Annual Dittander, or Scarrewort.

The Form.
Common Dittander or Pepper-wort sends forth somewhat long and broad Leaves,
sharp pointed, of a light bluish green color, dented about the Edges
somewhat like a Saw: the Stalk whereon most of the Leaves stand is round and
tough, sometimes a cubit or more in height, spreading forth diverse branches on
which do grow little white flowers, after which follows the small seed in
little heads: The Root is slender and apt to increase, the whole plant is very
hot and sharp in taste, as I said before.

The Places and Time.
The first grows naturally in diverse places of this Land, as about Clare in
Essex, about Exceter in the West Country, about Rochester in Kent, and about
Sawle Abbey in Lancashire, etc. and is taken into Gardens by some that know how
to use it. The other two are found about M^mpelier in France. The first and
last flower about June or July; the second in August, when the other two
perfect their seed.

The Temperature.
Dittander is hot and dry in the third degree, being of a cleansing quality,
and not so hot and fiery sharp, as some Authors make them, especially the
ordinary sort.

The Virtues.
The Women of Bury in Suffolk, and in the West Country also, as I have been
told by one that came from thence, and in other places also, do usually give
the Juice of Dittander, to the quantity of a Spoonful or two in Ale to be
drank by those Women that are in travail, to procure them a speedy delivery.
It is very effectual also for the Sciatica, or Hip-gout, or any other Gout or
pain in the Joints, or any other inveterate grief, the Leaves hereof to be
bruised and mixed with old Hoggs-grease, and applied to the place, there to
continue for four hours, if the party be a Man, but no more then two, if it be
a Woman, the place being afterward bathed with Wine and Oil mixed together,
and then wrapped with Wool or Skins, after they have sweat a little. The same
also amendeth the deformi^^es and discolorings of the Skin, whether in the
face or elsewhere, and helps to take away all manner of Marks, Scarres and
Scabbs, which remain after the healing of Ulcers, or the like, as also the foul
marks of burnings, either with Fire, or an hot Iron. The other two are also
judged to be endued with the same effects, and are also good for the Toothach^,
as Rondeletius affirms, who says, he made as good use thereof for that
purpose, as he did of Pellitory of Spain, and that some of the Leaves only
being held, gives ease unto them that are vexed with the said p^ine. A Leaf
of Scarrewort applied to the palm of the hand or any other place, is said to
make a Mark or discoloring, different from the adjaent parts, if it lie at it
but a while, and continues so after it is taken off.

CHAP. CCCXVII. Of the Holme Oak.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek, (...) from (...), signifying to Saw, because it is so
hard that it cannot be cut, but with a Saw. The greater sort is of some called
in Latin, Ilex major, Ilex arbor, and Ilex glandifera, to distinguish it from
the lesser, or Scarlet Holme Oak called Ilex coccifera, or coccigera. The
Acorne of the greater is called in Greek (...), and Acylum also in Latin, but
the Scarlet Grain of the lesser is called in Greek by Theophrastus (...),
Coccos Phoenicea, by Dioscorides (...) simply, and (...), Coccus Baphica. In
Latin by Pliny Granum Coccum, Quisquilium, Cusculium, Scoletium, Vermiculum
and Hysginum, but by the latter Writers, Coccus infectorius, and Granum
infectorium, by the Arabians, Chermes or Kermes, as also by the Apothecaries,
who likewise call it Grana tinctorum, in English, the Scarlet grain, or Chermes
berry.

The Kinds.
Of the Holme Oak there be three sorts: 1. The greater prickly Holme Oak. 2.
The great smooth Holme Oak. 3. The lesser or Scarlet Holme Oak, which though
it be the least in quantity, yet the Scarlet Grain thereof being so eminent
and useful, I shall describe that.

The Form.
The Scarlet Holme Oak grows in the manner of an Hedge tree, of a mean
bigness, having many fair branches, or boughs spread abroad, whereon are set
Leaves green above, but whitish underneath, snipt about the Edges, and at every
corner one short prickle, in manner like unto Holly, yet somewhat less: from
amongst which there come sometimes, but not often, small Acornes standing in
little Cups or Husks; for when it is pruined and cut low, it bears the
Scarlet grain growing all along the branches, at the several joints and
footstalk of the Leaves, about the bigness of a Pease, of the color of
Holly or Asparagus Berries, when they are ripe, and containing in them a clear
Juice of a crimson color, as deep as any pure fresh blood which by the heat of
the Sun is turned into small red worms, little bigger then fleas, at the first,
but being suffered to grow great consume the inner substance of the Berry or
Grain, creeping away, and leaving the Husk or Shel empty, which empty Shells are
sometimes used, when the Berries themselves are not to be gotten.

The Places and Time.
The first grows plentifully in Spain and France, the second in Spain, and
Italy, but for their rarity they have been planted in some Gardens of this
Land: the last grows not only in diverse places of Europe and Asia: but also
in Africa and America* as in Spain, Portugal, Italy, and in that part of
France called Provence, etc. They all flower in May, and their fruit is ripe at
the end of September; The Scarlet grain comes forth in the middle of April,
and is gathered in May and June, for the use of the Apothecaries and Dyers,
before the worms come forth.

The Temperature.
The Scarlet grain called Chermes is astringent, and somewhat bitter, and also
dry, without sharpness.

The Virtues.
The Scarlet grain, but especially the confection made thereof called
Alkermes. is not only commended, but also given by Physicians and Midwives,
very frequently to such Women with Child, as by infirmity or other casualty
are apt to miscarry by untimely travel, as also to comfort and strengthen them
in the time of their Labor, for it is so Sovereign a Cordial, that there is
none better (though perhaps there be cheaper) to fortify the heart, and to
revive the fainting Spirits, of which there is great need at such times:
notwithstanding it was chiefly devised in the beginning, for the purging of
Melancholy, which appears by that quantity of Lapis Lazuli, which is commonly
added thereunto, and is therefore profitable for those that are troubled with
Melancholy passions and sorrow, proceeding from no evident cause, for it
procures mirth, as much as any Physical means whatsoever. This noble and
famous Composition is also daily commended, and used with good success against
the trembling and shaking of the heart, and against swounings, but then it will
be most necessary that the Lapis Lazuli be left out, or at least to be very
well prepared before it be put in, because the sharp and venemons quality,
wherewith it is endued, working upon the Heart and other Entrails, many ^^mes
does more harm then good. It has been also found to be very effectual for the
healing of green Wounds and Sinews that are cut, if the powder of the Berries
be tempered with the Syrup of Vinegar, or Vinegar it self, and applied
thereunto. The manner of reducing them into powder is this; When these Grains
or Berries are seasonably gathered, the people that live in those places where
they grow, cast them upon a Sheet or some such thing, sprinkling them with a
little Wine or Vinegar, which being born up from the ground by the sides, or
four corners, and set in the hot Sun, will have little worms growing in them,
as I said before, who feeling the heat of the Sun begin to stir, and would
creep quite away, if there were not one appointed purposely to look unto them,
with a small Wand or Stick, who by striking the sides of the Sheet, causes
them to fall down into the middle again, till they be all dead, and dried so
sufficiently with the heat of the Sun, that they may be easily done into
Powder. Some use to put them into a Bag or Boulter, and shake them in the Sun,
and sometimes dry them in an Oven, and afterward bring them to the Market, and
sell them to the Merchants, who direct them into all parts where they have good
vent for them. The Crimson Silk that is appointed in this Confection, is not
to be that which is dyed after the ordinary manner, because they use many
things in the doing of it, which are not safe to be taken inwardly, and
therefore some have used to draw a tincture out of the dried Berries, but there
is a safer course now devised, namely to steep the raw silk, that has had no
Art pass upon it, in the true Juice of the Chermes Berries, which being
imbibed and sufficiently colored, the Juice after boiling and streining is fit
to be used. Both the Pulpe and Shells are used by those of Candy for dying, but
the richer Dye, which is made of the Pulpe, is four times dearer then that,
which is made of the Bladders or Shells.

CHAP. CCCXVIII. Of Ground Pine or Herb Ivy.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Ghamaepitys, which name the Latins many times
use, quasi humipinus vel picea, it a little resembling the Pine in the form of
the Leaves, but more in the smell of the root: It is also called in Latin
Ajuga, but more properly Abiga, not ab Abietis odore, because it smells like
Fur, as Pena thinks, but as most conceive, ab abigendo partu, and
procurando abortu: Some call it also Thus terrae from its smell, others Iva
Arthretica, or rather Arthrytica, because it helps the Gout and other Joint
aches. It is called in English, Herb Ivy; Forget me not, Ground Pine, and Field
Cypress.

The Kinds.
Of Ground pine there be these four sorts: 1. The ordinary or Common
Groundpine. 2. The sweet Ground Pine. 3. Clusius his Ground Pine of Austria. 4.
Bastard Ground Pine.

The Form.
The Common Ground Pine grows low, seldom rising to be above the height of
an hand-breadth, shooting forth diverse small branches, set with slender small,
long, narrow, gray, whitish Leaves, somewhat hairy and divided into three parts
many times, many bushing together at a Joint, and sometimes also some growing
scatteredly upon the Stalks, smelling somewhat strong like unto Rosen or
Pitch; the Flowers are small, and of a pale yellow color, growing from the
Joints of the Stalks all along amongst the Leaves, after which come small,
long and round Husks; the root is small and woody, perishing every year.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in diverse places of Kent very plentifully, especially about
Grave end, Cobham Southfleet, Horton, Dartford and Sutton, and is taken into
the Gardens of those that know the use of it. The second was seen by Pena on
the dry Hills and higher Meadows of Savoy: the third grows about Vienna in
Austria; the last in diverse unmanured pla^es of Spain: They all flower in June
and July, and give their Seed about August.

The Temperature.
Ground Pine is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third.

The Virtues.
The Decoction of Ground Pine drunk, does not only mervailously help all the
diseases of the Mother, but procures Women's Courses, expels the Deadbirth,
and Afterbirth, yea it is so powerful upon those feminine parts, that it is
utterly forbidden to Women with Child, in that it will cause abortment or
delivery before the time, in those that have not fulfilled their Months, but in
those that have, it furthereth deliverance as much as may be, as well applied
outwardly, as used inwardly. The said Decoction does wonderfully prevail
against the Strangury and Stoppings of Urine, or any inward pain rising from
the diseases of the Reins, and is exceeding good also for all obstructions of
the Liver and Spleen, for it cleanses gr^sse and impu^e blood, expelling that
which is congealed, and gently opening the body, for which purpose the powder
thereof was formerly made up in Pills, with the Pulpe of Figgs: It is effectual
also in all the pains and diseases of the Joints, as Gouts, Gramps, Palsies,
Sciatica and Aches, either the Decoction of the herb in Wine taken inwardly,
or applied outwardly, or both for some time together; for which purpose the
Pills, which are made with the powder of Ground pine, Hermodactyles, and Venice
Turpentine, are very effectual. The said Pi^s continued for some time are of
special use for the Dropsy, Jaundise, and also for those that have any griping
pains in the Belly, or Joints. It helps also all diseases of the Brain,
proceeding from cold and phlegmatic humors, and distillations, as also for the
Falling Sickness. It is an especial remedy also against the poison of all
sorts of Aconites, and other poysonful herbs, neither is it less powerful
against the stinging of the Scorpion, and all other venomous Creatures. The
green herb, or the Decoction thereof being applied to Women's Breasts,
dissolveth the hardness of them, as also all other hard tumors in any other
part of the Body: The green herb or the juice thereof applied with some Honey,
does not only cleanse putrid, stinking, foul, malignant and virulent Ulcers
and Sores of all sorts, but heals and sodereth up the lips of green Wounds in
any part also. The herb tunned up in drink and drank, is very much commended
for those inward griefs aforementioned, being far more acceptable to weak or
dainty stomachs, and this way is almost as effectual as any other. The
distilled Water of the herb has the same effects also, but more weakly. The
Conserve of the Flowers does the like, which is much commended for the Palsy,
as the Pills made of the herb, with a number of other Ingredients also are.

CHAP. CCCXIX. Of the Savine-Tree or Bush.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), and (...), Brathus, Brathy, and Barathron, in
Latin, Sabina and Savina, which are the more ordinary names, yet some have
called it Savinera. Some think it to be the Bruta arbor Plinii, being taken
from Brath^ by the transposition of a Letter, and Savina altera to be the same,
which he says was called Cupressus Cretica, but some are of another opinion.

The Kinds.
There be but three sorts of Savine that I can find, for though perhaps some
may think, that that which bears berries, and that which bears none to be
different kinds, yet they are not, for the same tree which bears berries in
the natural places, bears none with us, so that there be but three kinds as
I said. 1. The ordinary Savine Tree. 2. The greater berried Savine Tree. 3.
Gentle Savine with Berries.

The Form.
The ordinary Savine which grows most commonly in the Gardens of our
Country, is a pretty low Shrub, seldom exceeding the height of a Man, nor
much bigger in the Stem or Trunk then a Man's arm, with many crooked bending
boughs and branches, whereon are set many small, short, hard and prickly
Leaves, of a dark green color, which continue fresh both Winter and Summer:
Though it be reported to bear small black Berries like unto Juniper, where it
grows naturally, yet with Us it is commonly barren, both of Flowers and
Fruit: The Leaves are of a rank or strong smell.

The Places and Time.
The places where the first grows naturally are Candy, Mysia, and other of
the Eastern Countries; but since it has been brought from thence, it has been
so dispersed and propagated by the slips, that there is hardly a Country Town
but one or another has it, (and the biggest that ever I saw was in Thomas
Poultons Garden at Barford) yet those that have it would do well to keep it
under lock and key, and to suffer no body to have any thereof, unless it be
for some honest use, the contrary whereof is sometimes made. The second grows
in the mountain Taurus, Amanus and Olympus. The last upon the mountains of
Calabria and Apulia by Naples, as also near Gratianople: these two last are
also found in some of our more curious Gardens, as in that of John Tradescants
Garden at Lambeth, etc. They abide ever green, and show their ripe Berries not
until Winter.

The Temperature.
The Leaves of Savine which are of greatest use in Medicine, are hot and dry in
the third degree, and of subtle parts.

The Signature and Virtues.
That exquisite discoverer of Signatures Oswald Crollius, in his Book upon that
Subject, declares that Savine has the Signature of the Veins of the Matrix
or Womb, and therefore it is exceeding powerful in its operation upon that
part, for the Decoction thereof drank, not only provoke Women's Courses, send
forth the Birth and Afterbirth, but causes Abortion in those that take it
before they have gone out their full time, and therefore, as I said, it is not
to be permitted to those, whom you suspect to desire it for any such occasion,
as some Harlots do. The said Decoction expels blood by Urine, and is
profitable for the Kings Evil A dram of Savine in Powder, mixed with three
ounces of Niter, and two of Honey, does wonder^ully help such as are
short-winded, as Matthiolus says: It kills the Worms in Children, but it is
safer to use it outwardly, then inwardly, by applying it to the Navel, or by
anointing the Belly with the Oil thereof. The sum of the Decoction taken
underneath, provokes the Courses, brings away the Birth and Afterbirth. The
Powder of the dried Leaves mixed with Honey, is an excellent remedy to cleanse
old filthy Ulcers, and Fistulaes, especially if they be of long continuance,
and not easy to be helped, for it resists putrefaction, and digesteth them
exceedingly; yet it being so hot and dry, is altogether unapt for consolidating
or healing them. The said powder mixed with Cream, or the green Leaves boiled
in Cream and anointed on the heads of Children, which have Scabbs, running or
dry Sores, cleanses them thoroughly, and heals them, as also Saint Anthonies
fire. The fresh Leaves bruised and laid upon running and fretting Cancers, and
the like, as Tetters, Ring-wormes, etc. kills and destroys them. The powder
of the Leaves mixed with Honey, takes away all Spots and Freckles from the
Face or Body being applied thereunto, and so it helps the Blisters of the
Yard, that are gotten by dealing with unclean Women, after they have been
bathed with the Decoction of the Leaves, as the Powder of the Leaves being
strewed thereupon does also. Being given to Horses, or other Cattle in their
drink, it is effectual for the Botts and the smoke thereof burned, cures Hens
that have gotten the Pippe. The distilled Water thereof, helps those that
have the Worms, and is effectual also for them that have a giddiness in their
Brains. The same does cleanse the Skin from Spots and Marks, and other
deformities therein.

CHAP. CCCXX. Of the Birch-tree.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Semuda by Theophrastus, by others (...) and
(...), Semus and Semos, in Latin Betula, and sometimes Betulla, from the old
Verb Batuo, signifying to beat, because it was and is often used for that
purpose.

The Form.
The Birch Tree grows in many places to be a goodly tall straight tree,
fraught with many boughs, and other slender branches bending downwards, the
elder being covered with a discolored rough chapped bark, but those that are
younger, are browner by much, having under them another fine white thin rind
or bark. The Leaves at their first breaking out are crumpled, but afterward
they become somewhat smoother, not much unlike those of the Beech-Tree, but
smaller, and greener, with dents about the Edges: It bears small and short
Catkins, somewhat like to those of the Hasel Nut tree, which abide on the
branches a long time, wherein the seed is contained, but at length falls to the
ground.

The Places and Time.
Though the Birch Tree grow frequently in some Countries, yet in others it is
very rare, as is in some parts of Oxford and Northampton-shires, where they are
set in Gardens, as rarities, as in the Garden of my much honored Friend John
Cartwright Esquire, at his house in Aino. I remember once as I rid through
little Brickhill in Buckingham-shire, which is a Town standing upon London
Road, between Dunstable and Stony Stratford, every Signe-post in the town
almost, was bedecked with green Birch, so that in that Country it seems to be
very plentiful. The Catkins come forth in April, and the Leaves soon after,
but the Seed is not ripe until September.

The Temperature.
The Leaves of the Birch Tree are thought to be cooling, but the Bark and
Catkins are hot.

The Signature and Virtues.
The inner bark of the Birch-tree, says the said Crollius, whom I quoted in
the Chapter immediately going before, has the Signature of the Matrix with the
bloody veins thereof, and therefore the decoction thereof provokes Women's
Courses, expels the Afterbirth, and carries away all manner of superfluity
from the Womb. The juice of the Leaves while they are young, or the distilled
Water of them, or the Water that comes out of the Tree being bored with an
Auger, taken either before, or after it is distilled again, is held to be very
availeable to break the Stone in the Kidneyes, or Bladder, and is also good to
wash sore mouths, for which purposes a Lie made of the inner bark of the
Birch-tree is likewise effectual. The civil uses whereunto the Birch-tree
serves are many, as for the punishment of Children both at home and at School,
for it has an admirable influence upon them, to quiet them when they are out
of Order, and therefore some call it Make-peace: The old Roman Magistrates had
it born in bundles before them, as an Ensign, and Instrument of Justice to be
executed upon petty Offenders; it is used also to Hoop Caskes, bind Fagots,
make Besomes, etc.

Having thus dispatched these Simples which are appropriated to the Womb, I
pass on now to those that are availeable for Ruptures, which Disease is caused
by the breaking or loosening of the Rim, or Filme of the Belly, so that the
Guts fall into the Cods. It happens most commonly to young Children, and
those of the Male-kinde, yet sometimes Females, and elder persons are troubled
therewith, so that it will be very requisite to speak of some particular
Plants, that are very effectual for this purpose.

CHAP. CCCXXI. Of Rupturewort.
The Names.
IT is uncertain whether any of the ancient Greek Writers knew this herb,
because we have no Greek name left for it, that we can affirm to be the true,
and therefore I shall wave it. It is called in Latin Polygonum minus by
Matthiolus, and Castor Durantes, Herba Cancri minor by Cordus in his
Scholiastes, and Millegrana in his History of Plants, Epipactis by Anguillara,
Herba Turca by Lobel, and Casalpinus, but the name which is best known, and
most used by the Writers of this present age is Herniaria, being so called from
its efficacy in curing the Rupture, called Hernia; It is also called in English
Rupture-wort, or Burstwort, because it cures those that are bursten.

The Kinds.
Though some join the sorts of Rupture-wort with those of Knot-grasse, whereof
they are kinds, yet for their names and virtues sakes, we have reserved them
for this Chapter, and there be four sorts of them: 1. Common Rupture-wort: 2.
The greater Rupture-wort of Africa: 3. Rupture-wort with longer Leaves: 4.
Indian Rupture-wort.

The Form.
Common-Rupturewort grows with very many threddy branches, spread round upon
the ground, about a span long, divided into many other smaller parts, full of
small joints, set very thick together, whereat come forth two very small
Leaves, of a fresh green color, as the Branches also are, whereat there do
grow forth also a number of exceeding small yellowish flowers, scarce to be
discerned from the Stalks and Leaves, which turn into Seeds as small as dust.
The Root is long and small, thrusting down deep into the ground; the taste
hereof is scarce perceivable at the first, yet after a while a little
astringent taste, without any manifest heat, yet a little bitter and sharp
withal, may be perceived therein.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in many places of our own Land, as well as in others, in dry
barren grounds where it will be small, and in the moister places also, but not
boggy or moorish, that are not shadowed, and is for its usefulness brought
into Physick-Gardens of the greatest note; the second grows in Africa near
Tunis; the third in the dry cha^k or stony grounds of Kent, and other
Countries; the fourth in America, as Monardus says. They flourish and flower
in the months of May, June, July, and August.

The Temperature.
Rupture-wort does notably dry, and thoroughly closes up together and fasteneth.

The Signature and Virtues.
Rupture-wort, says mine Author, has such a Signature, that thereby it may be
perceived to be profitable for the falling down of the Guts into the Cods,
which is commonly called Burstness, and indeed it has neither its Signature,
nor its Name in vain, for it has been found by diverse experiences, to help and
cure the Rupture, not only in Children, but also in elder Persons, if the
Disease be not too inveterate, a dram of the powder of the dried herb being
taken in Wine every day, for certain days together, as the strength of the
Disease and age of the Patient shall require, for the older people are, and the
longer it is let alone, the longer it will be before it be cured; or the
Decoction made of the Herb in wine, and drunk, or the juice of the distilled
water of the green herb taken in the same manner; It is also wonderfully
effectual for helping all manner of Fluxes, either of men or women, Vomiting
also, and the Gonorrhea, or Running of the Reins, being taken any of the ways
aforesaid; It does most assuredly help those also that are grieved with the
Strangury, or have their Urine otherwise stopped, or are troubled with the
Stone or Gravel in the Reins or Bladder, causing them that take it to make
water very freely, and thereby to remove and wash down whatsoever sticks, or
is offensive in the passages of the Urine: The same also helps much all
Stitches in the Side, all griping pains in the Stomach or Belly, the
obstructions of the Liver, and cures the Yellow Jaundise likewise, and kills
Worms in Children. Being outwardly applied, it conglutinateth Wounds very
notably, and helps much to stay defluctions of Rheum from the Head, to the
Eyes, Nose, and Teeth, the green Herb being bruised and bound thereto; or the
Decoction of the dried Herb to bathe the Forehead and Temples, or the Nape of
the Neck behind. It also dries up the moisture of Fistulous Ulcers, or any
others that are foul and spreading. The lesser Rupture-wort has all the
faculties of the other, though not so exactly. Monardus writes, that the
Indian Rupture-wort is mervailously good for them that are bursten, whether
they be Children or Men that are so grieved, the green Herb being bruised and
applied to the place, whereunto a Truss must afterward be bound.

CHAP. CCCXXII. Of Thorough-wax.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Perfoliata (for it has no certain Greek name that I
can meet with) quod caulis ejus singula folia dissecat, atque penetra^, because
the Stalk grows through the Leaves, and therefore we call it in English
Thoroughwax, or Thorough-leaf.

The Kinds.
To this Kind may be referred these nine sorts following; 1. Common
Thorough-wax: 2. Double-flowred Thorough-wax: 3. Broad-leafed Mountain
Thorough-wax: 4. The lesser broad-leafed Mountain Thorough-wax: 5. The greater
narrow-leafed Mountain Thorough-wax: 6. The lesser narrow-leafed Mountain
Thorough-wax: 7. The least narrow-leafed Mountain Thorough-wax: 8. Common
codded Thorough-wax: 9. Codded Thorough-wax with purple flowers.

The Form.
The Common Thorough-wax grows up with one straight round Stalk, and
sometimes more, till it be half a yard high, or higher, whose lower Leaves
being of a bluish green color, are smaller and narrower than those that grow
higher, standing close thereto, but not quite compassing it; yet as they grow
higher, they do more and more encompasse the Stalk, until they so wholly close
together, that it passes almost through the middle of them, branching toward
the top into many parts, where the Leaves grow smaller again, every one
standing singly, and never two at a joint; the Flowers are very small and
yellow, standing in tufts at the heads of the Branches, where afterward grow
the Seed, which is small and blackish, many of them being thick thrust
together; the Root is small, long and woody, perishing after it has perfected
its seed, which being permitted to shed, rises again the next year.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in many Cornfieldsd and Pasture-grounds of this Land, as in
the Cornfieldsd about Beechen-tree, in the way between Oxford and Deddington,
very plentifully, and is taken into Gardens by those that know the use of it,
where by the alteration of the soil, it sometimes bears a double flower, and
is reckoned as a second sort, though it be but a kind of the first; all the
rest are strangers, except the last save one, which is found in our own Land.
They do all flower about July, and the Seed is ripe in August, or presently
after.

The Temperature.
Thorough-waxe is hot and dry, as may be perceived by the bitterishnesse and
astringency that is in it.

The Signature and Virtues.
The commendations of Thorough-wax are so many and so great, and the success so
answerable thereunto, as also to the Signature, which Crollius says it has,
that to omit it in this place would argue me to be very careless; Take notice
therefore, that the decoction of the Herb, or the powder of the dried Herb
taken inwardly, or the green Leaves bruised and applied outwardly, or both, is
very singular and available to cure Ruptures or Burstings, especially in
Children, before it grow to be too old. It is also an excellent Remedy to help
those Children that have their Navels sticking out, being applied thereunto
with a little Honey and Wax, and so it draws up the bowels, and keeps them
in their natural place, and setleth them and slacketh them, when they are too
much windy and swollen. It is also of singular good use with Chirurgions for
all sorts of Bruises and Wounds, either inward or outward, and old Ulcers and
Sores likewise, if the decoction of the Herb made with Water or Wine be
drunk, and the places washed therewith, or the juice or green herb bruised
and boiled, either by it self, or with other herbs, in Oil or Swines-greace,
be made into an Ointment, which may be used as any time of the year. The Herb,
as also the distilled Water thereof, is very good against St. Anthony's Fire,
and the Shingles. The green Leaves being stamped and boiled with Wax, Oil,
Rosin, and Turpentine, makes an excellent Ointment or Salve, to incarnate or
bring up flesh in deep ^^unds.

CHAP. CCCXXIII. Of Solomons-Seale.
The Names.
ITt is called in Greek (...), Polygonatum, from (...) multus, (...) genu,
because of the many Knees, Joints, or Nodes, that are in the Root; in Latin
also Polygonatum, but more usually Sigillum Solomoni^, because the flat round
circles that are upon the Root, do somewhat represent a Seal, or else because
of the wonderful faculty that it has in sealing or closing Burstennesses, or
green Wounds. It is also called Scala caeli, because the Leaves grow not
together, but one above another, imitating the rounds of some fashioned
Ladders. We call it in English Solomons-seale from the ordinary Latin name,
and sometime White-wort, or White(...).

The Kinds.
The sorts of Solomons-seale that I find mentioned by Authors, are twelve; 1.
Common Solomons-seal; 2. Great Solomons-seal: 3. The great-flowred
Solomons-seal: 4. The greatest leased Solomon's seal: 5. Small Solomons-seale:
6. Broad-leafed branched Solomons-seal: 7. Solomons-seal of Virginia: 8.
Cl^^ter-like Solomons-seal of America: 9. Solomons-seal of Brasil: 10. The
greater and lesser thorough-leafed yellow Solomons-Seal of America: 11.
Narrowleafed Solomons-seal: 12. Branched small Solomons-seal.

The Form.
The Common Solomons-seale grows with a round Stalk about half a yard high,
bowing or bending down the top, set with single Leaves one above another, which
are somewhat large, and like unto the Leaves of the May Lilly, of a bluish
green color, with some ribs therein, and a little yellowish underneath; it
has at the foot of every Leaf, almost from the bottom, small, long, white, and
yellow pendulous flowers, like unto those of the May Lilly also, but ending in
five longer points, for the most part two together, at the end of a small
footstalk, standing all on one side the Stalk under the Leaves; which being
past, there app^ar round berries, green at first, but afterward of a blackish
green, tending to blewness, wherein lies small, white, hard, stony Seed. The
Root is white and thick, full of knobs or joints, which in some places resemble
the mark of a Seal; the taste thereof is at first sweet, but afterward bitter,
and somewhat sharp.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in diverse places of this Land, as in a Wood two miles from
Canterbury, by Fish-poole Hill, as also between Newington and Sittingburne in
Kent, in Surrey about Horsely, in Wiltshire about Alderbury, in Ham^shire about
Odiam, etc. The rest are not found in England, unless it be in the Gardens of
the most ingenuous Herbalists. The Flowers of the common sort are ripe in May,
and they seed in September.

The Temperature.
The roots of Solomons-seale which are most in use, are hot and dry, containing
in them a certain kind of astriction, or binding and biting withal.

The Signature and Virtues.
The Roots of Solomons-seale do, by the Impresse that is set upon them,
signify the wonderful virtue they have in sealing or closing up the Rim of the
Belly, when it is so bursten, that the great Guts fall down into the Cods, if
the Decoction in Wine, or the Powder in Broth or Drink be taken inwardly, and
outwardly applied to the place: It is also very available in all other Hurts,
Wounds, or outward Sores, to heal and close up the lips of those that are
green, and to dry up and restrain the Flux of Humors into those that are old:
It is singular good to stay Vomitings, and also Bleedings, wheresoever, as also
all Fluxes in Man or Woman, whether they be the Running of the Reins in Men, or
the Whites or Reds in Women: The people of diverse Countries of this Land, have
found by late experience, that it is incomparably good to knit and join broken
bones in any part of the Body, even in those which by any weakness use to be
often out of place, or will not stay in long when, they are set, the Roots
being bruised and applied to the place, but the Decoction of the Root in Wine,
or the bruised Root put in Wine or other Drink, and after a nights infusion,
strained forth hard and drunk, soddereth and gleweth together broken Bones very
speedily and strangely, though the Bones be but slenderly and unhandsomely
placed and wrapped up, and this it does not only in Man, but in beasts also,
the Roots being stamped and outwardly applied in manner of a Pultis: The same
also is available for inward or outward Bruises, Falls, or Blows, both to
dispel the congealed Blood, and to take away both the pains, and the black and
blew marks that abide after the hurt. Some Authors do affirm, that the
powder of the Herb, or of the Seed, purges Phlegm and viscous humors very
notably, both upward and downward, and it is said also, that the Root chewed in
the Mouth, draws down much Phlegm out of the Head, and put up into the
Nostrils causes sneezing; but the distilled Water of the whole Herb does
without question cleanse the skin from Morphew, Freckles, Spots, or other marks
whatsoever, leaving the place fresh, fair, and lovely, after it has been a few
times washed therewith.

CHAP. CCCXXIV. Of the Balsame Apple.
The Names.
IT is not conceived that the Greek Writers had any knowledge of this Plant,
because the name thereof is not so much as found amongst their Writings, and
therefore it is, that the Latin Appellations do so much differ, there being no
Antiquity to build upon. Cordus calls it Cucumis puniceus; Gesner, Balsamina
pomisera; Lobel. Balsamina Cucumerina pun^cea, but the most usual name is
Balsamine, from the healing property that is in it, the Oil wherein the Apples
of it have been steeped, being in many things as effectual, as the liquor of
the Plant Balsa(...). It is called in English the Balsame Apple, or Apple of
Jerusalem.

The Kinds.
The Kinds hereof are not very numerous, being distinguished into two only:
1. The Male Balsame Apple* 2. The Female Balsame Apple.

The Form.
The Male Balsame Apple springs up with diverse slender reddish Stalks and
Branches, shooting forth many clasping Tendrels like a Vine, whereby it takes
hold of any Pole, or other thing that stands near it, or else, no such thing
being near, it lies upon the ground, not being able to support it self, having
the Leaves thereon cut in on the edges into sundry divisions, like unto those
of the White Briony, but much smaller, tenderer, and more divided: The Flowers
are yellowish white, like unto those of the Cucumber, coming out at the joints
with the Leaves as they do; after which comes the Fruit, which is somewhat
long and round, poynted at both ends, and bunched on the out side with rows,
the Skin it self being smooth and very red, the Pulp being reddish also, within
which is the Seed, which is rough, hard, flat, and reddish, when it is first
taken out, but after it is dried it is of a grayish black color, somewhat like
unto the Citrul seeds for form and bigness: The Roots are small and stringy,
yet creeping a good way within the earth.

The Places and Times
These Plants do at present acknowledge no natural place of abode, but they are
entertained as Sojourners in many of the Gardens of Italy, where they come to
perfection, and their seed is sent over unto us, which with labor and industry
is made to grow with us; but our cold nights being over-early, the whole Herb
withers before the Fruit be ripe, it being also late before it flowreth.

The Temperature.
The Male Balsame-Apple is of a notable drying quality, having withal a
certain moderate coldness.

The Virtues.
The powder of the Leaves taken in the distilled Water of Horse-taile or
Plantane, which are both good for this distemper, is a singular Remedy for the
Rupture or Bursting in Children, and so it does being drunk in Wine. A
Decoction of the Leaves in Wine, or the powder thereof being drunk in the said
Liquor, is affirmed to ease the griping pains of the Bowels, and the Cholick
passion, as also of the Mother, if it be injected with a Syringe for the
purpose. The Oil that is made of the Apples, by infusing them in Oil Olive,
is effectual not only for inward Wounds or hurts whatsoever, being drunk, but
for all outward Wounds that are fresh and green, to sodder the Lips of them and
heal them, as also to dry up the moisture of old and inveterate Ulcers, which
hinder them from healing, and so cause them to heal quickly. The said Oil is
also very profitable for all pricks or hurts in the Sinews, as also for Cramps
and Convulsions, if the places be therewith anointed, and to heal Ulcers in the
Secret parts of Man or Woman, or in Women's Breasts. It gives much ease likewise
to Women that are in great extremity of Childbirth, in taking away the pain of
the Womb, and causing easy deliverance, if it be applied to the place; and
being anointed upon the Bellies of those Women that are barren, by reason of
any superfluous humidity, it causes them to become fruitful; It cures the
Piles and other pains of the Fundament, if it be applied with Lint, such as
the Chirurgions use: It is of great force to take away either burnings by Fire,
or scaldings by Water; it takes away those blemishes or scarres that remain of
Wounds and Hurts, being healed, and takes away the pains of the stingings of
Bees and W^spes. The Female is thought to come somewhat near unto the Male both
in temperature and virtues, though the Form be somewhat different.

CHAP. CCCXXV. Of Doves-foot, or Cranes-bill.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Geraniu^, which is a general name to all the
Crantsbills, whose small heads with long slender beaks pointing forth, do very
much resemble the Head and Bill of a Crane. It is called Geranium also in
Latin, as also Gruinalis, Rostrum Gruis, or Gruinum, and Rostrum Ciconia, for
the like reason. But because there be many Plants belonging to this Family,
therefore there be diverse Epithetes added to distinguish them, as Geranium
Columbinum, Geranium Muscatum, Geranium Arvense, Geranium Batrachoides, sive
Gratia Dei Germanorum, Geranium Rupertianum, etc. We call them in English
Doves-foot, Musked Cranes-bill, unsavory Cranes-bill, Crowfoot Cranes-bill,
Herb Robert, etc.

The Kinds.
Though there be diverse Cranes-bills that grow no where in England, unless they
be fostered in Gardens, yet I shall name only those which are spontaneous, and
they are eleven; 1. The Common Doves-foot or Cranes-bil: 2. Doves-foot with
Leaves like unto the Vervain Mallow: 3. Unsavory field Cranes-bill: 4.
Unsavory field* Cranes-bill with white flowers: 5. Crowfoot Cranes-bill: 6.
Red or bloody Cranes-bill: 7. Creeping Cranes-bill: 8. Musked Cranes-bill: 9.
Herb Robert: 10. Great Herb Robert: 11. Rock Cranes-bill.

The Form.
The Common Doves-foot, or Cranes-bill, grows with diverse small, round, pale,
green Leaves, cut in about the edges, more than those of the Common Mallow, to
which they are compared, though they be much lesser, standing upon long reddish
hairy Stalks, lying in a round compass upon the ground, amongst which rise up
two or three reddish, joynted, slender, weak, and hairy Stalks, with some such
like Leaves as the former, but smaller, and more cut in up to the tops, where
grow many very small, bright, red Flowers, of five Leaves a piece, after which
comes the Seed, which is like to a Cranes or Storks bill, whereby all that
pertain to this Family are known. The Root is slender, with some Fibers annexed
thereunto.

The Places and Time.
The first grows very frequently in most places of this Land, both in Gardens
and elsewhere; the second is found in some Pastu^es also, but not so frequen^ly
as the former; the third is more commonly found in the ^orn fields, than in
other places, where the fourth is sometimes f^u^d; the fifth in moist Meadows;
the sixth about St. Vincent^ Rock, near Brist^ll; the seventh by Wal^orth; the
eighth grows also naturally in some barren High ways, though it be taken
into (...)dens for its sweet smell; the ninth grows upon old Walls,
especially those which are capped with mudde, and amongst rubbish, and sometime
upon Slated houses, and so does the tenth, but not so commonly as the other;
the last grows only upon Stone walls, and in some Quarries whence Stones are
d^gged* They do most of them flower, flourish, and continue the greatest part
of Summer, without any sensible decay.

The Temperature.
Doves foot* which is the Plant^l most a^m at in this Chapter, is cold and
somewhat dry, with some astriction or binding, having some power to sodder or
join together.

The Virtues and Signature.
It is very certain that the Herb and Root o^ Doves-foot dried, beaten into
fine powder, and then given to the quantity of half a spoonful, fasting, and
as much at night upon going to bed, in Red Wine or O^d Claret, for the space of
twenty days, or thereabouts, without intermission of a day, is of wonderful
efficacy to cure Ruptures of B^rstings, whether it be in young or old; but if
the Ruptures be in aged persons, it will be somewhat necessary to add
thereunto the powder of ^^ne Red ^aailes, that are without Shells, dried in an
Oven, which fortifieth the powder of the Herb that it never fails. It has
also the reputation of being singular good for the Wind-collick, and other
pains of the Belly, proceeding from Wind, as also to expel the S^one and
Gravel in the Kidneys, the decoction thereof being drunk, or used as a Bath
made thereof to sit in, or to be fomented with. The decoction thereof in Wine,
is an exceeding good Wound-drink, for any to take that have either inward
Wounds, Hurts, or Bruises, both to stay the bleeding, to dissolve and expel the
congealed blood, and to heal the parts: Being made into a Salve, with fit
Ingredients, and applied to any outward Sores, Ulcers, or Fistulaes, it
perfectly cleanses and heals them; and for green Wounds, many do but bruise
the Herb and apply it to the place wheresoever it be, and it will quickly heal
them; the some deco^tion in Wine fomented to any place pained with the Gout,
gives much ease; it does the same also to all Joynt-aches, or pains of the
Sinews; the unsavory Field-Cranes-bill are of a near temperature with
Doves-foot, and may perform all the properties found in them, but it is
approvedly good to expel all windynesse of the Mother, and to settle it in its
place, when it is fallen down, a dram of the powder thereof being drunk in
Wine: It is also good for Wounds and Ulcers, and the distilled Water thereof
takes away Bruises and black Spots. The Crowfoot Cranes-bill has the
Signature of the Shank-bone, and therefore the powder thereof taken in Wine, is
of singular use for those that have any Bones broken. The bloody Cranes-bill is
found by the Signature thereof, to be also effectual both in inward and outward
Wounds, either the decoction of the Herb or the powder of the Leaves and Roots,
being used as the cause shall require, as also to stay all manner of Bleeding,
Vomiting, or Fluxes, either in Man or Woman* Herb Robert is generally commended
for the same qualities, besides it is good against the Stone, and is effectual
in old Ulcers, even in the Secret parts.

CHAP. CCCXXVI. Of the Elm.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Ptelea, in Latin Vl^us, in English the Elm, and
the Elme-tree.

The Kinds.
There were but two sorts of Elmes, known to the Ancients, for though Pliny
seem to make four, Attinia, Gal^ica, Nostras, and Sylvestria, yet they are
reducible to two, for Attinia and Gallica, and so likewise Nostras and
Sylvestris, were the same, as Collumella plainly sets down, one whereof he
calls Vlmus Gallica, and the other Vernacula, which is Italica: Theophrastus
also makes but two sorts, Montiulmus, se^ Montosa Vlmus, and Campestris Vlmus,
yet the more Modern Writers make mention of four; 1. The Common Elm: 2.
Broadleafed Elm, or Witch-Hasel: 3. Smooth-leafed Elm, or Witch-Elme: 4. The
lesser Elm.

The Form.
The Common Elm grows to be a very great Tree, with a Body of a very large
size, covered with a thick rough bark, chapt or cracked in many places, but
that on the branches is smoother, as it happens in the Oak, Willow, Wallnut
and diverse other trees; the blossoms, that appear before the Leaves come
forth, are like small tassells of red threads, which falling away, there come up
in their stead broad, flat, whitish Skins, which are the Seed, and fall away by
degrees, some quickly, and some again continue till the Leaves are fully come
forth, and after: the Leaves are of a sad green color, somewhat round, yet
pointed at the ends, rough and crumpled for the most part, and dented about the
edges, one side of the Leaf next the Stalk being longer than the other, on
which do grow certain small Bladders, or Blisters, containing small Worms in
them: The Wood or Timber of it is of a dark reddish yellow color, very tough
and serviceable to make Pumps, and Pipes to conveigh water underground, as
also to make Beams, Rafters, or Transomes, and many other uses, where it may be
always moist, or always dry, but where it is subject to all Weathers, it
endures not so long as the Oak.

The Places and Time.
The first grows very frequently in every County of this Land, as the second
also does in some Countries, as much, or rather more than the first; the third
is to be seen in diverse Woods growing in Essox; the fourth grows also in
England according to Master Goodyer, but the place is not particularly
expressed. They all blossom before the Leaves come forth, and the Seed is
ripe not long after the Leaves are come to their full bigness.

The Temperature.
Both the Leaves and Bark of the Elm be moderately hot, with an evident
clearsing faculty, being also of a certain clammy and glewing quality.

The Signature and Virtues.
Those Bladders or Blisters that grow upon the Leaves of the Elm, are said by
Crollius to have the Signature of a Rupture, the Guts coming through the Rim of
the Belly, makes the Cods like unto it; and therefore he says, that the water
contained in those Bladders, is of much force to close up Burstennesses,
Clothes being often wet in the water that comes forth out of these, and
applied thereunto, but then it must be afterward bound with a trusse; and thus
much Matthiolus also affirms: The said Water, while it is fresh, is very
effectually used to cleanse the Skin, and make it fair, whether of the face, or
any other part: The same also being put into a glass, and set in the ground, or
else in Horse dung, for the space of twenty five days, the mouth thereof being
close stopped, and then the bottom set upon a lay of ordinary salt, that the
Feces may settle, and Water become very clea^, is so singular and sovereign a
Balsom for green Wounds; that there can hardly be a better, being applied to
them with soft tents. The decoction of the bark of the Root fomented, molifieth
hard Tumors, and the shrinking of the Sin^wes. The Roots of the Elm boiled for
a long time in Water, and the Fat rising on the top thereof, being clean
scommed off, and anointed upon any place where the hair is fallen away, it
will cause the same to come again very quickly. The said Bark being ground
with Brine or Pickle, until it come to the form of a Pultis, is an excellent
Remedy for the Gout, if it be applied to the pained place. The Decoction of the
middle Bark of the Branches being thin sliced, is very good to bathe those
places, which have been burnt with Fire, or scalded with Water. The said Bark
being boiled in Vinegar, and some Syrup of Mulberries mixed therewith, is so
repercussive, that it causes the Uvula, or Palate that is fallen down to go up
again very speedily. The same Bark being infused in Cream, is good* for the
Shingles, and other such like eruptions of the Skin, especially if the juice of
House leek ^e added thereunto, and being boiled only in water, and the Head
washed therewith it cleanses it from all manner of Scurf and Dandraff as it
does the Leprosy, from that and other parts of the Body, as the green Leaves
stamped with Vinegar are said to do also. The Leaves hereof bruised and
applied, heals green Wounds, being bound thereto with its own Bark. The
decoction of the Leaves, Bark, or Root, being bathed, heals broken bones. It
has been observed, that Bees prosper not well where many Elmes grow, for if
they feed upon the Bloomings or Seed, as they are apt to do, it will put them
into such a looseness, that unless they have speedy help, they will have much ado
to keep their lives.

There be diverse other things commended for Ruptures, as the Roots of Aron, the
Roots of Orpine, Avens, Wood-Betony, Bistort, Comfrey, Calamint, Birdsfoot,
Daisies, Gentian, Golden-rod, Horse-taile, and diverse others, which I have
formerly, and shall hereafter treat of. And now I pass on to the last head,
which concerns the lower Region, and that is about the diseases of the Privy
Members; and because the French Pox is a Malady, which for the most part comes
by the immoderate use of Venery, and is communicated to some by one Act only
with another that has them, by which botches do at first grow in the Groyne,
though afterward the whole frame of the Body is infected, and other evil
Accidents are procured, therefore I shall first proceed to declare what Simples
are most used in that Disease, and afterward make mention of some others, that
are profitable for some other distempers, happening about those parts.

CHAP. CCCXXVII. Of Guajacum.
The Names.
IT is not likely that this Commodity should have any Greek name, the Ancients
never having any knowledge of that part of the World. The West Indians, from
whence it first came, call it Guayacan, and from thence it is called in Latin
Guajacum, by some Lignum Indicum, Lignum Sanctum, and Lignum Vitae: In English
Pockwood, for its excellency in curing the French Pox, and sometimes Indian
Packwood, because it is brought from the West Indies.

The Kinds.
I find three sorts of Guajacum mentioned by some later Writers: 1. The true
Guajacum, or Indian Pockwood. 2. A West-Indian tree like Guajacum. 3. A
differing Indian Guajacum.

The Form.
This Tree, whereof Guajacum is the wood, grows to be of the bigness of an
Oak, with a reasonable thick greenish gummy bark, spread with sundry Arms,
and Branches both great and small, and on them winged Leaves, set by coup^es
one against another, which are but small, thick, hard, and round almost, with
diverse veins in them, abiding always green upon the branches; at the joints
and ends of the branches come forth many flowers, standing in a tuft together,
every one upon a long footstalke, consisting of six whitish yellow Leaves, not
very great, with some threads in the middle, which afterward turn into flat
yellowish gristly fruit of the fashion of the seed Vessel of Thlaspi, or else
o^ Shepheard^ purse with two divisions likewise, having in the one side a
gr^stly seed almost as hard as horn, the other being for the most part empty,
hanging down together by their long foot-stalkes: it yields also a Gum or
Rosi^ of a dark color, which will easily burn.

The Places and Time.
All the three sorts of Guajacum grow in the West Indies, and the first
especially about S^anto Do^ingo, whence this disease was originally brought to
the King of Spaines Camp, which was at Naples, in the year 1493. he being
then treating of peace with the French King whose Army was thereabouts also,
and in a short time after infected with it: The Frenchmen thought that they
got it by accompanying with the Spaniards, as indeed they did, and therefore
they called it the Spanish Scab* yet the ^paniards thought that the French had
given it to them, and they called it the French Pox: Others called it the
Disease of Naples, because it arose in those Coasts, as they supposed, when as
truly it came from the West Indies, and therefore some call it the Measells of
the Indies. Whence Monard^^ observes, that God Almighty would so have it, that
as these Pox came from those parts, so should a Remedy be brought thence also,
Diseases and their Remedies commonly arising in the same Climate, which is a
wonderful Act of Providence.

The Temperature.
Guajacum or Pockwood is hot and dry in the second degree, and has a cleansing
faculty.

The Virtues.
The principal Prerogative, and Excellency of Guajacum is, that it is the
best remedy in the world for those kind of Po^ks, for it provokes Sweat,
resists contagion and putrefaction, and cleanses the Blood, and strengthens
the Liver, which is a part many times affected in this disease, the decoction
of the Wood being made and used after this manner. Take of Guajacum a pound, of
the bark thereof two ounces, steep them in twelve or foureteen pints of Spring*
Water, four and twenty hours, then boil them to seven or eight pints,
strain it and give thereof a good draught morning and evening, and let the
party sweat upon it, and if you add two ounces of Liquorish or more, and some
Anniseed, it will be much more pleasant to take This decoction which was first
discovered by an Indian to a Spaniard, who had suffered great pains by the
Pox, is good also in the Dropsy Falling Sickness, shortness of Breath, in
Catarrhs, Rheumes, and cold disti^ations of the Lungs, or other parts, Cough^s
and Consumptions, the Gout, Sci^tica, and all other Joynt-A^hes, and for cold
Phlegmatic humors for the diseases of the Bladder and Reins, and for all long
and lingering diseases, proceeding from cold and moist Causes: for it opens
the stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, warms and comforts the stomach and
entralls, and is good in Scabbes, Itch, Shingl^s, Leprosy, and the like, as
also in Fevers, horrible Apostumations, and swellings of the Belly, the
Jaundise* etc. It makes the teeth white and firm if they be often washed with
the decoction thereof. The Bark is also given in the aforesaid Diseases from
half a dram to a dram in powder, and the Gum also is sometimes used, but the
Wood is of greatest use: The best kind whereof is the bl^cker, or browner, for
the yellow is but the Sap as it were, the former being in a manner all Heart,
yet it is all firm, hard, close, and heavy, so that it will sink in water more
th^n Ebony. It is not so good for hot and dry bodies, as it is in cold and
moist, and therefore for hot diseases use the more Water, and the less Wood,
and for cold griefs, more Wood and less Water.

CHAP. CCCXXVIII. Of China.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin (for Greek name it never had any) China, because the
Root thereof was first brought from China, which is a Country of the Oriental
Indies, and therefore also it is, that it is called China Radix, or Chinaea
Radix; in English, as in diverse other Languages it is called China, but the
Chinese call it La^patan, the Arabians and Persians, Chophchina.

The Kinds.
The sorts of China that I find mentioned, are two; 1. The true China Root: 2.
Bastard China.

The Form.
The China grows up with many prickly Branches, of a reasonable great
bigness, li^e unto Sarsa parilla, or the prickly Bindweed, winding it self
about Trees, and has diverse Leaves growing on them, like unto broad Plantane
Leaves; what Flower or Seed it bears, I find not mentioned by any. The Root
is like to the root of a great Reed, sometimes flattish, sometimes round, not
smooth, but bunched and knotty, reddish for the most part on the outside, and
whitish, or sometimes a little reddish on the inside: the best is solid and
firm, and somewhat weighty, fresh and not worm-eaten, and without any taste.

The Places and Time.
It grows not only in China, Malabar, Cochin, Cranganor, Tanor, and other
places of the East Indies, but also in the West Indies, as Monardus says.
Though the time be not expressed by any Author that I have met with, yet I
conceive it continues green all the year long, as diverse other Plants there
growing do. As for the duration of the Root, it will keep good many years.

The Temperature.
It is immoderately hot, and very drying.

The Virtues.
The Root called China is not only commended, but daily proved to be most
effectual in the French D^sease, the decoction thereof being made and given in
manner following: Take of China Root cut thin in slices, one ounce and an half,
put into it a Gallon of fair Water, and let it stand covered a night and a
day, then boil it gently till about half the Water be consumed; strain it, and
give about four ounces thereof in bed, for diverse mornings together, if need
be. The said Decoction is also profitable in Agues, whether quotidian or
intermittent, or pestilential Fevers, and also Hecticks and Consumptions, to
rectify the evil disposition of the Liver, the inveterate pains in the Head
and Stomach, which it also strengthens, to dry up Rheumes, to help the
Jaundise, and Ruptures in Children, or others, by drying up the humors, which
is the cause thereof. The Palsy also may be cured by it, and so may the
diseases of the Joints, as the Gout, Sciatica, and the Nodes also, or hard
bunches, that sometimes grow upon the Joints. It is useful also in the ulcers
of the Yard, Scabs, Leprosy, Scirrous and watery Tumors, and is good in all
cold and melancholy griefs, but especially in the Dropsy and Green
Sickness. Some say it provokes Lust, which is very likely, but it is not to be
used in hot and dry bodies, for to such it is very hurtful: It is also sliced
into thin pieces, and boiled in broth, being bound up together with a Chicken
in a Linen cloth: The dose to be put therein is from two drammes to four
drammes.

CHAP. CCCXXIX. Of Prickly Bindweed, and Sarsa parilla.
The Names.
I^t is called in Greek (...), and in Latin Smilax aspera, to distinguish it
from the other sorts of Smilax, of which there be four besides this, viz. two
Trees and two Herbs; the first of the two Trees is Smilax Arcadum, a soft Oak,
the other is Smilax simply, and by that is meant the Y^w-tree; the first of the
two Herbs is Smilax lavis, smooth Bindweed,; the other is Smilax hortensis, the
French or Kidney Bean: Gaza, in his translation of Theophrastus, calls it
Hedera Cilicia, because the Leaves thereof are somewhat like Ivy; and the
Hetruscians call it Hedera spin^sa, because of its prickles; the Spaniards call
it Zarsa parilla, or Sarsa parilla, which signifies a small or little Vine,
whereunto it is like, and therefore when they saw the like in Peru, they called
it by the same name, so that it is generally so termed at this day in most
Languages, yet some write it Sarca parillia.

The Kinds.
Three sorts of prickly Bindweed desire a room in this place; 1. Prickly
Bindweed with red Berries: 2. Prickly Bindweed with black Berries: 3. Sarsa
parilla, or the prickly Bindweed of Peru, which is the most useful, and
therefore I shall describe it as well as I can.

The Form.
Sarsa parilla, or the prickly Bindweed of Peru, springs up with many
branches, winding themselves about the poles that are stuck in the ground about
them, for to climb on, having some tender pricks, like thorns growing on them,
especially at the joints; it has diverse very green Leaves like unto Bindweed,
but longer, and cornered like Ivy leaves; the Flowers are great and white,
every one as big as a middle* sized dish, which opening in the morning does
sade at night, from whence the Spaniards are said to call it Buenas Noches,
that is, good night: Clusius says, that he had a small branch with three heads
of seed thereon, the largest that ever he saw of that kind, for it had five
leaves a piece, every one almost an inch broad and long, which seemed to be the
cup of the Flower and Fruit, every head which was three-square and skinny, had
within three round Seeds, as big as great Pease, of a smoaky or brownish
color. The Root, like that of Smilax aspera, is down right, and full of joints
or knots, from which shoot other roots or strings, which in the Indies grow to
be great and long.

The Places and Time.
The two first grow in Italy, Spain, and other the warmer Countries throughout
Europe, and Asia; but the third is found only in the Western Indies, as Peru,
Virginia, and diverse other places, the goodness or badness whereof is caused
from the fertility or barrenness of the ground, whereon it grows, so that the
Honduras being very fertile, brings forth the best: They flower and fructify
timely enough in the warmer Climats, but in ours they soon perish, if there be
not a care to keep them from the Frost and cold in Winter, but where a
convenient place is provided to set them in, they will continue, as I have seen
the true Sarsa parilla, if I mistake not, in the Garden* house of the Lord
La^bert at Wimbleton, growing in a po^.

The Temperature.
Sarsa parilla is hot and dry in the first or second degree, of thin parts and
provokes sweat.

The Virtues.
The Decoction of Sarsa parilla, or the prickly Bindweed of Peru is of great
force to cure those that are troubled with the French Pox, being made and
administered after the way which I shall here prescribe: Take of Sarsa parilla
four ounces, cut it into small parts, and afterward infuse it into ten pints
of hot water, for the space of four and twenty hours; then boil it, being
close covered, till it be near half consumed, then being strained, give a good
draught thereof morning and evening. It (I mean the said Decoction) is of very
great use in Rheumes, Gouts, cold diseases of the Head and Stomac^, and
expels Wind both from the Stomach and Mother: It helps all manner of Aches
in the Sinews and Joints, all running Sor^s in the Legs, all cold* Swellings,
T^^ters, or Ringwormes, and all manner of Spots and foulness of the Skin. It
is also good in the Catarrhe, or distillation from the head, being sharp and
salt, in Cancers not ulcerate, and in Tumors which are hard to be dissolved,
and it has been found by experience to be very good for the Kings Evil, a dram
of the powder of Sarsa, with the powder of Ruseus, or Butchers-Broom, being
taken in White* wine or Ale, for forty days together. The same powder, having
a just quantity of Tamari^k added thereto, is a good remedy in the tumor of
the Spleen. The roots of the other rough Bindweeds are also used by diverse of
the learned and judicious instead of Sarsa parilla, with good success; for
Sarsa does not purge the body of humors manifestly, as other purgers do, being
generally held to spend them by its dryness and di^phor^tical quality, rather
than by heat, or by going to stool: It is given as an Antid^te against all
sorts of poisonous or venomous things. A dozen or sixteen of the Berries beaten
to powder and given in Wine, procures Urine when it is stopped. The distilled
water of the Flowers being drunk, works the same effect, cleanses the
Reins, and asswageth inward inflammations. If the Eyes be washed therewith, it
takes away all heat and redness in them; and if the sor^s of the Legs be
washed therewith, it heals them thoroughly. Sarsa parilla i^ not convenient to
be given to those whose Livers are over-hot, nor to such as have Agues.

CHAP. CCCXXX. Of Star-wort.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) in Latin Aster Atticus, because the Flower of it
is like a Star, and that, as it is probable, it grew plentifully about Athens.
It is also called (...), in Latin Bubonium, because it is notable for curing
those Botches about the Share, called Bubones; and for a like reason it is
called Inguinalis, from Ingu^n, signifying the groyne or share. Other names it
has, as Asterion, Asteriscon, Hyopthalmon* and Herba stellaria; but it is
generally known by the name of Aster: In English Star-wort, or Share-wort.

The Kinds.
There be diverse sorts of Star-wort, but few of them growing in these parts, I
shall mention only six, which I take to be most familiar amongst us in our
Gardens: 1. The true Aster Attick, or yellow Star-wort: 2. Star-wort with
Willow leaves: 3. Narrow-leafed* Star-wort: 4. Italian Star-wort: 5. Virginian
Star-wort: 6. Fleabane-like Star-wort.

The Form.
The After Attick, or yellow Star-wort, rises up with two or three; or more,
hairy Stalks, about a soot high, with long, rough, or hairy, brownish, dark,
green Leaves on them, divided into two or three Branches: at every one of whose
tops stands a flat scaly Head* compassed underneath with five or six long,
brown, rough, green Leaves, standing like a Star, the Flower it self standing
in the middle thereof, is made as a border of narrow, long, pale, yellow
Leaves, set with brownish yellow Thrummes, which turning into Down, are carried
away with the Wind. The Root is very fibrous, of a binding and sharp taste.

The Places and Time.
Though the Attitk After grew very plentifully about Athens, as the name
seems to import, yet it is said to grow in other places also, as upon
Hamstead Heath, four miles from London, as the fourth also does, according to
one of our English Herbarists; the second is to be sound in diverse Gardens here
in England, and so is the third, but not so familiarly* the name of the fifth
speaks its Country; the last grows naturally in many places of out own
Land, in moist or sh^dowy places: They all flower about June or July.

The Temperature.
Star-wort is said to be cooling and drying; It does moderately wast and
consume, especially while it is yet soft and new gathered.

The Virtues.
Not only the name of Buboninus, but also the testimony of Dioscorides, do
give us to understand, that the Leaves of the Flowers boiled in Water, have
been of a long time held to be good for the pains and sorts in the Groyne, as
also the use of the fresh h^rb in Oyl^ to anoint the place, and likewise if the
dried Flowers be bound to the place that is grieved, it takes away the
inflammations thereof. It helps also Children that are troubled with the
Falling Sickness, as such as have the Quinsy. It helps an hot Stomach, the
inflammation of the Eyes and Fundament, when it is fallen down, if an Ointment
be made of the green herb, and old Hog's Grease. It helps them that are bitten
by a mad Dog, confumeth the swellings of the Throat, and being burnt it drives
away Serpents. It is profitable for the pains of the Hippes, if it be bound to
the place, as Pliny says.

CHAP. CCCXXXI. Of Herb Paris, True-Love, or One-Berry.
The Names.
IT cannot be gathered by any of the writings of the Ancients, that they had
any knowledge of this Plant, which is the reason why the Moderns have given so
many various appellations thereunto; Some calling it Herba Paris, others
Aconitum Pardalianches, and Aconitum Pardalianches Monococcum, supposing it to
be deadly, or at least dangerous; but some that have proved the contrary, have
called it Aconitum Salutiferum, which name properly belongs to another Plant.
It is called also After, but not Atticus, because it may be known from that
which I have treated of in the former Chapter, Vva Versa, Vva Lupina, Solanum
Tetraphyllum, etc.

The Kinds.
It will not be amiss to put these three sorts together: 1. Herb True-Love, or
One-Berry: 2. Herb True-Love of Brasil: 3. Herb True-Love of Canada, with a
round Root.

The Form.
The ordinary Herb-Paris, or True-love, shoots forth Stalks with Leaves, some
whereof carry no Berries, and others do, every Stalk being smooth without
Joints, of a blackish green color, rising not higher than half a foot at the
most, bearing at the top four Leaves set directly one against another, like the
parts of a True-Lovers Knot, which are each of them a part, somewhat like unto
a Nightshade leaf, but somewhat broader; in the middle whereof there rises up
a small slender Stalk, about an inch long, bearing at the top thereof one
Flower, spread open like a Star, consisting of four small and narrow long
pointed leaves, of a yellowish green color, and four other lying between them
lesser than they; in the middle whereof stands a round, dark, purplish
Button, or Head, compassed about with eight small yellow mealy Chives or Heads,
very lovely to bebold: the Berry in the middle, when the other Leaves are
withered, becomes to be of a blackish purple color, and full of juice, of no
hot nor evil, nor yet of any sweetish taste, of the bigness of a reasonable
Grape, having within it many white Seeds: the Root is small and creeping under
the upper crust of the Earth, somewhat like to a Couch-grasse root, but not so
white, of a little binding, but unpleasant loathsome taste.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in diverse places of this Land, in the Woods and Copses of
Kent, Essex, Lancashire, Cheshire, etc. the second was found in the Woods of
Brasil; the last brought out of Canada: They spring up in April and May, and
are in flower soon after; the Berries are ripe about the beginning of June, and
sometimes before May be finished.

The Temperature.
Herb-Paris is exceeding cold, whereupon it is proved to repress the rage and
force of any Poison, Humor, or Inflammation.

The Virtues and Signature.
The Leaves of Herb True-love, or one Berry, by the mighty cooling quality that
it has, are exceeding powerful to discuss all those tumors and swellings of
the Codds, Privy parts, and Groyn, which do commonly proceed of some
extraordinary heat, to allay all other kinds of inflammations in any part of
the Body, to cure all manner of green wounds, and to cleanse and heal up old
filthy Sores and Ulcers. The Leaves or the Juice applied to Felons, or those
Nails of the Hands and Toes that have Whiteflaws, or any such like impostume
gathered under them, heals them in a short space. The Leaves or Berries
hereof are very effectual also to expel Poisons of all sorts, especially that
of the Aconites, as also the Plague, and other pestilential Diseases, and
therefore it is a main Ingredient in that preservative powder called Pulvis
Saxonicus. It has been observed by Matthiolus and others, that a Dram of the
Seeds or Berries hereof in powder taken every day, for twenty days together,
has helped those that have lien long in a lingering sickness, and others that
by Witchcraft (as it was thought) were become half foolish, by wanting their
wits and senses. The Leaves dried and given in powder to drink, have the like
operation, yet in a weaker manner: It is thought also that the Berries will
procure Sleep, being taken at night in Drink: The Roots being made into powder
and taken in Wine, eases the pain of the Cholick in a short space. Crollius
says, that the black Berries of the Herb-Paris have the Signature of the Apple
of the Eye, and therefore the Oil Chymically extracted from thence, is a
Remedy so effectual for all the diseases of the Eyes, that it is called by
some Anima Oculorum, the soul of the Eye: It was formerly thought to be very
poisonous, but Pena and Lobel, by their experiments upon two Dogs, found not
only that it was not dangerous, but that it was effectual to expel the most
deadly operation of Sublimatum and Arsenick.

Having now passed through the three Regions of Man's Body, and taken notice of
the principal parts thereof, together with the Simples thereunto appropriated,
I come at last (by the assistance of God) to the Limbs, to whose particular
Maladies I should have spoken distinctly as I have hitherto to many particular
distempers, but the time not permitting by reason that the Printer is like to
tarry, if I make not the more have, I am compelled to be as brief as I can,
and therefore I shall only handle some principal Woundhearbes because the
Limbs are more Subject to Wounds then any other part, and so conclude.

CHAP. CCCXXXII. Of St. John's Wort.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) quod (...), super imagines and Spectra dominium
habeat, and therefore some of the Latins, as Superstitious as the ancient
Greeks, have called it Fuga Daemonum, supposing it to drive away Devils, of
which opinion was Paracelsus, who called it Solterrestris, the terrestrial
sun; for the Sun in the firmament does by its light as some suppose, cause
all the Spirits of darkness to vanish, so does this, says he, because it is
principal of the Solar plants growing upon the Earth. It is called Hypericum
also in Latin, and some call it Perforata or P^rosa, from the many holes that
are to be seen in the Leaves being held against the light.

The Kinds.
I find but seven sorts of Salut John's wort, and therefore I shall put them all
down: 1. Common Saint John's wort. 2. Small upright Saint John's wort. 3. Small
creeping Saint John's wort. 4. Round leafed Saint John's wort. 5. Great woolly
Saint John's wort. 6. Small creeping woolly Saint John's wort. 7. Indian Saint
John's wort, with white Flowers.

The Form.
The Common Saint John's wort shoots forth brownish, upright, hard, round
stalks about half a yard high, spreading diverse branches from the sides up to
the tops of them, having two small leaves set one against another at every
place, which are of a deep green color, somewhat like unto the leaves of the
lesser Centory, but narrower and full of holes in every leaf, which cannot be
so well perceives, unless they be held up to the light; at the tops of the
stalks and branches stand yellow flowers made of five leaves a piece, with many
yellow threads in the middle, which being bruised, yield a reddish juice like
blood; after which come small round heads, wherein is contained small blackish
seed, smelling like Rosin: the R^ot is hard and woody, with diverse strings and
Fibers at it, and of a brownish color, which abides in the ground many
years, though the stalks perish every winter.

The Places and Time.
The f^are first grow in Woods and Copses, and diverse other places in the
borders of fields, and higher pasture-grounds, in most places of this Land: the
fifth was found near Salamanca and Valentia in Spain: the sixth is found many
times in our own Country: the last came from the West Indies. They do all
begin to flower about Midsummer, and may therefore happily be called Saint John's
wort, and their seed for the most part is ripe in the end of July and August.

The Temperature.
Saint John's wort is hot and dry, and of thin parts, as Galen says.

The Signature and Virtues.
The little holes whereof the leaves of Saint John's wort are full, do resemble
the pores of the skin, and therefore it is profitable for all hurts and wounds
that can happen thereunto, and also for inward bruises, as well of the body and
flesh as of the Joints and Skin, if it be made into an Oil, Ointment or Salve,
bathe or lotion, and used outwardly or boiled in Wine and drunk. It has power
to open obstructions, to dissolve tumors, to consol^date or sodder together the
Lips of Wounds, and to strengthen the parts that are weak and feeble. The
decoction of Herb and flowers, but especially of the seed, made in Wine and
drunk, or the seed made into powder and drunk with the juice of Knot-grasse,
helps all manner of spitting and vomiting of blood, be it by any vein broken
inwardly, by bruises, falls, or the like. The same helps those that are
bitten or stung by any venomous Creature; and is good for those that are
troubled with the Stone in the Kid-neys, or cannot make Water, and provokes
Women's Courses: Two drams of the seed made into powder, and drunk in a little
broth, does gently expel Choler or congealed blood in the Stomach. The
Decoction of the Leaves and Seeds being drunk somewhat warm before the Fits of
Agues, whether they be quotidians, tertians or quartans, does alter the fits,
and by often using does drive them quite away: The seed is much commended being
drunk for forty days together, to help the Sciatica, the Falling Sickness,
and the Palsy. The Oil of St. John's Wort is excellent for old Sores and Ulcers
as well as green Wounds in the Legs or else where, as also for cramps and aches
in the joints, and pains in the Veins and burnings by fire, and so is the
Juice of the green Leaves being applied, or the powder of the herb strewed
thereon.

CHAP. CCCXXXIII. Of Clownes Woundwort.
The Names.
IT is thought of some to be of later invention than to have any Greek name,
yet it is very probable that though the virtues hereof were not thoroughly
discovered till of late, it was not only known formerly, but called also
(...), as being a kind thereof, because it is of so great efficacy to cure
those wounds that are made with Iron, and upon this account Thalius calls it,
as is supposed, Sideritis prima, which he terms gravis admodum odoris. It is
called in Latin Sideritis Anglica strumosa radice, and Panax Coloni, because a
Countryman cut his Leg to the bone with a Sith, and healed himself within
seven days, with nothing but this herb, and a little Hoggsgrease made into
the form of a Pultis; and for the same reason it is called Clownes Woundwort
in English, and by some Clownes Alheale, but neither Panax nor Allheale do
properly agree with it, for though it be eminent for healing green Wounds, yet
not for all other diseases as those names import.

The Form.
Clownes Wound-wort grows up with slender, four square, green, rough Stalks
to the height of half a yard or two foot, surrowed in a little upon every
square, the joints standing somewhat far a sunder, with two very long and
somewhat narrow dark green Leaves, bluntly dented about the Edges, and sharp
pointed at the end: the flowers stand toward the top compassing the stalks,
at the joints, as those of Horehound do, but it ends in a spiked top, which
Horehound does not, having long and much open gaping hoods, of a purplish red
color, with whitish spots in them, standing in somewhat rough husks, wherein
afterward stand blackish round seeds. The root is composed of many long
strings, with some tuberous long knobs commonly growing amongst them, of a pale
yellowish or whitish color; the whole plant is of a strong smell somewhat like
unto Stinking Horehound.

The Places and Time.
Clownes Allheale grows frequently in most of the Countries of this Land, by
the sides of several brooks and ditches, and sometimes by the Path-sides, and
Borders of fields: It floureth in August, and brings its seed to perfection
about the end of September.

The Temperature.
This kind of Sideritis is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first, and
withal of an earthy quality.

The Virtues.
The Leaves of Clownes Wound-wort stamped with Swines grease, and applied unto
green Wounds, in manner of a Pultis, does heal them in a short time according
to the first intention, that is, by closing up the lips of them without drawing
or bringing them to Suppuration or Matter, in such absolute manner, that it is
hard for any one, that has not had the experience thereof, to believe. It is
also very availeable in stanching of blood, and to dry up the Fluxes of humors
in old fretting Ulcers, Cancers, etc. that hinder the healing of them. Neither
is it excellent only for outward, but also for inward Wounds, Ruptures of
veins, bloody flux, spitting, pissing, or vomiting blood, a syrup being made
thereof, and taken now and then a little* and so Ruptures or burstings of the
belly are speedily, even to admiration, cured, if a Plaster of the Herb or an
ointment of the same be applied to the place. The said Plaster being applied
to any vein that is swollen, or Muscle that is cut, helps it, and if there
be a little Comfry added to it, it will be so much the better.

CHAP. CCCXXXIV. Of Arsmart.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Hydropiper. i. e. Piper aquaticum, because one
kind of it has a burning taste like Pepper, and Hydropiper in Latin
sometimes, but generally Perficaria, quod folia ^jus Perfica foliis similia
sunt, because the leaves of it are like unto those of the Peach-tree; yet some
make this distinction, calling the mild or gentle sort Perficaria simply, and
the other Hydropiper, five Perficaria urens; in English Water Pepper, and
Arsmart, and in some Countries Red-knees, and of some Culrage and Cyderach.

The Kinds.
There be four Sorts of Arsmart growing in our own Country. 1. Dead or
Spotted Arsmart. 2. Small creeping Arsmart. 3. Codded Arsmart or Touchme* not.
4. Biting Arsmart or Water Pepper.

The Form.
The ^ild or Spotted Arsmart grows up with Leaves of a middle size both for
length and breadth, set at the great red joints of the Stalks, with blackish
spots upon them many times, almost like a half moon but not always; the
flowers grow in long Spiky heads, either of a blush or whitish color, which
falling away blackish ^lat seed come in their places: The root is long with
many fibers thereat, perishing yearly: this has no biting taste as the Water
Pepper has, which is exceeding hot, but is rather like sour Sorrel, or else
a little drying or without taste: the way of distinguishing one from an other is
to break a leaf of it cross ones tongue, for the biting sort will make the
tongue to smart, and so will not the other.

The Places and Time.
The first grows very common, almost every where, in moist and watery
Plashes, and near to the brims of Rivers, Ditches, and running Brooks, and
sometimes in those Cornfieldsd, that are subject to moisture in the Winter
time. The second grows also within the confines of our Country, and so does
the third, but the place thereof is not particularly expressed, and therefore
some Physic Garden is the surest place to find them; the last is found in
like places with the first, but not so frequently, and is to be known from i^
by the red spots, which it sometimes has, as also by the Diagnostick I have
already set down. They flower in June, and their Seed is ripe in August.

The Temperature.
The ^ild^ or dead Arsmart, as it is called, is cold and something dry, but the
Biting Arsmart is hot and dry, yet not so hot as Pepper, according to Galen.

The Virtues and Signature.
The Leaves and Stalks of the Dead Arsmart, being stamped and applied to green
or fresh Wounds, do cool and comfort them exceedingly, and keep them from
^^postumation, and infla^mation, and so does the juice of them being dropped
thereinto. Being applied in like manner, it consumes all cold swellings, and
takes away black and blew marks of the Skin, by dissolving the congealed
blood, happening upon bruises, strokes, fall^, etc. which is signified by the
black spots which are upon the Leaves, and being laid to a Joint that has a
Felon thereon, it takes it away by Signature also. A piece of the Root, or
some of the Seed bruised, and held to an aching tooth, takes away the p^ine.
The Juice of it being dropped into the Ears, destroys the Worms that are in
them, and so it is good against deafness. Two d^amms of the powder of the
herb taken with a little Vinegar, opens the obstructions of the Liver. Being
stamped with Wine, and applied to the Matrix, it brings unto Women their
monthly Courses. If it be stamped with Rue and Wormwood, and all of them fried
together with Butter or Suet, and applied to the Stomach or B^lly, it kills
the Worms in them. When a Woman's Belly is great, and she not with Child, let
her boil of Arsmart, Rue, and Hyss^p, of each one handful in a quart of Ale,
to the one half, and drink thereof first and last, it will reduce it to its
just measure. The distilled Water of the herb mingled with an Ox Gall, and a
little Oil of Spike, being anointed upon any place, that is troubled with the
Gout, and a blew woollen cloth laid upon it, takes away the pain thereof. Two
spoonfulls of the said Water, with one of Aqua Vitae, being nointed on any
place troubled with an Ach, for five or six days, takes it quite away. It is
said, that if a handful of Arsmart wetted in Water be applied to a Wound or
Sore, and afterward buried in moist ground, as the herb rotteth, so the sore
will heal miraculously. The herb or juice being put to Horses or other Cattles
sores, will keep away the Flies, which would otherwise stick thereto, even in
the hottest time of Summer. The biting Arsmart, or Water Pepper is said by
Crollius to heal Wounds by Signature, the red spots sometimes growing on the
leaves, intimating as much. Being strewed in a Chamber it will soon kill all
the Flea^. The Leaves rubbed upon a tired Jades back, and a good handful or two
laid under the Saddle, makes him to travel lustily again.

CHAP. CCCXXXV. Of Bugle.
The Names.
IT has no Greek name that I can meet with, but it is called in Latin
Consolida media, and Solidag^ min^r, as also Buglum, or Bugla, but more
commonly Bugula. Matthi^lus calls it Laurentina, and Herba Laurentina; some
would have it Cham^^iss^s spicat^ Plin^, and others to be his Anonymos, we call
it Bugle, Brown Bugle, and the middle Consound, and sometimes Sicklewort.

The Kinds.
There being but six sorts of Bugle, I shall put them all down: 1. Ordinary
bl^w flowred Bugle. 2. Bugle with a white flower. 3. Bugle with a blush
colored flower. 4. Blew mountain Bugle. 5. Bugle with yellow flowers. 6. Sweet
Portingall Bugle.

The Form.
The ordinary blew floured Bugle has larger* Leaves then those of Self-heale,
and somewhat longer* but otherwise not much different, in some green on the
upper side, in others more brownish, dented about the edges, somewhat hairy as
the square Stalk also is, which rises to be about a foot high sometimes, with
the Leaves set by couples; from about the middle of the said stalk up to the
top, stand the flowers, together with many smaller and browner Leaves then the
rest, which are below, set at distances, the stalk being bare between them;
amongst which flowers are also some lesser then others, of a Bluish, and
sometimes of an Ash color, not much unlike to those of Ale-hoofe or
Ground Ivy, after which come small round blackish seed: The root i^ composed of
many strings, and spreads upon the ground in diverse parts, round about like
unto M^ney-wort or Penny-royall.

The Places and Time.
The first grows generally throughout all England, in Woods and wet Copses;
and moist Fields; and the second grows in the like places, but not so
frequently; the third grows in Austria, and some other places of Germany; the
fourth upon Carnedh Ll^wellin in Wales; the fifth is said by Ban^inus to grow
with Us here in England, and the last in Portingal. They flower from May unto
July, and perfect their seed in the mean time: the main root abides many
years.

The Temperature.
Bugle is temperate in heat, but drying moderately, and with some astringency.

The Virtues.
The Leaves of Bugle being bruised and applied to any manner of Ulcer or Sore,
whether new and fresh, or old and inveterate, does wonderfully cure it; and so
it does Gangrenes and Fistulaes also, if the places be washed and bathed with
the juice thereof. The same made into a Lotion with Honey and Allome cures all
sores of the Mouth and Gumms, be they never so foul, or of long continuance;
and works no less powerfully and effectually for such Ulcers and Sores, a^
happen in the secret parts of Men or Women: Being also taken inwardly, or
outwardly applied, it helps those that have broken any bone, or have any
member out of Joint. The decoction of the Leaves and Flowers made in Wine and
taken, dissolveth congealed blood in those that are bruised inwardly by a fall,
or otherwise; and is very effectual for any inward Wounds, Thrusts or Stabbs
into the Body or Bowels, and is an especial help in all Wound-drinkes; and for
those that are Liver-grown, as they call it. An ointment made with the Leaves
of Bugle, Scabious, and Sanicle, bruised and boiled in Hoggs-grease till the
herbs be dry, and then strained into a Pot, is singular good for all sorts of
hurts in the Body.

CHAP. CCCXXXVI. Of Selfe-heale.
The Names.
IT is called by the Modern Writers (for neither the ancient Greek, nor Latin
Writers knew it) Brunella from Brunellen, which is a name given unto it by the
Germans, because it cures that inflammation of the Mouth, which they call die
Breuen, yet the general name of it in Latin now-a-dayes is Prunella, as being
a word of a more gentile Pronunciation. It is also called Cons^lida minor, and
Solid^g^ minor* and of some Consolida minima; in English, Selfe-heal,
Carpenters herb, and Hook-heale, and all from the virtues it has in healing
green Wounds.

The Kinds.
All the sorts of Selfe-heale are but five: 1. The Common Selfe-heale. 2.
Self-heale with a white flower. 3. Selfe-heale with a great Purple flower. 4.
Selfe-heale with a great white flower. 5. Selfe-heale with jagged Leaves.

The Form.
The Common Selfe-heale is an herb that may be said to be low and creeping, for
it seldom stands upright, having many small and somewhat round Leaves, but
that they are a little pointed, unless it be when they grow in a fertile
soil, and then they are larger and longer, of a sad green color, without any
d^nts on the edges: from among which rise up diverse square hairy Stalks. about
half a foot high, which sometimes divide themselves into branches, having
small Leaves set thereon up to the tops, where stand brown spiked Head^,
composed of many scaly Leaves and Flowers mingled together, after the same
manner as those of Stachas are, gaping also, and most commonly of a bluish
Purple color, but sometimes of a pale Blew, of a sweet smell in some, though
but a few places: the main root is small, but very threddy, yet taking hold of
the ground by the Fibers, which it sends out from its branches, it increases
very much.

The Places and Time.
The first, which is of as great use as any of the rest, though not so rare,
grows in ^he Fields almost every where, and shows it self many times in
Gardens, though the ignorant which know not its use, do utterly extirpate it:
the second grows wild also, but not so frequently: the three last are
natural only to Germany and France. The two first sorts do commonly flower
in May* the rest later.

The Temperature.
Selfe-heale is moderately hot and dry, and somewhat binding.

The Virtues and Signature.
There is not a better Wound-herbe in the world, then that of Selfe-heale is,
the very name importing it to be vere admirable upon this account, and indeed
the Virtues do make it good, for this very herb without the mixture of any
other Ingredient, being only bruised and wrought with the point of a Knife
upon a Trencher, or the like, will be brought into the form of a Salve, which
will heal any green Wound, even in the first intention, that is, as I have
said, without bringing it to suppuration, or suffering any Matter to arise
therein, and particularly Women's Nipples when they are bitten by their sucking
Children, after a very wonderful manner. It is also a very excellent remedy
for that Disease which the Germans call die Bruen, which is common to Soldiers
when they lie long in Camps, but especially in Garrisons, coming with an
extraordinary inflammation or swelling, as well in the Mouth as Throat, the
Tongue being also rough or rugged and black a hot fierce continual Fever
accompanying it, the very Signature of the Throat, which the form of the
Flowers do represent, signifying as much, yet it will be necessary also for the
perfect cure of this Disease, that besides the drinking of the Decoction of
this herb, and the washing of the Mouth therewith, the party be let Blo^d under
the Tongue. It is likewise effectual for those that have received any great
hurt by any bruise or fall, or any such griefs, especially if a decoction be
made thereof, as also of Sanicle, Bugle and such other Wound-herbes, and then
it will be more effectual to inject into the Ulcers of the outward parts;
beside that the inward taking thereof will repress the sharpness of such
humors, as do commonly follow any Sore, Ulcer, Inflammation, Swelling or the
like. The juice hereof used with the Oil of Roses, to anoint the Temples and
Forehead, is very effectual to remove the Headache, and the same juice mixed
with a little Honey of Roses, cleanses and heals the Ulcers and Sores of the
Mouth and Throat, as also those of the secret parts. It is, to speak generally,
good for all those purposes where Bugle is not at hand, that Bugle is
prescribed for, and if they be both put together, they help broken bones so
much the better.

CHAP. CCCXXXVII. Of Saracens Consound.
The Names.
IT is uncertain whether this Herb were known to the Ancients, there being no
Greek name for it upon Record, it having fared with this as with a great many
other Wound herbs of great Excellency, that are not to be found in the
Catalogue of any Greek Author. It is called in Latin Solidago, and Consolid^,
^ Consolidando, from sod^ring, closing or glewing up the Lips of Wounds; for so
that obsolete word signifies, to which the Epithete Saracenica is added, not
only to distinguish it from the former Consounds, but also to denote the great
opinion that the Turks and Saracens who were accounted great Chirurgions, and
of wonderful skill, had of it to heal the hurts and wounds of their Soldiers,
which the Christians taking notice of, made use of it also, and found the
virtues of it answerable to the estimation they put upon it: Others have called
it Herba fortis, from the strong scent and take as it is supposed: in English,
Saracens Consound, and Saracens Wound-wort.

The Kinds.
There be some Authors that set down four sorts of Saracens Consound. 1. The
true Saracens Consound, with Willow Leaves. 2. The greater Saracens Consound.
3. The German Consound with small Cods. 4. Tragus his German Consound.

The Form.
The true Saracens Consound grows up with many long and narrow green Leaves
snipt about the edges, somewhat like unto Peach or Willow Leaves, but not of so
whitish a green color, from amongst which do rise up fair, brownish, and
sometimes green hallow Stalks, near unto the height of a Man, beset from the
bottom to the top with Leaves like the former, but not so large, where do
stand many pale yellow Starre-like flowers in green heads, which being fallen,
the ripe seed being somewhat long, small, and of a yellowish brown color,
wrapped in Down, is afterward therewith carried away suddenly by the Wind:
the root is composed of many strings, or Fibers set together at a head, which
perishes not in Winter, though the Stalks and Leaves do; the whole Plant is
of a strong and unpleasant taste or smell.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in the way between Dunmow and Clare in Essex, as also on the
five Mile bank near Whittlesea, and between Dudson and Gua^thlow according to
Doctor Bowl. The other three do grow in moist and wet grounds by Woods sides,
and sometimes in the moist places of the shadowy Groves, as also by Waters
sides. They flower in July, and the two first perfect their seed soon after,
but that of the two last is not ripe till August, and sometimes it is September
first.

The Temperature.
Saracens Consound is hot and dry almost in the third degree, and binding
withal.

The Virtues.
Saracens Consound is not inferior to any Wound-herbe whatsoever; for if it be
steeped in Wine and then distilled, the Water thereof may be inwardly taken, as
well as outwardly applied, and so it is of extraordinary efficacy for all
manner of Wounds and Ulcers, whether inward or outward; and so is the simple
distilled Water thereof, as also the juice or decoction, for it first cleanses
any green Wound or old Sore, or Ulcer whatsoever, from any corruption that is
bred in it, and healing it up quickly afterward: The same also is no less
effectual for the Ulcers of the Mouth or Throat, be they never so foul or
stinking, by washing and gargling the Mouth and Throat therewith, and likewise
for such Sores as happen in the privy parts of Man or Woman. The Herb being
boiled in Wine and given to drink, helps the indisposition of the Liver, and
freeth the Gall from Obstructions; whereby it is good for the yellow Jaundise,
and for the Dropsy in the beginning thereof; as also for all inward Ulcers of
the Reins or elsewhere, and inward wounds and bruises.

CHAP. CCCXXXVIII. Of Loose-strife, or VVillow-herbe.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...), Lysimachium, from whence the Latins have their
Lysimachia. Some have thought that this Plant took its name (...), from parting
of Strife, because, as some of the Ancients write, that this herb being put
about the Yoaks or Necks of Oxen, which are fallen out, and made one with
another, it will make them tame and quiet; but I am rather of their opinion
which would have it so called from Lysimachus King of Illyria, who was the
first finder of the Nature and Virtues thereof, for which he is renowned unto
this very day. It is called also in Latin Salicaria, ant quod inter Salices
^ritur, aut quid Salicis folia habet, either because it grows amongst the
Willowes, or because it has Leaves like the Willow, or both. The English
Herbarists follow the Greek Etymology, in calling it Loose-strife, and
sometimes Willow-herbe.

The Kinds.
The sort of Loose-strife which I shall here set down are twelve: 1. Purple
spiked headed Loose-strife. 2. Hooded Willow-herbe or Loose-strife. 3. Blew
spiked Loose-strife. 4. Wild Willow-herbe. 5. Little hooded Willow-herbe, or
Bastard Hedge-Hyssope. 6. Yellow Willow-herbe, or Loose-strife. 7. Yellow
Willow-herb with double Flowers. 8. The lesser yellow Willow-herbe. 9. Little
codded Willow-herbe. 10. Smooth codded Willow-herbe. 11. Great codded
Willow-herbe. 12. Small flowred Willow-herbe.

The Form.
The Purple spiked headed Loose-strife, grows with many woody square stalks
full of joints, near three-foot high, having two Leaves standing at every
joint, somewhat like unto Willow Leaves, but shorter, and of a deeper green
color, some of them being sometimes brownish; the stalks are branched into
many long stemmes of spiked Flowers, half a foot long, growing in ^undles one
above another, out of small Husks, very like unto the spiked Heads of
Lavender, every of the flowers consisting of five round pointed Leaves, of a
Purple Violet color, tending to redness, in which Husks, after the flowers
are fallen the seed is contained; the root creeps underground, almost like
Couchgrasse, but greater, and shoots up every Spring brownish heads, which
afterward, growing up into Stalks, do smell like C^^led Apples, whilst they
are young.

The Places and Time.
The first grows usually by Rivers and Ditches sides, and in wet grounds in
every Country of this Land, almost the others, grow in the like places, but
not so frequently; but that which is most rare, is the Yellow Willow herb,
with double flowers, which grows by Kings Langley in Hartford shire: Any of
these being brought into Gardens, do prosper well enough, as the C^amaenerion
of Rosebay Willow herb also does, though it grow not naturally in England*
June and July are the ordinary months wherein they flower, yet some of them
stay till August.

The Temperature.
All the sorts of Lysimachia are hot and dry, and of an exceeding binding
quality.

The Virtues.
The distilled Water of Willow herb, whether it be the yellow sort, or that
which I have described, which is more common, is exceeding sovereign for green
Wounds, whether they happen in the Body or Limbs, if to every ounce of Water
there be taken two drams of May Butter without Salt, and of Sugar and Wax each
as much also, and gently boiled together, til it become to be an Ointment, and
then let Tents be dipped in the Liquor, that remains after it is cold, and
put into the Wounds, and the place covered with a linen Cloth, doubled and
anointed with the Ointment. It likewise cleanses and heals all foul Ulcers
and Sores whatsoever, or wheresoever, and stays their inflammations, by
washing them with the Water, and laying on them a green Leaf or two in Summer,
or dry ones in the Winter. The distilled Water aforesaid is a present Remedy
for hurts and blows on the Eyes, and for blindness, if the Christalline
humor, or Sight it so if be not perished, or spoiled, as has been often
proved; and it is also of as good use to clear the Eyes of Dust, or any other
thing gotten into them, and preserves the Sight. The said Water gargled warm
in the Mouth, and sometimes drunk also, does cure the Quinsey, and Kings-Evill
in the Throat. The same being warmed and the Skin washed therewith, takes away
all Spots, Marks, and Scarres thereof; and a little of it drank quenches the
thirst extraordinarily. And not only this, but the Yellow sorts also are good
for all manner of Bleeding at the Mouth or Nose, or of Wounds, and stays all
manner of Fluxes of the Belly, or the Bloody Flux, given either to drink or
taken in a Clister; it stays also the abundance of Women's Courses: If the
herb he bruised, and the juice only applied to green Wounds, it stays the
bleeding, and quickly closes together the Lips of them: The decoction, or the
distilled Water thereof is often used in Gargles for sore Mouths, as also to
^ath the secret parts withal, as often as there is any Sore, or Ulcer there
arising. The smoke of the Stalks being burned, drives away Serpents, or any
other venomous Creature, as Pliny says, and the people in the Fenny Countries
can testify that it drives away the Flies and Gnats, that would otherwise
molest them in the night season.

CHAP. CCCXXXIX. Of the Daisy.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin (for it is a question whether the Greeks ever knew it)
Bellis a bello, as some think, quasi Bellis praesidium, because it is useful
in War, to heal the Soldiers Wounds; for which reason some have called it
Consolida also; other have thought that it was called Bellis from the Adjective
Bellus, signifying pretty, for it has indeed a pretty Flower, if it be marked,
some of the sorts especially. The greater sort is called by Bru^selsius,
Bupthalmus, and Oculus Bovis; and by Tabermontanus, Bellium majus, by others
Consolida media Vulnerariorum; yet most commonly it is called Bellis major, the
lesser sort being called Bellis minor, Consolida minor, and Herba Morgarita: In
English, the greater and lesser Daisy: the greater is also called Maudlin, and
Maudlin-wort.

The Kinds.
There be diverse sorts of Daisyes, as well in our Gardens, as growing beyond
the Seas; yet because the time will not permit me to enquire after them, I
shall give you only those that grow naturally with us, they being of greatest
use for our intended purpose, and they are three: 1. The Great Daisyes, which
some call Or-Eyes, and White Moons. 2. The middle sort of Daisyes. 3. The
little Daisy.

The Form.
The Great Daisy has very many narrow and round-pointed Leaves next the
ground, cut in on both sides, making them to seem almost like unto those of the
Oak, from amongst which do grow up somewhat high Stalks, with diverse Leaves
thereon, but smaller, and lesser divided than the lower; at the tops whereof
grow large Flowers, each upon several long foot stalks, consisting of many
white and narrow Leaves, as the Pale or Border, and the yellow Thrummes in the
middle, of little or no scent, whose Seed, which is somewhat long, is blown
away with the Wind: The Root is bush of white Strings, which abide many
Winters, shooting forth new Leaves in the Spring, if the cold weather has
killed the old.

The Places and Time.
The first, which is Great Daisy, Ox Eye, or White-Moone, grows almost every
where by the hedge sides, in the borders of fields, and other wast ground, and
many times in meadows, that lie any thing high: the second grows in the like
places, but not so frequently: the place of the third can hardly be mistook,
for it grows upon every Common, and other place almost: The two first flower
in May and June, and then must be gathered, for they last not long; but the
last begins to flower in the Spring, and holds on most part of the Summer.

The Temperature.
Daisyes are held by most to be cold and dry, which are the qualities which are
required in Wound herbs; yet D^donam says they be cold and moist, which no
body else does allow of.

The Virtues.
The Leaves of the great Daisy or Mandlinwort made up into an Ointment, or
Salve, with Wax, Oil, and Turpentine, is most excellent for Wounds, especially
those wherein there is any inflammation, and which are hardly brought to
digestion or maturation, as those weeping Wounds made in the Elboes, Knees, or
other Joints, and it is often used in Decoction or Drinks, as well as outwardly
for the same or the like purposes, as fractures in the Head, and deep wounds in
the Breast. The said Decoction being drunk, cures all Ulcers and Pustles in
the Mouth or Tongue, or in the Secret parts, which proceed from the heat of the
Liver, and therefore in such cases, the Juice or distilled Water of either
sort, does much temper the heat of Choler, and refreshes the Liver, and other
inward parts. The Leaves bruised and applied to the Cods, or any other parts
that are swollen and hot, does dissolve the swelling, and temper the heat. A
Decoction made hereof with Walwort and Agrimony, and the places fomented and
bathed therewith warm, gives great ease to them that are troubled with the
Palsy, Sciatica, or other Gout: The same also disperseth and dissolveth the
Knots and Kernels that grow in the Flesh, belonging to any part of the Body,
and the bruises and hurts that come of falls and blows: The Juice, Decoction,
or distilled Water, is drunk to very good purpose against the Rupture, or any
inward Burstings. The juice of them or the distilled water dropped into the
Eyes, clears them, and takes away the watering of them. The little Daisyes,
when the greater cannot so well be gotten, may be used with good success for
all the purposes aforesaid, as also to help Agues, the decoction of them in
Wine or Water being drunk. It is said that the Roots hereof being boiled in
Milk, and given to little Puppies, will not suffer them to grow great.

CHAP. CCCXL. Of Speedwell.
The Names.
IT must be divided into two sorts, viz. Male and Female, before I can give you
the names thereof: The Greek name of the Male is unknown, if ever it had any,
but in Latin it is called Veronica mas, and B^tonica Pauli; in English
Speedwell, and Paul's Betony, and of some Fluellen, yet that name is thought to
belong more properly to the Female kind, which is called in Greek (...),
Elatine; in Latin Veronica famina, because a Shentleman of Wales, whose Nose
was so near eating off by the French Pox, that the Doctors gave order to cut it
off, being cured by the use of this Herb only, to honor the Herb for saving
her Nose whole, gave it one of her own Country names, Lluellin or Fluellin, it
being before called Female Speedwell, which name it retains also.

The Kinds.
Of the Male and Female Speedwel there be eight sorts: 1. The Common Speedwell:
2. Speedwel with white Flowers: 3. Great Speedwel, or Fluellin: 4. Little
Fluellin, or smooth Fluellin: 5. The smallest Fluellin: 6. Female Fluellin, or
Speedwel: 7. Cornered Fluellin, with blew Flowers: 8. Sharp-pointed Fluellin.

The Form.
The Common Speedwell has diverse soft Leaves, about the breadth of a twopence,
extending themselves in length also, but not very much; of a hoary green
color, a little dented about the edges, and somewhat hoary also, set by
couples at the joints of the hairy, brownish Salks, which lean down to the
ground, never standing upright, but shooting forth roots, as they lie upon the
ground, at diverse joints, much after the same manner that Nummularia, or
Moneywort does: the Flowers grow one above another at the tops, being of a
bluish purple color, and sometimes, though seldom, white, after which come
small flat husks, wherein the Seed, which is small and blackish, is contained;
the Root is composed of very many Fibers.

The Places and Time.
All these Plants which I have named, are said to grow within the Dominions of
England, those which are Outlandish being omitted; The first grows in diverse
Countries of this Land upon dry Banks, and Wood-sides, and other places where
the ground is sandy, and particularly in Prey-wood by St. Albans very
plentifully, where there be a great many good Simples besides; the third was
found upon St. Vincents Rock near Bristoll, by Mr. Goodyer; the fifth in a
Field near unto Bar^ Elmes in Surrey; the other three grow in diverse
Cornfieldsd about Southfleet in Kent, abundantly, as also about Buckworth,
Hamerton, and Richwersworth, in Huntingdon-shire, and in diverse other places:
They flower in June and July, and their Seed is ripe in August, that of the
Female kind withering presently after.

The Temperature.
The Male Speedwell is temperatly hot and dry, the bitterness thereof showing
so much: The Female, though it be bitter, is held to be cooling, yet no less
drying than the former.

The Virtues.
Both the Male and the Female Speedwell are Wound-herbs of very good note. The
Male is singular to heal all fresh Wounds and Cuts in the Flesh, speedily
closing the Lips of them together, and not suffering them to gather corruption;
and Salve being made therewith, as also with Wax, Oil, and Turpentine, and
applied outwardly, and the decoction of it in Wine taken inwardly; and so it is
no less effectual for spreading Tetters, or for foul or old fretting, or
running Sores or Ulcers, that have been of long continuance, and therefore the
harder to cure: It stays the bleeding of Wounds, or other Fluxes of Blood in
any other part, and dissolveth all tumors and swellings, especially those of
the Neck: It is also held to be a special Remedy for the Plague, and all
pestilentiall Fevers, and infectious Diseases, for it expels the venom and
poison from the Heart, and afterward strengthens it, and makes it able to
resist all noisome vapors, if a Dram or two of the herb in powder be given
with a dram of good Treacle, in a small draught of Wine, and the party be
laid to sweat; and so does the decoction thereof in Wine, or the distilled
Water thereof given in some Wine: It helps the Memory, eases all swimmings,
turnings, and other pains of the Head, and makes Barren Women become
fruitful, as it is said: It cleanses the blood from corruption, and therefore
it helps the Leprosy, as no worse than a French King making trial thereof,
found to be true, as it is reported: The decoction of the Herb in water, or the
powder thereof being dry, and given in its own distilled water, is singular
good in all manner of Coughs, and diseases of the Breast and Lungs; and it has
the same operation upon Sheep, and therefore Sheepherds make use of it, by
adding a little Salt thereto; It opens the obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen, helps the yellow Jaundise, cleanses the exulcerations of the Reins
and Bladder, and also of the Mother, and of inward and outward Wounds, being
inwardly and outwardly used for the Spleen and Wounds, but inwardly only for
the rest; It provokes Urine, and helps thereby to break the Stone; and is
very profitable for the Back and Reins: The distilled water of the Herb only,
or after it has been steeped in Wine twelve hours, does wonderfully help in
the Plague, Consumption, Cough, and all other the diseases beforementioned, as
also to wash Wounds and Sores therewith; the same does wonderfully help all
Itches, Scabs, Scurf, Tetters, Morphew, and all discolorings of the Skin, as
Freckles, Spots, and Scarrs, a little Coperas being dissolved therein, and
bathed therewith; the said Water defends Garments from Moths, a little Allom
being dissolved therein, and sprinkled upon them. The Leaves of the Female
Speedwell, or Fluellin, being bruised and applied with Barley Meal to watering
eyes, that are hot and inflamed by defluxions from the Head, does very much
help them; It stops also the Fluxes of Blood or Humors, as the Lask, Bloody
Flix, and Women's too abundant Courses, and stays bleeding, whether it be at
nose, mouth, or other place, whether it come by bruise, hurt, or bursting of a
Vein, and wonderfully helps the inward parts, which need consolidating and
strengthening, the Leaves being sodden in Broth made of a Hen, or a piece of
Veal. It is effectual also both to heal and close up green Wounds, as also to
cleanse and heal all foul and old Ulcers, spreading and fretting Cancers in the
Nose or any other place, the juice and decoction of the Herb taken inwardly,
and the Herb used outwardly, as Pena instanceth in one, whose Nose was so eaten
with a Cancer, that it was to be cut off, left his whole Body should fall into
a Leprosy, yet a Barber, who knew nothing but by tradition, being unwilling
that the man should lose his Nose, desired that he might first make trial of
this Herb, which perfectly cured his Nose and him. And here it would not be
amiss to take my leave of Mr. Culpeper, who blames the College of Physicians
for those things, whereof he himself was far more guilty than they, for, if he
he were so skilful in the knowledge of Herbs, as he makes himself to be, why
did he leave the Male Speedwel out of his English Physician enlarged? it being
more common, and of greater use than the Female; but it seems he chanced to
read of the one, and not of the other, being in all probability ignorant of
both, for all his railing.

CHAP. CCCXLI. Of Pimpernell.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Anagallis, either (...), adducere, five ejicere,
quia adactos corpori acule^s extrahit, because it draws forth th^rns and
splinters out of the Body; or ex (...) and (...), idque ex (...) Fluvio ubi
^ritur, because it was first found by the River Gallus: It is called also in
Latin Anagallis, besides which it has had many other names put upon it, put
falsely, as Morsus Gallina, and Morgelina, which is that sort of Chickweed
called Henbit, Auricula Muris, Macia, Helicacabus, Corch^rus, which is the
Je^^es Mallow: Some call it Coralli^n, and the Composition made thereof
Diateralli^n; others think that it should be called Collarion, and the
Composition Diacollarion, because Pi^pernel is of a glutinous quality.

The Kinds.
There be four sorts of Pi^pernell growing in England; 1. Male Red Pimpernel:
2. Female Pimpernel: 3. Yellow Pimpernel: 4. Pimpernel with a white Flower.

The Form.
The Male Red Pimpernel has diverse weak square Stalks lying on the ground,
with two small and almost round Leaves at every joint, one against another,
somewhat like unto those of Chickweed, but that they are thicker, spotted on
the backside with brownish spots, without any foot-stalk, for they do as it
were encompass the Stalk, wherein it differs also from Chickweed: the Flowers
stand singly, or each by themseves, at the joints between them and the Stalks,
consisting of five small round* pointed Leaves, of a fine pale red color,
tending to an Orange, with* so many threads in the middle, in whose places
succeed smooth round heads, wherein the Seed, which i^ small, is contained: The
Root is small and fibrous, perishing at, or before Winter.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in Corne-fields, by Way-sides, and in Gardens also, of its
own accord, almost every where, and so does the second, but less frequently,
and has been found not far from Oxford, in Rumney Marsh, at Beaconsfield in
Buckingham-shire, and diverse other places: the third grows in St^w Wood,
about two miles from Oxford, and also in Charletown Wood, two miles beyond
Greenwich: the last grows in a Wood on the South Side of Chis^ehirst Heath,
over against Scadbury Park: They flower from May unto August, some of the Seed
ripening and falling in the mean time, and the rest quickly after.

The Temperature.
Pimpernel is of a drying faculty, without biti^g, and somewhat hot, with a
certain drawing quality.

The Virtues and Signatures.
It is agreed upon by all hands, that Pimpernell being bruised and applied to
corrupt, festered and fretting Sores, cleanses and heals them, and draws
out th^r^s, thistles, and sp^inters, out of the Hands or Feet, or any other
part of the Body: Being boiled in Wine and drunk, it is singular good against
all venomous bitings, obstruction of the Liver, and pain of the Kidneys: It is
a good Remedy against the Plague, and other pestilentia^ Fevers, and
contagious Sicknesses, being boiled in Wine and given to drink; but then after
the taking thereof warm, they must lie a bed and sweat two hours thereupon,
for hereby the venom of the Disease is expelled, but it must be used twice at
the least; the same helps the biting of ^ad Dogs, and the stingings and
bitings of the Viper* Adder, or Scorpion, the Spots on the backside of the
Leaves intimating so much: The Juice hereof mixed with a little Honey, and
dropped into the Eyes, cleanses them from cloudy mists or filmes growing over
them, which hinder and take away the sight: It is effectual also to ease the
pains of the Hemorrhoides or Piles. The distilled Water is effectual for all
the purposes aforesaid, especially for cleansing corrupt and stinking wounds,
and is accounted mervailous good to cleanse the Skin from any roughness,
deformity, or discoloring thereof, and to make it smooth, neat, and clear,
which it does by Signature, all spotted Plants being available for the doing
away Spots in the Skin, as Crollius says, who writes also, that it is
reported that the Male Pimpernel being held in the hand till it be hot,
stops the bleeding of any vein that is cut, the Flower of it being of a
bloody color signifying the same. The Juice sniffed up into the Nose, purges
the Head, and so it is said to do the Toothach, if it be put into the contrary
Nostrill. The Male Pimpernell is said to drive forth the Fundament, and the
Female to repel it, and drive it into its place again. Some Country People do
judge of the Weather by beholding the Flowers of this Herb the day before, if
the Leaves of them be contracted and closed up, it betokens Rain, but if
they be spread abroad, fair Weather. The Germans have a superstitious conceit,
that if it be hung over the Threshold, or Porch of the door of any house, it
will defend it from Witchcraft.

CHAP. CCCXLII. Of VVoody Nightshade, or Bitter-sweet.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...) Glycypicron, that is Bitter-sweet in English,
because the Bark of it being the wed in the mouth, tastes bitter at the first,
but sweet afterward; and for the same reason it is called Dulcamara and
Amaradulci^ in Latin: Some referring it to the Night-shades, do call it
Solanum lignosum, o^ fruticosum or rubrum, and therefore we in English call it
Woody Night-shads, Bitter-sweet, and of some Felon-wort, because it cures the
Felons, which happen upon the joints of the Fingers.

The Kinds.
Of this kind of Nightshade, there be only these two sorts: 1. Common woody
Nightshade: 2. Woody Nightshade, with white Flowers.

The Form.
The Common woody Nightshade grows up with many slender, winding, brittle,
woody Stalks, as high as a man, and sometimes higher, folding it self about the
Hedges, or any thing else that stands next thereunto, yet without any
claspers at all, covered with a whitish rough Bark, and having a pith in the
middle, shooting ou^ Branches on every side, which are green while they are
young, and so are the new shoots of those that are elder, whereon grow many
Leaves without order, somewhat like unto those of Nightshade, but that they
are pointed at the ends, with two small Leaves or pieces of Leaves usually
growing upon the Footstalk, between the Leaf and the Branch, like little
wings; of a pale green color, but some of them have but one, and some none:
the Flowers come forth at the tops and sides of the Branches, standing many
together in fashion of a long Umbell, upon short footstalks, one above another,
which consist of five narrow and long violet purple colored Leaves, with a
long gold-yellow pointel in the middle, sticking forth, which afterward turn
into round, and somewhat long Berries, green at the first, but red, soft, and
full of juice when they come to ripeness, of an unpleasant bitter taste, though
sweet at first, wherein many flat white Seeds are contained: the Root spreads
it self into many strings under ground, not growing to any great bigness.

The Places and Time.
The first grows in every Country by the sides of Ditches and Hedges, whereon
it many times runs; the second, is seldom met with, but by S. Margarets
Church in Rumney Marsh: The Leaves come forth in the Spring, the Flowers in
July, and the Berries are ripe in August.

The Temperature.
The Leaves and Berries of Bitter-sweet are hot and dry, cleansing and wasting
away.

The Virtues.
The Leaves or Berries of Bitter-sweet stamped with rusty Bac^^, applied to
that Joint of the Fi^ger that is troubled with a Felon, has been found by
diverse Country people, who are most su^j^ct thereunto, to be very success^ful
for the ^uring of the same. The decoction of the Leaves and tender branches
being infused and set over the fire in three p^nts of White Wine, the Pot
wherein it is done, being close covered for twelve hours together, which being
then st^ained, is a most excellent Drink to op^n the O^structi^ns of the
Liver, Gall, and Spleen, and is used with good success, not only in the
yellow, but black Jaundise, and to cleanse Wom^n hat are newly brought ab^d, a
quarter of a Pint thereof being drank for many Mornings together, and if you
will in the Evenings also: The said Infusion is also availeable for difficulty
of breathing, Bruises, Falls, and congealed blood in any part of the body, and
it is good against the Dropsy, for it purges away waterish and other humors
very gently both by Urine and Stool. It is also used against putrid Fevers or
Agues, and when any bone is broken, or out of joint, as likewise for Ruptures
and Wounds. The Sheepherds in Germany, as Tragus reports, do use to hang it
about their Cattles neck, when they are troubled with a swimming in the Head,
causing them to turn round as if they were bewitched, and therefore they say
it removes Witchcrafts both in Men and Beasts* b^t that swimming in the head
is no effect of Witchcraft, but proceeds from a natural cause, for which this
Plant is a specific remedy, as it is for all such like sudden distempers
whatsoever, being hung about the the Neck, and that is not far from the head.

CHAP. CCCXLIII. Of Ladies Bedstraw.
The Names.
IT is called in Greek (...). Gallium, or as others have it, (...), Galiun^,
and of some (...) and (...), Galerion and Galarion, from (...), which signifies
Milk, into which the Women of former times did put this Herb, as those of ours
do Runnet, to cause the milk to turn into a Curd, for the making of Cheese,
for which purpose it is said to serve very well, and therefore diverse do call
it ^heese Runnet, both here and beyond the Seas. It is called in Latin Galium,
after the Gree^, and that with white Flowers, M^llugo, in English Ladies
Bedstraw, and sometimes Maids hair, from the finenesse of the Leaves.

The Kinds.
There be but six sorts of Ladies Bedstraw in all, that I meet with, and
therefore I shall put them down: 1. The Common Ladies Bedstraw. 2. Red flowred
Ladies Bedstraw. 3. Mountain white flowred Ladies Bedstraw. 4. The common white
flowred Ladies Bedstraw 5. Mountain Ladies Bedstraw of Candy. 6. Another Ladies
Bedstraw of Candy.

The Form.
The common Ladies Bedstraw rises up with diverse small, brown square stalks,
standing upright, at first, but after it comes to be about a foot, or half a
yard high, which is its usual dimension, the tops thereof lean a little
downwards, being most commonly branched forth into diverse parts full of joints,
and with diverse very fine small Leaves at every one, set at equal distances
like Wood-roof, but much less, and hardly rough at all: at the tops of the
branches do grow forth from several joints, many long tufts or branches of
yellow flowers, set one above another very thick together, consisting of four
Leaves a piece, of a strong and resinous, yet not unpleasant smell The Seed is
small and black, like Poppy seed two for the most part being joined near
together. The root is somewhat red, which having many small threads fastened unto
it, takes fast hold of the earth, and creeps a little way also; but that
which makes it most to increase is, that after the branches are weighed down
to the ground by the heaviness of the Flowers, it takes root again at the
joints thereof.

The Places and Time.
The first is frequently to be found in many places of this Land in dry
Pastures. Closes, and Meadows, and sometimes in those that are wet, though I
think unknown to most, but the place that I particularly remember to abound
therewith, is Butlers Close at Adlerbury Towns end; the second was found in
Italy, and the third in Germany, on diverse hills there; the fourth is a
spontaneal of our own Land, and grows in the Abbey Orchard at Saint Albans,
and in diverse other places; the name of the fifth and sixth speaks their
Extraction. They flower in May and June, and the Seed is ripe in July and
August.

The Temperature.
Ladies Bedstraw, especially that with yellow flowers, which is most common, is
dry and something binding, as Galen says.

The Virtues.
Though Mugwort be an Herb noted amongst the Vulgar, for preventing weariness
upon sore Travel, and for doing it away after it is contracted, year I find
Ladies Bedstraw, more celebrated for that purpose amongst Authors, who say that
the Decoction of the Herb and Flowers being yet warm, is of admirable use to
bath the Feet of Travelers, and others who are surbated by long Jou^^eyes in
hot weather, and for Laski^s and such like, whose running long cause^ ^ot only
weariness, but stiffenesse in the Sinews and Joints, to both which this herb
is so friendly, that it makes them to become as lissome, as if they had never
been abroad. The Flowers and Herb likewise made into an Ointment or Oil, are
availeable for the same purposes, as also for burnings with Fire, or scaldings
with Water; for the dry Scabbe; and the Itch in Children: The said Ointment is
to be made with the Flowers and Herb boiled in Hoggs* grease or Sallet Oil,
having some Bees Wax melted therein, after it is streined; the Oil is made
likewise with the Herb in Flower, by being set in the Sun with a sufficient
quantity of sallet Oil for the space of ten or twelve days: Both the Ointment
and Oil may be used, either before a journey is taken, for prevention, or
after, the seet being first bathed with the decoction, and then anointed with
either of them, and this is the surest way. The decoction of the Herb taken
inwardly, is used by diverse to help to provoke Urine, and thereby to fret and
break the Stone; the same also drank, helps to stay inward Bleedings, and
also to heal inward Wounds, by the heating and drying qualities therein: the
Herb, as well as the Flowers, being bruised and put up into the Nostrills,
stays their bleeding, and it does as much to Wounds, if it be applied to
them, and it draws forth the fire out of any place that is burned, and
heals it: Dioscorides says, that the Root is availeable to provoke bodily
Lust, and some say the Flowers do so also: The good Housewives about Namptwich
in Cheshire do make that use of it, that the Ancients did, as I said before,
that is, to put it in their Runnet, esteeming more of the Cheese whereinto that
is put, then that which is made without it, as a Countryman of theirs
affirms: The so^ts with white flowers have been found by experience of the
Ger^anes, who have been great advancers of the faculty of Simpling to be good
for the Sinews, Arteries, and Joints to bathe them therewith, both to take
away their weariness and weakness, and to comfort and strengthen them also,
whenever need requires.

The Conclusion.
ANd thus, Gentle Reader, by the assistance of the Almighty, have I gone
through the general Anatomy of Man's Body, with the most usual Diseases, and
distempers of every part, from the Crown of the Head, to the Sole of the Feet,
and appropriated such Simples ( which I have in a manner Anatomized also) unto
them, as I held to be most convenient for the restoring them again to their
Ease and right Temper. I conceive that there is no body that understands my
well-meaning endeavors, that will think, that the remainder of such Plants,
which are not expressed in this Work, have not come within my cognizance, and
therefore I shall not need to be very exact in making any Apology, or laying
down my Reasons for the omission of them: yet if there be any inclined to
suppose so, let them know that I wilfully passed over some of them, and that
there were some which the time (a thing I have much wanted ever since I
undertook this business) would not permit me to insert. And let them know
also, that the present design was not an universal History of Plants, for
then how voluminous must we needs have been? but only of those which are more
useful, and may be gotten at the Apothecaries, or Druggists, if they grow not
near every ones habitation: Yet perhaps hereafter, if Life, Health, and Leisure
shall give way, I shall with a little encouragement devise some breef Appendix,
wherein I shall comprise the names at least, of all such as are here wanting.
But for the present I shall bid the apprehensive Reader to Farewell, and I
hope I shall not only bid, but also be a means to make him so to do.

FINIS.
Index Latinus Nominum in quo Numerus ad Caput refertur.
A.
ABrotanum mas, 288 Abrotanum faemina, 250 Abiga, 318 Absinthium 148
Acetabulum, 235 Achillea, 294 Accipitrina, 24 Ac^^u^, 21 Adianthum, 15 Ador, 70
Agallochum, 136 Agaricus and Agaricum, 5 Aegilops, 77 Ageratum, 182
Aglacphotis, 2 Agnus, 280 Agrifolium, 242 Agrimonia, 179 Alab^stri Rosarum, 19
Alcea, 93 Alchymilla, 89 Alcibadion, 138 Alisma, 11 Alkakengi, 227 Allesuja,
1^3 Alliaria, 131 Allium, 72 Alnus, 152 Aloe, 48 Alsine, 188 Althaea, 215
Alumen Catinum, 197 Amaracus, 10 Amaradulcis, 342 Amaranthus, 301 Ammi, 253
Ammoniacum, 98 Ammygdalus and Amygdalum, 80 Amyrberis, 175 Anacardium, 153
Anagallis, 341 Anagallis aquatica, 231 Androsaemum, 285 Anemone, 291 Anethum
and Anetum, 94 Angelica, 118 Anisum, 91 Anonis, 57 Ans^rina, 59 Anthemis, 141.
306 Anthera Rosarum, 19 Anthos 8 Aparine, 187 Apium Arabum, 186 Apium hortense,
214 Aquil^gia, 77 Argemone, 3 Argentina, 59 Arisarum, 32 Aristolochia, 312
Armeniacum malum, 171 Arnoglossum, 76 Artanita, 40 Artemisia, 286 Arthriticae,
11 Arum, 32 Arundo, 82 Asarum, 25 Asclepids, 126 Asparagus, 213 Asplenium, 204
Assa Faetida, 310 Aster, 330 Astrantia, 54 Athanasia, 249 Attractylis, 139
Atriplex, 309 Avena, 144 Aurantia, 164 Auricula Judae, 78 Aucricula Muris, 293
Auricula Ursi, 11 Axungia Vitri, 197
B.
Ba^charis, 25 Balaenus Myrepsica, 149 153 Balaustia, 52 Balsamine, 324
Balsamita, 182 Barbarea, 50 Bardana, 308 Basilicum, 100 Battat^, 269 Bechium,
110 Bellis, 339 Berberis, 175 Beta, 185 Betonica, 6 Betonica aquatica, 266
Betula, 320 Bipe^ula, 132 Bismalva, 215 Bistorta, 27 Blitum, 301 Borago, 120
Brassica, 86 Bruta, 319 Bryonia, 191 Bubonium, 330 Buglossum, 166 Bugula, 335
Buphthalmus, 339 Bursa Pastoris, 35 Byne, 71
C.
Cacalia, 110 Cacao, 277 Cactos, 267 Calamintha, 210 Calamus Aormaticus, 218
Calendula, 125 Callitric^um, 15 Caltha, 125 Camelina, 254 Campanula, 95 Candela
Regia, 112 Canella, 137 Canabis, 281 Cantabrica, 135 Capillus Veneris, 15
Capnos, 49 Capparis, 207 Caprifolium, 111 Cardamine, 50 Cardamomum, 163
Cardamum, 50 Cardiaca, 305 Carduus Benedictus, 139 Carduus Fullonum, 262
Carduus Mariae, 140 Carthamus, 200 Carthamus sylvestris, 139 Caryophyllata, 133
Caryophyllus, 134 Caryophyllus flos, 135 Cassia, 137 Cassia fistula, 157
Cassutha, 201 Castanea, 276 Ceterach, 204 Cattaria herba, 307 Centaurium, 248
Centunculus, 77 Cepa, 226 Cepa maris, 4 Cerasus and Cerasa, 173 Cerefolium, 230
Cervicaria, 61 Chamaecistus, 259 Chamaedrys, 209 Chamaecyparissus, 250
Chamaemelum, 141 Chamaepytus, 318 Charephyllum, 230 Chelidonium majus, 20
Chelidonium minus, 265 C^enopodium, 309 China, 328 Chironium, 247 Cicer, 271
Cichorium, 181 Cicuta, 283 Cinamomum, 137 Cinara, 267 Cistus, 259 Clematis
Daphnoides, 96 Clymenum, 111 Cnicus sylvestris, 139 Cochlearia, 146 Coccus
infectoria, 317 Cocc^gria, 257 Calabrina, 37 Colutaea, 154 Colchicum, 119
Colocyntha edulis, 99 Colocynthis, 245 Consolida, 292 Consolida media, 335
Consolida media herbarior, 339 Consolida minor, 336 Consolida Saracenica, 337
Convolvulus, 246 Corallina, 56 Corallium, 55 Coriandrum, 166 Cornu Cervi, 238
Corona Terrae, 26 Coronopus, 238 Corruda, 213 Cortices Rosarum, 19 Corylus, 304
Costus, 182 Cotonaria, 77 Cotula, 141 Cotyledon, 235 Crossula, 68 Crithmum, 239
Crocus, 119 Cucumis, 166 Cucurbita, 99 Cuminum, 159 Cunila, 289 Cupula Glandis,
237 Cupressus, 234 Curcuma, 178 Cyclamen, 40 Cuscutha, 201 Cynocrambe, 313
Cynorrhodos, 19 Cynosbatos, 261 Cynosorchis, 278 Cyparissus, 224 Cyperus, 219
D
DActylus Idaeus, 2 Daphne, 241 Daucus, 251 Dens Leonis, 181 Dentaria, 56
Dictamus and Dictamnus albus, 240 Dictamnus, and Dictamnum, 315 Digitalis, 67
Diospiros, 225 Dipsacus, 262 Dolychus, 236 Draco arbor, 302 Draconis sanguis,
16 Dracontium and Dracunculus, 279 Dryoptoris, 115 Dulcamara, 342 Dulcisida, 2
E
Ebulus, 189 Echium, 138 Elaterium, 200 Elatine, 340 Elleborastrum, 202
Eleoselinum, 186 Enanthe, 213 Endivia, 181 Enula Campana; 79 Epithymum, 201
Equisetum, 34 Erigerun, 150 Eruca, 272 Eryngium, 268 Erysimum, 109 Eupatorum,
179 Euphorbium, 200 Euphrasia, 22 Euphrosyne, 120
F
FAba, 101 Faba suilla, 58 Fagus, 303 Farfara, 110 Farsarus, 28 Febrifuga, 306
Felterrae, 247 Fenicul^m, 17 Feniculum marinum, 239 Ferula, 98 Ficus, 74
Filicala 115 Filipendula, 224 Filix, 206 Flos Amoris, 301 Flos Noctis, 247
Fraga, 122 Fraxinalla, 239 Fraxinus, 194 Fuga Daemonum, 332 Fumaria, 49 Fungus
Sambucinus, 78
G
Galbanum, 98 Galanga, 155 Galeopsis, 66 Galla arbor, 257 Gallitricum, 23
Gallium, 343 Garosmus, 309 Geminalis, 23 Genista, 193 Gentiana, 130
Gentianella, 16 Gerentum, 324 Geum, 133 Gingiber, 161 Glans, 237 Glycyrrhiza,
73 Clycyside, 2 Gnaphalium, 77 Gossipium, 274 Gramen caninum, 228 Gramen
Leucanthemum, 146 Grana Paradisi, 163 Grossul^ria, 174 Guasacum, 327 Grossus,
74 Gruinalis, 325
H
HAlicacabus, 227 Halimabus, 44 Harenarius, 237 Harundo, 82 Hedera, 27 Hedera
terrestris, 26 Helenium, 79 Helianthemum, 259 Helleborastum, 202 Helleborus
albus, 156 Helleborus niger, 202 Helleborine, 156 Helxine, 69 Hepatorium, 179
Herba cattaria, 307 Herba impia, 77 Herba Morgarata, 339 Herba Paralysis, 11
Hebra Paris, 331 Herba Sacra, 18 Herba Studi^sorum, 199 Herba Venti, 291
Herniaria, 321 Hibiscus, 215 Hieracium, 24 Hippia, 188 Hippoglossum, 64
Hipposelinum, 290 Hirundinaria major, 20 Hirundinaria minor, 265 Hol^stium, 146
Hordeum, 71 Horminum 23 Hidropiper, 334 Hyoscyamus, 58 Hyoscyamus Peruvianus
117 Hypericum, 332 Hypochaecris, 24 Hypocistis, 259 Hyssopus, 75
I
IAcobaea, 76 Jecoria, 180 Jalapium, 192 Imperatoria, 54 Ilex coccigera, 317
Illecebra, 47 Inula, 79 Intybum, 181 Irio, 109 Iris, 33 Iva Arthritica, 318
Juglans, 1 Jujube, 83 Juniperus 243 Ixia, 13
K
KAli, 197 Kermes, 317
L
LAhrum Veneris, 262 Labrusca, 81 Laser, 310 Lachryma Jobbaea. 225 Lactuca, 97
Ladanum, 259 Lamium, 66 Lampsana, 104 Lenaria, 112 Lapathum, 183 Lapathum
Sanguineum, 16 Lappa, 308 Larix, 5 Laserpitium, 310 Lavendula, 9 Laureola, 198
Laurus, 242 Lauri bacca, ib. Laurus Tinus, ib. Laurus Alexandrina, 64 Lens and
Lenticula, 102 Lentiscus, 53 Lepidium, 316 Leucacantha, 232 Leucanthemum, 146
Leucographis, 140 Leucoium, 135 Levisticum, 248 Libadium, 225 Libanotis, 8
Lichen, 180 Lichen arborum, 106 Lignum Aloes, 136 Lignum Vitae, 327 Lilium
album, 103 Lilium Convallium, 12 Linaria, 199 Lingua Cervina, 205 Linozostis,
313 Linum, 147 Lithospermum, 224 Lolium, 300 Lotus sativa, 142 Lonchitis
aspera, 204 Lujula, 123 Lunaria minor, 297 Lupinus, 212 Lupulus Salictarius,
220 Lysimachia, 338
M
MAcis, 164 Majorana, 10 Malicorium, 52 Malva, 93 Malus and Malum, 168 Malus
Armeniaca, 171 Malus Aurantia: 167 Malus Cotonea, 14 Malus Cydonia, ib. Malus
Granata, 52 Malus Limonia, 233 Malus Medica, 129 Malus Persica, 170 Marathrum,
17 Marrubium, 105 Marum, 290 Mastiche, 53 Matter Herculana, 111 Matricaria, 305
306 Mechoacan, 192 Melampodium, 202 Melilotus, 143 Melissa, 124 Melo, 166
Mentha, 43 Mentha felina, 307 Mentastrum, 43 Mercurialis, 313 M^spilus, 41
Meum, 252 Milium Solis, 225 Millefolium 294 Mirobalani, 149 Molle, 55 Mollugo,
343 Morus, 42 Muscus, 15 Myagrum, 254 Myosotis, 293 Myrica, 208 Myrrhis, 117
Myrtus, 258 Myxa and Myxaria, 112
N.
NApus, 83 Narcissus, 155 Nardus, 217 Nardus Rustica, 25 Nasturtium, 50 Nepeta,
307 Nigella, 92 Nummularia, 299 Nux Avellana, 304 Nux Ben, 153 Nux Juglans, 1
Nux Moscata, 165 Nux Myristica, ib. Nux Vesccaria, 227 Nymphaea, 282
O.
OCularia, 22 Oculus Christi, 23 Ocymum, 100 Oenanthe, 224 Olea sive Oliva, 244
Olus album, 97 Olus aureum, 309 Olus Hispanicum, 185 Ononis, 57 Ophioglossum,
296 Opthalmica, 22 Orchis, 278 Origanum, 200 Orobanche, 247 Orobus, 212 Oryza,
263 Osmunda Regalis, 206 Osyris, 199 Oxalis, 184 Oxya, 303 Oxyacantha, 232
Oxymyrsine, 175 Oxys, 309
P.
PAeonia, 2 Palma, 62 Palmae cerebrum, ib. Palma Christ^i sive Ricinus, 196
Palma Christi sive Satyrion, 278 Paludapium, 286 Panax Heraclevm, 241 Panax
Coloni, 333 Paneratium, 4 Panis Cuculi, 123 Papillaris, 104 Papaver, 3 Papaver
spumeum, ib. Parietaria, 69 Parthenium, 306 Pastinacea latifolia, 251
Pastinacea tenuifolia, 16 Pastoris Bursa, 35 Pecten Veneris, 2^0 Peganon, 21
Pentaphyllum, 36 Peplion, 44 Pepo, 166 Percipier Anglorum, 222 Perdicium, 69
Perfoliata, 322 Perforata, 332 Periclymenum, 111 Perpensa, 114 Persica, 170
Persicaria, 334 Personata, 308 Petasites, ib: Petroselinum, 214 Petum, 107
Peucedanum, 30 Phaseolus, 236 Philanthropos, 187 Philipendula, 224 Phaenix, 300
Phu, 145 Phyllitis, 205 Pilosella, 293 Pimpinella, 132 Pinguicula, 114 Pinus,
51 Piper, 164 Piper aquaticum, 334 Piper agreste, 280 Piperitis, 316 Pirus and
Piraster, 269 Pistachia, 275 Pistachium Germanicum, 227 Pisum, 271 Plantago, 76
Polium, 211 Polygonatum, 323 Polygonum, 321 Polypodium, 115 Polytrichum, 16
Pomus and Pomum, 168 Populus, 28 Porcellia, 24 Porrum, 255 Portulaca, 44
Pitentilla, 59 Poterion, 216 Praesium, 105 Primula Veris, 11 Prunella, 336
Prunus, 172 Prunus sylvestris, 260 Pseudohel^eborus, 202 Pseudolinum; 199
Pseudodictam(...), 315 Pseudonardus, 9 Pseudonasturtium silvest. 264 Psora, 85
Psyllium 60 Pulegium, 287 Pulmonaria, 106 Pulsatilla, 291 Pyrola, 63 Pyrus and
Pyrum, 169
Q.
Quadrifolium. Qfuscum 298 Quercus, 237 Quinquefolium, 39 Quinquenervia, 76
R.
RAcemus, 81 Radicula, 151 Radix, ib. Raphanus, ib. Raphanus Rusticanus, 256
Rapum and Rapa, 88 Rapum Genistae, 193 Rapunculus, 95 Regina Prati, 295 Remora
aratri, 57 Refina Laricea, 5 Rha, 177 Rhabarbarum, ib. Rha Ponticum, 248
Rhabarbarum Movachorum, 177 Rhefeda, 272 Rhus Obsonioru^r, 257 Rhus Coriaria,
ib. Ribes, 166 Ricinus, 196 Robur, 237 Ros Solis, 108 Rosa, 19 Rosa Junonis,
103 Rosmarinus, 8 Rubia ti^ctorum, 314 Rubus, 261 Rubus Idaeus, ib. Rumex, 183
Rupertianum, 325 Ruscus, 229 Rura, 21 Ru^a capraria, 127 Ruta muraria, 16
S.
SAbina, 319 Sagapenum, 200 Sagmina, Salicaria, Saliunca, 2^ Salix, 36 Salvia,
7 Sambucus, 189 Sampsychum, 10 Sanguinalis, 34 Sanguinaria, 182 Sanguis
Draconis, 302 Sanguiserla, 132 Samcula, 114 Santolum, 90 Santolina, 250 Sarza
parilla, 320 Sass afras, 195 Satureia, 289 Satyrium, 278 Saxifraga; 223
Stabiosa, 85 Scala Caeli, 323 Scandix, 236 Scilla, 4 Schaenanthum, 160
Scolymus, 267 Scolopendrium, 205 Scopa Regia, 229 Scoparia, 199 Scordium, 131
Scorodonia, ib. Scorpoides, 293 Scorzonera, 128 Scrophularia major, 65
Scrophularia minor, 265 Secule, 266 Sedum minus, 47 Sentinalis, 221 Sempervivum
sylvestre, 68 Sena, 154 Senecio, 150 Sentis, 261 Septifolium, 38 Septinervia,
76 Serapias, 278 Seriphium, 148 Serpentaria, 37, 279 Serpentina, 296 Serpillum,
290 Servillum, ib. Sigillum Solomonis, 303 Sinapi, 273 S^farum, 270 Siser, ib.
Sisymbrium, 75 Sium, 231 S^^ilax five Taxus de qua vide Isagoge meum cap. 19
Smilax laevis, 236 Smilax aspera, 329 Smyrnium, 290 Sol^anella, 190 Solidago
Saracenica, 337 Solanum hortense, 29 Solanun, lethale, ib. Solanum lignosum,
342 Solanum, Vesicarium, 227 Sonchus, 31 Sophia Chirurgorum, 264 Spatula
faetida, 33 Spina alba, 232 Spinachia, 185 Spina acida, 175 Spondylium, 311
Squilla, 4 Squinanthum, 150 Staphylinus, 251 Staphylodendron, 227 Strobilus, 51
Sylvae Matter, 111 Symphitum, 292
T.
Tobacco, 107 Tamaris^^^, 208 Tamarindus, 203 Tamus, 191 Tanacetum, 249 Tapsus
barbatus, 112 Taraxacon, 181 Telephium, 68 Terebinthina, 5 Testiculorum
varieta^es, 278 Teucri^^^, 209 Thalictrum, 77 Thalierum, ib. Thapsia, 16
Thalaspi, 256 Thymbra, 289 Thymum, 290 T^bacc^, 107 Tormentill^, 38 Tota bona,
23 Trachelium, 61 Tragacantha, 216 Tragorchis, 278 Tragoriganum, 200 Trafi, 219
Trichomanes, 15 Trifolium, 298 Trifolium acetosum, 123 Trifolium adoratum, 142
Trissag^, 209 Triticum, 70 Triticum trim^stre, ib. Triticum temulentum, 300
Tussila^^, 110
V.
Vaccinia, 116 Valeriana, 145 Vegres, 261 Veratrum, 20^ Verbascum, 11^ Verben^,
18 Veronica, 340 Vesicaria, 227 Vetonica, 6 Vinca pervinca, 96 Vincetoxicum,
126 Viola, 121 Viola tricolor, ib. Viperaria, 128 Virga aurea, 45 Virga
Pastoris, 262 Viscum, 1^ Vitex, 280 Vitis, 81 Vitis alba, 191 Vitis nigra, ib.
Vitis Idaea, 96 Ulmaria, 295 Ulmus, 326 Umbilicus Veneris, 235 Umbilicus
Terrae, 40 Unio, 226 Volubilis, 246 Urinalis, 199 Urtica, 89 Usuea, 15 Uva, 8^
Uvae passae, ib. Uvae Corinthi^^^, ib. Uva Crispa, 174 Vulgage, 25 Vulvaria,
309 Uvularia, 61, 64
X.
XAnthium, 308 Xylum, 274 Xyris, 33
Z.
Zingiber, 161 Finis Indicis Latini*
A Table of the English Names in which the Numbers are to be referred to the
Chapters.
A.
ABrecock Tree, 171 Acacia, 260 Acorns, 237 Adders-tongue, 296 Agrimony, 179
Agnus, 280 Ague-Tree, 195 A^green, is Houseleek, 47 Alecoast, 182 Alehoofe, 26
Allheale, 241 Alexanders, 290 Aller or Alder-Tree, 152 Alleluja, 123
Almond-Tree, 80 Aloes, 48 Aloe Tree and Wood, 136 Alk akengi, 227 Amaranthus,
301 Ameos or Bishopsweed, 253 Anemone, 291 Anise, 91 Angelica, 118 Balsome
Apples, 324 Apples and the Kinds, 168 Aprecock-Tree, 171 Archall, 180
Archangell, 66 Aron, 32 Arrach, 309 Arsmnart, 334 Artechockes, 267 Asara bacca,
25 Asparagus, 213 Ash-Tree and keys, 194 Asp or Aspen-Tree, 28 Assa faetida,
310 Avens, 133
B.
Baldmony, 130 Balm, 124 Balsome Apples, 324 Barberies, 175 Barley, 71 Basil,
100 Bays and its Berries, 242 Beans, 101 Bean Capers, 207 Flat Beans, 212
French Beans, 236 Sower Beans, 203 Beares-Eares, 11 Beares-foot, 202 Bears
Garlic, 72 Ladies Bedstraw, 143 Beggerlice is Cleavers, 178 Bell-flowers, 95
Beetes 185 Beech-Tree, 303 Paul's Betony, 340 Water Betony, 266 Wood Betony, 6
Bilberries or Whorts, 116 Prickly Bindweed, 329 Sea Bindweed, 190 Birch-Tree
320 Birds-foot, 326 Birds-tongue, 221 Bishops-Leaves, 266 Birth-wort, 312
Bishops-weed, 253 Bistort or Snakeweed, 37 Bitter-sweet. 342 Bitterwort, is
Gentian, 130 Blackberryes, 261 Black-thorne, 260 Bladdernut, 227 Blites, 301
Bloud-wort, 183 Bombast, or Cotten-Tree, 274 Borage, 120 Bramble Bush, 261
Brake, 206 The Wild Bryar-Bush, 19 Sweet Bryar or Eglantine, ib. Brimstone
wort, 30 White Briony, 191 Black Briony, ib. Brookelime 231 Butchers Broom,
229 Brook betony, 266 Broom, 193 Broom rape, ib. Browne-wort, 65 Bucks-horne,
238 Buck-mast, 303 Bugle, 335 Buglosse, 166 Vipers Buglosse, 138 Bulls-foot,
110 Bullocks Lungwort, 112 Bulleis-Tree, 260 Bullwort, 253 Burnet, 182
Butterburre, 308 Clote burre, ib. Butter-wort, 114 Butchers Broom, 229
C.
CAbbage, 86 Cal^mint, ^01 Calamus Aromaticus, 218 Camphire, 284 Camells Hay,
150 Camock, 57 Camomile, 141 Canes or Reeds, 82 Canel or Cina^^on, 137 Capers,
207 Bean Capers, ib. Capons-taile is Valerian, 145 Cardamomes, 163 Carotts,
251 Cara^ayes, 158 Cass^^a fistula, 157 Purging Cassia, ib. Ca(...)t, 307
Celandine, 20 Centory, 248 Ceterach or Miltwast, 204 The Chaste Tree, 280
Cherry-Trees, 173 Winter-Cherries, 227 Chervill, 230 Cheeseboules, 3
Cheeserunning, 343 Chesnut-Tree, 276 Chick-weed, 188 China, 309 Chocolate, 277
St. Christophers Her^e, 206 Sweet Cicely, 117 Sil^en Cicely, 126 C^^ers, 271
Cinck foil, 39 Cinamon-Tree, 137 Cistus and its sorts, 259 Cives, 255 Clary,
23 Garden Claver is sweet Trefoile, 142 Kings Cleaver, 143 Cleavers or
Goosegrasse, 187 Cloudberry, 261 Clove-Tree, 134 Clove* Gillow-flowers, 135
Clownes woundwort, 333 Cole flowers, 166 Cole-worts, 86 Columbines, 77
Coloquintid^, 246 Coltsfoot, 110 Comfrey, 292 Great Consound, ib. Middle
Consound, 335 Small Consound or Daisy, 339 Saracens Consound, 337 Convall
Lilly, 12 Coral, 55 Corall-wort, 56 Coralline or Sea Moss, 15 Cork or
Archall, 180 Coriander, 166 Corn Rose, 3 Corn Sallet, 97 Costmany, 182
Co^ten, 274 Cottonweed or Cudweed, 77 Cowslips, 11 French Cowslips, ib.
Cowslips of Jerusalem, 113 Couch-grasse, 228 Coventry Bells, 95 Crabbe-grasse,
197 Crabbe-Tree, 168 Cranes-bills, 325 Garden Cresses, 50 Water-Cr^sses, ib.
Winter-Cresses, ib. S^ines-Cresses, 238 Wart-Cresses, ib. Cron-Garlick, 72
Cuckow-flowers, 50 Cuckowes Meat, 123 Cuckow-pintle, 32 Cudweed, 77 Cullions,
278 Culrage or Arsmart, 334 Cumin, 159 Currants, 166 Cypresse-Tree, 234
Garden-Cypresse or Lavendar Cotton, 250 Field Cypress or Ground pine. 318
D.
DAisies, great and small, 339 Dandelyon, 181 Dane-wort, 189 Darnell, 300
Date-Tree, 62 Dauke, 251 Dill, 94 Dittander, 316 Dittany of Candy, 3^5 Bastard
Dittany, ib. False white Dittany, 240 Devills-bitt vide Scabious, Devills-durt,
310 Garden Dock or Patience, 177 Water-dock: 183 Wild-Dock. ib. Dodder of Time
and other, 201 Dogges-grasse, 228 Dogges-Rose, 19 Doggs-Stones, 278
Dogges-Tooth Violet, 56 Doves-foot, 325 Double-Tongue, 64 Dragons, 279 Dragon
Tree and blood, 302 Dropwort, 224 Dwale, 19
E.
EGrimony, 179 Elder and the sorts. 189 Elecampa^e. 79 Elm. 326 White
Ellebore. 156 Black Ellebore. 202 Endive. 181 Eringus or Sea Holly, 268
Eyebright. 22
F.
FEarn. 206 Feaberries. 174 Finger fern, 204 Mules Fern. ib. Featherfew. 306
Field Cypress, 318 Felwort. 130 Felo^wort. 342 Fennel. 17 Fennel Giant. 98 Sow
Fennel. 30 Fennel Flower, 92 Sea Fennel, 239 Figtree, 74 Filbeard tree, 304
Filipendula. 224 Fistick Nuts, 275 Fleawort. 60 Flixweed. 264 Flower amor. 301
Flower of the Sun. 79 Fluellen. 340 Folefoot. 110 Foolstones, 278 Forget me
not, 318 Fourleafed grass. 298 Fox Gloves. 67 Fox Stones, 278 Framb^is or
Raspes, 261 French Beans, 236 French Lavender. 9 French or Vine Leeks, 255
French Mercury. 313 French Mallows. 93 Fumitory. 49 Fusses or Fusts. 134
G.
GAlanga, 162 English Galangale 219 Gallow grass. 281 Sweet Gall, 257 Garlic,
72 Gent^a^. 130 Germander, 209 Water Germander, 131 Gill go by the Ground, 26
Ginger, 161 Glassewort. 197 Goats Organy, 200 Goats Rue, 127 Golden Rod. 45
Golden Saxifrage. 223 Gold of Pleasure. 254 Gooseberries. 174 Goosefoot, 309
Goosegrasse, 178 Gourds. 99 Bitter Gourd* 246 Grains of Paradise, 163 Gromell,
225 Grasses of diverse sorts. 81 Grapes of diverse sorts. 228 Winter Green. 63
Ground I^y, 26 Ground Pine. 318 Grounds^ll, 150 Gua^acum. 327 Gum Tragacanth.
216 Gum Arabic. ibid.
H.
HAarts-ease. 121 Hartshorn, 238 Hearts tongue, 205 Hearts Claver, 143 Heart
Trefoile, 298 Hasel nut tree. 304 Hather or Heath, 208 Haver or Oats, 144
Hawkweed, 24 Haw-thorne, 230 Haymaides, 26 Hedge-mustard, 109 White Hellebore,
156 Black Hellebore, 202 Bastard Hellebore, ib. Hemlock, 283 Hemp, 281
Hemp-Tree or Agnus, 280 Henbane, 58 Henbane of Peru, 107 He^^it, 188 Hawes, 232
Heps, 19 Herb Robert, 325 Herb Trinity 121 Herb Bennet, 133 Herb Carpenter,
338 Herb of Grace, 21 Herb Ive, 318 Herb Paris, 331 Herb Twopence, 299 Herb^
William, 253 Holy H^rbe, 18 Hercules Woundwort, 241 Hightaper, 112 Hipwort, 235
Hyssope, 75 Hollihockes, 93 Hogs Fennel, 30 Holme or Holly Bush, 243 Holme
or Holly Oak, 317 Holy Thistle, 139 Holy Seed. 148 Holy Rose. 259 Sea Holly.
268 Honisuckles. 111 Hops, 220 Horehound, 105 Horned Poppy. 3 Horestrong, 30
Hookheal 336 Horse mint 43 Horse tail. 34 Horse tongue. 64 Housleek. 47
I
JAck by the Hedge, 131 St. James wort, 76 St. J^bas-wort, 332 Indian
Spikenard, 217 Job's tears. 225 Jone Silver pin, 3 Juno's tears. 18 Ivy. 27
Ground Ivy. 26 Juniper tree. 244 Jujube tree. 83 Juray or Darnell. 300
K
KAli or Glassewort. 197 St. Katherines flower, 92 Kexes or Hemlock, 283
Keraelwort or Figwort, 65 Kidney beans. 236 Kidneywort, 235 Knawell, 221
Kneeholm. 229 Knotgrass. 221 Knotberry. 261
L
LAced Time Savory, etc. 201 Ladies Bedstraw, 343 Ladies Comb. 230 Ladies
Mantle. 89 Ladies Seal, 191 Ladies Smocks, 50 Ladder to Heaven. 323 Lambs
Lettice, 97 Larch-Tree. 5 Laserwort and the sorts. 310 Lavender. 9 Lavender
Cotton, 250 Laurel or Bay Tree. 241 Great Laurel, or the Cherry Bay Tree.
ibid. Spurge Laurel, 198 Laurel of Alexandria, 64 Laurus Tinus, 241 Leeks, 255
Lentils. 102 Lentisk or Mastick tree, 53 Lettice. 97 Lambs Lettice, ibid.
Lichwale, 225 Liquoris. 73 Lignum Aloes, 136 Lignum Vitae, 327 Lemon tree. 233
Lilly Convally, 12 Water Lilly. 282 Lingeor Heath, 208 Liriconfancy, 12
Liverwort, 180 Loosestrife. 338 Love in idleness. 121 Lovage, 248 Lungwort. 106
Lupines. 212 Lustwort. 108
M
MAdder, 314 Maidenhair, 16 Mayweed, 141 Mallows, 93 Ladies Mantle, 89
Marjerom, 10 Marigolds, 125 Marvel of Peru, 29 Masterwort, 54 Mastick tree, 53
Mastick Time, 290 Sweet Maudlin, 182 Maybush, 232 Meehoacan, 192 Medick Fodder,
298 Meadow Saffron, 119 Meadow Trefoile, 298 Meadow Parsley, 223 Medlars, 41
Melilot, 143 Melo^s, 166 French Mercury, 313 Dogs Mercury, ibid. Meum, 252
Miboile, 294 Miltwast. 204 Miats. 43 Cat-Mint, 307 Calamint, 201 M^riles. 258
Mirabolanes, 149 Misseltoe. 13 Moneywort. 299 Small Moonwort, 297 Morrell. 29
Moss, 15 Mother of Time, 29 Motherwort, 305 Mugwort, 286 Mulberries. 42
Mullein, and the sorts, 112 Monks Rubarb. 177 Mustard. 273 Hedge Mustard, 109
N.
NArdus or Spiknard 217 Venus Navell, 235 The Nectarin tree, 170 Nenuphar, 282
Nep, 307 Nettles, 87 Dead Nettles, 66 Nicotian, 107 Nigella. 92 Nightshade, 29
Nipplewort, 104 Nose bleed, 294 The Bladder Nut, 227 The Nutmeg tree, 165 The
Hasel Nut. 304
O.
Oak, and the Sorts, 237 Oak Fern, 115 Oak moss, 15 Oats. 144 Oculus Christi.
23 Oister green. 106 Olive tree. 245 One Berry. 331 Onion. 226 Opium. 3 Orach.
309 Orchis. 278 Orange tree, 167 Organy. 287 Orobus. 212 Orpi^e. 68 Orris. 33
Osmund Fer^e. 206 Ox Eye. 139 Ox Tongue or Buglosse, 166 Oxelips. 11
P.
PAigles or Cowslips, 11 Palm tree. 62 Palma Christi, 196, 278 Pansies. 121
Parietary. 69 Park Leaves, 285 Poormans Parmacetty 35 Parsley, 214 Parsley pert.
222 Parsnep. 251 Water Parsnep, 231 Pasque Flower, 291 Patience. 177
Peach-tree, and the sorts, 170 Pear tree, and the sorts, 169 Pease and the
sorts. 271 Pellitory of the Wall, 69 Penny Royal. 287 Pennywort, 235 Peony and
the sorts, 2 Pepper. 164 Wall Pepper. 47 Water Pepper, 334 Pepperw^rt, 316
Perwincle. 96 Pest^l^^ce-wort or Butterbur, 308 St. Peters-wort has the same
Virtues with St. J^has-wort, ^32 Pigeens-grasse, 18 Great P^l^-wort, 65 S^all
P^l^wort, 255 Pimper^eil, 341 Water Pi^nperneil, 231 Pi^e-Tree, 51 Ground Pine.
318 Pistack Nuts, 275 Pitch Tresoile, 298 Plantain. 76 Buck shor^ Plantain, 238
Plum-tree. 172 P^ckwood. 327 Poets R^semary. 8 Polymountain, 211 Polipody, 115
Pome Citron tree. 129 Pomegranate tree, 52 Poplar, and the Sorts, 28 P^ppies. 3
Horned Poppy, ibid. Spa^ling Poppy, ibid. Bastard wild Poppy, 36 Porcelane. 44
Potatees. 269 Shepherds purse, 35 Priests pintle, 32 Prick madam, 47 Primrose,
11 Prunell. 336 Pudding Pipe. 157 Puliol Royal. 287 Purcelane, and the sorts,
44 Water Purslane. 188 Purplewort, 298
Q
QUeen of the Meadows, 295 Q(...)n Tree, 194 Quick grass, 228 Quince Tree, and
the sorts. 14
R.
RAdish, and the sorts, 151 H^se R^dish. 256 Ragwort and the sorts, 76 Ra^pions
and the sorts, 95 Ra^sons, 72 Rape or Turnep, 88 Broom Rape. 193 Raspis. 261
Redweed or wild Poppy, 3 Reed and the sorts, 82 The S^gar Reed or Cane, ibid.
The Aromaticall Reed, 218 Ray or Darnell. 300 Rest harrow, 57 Rhapontick. 177
Ribwort, 76 Wake Robbin, 32 Rocket, 272 Shepherds Rod, 265 Roses and the sorts,
19 Water Rose, 282 Ros Solis. 108 Rosemary. 8 Poets Rosemary, ibid. Red Rot,
108 White Rot. 114 True Rubarb, 177 Bastard Rubarb, ibid. Meadow Rubarb, 77
Monks Rubarb, 177 Ruddes, 3 Medow-Rue, 77 Garden Rue, 21 Mountain Rue, ib.
Wild Rue, ib. Goats Rue, 127 Wall Rue, ib. Rupture-wort, 321 Rice, 263 Rye,
166
S.
SAffron, 119 Sage, 7 Wood Sage, 131 Sage of Jerusalem, 113 Solomon's Seal^, 323
Salt-wort, 197 Sallow, 36 Sampier, 139 Saunders, 90 Santliver, 197 Sanicle, 114
Sarza parilla, 329 Sarace^s Consound, 337 Sarace^s Birth-wort, 312 Sassafras,
193 Satyrion, 278 Sawce-alone, 131 Savoury and the sorts, 289 Savine and the
sorts, 319 Saxifrage and the sorts, 223 Scabious and the sorts, 85 Scabwort, 79
Scaleserne, 204 Scarlet-Oake, 217 The Scarlet grain, ib. Scarwort, 316
Scordiu^, 131 Scurvygrasse, and the sorts, 46 Sea Colewort 190 Scottish
Scurvy-grasse, ib. Sea-foale-foot, ib. Sea Holley, 268 Sebesten, 84
Selfe-heale, 336 Sena, 154 Bastard Sena, ib. Sengreene, 47 Senvy or Mustard,
273 Garden Setwall, 165 Mountain Setwall, ib. Setter-wort, 202 Share-wort, 330
Shave grass, 34 Shepherds needle, 230 Shepherds-purse, 35 Shepherds-stasse,
262 Silken Sicely, 126 Sickle-wort, 335 Silverneed, 39 Sink^cile, 39 Skirrets,
270 Sloe-bush, 260 Smallage, 186 Garden Smilax, 236 Snaile Claver, 298
Snakeweed, 37 Snakes garlic, 72 Soldanella, 190 Sorrel and the sorts, 184
Wood Sorrel, 123 Sowthi^^les, 31 Sowbread, 40 Sowfennell, 30 Southernwood, 288
Spanish Potatoes, 269 Sparrowes-tongue, 194 Speedwell and the sorts, 240
Spicknell or Spignell, 252 Spicknard, 217 Spinach, 185 Rough Spleenwort, 204
Smooth Spleenwort, ib. Great Spurge or Palma Christi, 196 Spurge Laurel, 198
Squtnant, 160 Stabbewort, 123 Staggerwort, 50 Starchwort, 32 Starrewort, 330
Stonecrop, 47 Strawberries, 122 Succory, 181 Sulphurwort, 30 Sumack of diverse
sorts, 257 Sundew, 108 Sunflowers, 79 Sweet Cicely, 117 Swallowort, 126 Sweet
Gaul, 257 Sweet Rush, 219 Swines Cresses, 238 Swines-grasse. 221
T.
English and Indian Tobacco, 117 Tamarinds, 203 Tamarisk and the sorts, 208
Garden Tansey and the sorts, 249 Wild Tansey, 59 Tarragon, 166 Tetterwort. 20
Tetterberries, 191 Thapsia, 30 Distasse Thistle, 193 Our Ladies Thistle, 140
The black Thorn, 260 The white Thorn, 132 Thoroughwax, 322 Three leafed grass,
298 Throatwort and the sorts, 61 Tills, 102 Garden Time and the sorts, 290
Dodder of Time, etc. 201 Mother of Time, 290 Toad-Flax and the sorts, 199
Tobacco, 107 Tooth-wort, 56 Torches, 112 T^rmen till and the sorts, 38 Trefoile
and the sorts, 298 Treacle wormseed, 154 English Treacle, 131 Herb true Love,
331 Tu^boofe, 26 Turpentine, 5 Turmerick, 178 Turnips, 88 Tu^san, 285
Two-penny-grasse, 299
V.
VAlerian and its sorts, 165 Venus Basin, 262 Venus Hair, 15 Venus Comb, 230
Venus Navel, 235 Ver^aine and the sorts, 18 Bitter Vetch, 212 Italian Vetch,
127 Vines of diverse sorts, 81 Violets, 121 Toothed Violets, 56 Vipers Buglosse,
138 Vipers-grasse. 128
W.
WAybredde, 76 Wake-Roh^n, 32 Wallnuts and the sor^s, 1 Walsh-nut Tree, ib.
Wallwort, 189 Wart-wort, 238 Water Germander, 131 Sea-weed or Sea-Wrake 106
Wheat and the sorts, 70 White Battle, 3 White Root, 323 White Rot, 114
White-wort, 306 Whorts and the sorts 116 The Wilding or Crab-Tree, 168 Willowes
and the sorts, 36 Winanke is Sassa^ras, 195 Windflower, 291 Wimote is
Marsh-mallow, 215 Winter-Cherries, 227 Winter-Greene, 63 With-wind, 247 Withy,
36 Witch-hasell, 326 Woodbind and the sorts, 111 Wood-sage, 131 Woody
Nightshade, 342 Wormseed, 148 Achilles Wood-wort, 294 Her^^les Wound-wort, 241
Wrake. 106
Y.
YArrow and the sorts, 294 Yew, see mine introductton to the knowledge of
Plants, Chap. 19. Youthwort, 108
A TABLE.
A.
ABortion remedied, Chap. 7, 21, 37, 41, 62, 249, 317. Abortion caused, Chap.
129, 279, 314, 315, 319. Aches, Chap. 87, 107, 141, 142, 252, 318, 339. Agues,
Chap. 1, 3, 5, 6, 18, 21, 25, 33, 35, 38, 46, 47, 54, 59, 62, 105, 107, 131,
139, 140, 141, 149, 164, 172, 248, 262, 271, 274, 284, 288, 294, 306, 308, 328,
332. Agues hot, Chap. 90, 93, 99, 110, 116, 121, 123, 138, 168, 174, 176, 181.
Agues in Children, Chap. 268. Agues Quartan, Chap. 66, 92, 115, 134, 139, 149,
154, 156, 256, 268, 293, 309. Agues Quotidian, Chap. 142, 154, 268. Agues
Tertian, Chap, 92, 149. Almonds of the Throat, Chap. 87, 261, 273. St.
Anthonie's Fire, Chap. 3, 21, 24, 29, 35, 47, 60, 69, 82, 102, 110, 166, 174,
181, 258, 262, 283, 284. Apetite, Chap. 52, 56, 129, 175, 273, 289. Apoplexy,
Chap. 4, 12, 136. Aposthumes, Chapter 45, 48, 51, 17, 82 85, 94, 98, 109, 114, 119,
168, 327. Astmahs, Chap. 98, 109, 111, vid. Breath short. Arteries, Chap. 258.
B.
BAck to cool, Chap. 284. Back to strengthen, Chap. 23, 62, 109, 121, 138.
Belly ^ loose, and pains to ease, Chapter 4, 3, ^, 20, 21, 30, 42, 48, 50, 67, 84,
93, 97, 99, 155, 175, 255, 271, 301, 310. Belly to bring down, Chap. 289.
Barrenness caused, Chap. 111. Barrenness help^, Chap. 286, 307. Belly to
bind, C^ap. 62, 81, 261. Belching, Chap. 38, 149, 259. Bees to increase, Chap.
91, 124. Biles, Chap. 23, 32, 70, 101, 124, 248, 266. Bitings of mad Dogs and
venom^us Beasts, Chap. 12, 43, 70, 72, 74, 91, 117, 118, 126, 139, 142, 252,
253, 255, 259, 275, 280, 286. Afterbirth to expel, Chap. 21, 23, 27, 32, 54,
64, 80, 103, 105, 117, 118, 119, 124, 130, 142, 156, 182, 286, 287, 290, 306,
313, 315, 319, 320. Bladder, Chap. 18, 29, 50, 74, 82, 83, 122, 165, 258, 327.
Blastings, chap. 44, 276. Bleeding at the Nose, and wounds, 18, 21, 34, 35, 36,
37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 47, 52, 55, 60, 63, 66, 77, 87, 90, 96, 255, 271, 281,
284, 292, 302, 282. Black and blew marks, chap. 50, 62, 75, 95, 101, 151, 253,
257, 272, 273, 287, 323, 334. Blew to dye, Chap. 116. Blisters, Chap. 31, 108,
Blood to cool, Chap, 119. Blood to increase, Chap. 24, Blood to purge, Chap.
50, 83, 120, Bloody Flux, vide Flux: Blood pissing, vide pissing Blood. Blood
spitting, vide spitting, Blood congealed, Chap. 253, 29^, 314, 332, 335.
Botches, Chap. 112, 139. Bones broken, Chap. 30, 85, 268, 323, 326, Botts in
Horses, Chap. 319, Bowels, Chap. 5, 9, Brain (...), Chap. 1, 5, 8, 38, 53, 94,
141, 162, Breast cleansed, Chap. 5, 67, 117, 265, 273, 28^, 305, 313. Bre^st
pained and Milk curdled, Chap. 50, 98, 99, 102, 103, 181, 309, 260, 318. Breast
s^eld hand and diseased, Chap. 51, 58, 60, 70, 103, 105, 109 126, 150, 263,
276. Breast hanging down, Chap. 89, 90, 283. Breath short, Chap. 18, 30, 31,
34, 35, 43, 44, 50, 51, 73, 75, 79, 85, 100, 103, 105, 106, 109, 115, 145, 274,
288, 290, 306, 319. Breath stinking Chap. 31, 33, 43, 53, 57, 129, 137, 148,
167, 258, 277. Bruises, Chap. 5, 37, 45, 65, 69, 77, 95, 131, 142, 145, 177,
179, 292, 297, 307, 334, 337 339. Buboes, Chap. 330, 331. Burnings, Chap. 44,
47, 68, 99, 168, 259, 285, 324. Bursten, Chap. 6, 30, 37, 45, 52, 56, 57, 59,
64, 68, 70, 77, 79, 112, 144, 131, 133, 142. 145. 250 257, 283. 292. 293. 296.
307. 321. 322. 327, 324. 325. 326. 328. 333.
C
CAncer, Chap. 20, 26, 33, 37, 49, 63, 297, 300, 308. Canker, Chap. 3, 22, 29,
47, 76, 79, 102, 109, 257, 266. Carbuncle^, Chap. 1, 81, 85. Cattarrahs, Chap.
3, 37, 58, 76, 90, 92, 122, 123, 252, 258, 279* Chappings, Chap. 283. Cheerful
to make, Chap. 66, 124, 138, 1^0, 168. Childbirth p^^ns eased, Chap. 30, 31,
40, 43, 74. Childbearing, Chap. 181. 289. Child dead expelled, Chap. 248, 251,
287, 315, 319. Child-blains, Vid. Kib^^. Chin-Cough, Chap. 299. Chollick, Chap.
1, 6, 12, 21, 33, 40, 43, 54, 62, 72, 112, 115, 118, 133, 141, 143, 144, 147,
153, 163, 251, 253, 255, 268, 271, 324, 325. Choler purged, Chap. 25, 48, 49,
60, 62, 83, 121, 148, 149, 152, 154. 177. 181. 313. Chest, Chap. 109. 111. 145.
181. Codds diseases eased, Chap. 33. 42. 70. Codds sweld, Chap. 57. 68. 81. 93.
101. 258. 280. 331. Conception, Chap. 23. 251. 277. 300. Consumption, Chap. 4.
5. 8. 35. 62. 72. 73. 86. 91. 108. 115. 116. 120. 251. 275. 278 341.
Convulsions, Chap. 6. 24. 33: 54. 79. 279. Cowes poisond by licking up of tick,
Chap. 130. Corns, Chap. 36. 48. 81. 103. Color to mend, Chap. 17. 18. 20* 74.
75. Color deformed in wounds, Chap. 259. Color high, Chap. 253. Courses vid.
Openness, Coughs in Horses, Chap. 106. 276. Cough, Chap. 3. 4. 5, 6, 8. 18. 21.
24, 30, 33, 34, 39, 44, 50, 51, 60, 62, 69, 72, 73, 74, 75, 80, 81, 109, 115,
137, 145, 164, 167, 176, 251, 256, 258, 259, 274, 276, 277, 279, 288, 290.
Cough old 101, 105, 120, 151,
D.
DAndriff, Chap. 259. Deafness, Chap. 5. 31. 36. 40, 58, 60, 118, 139, 313.
Delivery easy, Chap. 55, 64, 74, 93, 111, 137, 290, 315, 316. Deformity, of
Face, vid. Face Freckled. Digestion, Chap. 53, 97, 118, 137 163, 277. Dreams
terrible, Chap. 124. Dropsy, Chap. 4, 18, 20, 24, 25, 32, 33, 54, 56, 74, 75,
78, 91 100, 103, 107, 126, 130, 137, 140, 149, 177, 179, 251, 262, 268, 280,
314, 318, 327, 328. Drunkenness, Chap. 80. Dumb, Chap. 8. 12.
E.
Ear Worms, Chap. 17. 43. 58. 60. 281. Ears paind, Chap. 21. 26. 27. 28 29.
30. 31. 32. 43. 47. 71. 200. 105. 118. 177. 259. 279. Ears Deaf, vide
Deafness, Noise in the Ears, Chap. 31. 58. 72. 75. 80. 91. 255, 289. Ears
Aposthumated, Chap. 60. 101. 109, 179, 268, Ears inflamed, Chap. 75. Ears
running, Chap. 148. Eyes blood-shot, Chap. 82. Eyes black and blew, Chap. 32,
101 Eyes preserved from the Smallpox Chap. 119. Eyes sweld, Chap. 101. Eye
sight preserved, Chap. 79, 80, 87, 98. 100, 105, 112, 118. 124, 143. 338. Eyes
inflamed and diseased, Chap. 3. 8. 12. 17. 18. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 29, 32,
36, 38, 40, 47, 48, 70, 99, 102, 120, 121, 122, 130; 150, 164, 168, 181, 248,
262, 284, 288, 296, 331 258, 279.
F.
FAce freckled and otherwise deformed to beautify, Chap. 32, 36. 40, 50, 51,
59, 69, 79, 92, 101, 130, 133, 147, 153, 248, 259, 265, 272, 273, 274, 280, 282
319, 323, 326. Face red, Chap. 168, 284, 288. Fatt to make, Chap. 81, Fellons,
Chap. 23, 101, 103, 342 Fevers, Chap. 17, 38, 52, 55, 71 133, 129, 172 261,
282. Fevers, Hectic, Chap. 180. 278, 328. Fever old, Chap. 2. 7. 8. Falling
sickness, Chap. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8. 12. 25. 28. 30. 37. 48. 54. 57. 67. 74. 75.
91. 93. 98. 121. 126. 130. 142. 150. 156. 163. 173. 259. 273. 283. 309 315.
318. 327. 330. 332. Fistulaes, Chap. 3, 18, 26, 32, 35, 49, 62, 66, 69, 76,
262, 266, 278. Fleas to kill, chap. 21, 148, 166, 289. Fluxes, chap. 8, 34, 27,
35, 37, 38, 39, 44, 45, 52, 53 54, 56, 257, 262, 278, 281, 282, 300 301. 302,
321. Fluxes of the Belly, 101, 102. 106 112. 114. 116. 140. 259. 260. 263. 277.
304. Fluxes bloody, Chap. 27. 35. 38* 39. 59. 106. 112. 140. 162 179. Phlegm
purged, Chap. 48. 50. 51. 62. 98. 114. 148. 152. 177. 182. 67. 73. 105. 107.
111. 141. 167. Flies to destroy, Chap. 105. 156. Farcion in Horses, Chap. 308.
Fractures, Chap. 29. 7. 339. French Pox, Chap. 38. 39. 131. 144. 139. 266. 268.
288. 327. 328. 329. Frenzy, Chap. 91. 262. 280. 282. Fruit- full to make,
Chap. 255. 271. Fundament, Chap. 34. 40. 43. 52 65. 102. 147. 258. 262. 280.
G.
GAle overflowing, Chap. 2. 17. 20. 26. 105. 122. 181. Gangreen, Chap. 1. 81.
102. 127 139. 257. 300. 335. Gargles for soar mouths, Chap. 43. 46. 49. 51.
56. 70. 75. 76. 79. 120. 122. 260. 265. Giddiness, Chap. 5. Gonoreah, Chap.
33. 37. 44: 55. 90. 97. 114. 177. 180. 282. 285. 294. 308. 321. 323. 327. Gout,
Chap. 3. 6. 12. 17. 18. 21. 28. 32. 36. 47. 49. 58. 60. 66. 71. 79. 81. 102.
107. 109. 112 142. 262. 273, 281, 287, 318. Gripeings, Chap. 2, 70, 112, 124
126, 177, 248, 251, 252, 257, 259, 260, 274, 324. Green- sickness, Chap. 148,
178, 277, 328, Gums, Chap. 37, 44, 47, 55, 287. Guts eased, Chap. 34, 79.
H.
HAnds to make smooth, Chap. 1. Hair to make black, 257. 258, 261. Hair to
grow, Chap. 30, 36, 48. 69, 103, 151, 259, 273, 288, Hair to take away, Chap.
27, 49, 115. Head- Ach, Chap. 1, 4, 6, 8, 18, 25. 27, 30, 43, 47, 54, 58, 60,
90, 92, 121, 260, 276, 280, 281, 328, 329. Head soar, Chap. 4. 21, 35, 38, 43,
44, 50, 67, 69, 74, 135, 142. Head to purge, Chap. 27, 36, 37, 40, 43, 54, 100,
265. Head inflamed, Chap. 281. Head Scald, Chap. 303. Head Swimming, Chap. 306,
340, Hemorrhodies, Chap. 31, 32, 33, 37, 41. 42, 44, 47, 48, 57, 60, 62, 65,
110, 112, 145, 149, 255, 257, 259, 261. 263, 265, 266. Heart burning, Chap. 43,
261. Henns to make lay, Chap. 87. Heart trembling, Chap. 12, 90, 120 122, 126,
127, 128, 137, 140, 162. Heart comforted and strengthened, Chap. 38, 53, 55,
108, 118, 119 120, 121, 123, 124, 125, 127, 130, 131. 134, 133, 135, 136, 137,
138, 317, Hickcock, Chap. 4, 17, 43, 94, 148. Hipp- Gout, vid. Sciatica. Horse
pricked, Chap. 112. Hoarsnesse, Chap. 39. 51, 60, 73, 84, 109, 255, 273. Hungar
to stay, Chap. 73.
I.
JAundies yellow, Chap. 2, 5, 6, 17. 18. 20. 25. 26, 35. 39. 40 48. 57. 100.
105. 109. 120. 126. 145. 148. 175. 178. 179. 250. 268. 271. 277. 281. 286. 321.
313. 314. 318, 328. Jaundies black, Chap. 49. 179. 342. Jaws, Chap. 37. 38.
Inflammations, Chap. 28. 34. 58. 90. 110. 121. 142. 147. 166. 181. 277. 282.
298. 329. Inflammations of the Liver, vide Liver to cool. Inflammations of
Eyes, vide eyes. Inflammations of mouth, Chap. 29. 42. Iacubus, Chap. 48.
Joints eased, Chap. 5. 21. 48. 53. 60. 74. 109. 124. 142. 258. 287. 327. 328.
329. 343. Joints Knotted, Chap. 281. Itch, Chap. 20. 22. 49. 71. 79. 107. 120.
144. 153. 179. 250. 266. 287. Issues, Chap. 27.
K.
KErnels to dissolve, Chap. 38. 40. 43. 50. 65. 74 124. 130. 150. 153. 164.
266. 268. 286. 300. 328. Kidneys ulcerated, Chap. 63. Kidneys to purge, Chap.
2. Kibes, Chap. 58. 74. 88. 102. 308. Stone in Kidneys, Chap. 45. 64. 69. Kings
Evil, Chap. 2. 4. 38. 43. 47. 50. 65. 66. 67. 70. 71. 76. 98. 107. 130. 164.
265. 319.
L.
Lethargy, Chap. 8. 30. 50. 84. 100. 136. 156, 273, 280, 287, 289, 292.
Leprosy, Chap. 12. 49, 65, 70, 71, 74, 122, 144, 179, 266, 340. Lasks, vid.
Flux of belly. Lean to make, Chap. 17. Legs soar, Chap. 59, 74, 259, 283.
Liver to cool, Chap. 5, 21, 99, 120, 122, 129, 175, 176, 179, 180, 284, 296.
Liver grown, Chap. 287, 335. Liver- diseases eased, Chap. 8, 12, 17, 18, ^0,
25, 26, 33, 38, 43, 50, 55, 57, 67, 79, 148, 177, 179, 180, Lice to kill, Chap.
27. 58, 75, 107, 273. Loins paind, Chap. 82, 109, 138 268, 273. Longings to
stay, Chap. 41, 52. Loatning, Chap. 120, 167, 176. Lungs, Chap. 5, 18, 21, 26,
23, 73, 106, 109, 111, 112, 144, 115, 143, 248, 255, Lungs ulcerated, Chap.
106, 116, 120,
M.
MAtrix suffocated vid. Mothers, Matrix cleansed, Chap. 4, 52, 109, 126, 148,
253, 283, 292, 303, 308, 320. Matrix to keep in its place, Chap. 308. Marks
of Smallpox, Chap. 272. Members out of Joint, Chap. 82. 115, Maw- Worms,
Chap. 126. Megrim, Chap. 6, 107. Measels, Chap. 37, 74. Melancholy, Chap. 49,
55, 100, 154, 313, 317. Milk to increase, Chap. 17, 31, 71, 91, 92, 93, 94,
95, 96, 97 140, 271, 272, 280. Milk to dry up, Chap. 28, 43, 98, 101, 181, 283.
Memory to help, Chap. 5, 8, 7, 22, 25, 119, 136, 340. M^s^a^rying, vide
abortion. M^r^s, Chap. 142, 148, 257. M^ther help^, Chap. 6, 21, 30, 54, 62,
64, 69, 94, 118, 119, 147, 167, 251, 252, 258, 259, 280, 284, 286, 287, 288,
303, 305 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313. Mouth soar, Chap. 1, 40, 42,
46, 52, 64, 259, 279. Mouth Apostumated, Chap. 109. Mouth al^erated, Chap. 61,
114, 117, 253, 258, 261, 339. Mouth t^stamed, Chap. 29, 42, 73. M^rphew, Chap.
21, 33, 49, 74, Mumps, chap. 77.
N.
Nails s^are and loose, chap. 81 258. N(...) a^ry, Chap. 124, 268, 273, Neck
pai^d, and creek in it, Chap. 44, 273, 286. Navill, Chap. 30, 44, 60. Navill
sticking out, Chap. 322. Nerves strengthened, Chap. 18, 27, 30, 33, 36, 53, 66,
69, 70, 85, 112, 141, 247, 153. Night ware vid. Incubus. Nipples soar, Chap.
104. Nose diseased, cured, Chap. 21, 32, 52. Numnesse, Chap. 51. Nose bleeding,
vide bleeding.
O.
OBstructions, Chap. 87, 90. Obstructions of the Gall, Chap. 178 281.
Obstructions of Liver, Chap. 118, 119, 128, 130, 133, 136, 145, 165, 177, 181,
268, 275, 335 342. Obstructions of the Reins, Chap. 112. Obstructions of the
spleen, Chap. 133, 136, 145, 248, 268. Obstruction of the Stomach, Chap. 178.
P.
Palsy, Chap. 6, 7, 8, 12, 25, 30, 39, 51, 131, 135, 249, 273, 318. Pedagora,
Chap. 248, 283. Pestilence, vide Plague. Pains of Childbirth, vide
Childbirth. Palate fallen down, Chap. 42, 43, 61. Pi^^s vid. Hemorrhoids.
P^sh^g of bed, Chap. 37, 72, 260, 292, Pissing blood, Chap. 35, 44, 72, 106,
179. Pin and Web, Chap. 78, 142, 145, 283, 298, vid. eyes. Pimples, Chap. 44,
76. Pipes to open, C^ap. 73. Phrensy, Chap. 3, 30, 44. Plague, Chap. 1, 8, 18,
20, 21, 26 32, 37, 38, 48, 55, 85, 125, 126, 127, 130, 132, 133, 134 135, 145,
251, 259, 279, 284 340, 341. Plague scares, Chap. 32, 50. 70, 74, 103, 127,
139, 1^1, 309. Plurisie, Chap. 3, 24, 60, 80, 109 118, 119, 139, 142, 143, 248.
Polypus, Chap. 37, 87, 115, 259 279. Poison, Chap. 1, 3, 7, 17, 21, 37, 38, 74,
88, 120, 139, 251. 277. Poisonous Medicines of Canthaeride, Chap. 253.
Smallpox, 37. 38. 74, 119. Privities, Chap. 48, 102, 103, 106. Privities
ulcerated, Chap. 258. 259, 293, 335, 336, 337. P^isick, Chap. 5, 8, 44, 73,
115, 117, 118, 155. Purge for Children, chap. 114. Purples, chap. 298. Purge
upwards and downwards, Chap. 248. Pushes, Chap. 28, 44, 110, 122, Pustles,
Chap. 31, 34.
Q.
QUinsie, Chap. 1, 39, 68, 72, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 90, 121, 164, 248, 261, 330.
Qualmes, Chap. 108, 165, 177.
R.
RAvishing, Chap. 51. Reins, Chap. 18, 21, 23, 24, 50, 73, 82, 83, 121, 122,
148, 162, 249, 252, 273, 318, 329. Reins to purge, Chap. 255. Running of
Reins, vid. Gonorreah. Rickets, Chap. 143. Ring- Worms, vid Tetters. Rhume,
Chap. 23, 35, 52, 53, 321, 323, 327, 328, 329. Rhume in head, Chap. 57, 76, 90,
110, 137, 145, 166, 175, 180. Ruptures, vide Burstings.
S.
Satyriasis, Chap. 280, Scaby Head vid. Head soar, Scabs, Chap. 13, 21, 26,
38, 65, 79, 85, 107, 115. Scalding, Chap. 47, 68, 99, 259. Sciatica, Chap. 4,
21, 23, 26, 28 30, 30, 33, 38, 58, 59, 60, 66, 76, 98, 107, 109, 119, 250, 256,
266, 273, 281, 285, 286, 288, 289, 314, 318. Scurvy, Chap. 46, 47, 48, 50, 256,
261, 262. Scrophules. vide. Kings Evils Seed to increase, Chap. 51, 80, 271
274, 275. Secondine, vid. afterbirth. Senses strengthened, Chap. 154, 181.
Shingles, vide. St. Anthonies fire, Sinews cut, Chap. 103. Sinews vid. Nerves.
Sides paind, Chap. 56, 84, 86, 139, 140, 141, 143, 145, 146 260, 271, 273, 321.
Skin to clear, Chap. 31, 46, 80, 95, 110, 122, 253, 274. Sheep to provoke,
Chap. 3, 25, 58, 80, 94, 97, 131, 181, 283, 331. Sneesing to provoke, Chap. 33,
100, 164. Spleen, Chap. 3, 5, 17, 18, 21, 25, 26, 27, 30, 33, 38, 40, 50, 55,
57, 67, 75, 80, 111, 115, 146, 256, 280, 288, 315. Spitting blood, Chap. 35,
37, 52, 53, 55, 49, 70, 78, 79, 98, 106, 259, 261, 262, 266, 276. Spots in Face
vid. Freckles, Spots in the Eyes, vid. eyes. Soars fretting, Chap. 278, 279,
308. Soars running. Chap. 27, 29, 105 120, 153, 156. Soars old, Chap. 58. 61,
67, 74. Stitches, Chap. 7. 27, 85, 115, 133, 139, 140, 141, 143, 145, 146.
Stingings of Bees, Chap. 47. Stingings of Serpents, Chap. 75. Staggers in
Horses, Chap. 76. Stammering, Chap. 64. Stone; Chap. 4. 6. 18. 21 27, 29, 31,
33, 34, 41, 43, 50, 54, 64, 69, 80, 91, 101, 139. 141, 151, 163, 172, 173, 248,
251, 255, 261, 268, 271, 277, 288, 308, 315. Stomach to strengthen and comfort,
Chap. 1, 5, 8, 18, 21, 24, 31, 33, 41, 43, 46, 51, 55, 71, 79 81, 97, 115, 118,
119, 131, 136, 137, 149, 154, 165, 166, 168, 177, 259, 275. Stomach to cleanse,
Chap. 2. 71, 139 157. Stomach cold to warm, Chap. 124, 129, 131, 133, 137,
139, 162 164, 167, 248. Stomach hot to cool, 168, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176,
181. Stratgury, Chap. 13, 28, 31, 34, 35, 43, 73, 118, 142, 145, 249 252, 256,
268, 271, 277, 304, 318, 321, 325. Swellings to ease, Chap. 52, 139: 141, 142,
143, 153, 174, 181, 266, 271, 273, 278, 303. Sweat to provoke, Chap. 38, 40,
54, 125, 128, 139, 256, 308, 329. Sweat stinking, Chap. 137. 258. 272. Surfits,
Chap. 3. 27. 118. Swimming of the brain, Chap. 128, 139. Swooning, Chap. 52.
100. 120. 124. 128. 135. 140. 181. 298. 299. 317.
T.
TEeth- Ach, Chap. 1. 20. 27. 3^. 33. 37. 39. 40. 42. 44. 51. 53. 56. 59. 69.
112. 125. 134. 156. 273. 284. 287. 301. 309. Teeth to fasten, Chap. 52. 53. 55.
59. 175. 257. 302. 327. Teeth to white, Chap. 53, 107, 327, 277. Teeth to
breed, Chap. 55. Teeth hollow, Chap. 118. Terms to provoke, Chap. 2, 5, ^,
17, 23, 26, 27, 48, 50, 54, 69 75, 79, 87, 92, 105, 124, 130 136. 137, 141,
178, 248, 250, 252, 253, 256, 259, 268, 271 273, 280, 287, 288, 289, 290, 309,
314, 318, 319, 320. Terms to stay, Chap. 12, 20, 21, 34, 37, 41, 44, 47, 49,
59, 62, 63, 64, 76, 80, 96, 114, 166, 259, 261, 262, 264, 266, 286, 293, 294,
297, 299, 300, 301, 303, 304. Tenasmus, Chap. 29, 77. Testicles, Chap. 48, 109.
Tetters, Chap. 20, 21, 29, 34, 47, 70, 78, 105. Throes to draw forth, Chap. 32,
38, 51, 64, 73, 78, 81, 11^, 147, 260, 288, 300, 315, 341, Throughs vide.
Childbirth pains Thirst immoderate, Chap. 44, 47, 52, 73, 82, 121, 122, 149.
Throat soar, Chap. 32, 38, 51, 64, 73, 78, 81, 111. Throat sweld, Chap. 112,
330. Throat rough, Chap. 60, 62, 82, 84 Tongue inflamed, Chap. 180. Tongue
palsy, Chap. 50^ never cured in woman. Tongues rough, Chap. ^0. Tumors, Chap.
114, 119, 143, 147, 251, 273, 278, 283, 326 329, 340.
V.
VEnery to provoke, Chap. 23, 43, 50, 51, 62, 72, 101, 119, 16^, 166, 251, 252,
253, 255, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271 272, 273, 275, 276, 277, 278, 279. Venery to
restrain, Chap. 27, 44, 97, 99, 111, 118, 280, 282, 284, 285. Vein cut, Chap.
37, 38, 341. Venom, vid. Poison. Ulcers in diverse places of the Body, Chap. 1,
3, 18, 20, 24, 26, 29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 45, 46, 54, 64, 69, 74, 114, 139, 142,
149, 179. Ulcers old, Chap. 77, 105, 299, 324, 325, 335, 338. Cowe^ Under
s^^ld, Chap. 114, 130 Voice, vide, H^arsnesse. Vomit to provoke, Chap. 5, 25,
47 67, 150, 151, 155, 156, 256, 278. Vomit to restrain, Chap. 36, 37, 38, 41,
43, 50, 53, 59, 62, 81, 83, 94, 106, 123, 198, 257, 259, 283, 287. Vomiting
blood, Chap. 81. Urin provoked, Chap. 5, 17, 21, 24, 29, 33, 34, 35, 45, 50,
57, 62, 72, 75, 79, 80, 87, 92, 111, 139, 140, 141, 145, 150, 151, 153, 163,
248, 249, 250, 252, 253 258, 259, 267, 268, 270, 271 272, 277, 290, 298* 308.
Urin (...) Chap. 44, 73, 84, 97 111. Vul^^* Chap. 42, 78, 111, 166, 306.
W.
WArts to kill, Chap. 320, 21, 28, 31, 47, 74, 112, 125, 262. Weariness, Chap.
286, 343. Wenns, Chap. 124, 143, 262. Wheales, Chap. 26, 28, 31, 102 110, 122.
Wheesing, Chap. 73, 75, 10^, 109, 115. Whites to stay, Chap. 8, 55, 66, 89,
105, 250, 266, 299, 318, 333, 334, 336, 338, 337. Witchcraft, good against it,
Chap. 18, 331, 341. Wind short, vide, breath short. Wind broken in Horses,
Chap. 179* Wind- Pipe, Chap. 84. Wild- fire, Chap. 60, 119. Wind to expel,
Chap. 1, 24, 43, 54, 75, 91. 94, 117, 118, 136, 143, 145, 164, 167, 248, 249,
251, 253, 270. Womb, Chap, 18, 30, 37, 44, 137, 74, 305. Worms, Chap. 1. 4.
18. 19. 21. 37. 42. 44. 47. 48. 52. 72. 77 79. 80. 84. 87. 92. 107. 127. 136.
139. 148. 249. 250. 255 256, 257. 262. 266. 272. 288 290. 398. Wounds to heal
and cleanse, Chap. 18. 26. 38. 41. 45. 56. 59. 61. 63. 67. 75. 89. 102. 114.
123. 143. 145. 248. 262. 264. 288 294. 314. 315. 322. 324. 332 333. 334. 335.
337. 339. 340. Wounds green, Chap. 76. 77. 89. 106. 107. 114. 123, 143. 255.
259. 266. 299. 318, 333, 334. 336. 338. 337. Wounds bleeding, Chap. 274. 285.
340. 343. Wrenches, Chap. 155.
Y.
YArd, Chap. 52. 162. and vid. Privities. Yard ulcerated, Chap. 76, 94. 102.
and, vid. Privities ulcerated. Yellowes in Horses c(...). 178.
FINIS.

