More good and true NEWS FROM IRELAND, Sent from Dublin, by Master Robert Cole
merchant, to his Brother John Cole here resident in LONDON.

Likewise a new Plot discovered against our Kingdom by the Danes, which was
sent in a Letter to the Lord Burrowes, by Sir Henry Waddam: And by the
Parliament Ordered to be Printed.

Together with a Letter of great consequence from the Hage in Holland, written
by Charles de la Fin, Page to the young Prince of Orange, concerning a
difference between the old Prince of Orange, and the high and Mighty States.

London, Printed for F. Coules. 1642.

More good and true news from Ireland, sent from Dublin, by Master Robert Cole
Merchant, to his Brother John Cole, resident in London.
Dublin, the 7. of March. 1641.
GOOD brother John Cole, I have not written unto you of late, because I wrote
at large unto my Mother of the passages here* whereof I am assured that you
have been made partaker. I have heard of your sickness from London, but I hope
that God has heard our prayers, to restore you again, which I ^^all be glad
to hearof. The present news I shall only at present acquaint you withal;
This morning is come a Pinnace from Tredagh, or Droughedagh, which place I have
often written in my former Letters to my mother, which was besieged by the
Rebels, and in what manner it has been relieved, and what combats they have
had with the enemy, and what great overthrow they have given the Rebels from
time to time: they have with the loss of 40. or 50. men, at several times
slain 1000 men, with those that have been slain by our shipping within the
Harbor. And on saturday last, being besieged on the north side of the town, the
River dividing the Town, by Sir Phealam O Neale and his, company. Sir Henry
Tychborne, who is Governor of the Town, went forth against them, and gave them
a very great overthrow: he put Sir Phealam O Neale to flight, who had a very
narrow escape: but Great Mackmahan is taken prisoner, and about 30 more of the
Rebels. Some of the Neales and Mackmahans have been taken with him, and about
400. Rebels slain. This news is brought to the State by young Sir John
Burlacy, Captain Byron, and others that came in the Pinnace so now they have
one side of the Town clear. They cannot want victuals, nor any thing the
Country can offoord, and they will easily clear the south side toward
Dublin; for we are informed, that most of the Rebels on this side of the
town are likewise gone further into the Country: for our Army is gone also
abroad: My Lord of Ormond, our Lieutenant General, Colonel Hartcourt,
Colonel Lambert, and diverse others went hence, on Monday Morning last, with
3000. foot, and 700. horse, besides volunteers: they went first unto Kilshohan
Castle where our Army was last, and that they now took without any opposition.
I think we have soldiers lying there, to keep it, for it is a strong place.
Our Army burnt the houses about it, and burnt Filston: and we hear that they
are sines gone from thence toward the Navue, and intend to go unto Trym, we
hear that where ever they come, there are none (...) them, for the Rebels
shift to and fro, where they (...) our Army will not come near them: and that
as soon as (...) any place, they are presently in it again but out (...) them
but cold lodging, for they burn all before (...), we are ever bound to give
God praise and glory for the good agreement between the King and the Parliam^^^
(...) know that a man may have a perfect sight in both his eyes, and yet he may
have an enemy behind him that may destroy him, be he^ never so watchful: but
where there are many eyes round about, there is great hope of security. We find
that the unity in England, makes great distractions amongst the Rebels* the
last eastward;y winds made them take such cold heart, that they have been ever
since running up and down from place to place to catch heat, and I hope by the
next to write you how well our Army have warmed them. At instant I am told of a
Colonel of them that is now brought prisoner to the Castle of Dublin, taken by
our Army, and that my Lord of Dousany is taken prisoner: all which is good
news. We hear of the arrival of a great ship at Kingsale, out of England, to
guard this coast: they are not a little welcome.

Munster had some aid out of England the last East wind, and great need there
was of it. So I will cease from writing any more news to you at this time,
being you shall hear very suddenly from me again, God willing.

Your very loving Brother, ROBERT COLE.

The Danes Plot discovered against this Kingdom, which was sent to the Lord
Burrowes, and diverse others, etc.
My Lord,
IF it may not seem any way offensive to your Honor, I shall present one to
you; which whether you have heard of formerly, or no, I cannot tell, concerning
the Danes; who presumed so far upon his Majesty's Coasts, as to come within ten
leagues of his Majesty's Port of Hull, affrighting the people there by their
daily report, proceeding from their own mouths; that they were bound for
England, to receive satisfaction for some wrongs done them. Whereupon the
rumor spreading abroad, through these their threats, intelligence was given to
some of his Majesty's ships then at sea, being the James, and the Rainbow,
there being with them six Merchants ships, who resolved to go and meet them,
thereby to enquire the truth of this report: But ere they came near, they
perceived a small Company of Dutch ships, men of war, ready provided for an
encounter with the Danes; which gave them occasion of beholding the prospect,
they begun the encounter about twelve of the clock on monday last, being the
21. of March, continuing fight for the space of two hours very hotly, Van
Trump the Dutch, Admiral being then present, behaved himself very valiantly*
insomuch that they sunk many of the Danes ships, ere it was two of the Clocks*
when having spent much powder and shot of either party, they resolved upon
parley, which continued for an hour, wherein Van Trump desired the perusal of
their Commission, and to know whither they were bound, the ground of their
intents; which being denied, they fell to it again, and continued till it was
dark* when taking the opportunity of the night, being very cloudy, they fled,
but the wind being contrary, some were driven upon the western coasts of
Dorset and Devonshire: Whereas two of them are apprehended at Plympton M^rtes
in Devonshire, until the Owners shall be examined. When I shall give your
honor real intelligence concerning their profession, if so be they are not
sent up to London, to those other Rebels: And in the mean time, I shall rest,

Your Honors obliged Servant, HENRY WADDAM*

Hague, March the 20. stilo novo.
The copy of a Letter written from Charles de la Fin, Page unto the young
Prince of Orange, unto James de la Fin his Brother, Secretary unto the Duke of
Vallette, residing now in Coven-Garden, touching the late proceedings of the
Prince of Orange.

Written from the Hague, in Italian, and translated by William Vmfrevile, Gent.
March. 14. 1641. Brother,
AS I am acquainted from you with the state of things in England, so let me
impair unto you some alterations here, that more near to touch us: Grave
Henry our Prince, and Master, by some information, from Martin Van trump, the
States Admiral, is fallen into some more then distrust with the States, in
matter of his proceedings in the Army, their jealousies brake forth into open
discontent, upon occasion of a meeting of a great crew of his Commanders at a
supper in Flushing* upon the arrival of the Queen of Great Britain, where
his health being drunk before the Lords General, the Bourgemasters of the
Town, took great exceptions at it, giving out that the Prince of Orange was
but their servant, and took pay of them, as well as the meanest soldier in
the Army; that it was disorderly done, to drink his health before his betters:
to whom replied Monfieur de Varasaville, a French Captain of Horse; that he
trusted the Prince his Master so well understood himself, that having married
his Son to the eldest daughter of the King of great Britain, he would scorn to
be counted, much more to be termed, the servant of Brewers and Bakers, and
Felt-makers: hereupon the Burgemasters surlily and sawcily replied, that taking
their allowance, he was either a true servant, or a false Traitor.

Varracaville was rising to let fly at him: and some others were as ready as
he; but noise and tumult arising, the Governor of the Town came in, and
commanded all to be quiet, great muttering was in the Town, the next two days
about it: on the third, the Prince was summoned to the Hague to make his
appearance before the States General, to make answer unto such things, as
should by Martin Van Trump, John Van Esterdort be laid against him. His
Highness took such homely dealing bad, and his servants worse: and his Army
worst of all, who summoning a Counsel of warr^ to his Highness lodging;
plainly told him, that except he would, he should not go, and that they
should know, that if they had money they had swords, and that they having
command of the one, would not be long without the other, and that should
shortly appear, hereupon we all, as well servants, as Commanders, took an
oath unto his Highness, and his son, to serve them toward all, and against
all; which taken upon mature deliberation, it was ordered by his Highness
himself, because of the Queen of great Britains presence to go to the Hague,
but not to take notice of any summons, and with such a company with him, that
he should not greatly need to fear them; and here we are in that posture, not
caring for those that look so big upon us: I trust the Army is wholly made for
his Highness; not being desired of their service, but freely offering if: We
his servants, and those of my young Masters, are resolved to see our end
shortly accomplished, or to die every man of us: I trust there are no false
parties in the Army, then before May Day I hope we shall see an alteration: and
those that hold themselves our masters, shall be glad to give us all fitting
respect: the King of Denmark is assuredly for it, and has promised both
coin, men, and shipping: France hearkens to it, and Spain upon some
conditions, will yield assistance; it is more honorable for a Prince to be
tied in some ceremonious concernments unto a Monarch, then to any other, either
by Democrasticall, or Aristocraticall Government: more pleasant tidings I hope
to write you, at the Queens return, if not before; for this must not be long
in doing, and it is here thought, that she will not stay long here, by reason
that these achievements cannot long remain without a period, nor without some
bickering, we hold it not fit, she should be eye witness of it: His
Highness, although he is counseled to send away speedily his young son, and
our hope, into France, yet he will not, but is resolved that he shall partake
of his fortune, what ever it be; I hope we shall shortly cry, Vivez Oraneye;
and in this expectation, wishing Heaven to say Amen unto it.

Avisoes from several places.
THe 20. of December. stilo novo, arrived at St. Lucar the Admiral of the Nova
Spania's Fleet, in company of another little small ship, they came in 92. days
from the Havana, and were parted by a storm from the rest of the Fleet 12.
days after their setting forth. I suppose they may be arrived at Porto Rico,
for they had most of them spent their masts. The said Admiral was cast away in
the going into St. Lucar, of 4. Millions, which he brought, about 1. million
lost; the whole Fleet worth 10. or a 11. millions, the richest that ever was
known; in the said Admiral was lost 500. Chests of Cuchinell, and a 1000.
Chests of Indigo, with a great quantity of other goods. I have Letters by an
Aviso from Cartagena, dated the 14. of September, wherein they advise that the
Gallions were ready laden with the silver, and would depart thence the 6. of
October. The General of the Gallions, named Francisco Dias Pimienta, had bin
formerly in the month of July, with above 3000. men, and the least of his
Ships in the Island of Sancta Catalina, which he had taken and carried away all
the English, and rased the Forts, wherein they found 600. Negros, much gold and
Indigo, so that the prize is esteemed worth above half a million.

This unexpected, and undeserved act of the Spaniard, in supplanting our
Nation, will I hope ere long be requited, when as in cool blood the Spaniard
shall do us a mischief, in demolishing, and ruining that which another has
built; and is not able, or will not make use of it himself, supplanting our
more industrious people, which endeavored to do good both to the bodies and
souls of men, and only to show his greatness, with his multitude to destroy
a handful, and to account that a victory, which is rather a credulous
treachery: but let him triumph that wins at last.

Vicessimo tertio Die Martij. 1641.
IT is Ordered by the Honorable and high Court of Parliament, that there be a
speedy course taken for giving up the account of the several Counties in
England and Wales, that have taken the Protestation formerly set down, and
giving in the Names of such as shall refuse it, that that business may be
perfected; as also the account of Pole Money be likewise delivered up with all
expedition, that by it and the last four Subsidies, the Officers and Soldiers
entertained for the Irish affairs, may be sent over.

John Brown,
Cler. Parliament.
FINIS.

