The Perfect Pharisee UNDER MONKISH HOLINESS, Opposing the Fundamental
Principles of of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and Scripture-Practises of
Gospel Worship manifesting himself in the Generation of men called QVAKERS.
OR, A Preservative against the Gross Blasphemies and horrid delusions of
those, who under pretense of perfection* and an immediate Call from God, make
it their business to Revile and Disturb the Ministers of the Gospel.

Published, for the establishing of the People of God in the Faith once
delivered to the Saints. And in a special manner directed to BELIEVERS in
Newcastle and Gateside.

Isay 8. 20. To the Law, and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to
this Word, it is because there is no light in them. 2 Epist. of John, ver. 8.
Look to your selves, that we lose not those things which we have wrought.
Gateside, Printed by S. B. and are to be sold by Will: London Bookseller in
Newcastle 1653.

Christian Reader.
THe great Design of that old and subtle Serpent in the latter days, does
eminently appear to be, to over-turne the Faith of Souls* For what else is
the Reason of so many monstrous shapes, and varieties of appearances into which
he transformeth himself, but that he may have somewhat more probably
successful, to entangle, according to the diversities of the temper of
hearts? Yet such is the wise, and good dispensation of our God, that even when
Satan would appear most like an Angel of light; yet something ever does
break forth in his closest contrivances, that makes the design of the Serpent
very visible.

There is indeed something which pretends to holiness in this upstart
Generation of men; as the meannesse of their Apparel, sometimes more then
ordinary Abstinence, their forsaking the World (though to a sinful neglect of
their Callings and Families) and many trivial observances, which the Apostle
calls, The rudiments of the World, Col. 2. 23* (in which they yet place a great
part of their perfection) These things have indeed, as Paul said, A show of
Wisdom in Will Worship and Humility, and neglecting of the Body; But alas,
are narrower coverings then can conceal the wickedness of the Blasphemies,
Cursings, and Raylings, which under these are ushered in, to destroy the
foundation of the Saints.

Seeing therefore their folly is very fully, by the demonstration and witness
of the Scriptures, made manifest to our selves, and their Principles and
practices (hereafter specified) undeniably known to some of us. We are as those
that Watch for your souls, as those that must give account, Pressed in Spirit
to Publish the ensuing Discourse; With our Prayers, that as their folly is made
manifest herein, so it may proceed no further.

This is the Method of our proceeding in this Tractat. First, we lay down
their Doctrines. Secondly* prove them to be theirs from their own Words and
Writings. Thirdly, confute them from the Scriptures.

Tho. Weld.
Will. Cole.
Rich. Prideaux.
Will. Durant.
Sam. Hammond.

The Doctrines of the Quakers produced from their own Words and Writings, laid
down in the Positions following.
To which is subjoyned full Proofs of their asserting of those Doctrines. As
also Arguments for the discovery of their unsoundnesse.

Position 1. Equality with God.
Proof 1.
THat this has been asserted by the chiefest of them, upon whose mouth its
fully known they much depend, will thus appear; George Fox being by Warrant
from M. Toluson, and M. Lawry (now a Member of Parliament) two Justices of the
Peace in Lancashire, to be apprehended, for affirming he was equal with God;
before the said Warrant was put in execution, the said business was heard over
again at Lancaster, at a private Meeting of the Justices, where George Fox was
present; Where after several distinctions, and occasions favorably given in
behalf of the said Fox; Dr. Marshall in presence of the said Justices,
proposed the case to Fox himself* to speak his heart, Whether he did believe
himself equal with God. The said Fox in answer thereto, positively affirmed
thus, I am equal with God. The said Dr. Marshall, and Mr. Altham Schoolmaster
at Lancaster, deposed this at a general Sessions in Westmerland, in the
hearing of one of W. C.
us; and deposed the same again before the Honouradle Judge Pul^ston at
Lancaster, the next Assizes.

2. At a meeting with James Nayler, where a discourse was concerning
Persecution, William Baldwinson of Under-barrow in Westmerland, proposed to the
said Nayler, Whether he believed, that any could be as holy just, and good, as
God himself? To whom the said Nayler answered, That he did witness, that he
himself was as holy, just and good, as God. This the said M, Baldwinson did
offer to Collonell Brigs to depose* and has very often affirmed the same to
one of W. C.
us, and is besides a man fearing God, of eminent trust, where he lives in the
service of the Commonwealth.

3. Mr. George Berkett offered to depose, that George Fox did affirm himself
to be the judge of the World. And it is fully known to some of us* that the
general body of that irreligion* do pretend to know the secrets of the hearts
of men: its their common expression to all they speak unto, that they know
their hearts; and when they charge Persons with sins (which is usual with
them* even to such whose Faces they never saw before* nor heard of) which they
can find nothing outwardly to prove, their common ascertion is, that they can
see their hearts; and accordingly do call them damned, Devils, and pronounce
their judgments. Nor is it impertinent to this* that James Nayler to one of us
did affirm, that he wondered that God should reveal W. C.
any thing to me, and he not know it. One Wrote thus from Carlisle, that he was
threatened to be put in Prison with George Fox, whom he called, the Son of God.

Confutation 1.
1. That finite, and infinite should be equal, is a gross contradiction,
which all spiritual and natural light abhorres. Hear what an infinite God,
ascerting his own inequality says to the creature, Isay 40. 15. To whom then
will ye liken me* or shall I be equal, says the holy One. Read the whole
Chapter, as also Job 38. 39 40.

2. If so, then the creature must needs be eternal, a part ante, 2.
viz. must never have had a beginning of their being, unless they will either
affirm* that God himself was created, or that man is a created God. Read the
Creation of man, Genesis 2.

3. If equal with God then as holy, as just, as wise, as powerful, as
omni-present; some of these the proofs will clear to be affirmed by Nayler.
To whom we propose.

If he be as holy, just and good, as God, then he has been so either from his
Birth, or from some work of conversion since upon his soul. If he say he was
so from his Birth, then we cry out Blasphemy, For

1. Are we not sinners from the Womb? Psalm. 51. Isay 48. 8. Children of wrath
by Nature, Ephesians. 2. 2.

2. Is there not in all a body of death? Romans 7. 23. 24. And shall sinful man
be equal with God? he whose righteousness is but rags, dross, and dung;
whose goodlinesse but as the Flower of the Field, Isay 64. 6. Phil. 3. 7. 8.
Isay 40. 7. Whose Breath is in his Nostrils, Psalm. 144. 4. Whose station is
lower then the Angels, Psalm. 8. and the best of whom is so far from being
just with God, as that he cannot answer him one of a thousand, Job 9. 2. 3.

If they affirm he is so, from some work of conversion since he was Borne,

1. Then the work of conversion is to make new gods.

2. And growth in Grace shall be the growing of God; and so God shall be less
or more God according to the different degrees of Grace on the soul. But the
Blasphemy is so horrid, that to name it, is enough to make true Saints loathe
it, and abhor this pretense of Naylers to an holiness, justice and goodness
equal unto Gods. As for the other Attributes, powerful, omni present etc. we
send them to Gods Challenge of Job. in Job 38. Where wast thou when I laid the
Foundations of the Earth ver. 4. Can thou bind the sweet influences of the
Pleiades? and loose the bands of Orion? Can thou bring forth Maza^^th in his
season? Or can thou guide Arcturus with his sons? ver. 20 31. to chap. 40.
9. Have thou an Arm like God? Can thou Thunder with a voice like him? 4.


4. If equal* then the same God or another: other there can be none, but he
that was before all time. It Is a contradiction if another; so many Saints, so
many Gods: if he be the same, then God wanted something of his infinite
perfection which he receives by Naylers being god, etc.

These things we should not mention, but that Saints might be warned of such
devilish Doctrines, the very smoke of the bottomless Pit.

Position 2. That there is no distinction of Persons in the Godhead.
Proof.
George Fox lays down such a Principle, as you may see in their Book called,
Saul's Errand to Damascus, page 12. with other ascertions of the same kind,
known to some of us.

Confut.
We hope we need not say much to the confuting of so known an Heresy, raked
up out of the dust, and which the Saints have ever loathed, as pulling down
one great Pillar of their Faith, the Personal Deity of Christ being the maine
ground of the infinite value of his merits; and the Personality of the Spirit
being so fully evidenced by the Divine Attributes appropriated to him in
Scripture. But we refer you to these unanswerable Scriptures, Heb 1. 3. Mat.
3. 16. 17. 1 John 5. 7. Mat. ^8 19. Isay 6. 1. 3. compared with John 12. 39.
40. 41. and Acts 28. 25* etc.

Position 3. That the soul is a part of the Divine Essence.
Proof.
One of us W. C. had this positively asserted by Coll. Benson, and Captain
Ward, at Kendale, and discoursed the controvercy with them.

Confut.
Let the Christian Reader consider,

1. That if this could be so, then should the Essence of God be divided into so
many finite beings or parcels, as souls.

2. Yea, and by this Doctrine, that Essence of God which is infinite in him
should come to be finite, when it becomes a soul in man. The Heavens of
Heavens are not able to contain him! and the finitenesse of our created
spirits, who does not know?

3. How shall the All Creating Essence of God, become a Creature, and who
understands not the Creation of souls? Genesis 2. Heb. 12. 9.

4. If this be so, then shall a part of God be sinful? which how blasphemous?
unless men most wretchedly dare deny that there is a sinfulness in any soul.

5. And then shall God hate himself* burn in wrath for ever against his own
Essence, and it lie under damnation for evermore; for so is the state of
thousands of souls. How horrible i^ any of this to be ascerted of him, in
whose presence is fullness of joy. Psalm. 16. and that is God blessed for ever,
Rom 9 5.

6. Hereupon* when Jesus Christ gave himself to death for the souls of men:
either he dyed for himself, and for the Essence of God; or else he dyed
altogether in vain. What soul not grossly Apostatized, dare vent such things?

Position 4, That Christ is in every man; and in the reprobates he is held
under corruption.
Proof.
W. C.
One of us received this assertion from James Nayler, in conference with him;
wherein he extended the in-dwellings of Christ to Indians that never heard the
Gospel 2. Those whom they call Rebrobates, Devils, they usually tell,
notwithstanding, that they Crucify Jesus Christ within them As is clear in a
Letter one of us has Read, from John A^dland, to Edward Brigs, an holy, humble
Saint in Westmerland, whom God was pleased to deliver out of their snares, with
which, for some time, he was entangled. And in ordinary experience it is very
much apparent.

Confutation 1.
1. If so, then either Christ Personal, or else he is in them by his Spirit: we
rather suppose, they understand Christ Personal: and our reason is, because
Mr. Higgison in his Book, page 5. (which he offered the Supreme Power to make
good, in his Epistle) affirms it to be their Doctrine, That Christ, as Man,
dwells in them; which is so grossly Blasphemous, and horrid, a contradiction
to the Personal Ascension of Christ, Acts 1. 9. and his sitting at his Fathers
right hand, till the restitution of all things, Acts 3. 21. that it needs no
further confutation.

If Christ dwells in every man by his Spirit? Then

1. Are the fruits of the Spirit in all men? Gal. 5. 22. the fruits of the
Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
me^knesse, temperance. Are these in Turks, Indians, Papists, Drunkards,
whoremasters, Atheists? etc.

2. Where the Spirit is, it is a quickening Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 1. 2. 1 Cor. 6 9.
ye were such and such, but now ye are sanctified by the Spirit of our God;
but it is most apparent, that there is no such quickening in all. Nay, the whole
world lies in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. If they shall affirm (as they have
done) that the Spirit of God is in such kept under by corruption; then it is
so, either first, for want of will in the Spirit of the living God to get the
Mastery over sin. Or secondly, for want of Power. Not for want of will. For
the will of the Father, Christ, and Spirit, are all one; which will is, To
destroy the works of the Devil, wheresoever the Spirit dwells, 2 Cor, 3. 17.
where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty, and so not kept under
corruption? For the Apostle comfortably concludes, that sin shall not have
Dominion over those who are implanted into Christ, because they are not under
the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6. 14. Nor can he secondly, be kept under for
want of Power, 1 John 4. 4. You overcome the World, because greater is he that
is in you, then he that is in the World; the very ground of their over-comming,
is the greatness of the Spirits Power above corruption, wheresoever he is,
Mat. 13. 29. Luke 11. 22.

And if the Spirit be in all, then all must be saved, or it must 2.
necessarily go to Hell with the damned.

But enough of this so horrible an assertion.

Position 5. That Christ in the Flesh, with all he did and sufferd therein, was
but a Figure, and nothing but an Example.
Proof.
1. This is expressly found in their Book called, Saul's Errand to Damascus.
2. As also Mr. Higginson, page 5. says* The Lancashire charge stands clear
against them in this Principle, and nothing answered to evade it, in Saul's
Errand to Damascus, page 8. 3. Also this was Written in that Letter which
Nayler wrote to one in Lancashire, which was objected against him by Dr.
Marshall, upon account of another Principle in it, ( viz. that he that expected
to be saved by him that dyed at Jerusalem, should be deceived.) And this Mr.
Jacques Minister at Bolton in Lancashire, sent his Testimony under his hand,
that he would make appear, if the Justices of Westmerland pleased to call for
him at another season, being detained at that time upon other occasions.

Confu. 1
1. This wholly destroys the grand foundation of the Saints justification and
confidence at the Throne of Grace. For if he were but a Figure, then there was
no merit in his death, Heb. 9. 26.

2. If but a Figure, then he must Type out another Christ yet to come, Col. 2.
17. But surely they do not mean the Jewish Messiah; or do they intend a Type
of Christ in them yet to come* and to appear there in the time of their
conversion, as their Notion is. See Geo. ^^temans Pamphlet, page 29.
How absurd is such a Doctrine, That all the Acts of Christ, while here on
Earth, must be acted over again within them? As, that the Virgin Mary must be
in them, and bring forth a Christ, and be espoused to Joseph in them; that John
Baptizeth in them; that the eleven Apostles are in them* Judas, Herod, and
Pilat in them; that Christ is crucified, dead, and buried in them, and risen
again, and ascended to the right hand of the Father in them. And all these not
allegorized, but really, personally, and bodily acted in them, and as they were
acted at Jerusalem, etc. For all these are the necessary appendices of that
sottish Doctrine.

3. If an example only, this, in plain terms, cuts up the satisfaction of
Christ, which is the very Anchor and Refuge of souls. Let the Reader seriously
consider these Scriptures following, because the denying of this, does wholly
make fruitless the blood of Christ, Acts 20. 28. Romans 5. 8. 9. Ephesians. 1. 7.
Col. 1, 14. Col. 1. 20. 1 Peter 1. 19. 1 John 1. 2. Rev. 1. 8.

4. If an example, How then is the justice of God satisfied? it must be either
by the obedience of him the example; or by our own that follow it: they deny
it to be by Christ's obedience, in making it merely figurative; and that it
cannot be by any obedience of our personal actings; we refer you to what
follows in the confutation of the Principle of justification by works. And
thus the justice of God shall be unsatisfied still. What desperate ruin do
these Doctrines bring to guilty souls.

5. What comfort shall a guilty Conscience ever find, but in the satisfaction
of Jesus? and what Peace shall he have, if Christ be only an Example, unless
he do fully came up in every tittle of his life and death also, to answer the
Pattern? which it is impossible for man to do, Heb. 4. 15. he being without
sin, and in that alone accepted, as to a likeness to us in all things: and
the same impossibility is there of coming up to that pattern in the great
matters of his Nativity, death, and Passion, and the like.

Position 6. That men are not justified by that righteousness of Christ, which
he in his own Person did fulfill, without us.
Proof.
1. This was the clear sense of that expression in Naylers Letter, formerly
hinted, That whosoever expects to be saved by him that died at Jerusalem, shall
be deceived. 2. In Naylers delivering his sense of that expression before the
Justices in Westmerland, he clearly states the righteousness of Christ, by
which we are justified, to be fulfilled in us. 3. The proof for their next
Position fully cleares it. 4* Collonell Benson a^ Kendale, asserted the same to
one of our selves, and disputed for the maintenance W. C.
thereof.

Confut.
1. Then, what ground had Paul* to b^ast and glory in the Cross of Christ? Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? Who shall condemn me? upon
this account, Romans 8. 34. It is Christ that dyed; setting the blood of Jesus as
a full answer to all the challenges of guilt. 2. When we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans 5. 10. 80 3* He his own
self, bare our sins, in his own Body, on the Tree, 1 Peter 2. 24. And 4. He
reconciled us in the body of his Flesh, through death. Col. 1. 21. 22. This
body, this death, this cross, were certainly all without us. Romans 5. 9. We
are justified. And Ephesians. 1. 7. Have Redemption through his blood, even the
Remission of sins. 5. Nay, justification clearly imports, according to the
design of the Gospel Grace, a non-imputation of sin, and a clothing with that
which is the righteousness of Christ, fulfilled in the world, imputed through
believing, Romans 4. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 19. 20. 21. What spiritual man, may not
clearly observe the Scripture, laying the weight of justification upon the
death of Christ, and his bloody sacrifice on the Cross? Heb. 9. 26.

Position 7. That men are justified by that Righteousness, which Christ within
us enabled us to perform, or (which is in effect, and some of them have
expressed) by inherent holiness.
Proof.
Affirmed by James Nayler, in a Book of his, This light within you will let
you see your sin, bring to repentance, and tenderness of heart, bring you to
fear God, and so leads up to justification and peace, page 3. Fawnworth in one
of his Pamphlets, thus, Condemnation is only the disobeying of light within,
page 30. Nayler says, We are not reconciled to God, till we be perfectly holy,
and able to stand so in our own power, page 25. A. P. to the same purpose, in
a Book set forth by him, page 13. Christ reconciles God and Man by renewing the
Image of God in purity and holiness. Collonell Benson and Captain Ward, were
positive in the same Principle, in a discourse with one of us at Kendale in
Westmerland. Anthony Hodgshon, one of that way, being asked by Mr. Ward
Minister at Wol^ingham, an account of his Faith; at first denied so to do; but
he pressing with that of Peter, answered, 1 Pet. ^. 15.
then I tell thee, I believe to be saved not by the righteousness of Christ
imputed to me; but by the righteousness of Christ inherent in me.

Confut. 1
This assertion is fully and industriously confuted by the Apostles; and we may
cry out, Gal. 3. 1. Who has bewitched the hearts of these men. Gal. 3. 10. As
many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse: for it is written,
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, etc. clearly holding
forth an universal impossibility to fulfill the righteousness of the Law.
Ver. ^2. and ver. 21. If there had been a Law given which could have given
life, verily righteousness should have been by the Law. But the Scripture has
concluded all under sin, that the promise by Faith of Jesus Christ might be
given to them that believe. Romans 4. 5. To him that works not, but believes
on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted to him for
righteousness. Even as David himself describes the blessedness of the man*
unto whom God imputes righteousness without works, v. 6. This Doctrine
(believed and practiced) was the very reason of the Jews stumb^ing at the
Gospel* Rom 9. 30. 31. Romans 10. 3. 4. We might weary you with quoting such
Texts as Romans 3. 19. to the last; multitudes of Scriptures fully clearing up
this souleravishing truth of justification not by inherent holiness, but by
Faith in the bl^od of the Lord Jesus: but we shall close it up with these in
stead of all, 1 Cor. 4. 4. Phil. 3. 8. 9. 10.

Position 8. That God and man cannot be wholly reconciled, till ^e be brought
into the state of the first Adam, and able in his own power to stand perfect.
Proof.
We refer the Reader for proof hereof, to a Book of Naylers, page 26. where
he is so confident of this Doctrine that he proposes it as a Quaere to all, as
if none should have the boldness to gainsay it; your own Eyes may satisfy
you there.

Confut.
1. Is not this to bring us perfectly under the covenant of works and to make
us our own reconcilers, and so to make void the death of Christ. But he that
has an Ear to ^eare, let him hear what the spirit says, Romans 5. 10. When we
were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans 8. 3.
what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sent
his own Son to perform.

2. And let the Reader observe, that as the merit of Christ is by their
horrible Doctrine (before mentioned) wholly made useless as to righteousness;
so by this Position, the very spirit and power of the Lord Jesus is wholly cast
out, as to sanctification and holiness. And so this Antichristian Generation
have totally renounced the Lord that bought them: For* this our standing
perfect, is in that assertion attributed, wholly to our own power. Alas! who
knows not that John 15. 4. 5. John 1. 16. It pleased the Father that in him
should all fullness dwell, Col. 1. 19. Phil. ^. 13. it is God that works in
you both to will and to do, that is the Alpha and Omega, the very a^thor and
finisher of our Faith, Heb. 12. 2. Phil. 1. 6. These are the People that
pretend to lead you to Christ, that thus leave you to the mere strength of
your weak and rotten natures, both for life and holiness.

3. This bringing us again to the state of the first Adam, (till which time,
this people say, God and we, cannot be fully reconciled) is nothing else but to
bring us again under a covenant of works And though perhaps, to be restord to
the state of Adam may seem a glorious thing, yet it will clearly appear to be
short of that Gospel-state you are translated into, to the more infinite
advancing of Free Grace. Are you not clearly told, the second Adam, the Lord
Jesus ( Heb. 7. 22.) is made a surety of a better Covenant. Heb. 8. 6.
Established on better Promises? For whereas the first Adam by that Covenant,
First, Was to do* and live. Secondly, Had no Promise of perseverance in that
state, Thirdly, Nor was there a Mediator to enterpose in case of breach, the
tenor of the Law in it self considered as a Covenant, clearly dis-owning any
Mediator. 4. In a word, the sad condition of Adam under such a covenant, though
for a time in so good an estate, if it be not enough experimentally seen in all
our falls by his; yet may, in the ruin of damned Angels, standing upon the
like terms, be known apparently: First, Yet in the Gospel-state, Jesus Christ
purchased life for us to be received, not by working, but by believing, Romans 4.
5. 6. And secondly, None can take out of his Ioh. 10. 28.
hands. Thirdly, If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, 1 John
2. 2. And fourthly, Are delivered from the wrath to come, Romans 5. 9. So that it
will appear, that this restitution to the state of the first Adam, being so
magnified by these men, fully speaks how low their spirits are as to the things
of God, how Legal their conceptions of the way of salvation; and that it is
but a miserable state, in comparison of what you are brought to by the Covenant
of Grace; For how does the ministration of righteousness exceed in Glory? 2
Cor. 3.

Position 9. That no man that commits sin, or that is not perfectly holy* can
ever enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, unless there be a Purgatory.
Proof.
James Nayler in his Book before quoted, page 26. puts it by way of quaere.
And the very reading of the said page, will evidently manifest it, that this is
not only his Principle, but any assertion to the contrary, looked upon by him
as an impossibility or gross absurdity.

Confut.
Our Purgatory is the blood of Jesus, which cleanses the soul (otherwise, as
to its personal actings very guilty) from all sin, as 1 John 1. 7. And
though perhaps these tremblings and quakings (which the Administrator at Haxham
in his Banners affirms* page 18. doubtless his false Jew could do, and which
kind of ecstasies, page 24. he derives from the Francif^an Friars) may be
looked upon by these People as a Purgatory from their sin^e^^ ^et we dare not
trust our eternity upon such impost^r^^* or (be they never so real) on things
so evidently, rather the ^^^^e of Legal conviction, and the horror of an
unbeleeving ^o^l^, ^^^^ of any saving knowledge of the Gospel. How (...) does
this one Position lay the very whole design of (...)ably naked and bare, as to
an overturning of righteousness by the blood of Jesus* Our way, and the only
way into the holy of holies is by that blood, Heb. 10. 19. 20. by Faith in
which a soul, otherwise wicked, ungodly etc. Romans 4 5. is justified; and
though guilty, as to his own actings of many infirmities* shall be absolved,
and stand undeniably righteous before the Tribunal of the Father. But alas!
how sottish are the spirits of these men in this discovered to be? how grossly
ignorant of the great business of justification of sinners by Faith of Jesus
Christ, that dare trust to so filthy rags in the presence of so just and so
holy a God.

Position 10 No real Saint but he that is perfect, and perfectly holy in this
life, and does not sin.
Proof.
It is the design of Nayler in his Book in several Paegs to prove this, see
his Book page 21. 22. Nayler has often spoken it of himself, and said, he
witnessed it. So G. Fox, has done: others (some of us do know) have said,
they witness perfection in Nayler. W. C.
Nay so far does Farnesworths ignorance of the Gospel proceed, that in his
Book page 20. he thus writes, They say they can never overcome the body of
sin* or be made perfect here; and they say* no un* ^l^ane thing shall ever
enter into the Kingdom of God. How does this agree? Its one of their ordinary
out-^ryes against the Ministers, because they oppose this Doctrine. And it is the
most general Doctrine of all their Books and Papers

Confut.
1. Let the Reader consider* there must be of necessity a distinction of the
word perfect and perfection in Scripture; though we know this Generation of men
will cry down distinctions, and pronounce that cur^e against us, Rev. 22. as
if we added to the word Yet the following cases will evidence the absolute
necessity of distinctions, if the unity of truth, and the faithfulness of the
word be owned at all. Read 1 John 1. 8. 10. If we s^y that we have no sin
the truth is not in us; compared with 1 John 3. 8 9. Whosoever is borne of God
does not commit sin. Read 1 John 5. 16 There is a sin to death and there
is a sin not to death So Isay 9 7. Of his Government there shall be no end;
compared with 1 Cor. 15 24 Then comes the end, when he shall deliver ^p the
Kingdom, etc*

2. Now as to a necessity of it in the case in hand, consider the various use
of ^he word in Seripture, Phil. 3. is very full, ver. 12. Not as though I had
already attained, either were already perfect; compared with ver. 15. (where
it is a word of the same root) the Apostle speaking of the Saints, and taking in
himself in that expression, adds, Let us therefore, as many as are perfect, be
th^^ minded* In which is plainly evident, that Paul shall grossly contradict
himself, unless there be a distinguishing betwixt the variety of the sense of
the word perfect.

3. That perfection therefore, ver. 12. is perfection in Glory* as the verses
both before, and presently following it, do fully clear; its that for which
Paul was apprehended of Christ, as is evident 1 Cor. 13. 10. where it is opposed
to Paul's present state; When that which is perfect i^ come, then that which is
in part shall be done away; clearly meaning his enjoyment of God in glory* as
is plain, ver. 12. Now we see through a glass darkely, ^^en face to face. Now
the same word (perfect) in ver. 15. that it cannot possibly be meant of the
same sort of perfection is evident; For as the Apostle tells you, that he
enjoying the perfection, v. 15. is yet short of, and is pressing forward
toward the perfection, in ver. 12. as to a thing that's yet before, so taking
the word in both places in the same sense; it were a contradiction for him to
say, he is perfect, and is not perfect. For the true meaning thereof, we give
you three Scriptures, 1 Cor. 2. 6. Howbeit, we speak wisdom amongst those
that are perfect. 1 Cor. 14. 20. In malice be ye children, but in
understanding be ye men* or be ye perfect (for the word is the same with the
former Text.) Heb 5 last, Stong meat belongs to those that are of full age, or
that are perfect. In all which places, it is evident in it self, that the word
imports, Christians grown up to more knowledge in the Gospel, then others had,
who are in these quotations, called Babes. From the consideration of this Text,
it may be fully seen, that perfection of Saints here, is not that absolute
perfection in glory, which Paul professed he had not attained to; but that
comparative perfection, of being grown up to, more then ordinary measures of
Grace and understanding, much beyond the attainement of Babes in Christ.

2. As for our perfection by justification* the Scriptures fully hold it out
upon the account of the imputed righteousness of Christ* whereby the spouse
appears altogether lovely; not upon the account of her own holiness, for so
she is black, and an infant in her blood; but we know that it is not this
perfection they speak of, as he that has but looked into their Books may
presently discover.

3. There is a perfection which the Scriptures expresses integrity by; as that
word speaks the truth of grace in opposition to hypocrisy. Thus Job is called
perfect, Job 1. 1. but that this perfection does not imply a total absence of
sin* is plain; witness his sinful passionate cursing the day of his birth,
Job 3. 3. Let the day perish wherein I was borne. Job 6. 8. 9. Oh that is would
please God to destroy me, that he would let go his hand, and cut me off. See
his own confession, Job 9. 20* 2^* If I say I am perfect, my own mouth shall
prove ^^^ perverse. Thus Asa is called perfect, 1 Kings 1^, 14* The high places
were not removed; nevertheless Asa's heart was perfect with the Lord all his
days. Here is the perfection of Asa's heart with God, and that all his days;
yet you shall ^nd^ first, He took (...) away the high places, which was a
(...) (...)* Secondly, He took the gold and silver ou^ o(...) the ^^^se of the
Lord, and sent them to the (...) and (...)ue* ^ Chron. 16. 7. 9* Thirdly, (...)
an^ put him in the Pri(...)ppressed the People at (...)* And ^^ his D^^^as^
sought not to the Lord (...)* So that you may clearly see in wh(...) h^ was
s^^d to ^^ perfect. As for other examples in this kind* ^^ this time it may be
clearly understood in what sense the spirit c^l^^ them perfect, who otherwise
had their personal gross infirmitie^.

4. You are to disting^^sh betwixt the perfection of God, and the perfection of
the creature, in reference to that Text* Mat 5. last. In which place,
perfection cannot signify that which brings up to an equality with God, but a
similitude; unless you run upon that blasphemous Principle of equallity with
God, of which we have said enough before.

5 By our thus comparing Scripture with Scripture, we expect (from their former
usage in this kind) they will charge us, with pleading for sin, though we
are but discovering the imperfections of the best Saints, lest they should live
upon their own righteousness, (which to set up and establish, in opposition
to that of Christ's imputed, is evidently the design of Quakers) And that so
the strength of the Lord may be made perfect in their weakness; Did the
spirit plead for sin, when he rehearsed the faults of Saints? or Paul, Romans
7. when he cried out of the body of this death? or when he discovers the
unevenness of Peter's Judaizing? Gal. ^. or Christ, when he writes to the seven
Churches, and discovers their sin, Rev. 2* 2. 3. 4* and tells the purest of
them, their strength is yet but little, Rev. 3. 8 Hence you may discover from
Christ, the Spirit, etc. their manifesting the imperfections of the choysest
Saints, that to discover it, is not to plead for it, unless you will
blaspheme the holy one of Israel. And let all Christian Readers consider, that
it is far from us to plead for iniquity; but the great part of our work is
to reprove it in whomsoever, and to press Mortification and spiritual life,
and communion with God, that so they may press forwards to perfection as the
design and mark of their souls, Phil. 3. 14. and have the attaining to that
blessed state upon their hearts exceedingly, though it be to the best at
present a thing before, and that which they have not already attained, nor
shall do, till this corruption have put on incorruption. Yet are their
glorio^er and fuller measures of holiness then yet the best enjoy, that may be
attained here, which though attained to, do leave us short of that perfection
we do wait for in glory; yet may be a quickening Argument to draw out and
exercise their souls in pressing forwards continually.

Position 11. That every man in the world has a light within him suffici^^t to
guide him to salvation, without the help of any outward light or dis^overy.
Proof.
Farnsworth in his Book page 51. Every one mind the light of God within you.
James Nayler in a Book of his, page 2. All people cease from your out* side
lights, and turn to the light of God within you* (and this he ignorantly makes
to be the sure word of Prophecy. 1 Pet 1. 19*) The said Nayler in discourse
with one of us, W. C. at Kendale, affirmed, That every man in the world had a
light within them sufficient to guide them to salvation, etc. and this he
extended even to Indians, that never heard the Gospel* But the general stream
of their Words and Papers, speak it fully.

Confut.
By their constant expressions both in speaking and writing, and by their
calling off from all outward teaching; it is evident that by this light, they
mean the principles within, left in the spirit of every man since the fall,
the same light which an Indian has that never heard of Christ by any outward
discovery. For one of us, in discourse with Nayler, proposing whether Indians
W. C.
that never heard of Christ by any outward discovery had a light within them
sufficient to guide them to salvation; ^e affirmed, they had; and when the
experience of the Saints in New England, to the contrary was produced, he
answered, If any Indian were present, he would justify the contrary. Thus will
men to bear up an opinion affirm the things they do not know. Now that this
natural light which an Indian that never heard of Christ, may have, cannot
bring to salvation, we desire to propound these considerations following:

1. No light ean bring to salvation, but that which discovers Christ, 2 Cor. 4.
3. If our Gospel be hid, its hid to those that are lost. Where the Apostle
positively concluds the hidings of the Gospel to an evidence of a lost estate,
John 17. 2. Now Christ is not known by the light of Nature, Mat. 16. 17* Flesh
and blood has not revealed those things unto th^e.

2. God does clearly show a distinguishing grace in the discovery of Christ,
Mat. 13, 11. To you it is given to know the mystery: of the Kingdom of
Heaven, to them it is not given; in which, is apparent* all have not the
knowledge of the Gospel given.

3. Those that lived in the highest improvement of reason, being without Gospel
discoveries, did not, and could not apprehend God in Christ, 1 Cor. 1, 21. 1
Cor. 2. 14. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God,
etc. neither indeed can be, etc. here is the impossibility of natural
principles to give out the knowledge of Christ.

4. Romans 10. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God; not by the
inward light or discovery, which all men have, but by the word of the Lord
outwardly made known.

5. If they shall say that every man has the knowledge of Christ by special
revelation, and that immediate* then they speak that which is contrary to the
common and known experience of thousands? who conversing with Indians never
found the least hint of a Christ amongst them? Many of them, whose confessions
are in Print, having bin wrought upon by the Preaching of the Word by Mr.
Eliot, etc. have clearly declared they knew nothing of the true God and
Christ, before their Publishing of the Gospel to them.

6. We pray the Reader to consider what sad and lamentable effects will flow
from this Doctrine, to the utter undoing of the soul*

1. This is to forsake the Fountain of living Waters* not going out to Jesus
for light; but Ier. 2. digging to themselves broken ^isterns, leaving the Sun
of Righteousness, to live by the light of their own Candle.

2. It Is a confining our attainements to the improvement of this natural light,
which must needs keep men both as to light and power under Legal performances
and discoveries.

3. Hence do men account their tremblings and quakings as their perfection*
they being, at the best, but the improvements of an awakened natural
conscience, without the souls applying of Gospel Promises as to justification
by the blood of Jesus.

4. Hence the souls believing, and the acts of Faith in the blood of Christ
are such strangers to these People, as never to have the least hint in any of
their words or writings; and what they have spoken of Faith in general* as
Farnesworth in his discovery of Faith does manifest their exceeding ignorance
and darkness in the great business of the souls believing in the Lord Jesus.

5. Hence come men under the unavoydable chains of Satan, who leads them
captive at his will, whilst by this means they deprive themselves of any
standing rule to try the spirits by, but walk in such irregular and sinful
ways, as do evidently speak how unable that their light is to distinguish
betwixt duty and delusion.

6. And what is else the reason of their bitter railing and reproaching the
Institution of the living God, the Ordinance of Preaching the Gospel of Christ
Crucified, speaking all manner of evil against us for the works sake, their
design being in their reproaching of the Ministers, evidently apparent to
strike down the very work of Preaching the Gospel.

Position 12. That there is no need of any outward teaching by Reading or
Hearing the Scriptures opened or applied, etc.
Proof.
George Bateman in his Answer to Mr. Ledgard, page 21. affirms, If the
promises (there named) be fulfilled in any man, then what need have such of
Scripture teaching without them, when they have received the same spirit within
them by which all true Scripture was written. Pap. 22. If any soul be once
made one with God, who dare deny but that all What means that exp^^^s* on
t(...)e repeated true Scritu^^. Is any of the Scripture false?
true Scripture is fulfilled in them, and that such souls have no need of any
to teach them. Farnworth in one of his Books, p. 29. mind the light within,
here is your teacher, this light obeying it, and here is your condemnation this
light disobeying it. See James Nayler in a Book of his called* The Glory of the
Lord shining out in the North, page 2. All people cease from your outside
lights, and return to the light of Christ in you, and this light is not a
Chapter without you in a Book; and this light did the Apostles every where bid
to take he^d to, till the day dawned, 1 Pet. 1. 19. [Let the Reader observe the
palpable blindness of the man in the gross mis-interpretation of so plain a
Text.] What need we the teachings of men, says another, in a Paper of his, in
the hands of one of us. William Strickland walking up the streets in Kendale
naked except that he had a shirt on, published the said Principle; one of W. C.
us both heard it, and saw him in that immodest garb. Miles Bateman affirmed
the same before the whole Congregation at Kendale. And George Fox pretended; he
had all from within, though his juggling was presently discovered, a Concordance
being sent to him from York to help his Memory. Miles Hawd in the same
Congregation affirmed, That whosoever did refer any man to any light but that
which is within him, is a Deceiver. And being by one of us admonished to take
heed of such Blasphemy, and urged with Christ's referring to the Scriptures, and
Paul's referring to the Doctrine he had Preached before, Gal. 1. 8. he
Blasphemously, and in much heat of spirit* repeated the same again. John
Andland affirmed, No need of outward teaching, in discourse with us as
Newcastle.

Confut.
1. This is clearly to make Scriptures useless; for as they are a light
without, so there is no taking in of them* but by Hearing or Reading, the
Spirit going along therewith. And are the Scripture^ useless? Then why does
Christ command the Jews to search the Scriptures? John 5. 39. Paul commands
Timothy to Read the Scriptures, 1 Timothy 4. 13. Give attendance to Reading. 2 Timothy 13. 15. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God and is profitable,
etc. and so not useless. Col. 4. 16. the Apostle says, When this Epistle is
Read amongst you, cause it to be Read to the Laodiceans, and that you also
Read that from Laodice^. Luke 4. 16. Christ himself stood up for to Read the
Scriptures.

2. Wherefore were the Apostles sent forth, if outward Teaching be useless or
needless, Mar. 16. 15. Mat. 10. 7. As you go, Preach. Go Preach the Gospel
to every creature* Mat. 28. last, Go teach all Nations. And let the Reader
observe they did not only go to Preach for conversion, but for the building
up of Saints; as Acts 14. 23. they returned again to Lystr^, and Iconium, and
Ant^och, confirming the souls of the Disciples. Acts 15. 36. Let us go again
and visit every City wherein we have Preached the word of the Lord, ver. 41.
they went through Syria and Cilicia confirming the Churches. And why left they
Elders in every Church, but for the building up the body? Acts 14. 24. Acts 20.
17. Ephesians. 4. 11.

3. The great work of Christ at his Ascending to his Father, was to send forth
Officers for the perfecting of ^^ints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ, as is most undeniably proved, Ephesians 4. 11. 12 and
to continue to the end of all things till all the Saints (even those yet
unborne) be come to a perfect stature.

4. The Apostles, in pursuance of the will of Christ, Ordained Elders in every
City, Acts 14. 23. who are Officers for the teaching the house of God,
laboring in Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Set down qualifications of
Pastors. 1 Timothy 3, Bishops and Deacons, to Tit. 1. 5. For this cause left I
thee in Creet that thou should Ordain Elders in every City. 2. Tim. 2. 2.
Commit that thou have heard to faithful men, able to teach others.

Now let every Christian judge, to what end does Christ send forth his
Apostles, and other Officers, if outward teaching be needless? what folly, nay
what sin had they been guilty of to hazard, nay to ruin themselves, 1 Cor.
4. 13. 2 Cor. 4 8. 9. 2 Cor. 11 ^3. if outward Teaching were needless. To what
purpose should Christ so eminently engage by Promise to go along with them,
both in their success and sufferings. Mat. 28. last. Luke 10* 16. 1 These. 4 8.
he that despises, despises not man, but God, if outward Teaching be
needless: For they can but speak to the ear, as appears by the fruitlesnesse
of their labors often, and the worlds resisting them, Acts 7. 54. Acts 13. 45.
the Jews spoke against the things spoken by Paul, contradicting and
blaspheming: And though it were necessary the word of God should be first
spoken to them, yet they put it from them, Acts 28. 24. How clear is it from
Scripture assertion and example* That Faith coms by Hearing, and not by minding
a light within, as Romans 10. 14. 15. Gal. 3. 2. Acts 13. 48. Ephesians. 1. 12. 13.
And lastly, (though we might much more) yet we shall add but this, the Lord
was pleased eminently to seal to their outward teaching, as to his own
Ordinance, by those* ^aire Epistles Ministered by them, and written by the
spirit of the living God, viz. the multitudes of men converted from darkness
to light by their Ministry, and from the power of Satan unto God, 2 Cor 3. 3. 1
Cor. 4. 15. Acts 2. And we dare appeal to the experience of the Saints in
England whether the Ministry in England have not full and undeniable seals to
their Ministration, in the witness of Christ thereto, in making them fruitful
Fathers to beget many souls to conversion by the Gospel.

Position 13. That the Scriptures are not the Word of God, but a declaration of
the conditions of them that spoke them forth.
Proof.
James Nayler being asked by the Justices in Westm^rland, whether he believed
the written Word to be the Word of God, answered, I know no such thing. See Mr.
Higgis^^s Book, page 78. and this Passage one of us also heard. Farnsworth in
his Book W. C.
called, A discovery of Faith, page 6. cries out against Ministers, because
they say, The Letter is the Word; and the four books, Matthew, Mark, Luke and
John the Gospel, page 12. A Paper one of us has from them, has this passage
in it* they say, the Letter is the Word, which is false. To this purpose is
that of George Bateman to Mr. Ledgard, page 25. 26. a^ also their casting away
their Bibles. W^^. Strickland told Mr. Archer, If he had never Read the Bible,
it had been better for him. How constantly do the Scriptures pass under no
better name from them, then the Saints conditions, David's, Moses, Isays, Paul's
conditions; and a declaration of the condition of them that spoke them forth.

Confut.
This Position is so gross, that we hope it will never sink into any
Christian heart, but will be a confutation to it self in the thought of any
sober minded Christian: yet we shall propose these things.

1. That when the Word of the Lord came to the Prophets, Samuel, Isay,
I^remiah, etc. it cannot be understood of the Word that was made Flesh, the
Lord Jesus; but must necessarily signify that mind or message of the Lord
contained in those words or Scripture Writings, as 1 Samuel 15. 10. Then came the
Word of the Lord to Samuel saying, It repents me that I have set up Saul to
be King. Isay 38. 5. then came the Word of the Lord unto Isay, saying, Say to
Hezekiah, etc. I will add unto thy days fifteen years. Ier. 14. 1. The Word
of the Lord that came to the Prophet Jeremiah concerning the dearth, Judah
mourns, and the gates thereof languish. Its a gross absurdity to say this
word of the Lord was Christ; and it is as much to say, they were the
experiences of those Prophets, or their conditions; but they were the word of
the Lord by these Prophets* spoken to the Persons therein concerned.

2. As for the Phrase in the New Testament, the Word of God, it is clear, both
Christ and the Apostles in their mention thereof, do understand, that which
they Spoke* Preached, or Wrote, and not the Person of Christ, of the Father, or
Spirit, So Christ speaks to the Jews, Mark 7. 13. making the word of God of
none effect by their Traditions, which word can be understood alone of that
fifth Commandment, ver. 10. Honor thy Father and Mother. Luke 11. 28 Blessed
are they that hear the Word of God and keep it; which plainly hints, a word
spoken, written, or engraven, etc. not the eternal word, the Lord Jesus, Romans
10. 17. Faith comes by hearing, hearing by the Word of God, where the word
Preached, or the Scriptures of the Apostles which we now have, is plainly
called, the Word of God.

3. As for those Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, that they are the word
given forth from the living God* and of authentical and undeniable authority
over every conscience good and bad* we could fill Pages with the proofs and
evidence thereof; but the Reader may observe we are speaking of the Scriptures
in reference to these men's cavills* and no further. And so shall (leaving so
plain, so Fun^mentali a Principle) rather fall upon their own notion of the
word of God, calling it, A declaration of the conditions or experienc^^ of them
that spoke them.

1. This is fully to take away the very Foundation of the Faith of Saints,
which is only built upon the authority of God, not upon any experience of the
best Saints or the declaration of it. Luke 24* 25. O fools and slow of heart,
to believe all that the Prophets have spoken; where Faith is bottomed upon
Scripture authority, as Acts 18. 28. Apollos mightily convinced the Jews,
showing by the Scriptures that Jesus is the Christ. Acts 28* 23. Paul persuaded
them concerning Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses, and out of the Prophe^s.
Now, be this Law and the Prophets what they will, if they fall any thing lower
then the truth and word of God* they can be no bottom for the Faith of Saints*
and Paul takes a weak argument to convince them by. And yet, that those were
not the conditions of those Prophets, or the experience of things fulfilled in
themselves, is as clear as the day, to any not grossly ignorant* and
especially from 1 Pet. 1* 10. 11. 12. Of which salvation the Prophets have
enquired, and searched diligently, who prophe^ied of the grace that should come
unto you, Searching what or what manner of time the shirit of Christ which was
in them did signify when i^ testified before hand the sufferings of Christ,
and the glory that should follow. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto
themselves, but unto us they did minister the things which are now reported
unto you, by them that have Preached the Gospel unto you. And as in this its
clear, that they spoke not forth their own conditions and experiences; so also
the Apostle sends the Saints to a word of Prophecy, as a more sure foundation
of Faith, then the most glorious experience or enjoyment in the World, 2 Pet.
1. 18. 19.

2. This is to make the Scripture lose his authority, save only when we
experience it, or where it is fulfilled in men's souls, and so does make void
every command and Promise; and all wicked men that can experience little of it,
shall be left excusable before God at the last day* because not having the
Scripture fulfilled in themselves (according to the Quakers Doctrine) it had no
authority over them. This is the most pleasant Doctrine for desperate Atheists
that can be. Whereas John 12 48. He that receives not my words (has them not
fulfilled in him) yet the words that I have spoken, they shall judge him at the
last day.

3. This at once nulls and destroys the Divine Authority of the whole
Hystoricall and Prophetical Part of Scripture, together with all the
threatenings of Scripture, of Hell, and judgment (unless they say, the Sainss
have those threats of Hell fulfilled in themselves, and that condition of Dives
in Hell, is the condition of Saints) as also the promises therein of mercies
yet to come* their futurity denying their being the already experiences of the
Saints.

4 Consider what impossibilities, contradictions* falsehood, does this woeful
Doctrine bring upon most parts of Scripture; wherein such things there spoken
of, were not could not be the conditions of either God that gave the Word, or
the Prophets and Apostles that Published it,

In the close of this consideration, we disire to mind you of the reproachful
earmes this people every where give to the Written Word, though the Spirit.
Romans 15. says* These things were Written, that we through patience, and the
comfort* of the Scriptures might have hope. And the holy Ghost still referres
to the Written Word Luke 20. 17. John 15. 25. Heb 10. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 17 because
it is Written, Be ye holy as I am holy; where the Spirit of God does evidently
put an authority upon the Written Word, which is the same in signification and
thing, with the word Scriptures, of which see how glorious things the holy
Ghost reports thereof (how slightly soever the Quakers esteem* thereof) 2 Timothy 3. 15. 16. 17. The holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise to
salvation. All Scripture is given by inspiration from God, and is profitable
for Doctrine, for reproffe, for correcti^r* for instruction in righteousness:
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

Position 14. The Spirits are not to be tried by Scripture.
Proof.
Miles Hawd in the Congregation at Kendale, asserted that he that referred to
any light without, was a deceiver. In a Paper of theirs, one of them reckons
this up as one of the Errors of the Priests, (as he ^alls them) they profess
the Scripture to be the rule, and the touchstone to try withal. A Book called
Several Papers, set forth by A. P. page 19. says, the worlds touchstone is
without them and they try the living by the dead, the spirit by the letter; the
Saints touchstone is within, whereby they try the spirits whether they be of
God or no: which evidently demonstrates they allow no trial of the spirits by
the written word.

Confut.
^. Hear what the spirit says, Isay 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony,
if they speak not according to this, it is because there is no light in them.
2. This is to withdraw the soul from the judgment or determination of God,
whose revealed will the Scripture is, as above is shown. 3. This is to open a
gap unavoydably to all Satan's delusions, as you may see by the short Relation
of the Quakers Shaken, in the case of John Gilpin; and we can no otherwise look
upon this, then the very Hold Satan has to keep this people under his
delusions, by cousening them thus, to stop their eyes against the light, John*
3. 20. for what else shall be the Touchstone but the Word of God? 4 And how
strong are the persuasions of error? how fully does Satan pretend in the
soul, to be an Angel of light? and wherein shall man distinguish? The Berean^
searched the Scriptures whether these things were so, Acts 17. 11. trying the
Apostles themselves by the Written Word. 6. And Christ himself leaves the very
proof of himself to be the Messiah to the Scriptures* John 5* 39. Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have ^^^ ^^all life* and they are they
which testify of me.

Position 15. That there ought to be no sinse, meaning, or exposition given, or
studying, of the Scriptures.
Proof.
Their common expression is to him that opens or shows them the interpretation
of any Scripture* Cursed is he that adds, or the plagues are upon thee for
adding to the Scripture. John Audland* a few days since, being for his Railing,
and Public disturbance, called before the Magistrates, and there pleading
against the Ministry, alleging that Text, Ier. 5. 31. The Priests hear rule
by their means; One of us labored to convince him of this ignorance W. C.
in that gross mis-interpretation, for by means he understood by their
maintenance; showing, that that Text does most evidently hold this sense, That
those Priests bare rule by the means of the false Prophets: The said I. A.
presently cried out, Thou addest, thou addest. The same man having called
another of us Deceiver; was asked, Whether he heard him Preach S. H.
any thing contrary to the truth the day before; telling him withal, he
Preached that which he had Prayed, and studied the Scripture for; presently the
said Audland (as if studying the word were enough to convince a man to be a
deceiver) cried out, there thou show thy self. One of their Papers in the
hands of one of W. C.
us, wickedly rayles thus, Away with all your conjuring studying, away with all
your stage* play Preaching. And it is their known and constant Princip^e. Though
their grand master Fox, was not able enough in this point* but discovered his
Imposture by his Concordance to the Bible, sent him from York to Kendale.

Confut.
As to this, let the Reader consider, Neh. 8. 8. Ezra Read in the Book of the
Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the
Reading. Luke 24 27. Christ began at Moses, and all the Prophets, and expounded
therein all things concerning himself. Mark 4 34* He expounded all things to
his Disciples. Acts 28. 23. Paul expounded and testified the Kingdom of God
out of the Prophets Act, 8. 30. to ver. 35. Philip expounds the mende of the
holy Gho^^ in that Prophecy of Isaiah, to the Eunuch who Read it, and yet
without Interpretation knew not the meaning of it. Christ sends the Pharisees
to study the meaning of Scripture, in stead of cavelling. Mat. 9 13. Go learn
what that means. And Peter tells you in the writings of Paul, there are many
things hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3. 16. which the unlearned, and unstable*
wrest, as they do also other Scripture, unto their own destruction. But to
say there is no sense or meaning in the Scriptures, shows so gross ignorance,
nay, such senselessness in these people, that this may suffice* And for the
studying of the Word, read the command of Christ for searching it, John 5. 39.
of Paul 1 Timothy 4. 13. Give attendance to Reading Col. 3. 16. Let the Word of
God dwell in you richly in all wisdom. Ti^ethy must be nourished up in the
Word of truth, and of that good Doctrine to which he had attained, 1 Timothy 4. 6.
must give himself wholly 1 Timothy 4 15. to Reading, Exhortation* Doctrine, that
his profiting might appear to all. 2 Timothy 2. 15. Study to show thy self
approved unto God* a workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing
the Word of truth. 2 Timothy 3. 15. From a child thou have learned the holy
Scriptures, etc. out of which the man of God must labor to be thoroughly
furnished unto all good works.

Position 16 They cry down Baptism with Water, and the Lords Supper, a^ being
but types and shadows ceasing upon the appearance of Christ within them.
Proof.
A Book called Several Papers, set forth by A. P. page 19. thus* The worlds
Baptism is without them; the Saints Baptism is within them: the worlds
Communion is without them, taking a little Bread and Wine, etc. which is
carnal; the Saints Communion is within. Compare this with George Batemans
answer to Mr. Ledgard* page 29. disputing with him about Baptism, etc. says,
That Baptism and the Lords Supper* etc. Christ when he was in the flesh left
them as types of another nature* and this pointed at Christ's appearing in the
spirit; and as the types under the Law ended when Christ appeared in the Flesh;
so these types ( viz Baptism and the Supper of the Lord; for of them he speaks
there) end, when Christ appears in spirit. To which add that of Farnsworth in
his Pamphlet, entitled, A Discovery of Faith, page 11. All your Baptism, such
as are invented from the Letter* the carnal mind invents them these are for
the Fire, for they are the works of the Flesh. Read him also, page 13.

Confut.
What soul that lives under the Kingdom and Scepter of the Lord Jesus, will
not abhor these opinion^, that destroy and wholly take from the Saints these
two great Mysteries. We shall but briefly therefore propose, 1. That our Lord
Jesus appointed his Dsciples to Baptize with Water, John 4 2. Mat. 28. last. 2.
The Apostles practiced it quite through the Acts, Acts 2. 41. Acts 18. 12. 13.
16. 36. Here is Water, what hinde^s but I may be Baptized? read ver. 38. Acts
9. 18. Acts 18. 8. 1 Cor. 1. 14* 15. 16. And for the Supper of the Lord see the
Institution, Mat. 26. 26. 1 Cor. 11. 23. where it is an Ordinance established*
to continue in practice till*our Lord Jesus come again, ver. 26. which
coming, cannot be meant of that coming in the spirit, which these men speak
of, for so he was come already to them being already saints. And as this Text
does fully clear their continuance in the Churches till the last day* so where
Baptism and the Supper of the Lord are called types in Scripture, to cease
upon the coming of Christ in spirit* we demand a Text What a plain addition
is this to the W^rd of God, by those who so frequently curse the Ministry, in
their explications and applyings of texts, as if they added to the sayings of
the Prophecies of that Book? And how apparently does this Principle speak
their teaching, in stead of Gospel-Doctrines, and the commands of Jesus, the
fond imaginations of their own brain, and divinings of their own heart.

But we t^ust we shall need to add no more to the satisfying of those, who
have eaten of the Flesh* and drunk of the Blood of the Lord Jesus, and been
Baptized into his Death, and found the power and virtue of these blessed
Ordinances. What soul that is not under the strong delusions of Satan, dare
cast off as so slight things* or blaspheme with so vile reproaches (as these
men do) those sacred Institutions, which the Lord Jesus left to his Churches,
as such eminent memorialls of his blessed love.

Position 17 That there is ^^ ^ediat^ C^ll Call to the Ministry.
Proof.
This was asserted by Thomas Willan of Kendale in the Public Congregation
there* on a Lecture day, in the hearing of one of us, W. C. the said T. W.
(according to the custom of that Generation to Prophecy lies in the name of
the Lord) pretending to the man that Preached, he was sent of God to speak to
him: then the said Minister demanded, Whether he was sent by a mediate or
immediate Call: upon which proposal, being bassled in the proof of his own
immediate Call, which he pretended to; with a loud voice cried down all
mediate calls to the Ministry, as not of God. and it is one of their common
exceptions against the Ministers of the Gospel, as being sent forth by the
Ordination of men, not considering the Institution of Christ for such
proceedings.

Confut.
That a mediate call (since the time of those Apostles, who being to be
witnesses to the world of all that Jesus said and did, were to be such as had
accompanied the Lord Jesus in the days of his Flesh. Acts 1. 21. and received
their Call from Christ immediately, being inspired by the holy Ghost, 1 Pet. 1.
21. and able to evidence their Call, and confirm the Gospel they committed to
posterity, by infallible testimonies of mighty signs and real miracles, 2
Cor. 12. 12.) is the way of the Gospel for sending forth its Ministers, is
apparent to whomsoever shall read those texts, Acts 14. 23. When they had
Ordained them Elders in every Church* etc. 1 Timothy 4* 14 Neglect not the gift
that is in thee, that was given thee by Prophecy and the laying on of the
hands of the Presbytery. Titus 1. 5. For this cause I left thee in Creet, that
thou should Ordain Elders in every City. 2 Timothy ^. 2. The things thou have
heard of me that commit thou to faithful men, able to teach others* In Titus
1. and 1 Timothy 3. chapters* the Apostle at large leaves direction for the
qualification of such as should from time to time be Ordained to the Office of
Elders in the Churches in a mediate way; for to prescribe Rules to an immediate
call, is impossible But how confident soever these men are against this mediate
call to Ministerial work; yet as we dare oppose the above-written word of the
living God, against all raylings and revilings as enough to crush in piece^ all
gaine-saying pl^as* so there has been so much, and so convincingly on every
hand written in defense thereof, that we dare not question the establishment of
all sober spirits in that truth, and shall add no more to overturne the
gaine-sayings of this besotted people.

Having thus gone through the more gross Positions, which are the very
foundations and principles that support this Antichristian Rabble; we shall
presume to stay the Reader with some of their principles of lesser value; which
though (as the Reader may observe) are of inferior note, yet this sort of
people lay no less weight upon them, then to place the greatest part of that
great Diana of their imaginary perfection in the observance of them, and even
to damn all that oppose them therein, and cry down the Ministry of the
Gospel, because of their non compliance with them in these so rotten principles.

We could have given proof sufficient, that these principles that follow, are
clearly and fully owned by them; but they are so evidently the very marks and
distinguishing badges of their Irreligion, so constantly practiced by them, and
so plainly known to all that know this sort of men, that we shall, once for all
satisfy the Reader. We shall not need to produce any evidence, but only stand
upon the Confutation.

Principle 1. Not co-salute any.
Confut.
THe commands of our Lord Jesus and his Apostles may be a sufficient answer to
show the folly of this Principle, which they stand so much upon, and for which
they so often call the Ministry Priests and Antichristian, etc. Let the
Reader seriously consider that full Scripture* Mat. 5. 47. If you salute your
brethren only, what do you more then do others? do not even the Publicans
so? In the verse before, our Lord Christ commands the duty of love to all men;
and in the same way of commanding does also impo^e the duty of salutation; not
only of some, but all; of Friends but Enemies: If ye salute your brethren
only, what do you more then do the Publicans? (which how fully it speaks to
the snarpe reproof of Quakers, that salute none but one another; we believe
their consciences will as c^earely tell them, if they be not seared, as any
observing eye may presently see) Mat. 10. 12. When ye come into an house
salute it. The Apostle Paul almost in every Epistle, especially Rom* 16 is full
of such commands. And for the practice of the Saints, see 1 Samuel 25* 14. David
sent messengers* to salute Abigails Husband. 1 Samuel 17. 22. David came and
saluted his brethren. Acts 21. 18. when Paul had saluted them, he declared etc.
where you fully see the practi^e of Paul, ^e first saluted them.

For that so much objected text, Luke 10. 4. Carry neither purse, nor scrip,
nor shoes; and salute no man by the way.

1. You may see that by the same command the seventy Disciples were forbid to
wear shoes, or carry a purse: and yet these Qurkers, who do so imperiously
impose upon all men this not saluting, make no conscience at all of these
commands of not wearing shoes* and not carrying purses as is evident to any
that observes them, especially if they be traveling a far journey. And this
was very fitly objected by one in Lancashire to James Nayler, reproving him for
his salute, who retorted the words upon him again, as being guilty of the
breach of that command, by wearing shoes. Is not this to pick and choose in
the Scriptures such things as do most agree with their humors, and according
to their own fancy to take away from the Scriptures, and bring upon themselves
that cur^e, Rev. 22. which they p^onounce against others? if it be so, that
this example be any ways or in any part binding to us at this day?

2. Further, Let the Reader know, this is no binding example to us* but a
particular dispensation and command to the seven^y Disciples at that time, as
will appear. For 1. When he sends forth the Apostles he imposes not that
command upon them; but lays upon them a contrary injunction, Into what house
soever ye enter, salute it, Mat. 10. 12. And 2. The Apostles practice above
showed, cleares* they were under no such command, for as much as they walked
contrary, unless you charge Paul with sinning, in that Romans 16. Asts 21 As 3.
They commanded this work to others, as above is proved. 4 That general
command to the Saints, to salute all* not only brethren but also enemies, Mat.
5 47. evidenceth fully* this that wa^ but a particular dispensation, and so to
us it is not binding.

3 To close up this* to us it appears a very ungrounded distinction of the
nature of salutes, which is practiced by these very men* for all their trouble
in salutes, is about men's putting off the Hat; whereas themselves do
ordinarily salute their brethren as do the Publicans, not only with saying,
How d^st thou; but also with putting forth the hand, etc. Now the Hand, and the
Language, with the moving of the body being the way of saluting among the Jews
in those days; if the manner of our salutes be so much dis-relished; its
evident, the practice of Quakers more directly contradicts that command, then
the practice of any others.

Thus the Reader may take notice how groundless their clamor is, in crying
out against saluting; and how malicious, in making this an Argument against the
Ministry. For it being clearly a command to salute all; as for the manner of
it, whether by Words or putting off the Hat, we shall not be determined by
their judgment: For as one Country is not bound to the habits of another; nor
is it the duty of a Saint in England to wear that kind of garment which was
worn by a Jew in the time of Christ; so neither did the Apostles take it their
duty to be conformed in their salutes to the fashions of salutation used either
in other Countries, or by the Patriarchs in their own.

Principle 2. Not giving any outward taken of Reverence to Magistrate, Parent,
Master, or any other.
Confut.
Genesis 42 6. Joseph being the Governor of the Land* when his Brethren came
before him, they bowed themselves before him with their Faces to the Earth.
Genesis 23. 7 Abraham stood up and bowed himself to the people of the Land, even
to the Children of Heth. 1 Samuel 25. 23. That holy Woman Abigail when she saw
David, she fell before David on her Face, and bowed her self to the ground.
Genesis 33. 3. Jacob bowed to Esau seven times. Genesis 48. 12. Joseph bowed himself
with his Face to his Father Jacob. 1 Kings 1. 23. Na^han the Prophet bowed
himself to the King with his Face to the ground. Now this was a known token
of Honor due, and by these holy persons given to Magistrates and Parents. Let
any Christian Reader consider the fifth Commandment. Honor thy Father and thy
Mother. And Romans 13. 7. Render to all their due, tribute to whom tribute,
honor to whom honor. Now as tribute and honor are here apparent to be due;
so it is also plain, that they are due outwardly. For otherwise, to pay
tribute in the heart only* would be but a ridiculous illusion; as also is
their saying, their heart does honor men, when there is no outward expression
thereof at all. But they will tell us* they honor the power, not the persons.
To which we say* What is the power, without the person? Government without
Governors, but a mere fancy? This is an high way to power contempt upon
persons in supreme Authority; as if a Soldier should say, He would honor the
supreme Office in the Army, but would not hear the Lord General Cromwell.
How does this notion cause so much irreverent carriage in their practice
generally before the Magistrates? And we leave it to the Magistrates to
consider, how impossible it shall be for any to commit treason against the
person of any Magistrate* if there be no honor due to their person* but their
power? But so much may satisfy for that.

Principle 3. That no man must have the title of Master.
Confut.
In the old Testament the Saints frequently were so called* ^ts no less then
seventeen times spoken of Abraham, Genesis 24. Exodus ^^* 5 ^ Sam. 24 6. David
calls King Saul Master. 2 Kings 6. 5. One of the Prophets gives that also to
Elis^a, Alas Master* it was bo^^owed. So the Apostle, Ephesians. 6. 5. 9. Servants be
obed^^nt to your Masters* Col. 3. 22. So in 1 Timothy 6. 1. Let ^^^ Servants count
their own Masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God and his Doctrine
be not blasph^med. Now for what is objected, that this only speaks to the case
of servants to their own Masters; we wish the Reader to know that the Prophet,
2 Kings 6. 5. was not a servant to Elisha, though he called him Master; nor
David servant to Saul* when he was in actual arms against him, (we mean, he
was not his Family servant) when he gave him that title of honor, and called
him Master, ^ Sam. 24. 6. And if the Quakers stand so punctually upon the
command of Christ, Mat. 23. 10. let them know, that if that command were
binding in this sense which they put upon it* it should hold in the case of the
heads of Families as fully as any others; and so the Apostle should sin in
calling them Masters, 1 Timothy 6. 1. Further, consider the word Sirs, is the same
expression with Master, in our English compellation, and in the Original; and
you shall frequently* find it given to those that were not Masters to them
that called them so. Genesis 43 20. Sir, we came down at the first, etc. John 12.
21. Sir, we would see Jesus. Acts 7. 26. Sirs, ye are Brethren; as Moses
speaks to them that strove. Paul and Barnaba^, Acts 14. said to them that were
ready to sacrifice to them, ver. 15. Sirs, why do you these things? Acts 16.
30. the Jailer cries out, Sirs, What shall we do to be saved? So Paul. Acts
27. to the Mari^ers, ver. 10. 21. 25. uses the same expression. Thus you see
the vanity of their evasion, and the lawfulness of using the word Sir, or
Master. Add hereto, that titles more honorable then Master, are often given
in Scripture; as Luke 1, 3. most excellent Theophilus. Acts 26. 25 most noble
Festus. 2 Epistle of John, the elder to the Elect Lady, ver. 1.

For that text which they urge as to this principle, Be not ye called Masters,
Mat. 23. 10. we have given you some account already; and shall add but this,
That a Lording and domineering over the Faith of Saints, as that 1 Pet. 5. 3.
and a vain affectation of titles, are the sins forbidden by Christ in that
place; for therein was the pride and folly of the Pharisees, not in the
expression of that civil honor, which is largely proved before, the Saints
and the Apostles gave to others.

What is here said to the case of the word Master, will fully answer as to the
like quarrel, about calling any Father.

There are many other things which we might speak to, as being their
principles, for they are indeed, the very distinguishing characters of that
Generation of men, whereby they own one another, and dis-owne others that are
not as loud in the ^^anders of the Ministry, because of these things, as
themselves: but we shall rather lay them down as their charges against the
Ministry, by reason whereof, they ridiculously would seem to prove them
Antichristian.

Charge 1. That they love the high places in the Synagognes.
Confut.
We might here justly b^moane their ignorance in the Scriptures. For he that i^
acquainted with the Tongue the Evangelist wrote in, will know that (...),
cannot signify Pulpits Mat. 23 6.
(which these men cry out so much against) nor any thing of that kind, which
we use as the best advantage, that all may hear; but as it is truly
interpreted, the chief Seats, which the Pharisees so much affected.

1. Let the Reader observe, That of those uppermost Seats that Christ speaks
of there were many in one Synagogue, and so its nothing to the case of Pulpits
2. And they had their Disciples sitting at their Feet* called Scabellum pedum
Phariseorum, The Pharisees footstool, out of a proud ostentation; which is no
way applicable to our case. 3. Those their chief Seats also were such, as
they, out of a vain affectation of honor, by reason of their extraordinary
thoughts of their own holiness and learning, did assume to themselves, and is
so yet further different from our case who use Pulpits as conveniences for the
peoples hearing not for our own vanity. 4. Those their Seats also were such as
were places in the Synagogues, chief, or uppermost, as where the chiefest and
more honorable persons sat, and such of these the Magistrates and persons of
honor in our Congregations deservedly enjoy, and not the Ministers; for the
word (...) which is interpreted chief, or uppermost there, does not signify
altitude, or height (for so we could tell them, that the Galleries in which the
Boys do fit, are higher then our Pulpits* etc.) but pre-eminence, as in the
case of Magistrates, who do enjoy the chiefest places, by reason of the
eminency of their Office, and as is plain in that Luke 14. 10. Friend sit up
higher. 5. If yet their quarrel be at the Pulpit, we have warrant for it in
Scripture from the example of Ezra, Neh. 8. 4. Ezra stood up in a Pulpit of
Wood, which they had made for the purpose, when he expounded the Law. 6. And
lastly, The necessity of a place higher then the body of the hearers, will
appear to any serious considerate Reader* from the impossibility of having the
Voice heard and understood in so numerous an Auditory, which we do usually
Preach the Gospel unto, if we should not use such advantages to help the Voice,
for Edification of the people. So that any serious Christian we doubt not, will
conclude, that it is not our selves, or our own glory we seek in this, but
their good, that they may the better all be informed of the things of Christ.
Were it not for which, as it were all one to us, to speak in secret, or one
the house top, so we dare appeal to these men's consciences, whether in their
clamourings in our Congregations, they do not desire to be heard of all which
they cannot be in their standing amongst the people? You see the
unreasonablenesse of these men to lay so great a charge as Anti-christianism^
upon our thus Publishing the Gospel, that all may hear.

Charge 2. That they wear long Robes.
Confut.
We suppose they ground this Charge upon Luke 20. 46. where it is said, Beware
of the Scribes that desire to walk in long Robes, and love greetings in the
markets, and the highest seats in the Synagogues, and the chief rooms at
Feasts. Now any that compares this, with Mat. 23. he will find it to be an
epitome of that, which the Evangelist sets down there, ver. 5. where you may
observe, that what Luke calls here, a walking in long Robes, Matthew there more
fully expresses in these words, They make broad their Phylacteries, and
enlarge the borders of their Garments; and so goes on in adding the same that
Luke there repeats, as loving the uppermost seats, etc. so that it is apparent,
that they signify one and the same thing; and their long Robes spoken of by
Luke, are their broad Phylacteries, and enlarged borders of their Garments. By
Phylacteries, from ' Deuteronomy. 6. 8 the Reader may understand, certain Frontlets
or pieces of Parchment tied upon their Foreheads and Arms of the Jews,
whereon were written some places of the Scriptures; and the borders of their
Garments were such Fringes at the bottom of their Garment, which all the Jews
were to wear; as you shall find* Numb. 15. 38. Speak unto the Children of
Israel* and bid them that they make them Fringes in the borders of their
Garments throughout their Generations. But the vanity and pride of the
Pharisees appeared in this, that they made their Fringes as pompous as they
could, laboring to exceed all others in the bigness of them, placing much
piety therein; and this was the pride and hypocrisy which the Lord Jesus
charged them with in that particular. Now Reader judge thou what ground they
have from hence, to charge this Scripture against the Ministers, because of
their Cloakes? Have they either their Fringes, or Phylacteries? And had not
Paul a Cloak? 2 Timothy 4 13. for the color or length whereof, we desire him
that pretends to the greatest ^ttainement, to tell us what they were? How
undeservedly we are called Antichristian upon this account, upon such
pitiful grounds as this, we leave it the Reader to consider?

Charge 3. That they stand Praying in the Synagogues.
Confut.
We suppose this their Charge is grounded upon Mat. 6. 5. Thou shall not be as
the hypocrites are, for they love to stand praying in their Synagogues, and in
the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. First, it is evident,
that the challenge of Christ there against hypocrites is, for their performing
their private duties in public places, that they may be seen of men, as is
clear from ver. 6. But thou when thou prayest, enter into thy closet: they
were much in praying in public, in the Synagogues and streets, that so they
might get the esteem of being holy men, but little or nothing in secret before
the Lord. But that this text d^^yes either the work of Prayer in public
Congregations, or the gesture of standing in time of Prayer, is most absurd to
affirm: for 2. Chron. 6 32. Luke 18. 10. two men went up to the temple to
pray. Mat. 21. 13. my house shall be called, etc. and that in Acts 16. 13. is
understood of one of Act, 3. 1.
their Synagogues. And in the time of the Gospel, prayer in the public
meeting places of the saints, is fully proved from 1 Timothy 2. 8. I will
therefore that prayer be made every where. 1 Cor. 14. 14. If I pray in an
unknown tongue, etc. where the Apostle is treating about prayer in
Church-meetings; as also in 1 Cor. 11. 4. Every man praying or prophesying with
his head covered, etc. So Acts 1. 14. 24. the Apostle prayed. Acts 2. 4^. the
converted Christians continued in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread, and in prayer. The Apostles join together prayer, and the
ministry of the Word, Acts 6 4. See Acts 13. 3. Acts 14. 23. Acts 20. 36. Acts
12. 5* And for the gesture of standing. read Mark 11. 25. and when ye stand
praying forgive, spoken to the disciples. Luke 18. ^3. the Publican stood
afar off and prayed. So that it is neither praying in the public meeting
places, nor standing in Prayer, that Christ reproved* but the hypocritical
ostentation of Pharisees. But what is this to Ministers, who neither perform
their private duties in public places, nor pray in the corners of the
streets, but are employed in the performance of that solemn part of the
worship of God; and yet for this cause are by these men reproached as
Antichristian?

Charge 4. That they Preach for Hire.
Confut.
It is chearefully acknowledged, that we do receive wages in our labor in the
Ministry. But as to our making hire the end of our work, we do abhor it:
and do appeal to the searcher of hearts, to clear up the unrighteousness of
this reproach, who tryes and judges all things. But we are the less troubled
with this aspersion, because these inveterate adversaries of the Ministry do
condemn it, because we do receive wages for our work. Now as to our warrant
in so doing, we shall show you the evident practice of the Apostles* and the
express authority of Scripture; 2 Cor. 11. 8. I robbed other Churches, taking
wages of them. Here you see the Apostle receiving wages of the Churches amongst
whom he labored. 1 Cor. 9. 6. I only and Barnabas, have not we power to
forbear working; where it is clear, that the Apostles lived by not their
working with their hands, but their Preaching of the Gospel; and if sometimes
he say, he labored with his hands, 1 These. 2. 9. I Preached to you the Gospel
of God freely, 2 Cor. 11. 7. Let the Reader consider, First in that same verse
he calls it an abasing of himself* yea, and secondly* in 1 Cor. 4. 12. he
reckons his laboring with his own hands amongst his great afflictions.
Thirdly, Nor was this a denial of his right to maintenance, but a suspension
of it for present reasons to himself best known. For 1 Cor. 9. 6. I only and
Barnabas, have we not power to forbear working? 2 These. 3. 8. 9. that we might
not be chargeable to any of you, but not as though we had not power* Now for
the fuller authority of Scripture, as to this our practice, read Luke 10. 7.
the labourer is worthy of his hyre; where Christ lays it down as the very
reason why the Apostles should make no provision for their subsistence* Provide
neither gold nor scrip. etc. but wholly depend upon the maintenance due to them
for Preaching the Gospel, because the labourer is worthy of his Hyre. And we
hope any ingenious Reader will believe that we in our places might be enabled
as well as others for subsistence in the world (if they will look upon us as
capable to understand and practice the Callings in which others live) but that
in obedience to this authority, we do freely cast our selves upon the Gospel
maintenance; but we know, our work is to give our selves continually to
Prayer* and the Ministry of the Word: and remember that 2 Timothy 2. 4. No man
that warreth ^ntangleth himself with the affairs of this life. But if there
were no more, we should propose these following Scriptures against any
objection, 1 Cor. 9. 7* Who goes a warfare at his own charges? ver, 9. You
shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn; Does God
take care for Oxen? ver, 10. or says he it altogether for our sakes? for our
sakes no doubt this is Written. Ver. 11. If we have sown unto you spiritual
things? is it a great thing if we should reap your carnal things? If others
are partakers of this power over you, are not we rather! Do you not know that
they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the temple? even
so God has ordained that they which Preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel. So 1 Timothy 5. 17. 18. as to that you may see it is a Gospel-Ordinance,
[God has Ordained it.]

And thus you have the Scripture fully asserting that, which these men do so
maliciously charge upon us as Antichristian.

There are many other cavills which these men do raise against the Ministry:
as that first, We have been at Universities, as if Paul's Learning had truly
made him mad, according to the the false charge of Festus. Secondly, Our making
use of an hour* glass (though our respect is herein to the weakness and
capacities of people, for though the spirit be willing, the flesh is often
weak.) Thirdly, Our Preaching upon a Text, (though our work be to divide the
word aright, 2 Timothy 2. 15. and Christ and the Apostles practis^^ it, Luke 4*
12. 22. they wondered at the gratio^^ words that proceeded out of his mouth;
which must needs be his opening of that Text. So Acts 28. 23. but of this we
have spoken before.) Fourthly, As also, that we run to the powers of the world
to uphold us, (as if it were a sin for Paul in case of wrong and persecution,
to appeal to Caesar's judgment, and no blessing for the Churches to be
protected by the Magistrate, to live a peaceable life under their authority.)
Fifthly, That we steal from the Prophets and Apostles, while we quote them,
and Preach from the Scriptures. Is not this blasphemously to charge Christ and
his Apostles, who so often quoted the Prophets, and spoke out their words, Mat.
1. 22. Mat. 2. 6. Mat. 4. Acts 28. 25. Well said the Prophet Esaias, etc. And
lastly, our not thouing all we speak unto, and yet thouing God, as is their
expression. For this last, we are taught to own the simplicity of the essence
of God thereby; and as for the Phrase you, given unto men, it no way
intrencheth upon God, either his attributes or commands, but being according to
the use thereof in England, and expression of civil respect, as Sir, Master,
most Noble, etc. we see not why the same freedom in our Dialect may not be
used amongst us. But in such indifferencies and trivial cases* that rule of
the Apostle holds, Have thou Faith, have it to thy self, Romans 14. 22. These,
with many other such, we shall pass over, as being the perverse disputings of
men of corrupt minds* being afraid we have kept you too long in discussing
things of les^er moment. But truly when we consider, that many ^illy souls
are catched by them with such cobwebbs as these, we thought it our duty to
undeceive poor creatures, and to discover the vanity of these Principles and
Slanders against the Ministry.

Some Considerations as to their Practices.
Pract. 1. Quaking.
THat there are such, those that have lived in these Northern parts, are
sufficiently satisfied. And for the manner of it, the trembling of all the
parts of their body grovelling upon the ground, foaming at the mouth, horrible
noise, running naked in the streets and markets* with other the like passions,
are fully known; and the Narration of John G^lpin in Print* will give any that
desires more particular information, a full account.

1. First, There are in Scripture three sorts of tremblings held forth. One is,
when the Glory and Majesty of God has been more extraordinarily revealed in
Visions to the Prophets, as in Moses at Mount Sinai, Daniel, Habakkuk, etc. For
this trembling under Visions of the Lords majesty; First, We do fully and
admire the glorious appearances of God unto and in those blessed Prophets. But
secondly, We are fully convinced that the quakings of these men do not proceed
from any such Visions of God; For

1. By those that have been delivered out of their snares, it has appeared to
be a Diabolical delusion, as is convincingly apqarent in the example of Gilpin.

2. It Is not Gods way to confirm such Blasphemo^^ Doctrine by any miracle,
though the Scripture plainly foretells 2 These. 2. 9. that the coming of the
son of perdition shall be after the working of Satan, in all signs and lying
wonders. God will never set his seal, by any miraculous act of his, to the
blasphemies of men. For Deuteronomy. 13. 1. If there arise amongst you a Prophet, or a
dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a sign, or a wonder, and the sign or the
wonder come to pass whereof he spoke unto thee, s^ying, let us go after other
gods; thou shall not hearken to the words of that Prophet, for the Lord your
God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with all your
heart, and with all your soul.

3. Who knows not that ^alse Prophets have been under Sat^nnic^ll exta^ies? as
Mahomet, John of L^yd^n, Knipperdolling; and amongst the Papists, multitudes of
examples of pretended ^aptures and ex^asies, which, we hope now will gain no
Pro clytes to their imp^ous Doctrines.

4. What glorious Visions and Revelations did Milner in L^nc^s^ire, one of
these men, pretend unto? As that a sheet with fo^re corners should at such a
time come down from Heaven, etc. with many more; which said apish imitation of
that Vision of Peter, together with all the rest of h^s presumptacus
prophesies, God did lay very naked to the eyes of all, to be a mere delusion,
and imposture of Satan. Deuteronomy. 18. 22. When a Prophet speaks in the name of
the Lord, if the thing follow ^^^^nor come to pass, that is the thing which
the Lord has not s^oken, but the Prophet has spoken presumptuously, thou
shall not be afraid of him.

5. Lastly, we wonder how such bitter cursings and raylings, such Blasphemous
and Antichristian Doctrines, should be the ^ruit of the Visions of God in his
majesty and glory. Surely they would strike down the soul to more
selfe-loathings and aba^ings, then that it should presently dare to rail or
avouch in it self perfection; when such Visions made Isaiah to cry out, I am
unclean: and Job, to abhor himself in dust and ^as^es.

Now as to the second sort of trembling, arising from sight of sin, and sense
of the wrath of God.

1. We g^ant, not only the Scriptures, but the experiences of many do
witness the terrors of God sometimes upon the soul for sin.

2. Those workings of wrath upon the soul, we do conceive* are vastly
different from the tremblings and quakings of these men's. For first, Some of us
do know, that very young W. C.
children have been under these ecstasies amongst them. Secondly, Sense of sin
never caused foaming* and running naked in the streets, that we do know of.
Thirdly, By the Narration of Gilpin, you may clearly observe, that he was
often under those quakings when he was purely possessed by Satan. Fourthly,
Besides, it is looked upon by them (as we could instance in particular in some
that have been long quakers) as a great attainement; and they have exceedingly
desired to be in these fits of trembling; not as to the terrifying of the
conscience, but as to the trembling of the body. 5. Lastly, we propose this to
t^^m, How comes it to pass, that many of their partners and companions, are
owned by them as saints, and as brethren, who yet never had those fits of
quaking? For if their quaking do proceed from a true sense of sin, how come
they to be saints before they have attained it.

3. But thirdly, Let us put the case that these their quaking do proceed from
sight of sin, and sense of wrath (though truly we are convinced to the
contrary) yet we say, that this, which they call their great perfection, First,
Is nothing but the startlings of a Legal conscience, far short of the happy
state of a soul made free by the blood of Jesus Christ. Secondly, Do not the
Devils believe and tremble by legal fights of sin, and through sense of
wrath, as also the damned souls in Hell; and shall we call this quaking their
perfection? Thirdly, These quakings, under sense of sin, can be at best, but
an establishing of selfe-righteousnesse, while they are cried up, and carried
on to the neglect of the righteousness of Christ, imputed to the soul,
through believing (not through working) as we have largely proved before,
against their establishing of their own righteousness. And so, what is Felix
better for all his tremblings? And what are these quakings, but a forerunner,
and fore-taste of that eternal wrath of God, which is to fall shortly upon
him, who rests under the convictions and actings of the Law, but embraces
not the righteousness of the Lord Jesus, to be found in that at his appearing.

3. There is indeed a mention of trembling in a third sense in Scripture, as a
Cor. 7. 15. where the Corinthians are said to receive Titus with fear and
trembling, which they grossly apply to their case* as also* Ephesians. 6 5.
Servants obey your Masters with fear and trembling; which holds forth no more,
then a reverentiall carfulness and obedience. These last we mention, lest
they should charge us with passing over that which they presume to make so much
for them.

In all this, Reader, we desire to profess, that our so large discovery of the
nature of quaking, is not to discourage any poor soul, that under tremblings
of spirit, is ^onging for Christ; but to warn every man of the danger and
seduction of these methods which establish such Doctrines and practices, as
lead the soul into the covenant of works, and leaves them there.

Pract. 2. Railing, etc.
Their practice herein is notoriously known, to whomsoever has had to do
with them; and our selves, some of us* have had a large measure of this
revilings thrown upon us* In one Paper of theirs, which one of us has, you
have all these horrid raylings against the Ministers, calling them Priests,
Conjurers, Thieves, Robbert* Antichrists, Witches, Devils, Sir-Simons,
Serpents, Bloody Herodians, Searle^ colored Beasts, Babylons Merchants,
Wolves, Dogs* Swine, Sodemites, etc. Reader, we are not ashamed of the Gospel
of Christ, no^ of the reproach of men, because of it* But consider how fully
they make good that of Jude 13. Raging Waves of the Sea, foaming* m^ their own
shame, etc. though Michael the Aarchangel when disputing with the Devil, durst
bring no Railing accusation against him. But is not the condition of the
Ministers of Christ in England* such, that we have reason to take up the
complaint of David, Psalm. 57. 4. My soul is amongst lions, and I lie even
amongst them that are set on fire, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and
their tongue a sharp sword, their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness,
the poison of Aspes is under their lips. Neither is it only mentioned as the
Saints complaint, but as the strict prohibition of the spirit of God. Ephesians. 4.
31. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking
be put away from you, with all malice. As also that of Timothy, 2 Timothy 2. 25.
The servant of the Lord must be gentle toward all men, in meekness
instructing th^se that oppose themselves* if God per adventure will give them
repentance, to the acknowledgement of the truth. How clearly contradictory is
the way of these men to the rule of Paul, when they in all their speaking to
men* not of their way, or that oppose themselves, do fly out in those bitter
raylings, in calling them Devils, damned, and that they see the Devil in
their Faces, and such like expressions? So 1 Peter 3. 4. The Apostle calls for
meek and quiet spirits, which in the sight of God are of great price. But we
shall close up this with that of our Savior, Mat. 7. ^. Judge not that ye be
not judged. And Mat. 5. 5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the
Earth.

Pract. 3. Their pretending upon all occasions to be sent by special
Commission from God, as we shall instance in some cases following more
particularly.
Some of them came to Kendale Church, about a year agone* and pretended they
had a Commission to pull down the Steeple* Another Thomas Castley came in the
time of the Preaching of one of us to the Congregation at Kendale* and had* he
said, his W. C.
Commission from God to pull down the Houre-Glasse. And the same man came a
long mile, with no other Message from God (as he pretended) but this, to tell
of one of us, Thou at an high Priest; which words having spoken, he went his
way. Another time he came with a Message from God (as he pretended) to the
house of the abovesaid one of us, at which time I W. C.
was not at home; yet confidently affirmed to my Wife, that God had sent him
and that I was at home. Again also, the same man came with the like Message to
my House, and said, that God had sent him to me, and that I was at home; but it
being denied* he was by the Schoolmaster Mr. Turner, taken ^ver to his house*
where (by providence, being presently come home) I went to him, and asked him,
What message ^e had from God to me? whereat, he denied that he had any message
to me from W. C.
God at all. Mr. Richard Stookes Minister at Grayrig* told one of us that
disco^rsing with Fox at a meeting appointed, concerning his immediate call; the
said Fox affirmed, He was called by a V^yce from Heaven to Grayrig; and at his
affirming the ^ame* the simple deluded souls that were there with him,
affirmed, they kn^w it to be true; he asked them, whether they saw any vision,
or heard any voice? they answered, No; but all the account they could give of
it, was* That where^^ he was walking toward Firthban^e, suddenly he faced
about, and said* he was commanded to ^^e to Grayrig. One of these people, when
they were lately at Newcastle, told a Merchant there, Mr. H. T. having on his
black clothes, that he was a deceiver, etc. but being told he was no
Minister, he shuffied pitifully* as ^eeing how naked his mistake was laid.
Concerning this horrid pretense of being sent of God, to the commission of
abominable practices in Yorkeshi^e, we refer you to a Book called* The
Second Hearing of the cause betwixt the Quaerer and Anti-Quaerer, etc.

In the view of the Stories above-written, the Reader may make these
Observations.

1. Is it the way of the Lord to call men immediately from Heaven* on purpose
to tell only of an Houre-Glasse; and to have nothing to say, but to call a man
Priest, with no other Message? Were ever the Prophets of God sent forth with
such trivial messages as these? How fearfully is the glorious name of an holy
God abused in this particular.

2. Is not this to belly the all-knowing God, to say in the name of the Lord*
That one of us was at home, when he was not? And that he had a Message, which
presently after he denied again, being demanded what it was.

3. How emi^ent is that judgment upon the followers of these men, that they
are delivered up to strong delusions to believe lies themselves, and delude
others* who confidently affirmed, that they knew that Fox was so sent as he
peetended by an immediate voice from God, and yet upon enquiry, denied they
either saw shape, or heard voice.

4. That this their pretense of being commanded, or sent forth immediately by
God, is most wicked and vain, and merely their way to get populer applause or
acceptance, is plain. For,

1. If they be withheld in public from delivering their message there (as
they may pretend) yet why do they not deliver it in private? or at other
times? When they came to Newcastle, and were with us before the Magistrates,
they delivered not their message there; and they might have had liberty with
freedom to come to any of our Houses; nay, some of them were invited thither
by some of us. How fully do they W. C.
contradict themselves, and are faithless messengers to their master, neither
true to God nor Satan.

2. If they were under such powerful impulses of the spirit to speak, (as
they pretend they are) that they cannot hold; we desire to know how they can
now of late forbear till our public worship and exercise be concluded? At
their first breaking forth it was otherwise; but since they have found that
their speaking in the time of our public work, is punishable by Law, they
can now be silent till we have closed up the work. Certainly, such politic
proceedings do evidently make plain, that their pretense of an extraordinary
command, and strong impulses of the spirit, are absolute counterfeit, either
against their own consciences, or by the strong delusions of the Father of
Lies.

3. Their usual charge in public against us, is that we a^^ Deceivers, and
do teach lies in the name of the Lord; yet when they are charged to produce
any one tittle by us delivered that they particularly can call a lie, there is
nothing that they do ordinarily produce, or can except against us, but will
presently run to such expressions as these; Thou wearest long Robes, and
Prayest standing in the Synagogues; and therefore they tell us in the name of
the Lord, we Preach lye^: this wa^ fully apparent lately before the Magistrates
of Newe^stle, where John Audland, Stubbes, and the woman their partner, were
called, and challenged to instance in any one particular of the Doctrine
delivered by either of us, which they durst affirm to S. H. W. C.
be a lie, but had no syllable against it to object; and as we could instance
in many other cases.

4. But would you lastly, see their folly in pretending to an immediate light,
take this following Story; George Fox meeting with ^ne Mr. Nichols in Carlisle,
told him, that he was an Hypocrite etc. he replying* asked him, if he knew his
heart? he said, he did. He asked him again, and Fox affirmed again, he did.
He then asked him, if he knew his Name Fox answered, I know by thy questions
thou art an Hypocrite, shuffling so lamentably to evade his question. To whom
Mr. Nichols answered, Do thou know my heart and not know my name? And so
shaked him off as a most notorious Impostor.

Reader, they that live in the Countries where these people come, or do
reside, do know, we might discover much more of their Principles and
Practices, then what we have done* We might plead against them the fruits of
their casting off the Word and way of God; and the more, because they justify
them in stead of mourning for them. Such as George Fox* his cur^ing of Mr
F^therstone: Miles Ralhead, his cursing of master Walker Minister of Kendale
very lately in the presence of master Archer* and Mr. Cook. Christopher
Atkinson, (a grand leader of this people and a Prophetical Impostor) ^or a
good while together, his very immodest familiarity with (to say no more) a
woman of his way, in the sight of a godly Minister at Kendale M. Wa^^^oe. The
wife of Edmund Adlington of Kendale going naked ( November 21. 1653.) through
Kenda'e streets etc. but these we have named are the very badge of their
profession; and we are satisfied that this will suffice to enforce that rule of
the Apostle upon every watchful heart [from such turn away.]

We shall now add the reason of our Title; and how fully that title of
Pharisee which they ordinarily give to others will fall upon themselves, will
thus appear.

1. The Pharisees it is f(...)nowne, did separate themselves from the rest of
the People, upon an account of a conceit they had of their own surpassing
holiness: This is the very reason of their Name, as Luke 18. 9. Christ spoake
that Parab^e about the Publicans and Pharisees, unto certain that trusted in
themselves, that they were righteous, and de^^ised others. How fully is this
the spirit of these men? all that are acquainted with their Principles and
Practices know. Not any (whatsoever being owned of them as Saints) but such as
walk in their way, ptonouncing damnation to all others. Let them Read and
consider Isay 65. 5. They which say, stand by thy self, come not near to me,
for I am holier then thou; these are a smoke in my Nose, and as a fire that
burns all the day.

2. Their undeniable conformity to the Pharisees is in their known rash
censuring, John 7. 49. When the people had spoken to the praise of the Lord
Jesus, the Pharisees presently censure, saying, This people who knows not the
Law are Cursed. What is this but the ordinary Phrase of Quakers, i^ pronouncing
every one cursed and damned* that is not of their way. John 10. 20. There was a
division amongst the Jews, and many of them said, he has a Devil, and is
mad. So John 9. 16. Mat. 11. 19. Behold a man gluttenous, and a Winebibber. No
man dare say, that Christ sinned in excess, as to meat and drink, but only
this was their Pharisaicall slander, because of his lawful use of meat and
drink. Here you have them again perfectly acted, in pronouncing others
cursed, and rashly judging the lawful use of meats, etc. and appearing the
most absolute successors to Pharisees.

3. Mat. 23. 13. Christ is there charging the Pharisees for shutting the
Kingdom of Heaven against men, which is known to be by putting people upon a
righteousness within them, in opposition to that of Christ. And how fully this
is the very business of Quakers, we refer you to that Position of theirs in
page 10. of this Book. But we shall add that, Mat. 5. 20* Except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of heaven.

4. Mat. 23. 15. There Christ pronounces a woe to the Pharisees, for
compassing Sea and Land to make one Pro^elyte, which so made, is twofold more
the child of Hell, then before. Considering the blasphemies of these men
before alleged, and their wandering up and down to carry on that design of
poisoning men's hearts with their Doctrines; any Reader will see the fullness of
the parallel.

5. Mat. 23. 23. You have another woe pronounced against the Pharisees by
Christ, for tything Mint, etc. but neglecting the weightier matters of the Law,
etc. How evidently is this the frame of these men who laying all the weight
upon trivial observances of Hats, Thou, Clothes, etc. do wholly neglect the
great mysteries of Faith, righteousness of Christ* and Ordinances of the
Gospel? Thus they strain at a Gna^, and swallow a Camel.

6. Mat. 23. 27. 28. A woe pronounced to the Pharisees for making clean the
outside of the cup, being whited sepulchers, outwardly appearing beautiful,
but within full of hypocrisy and iniquity. How fully does this set out the
condition of these Quakers, as if it were a Prophecy of them? who are inwardly
so full of cursing and bitterness, and being only clothed with some seem
seem^^g^y beautiful rags of the Law, do put from them the very
righteousness of Christ imputed, and deny the Principles of the Gospel.

We have the rather given you the Description of them out of this Chapter,
because it is their presumption* and usual ^^^rse from this Chapter, to
persuade the credulons world, that the Ministers are these Pharisees. But alas,
how fully does it make these men naked and open, and pull off the fig leaves of
their hy^oc^i^^e We might also add that, Mat. 23. 5. All their works (as the
Pharisees then) they now do, to be seen of men, ^ise whence is it, That no
place will serve them to vent their messages in (though but to particular
persons) but in the meeting houses or Synagognes? No place hears of their
Religion so much as streets, and market Crosses: For though they Pray not at
all, as constant experience is a most convincing witness, (no, they are the
Heathen that know not God, and the Families that call not on his name) yet,
what of Religion is pretended to by them, is most in crying up their own
holiness, and Pharisaically despising and scorning others publicly in the
streets and market places. And though they be not called Master, and Rabbi, yet
they fully do affect the whole of that Pharisaicall vanity, in crying up
themselves as extraordinary Prophets, accounting themselves the only Rabbis
or Authentical Doctors of truth in the world. We could acquaint the Learned,
from Jewish Antiquities with many other affectations of the Pharisees, their
minicall gestures, hypocritical carryages in the streets, wherein these men
are a most exquisite picture of them. But we rather leave them, as they are
plainly set forth in these Seripture discoveries for Monkish Holiness, which
we also attribute to them: He that shall compare their neglect of Apparel, the
pretended frequent Fastings, their dissemb^^ng separation from the world
(though James Nayler being asked, how he left, W. C,
and gave away his Estate, when he entered into this way, said, in the Public
Sessions at Appleby, He gave it to his Wife? a pretty shift) their
counterfeiting Visions and Revelations, the laying weight of justification,
upon their outward observances, and many other things of the same nature; we
say, he that shall compare them in these things, with Popish Monks and Friars,
will questionless conclude, That as their way in these things, is clearly the
superstition of Monks and Friars, so we have not been injurious in giving that
Title to all the pretenses of their holiness: Nay we could produce instances
of Visions, Revelations, Fastings, etc. in that shaven generation, which might
let these people know, their perfection they boast of, leaves them many Leagues
short of this kind of perfection which has more fully been attained to by
that Popis^ Rabble.

And now Brethren, you, for the establishing of whose Faith in a special
manner we have Published this, having forewar^ed you of grievous Wolves entering
in upon you; not sp^ring, but endeavoring to make havocke of the Flock, and
of the Faith once delivered to the Saints. We commend you to the Lord, and the
Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
Inheritance amongst all them that are sanctified.
FINIS.

