THE LAST TRVE INTELLIGENCE FROM IRELAND.

Dated in Dublin, 16. March, and received in LONDON 28. March. 1642.



LONDON: Printed for H. Blunden. 1642.

DVBLIN, THE 16th. March. 1641.
Sir,
I Have not else to present you withal, other then the passages of the times,
which I know you much desire to hear of; in regard I know your affection is
such, to the prosperity of Gods Church, and People, that ye wait to hear after
it, as old Ely did for return of the Ark. And therefore for your further
satisfaction, that although we are far asunder, yet we may be thankful, and
rejoice, together for all the good that God has done for his Israel. I wrote
to you heretofore at large, but the last week I writ only to my Brother Joh.
Cole, knowing that you will be partaker of what I writ to him; I therefore
shall fall upon what since is done: only the manner of the taking of
Mackmaghan, whom I mentioned in my Letter; he had stripped himself from all his
clothes, and lay down as a dead man amongst those that were slain, besmeerd
with blood, but not wounded; with a Friars girdle girt about his naked body,
which Captain Byron beholding, bid one of his men take it from his body, and
perceiving a great head of hair, newly come from under the Barbers hands, bid
his man to cut it off; which his man taking aim, laid his sword once or twice
on his neck, whereupon Mackmaghan suddenly rose up, and desired quarter: and
that if they would spare his life, he would release my Lord Blanys wife and his
children, which he told them were his prisoners: so I hear now (but I believe
it not) that my Lady Blany and her children are come up to our Camp, and are
to be in Town with our Army this night. This Mackmagham titles himself Baron
of Manahan; as Sir Pyealam O Neale does title himself Earl of Tyrone. We
understand that upon the getting in of the last shipping to Tredath, with
provision for relieving of the Town, that the Rebels were so much discouraged
at it, that Colonel Relys Soldiers lying on this side of Tredath, ran most of
them from him into the North, which Sir Henry Tichborne (Governor of Tredath)
hearing of; went the bolder on Sir Phealum O Neale, and Mackmaghan on the other
side, so that when he had put them away, the country people presently brought
him in store of provision of all sorts; The 11. present, the Earl of Ormond our
Lieutenant General, went from Garrets Town, where all the Foot Company lay
(because of the bad weather they had) with 700 horse unto Tredath, where my
Lord Moore and Sir Henry Tichbourne made him and all his Company very welcome.
Whiles my Lord was there, came in diverse Gentlemen of the Country, and
submitted unto him, Master Barnwell of Kilbene, Sir John Newtervill, son and
heir to my Lord Viscount Newtervill, Edward Dowdall of the Mountyne, that was
Regester of the Chancery, who had changd his Religion and his allegiance upon
a sudden and became Captain of a Troop of Rebels; there came in also and
submitted at Tredath, and to my Lord in the Country, Master Garret Elmor and
his two sons, Master Talbut of Roberts Town, and diverse others, and are many
of them brought and imprisoned in the Castle, every of them submitting
themselves. The Earl of Fingully wrote a submissive Letter to my Lord of
Ormond, and promised to come to my Lord and 100 more Gentlemen with him, but my
Lord went to meet them, but they kept not promise. Whereupon our Soldiers our
Horsemen rid thither to Killeene the Earl of Fingully and burnt it and all
other places belonging to him wheresoever they came. And from Garretts-Towne
our Army removed to Baleoddry, and when they came thence they burnt it: and
from thence they sent out to my Lord of Germenstowne, but I hear not what is
become of my Lord of Germenstowne, nor my Lord Newtervill, but I hear their
Horses were left without any either men and much goods. I hear that they have
only spoiled the waste houses about those Castles, but the Castles they have
preserved. And from Ballroddry they came yesterday morning, purposing to come
home near the Sea side, and they intended last night to lie about Sword, which
is six miles from this place; and in their way to burn Colonel Luke
Newtervils house; and coming by Malehide, Master Talbut of Malehide did submit
himself. You may please to take notice, that the furthest place that our
Footmen went was to Garretts Town, Which is but thirteen miles from hence,
and there they lay some days, because of the extremity of the weather; but
our Horse did scowt abroad further; and did much mischief to the Rebels, by
firing their Towns and houses. But in all this time they have not had so much
as the sight of the enemy. In so much that I hear that my Lord of Ormond was
resolved once to follow them into the North as far as the Newry, where their
great Magazine, or store lies. I am persuaded they have much money there. And I
am afraid that the Army expected out of Scotland, will fall upon it and get all
the booty. I hear that our Lord Justices did hinder our Army going thither,
fearing the Enemy should lie somewhere hereabout stronger then we are. We
hear that Colonel Birne and Colonel More have left the Castle of Leastip,
for most of their men fled from them upon the report that was amongst them of
the coming of our Army thither, and have told their Soldiers, that they have
three ships laden with Ammunition come in for them to Wexford, and they are
gone to leavie more money on the Country to raise 1000. l or send for more
Arms. I believe it is to put money in their Purses, to get them out of the
Kingdom, God grant that our shipping may meet with them. The passage between
this and Tredath by Land is almost free for a single man Armed to pass. Our
Army have sent three hundred of their men to Tredath, and one battering Piece
of Ordnance. Upon our Armies return that is abroad under Command of the Earl
of Ormond, Colonel Harcot, Lord Lambert, and Sir Richard Grinfield, those
which are here are to go forth under* Command of Sir Charles Coote and
Colonel Crayford; and it is thought they shall go toward Leastip, and to
Kilkock, and so down to the Queens Country. I think they may go through
the Kingdom without any opposition; for they have wounded their own
Consciences, and God their hearts, and they will never adventure the rest of
their bodies; for now they see their estates gone, they have not any thing else
to preserve. We hear that my Lord President of Mounster, has joined his
Forces with Sir Charles Vaviser, and is gone out against my Lord Mountgarrett
and his Army; and that my Lord Muzgrave is not at all in Rebellion. We hear
also that Lymerick and the Fort there is safe on our side, and the Lord our God
being also on our side, I trust will send us peace, although the Enemy be yet
very strong. Some report that the Town of Gallaway is not revolted. I trust
that God will so prosper us, that I shall by the next Post write you better
news. We hear that in the North our friends hold what is their own, and in
every Battle put the Rebels to flight. I trust that the Scotts Army will not
now come over, if they be not already come; for it will grieve our Soldiers
to loose their expected Booty, for all the toil they have had this Winter;
yet we are beholding to them for their forwardness to come over. Thus for
present I humbly take leave, resting ever.

Your dutiful and obedient Son, ROBERT COLE.

FINIS.

