NEVVES FROM IRELAND.

Wherein is related these Particulars following.

1. A Proclamation from the Rebels. 2. The Marching of 30000 Rebels into the
Province of Munster, under the command of six great Lords. 3. The Siege of
Kingsale, and Bandon-Bridge. 4. Diverse skirmishes with the Rebels near
Dublin. 5. Two several overthrows of the Rebels, given by the Scots and the
English, the one at London Derry, the other at Newry.
Sent in 2 Letters, one to Mr. Roger Cole in Iremonger-lane, from his Brother,
M. Cole, Merchant in Dublin, And the other from a Scotch Gentlewoman to her
Husband, now resident in Shoe Lane.

London, Printed for F. Coals. 1641.

NEVVES FROM IRELAND.
From Dublin the 23. February. 1641. Most dear Mother,
AFter my humble duty remembered, etc. I wrote to you the last week by a friend
bound for London, enclosed to my Brother Roger Cole, and enclosed a
Proclamation set forth by the Lords Justices and Council here, showing the
names of diverse of the Capital Rebels, and what reward shall be given unto him
that shall bring in the heads of them or kill them, although they shall not be
able to bring in their heads, yet a different reward to be given the doers of
it, and since which time, Sir Phelom O Neale and the Lords of the English Pale,
viz. the ancient English Inhabiting diverse Counties about Dublin, bestowed on
them by the Kings of England, of whom I wrote the names in my former letters,
have made a Proclamation on their parts, that whosoever shall bring unto them
the head of the Earl of Ormond our General, of Sir Charles Coote, Sir Simon
Harcourt, and other Colonels and Captains of ours, shall have a very great
reward, and the fine of each is expressed in the Proclamation, as yet they dare
do any thing, for if we count the arm of the flesh to be strength, they are
near 20 to one against us. There is of them gone into the Province of Munster
above 30000 men, and some report they are complete in Arms, and the Commanders
are the Lord Montgarret, L. Dunboyne, L. of Icharin, L. Kihare, L. Brittis, and
Lord of upper Ossery, and some affirm that my Lord of Muzgrave is General,
they have driven the Lord President into Cork, and 14 or 1500 men with him,
and have laid siege to Bandon-bridge, and Kingsale, of which we have certain
news, but what mischief they have done to our English in all the Country
there about, we know not, but do grieve to think upon. All the Province of
Connaght is likewise in rebellion, and Gallaway taken by them, only we
understand that the Fort there is on our side, but hour long they can subsist
without provision we know not, that is the most dangerous place in the Kingdom,
because it is a good Harbor and lies open to Spain, and you know that spain
has ever bin a harbor of Rebels against England, their Religion teaches men
so to be. I wrote you formerly that if we have not shipping in all the Ports of
this Kingdom, to prevent the coming in of Arms to the Rebels, that all the
aid England can send will do us little good, for you may please to consider
the difference between their Soldiers and ours, setting their Commanders a
part: our men are for the most part poor men and weak in many respects, for
he that is of any great means and great breeding in England, will not come
over to be common Soldier here, and those that are here they are (many of
them) poor pilledg'd people, the better sort are gone for the most part into
England: they are the most wise able and active men of this Kingdom, and in
battle they have a very great advantage against us, for they commonly place
themselves hear unto some great Bog, and if they be put to the worse in 500
yards running they will get into the Bogs, where no horse can come near them,
neither are our foot skillful to follow them: if it were possible there to
compassd them in, it were to the purpose, but to meet with them on the other
side of the Bog, it may be will cost our men (as in many places) 20 or 30 miles
march, and by that time they will be far from our Army. The Rebellion is so
general, and their men so many, that if our Army here, which with my Lord
Lieut. Regiment now landed, and the 4 or 500 horse now come (as is reported)
will make hardly 8000 men, 1000 whereof are Inhabitants, and most of them
householders, Merchants and Tradesmen of this City, and their servants, who may
not leave this City without great danger. I have two servants in the Kings
pay, and I stand with my own Arms upon any service that shall be required,
and will God willing, adventure my hearts blood for the cause in hand; I say if
our Army here should adventure far into the Country against them one way,
they will escape our Army many ways, and come upon Dublin, which would
endanger the loss of the whole Kingdom, for all depends upon this place: For
although we have no intelligence out of the North, whereby to write you of it,
yet you may please to conceive, that where the Rebellion began, they will make
sure something for themselves: I think there are none but Scots Inhabitants,
very few English left to oppose them, we have no certain intelligence thence
of the landing of any out of Scotland, but what we hear out of England; I wrote
you of the going away of shipping from hence with provision for to relieve our
Soldiers in Tredath (or Droghedath) and was in hope that they had got in safe,
but On Saturday we understood that they were not then gotten in, that the
Rebels had sunck many boats and chained them together, and that Captain
Bartlet of the Kings Pinasse; intended to try the breaking of the chain, or if
the spring-tyde would bring water enough to carry them over the chain, and
that Captain Bartlet had taken one vessel laden with Herrings, and sunck
another being come from Wexford, thither with provision for the Rebels, I trust
to hear good news from thence.

We hear that there are two Priests at Nantz in France, buying of Powder and
Arms for the Rebels, I am much afraid that this South wind has brought them
in unto Wexford, for that Town is in their own custody, I cannot hear
whether Youghall and Dungarven be taken by them or not; but they have a very
great Army gone that way; we are here in a very bad case for want of money, and
we have had good hope to have had store out of England this wind, but there is
not money to pay the Soldiers that are now come over. We have great joy for the
blessed agreement between the King and the Parliament. God who is the Author
of peace and Unity, keep the devil and his instruments; the sower of
sedition, and his children, from disturbing the same, that the King may be
happy, God glorified, his Religion established, that truth and honesty may be
in fashion, and superstition and lies may be put away from our Land, and the
father of lies and Antichrist utterly banished. We have reported here, that my
Lord Masgrave has great forces apart, besides the Army that is with my Lord
Mountgarret, but I think it is all one Army, and I marvel from whence they
have their Arms, except France should furnish them, brought into Wexford.

I have written you what conflicts we have had about us with the Rebels, I
think that in several battles; viz. at Glasnemoccy (so much reported of in
the English Currants) was not above 6 men poor Rogues found in houses without
fight, at the Grange 6 miles from this, I think were some 70 men slain, and
many Arms taken, at Sheourd 4 Colors were taken, and about 100 slain of
them, and there we lost Sir Luciu^ Carry, brother to the Lord Viscount Fawkland
in England, he was Lieutenant Collonell to Sir Charles Cootes Regiment; at
Racoole there was about 50 men slain of them: at Fingles, about some 30 of
them slain; and we lost but one ordinary Soldier, and what men have been
slain at Tredath, or Droghedah, we hear that this last voyage, we were like
to lose a great boat load of provision, that went down to relieve the Town,
by being grounded, but that they had a piece of Ordnance aboard, which secured
them till the Tide came again, and slew many of the Rebels both horse and
foot, of which I shall write more the next opportunity; In the mean time I
humbly commend you to God, and rest,

Your dutiful Son, Robert Cole.

The true Copy of another Letter that was sent from Irevine, the twenty seventh
of February, 1641.
Most loving Husband,
MY love remembered to you, I do much wonder that since you went to London, I
never received any Letter from you but one, which I wonder of you, being so
long in London.

Your brother Henry the writer hereof is come over with good News blessed be
our God, for there has been two great battles fought between the Rebels and
our Scotchmen, the one at Londonderry, the other at the Nenry, where the Lord
has given great victory; above 15. or 16, hundred slain of the Enemies in
both the battles, Captain Ellis with his company of 300. has banished them
from the band-fide, and Captain Cunnighame met him at Ballachy, in March from
the Town of Coulraine, and with him and Captain Play, 500. so that they are
we hope from these three Counties, for we have intelligence by your brother,
that there is brave Commanders beyond, as Colonel Lestie, Major Lestie, that
went from this Town, Lieutenant Colonel Brothwike, and Captain Hamilton, who
has been very valorous, there has been no loss on our side this great
while, only one Robert Jake, and John Carfell, two of Captain Ellis Soldiers
slain at the Town, and your cousin John Vernet is hurt, and one that kept Sir
John's Land in the Grange, the Lord of Antrims Country is silent now, but a
while ago they made great stir as you writ, that Glenram and Enver was burnt,
but it is not so, they are safe, Murno did not stay in Carikfergus above 48.
hours after he landed, but marched toward Belfast, and from thence to
Drummore, and as we hear by your brother of a certain, gave battle to one
Patricke, Mac Cartane, and one Mac Geere, where he did kill many of them, being
accompanied with my Lord of Ardes and his forces, with the loss of 14. men,
and your brother says they are beaten from the Newrie, and the North part
somewhat quieter then it was, blessed be our good God; we hear that England is
like to be in a woeful case, and yet you never touch it in your Letter, I pray
you do not so any more, we suspect the General himself will go over shortly
if he had commission: men are levying very fast here.

Thus to obey your desire, to write younewes, as you do not the like to me,
but you may thank the Clarke, I wrote, one to you before as well as I could,
your father and mother remembers them, you and all your friends: your father is
going over again, if he hear any further of any settling, your brethren that
is with Master James Catwarthy are all well, Alexander your brother is newly
come over, but is going back in all haste, he came for more Arms, I pray yon
have you home as soon as possible you can, and let me hear from you by every
Post, I commit you to the Lord, and rest,

Your loving Wife, Jane Glencorse.
Irewine in Scotland, the 27. of Feb.
FINIS.

