A SERMON OF Conforming and Reforming: made to the Convocation at S. PAUL'S
Church in London, By JOHN COLET, D. D.

Dean of the said Church: upon ROMANS xii. 2.

Be ye reformed, etc.

Writ an hundred and fifty years since.

To which is now added an Appendix of Bp. Andrews, and Dr. Hammonds solemn
petition and advice to the Convocation; with his directions to the Laity, how
to prolong their happiness.

Jo. Colcti cogitationes, quacunque etiam lingua proditas, optarim. Erasmi
epist. p. 708. l. 12.

Printed by J. Field, (Printer to the Universitie of Cambridge) for William
Morden, 1661.

To the Reader.
COnforming and Reforming is now the talk of every man in this Kingdom. Some
are very zealous for one without the other; our Dr. is for both conjoyntly, but
yet in due order. He would have us first obey the laws of Christ (our great
Lawmakers) and then the Canons of the Church: and not without reason. For if
the Church be the body of Christ, I would fain learn from Romans xii. 5. 1 Cor.
x. 17. and xii. 13. Ephesians. ii. 16. iv. 4. Col. iii. 15.
our Non-conformists, why we may not give as much reverence and obedience to
the laws of the Church, as we must to the laws of each paltry Corporation The
contrary position has occasioned the great increase of fanatics in this
Realm, as I have proved in my discourse of the rise and growth of Quakerisme,
which will shortly be printed.

If you desire to be informed concerning the life of this excellent person Dr.
Colet, you may read it described at large by Erasmus in his Epistles, a page
702. ad 712. (to which add Sr. Thom. Mores letter printed in Stapleton, tom. 4.
p. 992.) And if you would know what other works this Author writ, take the
catalogue of them as it is set down by Pitseus, page 692.

1 In Proverbia Solomanis. 2 -- Evangelium Matthaei. 3 -- Epistolas Pauli. 4 --
Precationem Dominicam. 5 -- Symbolum Fidei. 6 Breviloq. dictorum Christi. 7 De
reformidatione Christi. 8 Conciones ordinariae, and 9 -- extraordinariae. 10
Vita hominis Christiani. 11 In cleri Convocatione. 12 Excerptiones Doctorum. 13
Ortolanus. 14 Epistolae ad Erasmum. 15 De moribus (...) 16 De institutione
puerili. 17 (...) ad Tailerum. 18 Ad argumenta Erasmi.
Of which 18 books I have seen none yet, except this which I here publish, and
his Commentary on the first Epistle to the Corinthians, (which is in Emmanuel
Colledge-library) unless I may reckon that small tract for one of them, which
is prefixed to his private Devotions; printed for I. Benson. If any man know
where any other of his pieces be, he is entreated to give notice thereof,
either to me, or to M. Crumleholme Master of S. Paul's school in London or to M.
Morden Bookseller in Cambridge; that they may be published. You see this Sermon
is one of Pits's number: and it is cited by Holland in his (...) Anglica, p.
146. And he that compares the 4th page of it, with what Mr. Cambden says of
Dr. Colet (Remains, p. 272) will conclude, that he there means this discourse.
The notes are added by me, partly to satisfy them who will ask what Canons
there be to that purpose, and partly out of my gratitude to D. Colet, unto
whose bounty on S. Paul's School, I (...) most of my education.

If any ask why I cite Theodorus and the Canon law thrice, Linwood and Spelmans
Councels often: I answer, Because I suppose our Dr. meant them. And again those
that I cite seem to be confirmed by an Act of Parl. 25. Hen. 8 c. 19.
entitled, An Act concerning submission of the Clergy: wherein it is decreed
thus, Provided also, that such Canons, Constitutions, etc. being already made,
which be not repugnant to the laws, statutes and customs of this Realm, nor to
the damage or hurt of the Kings prerogative, shall now still be used and
executed, as they were before the making of this Act, etc. which Act is
revived, 1. Eliz. c. 1.

I have lately seen two small pieces in 8o, on the same subject with this
Sermon of Dr. Colet (which I wish were reprinted together) viz. Stimulus
pastorum per Bartholomeum a Martyribus, Hispaniae Primatem, Parisiis, 1586.
and, Oration Gentiani Herveti de reparanda Ecclesiasticorum disciplina, Brixiae,
1563. From which and the like considerations, it is manifest enough to me, that
the want of putting old Canons in execution, is the chief cause of almost all
the (...) and heresies, which now rend asunder the Christian world.

If any object, that these times will not bear the publishing of such books
here; I answer, that I hope better things, that our Churchmen are not so bad as
their enemies do (...) them; and that I have no other design, (...) publishing
this paper, but to stop them ((...) much as lies in me) from being so; knowing
that prosperity is too apt to make even (...) men forget themselves, and stand
in need of a friendly remembrancer. (...), Esth. xvi. 2, 3. But for my part, if
ever I hear this objection (which I hope I shall not) I shall think it hugely
strange, that we who call our selves REFORMED, (in contradistinction to the
Papists) should (...) be able to brook what they printed (cum privilegio) (...)
Reformation; and that from this very objection it will be most clear, either
that they are not so bad, or that we are not so good as we pretend; and
considering our afflictions, may well afford to be. That Almighty God of his
infinite mercy may mend us all, is the daily prayer of

Chr. Coll. Jun. 11. 1661.

Tho. Smith.

A SERMON OF Dr. COLET made to the CONVOCATION, in the year 1511.
YE are this day come together (Fathers and Right-wise brethren) to enter into
Council: in which, what ye will do, and what matters ye will handle, we do not
yet understand. But we wish, that once remembering your name and profession, ye
would mind the reformation of Ecclesiastical affairs. For assure your selves
there never was more need of it, the state of the Church did never more desire
your endeavors. The Spouse of Christ (whom ye would should be without spot or
wrinkle) is made deformed and ill-favored; as says Esaias, The faithful city
is become an harlot, chap. 1. ver. 21. She has played the whore with many
lovers, Jer. 3.1. whereby she has conceived many seeds of wickedness, and
daily brings forth very foul fruit. Wherefore I come hither to day (Fathers)
to warn you, that in this your Council ye bestow your whole thoughts upon the
Reformation of the Church.

But indeed I came not willingly; being sufficiently conscious of my own
unworthiness; and foreseeing how hard it will be to please the precise
judgment of so many men. I esteemed it very unmeet (almost too malapert) that
I a servant should counsel my Lords; that I a son should teach you my Fathers.
Truly this had been more fit for some one of the Fathers themselves; that is
to say, You Prelates might have done it with far more grave authority and
greater wisdom. But the command of the most Reverend Father and Lord the
Archbishop (President of this Council) must be obeyed, who laid upon me this
burden (which is in truth too heavy for my shoulders) for I remember that the
prophet Samuel said, Obedience is better then sacrifice. Wherefore I pray and
beseech you, to sustain my weakness with your goodness and patience: in the
first place to help me with your good prayers. And before all things, Let us
pray to God the Father Almighty: first remembering our most holy Father the
Pope, and all spiritual Pastors, with all christen people; furthermore the
most reverend Father and Lord the Archbishop, President of this Council, and
all Bishops, and all the Clergy, and all the people of England: remembering
finally this your congregation; Desiring God to inspire your minds so
accordingly to agree, to the benefit and fruit of the Church, that ye may not
seem when the Council is finished, to have been gathered together in vain, and
without cause. Let us all say, Pater noster, etc.

To exhort you, Reverend Fathers, to endeavor Reformation, because nothing
has so disfigured the face of the Church, as has the fashion of secular and
worldly living in Clerks and Priests, I know not where more conveniently to
begin my discourse, then from the Apostle Paul (in whose temple ye are gathered
together): for he writing to the Romans (and under their name to you) says,
ROMANS xii. 2. Be not conformed to this world, but be ye reformed by the renewing
of your mind; that ye may prove what is that good will of God, well-pleasing
and perfect.

THis the Apostle writ to all Christen men, but most chiefly to Priests and
Bishops. Priests and Bishops are the light of the world. For he said unto them,
Ye are the light of the world: and he said also, If the light that is in you be
darkness, how grea^t is that darkness? that is, If Priests and Bishops (who
should be as lights) run in the dark way of the world, how dark then shall the
secular people be? Wherefore S. Paul said chiefly to Priests and Bishops, Be ye
not conformed to this world, but be ye reformed. In which words the Apostle
does two things: First he forbids, that we be not conformed to this world, and
made carnal: and then he commands, that we be reformed in the spirit of God,
and become spiritual.

Intending to follow this order, I shall speak first of Conformation, and then
of Reformation. Be not conformed to this world. By the word world, the Apostle
means the ways and manner of secular living; which chiefly consist in four
evils of this world, that is, in devilish pride, carnal lust, worldly
covetousness, and secular business. These are in the world as S. John
witnesses, 1 Epist. 2. 16. For he says, All that is in the world is either
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, or the pride of life. These same
things now are and reign in the Church and Ecclesiastical persons; so that we
may seem truly to say, All that is in the Church is either the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eyes, or pride of life.

I. And first to speak of pride of life. How much greediness and appetite of
honor and dignity is seen now adays in Clergymen? How run they (yea almost
out of breath) from one benefice to another, from the less to the greater, from
the lower to the higher? Who sees not this, and who seeing sorroweth not? And
most of those which are in these dignities, carry their heads so high, and are
so stately, that they seem not to be put in the humble Bishop-rick of Christ,
but rather in the high Lordship and power of the world; not knowing, or not
minding what Christ the master of all meekness said unto his disciples (whom he
called to be Bishops and Priests); The princes of the Gentiles exercise
dominion over them, and those that be in authority have power; but do ye not
so. Whosoever will be chief among you highest in dignity) let him be your
servant. The son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, Matthew.
20. 25, etc. By which words our Savior does plainly teach, that a prelacy in
the Church, is nothing else but a ministration; that an high dignity in an
Ecclesiastical person, ought to be nothing but a meek service.

2. The second secular evil is carnal concupiscence. And has not this vice
grown and increased in the Church so far, that in this most busy age, the far
greater number of Priests mind nothing but what does delight and please their
senses? They give themselves to feasts and banqueting, spend their time in
vain babbling, are addicted to hunting and hawking, and in a word drowned in the
delights of this world; diligent only in progging for those lusts they set by.
Against which sort of men S. Jude exclaims in his Epistle, saying, Woe unto them
which have gone the way of Cain: they are foul and beastly, feasting in their
meats, without fear feeding themselves; floods of the wild sea, foaming out
their own shame: unto whom the storm of darkness is reserved for everlasting.

3. Covetousness is the third secular evil, which S. John calls the lust of the
eyes, and S. Paul, idolatry. This abominable pestilence has so entered into the
minds of almost all Priests, has so blinded the eyes of their understanding,
that we see nothing but that which seems to bring unto us some gain. What other
thing seek we now adays in the Church, except fat benefices, and high
promotions? And it were well if we minded the duty of those when we have them:
but he that has many great benefices, (...) not the office of one small one;
and in these high promotions, what other thing do we pass upon, but only our
tithes and rents? We care not how vast our charge of souls be, how many or how
great benefices we take, so they be of large value. Oh covetousness,
covetousness! S. Paul justly called thee the root of all evil. Of thee comes
this a heaping of benefices upon benefices. Of thee so great pensions assigned,
from many benefices resigned. Of thee so much suing for tithes, for offerings,
for mortuaries, for delapidations, by the right and title of the Church: For
which things we contend as eagerly as for our lives. O covetousness! of thee it
comes that these visitations of Bishops are so chargeable. Of thee the
corruptness of Courts, and these daily new inventions, wherewith the poor silly
people are so vexed. Of thee comes the besyte and wantonness of u Officials. O
covetousness! mother of all iniquity; of thee comes this fervent study of
Ordinaries to dilate their jurisdictions; of thee comes this peevish and raging
contention in Ordinaries; of thee insinuation of testaments; of thee the undue
sequestration of fruits; of thee comes the superstitious observation of all
those laws that sound to any lucre; setting aside, and despising those that
concern the amendment of manners. What should I rehearse the rest? To be short
(and to conclude at one word) all corruptness, all the decay of the Church, all
the offenses and scandals of the world, come from the covetousness of the
priests: according to that of S. Paul, which here I repeat again, and beat into
your ears, Covetousness is the root of all evil.

4. The fourth secular evil that spotteth the face of the Church, is continual
secular occupation; wherein Priests and Bishops now adays do busy themselves,
becoming the servants rather of men then God, the warriors rather of this
world, then of Jesus Christ. For the Apostle Paul writes to Timothy (2 Epist.
ii. 3.) that no man who is a good soldier of Christ, or that warreth for God,
entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, is turmoiled with secular
business. The warfare of Gods soldier, is not carnal, but spiritual. Our
warring is to pray devoutly, to read and study Scriptures diligently, to preach
the word of God sincerely, to administer the H. Sacraments rightly, and offer
sacrifice for the people. For we are mediators and intercessours unto God for
men: which S. Paul witnesses writing to the Hebrews, Every Bishop, says he,
taken of men, is ordained for men in those things that be unto God, that he may
offer gifts and sacrifices for sins. Wherefore those Apostles, that were the
first Priests and Bishops, did so much abhor all manner of meddling in secular
things, that they would not minister the meat that was necessary to poor
people; although it were a great work of virtue: but they said, It is not meet
that we should leave the word of God and serve tables, we will give our selves
continually to prayer and preaching the word of God, Act. vi. 2, 4. And S. Paul
cries to the Corinthians, 1 Epist. vi. 4. If you have judgments of things
pertaining to this life, set them to be judges that be most in contempt in the
Church. Many evils doubtless do ensue from this secularity, when Clergiemen and
Priests (leaving all spirituality) turmoyl themselves with earthly occupations.

I. First, the dignity of Priesthood is dishonored, which is greater then
either that of Kings or Emperors, equal with the dignity of Angels. But the
brightness of this great dignity is sore shadowed, when Priests are employed in
earthly things, whose conversation ought to be in heaven.

2. Secondly, Priesthood is despised, when there is no difference between such
Priests and Lay People; but according to the prophecy of Hosea, As the people
be, so are the priests.

3. Thirdly, the beautiful order and holy dignity in the Church is confused,
when the highest in the Church do meddle with vile and earthly things; and in
their stead vile and abject persons do exercise high and heavenly things.

4. Fourthly, the lay people have great occasion offered them of evils, and
cause to fall; when those men whose duty it is to draw others from the
affection of this world, do by their continual conversation in this world,
teach men to love the world; and by the love of the world cast them down
headlong into hell.

Moreover, in such Priests that be so employed, there must needs follow
hypocrisy. For when they be so mixed and confused with lay people, under the
garment and habit of a Priest, they live plainly after the lay-fashion. And
through spiritual weakness, bondage, and fear (being made weak with the waters
of this world) they dare neither do nor say any, but such things as they know
to be pleasing and grateful to their Princes ears. At last, through ignorance
and blindness (when they are blinded with the darkness of this world) they see
nothing but earthly things. Wherefore our Savior Christ (not without cause)
did warn the Prelates of his Church in this manner; Take heed to your selves,
lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with gluttony and drunkenness, and
the cares of this world, Luke xxi. 34. The cares, says he, of this world;
wherewith when the hearts of Priests being sore charged, they cannot mind the
other life, nor lift up their souls to high and heavenly things. There be many
other evils beside these that follow of the secularity of Priests, which were
long here to rehearse: but I make an end.

These be the four evils that I have spoken of (O Fathers, O Priests) by which
we are conformable to this world, by which the face of the Church is made
illfavoured, by which the state of it is destroyed; much more truly then it was
in the beginning by the persecution of tyrants, or afterward by the invasion of
heretics that followed. For in the persecution of tyrants, the Church being
afflicted, was made stronger and brighter; in the invasion of heretics, the
Church being shaken, was made wiser and more skillful in holy writ: but since
this secularity was brought in, since the worldly manner of living crept in
among Churchmen, the root of all spiritual life (that is, charity) has been
extinct: which being taken away, the Church can neither be wise nor strong in
God.

In this age we are sensible of the contradiction of lay people. But they are
not so much contrary to us, as we are to our selves. Their contrariness hurts
not us so much, as the contrariness of our own evil life; which is contrary
both to God and Christ; who said, He that is not with me is against me. We are
also now adays troubled with heretics (men intoxicated with strange opinions)
but the heresies of them are not so pestilent and pernicious to us and the
people, as the naughty lives of Priests, which (if we believe S. Bernard) is a
kind of heresy; nay, the chief of all, and most perilous. For that holy
Father preaching in a certain Convocation to the Priests of his time, had these
words in his sermon: Many men are Catholic in their speaking and preaching,
which are heretics in their works and actions. For what the heretics do by
evil teaching, the same do these men by ill example; viz. they lead the people
out of the right way, and bring them into error of life. And these men are so
much worse then heretics, by how much their works prevail more then their
words. This that holy Father S. Bernard spoke, with a fervent spirit, against
the sect of evil Priests in his time. By which words he shows plainly, that
there be two kinds of heresies; one arising from perverse teaching, and the
other from naughty life: of which two this latter is far worse, and more
perilous; reigning (now) in Priests, who do not live like themselves: not
priestly, but secularly, to the utter and miserable destruction of the Church
of God. Wherefore you Fathers, you Priests, and all you of the Clergy, at last
rouse and look up from this your sleep in this forgetful world; and being well
awaked, hear S. Paul crying unto you, Be ye not conformed to this world. Thus
much for the first part. Now let us come to the second.

II. Of Reformation. But be ye reformed by the renewing of your mind.
THe second thing that S. Paul commands, is, That we be reformed by the
renewing of our mind, that we may prove what is that good will of God,
well-pleasing and perfect. Let us be reformed in those vices which be in us
contrary to those virtues I mentioned even now; that is, to meekness, to
sobriety, to charity, to spiritual occupation: that (as the said S. Paul
writes unto Titus) Denying all (...) and worldly lusts, we may live soberly,
(...), and virtuously in this present world.

This reformation and restoring of the Churches estate must needs b begin of
you our Fathers, and so follow in us your Priests, and in all the Clergy. You
are the heads, you are an example of living to us; upon you we look as upon
marks of our direction. In you and in your lives we desire to read (as in
lively books) how, and after what manner we ought to live; wherefore if you
will consider, and pull out the motes that be in our eyes, first cast out the
beam out of your own eyes. It Is an old proverb, Physician heal thy self; Let me
beseech you, spiritual Physiclans, first to take your selves this purgation of
manners, and then afterward offer us the same to take.

Now the way whereby the Church may be reformed into a better fashion, is not
to make new laws: there be already laws enough, if not too many. Nothing is new
under the sun, as says Solomon, Eccl. 1.9. For the evils that are now in the
Church, were before in times past; and there is no fault committed among us,
for which our forefathers have not provided very good remedies. There are no
trespasses, but there be remedies against the^ in the body of the Canon law.
It Is not needful then that new laws, and new constitutions be made, but that
those which are made already be well kept and put in execution. Wherefore, I
pray you, let those canons and laws which are made be called for, and rehearsed
before you, in this your assembly: those canons I mean that restrain vice, and
those that further virtue.

First, let those canons be rehearsed, that do warn you, O Fathers, c not to
lay hands suddenly on any man; not to be too facile in admitting into holy
Orders. For here lies the original and springhead of all our mischiefs, that
the gate of Ordination is too broad, the entrance too wide and open; every man
that offers himself is admitted every where without putting back. Hence comes
it that we have such a multitude of priests, who have little learning and less
piety. In my judgment, it is not enough for a priest to construe a collect, to
put forth a question, to answer a sophism; but an honest, a pure, a holy life
is much more necessary, approved manners, competent learning in holy Scripture,
some knowledge of the Sacraments. But chiefly and above all things, the fear of
God and love of heavenly life.

Let the canons be rehearsed, which command that d benefices of the Church be
given only to those that are worthy, and that promotions be made by the right
balance of virtue, not by nearest q kindred or carnal affection, or acception of
persons: whereby it happens now adays, that boys, and fools, and ill-livers
do reign and rule in the Church, in stead of old men, and wise, and good.

To this end, let the canons be rehearsed, which forbid and oppose the dirt of
e Simony. Which corruption, which infection, which cruel and detestable
pestilence, does now creep abroad like a canker in the minds of Priests; so
that in these days many are not afraid, by (...) and servile attendances, by
rewards and promises, to procure to themselves great dignities.

Let the canons be rehearsed, that command personal f residence of Curates in
their Churches. For of this many evils grow, because all Offices now adays are
performed by Vicars and Parish Priests; yea, and those foolish and unmeet,
oftentimes wicked: that seek nothing among the laity but filthy lucre, whereof
comes occasion of evil heresies, and ill christendom in the people.

Let the canons be rehearsed, which concern the lives of you Fathers, and the
honesty of us Priests: which forbid a clergie-man to meddle in g merchandise,
that he be no h usurer, no i hunter, no common k gamer or player, that he bear
no l weapon.

The canons that forbid clergymen to haunt k taverns, that forbid them to have
suspected familiarity with women. The canons that command sobriety, moderation
in m apparel, and temperance in adorning the body.

And to, my Lords, these Monks, Prebends, and Religious men, let the canons be
rehearsed, which command them to go the straight way that leads to heaven,
leaving the broad way of the world: which command them not to turmoil
themselves in business, neither n secular nor other: which command that they do
not (...) plots.
sow in Princes Courts for earthly things. For it is decreed in the first
Council of Calcedon, That (...), etc. Can. 4. and 7.
Monks ought only to give themselves to prayer and fasting, and to the
chastizing of the flesh, and observing of their rules.

Above all things, let the canons be rehearsed that appertain to you, my
Reverend Fathers and Lord-bishops; laws concerning your just and b canonical
election in the Chapters of your churches, calling upon the holy Ghost. For
because those canons are not obeyed now adays (but Prelates are chosen
oftentimes more by the favor of men, then by the grace of God) hence truly it
comes to pass, that we have not seldom Bishops who have little spirituality in
them; men rather worldly then heavenly, savouring more the spirit of this
world, then the spirit of Christ.

Let the canons be rehearsed of the o residence of Bishops in their Diocesses;
which command that they look diligently to the health of souls, that they sow
the word of God, that they show themselves in their Churches, at least on great
holydays; that they officiate in their own persons, and do sacrifice for their
people, that they hear the causes and matters of poor men; that they sustain
fatherless children and widows, and exercise themselves in works of virtue.

Let the canons be rehearsed concerning the right bestowing of the p patrimony
of Christ: the canons which command that the goods of the Church be spent not
in costly building, not in sumptuous apparel and pompes, not in feasting and
banqueting, not in excess and wantonness, not in q enriching of kinsfolk, not
in keeping of hounds; but in things profitable and necessary for the Church.
For when S. Augustine the Monk (once Bishop of England) asked Pope Gregory, how
the Bishops and Prelates in England should spend their goods, which were the
offerings of faithful people; the said Pope answered (and his answer is put
into the decrees, cap. 12. quaest. 2.) That the goods of the Bishops ought to
be divided into four parts; whereof one part ought to be for the Bishop and his
household, another to his poorer Clergymen, the third to repair and uphold his
tenements, the fourth to poor people.

Let the Canons be rehearsed (yea, and that oftentimes) which take away the
filthiness and corruption of your n Courts, which take away those daily
newfound crafts for lucre: which effectually pull away this foul covetousness,
which is the spring and cause of all the evils that we feel; the fountain of
all iniquity.

Lastly, let those canons and constitutions of our forefathers be renewed,
which concern the celebration of r Councels; which appoint Provincial Synods to
be oftener used for the Reformation of the Church. Because there never happens
any thing more hurtful to the Church of Christ, then the lack of Councels,
both general and provincial.

When these Canons are rehearsed (and such others as concern us and the s
correction of our manners) nothing will be lacking, but that the same be put in
execution with all authority and power. That once (seeing we have a law) we
live according to the law. For which things, with all due reverence, I call
chiefly upon you Fathers (for this execution of the canons, and observing of
the constitutions, must needs begin at you) that ye may teach us Priests to
follow you, by lively examples: or else truly it will be said of you, They lay
grievous burdens upon other men's backs, but they themselves will not as much as
touch them with their little finger, Matthew. xxiii. 4.

For indeed if you keep the laws, and first reform your own lives to the rules
of the canon-laws, then shall ye give us light (in which we may see what is to
be done on our part) that is to say, the light of your good example. And we
seeing our Fathers so keep the laws, will gladly follow their steps.

The Clergy and Spiritual men being thus once reformed in the Church, we may
then with a just order proceed to the reformation of the t laities part: which
truly will be very easily done if we be first reformed our selves. For the body
follows the soul, and such as the Rulers in the city be, such are the
inhabitants. Wherefore if Priests that have the charge of souls be good, the
people will straight be good too. Our goodness will teach them far more clearly
and effectually to be good, then all other teachings and preachings whatsoever:
our goodness shall compel them into the right way, truly more powerfully, then
all your suspensions, excommunications, and cursings.

Wherefore if ye will have the laypeople to live after your wish and will,
first live you your selves after the will of God; and so (trust me) ye shall
effect in them whatsoever ye would.

Ye would be obeyed by them: and it is fit ye should (for these are the words of
S. Paul to the lay people, Heb. xiii. 17. Obey them that have rule over you,
and submit your selves:) But if you will have this obedience; first do you
perform within your selves that which is the reason and cause why they ought to
obey you, which the said S. Paul teaches (and it follows in the text) viz.
Take you heed diligently as those that must give a reckoning for their souls,
and they will obey you.

Ye would be honored of the people: and reason good (for S. Paul writes to
Timothy, that the Priests who rule well are worthy of double honor, especially
they who labor in the word and teaching, 1 Timothy iii. 17.) But if you desire to
be honored, first look that you rule well, and that you labor in word and
teaching: and then shall the people have you in all honor.

Ye would reap their carnal things, and gather tithes and offerings without
contention; and it is very fit (for S. Paul writing to the Romans, says, It
is their duty to minister unto you in carnal things, Romans XV. 27.) But you
ought first to sow your spiritual things, and then ye shall reap plentifully
their carnal things: For truly that man is very hard and unjust, that will reap
where he never did sow, and desires to gather where he never scattered.

Ye would have the Churches liberty, and not be drawn before secular Judges,
this also is reasonable (for it is in the Psalms, Touch not mine anointed,
Psalm. CV. 15.) But if ye desire this liberty, first unloose your selves from
the worldly bondage, from trucking with the world, and from the vile services
of men; and lift up your selves to the true liberty, the spiritual liberty of
Christ; place your hearts and affections upon his service which is perfect
freedom, serve you God, and reign in him: And then (believe me) the people
will not touch the anointed of their Lord God.

Ye would be out of business, in rest and peace; and that is convenient: But if
ye would have peace, return to the God of peace and love. Come again to Christ
(in whom is true peace, which passes all understanding) come again to your
selves, and to your priestly living. And (to make an end) as S. Paul says, Be
ye reformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may savor the things that
be of God, and the peace of God shall be with you.

Thus have I recited to you (Reverend Fathers, and right famous men) the
particulars which I thought fit to be spoke for the reformation of
Ecclesiastical affairs. I trust you will take all (out of your gentleness) in
good part. If peradventure it be thought that I have passed my bounds in this
sermon, or have said any thing out of temper, forgive it me; and ye shall
forgive a man speaking out of mere zeal, a man heartily lamenting the decay of
the Church: and consider the thing it self, not regarding any foolishness.
Consider the miserable condition and state of the Church, and endeavor your
selves with all your souls and abilities to reform it.

Suffer not, Fathers, this your great Convocation to depart in vain; suffer not
this your congregation to be for no end. Truly ye are gathered oftentimes
together, but (by your favor to speak the truth) I see not yet what good
comes of your assembling, namely to the Church.

Go ye now in the Spirit that ye have called upon, that by the help of it ye
may in this your Council find out, decree, and ordain those things that may be
profitable to the Church, a praise unto You, and an honor to God; unto whom be
all honor and glory now and for ever.

Amen.
The End.
Dr. Hen. Hammonds petition and advice to the Convocation.
IT is now my public solemn PETITION both to God and man, That 1 the power of
the keys, and the exercise of that power, 2 the due use of confirmation, and
(previous to that) 3 examination and trial of youth, 4 a strict search into
the manners, and tempers, and sufficiencies of those that are to be admitted
into holy Orders, and 5 to be licentiate for public preachers, 6 the
visitation of each parish in each Diocese, and 7 the exercise of Church
discipline upon all offenders, together with 8 painful, mature, and sober
preaching, and 9 catechizing, 10 studies of all kinds and parts of Theological
learning (languages, controversies, writings of the schools, and Casuists,
etc.) may be so far taken into consideration by our LAWMAKERS, and so far
considered in the collating of Church preferments and dignities: So much of
duty required in Clergymen, and so little left arbitrary or at large, that
every Church preferment in this kingdom, may have such a due burden annexed to
it, that no ignorant person shall be able, no lazy or luxurious person willing
or forward to undergo it. Considerations of present use concerning
Church Government, page 12. printed by R. Royston, 1644.

The same Dr. Hammond in his third sermon, p. 74. printed 1649. has these
words: Shall one take up a snare from the earth, and take nothing at all? Amos
iii. 5. that is, Shall God remove his judgments from a nation, while the sins
are still at high water? Infallibly he will not do it. If he do, it is a sad
presage that his soft hand is but absolute desertion; the leaving us to our
selves, is the giving us up to our bloudiest enemies, that unseasonable heaven
is the far worse (...) of the twain.

Let but the present calamities work the cure on us, and then all the Canaans
in the world are ready at hand to perfect it; the old flourishing England, hid
under that heap of thunderbolts, is ready to be our bath and palaestra once
again, to refresh and confirm what was thus acquired, and to beget a whole
treasure of health in us. But til then, prosperity is quite beside the purpose,
a mere ignorant Emperick prescription, which has nothing of purging or
medicinal in it. Should it be administered, it would never reform or convert any.

The beast that is not tamed or humbled by the whip or goad, the rich pasture
in all reason will never break or work on. The liberty of the field is a new
temptation; and that plenty strengthens for a sturdier resistance: and both
liberty and plenty, respite and peace are apt to be mistaken for a reward of
former stubbornnesses, far from any restraint of them. Will you see this
exemplified in the most eminent stories of deliverances and prosperities that
the Scripture takes notice of, that will enforce the conclusion a majori? You
have Lot of Sodom, and Noah of the old world, (the remnant preserved from that
double deluge of fire and water) as soon as they are landed in their fair
havens, the same calm shipwracks both; and their prosperity is branded in holy
Writ, for the mother of their two bestial sins, incest and drunkenness. Look
back from thence to Eden; and there that happy at once and innocent pair, are
not by plenty secured from coveting, etc. Page 78. The Hermites indeed in
Theodosius the youngers time, left their solitude, and came to study perfection
in the Kings palace; but sure it was because they were (or else conceived
themselves to be) advanced to a spiritual height, and so came out to practice
in these (...), that is, not because there were conceived to be less, but more
temptations. And yet even for such, I should not be over-forward to commend the
design. Without question the still privacy had been the more prudent course.
For so Licetus that tells us of some lamps which under ground continued for
1600 years, concludes his observation, that as soon as ever they were brought
forth into open air, they went out immediately. And I need not tell you, how
many zealous, burning, or fair-shining votaries the world has had, whose
imprisoned, retired, cloystered piety has done so too. And do not think that
it is an appetite to other men's possessions, or an insidious praising of a lost
treasure (that so they that have taken it up may return it again) if I tell you
(that which it is not these times have taught me) That affluence and abundance
of riches, of ease, or even peace it self, is generally no safe commodity;
There is not one of a hundred but is less Christian for it. Jeshurun waxed fat,
and kicked, etc.

And a little after, urging us to repentance and reformation of our manners
under the rod, he says thus, Till somewhat be done this way ( MORE then
hitherto has been done) peace may hover over our heads (express its
willingness to light upon us) but ad candida tecta columbae, that dove will not
enter or dwell where purity has not prepared a room for her; or if she should
so unlearn her own humor, 'twere danger she would turn vultur, that most
desirable blessing would prove our fatalest curse; leave us in and to a state
of all impurities, to deprecate and curse those mercies that have betrayed us
to such irreversible miseries.

In like manner the same Dr. Hammond concludes his tract of late Repentance,
thus, The only course that a whole SYNOD and assembly of Angels could upon
consultation advise us to (and promise it prosperous for the averting of ruin
from the land) is, so to improve our sorrow above the occasion of it (the
afflictions that are upon us) as that it may be a sorrow for Some of these sins
he names in his sermons, as p. 174. (...), adultery, drunkenness, heartless and
zeal-less behavior in the house of God. What cold addresses, what (...) eyes
and thoughts, what yawning in stead of sighing out our (...) of it, what
absolute (...) (if God will take (...) witness) whether we be heard or no? Thus
in the Preface to (...) Vindication of the (...), Sect. 8. he says, Our so
long abuse of this so (...) a mercy (of enjoying (...) Common Prayer) our (...)
of diligence in (...) our selves together (the too ordinary fault of too many
(...) the best of us) our (...) scandalous, and inexcusable disobedience to the
(...) of the Church (which require that Service to be (...) constantly in
public every day) the vanity of (...) tongues, and itching (...) which are
still thirsting (...) and variety; but ABOVE ALL, the want of ardour and
servencie in the performance of this prescribed service, the admitting of all
secular company I mean worldly thoughts) into its presence, preferring all
secular business before it; the general irreverence and indifference in the
celebrations, (...) well be thought to have encouraged Satan to his expetivit,
to the preferring his petition to God, and his importunity at length to have
provoked God to deliver up our Liturgy to him and his ministers, for them to
oppose and malign, to calumniate and defame, and at last to gain the
countenance of an Ordinance to condemn and execute it. The Lord be merciful to
them that have yielded to be instrumental to that great destroyer in this
business. Thus Dr. Hammond. And are we not as bad, or worse in all this now
then formerly? Are not many of those who (...) 16 years together, to long and
pray for the restoring of our (...), now as (...) in coming to it, and as
key-cold in devotion when they do come to it, (...) any other whosoever? But
let us return to (...) Hammonds Sermons.
(...), purely for sins: and then that sorrow bring forth such a change of
mind as may prove immutable upon Gods allowing us a time of respite, bring
forth fruits of repentance worthy of such reprieval. When the whole heart of
this kingdom (or of that part of it that still cleaves to the house of David)
is thus smitten and really affected by Gods rod (so that He to whom all things
are naked, may pronounce it a sincere hearty change) then will there be a place
of hope, assured hope: then may the Priest intercede with confidence, Spare thy
people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach; and the Hearer of
Prayers will be obliged by that his (...) to answer that importunity. But till
this Rod of the Lord be thus heard, all hope in God for mercy to the land, or
for victory (though to the justest cause that ever man espoused) will be little
better then presumption.

Page 100. Till this [ reformation of life] be done, every minute we breathe we
suck in poison, we run upon all the spears and cannons in the world. Nay, if
God should hear us before we have answered him, if mercy should interpose;
before repentance and reformation make us capable of it; that very mercy were
to be deprecated as the greatest judgment in the world, a kind of hell of
desertion, a [ why should ye be smitten any more?] a not vouchsafing us the
medicinal stripes, a delivering us up to our selves, as to the fatalest
revengefullest executioners. God may spare us in wrath, relieve us in fury,
give us a treacherous settlement, a palliate peace, the saddest presage and
forerunner imaginable. And such it is sure to be if the surface of the flesh
be healed, before the (...), the depth of the wound in the heart be searched
and mollified; if God repent before we repent. And against such mercies we have
more reason to pray, then against all the (...) and intestine flames (all the
Tophets, and purgatories, and hells) that the fury of men or devils can kindle
within our coasts. The same motive that made S. Basil call for his fever again
(to wit, if the recovering of his health were the reflourishing of his pride)
may move us to pray for the continuance of this State-feaver, till our
impenitent hearts be humbled.

I will make you my Confessors; Till this Kingdom be really and visibly the
better for stripes, I cannot (without some regrets, some fears of
uncharitableness) pray absolutely for peace for it.

Lord purge us, Lord cleanse us with thy sharp infusions; Cure and heal our
souls by these causticks of thine; and then thou may spare that charge, pour
in thy wine and oil in stead of them: But till then, Domine, nolumus
indulgentiam hanc, Lord, we are afraid of thy indulgence, we are undone if thou
be too merciful: we tremble to think of our sad condition, if thou should
give over thy cure too early; if thou should tear off our plasters and our
flesh together, restore our flourishing before thou have humbled and changed
our souls.

Thus he ends his fourth sermon: and in like manner he ends his last, p. 257.
and 261. saying, I shall from hence be able to pronounce dogmatically, that
should such a fate befall us (either the Nation in general, or any of us in
particular) that is, should there be a respite of the rod, before any laying
down of the sins that called for it (a cessation of arms betwixt heaven and
earth, before a cessation of hostilities between earth and heaven) this were as
the last, so the worst of evils; a calm to be dreaded beyond all the loudest
tempests. What would this prophetic Saint have said, if he had lived two
months longer, who writ all this near twenty years since?

I shall conclude all with the words of Bishop Andrews, in his Conciones ad
Clerum, page 14. Nos ipsi sumus, and apud nos hic multi sunt qui sacra
devorant. Nam (quod non nemo e nobis facit) per otium and ignaviam hic fucorum
instar obtorpescere, bonas horas male perdere, luxu diffluere, comessationibus,
ludis, nugis, vacare, haec facere, and tamen ex iis quae sacris usibus dicata
sunt, nos saginare, id demum est ex Christi sententia (...), devorare, and
dilapidare paternam rem.

Propius adhuc accedam: Prioris illius (sacrilegii) partem magnam fluxisse a
nobis hinc: Ideo ab alienis sacra vorantur, quia vorantur a nobis. Perinde enim
sibi licere res sacras legere, rem sacram negligere ac nobis. Et quidem (quod
valde vereor) qui nunc tondent lanam, pellem cum lana deglubent; qui nunc
arrodunt Ecclesiae bona plenis tandem faucibus absument, nisi detur a Deo nobis
men's melior.

Page 29. Et est in vobis cura, est attentio vestri; quis negat? Satis enim Vos
vobis (...) and rei vestrae, populi vox est; satis (...) strenue, ditandis
filiis, dotandis filiabus attendere, etc. Attendere hoc quidem est, sed vereor
ut Pauli sit. His text is, Act. xx. 28.

Page 31. Scio ego vos advertisse Statum hunc atque Ordinem nostrum
(Ecclesiasticum) non tam a politicis legibus, quam ab hominum conscientiis
momentum habere atque vim suam: quibus nisi vos commendare in conspectu Dei,
and in quibus nisi venerationem internam lucrari detur (quam pia nobis vita
conciliabit) frustra nobis faverit, frustra caverit lex ulla. Si remittitis hac
in part attentionem vestram, si doctrina ludibrium est, si vita scandalum;
fortasse non momento uno, non ictu oculi, sed sensim tamen senescet, evanescet,
tendet ad interitum Ordo vester, (...).

Ibid. Enimvero, nisi vos vobis hac part caveatis, optimi Principis gratia,
Procerum favor, Legum terror diu vobis cavere non poterunt. Intelligentibus
loquor.

FINIS.
Notes upon Dr. Colets Sermon.
a Heaping of benefices.] Parkerus, Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis, in libro De
Antiquitate Britannicae Ecclesiae, Hanoviae edito, 1605, page, 208. lin. 51.
haec habe. Diximus ante a Johanne Peckam Cant. (...) fuisse constitutum, ut
Clerici plura beneficia non tenerent, sed uno contenti sint: deinde, ut in
beneficiis residerent. Hujusque constitutionis haec fuit sanctio; quod secundi
(...) apphehensa possessione, vel perceptis fructibus, vacaret ipso jure
primum; tum si possessor presbyter non ordinaretur, vacaret etiam simili modo
beneficium; and non residentes ad residentiam moniti privarentur, jusque
praesentandi denuo ad Patronum rediret. Quae Johannis constitutio a Lugdunensi
Concilio profecta est, sub Gregorio decimo celebrata, de quo Polychronicon hoc
versu affirmat: Gregorius denus congregat omne genus.


Decretalium Gregorii 9. l. 1. De electione, etc. tit. 6. cap. 54. page 74.
edit. Francfurt. 1586. Unde cum in eodem concilio sit statutum, ut (...)
receperit aliquod beneficium curam animarum habens annexam, si prius tale
beneficium obtinebat, eo sit ipso jure privatus: and si forte illud retinere
contenderit, etiam alio spolietur. Praedictus electus contra hujusmodi veniens
statuta, transgressionis notam nec non cupiditatis vitium (quod in aliis
reprobare debuerat) ex pluralitate beneficiorum incurrit, and retinendo
beneficia quae non spectabant ad ipsum (cum post receptionem alterius, priora
beneficia vacaverint ipso jure) rem contrectavit per consequens alienam, and
sic furtum commisit quodammodo vel rapinam. In suae salutis and multarum
animarum dispendium praedictas parochiales Ecclesias retinebat cum earum cura,
qua jam privatus fuerat ipso jure, ad eum nullatenus pertineret: and sic per
ipsum (...) animae damnabiliter sunt deceptae.

Ibid. l. 3. De clericis non resident. Tit. 4. cap. 3. p 418. Quia nonnulli
modum avaritiae non imponentes, dignitates diversas Ecclesiasticas, and plures
ecclesias parochiales, contra sacrorum instituta nituntur accipere, ut cum unum
officium vix implere sufficiant, stipendia sibi vendicent plurimorum: ne id de
caetero fiat districtius inhibemus. Cum igitur ecclesia vel ecclesiasticu^
ministerium committi debuerit, talis ad hoc persona quaeratur, quae residere in
loco, and curam ejus per seipsam valeat exercere. Quod si aliter actum fuerit,
and qui receperit, quod contra sacros canones accepit, amittat; and qui
dederit, largiendi potestate privetur.

Ibid. l. 3. De praebendis and dignitat. tit. 5. c. 5. page 423. Quia in tantum
quorundam processit ambitio, ut non duas vel tres, sed plures ecclesias
perhibeantur habere, cum nec duabus possint debitam provisionem impendere; Per
fratres and coepiscopos nostros hoc emendari praecipimus: and de multitudine [
Vex praebendarum non (...) in antiquis, nec in Concilio.
praebendarum] canonibus inimica, quae dissolutionis materiam and evagationis
inducit, certumque continet periculum animarum, eorum qui (...) deservire
valiant, indigentiam volumus sublevari.

Constitutio Othoboni, De institutionibus and collat. mihi, page 56, and 99.
edit. Londini, 1557. Christianae religionis unitas ita plerosque in suorum
cordium elatione reliquit, ut cum animae suae curae vix unusquisque sufficiat,
ipsi se plures esse mendace statera pensantes, non solum unius beneficii, etc.
Ex his autem dicere non sufficimus quanta mala proveniunt ecclesiae. Namque
maculatur honestas, annihilatur autoritas, fides Christi prosternitur, charitas
exulat, spes pauperum deperit, eo quod apertum vident os divitis and potentis,
in quod intrat omne beneficium vacaturum. Quod suum non est peccator miser and
coecus (Rectorem se jactans) non tam recipit quam furatur. Inter ipsos quoque
divites contentiones and scandala oriuntur, lites and odia confoventur. Digne
etiam super hujusmodi regnorum homines divinae indignationis exarsisse ignem,
and ob aliquorum delicta, in omnes misisse vindictam, ex hoc praecipue
formidamus: and dum nihil aliud ita periculis plenum conspicimus, talia vel
graviora etiam pertimescimus in futurum, nisi Dei misericordia nos respiciens,
apponat remedium salutare.

Add to this a clause in an Act of Parl. which was made in the same year that
this Sermon of Dr. Colets was preached. 21. Hen. 8. c. 13. Be it enacted, That
if any person, having one benefice with cure of souls, being of the yearly
value of 8 pounds or above, accept and take any other with cure of souls (and
be instituted and inducted in possession of the same) that then and immediately
after such possession had thereof, the first benefice shall be adjudged in law
to be void: And that it shall be lawful to every Patron having the advowson
thereof to present another; and the presentee to have the benefit of the same
in such like manner and form, as though the incumbent had died or resigned: any
license, union, or other dispensation to the contrary hereof notwithstanding
And that every such license, union, or dispensatino, had or hereafter to be
obtained contrary to this present Act (of what name or names, quality or
qualities, soever they be) shall be utterly void and of none effect. See my
note c.

(...). Jewel in Hag 1.2. (page 181. edit. 1611.) O that Aggeus the Prophet
were now alive, and saw the rearing up of Gods Temple here in England! What
think you he would say? You build your own houses and leave the house of God
forsaken? Nay, he would say, You build your own mansions, and pull down the
house of God. The Masters of the work, build benefice upon benefice, and
Deanery upon Deanery, as though Rome were yet in England.

b Begin of you our Fathers] See (...) quorundam Canonum, anno 1571. De
Episcopis, Decanis Ecclesiarum, de Archidiaconis, de Cancellariis, etc. which
begins thus, OMNES Episcopi diligenter docebunt evangelium, non tantum in
(...) cathedralibus quibus praesunt, sed etiam passim per omnes Ecclesias suae
(...) dioeceseos, ubi maxim putabunt expedire.

Perhaps it will not be amiss to hear what the Council of Trent says on this
subject. There are in the 25 Session of it 21 chapters concerning Reformation;
the first whereof is this: Optandum est, ut ii qui episcopale ministerium
suscipiunt, quae suae sint parts, agnoscant; ac se non ad propria commoda, non
ad divitias aut luxum, sed ad labores and solicitudines pro Dei gloria vocatos
esse intelligant. Nec enim dubitandum est, and fideles reliquos ad religionem
innocentiamque facilius inflammandos. si Praepositos suos viderint non ea quae
mundi sunt, sed animarum salutem ac coelestem patriam cogitantes. Haec cum ad
restituendam Ecclesiasticam disciplinam praecipua esse sancta Synodus
animadvertat; admonet Episcopos omnes, ut secum ea saepe meditantes, factis
etiam ipsis ac vitae actionibus (quod est veluti perpetuum quoddam praedicandi
genus) se muneri suo conformes ostendant. In primis vero ita mores suos omnes
componant, ut reliqui ab eis frugalitatis, modestiae, continentiae, ac (quae
nos tantopere commendat Deo) sanctae humilitatis exempla petere possint.
Quapropter, exemplo patrum nostrorum in Concilio Carthaginensi, non solum
jubet, ut Episcopi modesta supellectili, and mensa, ac frugali victu contenti
sint; verum etiam in reliquo vitae genere, ac tota ejus domo caveant, ne quid
appareat, quod a sancto hoc instituto sit alienum; quodque non simplicitatem,
Dei zelum, ac vanitatum contemptum prae se ferat. Omnino vero eis interdicit,
ne ex reditibus Ecclesiae consanguineos, familiaresve suos augere studeant: cum
and Apostolorum Canones prohibeant, ne res Ecclesiasticas, quae Dei sint,
consanguineis donent; sed, si pauperes sint, iis, ut pauperibus distribuant;
eos autem non distrahant, nec dissipent illorum causa. Imo, quam maxim potest,
eos sancta Synodus monet, ut omnem humanum hunc erga fratres, nepotes,
propinquoque carnis affectum (unde multorum malorum in Ecclesia seminarium
extat) penitus deponant. Quae vero de Episcopis dicta sunt, eadem in
quibuscunque beneficia Ecclesiastica obtinentibus observari decernit, etc. Thus
far the Council of Trent: See large notes on this, edit. Col. 1533. Rob Parsons
the Jesuit, in his memorial for reformation, part. 1. c. 2. says this of it;
Quando ultimamente se celebro el SSo, Concilio de Trento, viniendo a tratar de
la Reformacion de las costumbres etc. When at last the holy Council of Trent
was celebrated, the Fathers coming to debate the amendmentof manners (although
it desired to make a perfect reformation in the Universal Church) they were
constrained only to establish some things which they believed ought to be
received in the whole Church; and such things as those times (being so much
vitiated and corrupted) would permit. Just as a prudent Physician endeavors
wholly to apply himself to the disposition, fancy, and strength of his patient;
though perhaps the infirmity may require a stronger cure. -- For though they
saw very well, that many things of greater perfection and severity might have
been decreed, which some holy men propounded yet they desired only to
establish some things that were most necessary, and which they judged to be
most convenient, according to the disposition of the time, and likely to be
most easily received by all men, etc. See more to the same purpose in the same
memorial, par. 2. c. 1, and 2. and in Parsons description of the person and
family of a Bishop, and his relation of John Davila's petition to the said
Council, ibid. He who desires to read a Dr. of the Roman Church on this
subject, and cannot meet with Parsons memorial, may peruse and blush at
Granada's sermon at the Consecration of a Bishop (upon Joh. xxi. 15.) tom. 2.
p. 1395. in his works printed at Cullein, 1628. The sayings of Fathers are
numerous to this purpose; but I cannot forget one passage of S. Chrysostom,
who says, (in Heb. xiii. 17. hom, 34. p. 602. lin. 28. edit. Savil.) that he
should wonder if any Bishop can be saved, (...), etc. You who are a Bishop,
says he, shall give an account for all the men women and children that are
under you. If Aaron (though drawn by necessity to it) came into danger; and if
Moses was in peril (though he often refused; and Saul (to whom the principality
of another was committed after he had denied it) fell into danger, because he
managed it ill; how much more shall they perish which strive for rule, and rush
upon it. Thus Chrysostom: ( see more in hom. 1. ad 2. Epist. ad Tim.) Which
Father has so many and so good directions, not only for Bishops, but also for
all Clergymen, in his books De sacerdotio, that I have often wished (publicly
and privately) that all such as enter into holy Orders were first enjoined to
read them over, that they may understand what they undertake. See note (q.)

c Not to lay hands suddenly.] 1 Timothy v. 22. Sacer ordo est eo dignius
conferendus, quo ab ordinato caetera Sacramenta conferuntur. Quare cum
periculosum sit nimis minus dignos, idiotas, illegitimos, irregulares,
illiteratos, and extraneos, aut sine titulo certo and vero aliquos ordinari:
Statuimus ut ante collationem ordinum per Episcopum, de his omnibus indagatio
diligens habeatur. Et ne reprobatis approbandis, and qui non fuerint approbandi
approbatis, clanculo asserere se valiant reprobati, in examinatione scribantur
numerus and nomina probatorum. Constitutio Othonis, page 5.

(...). Siqui sine examinatione presbyteri promoti sint -- tales canon non
admittit: quod enim est reprehensibile, Catholica ecclesia non defendit.
Concilii Nic. 1. can. 9.

d Benefices to those that are worthy.] It is the 76th Apostolical Canon, That
a Bishop ought not to give preferments to gratify his brother, or his son, or
any kinsman: nor to let humane affection interpose in his dispensing the goods
of the Church; nor to confer Ecclesiastical goods upon his heirs. If he do so,
the ordination is void, and the Bishop himself is to be excommunicated. Vide
Constitutionem Othonis, ne indigni promoveantur, etc. And see much to this
purposo in Spalato De repub. l. 9. c. 10. 12, 13 etc.

The Bishop before he admit any person into holy Orders, shall diligently
examine him in the presence of those Ministers that shall assist him at the
imposition of hands, etc. And if any Bishop or Suffragan shall admit any to
sacred Orders, who is not so qualified and examined as before we have ordained,
the Archbishop of the province being assisted by one Bishop shall suspend the
said Bishop or Suffragan so offending, from making either Deacons or Priests
for the space of two years. Canon. Eccles. anno 1603. number. 35.

Ibid. number. 34. No man is to be ordained, except he bring letters of his good
life and conversation under the seal of some College in Cambridge or Oxford,
or three or four grave Ministers, together with the subscription of other
credible persons. w. o have known his life and behavior by the space of THREE
years next before. Here I cannot but annex a very seasonable piece of advice of
Mr. Hooker, to all Masters and Fellows of Colleges, Eccl Pol. lib. 5.. ult.
page penult. I end with a request and most earnest suit; First, that they who
give Ordination, would (as they tender the very honor of J. Christ, and safety
of men, and the endless good of their own souls) take heed, lest unnecessarily
and through their default the Church be found worse, or less furnished then it
might be. Secondly, that they which by right of Patronage have power to present
unto spiritual livings (and may in that respect much damnifie the Church of
God) would sor the ease of their own account in that dreadful day, somewhat
(...) what it is to betray for gain the souls which Christ has redeemed with
blood; what to violate the sacred bond of (...) and solemn promise given at the
first to God and his Church by them, from whose original interest, together
with the self-same Title of right, the same Obligation of duty likewise is
descended.

Again, That the graver and wiser sort in both Universities, or whosoever they
be, with whose approbation the marks and recognizantes of all learning are
bestowed, would think the Apostles caution against unadvised Ordinations, not
impertinent or unnecessarie to be born in mind, even when they grant those
degrees of Schools. Which degrees are not gratiae (...) datae (kindnesses
bestowed by way of humanity) but they are gratiae gratum facientes, favors
which always imply a testimony given to the Church and Commonwealth, concerning
men's sufficiency for manners and knowledge; a testimony upon the credit whereof
sundry Statutes of the Realm are built; a testimony so far available, that
nothing is more respected for the warrant of diverse men's abilities to serve in
the affairs of the Realm: a testimony, wherein if they violate that Religion
wherewith it ought to be always given; and do thereby induce into error, such
as deem it a thing uncivil to call the credit thereof in question; let them
look that God shall return back upon their heads, and cause them in the state
of their own Corporations to feel (either one way or other) the punishment of
those harms, which the Church through their negligence does sustain in that
behalf.

e Simony.] Also to avoid the detestable sin of Simony, because buying and
selling of Benefices is execrable before God; therefore all such persons as buy
any Benefices, or come to them by fraud or deceit, shall be deprived of such
Benefices, and be made unable at any time after to receive any other spiritual
promotion. And such as do sell them, or by any color do bestow them for their
own gain and profit, shall loose their right and title of Patronage and
presentment for that time, and the gift thereof for that vacation shall
appertain to the Queens Majesty. Q. Eliz. injunct. 9.

Vide (...) (...). De patronis. And whoever (...) admitted, instituted, or
installed into any Ecclefiastical dignity or benefice, ought to take a solemn
oath before the Archbishop, Bishop, etc. prescribed by the Canon in these
words, I N. N. do swear that I have made no Simoniacal payment, contract, or
promise, directly or indirectly, by my self or by any other, to my knowledge or
with my consent, to any person or persons whatsoever, for or concerning the
procuring and obtaining of this Ecclesiastical dignity (naming it); nor will
at any time hereafter perform or satisfy any such kind of payment, contract,
or promise made by any other without my knowledge or consent: So help me God
through Jesus Christ. Constitutiones Jacobi 41.

f Residence of Curates.] Solerter cavendum est, ne talibus cura gregis
Dominici committatur, qui aut negligunt, aut ignorant custodiae sibi commissae
(ut decet) intendere vigilanter. Statuimus itaque, ut nullus Episcoporum ad
Vicariam (...) admittat, nisi velit in ecclesia (in qua ei Vicaria conceditur)
personaliter ministrare, ac talis existat, qui infra breve tempus valeat in
Presbyterum ordinari. Quod si admissus fuerit aliquis, and noluerit in
Presbyterum ordinari, vicariae beneficio spolietur. Et quia inhonestum est, ut
Ecclesiae propter minores redditus pastoribus maneant desolatae, Praesenti
decreto statuimus, ut ecclesiae quae in redditibus ultra quinque marchas non
habent, non nisi talibus personis conferantur, quae resideant in eisdem and in
propria persona ministrent. Quod si forte tales admissi fuerint qui residere
noluerint, aut etiam ecclesiae ministrare (cum non nisi (...) panis Dominicus
sit largiendus) ecclesiis ipsis praemissa admonitione debita, per Diocesanum
Episcopum spolientur. Council. Oxon. 1o. Linwood De clericis non residen. c. Cum
hostis.

Absentia Pastoris a Dominico grege, and secura illa negligentia quam videmus
in multis. and destitutio ministerii, est res and in se foeda, and odiosa in
(...), and perniciosa Ecclesiae Dei. Canones Eliz. anno 1571.

Hookers (...). policy, lib. 5.. 81. begins thus; The truth is, that of all
things hitherto mentioned, the greatest is that threefold blot or blemish of
notable ignorance, unconscionable absence from the cures whereof men have taken
charge, and unsatiable hunting after spiritual preferments without either care
or conscience of the public good. -- Against these no man is so raw and dull,
but that the volumes which have been written both of old and late, may make him
(in so plentiful a cause) eloquent, p. 445. As it fares in such cases, the gap
which for just considerations we open to some, lets in others (through
corrupt practices) to whom such favors were never meant, nor should be
communicated. And (having propounded several expedients for reformation, p.
451, 452.) he concludes the book, with desiring that a voluntary reformation
hereof were made on all sides, of that which may give passage unto any abuse.

g Merchandise.] Constitutio Othoboni, p. 73. b. quod religiosi non ement vel
vendent. Arctius inhibemus ne Monachi, moniales, aut religiosi quilibet
(cujuscunque religionis existunt) mercationes (quae in emendo vel vendendo
consistunt) in mundanis mercatis, vel alias, audeant in quibusdam rebus
aliquatenus exercere. Alioquin ab officio sint suspensi; quae suspensio per
superiorem non (...) quousque satisfecerint de praemissis.

Saxonicus Canon (...) in Spelmanno, p. 579.. 30. Ne beo, etc. Presbyter nec
sit mercator, nec mercaturae cupidus, nec omisso Theologiae studio, se ad
mundanas conferat sermocinationes, nec arma ferat, nec lites agat, nec in
oenopoliis bibat more secularium.

h Usurer.] Usurarios prohibet Rex Edwardus Confessarius, ne remaneret aliquis
in toto regno suo. Leges Eccles. (...). Edw. in Spelman, p. 623.. 23, and p.
299.. 17.

i Hunter.] Venationes and silvaticas vagationes cum canibus, and ut (...) and
falcones habeant, prohibemus, Spelman. p. 238.. 4. De clerico venatore.
Statuimus ut si quis clericus, etc. Linwood, p. 232. Si clericus venationes
exercuerit, unum annum poeniteat (cum pane and aqua) diaconus duos, presbyter
tres, Theodori canon. paenit. cap. De venatione.

k Gamer.] (...). Siquis clericus (...) ludat, deponatur; si laicus segregetur.
Council. Constantinopol. in Trullo. can. 50.

Ecclesiastical persons shall in no wise (at any unlawful time) nor for any
other cause then for their honest necessities, haunt or resort to any taverns
or alehouses. And after their meats they shall not give themselves to drinking
or riot, spending their time idly by day or by night, at dice, cards, or
tables-playing, or any unlawful game. But at all times as they shall have
leisure, they shall hear or read somewhat of the holy Scripture, or shall
occupy themselves with some other honest study or exercise. And that they
always do the things which appertain to honesty, and endeavor to profit the
commonwealth; having always in mind, that they ought to excel all others in
purity of life, and should be examples to the people to live well and
Christianly. Q. Eliz injunct. 7.

Decanus and residentiarii quantum maxim possint dabunt operam, ut minores
Canonici aut vicarii and ministri Ecclesiae, non ignavi and inutiles vitam
ducant in otio, and illicitis lusibus se exerceant. Liber quorundam Canonum
anno 1571. cap. 2.

l Weapon] Interdiximus servis Dei ut (...) habitu, vel sago vel armis utantur.
Cutbert. in Spelmanni Council. page 238. Non licet Clerico esse mercatorem, nec
habere praefecturam, nec turpe lucrum sectari, nec implicare se negotiis
secularibus, nec esse ebriosum, nec bibere in tabernis: sed oportet eum semper
esse paratum ad hoc quod ordinatus est. -- Non debet esse superbus, arrogans,
nec superfluus in vestibus, nec comptus annulis: -- non debet armis uti, nec ad
bellum procedere: quia canones docent, quod quicunque clericus in bello aut
rixa mortuus fuerit, neque oblatione neque oratione postuletur pro eo. Theodori
poenitentiale MS. in bibliotheca Collegii Corporis Christi Cantabr. in medio
voluminis.

m Apparel and adorning the body.] Proviso, ne Clerici in publicum nisi
promissis vestibus (cassocks) induti prodeant Constitut. 1603. 74. Injunctions
1559. 30. See John Gersons excellent tract De temperantia in cibis, potu, and
vestibus Praelatorum; where he proves, that excess in these will be one means
to ruin the Church. Now whether to go in coerpo, with a band hanging over the
shoulders, and hair (...) almost to the middle of the back, compassed round
with ribbons (so that many in holy Orders, look rather like (...) and ruffians
then Clergymen) whether this agrees with old Canons, let him judge who meets
there often with Clericus comam non nutriat. (which is called by Epiphanius, An
Apostolical Constitution, p. 1073. and 1074. edit Petav.) or consults Spelmanni
Concilia p. 52.6. and p. 453.. 47. Council. Carthag. IV. can. 44. Aniceti epist.
decret. Dionys. De eccles. hierar. par. 2. c. 3. or the late Canons De vestitu
clericorum, anno 1564. or regards the custom of any other Churches, or S.
Paul's plain precept 1 Cor. xi. 14, 16. or knows how sharply Epiphanius (in the
place afore-cited) and S. Augustine (lib. De oper. Manich. cap. ult) do rebuke
some Monks for going in long hair.

n Secular business. (...) No man being admitted a Deacon or Minister, shall
use himself in the course of his life as a layman, upon pain of
excommunication, Can. 75. anno 1603. Presbyteri sciant se necessario pro Dei
intuitu debere a secularibus negotiis causisque in quantum praevaleant, vacare,
Spelman. page 247. 8. and 582. 34.

o Residence of Bishops.] Vide Constitutiones Othoboni, De residentia
Episcoporum, p. 43. Pastor bonus cognoscens gregem suum debet ipsum and
corporis, and mentis oculis jugiter intueri, etc. Sub divini attestatione
judicii commonemus, ut ad commissi gregis curam, etc. ibid.

Spelman, p. 238. Statuimus ut singulis annis unusquisque Episcopus parochiam
suam solicit circumeat, populum confirmare, and plebem docere.

p Patrimony of Christ.] The goods of the Church are called the goods of the
poor; and in these days nothing is less seen then the poor to be sustained with
the same; so says the 15th Injunct. of Edw. 6. anno 1547. Gratian having
brought many autorities to this purpose, concludes thus; By all these
autorities it is clear, that Clergymen can have no propriety; if they have,
they are no Clergy men. 12. q. 1. c. habebat. Almost all the 9th book of
Spalato De Eccles. Repub. is spent in proving this; but see chiefly, c. 7.. 8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13. etc. 1.. 18. ad finem. The same Spalato has more to the
same purpose in his large reply (which is extant in Cajus College library) to
that letter of Bishop Hall, which was printed by John Crook, 1660. in Bishop
Halls remains, p. 394. In which reply Spalato complains, that his writing upon
this subject, was the only reason why his third tome (which now has been
twice printed in Germany) was not permitted to come forth in England in the
year 1620. The judgment of Bishop Goodman in this point (...) in (u my last
note.

q Enriching of kinsfolk.] This follows from the former. For if Ecclesiastical
goods be (as our Church says) the goods of the poor, then kinsfolk ought not
be enriched by them. Non te numerus propinquorum avarum faciat, quasi illis in
haereditatem congregare debeas; nullus haeres melior est Christo, nemo tui
thesauri fidelior custos est. Epistola Alcuini ad Eanbaldum Archiep. in
Poenitentiali Theodori Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis. Thus the 38th Apostolical
Canon says, that a Bishop is to dispense the goods of the Church as in the
presence of God, and it is not lawful for him to give any thing (even to his
own parents) of those things that belong to God: only if they be poor, he is
to help them as other poor people, and not to prey upon the Churches goods for
them. The Council of Gangra (which was presently after the first Nicen)
decrees, can. 8. That if any receive an oblation beside the Bishop, and him
that is appointed by the Bishop to dispense alms to the poor; both he that
gives, and he that receives it shall be excommunicate. See more Canons in
Spalato. l. 9. c. 4.. 13. and c. 7.. 10. I conclude this with a passage of S.
Augustine (Sermon. 21. ad fratres in eremo) tom. 10. Non ergo habere debemus
temporalia, etc. We ought not therefore to have temporal goods to keep them in
our possession; nor must I that am a Bishop have them, but only to dispense to
poor people, because the goods of the Church are the goods of the poor:
wherefore I must take great heed lest the estate of the poor (which belongs to
the Church of Hippo) be given to the rich. In which matter I have hitherto quit
my self well. For I have kindred who call themselves noble, and they come to me
being a Bishop (one while threatening, another while flattering me) and say,
Father, give us somewhat for we are your kin: And yet by Gods grace, and the
mediation of your prayers, I do not remember that ever I enriched one of them.
For the poor are more dear to me then the rich, because having food and raiment
we should be therewith content. See more of this and all the former
particulars, in Concilio Aquisgranensi de Ecclesiastica disciplina celebrato
anno 836. in Binio, tom. 3. part. 1. Sect. poster. page 313. etc. Hieron. adv.
Jovin. l. 2. De consecrat. did. 5. c. Ne tales. Prosperum de vita
contemplativa these chapters; Of the negligence of a Priest who acts contrary
to his doctrine lib. 1 cap. 15. what danger will betide them who neglect the
cure committed to their charge c. 16. what manner of persons Priests should be,
c. 21. and 25. That Priests ought to look upon nothing as their own, l. 2. c.
9. how they ruin their souls who take of the goods of the Church when they
have enough of their own, c. 10. Council. Carthagin. 4. Lopez (...) patrum l. 5.
c. 11. Episcopi non (...) consanguineos. Bishop Andrews p. 39. of this book and
note [ b]

r Councels] Episcopus bis in anno Synodum cogat, and parochiam suam semel
(...), peccata corripiens. Spelman p. 293. 3.

P. 28. l. 18. I see not what good comes of your assembling, namely to the
Church] Sacerdotum ac principum concilium uno (...) habebatur; ac unum tantum
agebatur, ut pecunia imperaretur. Polydor. Vergil. l. 27. in Hen. 8. mihi page
1710 Edit. Gandavi, 1557.

s Correction of manners] See many laws to this end in Concilio Aquisgranensi
jam citato, and in Spelman p. 395. etc.

t Laity] I shall only mind the Laity (for 20 years confusion has made many
forget) how the Church of England exhorts them to behave themselves in holy
places and at holy times ( God joins both together Lev. xix. 30.) All Bishops
and Preachers shall (...) and teach the people committed to their spiritual
charge to use themselves in this manner following: that is to say, At their
entry or coming into the Church, let them make account with themselves how
they have bestowed the week past; remembering what (...) minds and purposes
they have had, what words they have spoke, what things they have done or left
undone, to the dishonor and displeasure of God; (...) what example or occasion
of evil they have given to others. And when they have thus recollected and
considered all these things in their minds, then let them humbly acknowledge
their faults unto God, and ask forgiveness for the same; with unfeigned purpose
in their hearts to convert and return from their naughty lives, and to amend
the same. And when they have so done, then let them clearly and purely in their
hearts remit and forgive all malice and displeasure which they bear to any
creature: and after that let them fall unto prayer, according to the
commandment of Christ, where he says Mat. 5. When ye begin to pray, forgive
what soever displeasure ye have against any man. And when they be (...) of
prayer, then let them use reading of the word of God, or some other good and
heavenly doctrine; so that they do it quietly, without disturbance of others
that be in the Church: Or else let them employ their minds with some wholesome
and godly moditations whereby they may be the better. Thus far the book
entitled, The Institution of a Christian man, subscribed by 21 of our English
Bishops in the year 1537. And they are to keep holy days not in idleness,
pride, (...), etc. but in hearing the word of God read and taught, in private
and public prayers, in acknowledging their offenses to God and amendment of
the same, in reconciling themselves charitably to their (...) where displeasure
has been, in often receiving the Communion, in visiting the poor and sick, in
using all soberness and godly conversation. Thus the 25. injunction, Edw.
(...). ao D. 1547.

Reformation of the laity] It seems the laity needed reforming in Dr. Colets
days; but how much more they have needed it since, appears by a Sermon preached
by the Bishop of Chichester at S. Paul's Cross March 4. 1576. in the midst
whereof are these words: Good Lord, what devotion was there in the children of
darkness (meaning papists in his memory.) They would go a foot many an hundred
miles to a dumb image. They would rise by midnight, and tarry all the morning
in the Church cold and hungry to hear that which they understood not. They gave
away their goods and their lands to clothe images. They would eat nothing but
bread and water full many a time; and spare from their own belly to bestow it
as their zeal led them. I leave them to God, I hope the best.

But we that have the light of the Gospel (that know true religion, and true
faith, and true prayer, and true alms) have little devotion, either to fast, or
to do the works of true mercy. We will scarce rise at seven a clock (nay at
nine a clock) to hear the word of God, and to serve God; we will not go a mile
(nay we will scarce go out of our chambers and houses) to hear Christ preached,
and to honor God in his congregation: Never so little business stays us from
Sermons and Common Prayer, etc.

[I find Erasmus in his Epistles ( l. 10. ep. 9, 10. and saepe alibi, often
calling Dr. Colet praeceptore^ unicum and optimum; but why I know not, unless
for his giving so good praecepts in this Sermon.]

u Courts] Vide librum quorundam Canonum 1571. cap. 4. and constitutiones 1597.
de excessibus Apparituru^ reformand., and feodis quae officiariis Eccles.
debentur. Godfrey Goodman, the last Bishop of Gloucester, in his epistle to
Trinity College in Cambridge set before his Mysteries of Christian Religion,
has these words; I confess that God would never have permitted us to have
suffered in such a manner, as we have done, had we not provoked him with our
sins: and that I may be our own accuser, I think our greatest offense did
consist in these two things. First, that many of us did not spend our
Church-means in a Church-like manner, but converted them to our own private
uses, or otherwise mis-imployed them: therefore God justly takes them away, and
permits sacrilege; we our selves having first offended in the same kind. For
certainly Church-means should have relation as well to the uses as to the
persons; and a Church man in mispending them commits sacrilege. And whereas
many excuse it in regard of their wives and children, God forbid but regard
should be had of them, yet still with moderation. I cannot excuse the excess of
Apparel and some other courses of expense. Yet this I must testify for a
truth, that speaking privately with some Bishops, they told me (and I believed
them) that they laid not up one farthing of their Bishoprics: and this may
appear, for many of them died very poor, as Worcester, Hereford, Peterborough,
Bristol; and not unlike but others will do so.

Another great fault in the Church was the intolerable abuse of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction; therefore God has made us now incapable of any Jurisdiction. So
just and wonderful is he in all his judgments! I confess in mine own
particular I did as much desire and labor to reform it as any man could do,
yet I could never prevail. Herein a little to excuse the Church, I have it (and
can produce it at this time) under the Kings own hand and seal wherein he
forbids that any Church man or Priest in holy Orders, should be a Chancellor;
and this was the occasion of all the corruption of the spiritual Court: for the
Judges at the Common Law have their Pensions and Allowances, but Chancellours
have none at all, they live only upon the fees of the Court, and for them to
dismiss a cause, it was to loose so much blood. Now if they be naught in
themselves, then they must for their own advantage and profit have Instruments
and Agents accordingly: so the Registers, Proctours. Apparatours, they were
pessimum genus hominum. While the spiritual Court was only governed by Church
men and Priests, as it ought to be (and has ever been so heretofore) they had
their spiritual Benefices and Dignities to live upon, and did scorn the Fees of
the Court: besides the holiness of the Profession kept them from bribing and
corruption. Little do men think how much they suffer by this one position, That
Church men should not interpose in Civil and Moral affairs: Whereas formerly
Bishops and Churchmen only were trusted with last Wills and Testaments, and
granting out Administrations. And certainly if there be any honesty among men,
it must be supposed to be rather in them then in others; but there having been
such an abuse it must be acknowledged that God is most just in all his ways,
and what has befaln us, is according to the deserts of our sins.

(...). Nicen. 1. Can. 6.
The contents of Dr. Colets life.
. 1. His birth and parentage, the derivation of his name. 2, 3. His wealth,
comeliness, and studies in several countries. 4. He expounds S. Paul's Epistles
in Oxford; and thereupon (5) is made D. D. and Dean of S. Paul's Church. 6, 7.
Sir Thomas More's judgment of him, and some others, and of a Citie-life. (5)
8. His behavior in Gods house and his own. 9. His garments, and amanuensis.
10. How he distributed his Church-revenues, and how his own inheritance. 11,
12, 13. S. Paul's school built, endowed, and described. 14. His house at
Richmond. 15, 16, 17, 18. His natural temper; subdued by Philosophy and
Religion. 19. His opinions; and 25. his afflictions. 14. His death, and 32, 33.
The buryingplaces of him and his kindred.

THE LIFE OF Dr. COLET,
Writ by ERASMUS ROTERODAMUS.
. I. JOHN Erasmus tells Lupset (who gave him some materials to write this life)
that Colet is a name that seems to have been given to this Author by God, for
Coh^, which in Hebrew signifies Ecclesiastes, the preacher. If I might guess
again, I should say that he was so called because of those rare endowments that
were in him. For the Colet is that part of the ring wherein: the precious stone
or signet is set. See Tho. Thomasius in voce Pala. It pleased Alm. God to break
his mothers wedding-ring in taking away all her 22 children, except enly one:
but he preserved the colet of it, in preserving our Dr. alive as long as she
lived. See more of this, page penult.
COLET was born in London, the son of Henry Colet (Knight, and twice Ld. Major
of that City) and Christian his wife: who Erasm. 1. 24. ep. 16. p. 1317.
was a Matron of very rare piety and Christian fortitude; whereof I will give
but one instance. She had 11 sons, and as many daughters of the same husband;
all which she saw buried, except John who was her firstborn. God was pleased to
take Sir Henry away, when she was a very old woman. And when she was fourscore
and ten years of age, her countenance was so comely and entire, her behavior
so cheerful and pleasant, that if you had seen her you would have said, sure
she never had any sorrow or any childbearing in her life: yet, unless my memory
fail much, she out lived her son John. So much strength of mind was there even
in a woman, caused not by Philosophy or humane learning, but by sincere piety
to God and trust in Christ. A shame for many men!

. 2. LIB. XV. Epist. 14. page 702. Of these two and twenty children, John being
the eldest was according to the law of England his fathers sole heir: whereby
he must have inherited a very considerable fortune, though the rest had all
lived, but they were all dead when I first began to know him. And nature was as
indulgent to him as fortune; for he had a very proper, tall, This appears from
that picture of him which is in our public library at Cambridge, in a very
choice Manuscript, most elaborately done in his own house at Paul's. In the
first page whereof these words (D. Johannis Coletsi Decani S. Pauli) are writ
over a young person in Priestly attire, having the beautifullest face (in my
opinion) that ever I beheld; and so far differing from that (...) is of him at
S. Paul's school and his tomb, hat I was saint (...) them both to a judicious
Limner, to know whether they were drawn for the same man: who answered, yes
certainly: whence I gathered (and from p. 58. l. 18. and p. 71 l. 23. of this
book) that he was very fair till his sweating sickness and consumption, and
(perhaps chiefly) his afflictions changed his complexion. -- re creed coleri.
handsome and comely body. In his younger days he much addicted himself to the
study of Scholastical Philosophy, and commenced in England Master of Arts; an
honor due not so much to his standing in the Universitie, as his knowledge in
the seven libereal sciences: in none whereof he had been then ignorant, in most
of them exquisitly learned. All Tullies works were as familiar to him as his
epistles. He had read over Plato and Plotinus [so diligently, that when I heard
him speak, me thought I heard Plato himself talk, lib. 5. ep. 2. page 309. c.]
And he had a smartering in each part of Mathematics

. 3. Being thus well principled at home, he began to look abroad, and improve
his stock in foreign parts. In France he added to his Humanity, what he thought
necessary for the study of Divini y: which then he effectually prosecuted in
Italy. Amongst the Ancients he was most taken with Dionyfius, Origin, S.
Cyprian, S. Ambrose, and S. Hierome. But among them all he did most disgust S.
Augustine. And yet he did not so tie himself to Antiquity, but that (as
occasion served) he sometimes surveyed Aquinas. Scotus. and other School men.
In a word he was well versed in both Laws; and singularly read in History, both
civil and ecclesiastical. And because he saw that England had her Dantes and
Petrarchs as well as Italy (who have performed the same here, which they did
there) those and these, he both read and diligently imitated; accommodating
thereby his style to the Pulpit, and preaching of the Gospel.

. 4. After his return from Italy, he staid not long in London (where his
parents lived) but chose to live in Oxford, where he publicly (yet freely and
without stipend) expounded S. (...) Epistles, being not full thirty years of
age younger then I was by two or three months. There and then I had the
happiness to come first acquainted with him: For though at that time he had
neither took nor desired any degree in Divinity; yet there was no Doctor
whatsoever either of Theology or Law, no Abbot nor dignified person in the
whole Universitie, that did not frequent (and which is more) take notes of his
Lectures. Which was to be imputed either to Colets authority, or their
studiousness and modesty, choose you whether.

. 5. But before he left Oxford they honored him with the degree of Doctor;
which he accepted rather to please the givers then himself. From that
University and these sacred employments, he was called back to London by the
favor of K. Henry VII. who bestowed upon him the Deanery of S. Paul's; that he
might be President of his College whose Epistles and learning he loved so
well. [He was made both Doctor and Dean ao 1504. l. 10. ep. 8. p. 512.] Of all
the Deaneries in England the highest in esteem, but not of greatest value:
which Colet embraced rather as a burdensome charge, then honor. And therefore
as soon as he had regulated his College of Prebends, and raised up the ancient
Discipline that was fallen down, he resolved (which was not usual in those
times) TO PREACH EVERY HOLYDAY in his Cathedral, over and above his Sermons at
Court, and many other Churches. At S. Paul's he expounded the Scriptures, not by
retale, but wholesale; running over, sometimes a whole Epistle, sometime a
whole Gospel, the Creed, or the Lords Prayer. Wheresoever he preached, he was
exceedingly followed, both by the chief Citizens and Courtiers: which appears
by this following letter sent him by Sr. Thomas More (afterward Lord
Chancellor of England) which you may see in Stapleton, (tom. 4 page 992.
operum in folio.)

. 6. SIR; I lately met your boy in Cheapfide, whom I was very glad to see,
chiefly because I thought he had not returned without you. But when he told me
that you were not only not come, but not coming; you cannot imagine into what
a dump of sadness I fell from an height of joy. For what can be more trouble
some to me, than to be deprived of your most sweet company? having been so
long used to enjoy your most prudent counsel, to be refresht with your most
pleasant society, to be rouzed with your most grave sermons, and bettered by
your excellent example and life: in a word, in whose very countenance and
gesture I was wont to be unspeakably delighted. As me thought I was
strengthened by these things while I had them, so for want of them I seem to
languish. And because of late by following you, I had almost got out of the
jaws of hell, now again like another Euridice (yet by a contrary law; for she
fell because Orpheus looked upon her, but I fall because you do not look upon
me) I am carried back by a kind of force and necessity into sad darkness. For
what is there in this city that should move any body to live well, and not
rather (while he is of his own disposition climbing up the sleep hill of
virtue) pull him back by a thousand allurements and devices? Which way soever I
walk, what do I hear of, but dissembling, and the sugared poisons of flatterers;
what do men talk of but quarrels and lawsuits? which way soever I look, what
do I see but alehouses, taverns, (...), butchers, fishers, fowlers, and such
cattle; who prog for belly-timber, and serve the world, and the (...) prince
thereof? I know not how it comes to pass, but methinks the very tops of the
houses almost meet sometimes, and take away a good part of the pleasant light;
and will not suffer us to look upon heaven freely: so it is not the
circumference of the horizon, but the housetop that bounds the air. For which
cause I may excuse you the more, if you are not yet weary of the country;
where you see people dealing plainly, and not acquainted with the knavery of
the City; where which way soever you turn your eyes, the smiling face of the
earth pleases, the sweet temper of the air refreshes, and the goodly aspect of
the heaven delights you. You see nothing there but the bountiful gifts of
nature, and some holy footsteps of innocence.

, 7 But, Sir, I would be loath you (...) be so far taken with these delights,
as to be detained long from us: for if the inconveniences of the City (...)
you, yet Stepney (of which you should have some care) will be as convenient for
you as the place that you are now in; whence you may step into the city (where
you have an huge opportunity of doing good) as into an inn. For whereas men in
the country are of themselves either almost innocent, or not so abominably bad
as they be here; any Physician may do good among them. But to this City, both
by reason of the multitude of the inhabitants, and the inveterate hold which
the diseases (of sin) have got, a Doctor comes to no purpose, unless he be
excellently skild. I confess some (...) into your pulpit at S. Paul's sometimes,
who promise fair; but when they seem to have made an excellent discourse, their
lives differ so much from their words, that they do increase rather then (...)
the malady. For they who themselves are sickest of all, will never persuade
people, that they are fit to be charged with the care and cure of other folks
distempers: which when men feel touched by those that they see full of ulcers,
they cannot but winch, kick, and be angry. But if (as the Philosophers say) he
be the fittest Physician, in whom the sick person has greatest confidence,
(...) none is more likely then you to cure this whole City. By whom, how
willing they are to have their wounds handled, in whom what confidence they put
(and how ready they are to obey you) appears sufficiently by the experience
that you have of them and the incredible expectation that they have of you.
Therefore make haste a way, my good Colet: either for your town Stepnies sake,
(...) laments your long absence as much as a child (...) his mothers; or for
your native countries sake (London) whereof you ought to have as much care as
of your parents. In the last, though least place, be moved by your respect to
me, who have dedicated my self wholly to you and do (...) long for your return.
Farewell, and still, love

Your very affectionate, THOMAS MORE.
London. October 23.

. 8. The Deans table which in former times had under pretense of good
housekeeping, been too much prostitute to excess, he reduced to frugality. For
he kept himself to one meal a day many years together, both before and after
his preferment: which at once cut off all his supper-guests (late dinners not a
few) and the more, because his entertainment (though neat) was neither costly
nor excessive; his sitting short, and his whole discourse such as pleased none
but those that were either learned or pious. For soon after he had said grace,
his boy read a chapter (distinctly and aloud) out of S. Paul's Epistles, or
Solomon's Proverbs; from which he himself for the most part picked the subject of
that meals discourse: asking not only Scholars, but even ordinary people (if
they were ingenuous) what was the meaning of this or that passage. And he so
ordered his words, that though he were holy and grave, yet he seemed no whit
tedious or supercilious. And at the end of the meal, when their hunger (not
pleasure) was satisfied, he fell upon another subject: thus dismissing his
guests, with as much satisfaction to their minds as refreshment to their
bodies, desiring they should depart better men then they came, not with bigger
bellies. He was hugely delighted with the conference of his friends, who often
kept him till late at night; but all his conference was either of literature,
or Jesus Christ. If he had no acceptable friend to chat with (for every one did
not please him) his boy did read somewhat to him out of godly books. Sometimes
he called me to ride abroad with him, and then he was as merry as any man
alive; but a good book was always his comrade in his journey, and his talk was
continually of Christ.

. 9. He was so much averse from all filthiness, that he could not endure
solecismes or barbarous language. He affected neatness in his household stuff,
clothes, books, meat; but not magnificence. He wore no garments but black,
whereas in England Doctors in Divinity and other eminent (...), commonly wear
scarlet. His upper garment was always of cloth, plain and without trimming;
which in hard frosts he fortified with fur. [ Praefat. ad notas in N. T.] And
he being an eminent advancer of divine philosophy, lent me two very old Latin
copies of the * The two (...) Gospels were copied out of them by Peter Meghen,
a tare scribe with one eye, born at (...) in Flanders. He was kept by Dr. (...)
in the Deans house at Paul's, and his most fair transcript is now kept in the
public Library at: Cambridge.
New Testament, when I wrote notes upon it; writ in characters that were like
Saxon, and indeed so old, that I was forced to turn child again, and begin
anew to learn my Alphabet before I could read them.

. 10. Whatsoever revennues accrued unto him by the Church, he entirely
committed to his steward, to be distributed, and spent in housekeeping. [ See
page ult.] His own hereditary rents and profits (which were vast) he himself
distributed to pious uses. For his father being dead, money flowed in apace
from what was left him by inheritance; and lest that being kept should breed
some disease in him, he therewith erected a stately new school in S. Paul's
Churchyard, dedicated to the holy child Jesus: whereunto he joined fair
dwellings for two Schoolmasters, to whom he assigned liberal stipends, that
they might teach gratis but so as that they should not be enjoined to admit
above a certain number [viz. 153. from John xxi. 11.]

, 11. The whole fabric he divided into four parts: whereof one (at the
entrance) is as it were for the Catechumeni (and yet none is admitted till he
can read and write) the second for such as are under the usher. The third part
is for those whom the upper Master teaches These two ends are divided by a
curtain, which is drawn to and fro when they please. Above the Masters chair
stands the holy child JESUS, curiously engraven, in the posture of one reading
a lecture, with this motto HEAR HIM, which words I advised him to set up. And
all the young fry when they come in and go out of school [ beside (...)
appointed prayers] salute Christ with an Which you may read amongst Erasmus's
Epigramms.
hymn. At the upper end is a chapel, in which divine Service may be said. The
whole building has no corners nor lurking holes for dunces, having neither
chamber nor dining room in it. Every boy has his proper seat distinguished by
spaces of wood, and the forms have three ascents. Every class contains
sixteen boys, [ the two lowest much more] and the best scholar of each, sits in
a seat somewhat more eminent than the rest [ with the word CAPITANEUS engraven
in golden letters over his (...).]

. 12 The masters of this School do not rashly admit all that are brought; but
choice is made of the most towardly wits and best dispositions; lest in that
laborious employment they should toil in vain. For some men in this age are so
base [ as I told Dr. Colet l. 31. ep. 45. p. 2046. g.] as to set those to be
Scholars, and profess Divinity (the chief of all Sciences) whom for their dull
capacity and bad natures they think scarce fit for any other study. He
entreated me [ lib. 10. ep. 17, and 18. p. 518. (...). and 520. c] to seek out
a man whom I thought a fit Under-master for this his School (Will. Lilly being
the first upper-master) I enquired in many places but could hear of none. At
length being at Cambridge among some Masters of Arts, I propounded it to them;
one of them (and he of no mean esteem) smiling, said, Who would endure to live
in that School among boys, that could make a shift to scrape up a livelihood
any where else? I answered modestly, that it seemed to me a very honest
employment, to instruct young people in learning and good manners; that Christ
did not despise that age; that a man could bestow his pains upon no age better;
and in no place expect a better effect or reward of his pains then at S. Paul's
School, because it is in the midst of London, and London the chief City of the
Kingdom, where from all other parts the lines (or gentry and ingenuous
people) meet as in a center. And I added, that if men were truly pious, they
would think that they could no way serve God better then by bringing children
to Christ. But he drawing up his nose and scoffing, replied, if any have a
mind to serve Christ let him go into a Monastery or Religious house. I
answered, that S. Paul placed true Religion in the duties of Charity; and that
charity consisted in doing as much good to our neighbors as we could. He
rejected that as sillily spoken. Behold, quoth he, we have left all, therein is
perfection. I finally told him, that that man has not left all, who when it is
in his power to do good to very many people, shuns the employment because he
thinks it too mean for him -- And so (lest we should have wrangled) I left the
man. But you here see the wisdom of the Scotists.

. 13. Our quick-sighted Dr. Colet saw very well, that the main hope and pillar
of a Commonwealth, consists in furnishing youth with good literature, and
therefore did he bestow so much care and cost on this school. Though it stood
him in an So vast charges, as would have scared even a Peer of the Realm to
think on it; for he laid out all his inheritance upon it. Tam ingentes sumptus
ut satrapam quoque (...) possint, etc. Erasm. l. 28 ep. 28. epist dedic. ad
Copiam verborum. which book he wrote for the benefit of S. Paul's school, as he
wrote his book called Ecclesiastes, sive de ratione concionandi (at the request
of Bishop Fisher) for Christ's College and S. John's in Cambridge, as appears by
the epistle dedicatory before it.
infinite sum of money to build and endow it, yet he would accept of no
copartner. One left indeed a legacy of an 100 pounds sterling to the structure
of it; but Colet thinking, that if he took it, some lay people would challenge
to themselves I know not what authority over the school, did by the permission
of his Bishop, bestow it upon holy vestments for the quire. Yet though he would
suffer no layman to have a finger in the building, he entrusted no Clergyman
(not so much as the Bishop, Dean and Chapter of S. Paul's) nor any of the
Nobility, with the oversight of the revenues, but some married citizens of
honest report. When he was asked why he would do so? he answered, That there
was nothing certain in humane affairs; but he found least corruption in such
men.

. 14. As all men highly commended him for his Of which school (...)r. Colet,
More writ thus to Dr. (...), Neque valde miror (...) clarissimae scholae (...)
invidia. Vident enim (...) ex (...) Trojano (...) qui barbaram diruere Trojam,
sic (...) tua prodire schola, qui ipsorum (...) atque (...) in (...). Lib. 23.
p. 870. cited by Stapleton. tom. 4. p 993.
school, so many wondered why he would build so stately an house, within the
bounds of the (...) monastery: which is not far from the palace at Richmond:
but he told them, that he provided that seat for himself in his old age, when
he should be unfit for labors, or broken with diseases, and so constrained to
retire from the society of men. There he intended to philosophize with two or
three eminent friends, among which he was wont to reckon me; but death
prevented him. For being few years before his decease visited thrice with the
sweating sickness (a disease which seized no contrymen but English) though
he recovered, yet he thereupon grew consumptive, and so (...). One Physician
thought that the dropsy killed him; but when he was diffected, they saw
nothing extraordinary: only the capillary vessels of his liver, were beset
with (...). He was buried in the south side of the quire of his own Cathedral,
in a low sepulcher, which he to that end had chose for himfelf some years
before, with this inscription, JOHN COLET. [ but hereof I will add more in the
last pa e of this narrative.]

. 15. In the mean while I shall say somewhat, first of his nature, secondly of
his paradoxical opinions, and lastly of those (...) where with his ingenuous
piety was exercised; for some whereof he might have thanked his own natural
temper. For he was of a very high spirit, hugely impatient of any injury,
wonderfully prone to lasciviousness, luxury, and overmuch sleep, to jeasting
and facetiousness above measure, (all this he confessed to me himself) and he
was not wholly safe from covetousness. But against each of these he fought such
a good fight, by Philosophy, Divine contemplations, watching, fasting, and
prayer, that he led the whole course of his life free from the infections of
this world; and as far as I could any way gather (by familiarity and much
liberal converse with him) was a pure virgin to his dying day. All his wealth
he distributed to pious uses. [ of which I have (...) somewhat already, and
shall say more (...).

. 16. [ Lib. 23. ep. 5. p. 1206. a.] He had an uncle that was a very old
ill-conditioned man, with whom he did not agree, The difference between them
was not about a trifle, but so vast a sum of money, that a son might almost
have fought with his father about it. Colet being to dine with the Reverend
Father in God What an exemplary man this William was, and how excellent a
pattern of a good Prelate, see in Erasmus's Ecclesiastes in the middle of the
first book, which is extraordinarily well worth the reading.
William Archbishop of Canterbury, took me in the boat with him from S. Paul's
to Lambeth. All the way he read the remedy of anger in my Enchiridion, but did
not tell me wherefore he read it. When we sat down, it chanced that (...) sat
over against his uncle; and there he was very sad, neither speaking a word, nor
eating a bit. Now the Archbishop had an excellent faculty in such a case (to
make every one merry at his table) ordering his discourse according to each
man's peculiar temper; so he began to compare our several ages, and then those
who sat musing before, fell to chatting; and the uncle (as old men are wont to
do) began to brag, that though he were so far stricken in years, he felt no
decay of his strength. After dinner they two had some discourse betwixt
themselves; but what I cannot tell. When Colet and I were come back to the
boat, he told me that he saw I was an happy man; I answered, that I wondered why
he should call me happy, who thought my self the unhappiest person in the
world: whereupon he told me, that he had been that day so angry with his uncle,
that he had almost resolved (breaking all bonds of Christian modesty, and
natural affection to his kindred) to have sued him openly at law: That for this
reason he took my (...) in his hand along with him, to read the remedy against
anger, and that the reading of it had done him much good; That by that prattle
in dinner time, the bitterness and heat of each was so far allayed, as that
when the Archbishop stepped aside, and they talked together privately, the whole
difference was composed. [ p. 705.] In a word, Colet did daily so endeavor to
conquer all his passions, and subdue the haughtiness of his mind by reason,
that he would take it well to be admonished even by a child.

. 17. Lasciviousness, sleep, and luxury he chased away by abstaining constantly
from supper, by continual sobriety, indefatigable study, and holy conferences.
But yet when there was occasion, either to discourse with fair Ladies, or jest
with witty persons, or feast with pleasant, a man might easily perceive some
footsteps of his nature, which made him for the most part keep from the
society of all lay people; but especially from banquets, to which when he must
needs come, he commonly took with him me or some learned friend, with whom he
discoursed in Latin, that he might avoid idle talk. His custom was to eat
only of one dish, to content himself with one glass of beer or ale, or two at
the most. And though he was delighted with good wine, yet he drank very little
of it; always suspecting his own sanguine complexion and inclination, and being
very wary of all those things, by which he might offend any person whatsoever.

. 18. In all my life I never saw a more happy wit; and thence it came that he
was exceedingly pleased with such wits as were like himself: but at all times
when he might choose his discourse, it was of such things as prepared him for
the immortality of a life to come. And when at any time he refresht himself
with pleasant stories, he did not fail to make use of his philosophy in them.
He was much pleased with the purity and simplicity of nature in little children
(to the imitation of whom we are called by our blessed Savior) being wont to
compare them to angels.

. 19. Now for the second particular, his opinions; much differed in them from
the vulgar. The Scotists (of whose acuteness most men have an high conceit) he
esteemed heavy fellows, and any thing rather then ingenuous. And yet he had a
worse opinion of Thomas Aquinas (for what reason I know not) then of Scotus.
For when I sometimes commended Thomas to him as no contemptible author (among
the moderns) because he seemed to have read both Scriptures and Fathers (as I
guessed by his Catena Aurea) and to have somewhat of affection in his writings;
Colet seemed not to mind me two or three times, and said nothing. But when at
another discourse I spoke the same again with more vehemence, he looked (...)
upon me, to see whether I were in jest or in earnest, and when he saw I spoke
seriously, he replied thus in a passion, Why do ye commend this man to me? who
if he had not been very arrogant would never so rashly (and yet so
magisterially) have presumed to define all points of religion: and if he had
not savoured too much of the spirit of the world, he would not have polluted
all the doctrine of Christ with so much of his own profane philosophy. I
wondered at the enthusiastic posture of the man, and after that set upon
reading Aquinas his works more attentively; and I must needs confess, that my
opinion of him abated much.

. 20. No man was more a friend to true Christian piety, yet he had little or no
kindness for Monks, or rather I should say for those who are now (for the most
part falsely) so called: and therefore while he lived he gave them but little,
and when he died, nothing. Not that he (...) the profession, but because he saw
they did not live according to it. Yet his desire was to have disingaged
himself from the world, and betaken himself to a Monastery, if he could any
where have found a society that was truly and unanimously resolved upon an
Evangelical life. And when I went into Italy, he charged me to seek for such an
one; telling me that he had found some Monks there, who were really prudent and
pious: commending also some Germans, among whom he thought that the footsteps
of the good old Religion did still remain.

. 21. Though he lived very chastely himself, yet he had a very charitable
opinion of those Priests and Monks, who had no other crime but venery. Not that
he did not heartily abhor the sin; but because he found such men far less
mischievous then others (if compared) who were haughty, envious, backbiters,
hypocrites, vain, unlearned, wholly given to the getting of money and honor.
Yet these had a mighty opinion of themselves, whereas others by acknowledging
their infirmity, were made more humble and modest. He said, that to be covetous
and proud was more abominable in a Priest, then to have an hundred concubines:
not that he thought incontinence to be a light sin; but covetousness and pride
to be at a greater distance from true piety. And he was not more averse to any
sort of men, than such Bishops who were wolves in slead of shepherds: and
commended themselves by external service of God, ceremonies, benedictions, and
indu^lgences to the people; while with all their hearts they served the world,
that is, glory and gain. He was not much displeased with them, who would not
have images (either painted or carved, gold or silver) worshipped in Churches;
nor with them, who doubted whether a notorious wicked Priest could consecrate
the Sacrament. Hereby not favoring their error, but expressing his
indignation against such Clergymen, who by an open bad life gave occasion to
this suspicion.

. 22, He said, That the Colleges in England (which are large and stately)
hindergood literature, and are receptacles of idle people: nor did he much
regard the public Schools, because there ambition and gain did corrupt the
sincerity of all old discipline. As he did much approve of secret Confession
(professing that he never had so much comfort from any thing as that) so he
much condemned anxiety in it, and repetition. Whereas it is the custom in
England, for Priests to consecrate the host, and receive it almost every day,
he was content to sacrifice on Sundays and Holi-days, or some few days beside:
either to gain more time for his sacred studies, and fit himself the better for
his pulpitemployments, and the business of his Cathedral; or because he found
that his devotion had a greater edge, when it was sharpened with intervals. And
yet he would not condemn them who were minded to come to the Lords table every
day. Though he was a very learned man himself, yet he did not prize that
anxious and laborious fort of wisdom, which is fully attained by knowledge of
several sciences, and reading a multitude of books; saying often, that the native
sound constitution of men's parts, and the sincerity of their wit was lost
thereby; and that they rather got a learned sort of madness, then any true
incentive to Christian innocence, simplicity, and charity.

. 23. He attributed very much to the Epistles of the H. Apostles; but when he
compared them with that wondersull Majesty which is to be found in our Saviors
own sayings and sermons, he thought them somewhat dry. He had very ingenuously
reduced almost all the sayings of Christ to ternaries, and intended to write a
book of them. He wondered that Roman Priests should be forced to say so many
prayers every day; nay, though they are much employed, whether at home or in a
journey: but he much approved of the performing divine service magnificently.
He dissented from innumerable opinions now commonly received in the Schools, in
which he would sometimes tell his mind to his friends; but say nothing to
others, lest he should (...) a double inconvenience, viz. loose his own credit,
and do them no good: perhaps harm. There was no book so heretical, that he was
not willing to read over attentively; professing that sometimes he advantaged
himself more by such, than by their works who determine every question which
they handle in such a manner, that they often flatter their leaders, and
sometimes themselves.

.24. He endured not that any one should in speaking fluently, be guided
altogether by the precepts of Grammar (that he said, often hindered one from
speaking well) but by his reading the best authors. Which opinion brought its
own punishment along with it: for though he had eloquence both by nature and
education, and had wonderful store of matter in his head when he began to make
a speech, yet he often tripped in those things which Critics are wont to take
notice of. And thereupon I suppose he abstained from writing books, which I
wish he had not done: for I HEARTILY DESIRE THE You have a catalogue of Dr.
Colets works in the second page of my Preface to this book, where I should have
added, that his Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans, and an Epistle of his
to a Cardinal (both writ with his own hand) are in the Library of S. Paul's
school in London; together with the printed statutes of that school, and his
last Will, copied out of the Prerogative Office, which will give some light to
this Narrative.
MEDITATIONS OR WORKS OF THIS MAN, IN WHAT LANGUAGE SOEVER THEY ARE PENNED.

. 25. And now, lest you should think any thing wanting to the complete piety of
Dr. Colet, in the last place hear his afflictions. He never agreed well with
his Bishop, who (to say nothing of his manners) was a superstitious and
stubborn Scotist; and thereupon thought himself half a God. Of which sort of
men, though I know some whom I will not call knaves, yet I never saw one whom I
thought I might truly term a Christian. Neither was the Doctor acceptable to
most of his own College, because he was very tenacious of regular discipline;
and the Prebends complained that he used them as if they were Monks, whereas
indeed (...) at College was anciently (and in old records is called) the
Eastern Monastery: [ as Westmonasterium, the Western Monastery.]

. 26. But when the old Bishop (for he was fourscore years of age) his hatred
grew too high to be smothered, the fire brake out; and adjoining two other
Bishops as wise and virulent as himself, he began to trouble D. Colet,
exhibiting articles against him to the Archbishop of Canterbury, taken out of
his Sermons: 1. That he said, Images were not to be worshipped. 2. That
preaching upon that passage in the Gospel, Feed, feed, feed my sheep; he
expounded the first by good example, the second by sound doctrine (as other
Expositors do) but in the third he differed from them; denying that the
Apostles who were poor men, were commanded to feed their sheep with temporal
revenue, because they had none of it themselves: and that he named somewhat else
in this third place. Lastly, That by blaming those that read all or most of
their sermons, (which I (...) many do now in England very coldly) he had
obliquely taxed his Diocesan, who being a very old man was wont to do so. The
Archbishop (being well acquainted with Colets (...) in his general practice of
Physic, part. 1. c. 12. Sect. 1. says, that one of his excellencies (...) a
memory, so stupendous that be could repeat all the (...), memoriter verbatim,
and never forgot any thing that he read. And that he got this by help of a
medicine there described. Sit (...) autorem: Yet there may be some truth in it.
But I take Polydore Vergil to be far the more credible author, who (hist lib.
26. p. (...).) gives us a large relation of Dr. Colets life: yet (...) which
you have not had in this of (...); except that his mother was (...), that
Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester stirred up Dr. Colet to propagate learning,
that he studied at Cambridge as well as at Oxford; that he desired no honor,
sought no wealth or riches, (which followed him running from them) and that for
his sweet dispositions and holiness of life, he was esteemed in England almost
(...) Apostle Paul.
excellencies) received the articles; but instead of being his Judge, became
his Advocate.

. 27. Yet the old man's (...) did not end so, but stroveto incense the Court
against him, especially K. Henry VIII. himself; because the Doctor had said in
a sermon, That an unjust peace was to be preferred before a most just war:
which sermon was preached in that nick of time, when the king was raising
forces against the French. Two minim-Friars were the chief men that managed
this business, whereof one was an incendiary of the war (for which he deserved
a Bishopric) the other with a pair of huge lungs, declamed in his sermons
against Poets, thereby aiming at Colet, who though he had skill in music, yet
was in truth averse from Poetry.

. 28. Here the King (who was an excellent person in his youth) gave an evident
proof of his royal parts; exhorting Colet privately, to go on in his preaching,
freely to tax the corrupt manners of that age, and not to withdraw his light in
those most dark times; adding, That he knew very well what incensed the Bishops
so highly against him, and how much good Colet had done by his divine life, and
holy doctrine to the English Church and Nation; lastly, that he would so curb
their endeavors, that it should appear to the world, who (...) troubled Colet,
should not escape unpunisht. Hereupon Colet humbly thanked the King for His
royal favor; but beseeched Him not to do so; professing that he had rather lay
down his preferment, than that any should suffer for his sake.

. 29. But soon after another occasion was offered, by which they hoped to ruin
him. For it happened that the King made preparation to march after Easter
against the French: and upon Good Friday Colet made a sermon to the King and
Courtiers, which was much admired, concerning the Victory of Christ: Wherein he
exhorted all Christians to fight under the banner of their heavenly King, and
overcome: saying, That they who either through hatred, or ambition, or
covetousnes do fight with evil men, and so kill one another, fight not under the
banner of Christ, but the Devil; showing withal how hard a thing it is to die
like a Christian, how few go forth to battle free from hatred and
covetousness; and how difficult for such to be in charity (without which no man
shall see God) who sheath their swords in their brethrens bowels. Adding, that
they should rather imitate their King Christ, then Pagan Cesars and Alexanders.
And he had so many other (...) passages to this purpose, that His Majesty was
somewhat afraid lest this sermon would dis hearten the soldiers that were
listed.

. 30. Hereupon all the birds of prey flockt about Colet like an owl, hoping the
King would be incensed against him. His Majesty commands Colet to come before
him at Greenwich. He goes into the garden of the Monastery of the Franciscans
which was near, presently dismisseth his attendants. When they two (...) alone,
the King bid Colet cover his head, and speak his mind freely; and then His
Highness began thus; Dean, be not surprised with needless fear: I did not send
for you hither to disturb your most holy labors (which I resolve to cherish as
much as I can) but to unload my conscience of (...) scruples, and to desire
your advice concerning my (...). The conference lasted almost an hour and an
half, and I must not relate it all. In the mean while Bricot (the Franciscan
Bishop) was in the Court stark wild, hoping that Colet had been in great
danger, whereas the King and he agreed in every particular very well. Only His
Majesty wished, that what Colet spoke truly, he would speak (sometime or other)
more plainly; lest the rude soldiers should mis-understand it, as if he had
said, That no war is lawful among Christians. And thus Colet (by his singular
prudence and moderation) not only satisfied the King, but got farther into his
favor.

. 31. When they returned from the garden to the Court, the King being about to
dismiss Colet, called for a cup, and drank to him, embraced him most kindly,
and promising him all the favors that could be expected from a most loving
Prince, dismissed him. And now the Courtiers standing round the King, expected
to know the issue of this long conference; and the King in the hearing of them
all, said, Well, let other men choose what Doctors they please, and make much
of them; this man shall be my Doctor. Whereupon Bricot, with the rest of the
gaping wolves departed: and from that day forward never dared trouble Colet any
more; a person that in an high fortune and plenty, was led and governed not by
his nature, but by Christ: in a word, whom I shall not doubt to reckon in the
catalogue of my Saints, though he be never canonized by any Pope.

. 32. Thus far Erasmus: who in other epistles and diverse pieces of his works,
inserteth elogies of Dr. Colet, so ofien (as epist. p. 619. d. and p. 311. b.
lib. 5. ep. 4. p 306. f. etc.) that they seem too numerous to be added here: I
shall only annex a few lines collected out of Stow's Survey of London (in
folio) concerning his kindred. His Father, St. Hen. Colet (son to Robert Colet
of Wendover in Buckinghamshire, Esquire, p. 573.) was buried at Stepney, where
his monument still remains, p 787. And the pictures of Sr. Henry, and his dame
Christian, and ten of his sons, and ten of his daughters remain in the windows,
on the North-side of S. Anthony (alias Antlin) his Church near Budge-row. But
he was born in the Manor of Hale in Buckinghamshire, near Wendover and
Ailesburie: which Manor our Dr, left to S. Paul's school, and some of his name
dwell there still. Mr. John Colet (now a student in the Temple) and his Father,
as also Mr. Nic. Ferrar of little Gidding in Huntingdonshire, are all very
nearly related to our Doctor; of whom I shall only say this, that they were
all three Fellow-Commoners in Clare-Hall, diligent frequenters of the Chapel:
And Mr. Ferrar would, in the opinion of all that knew him, soon be as eminent
for his sanctity, as our Doctor is, if his and my knowing and pious friend Mr.
Timothy (...), would be persuaded to write his life.

. 33. Dr. Colet was buried in S. Paul's Church, where his monument is so
excellently described by my learned friend Mr. Dugdale in his History of S.
Paul's Cathedral. p. 64, 65. that I shall not set (...) any thing of it here,
but the words that be there engraven; which are as follows: Hic situs est,
etc. Here lies John Colet, Dean of this Church, an eminent Divine, who after
the example of S. Paul, preached the Gospel always That he did this Erasmus
witnesses, Epist. Dedic. ad (...): Verborum. Hoc in patriam officium, Colete.
it a gratuitum and (...) esse voluisti, ut nec (...) annorum (...), vel (...)
sactus (...) ditior; cumque (...) spiritualia, nullius unquam (...). And that
in this rare act he did no more then his duty, no more then holy Scripture, and
the old Canons of the Church (which in this Sermon he urges so much, to be
rehearsed and obeyed by others) required of him, who had a good estate beside;
is ananswerably proved by Spalato De Eccles. repub. lib. 9. cap. 1. sect. 8. ad
16. and sect. 24. ad 31. capite 4o. toto. (...) 5'. cap. 7. sect. 8. etc. but
chiefly cap. 10. sect. 1, 2, 3, etc. Having said to much on this subject
already in my notes on Dr. Colets sermon, page 38, 39, 43, 44, 45., 52 53, 54,
56, 57. I shall close all withone. line of S. Chrysostom (Homil. 15. ad 1.
Tim. page 312. (...). 22. Edit. Savil.) (...).
without charges, and answered that fincere doctrine with the perpetual
fincerity of his life. He alone (...) S. Paul's school, and (...) it with a
yearly revenue. He honored his most honest kindred with Christian qualities,
chiefly with admirable sobriety and chastity: and now enjoyes the pearl of the
Gospel, for love whereof he neglected all other things. He lived 53 years,
(...) 16 years, and died in the year 1519.

FINIS.
Errata. Page 43. lin. ult. read propinquosque. page 56. lin. 24. read
Apparitorum. page 60. lin. 5. a fine, read from page 69. lin. 12. and page 71.
lin. 23. p. 51. l. 16. add (...) 8. in 1 Timothy page (...) and (...). do dis. and
hab. virg. (...). 189. and (...). page 204.


