THE Situation of PARADISE FOUND OUT: Being an HISTORY Of a Late Pilgrimage
UNTO THE HOLY LAND. With a necessary APPARATUS prefixed, Giving Light Into the
whole DESIGN.

I have chosen the Way of Truth, Psalm. 119. v. 30. LONDON: Printed by J. C. and
F. C. for S. Lowndes, over against Exeter-Exchange in the Strand,and H.
Faithorne, and J. Kersey, at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

Doce me Domine viam tuam ut ingrediar in veritate tua

Teach me thy WAY O Lord I will walk in thy TRUTH.

Ps. 86. 11. Engraving showing a pilgrim walking along a path toward a domed
church, a cross and open book in his hands.

Doce me Domine viam tuam ut ingrediar in veritate tua Teach me thy WAY O Lord
I will walk in thy TRUTH. Ps. 86. 11.

AN ADDRESS TO The Gentry Of both SEXES, And the Youth. In this Kingdom.
FRom as many of You as have either Estates too Narrow and Limited for the
Greatness of Your Minds, or are delighted with curious Inquiries and newfound
Lands, or know how to divert Your selves with the Tales and the Legends of
Love, can be pleased in reading a Cleopatra or a Parthenissa; these Papers may
hope for a favorable Reception. Though their own Worth may not be great, what
they present You with, I am sure, is justly valuable. The Ambitious and the
Covetous may here feed both their Desires; the one may be ennobled, the other
enriched: You are told how to seek, and invited to lay hold on Crowns of Glory,
and Riches not to be exhausted: You are taught how to add to an Earthly
Inheritance conveyed down to You by Your Ancestors, an Inheritance better and
safer; a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, with the richest Abundance, and the
delicious Overflowings of unbounded Joys. In the next place, to all them whom
Discoveries please, here is given the Greatest, and the Noblest, and the most
Necessary besides. And lastly, if they chance but to meet with Sanguine
Readers, such as are taken with Composures of this nature, and are of a Temper
that is Soft and Passionate, as they are the most proper for, so are they the
most likely of any to move these: Yet if this cannot be done, it will be well
enough, if they can do no more but detain such Persons a little while from what
is worse.

LADIES,
You, among the rest, may challenge no small Propriety herein. Unless You are
out of love with Your Beauty, You cannot be displeased at One who directs You
to a Fountain that will render You far more lovely and beauteous: that will
make You attract even Angels for Your Lovers, and all the blessed Choir of the
fairest and the chastest Spirits holily enamored on You. Whereas if You wash
not in this Fountain rising out of Paradise, it is impossible for Your Beauty
either to be perfect, or not to fade. I doubt not also but that Pilgrims Habit
will become You as well as another Dress, and the Virtues fit upon You like so
many incomparable Jewels.

But that which most of any thing commends it to You All; this is not (as is
frequently so) a Present of dry Ethics, or of troublesome Speculations: but
what may better suit Your Age and your Degree, and which now and then may serve
(at least) to pass the idle time away as delightfully, and more innocently than
is now usual. It Is an honest Policy, a Stratagem to make You in love with
Religion, a Counter-treason to betray You into Felicity, a Design to render
You Happy, against Your Wills. Without any Fucus, this shows You true Happiness
and true Pleasure; and I may presume I know You better, than that You can be
angry at me for showing You the last. Nay, forasmuch as this mean Essay comes
upon such an Errand, though it is sent not forth perhaps in so rich Dress as it
deserves; it will be no more I hope for this despised, than the poor Labourer
who opens You a wealthy Mine: nor will such a Proffer, I believe, be rejected
by any, only for that the Tools and Pick-Axes are not of Gold. Besides, it
requires somewhat of favorable Allowance, as coming from one that is no
Ecclesiastic: Nor can it hence be thought the Foolishness of Preaching. Nay,
he is so far removed from Envy or Interest, and so much Your Friend, that he
would not for all the World rob You even of one small paultry Pleasure, but to
give You a thousand; to give You Pleasures better and more refined, more real
and satisfactory. And he hopes You will not esteem it in him so unpardonable a
Crime of Profane, to make You Christian Epicures.

Who if he can but thus insensibly snare You, and before You are aware draw You
back from the Vale of Death, and the Pit of Eternal Burnings; he fears not at
all but that in the other Parts (which he hopes will be abundantly more
delightful than this first) You will be ready to bear him company, unto the
Land of Endless and Unconceivable Delight. But in good earnest, till You have
gone so far, You must not think to take Heaven by Violence, or leap over the
Mound, into the Paradise of God: to find a Place out which You never so much as
sought after. However, he is confident he has done his best, and what he can,
and heartily wishes in the Da portionem meam in horto Eden, munda me in seculum
futurum justis destinatum, notam fac mihi semitam vitae, and satia me laetitia
vultus tui gloriosi. Lit.
Jewish Form of Comprecation, that Your Portion (whatever it be before upon
Earth) may be in the Garden of Eden.

THE CONTENTS of the Apparatus.
Sect. 1. Of PARADISE. THE Pardes Hachocmah and Haneshamoth. Four believed by
the Jews to have entered the former, and Three the latter. Great Multitudes
there. Four Rabbinical Acceptions thereof. The Paradise of Nature, and of
Scripture. Four Paradises. Terrestrial Paradise; 1. Whether or no known to the
Heathens, their Fables concerning it considered, Elysian Fields, Gardens of
Alcinous, Adonis, the Chaldaean Paradise. 2. Whether it yet exists. 3. Its
Site. Several Opinions. Moses ^seth the names given after the Flood. Burnet's
Hypothesis. The generally received Opinion of Steuchus. Opinion of the Ancients
revived by Nicolaus Abram. 4. The Original and Reason of the Allegory. Paradise
taken for the State of Blessed Souls before the Resurrection, and in a more
general sense. An Expostulatory Conclusion.

Sect. 2. Of the PARABOLICAL Style. The General Reason of the Miscarriage of
Pious Discourses. History and Allegory. Chosroes. Mythology of the Ancients.
Several Allegorical Writers. Ancient Poetry. Fabula Romana. Pilgrimage. Scala
Paradisi: De Sorbona: Bonaventure: Bernardine: Giraldus: De Nerveze: Gracian:
Parable of the PILGRIM: B. Tailor: Earl of Orrery. The Authors Design. A List
of some Characters and Persons in the History. The Parables of Christ. Story of
Tobit. Judith. Apocryphal Books. Susanna. Romish Legends. Chimerical Phancies
of Ariosto and Spencer. The Scene of the History. Not guilty of Satyr.


AN APPARATUS, OR Preliminary Discourse OF PARADISE: THE Authors Design, and
manner of Writing.
SECTION I.
THE Jews tell us of two Paradises; one of which they call (...)
Pardes Hachocma, or the Paradise of Wisdom; the other (...)
Pardes Haneshamoth, or the Paradise of Souls, and the Animalia Sanctitatis,
(the Angels) and placed above the Ninth Heaven. By the first, meaning the
Acquist of Spiritual and Eternal Truths; and by the latter, the possession of
Eternal Bliss: So making one the preparation and the introit into the other the
Contemplation of the Divine and the Angelical Natures, and of the stupendous
Fabric of the Creation. (which is the first) the prepossession of and
admission into that other Paradise which is above. Now were we but so happy as
to find out, or set footing in either of these, there we might feed on the Tree
of Knowledge without sin; Nullus hic Cherubin qui arccat, nemo qui aditum
inhibeat.
on the Tree of Life and Immortality, without being repelled by a Flaming
Sword, or the fiery Judgments of an angered and almighty God. But, say they, he
who enters here, must not be idle and lazy, dronish and unactive, (...) R.
Maim. Halc. Jes. Hathorath. c. 4.
must not starve and macerate himself, but must fill his belly with Bread and
Flesh; and that it is Bread and Flesh to know what is prohibited and sinful,
what lawful and righteous: This being as much the Food of our Souls as they are
of our Bodies. Thus did our Savior Christ, using this common Jewish Metaphor,
call it, Joh. 4. 34.
His Meat to do the Will of Him that sent him, and to finish his Work. And so
must every good Disciple of his think of the performance of his most Holy Will,
that would this day and ever be with him in Paradise; here in one, hereafter in
the other.

2. Into the first Ecclus. 24.
the Paradise of Divine Science, the holy Parnassus, the Grove of chaste Muses
and devout Philosophy, the Garden of God, the Garden of the eternal Wisdom
planted upon Earth; not many enter, not many strive to enter. The Arithmetic
of the Jews is indeed somewhat strange, that will allow but Four to have
entered, viz. Hazai, Soma, Elisa, and Akiba, Talmudical Doctors. But however,
certain it is, they are very few and soon numbered; a very inconsiderable parcel
of men that are so happy. And as into the first there are reckoned these Four
whilst they were living, into the other they reckon not so many by one; Enoch,
Elias, and R. Joshua, to have entered whilst their Souls were embodied with
Flesh; to whom some Christians added St. John as a fourth, to complete the
number. They also confining not only Paradise, but even the Resurrection unto
the Seed of the Circumcision, give almost as narrow an account of those who
have put off their Flesh, as they do of the others; notwithstanding they make
these to pass through a Purgatory as bad (if not the same with) Hell. In like
manner the Holiness of the Christian Religion, and the Lives of its Professors,
have made some conclude (and publicly declare as much) that not one in a
Myriad of us are to be saved, and would make Paradise very small and
uninhabited.

3. Now to prevent this, and thereby refute a conclusion that must needs be
distastful unto most men, I (who delight not to terrify my Readers with the
narrowness of the Way, straitness of the Gate, and littleness of Christ's Flock,
but had rather show them a great multitude, which no man can number, of all
Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, standing before the Throne, and
before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and Palms in their hands, Rev. 7. v.
9.) shall try to chalk them out not a rugged, uneven, crooked, or by-path, but
one that is safe, easy, and pleasant.

4. The Pardes Hachocma which I have told you to be the entrance into this of
beatified Spirits, and which is therefore attainable (and must of necessity be
attained) in some measure upon Earth, by all good and all wise men, is very
much the same with that which is called the Life or State of Grace; and is that
Divine Wisdom which takes up so great part of the Proverbs, the Book of Wisdom,
and Ecclesiasticus.

5. Moreover, the Rabbis signify by it, 1. Talmudical Contemplations. 2. The
Science of the Divine Attributes. 3. Their Fourfold Interpretation of the
Scriptures. 4. The Philosophy of Natural Bodies and Angels. It may also be
taken these two ways; viz. as it is to be drawn from the Book of Nature, or of
God; which we may call the Natural and Scriptural Paradise.

I. The first is the consideration of Man himself, his Author, Matter, Form,
and End both intrinsic and extrinsick; and so from him passing to the Great
World, of the Multitude of created Beings, their Diversity, Powers, and Beauty,
the Earth, Water, and Fountains, the Air, Fire, Heaven, Sun, Moon, and Stars;
from thence to the Rational Soul; then Angels; then the Essence of God, his
Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and Justice; which the Pen of Cardinal Bellarmin has
very piously and pathetically drawn, (for Virtue is so amiable, that I like her
even in an Enemy, and am bound to do justice to him from whom I differ in
Opinion) in those excellent Meditations of his decrepit Age, to which he gives
the Title, Of the Ascension of the Soul to God by the Steps of the Creatures;
in imitation, he tells us, of The Souls Itinerary done by Bonaventure. And he
says, that Qui enim singulari Dei dono per aliam viam in Paradisum admissi
audierunt arcana Dei, quae non licet homini loqui, ii non ascendisse, sed rapti
fuisse dicendi sunt. quod de se B. Paulus aperte confitetur, cum ait: Raptus
suam in Paradisum, and audivi arcana verba, quae non licet homini loqui. Pref.
those who by Gods special leave are any other ways admitted into Paradise, are
not to be said to Ascend, but to be Caught up thither; which St. Paul confesses
of himself, when he says he was caught up into Paradise, and heard Unspeakable
Words, not lawful for man to utter.

II. The Book of God, as it deserves most justly, so it has received from some,
the name of Paradise. Aloysius Novarinus, in his Paradisus Deliciarum, has
quite throughtout kept prettily to the Allusion, and very handsomely turned the
literal truth of the Story, and spiritualized it. Herein every Leaf is moved
and shaken with the Breath of God, and the Garden is watered with a River which
is Gods, streams of Living Waters; and here also not one, but every Tree is a
Tree of Life, bearing the Joh. c. 6 v. 68.
Words of Eternal Life, and that which is for the Rev. c. 22. v. 2.
Healing the Nations. Et nunc deambulat in Paradiso Deus, quando divinas
Scripturas lego. Paradisus est Genesis liber, in quo virtutes pallulant
Patriarcharum; Paradisus Deuteronomium, in quo germinant Legis praecepta;
Paradisus Evangelium, in quo arbor vitae bonos fructus facit, and aeternae spei
mandata diffundit per universos populos, l. 6. Ep. 41. ad Sabin.
Then God walks in this Paradise, when I read therein, says S. Ambrose. This
is the Paradise or Garden of the Holy Ghost, whose Rivers are the Four
Evangelists, says the Moses Bar Cepha, Biblioth. Patr. tom. 1. p. 491.
Bishop of Bethraman and others. The Law is a Paradise, say they, and so is the
Gospel: the Psalterium est Paradisus animarum. Cass.
Psalms, and the Prophets, and the (...)(Sc. Pauli) (...). Chrysostom. Homil. 21.
Ep. 2. Cor.
Epistles are so many lesser or greater Paradises for the man to till, Genesis 21.
15. and gather thence the Fruits. Lector quisquis es,
Paradisus esto, ut Paradisum ingrediaris,
Aut ingressus evade:
Serpens huc nullus, nullus aspis accedat;
Dolus omnis exsit, and omne virus.
Al. Novarin. Elect. Sacr. l. 1.

Whosoever enters, must be himself a Paradise, (that is, innocent, calm, and
pleasant) or be converted into one.

6. Both this and the former are contained under the general name of Pardes
Hachocma; and that too under the name of the Heavenly. The one being but the
Consummation and Completion of the other: the first a Foretast of the last: the
one of Paradisus Spiritualis duplex est, una est in ecclesia militante, altera
in ecclesia triumphante. Bonav.
Sojourning, and the other of Triumphing Saints. There are also other
Divisions; as into that Interior.
Within, which is a virtuous and serene Mind; that Exterior.
Without, which is the Church Militant; that Superior.
Above, which is the Church Triumphant; that Inferior.
Below, which is the Affluence of Temporals, Joy, and Abundance in this Life.
Of these may the Divine Author say, (...) Eccl. 2. 5.
I have made me Gardens and Paradises, and I have planted in them Trees of all
Fruits.

7. But for the better explanation of the Allegory, and the discovery of the
Analogy betwixt both, it will be necessary to premise somewhat concerning the
Terrestrial Paradise. The Author of Paradise Lost, handsomely describes it.

-- In this pleasant Soil
His far more pleasant Garden God ordained;
Out of the fertile ground he caused to grow
All Trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste;
And all amid them stood the Tree of Life,
High, eminent, blooming Ambrosial Fruit
Of vegetable Gold; and next to Life,
Our Death, the Tree of Knowledge, grew fast by,
Knowledge of Good, bought dear by knowing Ill.
Southward through Eden, etc.
And in another place, speaking of Raphael, he says,
Their glittering Tents he passed, and now is come
Into the Blissful Field, through Groves of Myrrh,
And flowring Odours, Cassia, Nard, and Balm;
A Wilderness of Sweets: for Nature here
Wantoned as in her prime, and played at will
Her Virgin-Fancies, pouring forth more sweet;
Wild above Rule or Art; enormous Bliss.
Of the Fountain he says,
But rather to tell how, if Art could tell,
How from that Sapphire Fount, the crisped Brooks,
Rolling on Orient Pearl and sands of Gold,
With mazie Error under Pendant Shades,
Ran Nectar, visiting each Plant, and fed
Flowers worthy of Paradise --
Of the Gate he says,
-- It was a Rock
Of Alabaster, pil'd up to the Clouds,
Conspicuous far. --
Here, though I might be voluminous upon the History of Paradise, and those
many Inquiries concerning it that are to be found among the Schoolmen and the
Commentators; lest I should exceed the bounds of a Discourse that is
Introductory, (which I am afraid I shall nevertheless) I must be very short
upon each Particular. First, I shall show what was known thereof to the
Heathens: Secondly, Inquire whether it yet exists: Thirdly, give some account
of its situation: And then lastly, lay down the Grounds and Reason of the
Allegory.

I. That the Heathen World had knowledge thereof, I make no doubt. It is not
improbable that they should receive such a Tradition (of a Garden in the East)
from the Sons or Grandchildren of Noah, who were the Fathers of their Nations.
And every one has Experience enough to tell him how much Tradition and Rumor
will in a short time grow unlike themselves, and what they were at first. But
yet if it were not so, the Egyptians had space and opportunity, no man can
deny, to learn the same from the Jews: and the Greek Philosophers who traveled
into Egypt, might learn it there. For the Garden of Jupiter in Plato, seems to
me to be the very Translation of the * Garden of the Lord, Genesis 13. (...). In
Symp.
10. in Moses. (Though I know Dr. Parker, in his Censure of the Platonic
Philosophy, will not allow this.) The Et vero fabulam hanc effe Phoeniciam
constat ex ipso Elysii nomine, quod ex Phoenicum lingua desumtum. Ebralce enim
(...) alag, (...) alats, (...) alas est laetari and exultare; and (...) aliz
laetus, (...) alizuth exultatio. Inde Elysius (...) A and E permutatis, ut in
Enakim, Evila, etc. Geogr. Sacr. l. 1. c. 34.
Elysian Fields, from the Descriptions we have of them, I take to have been at
first the Land of Eden. Both signify almost the same; Eden the place of
Pleasure, and Elysium the Place of Joy, (as learned Bochart derives it.) Whence
Jerusalem is by the Prophet Isaiah called Kirjath Alyzah, c. 22. v. 2. the City
of Joy and Exultation: a Joyous City we render it; so very well befitting the
Celestial Jerusalem, and excellently expressing the Christian Elysium.
Besides, the variety of Opinions concerning the situation of Elysium, makes me
the apter to believe this. For some of them placed it upon the Earth; others
near the Empyraean Heaven; others under the Earth, in the Confines of Hell. Of
those that placed it upon the Earth, some said that it was far beyond the
Ocean, some in Rhodes, some in the Fortunate Islands, some in the further part
of Spain, and not far from the Pillars of Hercules; some about (...) -- Hesych.
Vid. etiam Plutarcum in Vit. Sertorii.
Egypt, others about Lesbos; some said that it was an inaccessible place,
guarded with Thunder and Lightning. The last any one may easily guess to refer
unto the Flaming Sword that guarded Paradise; and the rest may be without much
difficulty in like manner paralleled. I know that Fancy can parallel and
compare things very different; but it cannot create any likeness that is real.
And that this is not a mere Fancy, will further appear from the Writings of the
Heathens, who tell us they received all their Notices of a Future State (and
consequently of their Elysium) from the Barbarians. Not but that I allow a
great deal to the Invention of the Poets. The Gardens also of Alcinous, and the
Hesperides, are like enough to be stolen Relations of this our Father Adam;
altered and mangled by transmission from the Phoenicians. These are perhaps but
several names for the same place. The first I conjecture to be the same with
Pardes Al Cenaan, and by a light mistake (of (...)
two Final Letters not much unlike) Al Cenaas, the Garden or the Paradise of
Canaan, and is thence easily made Alcinous. It is described by the (...), etc.
Odyss. H. v. 112. ad 132.
Ethnic Poet (whom we may allow to dress it up according to his own fancy) A
place large and pleasant, (as much as Fiction can make it) where delicious
Breaths continually blow, and the Fruits (...). ib.
fall not from the Trees, or ever rot, but hang untoucht with any Blast or
Worm; the choicest for their Excellency, and wonderfullest for their
Perpetuity; a place having always the Fertility of one Season of the year, and
yet the delightfulness and beauty of the other; ever blessed with a rich Autumnal
Spring. But from the strong aversion they had against the Jews, who placed it
in the East, these would therefore place it in the West; and call the Eastern
Garden the Garden of the West, or the Hesperides (which is all one.) And this
Opinion has continued hitherto in some few parts of the Idolatrous World, who
think the Souls of their Friends are carried into a place of Rest that lies
toward this quarter of the Heavens. Adonidis Horti in the Poets, the delicious
and fragrant Gardens of Adonis, may perhaps be the Genesis 13. 10. Ezech. 28. 13.
Garden of Adonai, (which is the name of the Lord in the Hebrew, and also the
common reading of the most Holy and Concealed Name JEHOVAH,) multiplied.
Ambrosia, which signifies Immortality, or a Preservative against Death, and is
that on which they supposed their Deities to feed, by eating whereof they
became unable to die, Pontamus and others will have to be the Tree of Life; but
Nectar is more apparently derived from the Hebrew Fountain, and is the same
both in its (...)
Origination and Use with Cauthar the River of the Mohammedan Paradise. But more
than all this, I find the very name of Paradise was not unknown unto them:
Psellus says it was used in the Magical Rites of Zoroastres. It appears from
him, that the Learned of the Chaldeans knew it, though they took it in a
Metaphorical and Spiritual sense, understanding thereby Virtue and Wisdom;
which is the same with the first division of Paradise I mentioned.

II. This blessed place which the Jews knew by infallible History, and the
Gentile World by Fables, has busied the Curiosity of a great many Inquirers;
and it is the Opinion of some, that it was never destroyed; or if part of it
was, not all. For it was uncurst by God, say they, and needed not any Deluge to
purge it, like the rest of the Earth. Here they will have Enoch and Elijah to
live together, and to feed on the Tree of Life in the midst, or (as others will
have it) in the East of the Garden. Near which Tree, they who will allow the
greatest part of it to be drowned and defaced, yet reserve a few (about six)
acres for them. De Great. pr. hom. c. 14.
Bellarmin is very positive, and never read, he says, anywhere that the general
Flood drowned it. Sure I am that the Scripture says, Genesis 7. 19.
All the high Hills under the whole Heaven were covered.

III. Concerning the Site thereof, the place where it was planted by God (which
is my third Inquiry) there are so many differences and odd phant'sies, as to
make it (as in all the rest, so) in this, an exact figure of the Heavenly one,
and to typifie too fitly the many Heresies and Wanderings in the search after
this latter. Some place it in the middle of the Earth; some in Chaldea, Syria,
Arabia foelix, India, Babylonia, the Isle of Eden; Bar Cepha upon an high
Mountain above this habitable Earth, that reaches up to the Moon; Origin in
Heaven; others make it the whole Earth, (as if Adam, before he was brought into
Paradise, must have been nowhere; and when he was banished out of Paradise,
was banished out of the World) every place to be Paradise, before Sin entered
with a Curse. I hear there is a Manuscript in Corpus Christi- Colledge-Library
at Oxford, wherein it is said to have been found by Alexander the Great by the
River Tigris; and that the way to it is therefore unknown, because if it should
begin to be otherwise, it would be so resorted unto and filled in a short while
with the Rich from all parts, that there would not be room left for a poor man.
What credit this deserves, let the Reader judge as pleases him. I have not
room to try the validity of these several Opinions which I have named; of which
and many others, they that would be further satisfied, and are able, may
consult such as are quoted in the V. Mosem Barcepha. Bibl. Patr. tom. 1. 405.
Basil. Magn. Hom. de Parad. T. Aquin. Sum. par. 1. q. 102. Al. Lippoman.
Catenam in Genesis f. 65. Suidam in Voce Paradisus. Ortelium in eadem Voce. Perer.
Comment. in Genesis l. 3. Tremell. in c. 2. Genesis Mersenn. Grot. etc. in eund. loc.
Bellarmin. de gratia primi hominis. Suarez l. 3. de opere sex dier. Delrio t.
1. Adag. 789. Malvend. de Paradiso. Sherlog. Antiq. Heb. l. 2. diss. 3. sect.
3. etc. W. Rawleighs Hist. World, c. 3.
Margin. Indeed, of all the numerous Relations and Opinions that I have met
with, I do not think above two or three of them worth my taking notice of:
Which I shall consider with as much brevity as they are capable of, after I
have removed an Objection that would render all this Inquiry useless. There are
some then that argue very plausibly, as if the general Deluge had so altered
the face of the Earth, changing the currents of Rivers, that there is not left
any possibility of finding out where the Earthly Paradise was. To this I
readily agree (though I am not sure) that there might be a great alteration in
the surface of the Earth; but I cannot be brought to believe that Moses, who
wrote many hundred years after this Deluge, would have so particularly
described its situation by Rivers and Countries not in being, or not as they
were then. Havilath or Evila was known for a long while after, Eden for two
thousand years, Ethiopia and Euphrates unto this very day. Wherefore there is
not much doubt but that his Description was then understood by the Jews, when
he writ his History. Besides, I shall prove hereafter that the knowledge of its
true Site will conduce not a little to the more clear understanding of several
noble less-heeded passages of Scripture. I do not reckon among these Objectors
an ingenious Philosopher, who has upon this Subject very lately published his
Thoughts, but shall give him among the Inquirers the first place.

1. He has happily gone a different way from all others in search after the
Burneti Telluris Theoria Sacra, 1681.
Earthly Paradise, and without following the puzzling Maeanders of Rivers that
are now but guessed at, has used a strict and a Philosophical method. His
Hypothesis or Supposition of this and the Deluge being all one, must therefore
be considered together. I count that person not unworthy of the highest
Commendations, who like him abstains from such proofs as are dubious, and in
the most difficult and abstruse things so regularly follows the Guidance of
Nature. None ever before him thought, by searching into the nature of what was
proper to Paradise and to the Antediluvian World, a perpetual Spring, length of
Life, and fertility of Soil, to decide this noble Question. Neither can these
Phenomenon, or the Universal Deluge, be any otherwise than as he has laid down,
tolerably explained. His Theory nevertheless I conceive might be somewhat
mended: But though it be very bold, I do not think it in the least
dishonorable to God; and I my self could strengthen it by more than one
Argument, but am afraid to run out too far. He forgot indeed to provide for one
great part of the Creation, the Fishes that cannot live out of salt water;
which, in my opinion, might yet be done by the same Principles he uses. Now his
Explication of the Deluge. notwithstanding it seems to overthrow what I have
said, and am about to say, concerning Moses his description of the Site of this
place, you shall see that it rather confirms it. He holds that this Moss of the
Earth was then broken, and that we now inhabit only the Rubbish, as it were,
and the Ruins of the first Happy Earth. But now as we can find where stood
such or such Temples and ancient Edifices by their Ruins; so in like manner
will the Ruins of Paradise show us the place where it was. Nay, this is so
certain, that I must needs dissent from this learned man, when he is against
translating the Names in Moses, and thinks we are not sure either of Euphrates
or Tigris, which are universally agreed upon to be meant in the Text. To what I
just now said, I add, that there are Names and Descriptions of places in
Ptolomy and Strabo, that are able to puzzle the most expert Modern Geographers;
although their Writings are of a very inconsiderable Antiquity, in comparison
with the Book of Genesis. Besides, it is plain that Moses, on purpose that he
might be understood, uses not the old, but the new names by which the Places
were called in his time; and some of which, if not all, were imposed a good
while after the Flood, particularly Havilah and Cush, as may be proved out of
Genesis 10. v. 6. and 29. Concerning Euphrates, I cannot see what reason there
should be of doubting; for any one may as well suspect Roma not to be Rome, as
Hu-Phrath not to be Euphrates. And that Hiddekel is Tigris, nothing can be more
plainly made out, from Dan. c. 10. v. 4. I suppose therefore that Paradise took
not up all the Southern Hemisphere, but only some part thereof, whence these
Rivers had their Original: and in holding this, I do not much disagree with
him. To search out which that part was, is not so easily done. Yet if we can
learn certainly where Eden lies, we cannot be much out, though we should not
prove able to show you the division of the River into four heads, in that the
breaking of the Earth will easily solve that difficulty, if you please to
consider it. An Italian Virtuoso who much after the same manner explains the
Deluge by the sinking of Beds of Earth into the Abyss, says those places have
remained so as they are from the Creation, whose Beds are unbroken and alike.
Now in this Dissolution (if it be true) the greater parts must retain some
likeness to what they were. Whence if there can be found a large, smooth, and
unbroken Plain in the Aequinoctial, East of the Holy Land, in Eden, and watered
by a River that may probably be supposed to be divided into four others, of a
better Mold than any other Earth, and bearing a visible resemblance of the
Primitive World; I judge it may reasonably be conjectured to have been either
all, or a part of that Garden which was planted for our first Father. But for
this, it is needful that we descend to more particular Inquiries.

2. The most generally received Opinion is, that it was about Mesopotamia; and
there lack not some probable Arguments to uphold this. But yet it is an upstart
Opinion; and the Author, who lived about an hundred years ago and no longer,
bragged that he had received it from neither Hebrews, Greeks, or Latins.
Besides, though a great many Learned men maintain it, yet they almost all
differ in this one from another; and they are hard put to it to derive
Auranitis from Eden.

3. But in my mind the most probable of any I have met with, as also the most
agreeable to the Allegory I pursue in these Papers, is of Nicolaus Abram in his
Discourse of the Rivers and place of Paradise: Where he is against such as seek
for it out of the Holy Land, and conjectures its situation to have been there
where the Sea of Galilee is, and the Convallis Illustris (so called from its
preeminence above all other parts of the Country.) Who after that he has proved
which are the Rivers understood in the Text, from their peculiar properties,
the derivation of their Mosaic and their more common names, and the concurrent
Testimony of sacred and profane Writers; after that he has made it probable
that Jordan was the River which watered Paradise, and after it had watered it
to be (by Con^yances under ground) divided into the four other Rivers that
Moses names, from its being sited in the midst of them, not running into the
Sea, very sufficient Authority for all this from its name Jarden, contracted of
Jaar-Eden the River of Paradise, and not from Jor and Dan; after also he has
proved this most luxurious and rich Champaign in the whole World, and the Sea
of Galilee (otherwise called the Lake of Gennesareth) to be in the Land of
Eden, (as it is taken in the Scripture-acceptation) and in the East of the Holy
Land, which Lot beheld to be well watered everywhere as the Garden of the Lord,
Genesis 13. 10. brought many Arguments, many pretty and surprising Etymologies;
and to instance in one more of Gennesar or Gennesareth, he takes to began Sar
the principal Garden, the first, and the most beautiful Garden of the World:
And after he has spoken of its wonderful Fertility and Pleasantness, mentioned
an ancient Tradition credited both by the Learned of the Jews, and the Fathers
and Doctors of the Christian Church, that Adam lived in Judea about Jerusalem,
was buried in Calvary; concludes, that where the first Adam sinned, there it
behoved the second Adam to expiate that sin: and that it was fit where sin
entered the World, there it should be driven out. This was the place which was
chiefly honored with his presence, trodden with his sacred feet; here he lived
and died, acted his Miracles, crushed the Serpent's head, opened Paradise where
the first had shut it, gave admission into a Celestial and Intellectual
Paradise, where the first was expelled a Sensual and an Earthly one; here stood
his Cross, here it was planted by evil men, where stood the Tree of Life that
was a Type of this. How fitly were the Waters of this River of Eden sanctified
with his holy Body, that the virtue thereof might with those Streams diffund it
self all over the Earth! It was a very ancient Opinion, that Paradise was in
Palaestine. St. Athanasius in his forty seventh Question Ad Antiochum, mentions
two Opinions hereof; one (...)
that it was in Jerusalem, (perhaps it should be in Judea) the other, that it
was in Heaven. Which proves that it was believed of old: and though the Father
think it unreasonable to believe so, because he says Adam was expell^d it, and
yet was buried there; this does not refute but confirm me rather that it was
near thereabouts, and according to all probability Eastward in Judea. Though I
might allege a Tradition as old as the former, of his Corpse being carried by
Noah into the Ark, and afterward by him interred; whence it cannot be a
Contradiction to affirm that he was expelld Paradise, and buried there when it
was no longer so. Nor is it very unlikely it should be thus. But if this were
so, then must it have reached as far as Jerusalem; which whether it did or did
not, makes not against what I have said. If we had but some such Description or
Map of Palestine as is mentioned in the 18th of Joshua, I fancy it might be
possible thereby to unperplex and unfold all the Difficulties and Bussles about
this grand Question. This Opinion, as it has all the advantages of the rest, so
it has none of the disadvantages; it being made Consonant both to the
Philosophy of that worthy Person I named a little before, and to the accurate
Criticisms and Geography of the ablest Studiers in the Art. There are, besides
those whom the industrious Reviver of this Opinion reckons up, to prove it to
be neither novel nor singular, many Modern Authors, who though they do not
place Paradise in Canaan, do yet place Canaan in Paradise, taking into it
Babylonia, Syria, Damascus, Palestine, and all that part of Minor Asia: one of
them, whom I cannot call to mind, expressly, I think, names Jerusalem; and
almost all the Arguments which are brought to prove it to have lain in
Mesopotamia, or by Babylon, or any of those places, will serve as well to prove
it to have lain in this place. I do suppose that Eden received its name from
Paradise being there, and that it might be much larger than it is now supposed
to be; till that part of it receiving new names, lost the old name, which might
be the reason that there came to be two Edens, they being only two small parts
of the old Eden yet retaining its name. But now I am rambling about this
Delicious and Spicy Eden, I cannot yet find the way out. As to the Easterly
situation of this Garden. S. Athanasius in the place aforementioned, has a
Fancy thereupon extraordinary Poetical, and which I take to be more expressive
of its Riches and its Pleasures, than those Descriptions the most Fanciful
Poets can give of their Elysium; viz. That from hence about the Oriental parts
of India there are every where such fragrant scents, and that the Spices
receive their Odours as if blown from that happy place. Which is good Poetry
enough, (though too light for him:) and Milton has it,

-- Now gentle Gales
Fanning their odoriferous Wings, dispense
Native Perfumes, and whisper whence they stole
Those balmy spoils. --
Thus have I showed you, according to what I promised, the goodly and beautiful
Ruins of the most beautiful place that ever was; led you into this Eastern
Eden, this illustrious and holy Vale: and here I could pluck you many a Flower,
but that I am in haste, and must be gone. Only I add three things more that I
had almost forgot. First, this was the Promised Land; and it is natural to
conceive that Faith and Obedience should give just Abraham a Promise to the
place, whence Disbelief and Disobedience had thrust out his Progenitor.
Secondly, All the Allegories of a future State, Canaan, Jerusalem, Sion, City
of God, Temple, holy Mountain, Mountain of God; Ghe-Hinnom, Tophet, the Lake,
are taken from the Holy Land; and thence too very likely Paradise. Thirdly,
That which thousands of years after remained the Garden of the World, may, I
think (by no unreasonable supposal) be thought before the Deluge to have been
so too. I have thus given as short an account as I well could of the Site of
the Terrestrial Paradise; with submission to the Learned. Now I am of this
Opinion; hereafter I may either alter, or confirm it.

IV. It is thought that until Esdras his time, by Paradise the Jews understood
always this place, and then began first to signify by it that of future
Blessedness. For it being very hard for them to conceive an Intellectual
Heaven, who were wedded so fast to an Earthly Canaan, they were forced to
depaint Celestial Joys by what they counted most Celestial upon Earth, (not
able to think on the higher and ecstatick Delights of unbodied Spirits) and to
give them the name of that which was likest to, and typically expressive of
them. All Nations never so barbarous, expected beyond the Grave a place free
from Storms and Tempests, sited above the noise and hurricanes, chances and
perturbations of this Sublunary World, the Refrigerium of their Fathers, and
Righteous Spirits; which they described by delightsome Groves, and cool Shades,
and pleasant Meadows, and flowery Walks. Thus because they could no otherwise,
they strove to decipher them by whatsoever they rated highest, and estimated
dearest; by Fields, and Gardens, and Fountains; Feasts, and Music, and
Merriments. But hence too (for nothing there is but may be corrupted) sprang
the brutish and fond Conceits of another State, the Turks hellish Paradise, and
the fancied Loosenesses and Revels that a rude Indian hopes for. Yet in making
this blessed Paradise of our first Parents, the Type and Figure of our Heaven,
there can be no danger of any such sinful or gross, unchristianlike or
disparaging thought thereof. For how is it possible for any one to fool himself
into an expectation of sensual Joys, who considers that it was Sensuality which
drove out hence Adam and Eve? or to keen his Appetite for Gluttonous Treats,
when but a taste of an Apple cost them so dear? The Type and the Antitype do
resemble each other so, that Guiltiness, as well as Misery, is excluded out of
both: Both were planted by God; naught but Innocence can ensure either, and
lack of this is certain expulsion out of both: Then the one and the other is a
Paradise of Pleasure (as the vulgar Latin and Chaldee Paraphrast renders it)
prepared a principio from the beginning, without any premerit of man; a most
free and undeserved Donative. It is an Axiom, I remember, of the Schoolmen, Ea
quae de Paradiso in Scriptura^ dicuntur, in modum narrationis historice
proponuntur. In omnibus autem quae hic Scriptura tradit, pro fundamento tenenda
est veritas historiae, and desuper spirituales expositiones fabricandae. Thom.
That in whatsoever the Scripture delivers to us concerning Paradise, the truth
of the History is to be believed in the first place, and then Spiritual
Expositions and Allegories to be made of the same. Beside, this noble and
universally received Metaphor which I use, has the Authorization and Warranty
of the Holy Spirit, and is in a manner sanctified by the Pens of inspired and
sacred Writers, by the Mouth of our very Lord, his most gracious Donation and
dying Promise, not unto the Thief alone, but alike unto all believing Penitents.

8. There are some who take it, 1. for a place distinct from the third Heaven,
and a part of Hades; into which our Savior went, Luke 23. 43. before he
ascended into Heaven, Joh. 20. 17. the State of Rest of the blessed Souls
before the Resurrection. 2. In a more comprehensive sense, for the general
State of Bliss both before and after the Resurrection. In which last
acceptance I here use it. We are all much taken with this same place, and need
not the instigation of the Proverb to bid us (...).
seek out Paradise: all of us have an inbred desire after Pleasure, but almost
infinite are our Mistakes in the pursuit thereafter; whence I presume it will
not be thought an unfriendly Office to tell where and how it may be found.
Indeed the Author cannot pretend to Revelations, the being wrapped up thither
with St. Paul, or with St. John, the having seen with the Popish Saints any of
its Roses shower down from thence: He is not about to verify the strange
Ramblings in the Cave of St. Patrick, or any such Tales in the Papal Church or
Jewish Synagogue; the Legendary- Travels of an Irish St. Brandon, or the
Jehoshua.
forementioned Rabbin. Nor needs he: for it was Clausa est per peccatum, and
per Christi passionem aperta est janua Coelestis Paradisi.
opened long since by the death of Christ: and we have as fair and exact a
Chart of it and the way, as God himself thought not unbecoming him to draw. One
would therefore think this were Discovery enough, or at least that after
welnigh seventeen hundred years were past, all our Disputes and Controversies
about it should have been decided, and the way unto Happiness not now any
longer to be sought for: That all would have agreed about this which is their
everlasting Concern; have proved no less unanimous (more successful) in their
Search, than in their Wishes for it: That every one would have taken up the
Cross of Christ that is both light and comfortable, and followed him thither;
that none could refuse his Yoke that is so easy and pleasant. But a most
deplorable truth it is, and incredible, that men should notwithstanding study
to banish themselves the Paradise of God: After they have touched the Tree of
Death, refuse to be healed with the Leaves of the Tree of Life; counting it
impossible to enjoy themselves, without being thrust out from the Garden of
Pleasures.

SECTION II.
THe pious and excellent Labors of many Religious Writers, have hitherto in
vain strove to encounter so prodigious and prevailing a Folly. These, they who
need, read not; or if they do, they can perhaps in a Rational or an Eloquent
Discourse, observe the neatness and the good manag'ry of the Author, and that
is all. This cannot but be more than enough to disencourage any one from so
unprosperous an Attempt again, and to show him the vanity of endeavoring
either an Union in Faith, or a Reformation in Manners. But I know many whose
weak queasie Fancies cannot digest that which is convincing and solid, who wist
yet be easily persuaded to divert themselves with looking over a Romance. They
who despise the ungentile Ethics of a dull Aristotle, and the dry abrupt style
of a short-lung'd Seneca, (to use their own Expressions) will be the more apt
to take into their hands this trivial Piece. And perhaps it may be somewhat the
more conducive, because it is sent from a Secular and Uninterested Hand.

2. The Benefit and the Instructiveness of History, and of the Lives of Worthy
Persons* is no less universally, than deservedly acknowledged to be very Great.
Yet we know the Historian is so tied to the Laws of Truth, that he must tell
you, if he does as he ought, as well the Faults of him he writes of, as his
Virtues; so that commonly he is far enough from setting you forth a perfect and
just Exemplar. Now here is none of that disadvantageousness; nor is this
Allegorical way of writing either improper, or new. It is storied of Chosroes
King of Persia, that he employed the diligence and the secrefie of one of his
faithfullest Servants, and almost emptied his Exchequer, but to gain a copy of
a small Piece that was Parabolically written. And this was so prized by the
Indian Gymnosophists, that they held it piacular to reveal the same to a
Stranger.

3. Thus was the Theology, and thus also was the Philosophy of the Ancients
taught; whence some have writ large Volumes of the Heathen Mythology. Thus has
Xenophon given the pattern of an excellent Prince, and Plato of a Commonwealth;
and we have the latter ones of New Atlantis, Utopia, Severambi, etc. Not to
instance in the Tales of Chaucer, the Legends of Spencer, and the jocular
Visions of Quevedo, Pasquin, Heraclito-Democritus, and others: what has been
done this way by B. Hall, (under the name of Mercurius Britannicus) Baker,
Crashaw, Patrick, and Glanvil, is I think well enough approved of. And surely
this same way, though seemingly so, cannot by judicious men be esteemed light
and useless, when the divinest Philosopher that ever writ, thought he could not
better infuse into the minds of his Readers what he wished, than under the
person of his Socrates: nor the greatest Orator, than under the persons of his
Cotta and others: not to go farther, and allege the Parables of Christ, the
Allegories of the Prophets, the Typical Histories and Ceremonies of the Old
Testament, the sacred Poems of Tobit and Judith; which are so many just
Apologies for my Undertaking. I am of the opinion, that Religion and Good
Manners are not to be taught just like a Science, by Rules and Precepts, or in
a Scholastic dress, but rather by Examples: I never yet heard of any whom
Aristotle' s Ethics converted. This is the difference; the one way is dead and
without any Spirit, liveless and unmoving; but this is animated and full of
vigor, having a soul and life in it, and powerfully affecting. The Learned and
the Ignorant are both alike moved hereby: it is so cogent, that it is able to
work upon the most judicious and the most wise; and yet so plain, that it is apt
to take with the most Rude and Vulgar: fit for every one, but chiefly for the
Ingenious.

4. This was the ancient Poetry, before ever it was confined to Verse. At
length it was brought not only into the Drama, but also the Epick Poem; whence
of the last sort Homer and Hesiod, Virgil and Ovid, have two of them given us
the most noble and the most adequate Images of Heroic Virtue, and the other
two not less delightful and instructive Figments. Wherefore I cannot agree to
those who make it as late as the irruption of the barbarous Nations into Italy.
It is true, that then it grew into greatest credit with the Soldiers; but I
nowhere learn that the wild Germans brought it along with them thither, or
that any besides the Italians themselves used it; whence it is said to receive
the name of Romanzo, and Fabula Romana. I have already exceeded the measure of
that Discourse I intended, and therefore cannot stay to give you an account of
its progress from the Jews, Egyptians, Indians, Persians, Arabians, Moors,
Spaniards --. The last I named were so addicted to this sort of Wit, that one
of them (I mean the Author of Quichot) has in the same style writ a Satyr
against them. Which in Spain growing so in vogue, has passed thence into most
of the Nations of Europe, though still made worse by transplantation, and very
much abused to wanton and mean Subjects. And if we may take an estimate from
the mischief it has done now it is corrupted, the good must certainly be very
great which we are to expect when once it is reformed: That which has done the
Devil such service, will, I hope, if wrested from him, do God as much; and it
will be a cunning artifice thus to wound him with his own Weapons.

5. The Reader has now seen the Motives and the Reason of my putting Pen to
Parer. Wherefore I call this a PILGRIMAGE, is from the frequent comparison in
the holy Scriptures of Gods Law to a Way which leads to everlasting Life. This
has been heretofore attempted by several, tho they have not kept closely to the
Metaphor. There is extant the Scala Paradisi of an uncertain Author, in the
ninth Tome of S. Austin' s Works; and Robertus de Sorbona (Penitentiary to
Lewis the Ninth of France, surnamed the Saint, and Founder of the Sorbon-
College) in the Bibliotheca Patrum, calls a little Tract of his, Iter
Paradisi; Bonaventure has besides his Itinerarium, the Seven Journeys of
Eternity; Bernardinus has writ De Paradisi Acquirendi Via. But herein they
have proved unhappy, and are not worth much. The Itinerarium Paradisi of
Giraldus in Italian, which I have not seen, I guess to be much after this
manner, only more like a Journal or an exact Diary than this; and like unto
the Victory of Divine Love, a short Romance written by the Sieur de Nerveze,
Secretary of the Chamber to Henry the Fourth of France, wherein he handsomely
draws the Loves of Polydore and Virgin, (under them two representing the
Skirmishes of worldly Pleasure, against Seraphical;) and divides into seven
Days or Sections. But truly nothing that I have yet met with in this kind, is
in the least able to compare with the Critic of Gracian, or the Pilgrim of our
Dean of Peterburgh. But this last worthy Person limiting himself to the Needs
of a private Friend, is not of so general use as could be wished. Perhaps there
was never one better accomplished for such a design than the late B. Tailor,
whose extraordinary Eloquence and Sweetness must here needs have been very
proper. The last Lord Orrery had indeed a Genius fitted for this; his handsome
Style, Fancy and Piety are, by as many as read those excellent Composures of
his, not unworthily applauded; and had not Death prevented, we might probably
have seen such Productions from his noble Muse. But our great disparity has not
disencouraged me from setting about, and laying this Foundation to a much
bigger Superstructure: In which my intent is to handle otherwise than by any
Pen has yet, all the Virtues Moral and Divine; their contrary Vices; the
Passions; the rise of Errors; the discovery of the Truth; both the Pleasures
of, and the Instruments wereby, to attain an Habitual Piety; with all or most
the Cases that can befall not only a private Christian, but the whole Catholic
Church, and every Order of Men within it. The Reader therefore must not think
strange, if he meets with some Passages here and there which are little more
than References to the following Parts.

6. Now if this finds not a too hard reception, hereafter may be expected,
under the person of Theosophus, the Character completed of a holy and wise
Prelate; under the persons of Orthodoxus and Eubulus, of an Apostolic and
pious Clergy; under Uranius, of a Divine Poet; Euistor, of a Sacred Critic;
Ephorinus, of a Contemplative Philosopher: for a loyal Soldier, Cratander; for
a worthy Statesman, Nestorius; for a just Judge, Diceus; for a good Physician,
Lucas; and Spudeus and Philoponus, for honest Plebeians: The highest Love of
God exemplified in Theophilus, Humility in Chamalus, Temperance in Sophron,
Chastity in Parthenius, Vigilance in Nephalius, Charity and Hospitality in
Eleutherius, an aged Piety in Eusebius, and on early Piety in the Child
Erastus: Devout Widowhood in Priscilla, Holy Virginity in Parthenia, and
Parental Care in Christina; and so in the rest. For it is a common truth, the
very sad experience of every day, that we are sooner prevailed upon by
Examples, than by never so excellent Precepts and Discourses. And certainly,
our Savior (as a late ingenious Writer has it) could as well have given the
moral common places of Incharitableness and Humbleness, as the divine Narration
of Dives and Lazarus; or of Disobedience and Mercy, as that excellent Discourse
of the lost Child and the gracious Father, but that he knew the Estate of Dives
burning in Hell, and Lazarus in Abraham' s bosom, would more constantly
inhabit both the Memory and Judgment. As for me, I can conceive nothing more
moving, than to have a Prodigal represented feeding upon the Husks and the Wash
of Swine. Nay, methinks it should make every one that has run so far parallel
with him as to waste their Estates with riotous living, Luke c. 15. v. 13. to
return also and say, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, -- v. 21. Let both
the severest Stoic, and the Ciceronian, and most eloquent Orator, at once lay
out all their Art and their Passion, their Arguments and Ratiocination in
declaiming against Luxury; it will at last come extremely short of this one
instance (duly considered) of the Rich Man praying for a drop of water to cool
his tongue, cap. 16. 24. Whenever also I read the Parable of the lost Sheep,
I am a great deal more moved at the love of my God, and the rejoicing in Heaven
of the holy Angels at the Conversion of a Sinner, than I am with all the
intricate Disputes of Grace and Predestination betwixt Metaphysical Airy
Divines. Whence this good Shepherd laying his found Sheep upon his shouldiers
with joy, v. 5. has ever been by pious men made an Emblem of the Worlds
Redeemer. What shall I say of him who being forgiven his Matthew. 18. 24. A
thousand Talents amounts to 1870500 l. Sterling, and the hundred Denarii to 3
l. 2 s. 6 d. which is calculated to be above five hundred thousand to one. A
very vast disproportion. See Dr Hammond.
ten thousand Talents, would not have patience with a poor Fellow Servants for
but the paying of an hundred pence? Can any thing livelier express, or
powerfullier curb, our Ingratitude to God? I should have thought that nothing
could have possibly more commended to the Disciples of the blessed Jesus
Charity and mutual Forbearance, than this Saying of his, If you forgive men
their Trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you yours: but if you
forgive not men, no more --; till I read this home and pressing Instance, this
reasonable and irresistible (one would think) Incentive to Gratitude: and had
marked the great cogent Argument, and more cogent Terror, here couched in a
neglected Parable.

7. And as for my part, notwithstanding the Clamours that are made against it,
I can find no harm in the so-much-despised Story of Tobit. Whether it be a
Fiction (as is very probable) or else real History (as the Jews would have it)
it matters not at all. I can scarce think of any thing (besides the Historical
Poem of holy Job) that can more encourage a good man (for so Tobit in the
Hebrew signifies) than the Rewards and Blessings of his Piety, and the notice
taken of it in Heaven. Nothing ever comforts and enlarges my heart more, than
that the Angels are ministering Spirits to our good: and sure when I read how
one of them condescended to be a Servant, and to travel along with an
honestly-educated Youth, to drive away from him Asmodeus the Spirit of
Unchastity, and cure the Blindness and Infirmity of his good Parents; I cannot
but be above measure raised up with devout joy, and rapturous Sentiments hereof.

8. The pious and ingenious Fancy through the Book of Judith, which Grotius
has discovered and rendered more than probable, is not only delightful, but
might be also of great use unto the People of God in their Afflictions. I hope
I am not over-partial in what I here say: for though I know that the Lord will
one time or other deliver his Church, and that he is able by never so weak
means to bring the greatest things to pass; yet am I more than ordinarily
elevated, and confirmed herein, if I chance but to read the strange deliverance
of the Bethulians, and what great powers were defeated by the hands of a Woman.
Questionless when Jerusalem was beleaguered by the numerous Army of Antiochus,
there lacked not (as is usual, and not unpolitical) Consolatory Discourses to
keep up the Spirits of the Inhabitants from Despair. But sure nothing could be
more proper, more sweetly affecting and comfortable to them, than to have their
(...) Gens Judea.
Country Judea represented by a beautiful Widow under the name of Judith; the
Devil their potent Adversary, by Nabuchodonosor Hebraeis saepe Diabolum
significat, and Assyria fastum. Grot. ib.
Nabuchodonosor; their (...) Bathulia, Templum Dei Jah.
Temple, by Bethulia; and by the Gladius inde egrediens, preces Sanctorum.
Sword thereof their Prayers ascending into Heaven; by (...) Holophernes,
Lictor Serpentis.
Holophornes, (i. e.) the the Instrument of the Serpent, Antiochus. I cannot
but conjecture that these pretty Similes did work upon them, and conduce
somewhat (at least) toward their Delivery, the expulsion of the Enemy, and of
Idolatry: and might perhaps make Judas Maccabeus with his small Band courageous
and victorious. Nor is this so very unlikely, since every one knows what effect
but the Story of Menen. Agrippa had, how it appeased the furious Rabble, kept a
great People from Ruin: and that of the Prophet Nathan saved a great King from
destruction.

9. The Additions to Daniel and Esther, the Apocryphal Books of Esdras and
Baruch, considering their several Repugnances with History, Inconsistences with
the Canon of holy Writ, and newness of their Style, should they be read as
sincere and authentic Narrations of the Truth, would not only woefully therein
deceive the Reader, but force him by an unhappy consequence to throw away his
Bible, to quit for these the sacred and truer Records which were preserved in
the Ark. But whosoever reads them as mere Fictions, as he cannot be deceived,
so likewise he will reap that Pleasure and Profit which otherwise he might have
sought for in vain. For looking upon them as humane Composures, I find
Excellencies in them which are scarce to be matched elsewhere. The contrivance
of some of them (particularly of Susanna) if not exceeds, equals at least, I
may well say, that of the best wrought Romance I have ever seen. Not to speak
of the several parts which are there exactly observed, I cannot think what is
joyfullier surprising, than so clear and unexpected a Vindication (as is there
related) of condemned Innocence: that can forceablier encourage us to embrace
for a short while Reproach and Shame for the sake of Virtue, by representing
thus to us the Providence of an All-seeing God, and his Care over us. But of
these I may have occasion in some other Papers to speak more at large.

10. The Church of Rome by her Legends, her ridiculous Forgeries, (or rather)
the imposition of them, has given her own Cause a greater Wound, than could the
Weapons of her stoutest Adversaries. Certainly nothing can be more absurd, or
an Imposture more barefaced, than the imposing such apparent Falsities and
Incredibilities, such whimsical idle Dreams of melancholy Devotes, for Truths:
Nothing more amazing and less profitable, than to give for Patterns such
miraculous unimitable Saints. So if in those Stories the Authors had contained
themselves within the bounds of Probability, and had a little better penned
them, declaring them to be feigned Relations; I am apt to believe they might
have been a means to bring Practical Christianity more into the Lives of men.
More modest and of greater use are the Printed at Rome 1666, after Pachymer his
Michael Paleologus.
Ichnelatae of the old Indians, the Apologues of Lochman, Aesop, Phedrus, and
the moral Picture of Cebes the Pythagoraean, with the Draughts and Emblems of
Poets and Painters.

11. Ariosto (and after him our English Spencer) from whom his sort of Verse,
which is the Stanza of eight, was called Romansi, has run into another
extreme, filled his Canto's with Monsters, Phantoms, and Chimerical
Descriptions of things; which though never so good, are very unbecoming, and
agree not with the Laws of Poetry. Both these ways, which would take away the
Imitableness of what I write, I shall studiously avoid. And for this reason I
have laid the Scene thereof as near these Times as I can; that so it may be
thought to belong the more unto them. Not but that I see it would be freer from
Censure, were it not thus adapted to our present necessities: Should I have put
it back as far as the first flourishing Age of the Church, it would have been
thought not to concern these depraved Times: My Pilgrims in their antiquated
Garbs, could not in so fashionable an Age as this have looked for any to
imitate them, and their Piety would have appeared even more ridiculous and
out-dated than their Dress.

12. But I am confident none of the sober Sons of the Church of England will be
angry with me for taxing the Immoralities of some of those who professed
themselves to be of her Communion; and that the more modest Dissenters from her
will not be at all displeased to be told into what Calamities Enthusiasm and
the Pretensions to the holy Spirit hurried us. I have so great a Veneration for
some of their Persons, that it would be the highest disingenuity to
misinterpret this as a Satyr upon them. For any one may see that even then when
occasion most offers it self, I avoid that Bitterness which, were my design
but to please, would tickle a great many Readers. Therefore have I left out of
the eleventh Chapter, the Consult and the Transactions of the Church of
Bethaven; that so nothing of that bitter Spirit which continually widens our
Divisions, and which I so much dislike, should be charged upon me. For if
Michael disputing against Satan, the chief of Angels against the chief of
Devils, durst not bring against him a Railing Accusation; how much, good God,
have we Christians and Brethren to answer for, who at so strange a rate revile
and worry each other! Here I can no longer contain my Passion. Shall we, so
nearly and holily related, incorporated into the same mystical Body Christ
Jesus, tear one another and our selves, and out do the greatest Hostilities
betwixt Heaven and Hell?

13. Having now tired you with a long Apparatus, let me only tell you, I have
chose in these following Sheets to be loose and immethodical, without tying my
self to any Rules of Order, but occasionally interspersing Meditation with
Story, so to ease the minds of those who are not used to read Books of Piety:
But even in those places where I seem to be most Poetical, and solely designing
Delight, I endeavor to move some devout Passion, and do try whether I can stir
up that the more easily, when the Springs are unseen. Now if I can hereby
direct any one to find out Paradise, or persuade him to travel thither, into
that purer and happier Climate, I have mine end.

To the READER.
PErhaps thou may be offended at the Tenth Chapter of this Book; which I at
first foresaw, and have taken care, by parting it into Sections, lest it should
prove burdensome. If thou can not relish such Raptures, I advise thee to
read it by Parts, or else to omit it the first time, and pass over to the next.
But I promise thee, if thou can but raise thy self up to a fit pitch to utter
it affectionately, thou shall there perceive more Sweetness than in the whole
Book besides.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Introduction. CHAP. I. The Retirement. CHAP. II. The Prospect of the
World. CHAP. III. Theosophus meditates on the Folly and Misery of the World,
and thence takes occasion to run out into the Praises of Paradise. CHAP. IV.
His Vision. CHAP. V. What immediately thereupon fell out. His Persecution.
CHAP. VI. A remarkable Accident which during his Concealment happened to him.
CHAP. VII. The Penitent's Sickness and Signs of Recovery. CHAP. VIII. The
Mystical Feast unto which Theosophus carries his Charge. CHAP. IX. The
Penitents Regeneration. CHAP. X. An Eucharistical Meditation. CHAP. XI. The
Fruits of Eubulus his Mission. CHAP. XII. Timotheus relates his Travels unto
the Burning Vale of Tophet. CHAP. XIII. The Religions: or a continuation of the
Travels of Timotheus. CHAP. XIV. The Vision of Tophet.
THE Situation OF PARADISE Found out
The Introduction.
NOT long since, when the whole Order of the Universe, by our huge massy
Crimes, began to be inverted, and this noble Fabric of the Creation did by
degrees moulder into something worse than nothing: When relapsed Humanity was
beyond compare both vicious and miserable: When the Land of our Nativities lay
waste and polluted, and not any Climate but bred unwholesome Air: When we saw
the deadliest Impieties and foulest Lusts stain every, and the most sacred
place; terrible Earthquakes overturn the Temples of our God; the fair and lofty
Trees fall, the best Fruits blited, the Fountains in Israel dried up, and every
thing, through sin, decay apace, and make haste to destruction: When Pride, and
Envy, and Prejudice so biased, as they had within a little like to have
overthrown the World; and the great Mass we tread on groaned under the heavy
pressures of Sacrilege, Rapine, Fraud, Perjury, Murder, and all the
weightiest and most intolerable Evils: When herewith arose such a Storm in the
North as made the poor afflicted Church of Christ flee into the Wilderness:
When Truth and Peace were also forced to leave us, when they both bad the
ungrateful Earth adieu, and when all that was just or holy disappeared: When
Happiness finally was nowhere to be had, so long controverted until we had
quite lost it; the true Site of PARADISE which every one did pretend to know,
harder still than ever to be found; There lived a man (if it be not rather a
note of infamy for him to be called man, who could, and durst, in those times
be) Constant, Wise, and Pious: who lacked not Resolution to attempt the
greatest things, nor Discretion to choose the best methods to further such his
attempts; and could direct himself aright through all the mazes and the chances
of a variable and deceitful World: of unsullied Integrity and divine Knowledge,
Angelical in his Life, and Primitive in his Faith: a reverend aged Seer wholly
untainted with the corruptions of so degenerate an Age, whom had you known, you
would have said, with me, he was a person of as gallant a Spirit as ever lived,
as far elevated above the rest of mankind as they were now beneath themselves
degraded, and thought him able even to transform that viperous and depraved
Race of Mortals: a person every way so qualified, as if he had been prepared on
purpose by the divine Mercy for no meaner Enterprises than the restitution of
Beauty and Holiness to the polluted and tottering Machine of this lower World,
and the transmutation of these very dregs of Time into the Golden Age of
Innocence and Love.

Were it not for the strangest obstinacy of men imaginable, so excellent a
Change as this could never have been long deferred; nor had the putting an end
to the Disputes about, and guiding Travelers safely into an ever-delicious
PARADISE, been looked upon as a sleeveless Errand in our great Hero. Now as
for the first, to effect this Change, methinks our endeavors and our wishes
ought not to be idle. I desire to appeal to the breasts of all my Readers,
whether they think any thing can be in it self more desirable. I do not believe
any one can tell what is more reasonable, or of a more ravishing nature than
this; or (if we our selves please, and refuse not to give it the concurrence of
our Will) more possible also, or accompanied with Difficulties more
conquerable. Whereas it is no wonder if our Aversion can make things appear
harder much than they are in themselves. We are unwilling, and therefore
presently we complain it is not easy enough. Whilst we are grovelling upon
Earth, we hate to look up to the Regions of eternal Glory, our celestial
CANAAN. Nay, though it is impossible to be happy otherwise, we refuse to be
happy so. This is such a folly, and so common to most of us; (I am sorry I must
say so, or give it such a name) as the few sober Pilgrims of this present Age
think they can never enough admire, nor enough lament.

Hope I will, however, that this honest Conductor may now find better
acceptance than he did from that stiff Generation; and that those who chance to
turn over these Sheets will not be unkind, at once, both to themselves and him.
But I hope herein they will prove themselves (what many are so ambitious to be
thought) persons of Ingenuity and Generosity; that they will embrace him for
their Friend, and be content for vast unproportionable Felicities, to part with
a foolish unbenefitting Habit, which may be shaken off, though it stick never
so close. If but some bold Spirits among the witty Ralliers of the Age should
begin this, and study to expose Profaneness to ridicule and contempt, and to
drive it out by laughing, as they brought it in; it might be expected that Vice
in a while would become as dishonorable as Virtue is now, and this latter
obtain the upper hand among all the men of sense. Hereby would they gain credit
to themselves, and much more than by going in the common track. So might this
so blessed an alteration be effected, all things prepared for our
transmigration hence; and so might (which is the design of the following
History) this excellent person in after-Ages bear the honorable title of
Leader of many Families and Tribes unto the HOLY LAND, the glorious place of
everlasting Love and Happiness.

I shall not trace him thorough the several Stages of his Life, but begin his
Story then when the aforesaid Storm arising in the North, during the late
unhappy Commotions and subversion of Christian Piety, he was deserted by every
one, worried up and down, pillaged, turned out of all that little which he held
but by the (then weak) tenure of Divine Right, maliciously defamed and
blackened in his Name, brought even into public Courts, his best deeds
misinterpreted, and his very Piety (most of all) slandered: his Friends or
Followers either seduced or forced from him; hated even by those to whom he
would have done the greatest good, universally slighted, ungratefully,
barbarously treated by his dissenting Neighbors, and so brought at length to
the ^tmost extremities of Indigence and Misery.

CHAP. I.
The Retirement.

MAny years had this Reverend Sire seen pass over his head, all which were
spent in the exercises of his duty, and sanctified by the severities of a
strict Piety and an holy Religion; many brave heroic Achievements he had
performed; nothing he lest undone to bring back the dissolute Worldlings from
out the ways of sin and error, of blindness and an undiscerned death; he had
gallantry of Soul enough to stand in the Gap against all opposition, and boldly
to resist the deviation in the Multitude; and he strove as much as in him lay,
to reduce the Church, under which he lived, into its primitive Order and Purity.

Now finding all his pains and methods succesless, himself lying under an heavy
Interdict of the usurping Senate, and ready to be banished the Island Albina, he
resolves to withdraw a little, and hide himself in the close retreats of a
Country-Shade; there to try in the last place whether or no the rustic Boors
and Shepherds had forgot their honest simplicity, shaken off their old rural
Innocence and Plainness.

Several leagues had he left behind the Royal City Megalopolis, and having
passed above a days journey through naught but desolate and waste grounds, he
came at last into a most delicious Plain, or Grove, or Garden, call it which
you please, overlooked by the tops of the Hills, and shaded by the pretty wild
disorder of the Trees; which made it appear the Seat of pleasant Solitariness
and delightful Melancholy. A very rich lovely Champagn it was, bestrew'd with
the green and flowery Tap'stry of the Spring, and set off by the careful hand of
Providence with all the delicacies that Nature ever afforded; most curiously
enamelled with inartificial Beds of Violets and Heliotropes, interspersed with
the Anemony, the Hyacinth, and the Primrose. And by the four Arms of a small
Riv'let, it was parted into as many pretty Isles. But that which commended it
above all was, that it appeared not to be freque^ed or trodden by any men;
wherefore he was glad to find himself at last a resling place, in which he
thought to spend the poor remainder of his days. And designed (as did
heretofore the Genesis 21. 33.
first Father of Religious Pilgrims) to consecrate this Grove into a Temple,
and turn every Tree into an Oratory, using the Boughs for Hosanna's to the Son
of David, and Directions of the way to those that follow after.

Here the pensive and melancholy Hermit delighted to walk; and still at every
step he made some progress The Contemplative Life.
toward a better and a more lasting Scene of Pleasures. Every thing he saw,
added fuel to the pious ardours of his Soul, caused him to long for the
Mansions of Eternity; that Spiritual Eden which he beheld faintly, as it were,
reflected upon this spot of Land: Sometimes would he listen to the Music of
the little chanting Birds, those vocal Choristers of the Air, and with them
join concert in a sprightly Carol to the King of Heaven: And sometimes again
the bleating innocent Animals that were grazing upon the neighboring Hills,
made him pity his own disconsolate and scattered Flock (committed to him indeed
by the good Shepherd of Men, but) rapaciously stolen from him some while since
by Thieves in a Pastoral disguise. Now casting his eyes Heavenward, (as if his
divinely ravished Soul had eager longings to break her fleshie Gaol, and take
flight thitherwards to that her Native Country, those pure unsullied Regions of
Tranquillity and Joy;) he stood long contemplating on the admirable Beauty, the
wonderful unconceivable Architecture of the Aetherial Orbs, the dazzling light
and splendour of the Sun; till wearied with too much intention, at last he looked
down, and at his feet he saw the Sun and whatsoever else in the Heavens he had
with pleasure observed, to reflect their Images and glass themselves in those
little beautiful Canals of running-water. So now he had two Worlds, and two
Suns to contemplate; the one real, the other reflected: Which made him with
sorrow think of those poor Souls who care not to look up so high as the
Paradise in the highest Heavens, where are the only real and permanent
Mansions of Felicity; but downward upon one that is no other but reflected and
imaginary: Which whilst they strive to obtain, they do but grasp the very
appearance of a watery Shadow, and thereby foolishly drown and destroy
themselves; meeting with, instead of Happiness, a dismal Disappointment, cold
unexpected Death. But quite otherwise, these shadowy Representations made him
the better fix his mind upon Realities: these scanty Streams, shallow Crystal
Currents, could send him to the Waters above the Firmament, the Rivers of
Delight which are at Gods right hand. So that, by contemplation on and
foretaste of those Joys above, he almost thinks himself already here
imparadised; which Solitude would the rather persuade him to think no mistake:
Here Pison and Hiddekel, Gihon and Phrath, were before his eyes. Nay, every
Plant, every spire of Grass, the most neglected Flower, the most ordinary Herb,
the smallest Insect, had all some kind of Image of a Deity enstamped on them.
There was somewhat of Paradise he fancied in whatever he saw; and well might
that place be counted Paradise, which could boast of the truly virtuous
THEOSOPHVS, (so was he called.) In this manner viewing a pleasant Vale, which
another might perhaps have looked upon barely to feed his eye, or recreate his
sense, he drew thence a Map of the Celestial Temple. Whereof he was thus
already possessed in imagination and picture.

Now it happened as he was thus meditating with himself, he lighted unawares
into a Path. He strait knew himself mistaken concerning the loneliness of the
place; which he was soon further convinced of by reading several small
Histories of Christian Palmers and religious Conferences, cut in the rindes of
the Trees, with the names of EVBVLVS and ORTHODOXUS underwritten; many Hymns
and Verses composed in praise of Virtue, Raptures of a pure Celestial Love,
and passionate Burnings of an Heavenly Muse sighing after the Joys of PARADISE;
under all which was subscribed VRANIVS.

Hence the Pious Father over-joyful, presently knew that it must needs be the
Retreat of these his Friendly Coadjutors; and big with hopes, expected to find
them here. And so he did: For not long had he sought them, before he heard the
hacking of Axes hewing down the Trees all round about, and observed the narrow
Rivulets to begin to be tainted unnaturally with a bloody color; when not far
off he could descry his three dearest Friends, with their hands bound, hurried
away Prisoners, followed with shouts and reviling acclamations; with loud
outeries of Heresy against the most moderate and learned ORTHODOXVS; against
EVBVLVS of distastful and pernicious Advice; and impure and doggril Rhymes
they, as maliciously, laid to divine VRANIVS his charge.

One would have thought, that to have ones greatest and fiercest hopes thus on
a sudden disappointed, had been enough to cast a sad damp over the most
courageous Spirit that ever was. But all this could not in the least distemper
the Spirit of the stout and the wise THEOSOPHVS, who (that he mighty hereby
teach us that the greatest evils and most surprising accidents, do much rather
require the succors of Reason, than the violence of a disorderly Passion; nor
ought therefore to discompose the evenness and tranquillity of our minds;) not
suffering himself to be moved, in imitation of his blessed Master, only smote
upon his breast, saying these few words, Not ours, but thy Will, O LORD, be
done. Fearing not in the least but Heaven would take care of such virtuous
Souls as these, and at last set them free by a merciful Deliverance, or a
glorious and happy Martyrdom.

It chanced that he was not seen, or not regarded, by any of those cruel men:
for he being but newly come hither, they who had deprived him of his Friends
had not received yet the news of his removal from the City, and therefore made
not here any search after him, (whom they would have much rather taken) but in
the hurry they were in, let him escape to an adjacent Hill. The top whereof,
which (like a rich man) proudly overlooks the under-hillocks and lower grounds,
having with much trouble gained, he had before his eyes, by the help of a
certain Telescope (which is the free unprejudiced Operation of Right Reason) to
render the Objects more visible and distinct, and take off the false rays which
the vapors of Humor or Passion raise to obscure and set off the greatest
deformities as fair; this sad Representation of the Worlds Miseries.

CHAP. II.
The Prospect of the World.

THe Country underneath he saw waste and untilled, oppressed with heavy loads
of Guilt and Misery; the Isles of the North tempestuously wafted on the Seas,
even ready to be swallowed up with a dreadful Inundation of Woes: that little
seeming Paradise also of the Earth which but just before he had chosen out for
its delightful lonesomeness, and in his thoughts made the lovely retiring place
of religious Melancholy, now converted into an Akeldama of Blood. Whence
casting a look a little way off, he could not but pity the poor Cottagers, the
laboring Slavery.
Peasants that were toyling to fill yonder rich man's Barns, and they themselves
like to perish and die for scarcity; nor yet so much enslaved to their Lords,
as to their Lusts; at once wretched, and wicked; so much the more to be pitied,
as they deserved less. Round about the skirts of the Mount sat a People
distracted with Jealousies and Fears, preparing Bonds wherewith to bind
themselves fast, and pulling down on their heads those evils which they dreaded
most, taking care to be miserable, by their own means alone enthralled, cruelly
tyrannized over (and that which renders it still most of all insufferable) by
men of mean estate, puny upstart Levites. They kissed their very Shackles,
embraced even Gibbets and Racks, and mattered not ought the being made a Prey
to the griping Avarice of Religious Free-booters.

The whole Earth appears unto him blasted with a Curse, empoysoned with the
Devastations.
Venom of the Serpent, overgrown with hurtful Weeds, with bad Manners and evil
Dispositions. Whithersoever he looked, he saw the Lands foraged and ransacked,
defiled with Blood, naught but a frightful Landscap of Desolation and Ruin, a
Golgotha of dead men's Sculls. A destroying Pestilence took its range through
the Territories of (professed) Christians, which carried all before it; and
scarce one cared to avoid the Infection. The Fields were torn and rifled of
their Beauty, the Air clamorously ringing with Mutinies and Tumults, the loud
roaring of Cannons, the doleful shrieks of departing Ghosts still pierced his
ears.

Here were two Princes fighting for a little spot of Ground; and there an
ambitious Monarch devoting no less Ambition.
than thirty or forty thousand lives to the satisfying one single Lust. Here a
proud Conqueror reeking in Sweat and Wounds, exchangeth his Laurel for a Wreath
of Cypress, descends down into the Pit to converse with those he had before sent
thither; and he whose desires but some short while agon could not be confined
within the borders of a Kingdom, is now sufficed with a few feet to cover a
vile putrified Carcass. These were they who could alter Empires, do what they
pleased, and turn the World topsie-turvie. But they who erewhile thought
themselves unconquerable, now are crushed into the Grave, and thrown aside by
their Friends and their Adorers, into the place of Forgetfulness; there to
impart their Conquests with the Worms: they go from the Palaces of the Sun and
of the Day, of Mirth and Light, into the black dismal Chambers of Death, to
inhabit with Toads and Serpents, Stench and Corruption, leave behind all their
joys and their good things for them that come after, and turn from the spoils
of their Enemies to be preyed on by every as despicable and proud a Worm, or as
foul an Insect as themselves. This did he see; and wept for them: he saw havoc
by such hot-spirited men as these universally made, and waited therefore till
he saw their unhappy falls. But these were not a near so formidable Monsters,
or so destructive, as the Religions.
Makers and the Disturbers, Hell-inspired Founders and Innovators of Religion.
Now he came to have the greatest need of his Telescope to discern these, the
Exhalations being so very thick. Through which he could see the broad Road to
Perdition thronged by full Caravans of silly men decoyed in by the over-hot
Zeal or officious Cheats of either blind or malicious Guides. Unto his sad
consideration there appears a third part of the World lamentably deceived by an
Impostor, a vile Epileptick person, bewitched to the most ridiculous
absurdities that ever Imagination could invent, or the blackest Melancholy give
credit to: Another third part, and more, under Idolatry, walking in thick
darkness and the shadow of Death, the Worshippers of the cruel King of
Darkness: And that which of it remains, not of one Religion, but divided into
above a thousand different Sects; besides a Vagabond Nation retaining their
antiquated Rites, hated by all because they had most barbarously murdered
their Prince, the great Messiah; and those also who professed to be, and those
who lived, as if they were not of any.

Where could he cast his eye? if upon the Country, that alas was vitiated
Universal Wickedness.
with sordidness and narrowness of mind, base and mean Vices: if upon the
Cities, they too with fraudulent dealing and deceit in Wares, with pride and
discontent: the Court with ambition and faithlesness, cogging Parasites and
false Friends: the Bench with injustice and wrong, bribery and subornation:
private Families with dissimulation and eye-service, strife, worldliness, and
grudgings; either an Epicure, or a Churl, or an effeminate wanton, the Master
thereof: public Societies with Self-interest and Fraud: the Schools with
contention: Houses of Prayer made Dens of Thieves, converted into Stables, and
polluted with all manner of profaneness and extemporary extravagancies.

These Territories were wasted by foreign Incursions; the other by distractions
at home, and intestine Wars (far more) miserably depopulated: Tyranny lorded it
in this place, Confusion in that: And so Desolation and Sin not content with
one, took their range thorough every Quarter.

Nor was the Land only, but the very Sea enriched with the Wrecks and the The
Sea.
Spoils of wretched Mortals. There was a Ship split against a Rock, another
struck on a Quick-sand or a Syrtis, and a third sunk in the very Haven. There
might he see the Hull of a rich Carrack broken by the violence of a Tempest;
and there a Merchantman carelessly coasting, whilst the Winds whistle sweetly
upon its Sails, and the curled Waves seem to sport with the Vessel, overtaken
by another which boards it, kills the men; or if so cruelly merciful as to
spare them, it is perhaps for a more insupportable slavery: either to tug at the
Oar, or labor in the Mine. Next moved huge floating Islands built only for
destruction: for as if the Sea, the Storms, and fury of meeting Winds,
Hurricanes, Travadoes, Swallows, Whirlpools, Rocks, Quicksands, Banks, Washes,
Oaz, Leaks, and all Mischances, with Pirates both Mohammedan and Christian, were
not enough, bloody Battles must be fought even there, lives perish which the
guiltless Element consents not unto, and all sorts of death made to combine
with man's wickedness, fire it self to rage upon the Waters; for no other end,
but that more Blood may be so shed than the very Ocean can purge away. Yet
notwithstanding all this, he could descry whole Fleets Indian Navigation.
farther off, contemning suchlike dangers as these, and seeking the utmost
corners of the Earth, to lade themselves with clods of Hab. c. 2. v. 6.
thick Clay, a little yellowish and a little whitish Earth, (silver or gold)
sun burnt in the bowels of the Eastern Mountains, and dried up into the
hardness of a metallic substance; so much baser than common Mould, as it has
more of Care and more of Vice in it.

He saw that which was but just now a Disease in the Shellfish, made a Pearl
in this Ladies Ear: and Stones that sparkle Pearls.
like a Glowworm, or a piece of rotten Wood, rated at the Mortgage of a whole
Manor. He saw stately Palaces and rich Villa's built by that great man, Vanity
in Building.
empty, uninhabited by any; whereof he was not so much Possessor (thought the
good Contemplator) as the Rats and Mice were. Another there was who The
Covetous.
buried his Soul with his Treasure, as if he meant to descend alive into Hell:
the gripling Usurer and the cold decrepit Hoarder, dug their way down thither
apace. But another wiser, he thinks, than his cramp-finger'd and slovenly
Father, now gone to receive his doom, The Spendthrift.
just come of age, throws away his Inheritance upon Taverns, and the houses
of Impiety and Looseness; and by and by is poor and old, forsaken, despised,
thrust out from his Company, pitied by none, but forced to beg a crust of Bread
at that man's door, and is denied. This Son beds his Fathers Concubine, and that
new Mother-in-law playing Lust.
with the Babies in her Son's Eyes, teaches him to sin; who first begins to
love her as a Mother, and then to court her as a Mistress. A lustful Rival
stabbed by his Fellow, lay weltring in his fresh-spilt gore, but the Murderer
dropped down soon after at his feet. And such was the unlucky end of both those
mad men. There might he see a Cloistered Friar making his forbidden loves to a
Veiled Sister, or else more filthily waited on by his Boy Hylus. In that
stately Serail he discerned a Prince locked up in the arms of his Olympia, who
privily stealing away his Heart, flung it into the fire, which so much the
rather still doted on her; until at last having long enough played with her
Princely Lover, and fooled him out of both his Sense and Empire, she delivers
him up bound unto his Enemy. Then looked he down upon those Draughts of sin, the
impure Sheds of the Summenium, Brothel-houses.
where he could espy Shione, and Helis, and Lesbia, shamelesly plying the next
unhappy Comers, selling their Bodies for a small piece of Coin, and delighting
to entrap the unexperienced freshness of a raw puny sinner. But hence proceeded
so noisome a Stench infecting round the Air, enough to stifle any not used to
such filthy places, that forced him strait to turn away his glutted eyes from
these loathsome and hellish receptacles of Devils, the pestilential stinking
Jakes of Lust. By which means he had the beastly The Drunken Club.
sight of a drunken revelling Match, and the rude Disorders before him of a
swearing, healthing, damning Club; which some hours after broke up in Quarrels,
Fightings, and Murders.

Some also were touring themselves over a Love-Sonnet, with which they intended
to present their Mistrisses, Love-Poetry.
and presently meet with Death in those Embraces which they so much courted;
rottenness and poison in the Lap of a sweet Enchantress. Some vile degenerate
Souls plumed themselves over the noble deeds of their famed Progenitors. An
odd Nobility.
kind of Confession, that in themselves they could find no worth: they laid
claim to the good actions of their Ancestors, as if they were (like their
Estate) theirs by Inheritance. Others would venture all they had, yea, their
very Lives, for a little Air, Fame.
the breath of the People; which having sucked down, they swell big and burst
asunder. Some too were seen to pride themselves in that they were clothed with
the Excrements Silks.
of a Worm; and thought themselves very fine, and despised all that were not
clad so finely as themselves. There one, forsooth, very cunning and shie in
whatsoever he did, having sent away a Secret Sins.
Friend or a Servant from him, that he might with greater retiredness act those
sins he was ashamed of, thought also with bars and doors to shut out the
Omnipresence of the All-seeing God: but as he guessed himself most unobserved,
behind him stood a dreadfully grinning Devil, taking notes thereof in a Book,
which he kept to produce against him at the last great Terrible Day.

Then next he observed, by moving the Telescope before his eyes a little back
to seek out again where he Blindness and Error.
had beheld the Scene of Religious Madness, several Companies of unlucky
Passengers traveling by, misled out of the way, bewildered by ignes fatui, by
false Lights, and treacherous Leaders: And amongst them he could not but sadly
lament the froward and unweildy Zeal of his own Countrymen, set on fire by the
dishonesty and imposture of their Guides. Some he saw with their bloody fingers
tearing out their own Eyes, crushing the little lightsome Balls into a cruel
disorder, that they might not behold those evils which their fanciful
imagination prompted them to fear; so strongly imaginative, as thereby alone to
call down those Plagues, which nothing else could ever have done. These were
they who, unchristian-like, racked themselves with future Contingencies; but
others again were so stupid, so unperceiving, as not to be moved at the
dreadfullest Calamities that befall a sinning Nation. And these not concerned at
any thing, sat themselves down upon the next green Turf, to be merry with
their Friends; and then folded up their arms in sleep, letting whole days and
years pass without taking notice. Some out of their profound prudence, made
themselves blind, purposely that they might avoid those Precipices they were in
danger of; and thought they should see better with another Eyes, than with
their own they could before; and that the way to shun the Blocks of stumbling
which were lain so thick in the Road, was to be incapable of seeing them:
Others did the same, that they might the more securely err, and through an
affected ignorance of their duty, plead not guilty to its omission; just as if
a Malefactor should think to save his Neck, in refusing to learn what the Law
makes death. But what was yet more sadly amazing to our good Contemplator,
others who could see, would nevertheless go along for company with the blind;
and though they knew well enough whither they were all traveling, yet would
not return back again, or leave the Wrong for the Right way. The folly of these
was miserable; but more miserable was (if Comparison can express) the folly of
those who used the most approved Collyries, the choicest Ocular Medicines, to
quicken and better the sight, to drive the Film from their Eyes: and preserve
them against the Dust that was raised by Travelers, read Controversies on all
sides, enquired diligently after the Truth, and busied themselves in learning
out the true way; and all this for no other end, than that they might decline
it, persecute the Truth, defend their own side, and see the better to pull out
the Eyes of their Friends.

Such absurd unmanlike Vices as these, such Unreasonableness and mean Descents,
Bruitishness and Folly, did he everywhere observe. Men in every place he saw
(and Brutishness of Vice.
that more than in Fable) metamorphosed into Beasts, having discarded and
changed their very Selves, their own Natures; put off all Humanity and Reason;
and foolishly degraded themselves (O piteous Sight!) as low, or lower, than the
very state of Brute Animals; the Covetous, of a Mole; and the Lascivious, of a
Goat: Here Gryllus grunteth charmed into a Swine, whom the Eloquence and
Persuasion of an Ulysses is not able to make reassume his old Shape, and be a
Man; the Night-walker into an Owl; nay, some transformed into Stocks and
Stones; some into ugly loathsome Toads, poisonous Creatures; the Outrageous,
into mad Dogs; Parasites, into Flies; ungrateful Children, into a brood of
Vipers; busy foul-mouthed Praters, into croaking Frogs: many also that spent
their whole lives in weaving the Spiders Web; and not a few Asses, who covered
with Lions Skins, would strut and look terrible, and roar to frighten all those
that were about them; by which they most ridiculously detected themselves, and
were hooted at by those into whom they meant to strike terror; some that could
very dexterously mimick it with the Ape; and others that knew how to shed the
tears of the Crocodile: dissembling Panthers; subtle Foxes; devouring Wolves;
venomous and malicious Serpents; griping and bloud-sucking Harpyes.

Amongst which last was a merciless Extortioner, who drank the Widows and the
Orphans Tears; whom The miserable Effects.
the furies of his own Conscience dragged to Execution: hated he lived, and
unlamented he died of all. Nor was it less terrible that followed next. Cares
and sleepless Nights, tormented with continual Lashings a Nusling Hide-bound
Miser: boiled in a Cauldron was the angry man by Rage, the cruellest Fury of
Hell; and the Ambitious torn upon the Rack of their own restless Desires. Some
had their hands bound behind with silken Cords, and rolled on a Bed of Roses;
till at last they were The Deceits.
dropped in a Plat of Nettles, and seen no more. Unto a great many, Poison was
reached out in a golden Cup; and this alone being enough to recommend it, it
was accepted: Bonds of that Metal were even counted honorable, were willingly
and greedily received: and deadly Pills, but gilded over, sweetly slipped down
the voluptuous Throat. Drinking excellent Wines, they drunk off at the bottom
lethiferous dregs; they mistook Ratsbane for Sugar; and in their sweetest
Honey, Death, which they never thought on, was hid. These were the Deceits of
the World; which his Eye perhaps, if unarmed, had never been able to discern.
For as the Joys of Heaven, by reason of their distance, are disregarded, and
the Disc of the Sun, because it is far removed, appears to us but very narrow;
yet neither they, nor this, are therefore to be counted so small, or so
inconsiderable, as the Eye shows them: So it would be the same madness,
considering the vast disproportion and unlikeness betwixt the appearance of the
things of the World and the things themselves, to judge of the latter by the
first, without a strict and impartial research of the Mind. Nor is it to be
wondered at during our tarriance here, if luminous Bodies, the Lights and the
Joys Celestial, the best, the fairest, and the most glorious Objects are
lessened, whilst even Shadows, the sorrowfullest, the meanest, and the
deceitfullest, are lengthened. Wherefore Theosophus thought it not safe to
believe things to be as they outwardly appeared, before he had looked through
that undeceiving Glass he had; which dispersed all prejudices and vapors, to
represent them as they were in themselves. Whereby he could descry all the
errors and the fallacies, the paint and false glory, the sad disappointments
and real deformities of the deceiving World. He could perceive fond Hopes
betray this man, ignorant and uncertain Confidence another, a listless Will and
an unruly Appetite a third.

He had taken notice of all these and many more, when the Shadows who had
waited this while very thick without, broke in, to play with and delude
senseless Cheats in Religion.
Mortals. And foremost of them entered a troop of Pious Frauds, that in a
moment scattered themselves all over the World. Ignorance, misguided Zeal,
morose Demeanor, Singularity --, under the false Veils of Virtue, came next
upon the Stage, and played their antic Tricks; by which they discovered
themselves not to be any of her Attendants; and so went off, showing their
illfavoured haggard Faces.

But first they let in against Man (just then as he was going to put an end to
his Observations) an Army of Furies, The Band of Vices.
led by their Chieftan FOLLY, the great Diana of this World, and Mistress in
humane Actions. Who is a Goddess universally worshipped and sacrificed unto,
yet not acknowledged by the veriest Idiots. She hid her Face with a Visor, as
not willing to be known. Under her Banner passed even Wit, (at least that which
bears the name of Wit) and had deserved so well for maintaining a bad Cause,
for keeping the Standart against all the Forces and the Powers of Reason, as to
be made the Ensign bearer, and to be followed by Vices of a nobler kind: those
who would be counted men of Parts, went and fell down before her Idolship. To
whom she gave that to drink which blister'd their Tongues, and made their
Brains run round ever after.

In the Van marched those Sins that more immediately strike against, or any way
dishonor the Majesty of Heaven; the prodigiously sottish Wickednesses, and
deformed Superfetations of the shallowest Pates, which aim to affront him who
is Omnipotent; viz. loud Blasphemies, blind Atheism, all the Madnesses of a
false Worship, all the kinds of wild Enthusiasm, rash Disputes, groundless
Maintenances of received Opinions, Disloyalty in Religion, a restless
Impatience under Providence, the strange Dreams of Prophetic Spirits,
blear-eyed Fascination, hellish Magic, accursed Simony --: Fury and Fanaticism
on this hand, and a cold indifferency on that: Nor was there ever the less
Superstition, notwithstanding so much Profaneness: Incredulity and Skepticism
on this side, and too much easiness of Belief on the other.

Now looking over S. Paul's Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.
Catalogue, he sees these armed Furies in several Companies troop out against
their poor silly Enemy, and in the Head of four thereof, those he sought after;
1. Adultery, Fornication, (...).
unnatural Lust, [Sodomy] Softness; uglily spotted with little deadly specks,
and having on besides but very unclean and filthy Garments, in which they
carried the Materials of a strange Fire, and Drugs of Poison. 2. Idolatry,
Witchcraft; both as black as Hell. 3. Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath,
(...).
Stubbornness, Schisms, Heresies, Envyings, Murders; with distorted Limbs, and
ugly frighting Faces, moving unequally and contrary to each other. 4.
Drunkenness, (...) Nocturnae amationes.
Revellings (or Serenades;) staggering and dancing in unhandsome measures. The
first and the last of these were the merriest; the second were the saddest; the
third were the savagest, who were therefore all dawbed over with Blood. Every
of whom (except perhaps the second) was well armed with Opportunities and
Temptations. But none of these (nor all the rest) could Treachery against one
self.
do any hurt, before the Forts of Reason were dismantled or betrayed by
Inconsideration, Obstinacy, Disobedience, Procrastination, Trifling, Rashness
--; and then the unhappy men were presently took, their Souls blinded, and
their Eyes plucked out with burning Pincers. Next, Lies sneakingly came upon
them, using the Genesis 27. 22.
Voice of Jacob, the Dialect of Josh. 9. 6.
Gibeonites; but clothed by Simulation in the Habit of Truth, and varnished
over with the deceitful Glosses of Plausibility: Hyperboles ranted on one side
of them, Detraction and a mincing Speech on the other side gingerly trod;
followed by Sycophantry and smooth Glavering Words, by Perjuries,
Equivocations, Mental Reserves, and by a numberless train of Errors: Then
Piques and Prejudices, sinister Suspicions and calumniating Arts; sent to
embitter the best Sweets, and misrepresent the fairest Actions. After which
hobbled as fast as they could to get the Prey, Virulence, Malignity, and
Spite, wounded even before the Battle began.

At one end of the Camp were Querulousness and Grudgings, an impatient
Inconstancy, evil Censures, and snappish Manners, all together in an Uproar.
But none were a near so troublesome as were Impertinence and Importunity, who
buzzed up and down in every corner.

Now in the Army two there were of greatest Quality and Command; though the one
was but a Inducement to Vice.
Stale, and the other a Scarecrow. She who was for the Stale, was a Fury of a
fair face and a brisk humor, (who usurped the name of Pleasure) set off with
Paint and gaudy Trappings, lovely, and complaisant, and sportive; who allured
whole Droves after her, whom she wantonly received and spoke fair to, whilst
she crushed them to death in her Embraces, and trampled on them with her Claws.
But while she was enticing them, another more ugly Fury, of a Determent from
Virtue.
nature quite contrary, (who was named Fear) with false Difficulties, and the
light uneasinesses thereof, frightened them from their Duty; and was therefore
highly honored by the great Empress of this World, for that she had so scared
away Fools from their Happiness, and made it unsafe (or at least so seeming)
for any to be now any longer upright or honest.

The Armies covered the Land like Locusts, and with their Multitudes made a
Night wherein none of the Lights The Victory.
of Heaven, or of Paradise, were seen: the Pomps of the World, the Lusts of the
Flesh, the Lusts of the Eye, all standing in stately Array, were prepared for
the Battle, but with the bare Ceremony of a Skirmish they won the day, and
gathered up the spoils. Hindmost of these wadled fat Sensuality, an hoggish
nature and Epicurism, Gluttony and Gormandizing, Intemperance in Meats, Drinks,
Sleep, Apparel, Recreation, --; accompanied with Surfeits, Cramps, Gouts,
Catarrhs, and a whole Spittle of Maladies. They made their continual
Encroachments; held all together to overthrow humane kind: Sins there were of
all sorts, sizes, and humors, Division of the Conquests.
which distributed themselves up and down to destroy and ravage every Quarter.
There were Sins of Youth allotted, and others deputed to catch those of riper
age; but that now and then youthful pleasure and a shrivelled face went
together, and childish dotage made the old man laughed at. Oppression,
Extortion, Sacrilege, and Rapine, went over to the more powerful: False
Surmisings, Jealousy, Unfaithfulness, chose to dwell with Friends; Deceit with
Tradesmen; and unpunisht Murder in Meats and Drinks, at rich Tables and large
Cellars, in the Shops both of Luxury and Medicine: The Viper was bad to lurk
within the bed of the Harlot, and the Fox to send his fur to line the
Statesmans Gown: The muddy Souls of some were pleased best with filthy and
obscene Delights; the shrewd Brains of others best tickled with their
Neighbors evils: Sloth and Retchlessness, dreaming Fancies -- agreed well with
the temper of the Phlegmatic: revengeful Sullenness and peevish Anger were as
easily entertained by the Choleric person: but the Sediment of black Choler
was claimed by Devils of another size, more ugly and hated than the former; of
which they made a Bath therein to wash their cloven feet, and fashion strange
uncouth Idaea's of things; wherewith heresy in diverse forms knew how to
mingle, and so employ her whole skill against the miserable Possessed. These
were fierce and cruel; whilst seemingly more pleasant were those, which mixed
themselves with the blood of a soft sanguine constitution. Yet even the little
God of Love appeared to the impartial Cupid.
view of this sad Spectator, the most terrible and bloodthirsty Monster amid
them all, and of a more sportive cruelty than any of the most mischievous
besides; having his Arrows dipped in the blood of his Worshippers, and
frolicksomly playing with Torches lighted at the fire of Hell. Dull insipid
Vices would creep into an heartless and a brainless Sot; while those of another
appearance (though indeed no less at all ridiculous, besides much more
dangerous) would be always aspiring to be in the company of the more ingenious;
till they had pillaged and left naked both the one and the other. Not a few
shared the Barren, and many more the Fertile Soil: Some took up their Quarters
in the well, and others in the ill-timber'd Body: Some would lay in those Heads
that were soft, and others in those that were hard: Some liked to dwell in a
thick, but others liked a thin Scull better: Many set upon the glib Tongue, and
a few upon the tied: There were those that were sent to plunder the Sick, and
those the Healthy: There were those that would live upon the Rich, and others
upon the Poor; upon the great men, and the small; in much Blood, or little; in
an hot, or cold Constitution. Thus was not any secured from their destroying
Talons; nor (what is most wonderful) any made Resistance, but let them possess
as quietly as they had conquered. Now Pride, Sell-conceit, an overweening
Opinion -- not contented to take a share, made every body their slave; had
learnt even how to insinuate into a Saint, and could easily captivate those who
could the least brook a submission. With whom pert Impudence came flurting in,
uninvited. But Negligence lay sprawling on the ground, bedirtied and bemired;
not striving (like the rest) after any Prey, but pitied therefore and
entertained by stupid unactive Souls, who were soon undone by the foul
ungrateful Traitor, and robbed of all they enjoyed. after which Craft came
wrigling in, with demure Hypocrisy and armed Injury that passed for Justice;
three such revenous Furies as did devour as much as all the bellies of the
rest, and to get more booty, plundered their very Army. The Mutinous and the
Quarrelsome, the Vain and the Fickle, the Buffoon, the Apish, and the
Licentious, the Adulterer and Incestuous, the Blasphemer and the Apostate, the
Parricide and the Assassin, the Felon and the Impostor, the Ungrateful and the
Perfidious, the Inhumane, the Uncharitable, and the Simoniack, the open Rebel
and the close Conspirator; were all coaks'd into the World's strongest Net, and
had the mark of the Beast burnt upon their foreheads more than ordinarily
visible. Thus being sealed by their beloved Conquerors, after a little while of
sport and play, they were pinched and griped, and their brains knocked out one
against another, and then sent for a Present to the other World. For they would
allow some of them time to frolic in, before they showed them the Axes and the
Halters: knew how (after the Persian mode) to dress up a Mock-Prince to be
played with, and with such formalities barbarously to sport at those whom they
had sentenced tardy. These Tyrants forced some to rejoice, as they forced
others to mourn; but those that rejoiced came at last to mourn most: they
killed these with singing and roaring; they destroyed others with fretting and
pulling: they lowred upon some, but smiled upon others, as they were sticking
them into the heart: they feared some Consciences hard, but burned others sore
and tender; those were not afraid to act any thing unlawful, while these on the
other side were afraid to act what was lawful. Thus they hampered both the
Insensible and the Uneasy. Some of their Captives foamed at mouth, as if they
were all in a ferment; others sparkled, as if they were on fire; and others
looked black and ghastly as any Carrion. Indignation, Disdain, Despite, Scorn,
Envy, Revenge, Outrage, Repinings, with a number of suchlike Affections,
disfigured the faces of a great many: this man's heart was cankered with inward
Rancor; the others fester'd sorely with Carking and vain Solicitude: they
pricked some to death with Needles, (these were they whose uncontentedness
would not suffer them to rest quiet) and run others through with red-hot Irons
(these were they whose Flesh was corrupted, and whose Marrow was burnt up
within their bones.) Thus the Furies divided the Spoils among themselves, laid
waste the Lands, and treacherously killed the poor Captives, to whom they had
promised Quarter. Whilst Desire (and that too always followed by Loathings)
made them greedily swallow down the poisoned Baits.

Nay, both the Extremes hugged themselves together against Man. In the Gentile
Sinner, the fine sparkish Opposites made Friends.
Gallant, he observed a beseeming Foppery and Court-Flattery: but in the Clown,
Rudenesses and Incivilities, Roughness and a rugged ill-natured
Untractableness. One was Foolhardy; another Fool-wary. He was too Rigorous,
but the other over-Easie; and both thereby alike hurtful unto Virtue. So much
Knavery could not rid the Multitude of Folly, nor Cowardice of Temerity. The
Deceiving and the Deceived, the Blockish and the Crafty, the Fantastical and
the Morose, lived near together, and were beholding to each other for what they
were. The Knave led the Fool by the Nose, till he himself was at last caught in
the Gin, and by tearing himself fluttered to get out, but could not. There were
both the Despairing and the Desperate, who presented themselves to his view:
the former desponded of every thing, the latter of nothing; and past Despair,
durst set upon Impossibilities; whereas those through Fear durst not set upon
the greatest Possibilities. Affectation dressed up more than a few to be
laughed at, and Indecence as many to be trodden on. Abjectness and
Highmindedness, Impudence of Brow and a Sheepish Unmanliness, Arrogance and
Baseness, a crabbed Sourness and soft honeyed Soothing, bound up as many Slaves
as one another, and triumphed over the weakness of those they had conquered.
Treachery combined with overmuch Officiousness, and mean Condescentions went
along with them to support Tyranny; Diffidence and foolish Presumption hand in
hand; much Talk and peevish Silence, looser Laughter and a Weeping-fit,
mutually succeeding each other. Thus even Contrarieties conspired against a
weak Race, were reconciled to do Man an Injury. But though some were so modest
as but to scatter up and down among the least number of Vetaries; he could see
light and unsettled Spirits, Selfishness, littleness of Mind, a love of the
World, Imposture and Blindness in every place; with Machivellian Policy, the
Devices and Slights of cunning Cheats sent to impose upon the World, Massacres,
Plots, Factions, Rebellions --. Dire Presages were seen to fill the Heavens,
and an hundred thousand Plagues and upwards to hover over head, ready to fall.
REMORSE and TROUBLE of MIND brought up the Rear.

Thus all the Vices and the Passions were banded together against frail Man:
thus they divided and ruled their Conquests. And in such sort did all the World
(except a few despised Pilgrims) seem unto him enslaved by this Sorceress
FOLLY, and their hearts tyrannically possessed by foolish hopeless Vices.
Whereinto these * Devils were no sooner entered, but the Herd (properly Luke 8.
33.
enough so called) ran violently down a steep place into the Lake, and were
choked.

And so which way soever the sorrowful Contemplator looked, he saw a thousand
thousand Follies, ridiculous Phrensies, Miscarriages, heavy and numberless
Calamities, infinite Evils. A slight view whereof had heretofore, when he was
young, such an effect upon his mind, was so dreadfully amazing, as struck in
him a resolution presently to quit the World, and seek new Countries out, where
Death and Sin had got no footing, and where Innocence might rest secure from
either Violence or Fraud.

Wearied with so dismal. a Prospect, he put up his Glass, unwilling to view any
longer, and descended to the bottom of the Hill, which was washed by the River
Thamus. Whose sadly discolored streams had not yet lost the stain of a
miserable Slaughter that was somewhere thereabout committed. As if they even
blushed at man's Cruelty, were ashamed of that Barbarity which he gloried in;
and thinking it a very praiseworthy Enterprise, sought perhaps to have
eternized in Pillars of Stone, or everlasting Records. The dejected Father
feeling the burden of his Grief unsupportable, sat himself down under the
fair spreading shade of a tall Pine. Sorrow had sunk his eyes into his head,
and made his eyelids come together, and his heart strings were almost ready to
burst; when casting in his black melancholy thoughts what he had seen, he thus
uttered himself.

CHAP. III.
Theosophus meditates on the Folly and Misery of the World, and thence takes
occasion to run out into the Praises of Paradise.

GOod God! and is it possible that ever any one can be in love with such a mass
of Evils, such an heap of Misery and Sin? What, I pray, can a delirious brain
fancy herein so lovely? Is it a great Name, or a great Estate; blustering
Vanities, or useless Superfluities? Is it a Body plastered with Paint, or a
rotten Carcass gilded over with exterior Braveries? Perhaps it may be any, or
all of these: for nothing did I ever see, but that a fool could admire, and a
wise man despise. I see it is just so: no Victory is now held so honorable as
to overcome ones Reason, and baffle Conscience; nor Conquest so deserving as
everlastingly to overthrow one self. See, how far the Triumphs of that
bewitching Siren (sinful Folly) are extended! See, how they are all led in
Chains by this their foolish Goddess, and submit their necks to be trodden on
by the sweet Destroyer! For of a truth it is mankind is mad, stark raving mad.
They court Misery, run upon the jaws of Hell; so sottishly vicious, as to
mistake all that is good for evil, and find no Pleasure but in their own
Wretchedness. O prodigious and unheard of Folly! Are Anger, Revenge, Envy,
Love, Discontent so delightful Passions, such pleasing Perturbations of the
Mind? As well may we go and fancy the burnings of a Fever, or St. Anthony' s
Fire, as any of these: nay, as soon shall I be brought to think a Leper
beautiful, as a Woman deformed with Lust. Prithee tell me therefore, foolish
Worldling, what do thou adore, and how thou came to be thus enamored with
the World. O miserable and unsatisfying World! whom the whole is not able to
content, even the least dust is enough to trouble and discompose; a small Atome
or Mote in thy eye, every trivial Mischance, and every uneasy Accident, death
of thy Friends, the miscarriages of thy Child or of thy Servant, are of more
force to afflict thee, than all the rest of it to ease thee. And is it for this
goodly Vanity, that so many Wars are commenced, Conspiracies hatched, civil
Broils fomented and carried on by ambitious Spirits? Is this the Prize of so
many noble Actions? -- Let the vainglorious Victor now boast his strength, and
leave engraven in brass the Monuments of his fortunate Cruelty. If to kill be
so great honor, why should not the Wolf, the Lion, and the Bear, challenge it
as well as Man? Is it because they fight with less courage, or with less force?
If so, go, proud Murderer, and if thou can, grapple with one of these, and
then acquaint me which is the weakest: thou that art so strong, do thou not
fear the Trunk of the Elephant, and the Tusks of the wild Boar? Believe thou
not that Diseases, Dearths, and Plagues can dispatch quite as many as thou? Yet
who praises the Pestilence for depopulating whole Towns, or worshippeth the
Fire for being more terrible, and burning down the Houses of some and Palaces
of others; or has learnt yet to flatter the Surfeit for snatching away so many
young men in the spring of their flourishing years? With these therefore now
go, and share thy ill gotten Praises: unto these, that much better deserve it
than thou, communicate thy Fame: let these, I say, partake of thy Triumphs, and
together with these erect the Trophies of thy redoubted Valor. O monstrous
Inhumanity of Men, thus to destroy one another; and what is more, even glory in
that destroying! But wherefore call I them so? Are these men? it cannot be:
them I always took to be another sort of Animals, more divine, more rational
Creatures. Who can tell me where to find a Man, one that has not put off
himself, nor lost the image of his Creator?

How can my eyes behold this; the blasted Earth made the Habitation of Devils,
Cities the retreat of the Elk and the Lion, the Beasts of the Forest and impure
and raging Spirits? What do I see every where, but a Wilderness of wild Beasts?
but that alas, now I think on it, Tigers and Pards are less cruel, do never
prey upon their own kinds. Is it then a Map of Hell, or is it Hell it self? but
even there the very Devils divide not against themselves -- How are the
Northern Isles laid waste, the European Coasts stained over with humane blood?
What is it that makes the wretched Natives strive thus to out-vy the years past
and the years to come, both in their Crimes and Punishment? Must all the
Wickednesses and Calamities of all Ages be amassed together in this one?
Therefore mine Psalm. 119. v. 136, 139. Lam. 3. v. 48, 49, 50.
eyes, O God, gush out with water: they gush out with water, because men keep
not thy Law; continually cast forth Rivers of water for the approaching
destruction of this People: yea, my Zeal has even consumed me, because mine
enemies have forgotten thy Words. Without any intermission mine eye trickleth
down, and cease not; till the Lord look from Heaven. Behold, Lord, look down
upon and pity: pity, most gracious Jesu, the madnesses of those silly wretches,
those who by their evil Guides are infatuated to so high a degree as to
embrace, under a show of Sanctity, the deadliest sins, and embrew their hands
in blood, that so they may appear the meek followers of thee, the Prince of
Peace. Will thou let Schism and Heresy, with all their vile monstrous brood,
thus rigorously persecute (O horrid Barbarity!) thy most holy, thy most lovely
Spouse the Church? Will thou not support her under the Cross thou have laden
her with? Crosses and Martyrdoms are nothing to this Persecution. She now feels
within her own bowels more than a thousand Diocletians: the most exquisite
tortures and enraged cruelties of Superstition, and Hypocrisy, and
Profaneness. Behold, Lord, and pity: behold the Giants of the Earth, the mighty
men, how they labor to o'erturn all things, to shake the very foundations of
the Earth, and shatter this same goodly frame of the Universe into Confusion,
Discord, and Chaos: into that which is many degrees worse than its primitive
Nothingness. Behold even how Heaven it self is (again) assaulted by their
enormous Villainies, their huge Gigantick Crimes! Crimes that are always
attended on by Famine, Plague, War, and all the meagre train of Deaths, which
we poor silly Mortals both court and dread. So that Virtue is now by many
thought to be but an imaginary Being, a pious Dream, a vain fantastical
Chimera of some dull Brain, the dotage of a morose stupid Ascetick; and made
the Worlds Fucus to the foulest Vices: Fury and Madness. Sedition and Murder,
usurp the mild and sacred names of Zeal and Godliness. In this lamentable
decay of Piety, where shall one find a good man, or an honest Pilgrim? --

He would have proceeded, but that some Herdsmen driving their Beasts by that
way to the Market, here disturbed him. The Beasts were very plump, and
skittishly played as they passed by; not knowing whither they were driven. Alas
(said he to himself) how unconcernedly do these poor Cattle now go to be
slaughtered? They who drive them have only fatted them for this, that they may
now sell them to the Butchers, and their Deaths bear a greater rate. Thus fares
it with the Pilgrims of these unhappy times, who after that they suffer
themselves to be transformed into Beasts, and to be fatted and stall'd with
irrational beastly pleasures, are by themselves, or their interested Guides,
soon sold over to destruction and the slaughter.

After these passed by others also of the Country thereabout, that had labored
very hard all that day; in whose looks one might read an honest and rough
Simplicity. Whom the good man therefore thought he could easily enough persuade
to seek their own Welfare; and to go along with him, leaving the toilsome and
barren Earth unto the more fruitful Plains of Paradise. And to this end he used
the most sweet and most prevailing means, discoursed very plainly with the poor
Drudges, dealt with all the openness and sincerity possible concerning their
removal and the way thither, and left nothing unattempted to make them happy.
But all in vain; he met with so fierce (so much the more fierce as the more
unexpected) opposition from these besotted Clowns. Instead of Simplicity he
meets with Bluntness, and a resolute ill-grounded Refusal: so far are they from
being persuaded by the plainness and the truth of his Discourse, or at all
bettered by his sober Admonitions, that some of them revile, and others jeer,
and every one despises him.

Though the most noble-minded Theosophus knew not how to sorrow for himself,
yet could he not choose but deeply sorrow for these enslaved Wretches. But as he
was still disappointed, so his disappointment still made him the more strive to
obtain, and the more long to be in Paradise. On which place (having by this
time marshalled, in his sorrowful thoughts, all the deplorable Vanities of the
World that he had seen) he brake forth in this manner following.

But as for thee, O divine place, how glorious art thou! how great and
transcendent is thy Beauty! and how desirable is the Vision of thee before all
others! Nothing but thee do I desire; I think of nothing but thee; my very
Enemies can witness how incessantly I praise thee, O supreme Beatitude: the
Brooks and Winds (that use to repeat my words) can tell as much. Paradise, how
do I pant and thirst after thy Felicity! Paradise is inscribed upon my heart in
indelible characters, and every minute carries the blessed name of Paradise
along with it. All the day long my thoughts are of thee, and at night my roving
phant'sie cannot rest from seeking thee out. In a Land where no man seeks
thee, but every one is gone astray after their own inventions, my Soul
continually gasps after thee: yea, in a barren and a thirsty Land where no
Waters are, and where the People have hewn out to themselves broken Cisterus:
forsaken the Wells of the Prophets, because they flow from thy sacred Head.
What study or cost have I spared to learn whereabouts thou art seated? What
have I not underwent to make a Discovery into thy Celestial Map? Have I not
for this exposed my self to the fury of raging Winds and the tempestuous Main,
been tossed up and down by the Storms of Popular Zeal, robbed by Pirates,
engulf'd up in Misery, and oftentimes even sunk to the bottom with Reproach and
Calumny? Have I not in thy enquiry searched all places, endured both the chill
cold and scorching heat of different Climes in Religion? And what else shall I
do to win thee, thou fair Object of my Affection? Thou know how laborious,
how diligent I have always been to fill thee with Inhabitants; when not only
my Adversaries, but my very Friends also (those at least who profess themselves
my Friends) would by their too quarrelsome Piety or open Profaneness, turn thee
into Solitude and a dispeopled Wilderness. O that I could pull down Mercy and
Peace from thy holy place! Why do thou not manifest thy self unto us, and put
an end to all our Controversies? -- O when will come those happy days? -- Will
they ever come? -- Yes, did but exiled Charity return, they would then be very
near: then shall our Divisions be healed, and thy Paths (by consequence)
crowded. In the mean while how unhappy are we in the Quest after thee, whom the
very eagerness and heat of Pursuit still makes us to lose? -- And shall we all
thus perish? No sure, it cannot be. It cannot be that any Soul should perish in
the search after thee. It cannot be, no more than I can cease to love thee; no
more than I can cease to pant after thy Joys. And can I ever do this; can I
ever forget thee? No. Impossible it is for me not to extol thee among the
Children of men. How desirous am I to tell thy Lovers where thou may be
found, and how ready to conduct humble Souls into thy blissful and immortal
state! How do I long for thee, thou sure Reversion of never-fading Pleasures!
Paradise the meed and recompense of my Travels, Paradise the sole aim of all my
hopes, how fain would I leave these Habitations of Clay, to dwell in thine
eternal and delightful Mansions! What would I not give to enjoy the liberty of
thy Citizens, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! -- Why art thou then thus concealed from
mine eyes, or what makes me to be debarred the fruition of my Lord? Why do not
ye who are his winged Messengers, translate me thither? For I am weared with
toil and labor, I am quite tired with vexation, and can hardly any longer (but
for his sake whom I love) endure to be thus flouted at by these Country-Swains
for teaching them the most necessary and the most profitable Truth in the
World: and to be persecuted even by those who in show appear his most devout
and zealous Pilgrims. But alas, that --: that which dams up my heart with
grief, is, that all this while, this tedious while, I have not so much as
gained over a Proselyte, not so much as a Proselyte to follow his steps. My
Endeavors, alas, alas, have all been fruitless and come to naught: all along
have I been disserviceable unto thee, dear JESUS -- In vain do I strive to
honor thee, in vain do I strive to advance thy Kingdom upon Earth: the Feuds
and Rents in thy Church do quite dishearten me. Is not Truth, preached out of
my mouth, termed Heresy; and Primitive Christianity, without any further
scrutiny, strait exploded? Whenever I speak, my Neighbors look awry, and
every one stops his ear against me. Woe is me, that I am constrained to dwell
with Mesech, and to have my habitation among the Tents of Kedar. My Soul has
long dwelt among those that are Enemies unto Peace. I labor for Peace; but
when I speak unto them thereof, they make ready to battle. Who will therefore
give me the wings of a Dove, that I may fly and rest my self upon the Mount of
God! When must I leave this Beth Chomer! this Cottage of Clay! this ruinous and
shaken house! O that I had wings like a Dove; for then would I flee away and be
at rest. O when shall I arrive there! How long will it be, O my Soul, before I
enter the Court of Heaven!

CHAP. IV.
His Vision.

IN such sort did the dejected Eremit pour forth his Soul upon the Banks of the
River Thamus (whose becrimson'd streams well enough accorded with his Woe, and
whose waves seemed to listen to his words, and then rejoice to report them to
each other in sorrowfully-painful Eccho's,) till by the rolling murmurs of the
Current, and the heaviness and sorrows of his wearied Spirits, he was easily
compelled to take the respite of a little sleep.

But his Imagination suffered him not to rest: for no sooner had he let his
Senses go, but he thought he saw a rich and stately Temple raised suddenly by
the hands of Angels; the Materials and Stones whereof were taken out of the
Celestial Quarries, and the Sun glittering against the Walls, rendered it
above measure resplendent: which frightened away an ugly Pore-blind Hag that
had hid her self under the Groundwork, not able to abide so dazzling a Luster.
For she loved to converse with Bats and Screech-Owls, her Eyes being too weak
to endure the Light, or even without violence the least gleam thereof; so
hateful unto her, that to obscure the same, out of her mouth she continually
belched forth foggie Exhalations, and muffled her head round with gross
palpable Darkness; by which he knew her to be IGNORANCE: the mistaken Mother of
mistaken Devotion. He was for some while delighted, he said, to view the glory
and magnificence of this divine Structure, and to behold the chase of that
blind deceiving Witch.

But at last he saw the Clouds begin to gather themselves together very thick,
and the Sun strait to hide his head, and Ignorance again return. When he
observed a great many making Battery against it. But others there were he
perceived undermining the Foundation: and withal some hellish Spirits not far
off, who yelled hideously at his beauteous Decency, raising a Storm which beat
against it, shaking the stones so, that the Underminers more easily overthrew
it; and nothing presently was left but the Ruins of this (once) goodly
Fabric. Than which, nothing could move the melancholy Dreamer more. But the
Air at length clearing up, and the Fogs dispelled by the bright Rays of Truth
(the Sun) this same Temple (that but lately fell) again appears to him in
greater beauty and splendor; upon whose Portal he read, The CHAPEL of the
Pilgrims to the HOLY LAND. During the while, there touched his ear a sad
pleasing harmony of elegiack and mournful Notes in a most soft melodious Air.
All which was closed in a sudden turn with quick and joyful Hallelujahs. And as
he looked to know whence it came, not yet recovered of his pensive sadness, he
saw a winged Youth, as quick as Lightning, pierce the Sky, who smilingly
approaching him, touched him with his wings; and showing him a Mitre richly set
with curious stones, invisibly held up, having this Inscription, To him that
leads; thus, with a countenance darting forth beams of joy, spoke, viz. Why
art thou, Son of Man, thus heavy and cast down, as if thy God had forsaken
thee? I have hitherto (though unseen) still attended on and guarded thy person;
but am now specially commanded from him who is thus solicitous for you, to
raise up your drooping Spirits, and to assure you that your labors are
accepted with him, and that after many disappointments, hazards, and perils of
life it self, you shall find a select number ready to bear you company unto
those yonder happy Regions of Immortality, where I, my dear Charge, expect at
last to see you.

Having said this, his Guardian Genius (who had ordered all these Shadows, and
presented them to his Imagination) disappeared, leaving in his veins for a long
while after, such a secret joy, as made all his blood leap; and such a calmness
in his Soul, as made him quite forget his past discomforts.

However, he was somewhat startled after this, at the sight of a dead Corpse
before his feet, beginning to move and stand upright.

This broke the Chains of Sleep, setting his senses and thoughts at liberty to
reflect upon what he had seen. All which (except the motion of the dead Corpse)
when he considered the sweet comfortable words of his Tutelar Angel, admitted
of an easy interpretation. The subversion of the Church, and re-edifying
thereof, the Mines under the Foundation, the yelling of Devils, the Tempest,
the return of Ignorance, the glorious Mitre, and the dolorous Music, concluded
with divine and sprightly Hallelujahs, were all obvious to make out. Only this
appearance of the Carcass seemed to forebode some sudden Evil, which he would
fain have understood.

CHAP. V.
What immediately thereupon fell out. His Persecution.

NOw upon the shore, not far from him, lay a small Casket, thrown up, as it
were, by the flowings in of the Tide. On which, as he took it into his hands to
view it more narrowly, (guessing it to be the Prize of some poor slaughtered
man) he found the Holy Lamb curiously nich'd, with this word, Who overcomes;
and underneath that, the Seal of the dearest Consort of his troubles, Eubulus.
O my Eubulus, have I then lost thee? What cruel hand has thus bereaved me of my
Friend? Was it this the Corpse portended? Well, be it so, yet grieve I will
not. Thy Journeys end thou have but so much sooner attained; and with a shorter
cut, than otherwise thou could, have reached the Holy Land. Happy Martyr, I
envy thee not: -- yet I cannot, methinks, but sorrow somewhat for my self who
am left behind. -- Stay, -- let me open this Casket: herein perhaps I shall
find his last words directed to his Friend.

Thus said he to himself, and then breaking it open, the first thing treasured
there he met with, was a fair rich Manuscript of the two Covenants in their
Original Languages, with an ancient Liturgical Form of Prayer annexed thereunto.
Next, in a long Scrole was contained the Constitutions and the Articles of the
Primitive Pilgrims. There was also an Emerald-Ring believed to be of efficacy
to preserve Chastity, having the whole History of the Crucifixion most
admirably etched on it. Wrapped up it was in a small shred of Paper, bearing this
Inscription, The Gift of the excellent Youth Theophilus. But at the bottom he
found a Letter, the purport whereof was as follows: viz. With Orthodoxus and
Uranius, in the solitary Vale of Edena, now ready to be taken; and fearing to
be rifled of this small Treasure (partly theirs) which would endanger us all: I
am forced to cast the same into the River, hoping that if it perishes not
there, it may by some means or other light into the hands of the Reverend
Theosophus, my honored Friend and Supervisor. For whose safety I am very much
troubled, having overheard some whispers of a Conspiracy against his life, by
raising a Commotion in the Country People. The chief Instigators whereof I have
learnt to be Diotrephes and Santomero. But we must acquiesce in the divine
pleasure; knowing that through this Jud. c. 2. v. 5.
Bochim, this Valley of Tears, we are to pass unto Mount Sion.

EUBULUS.



Scarce had he read this Letter from his Friend, when he could distinguish
these pitiful Complaints, in a voice which he thought he was not unacquainted
with, coming from an adjoining Tree: O my dear Timotheus, my dear Friend, my
Timotheus, alas, my Timotheus, alas, where art thou? where, alas, shall I find
thee, my dear Companion? Art thou quite lost? O would it had pleased God to
take thee away whilst thou were his: Then had I not lost thee; but now I have
lost thee. Happy had it been for thee, dear Timotheus, if thou had died long
ago. Yea, nothing could have been happier for thee than this: I should not thus
have grieved for thee, though I had thereby lost so excellent a Friend. Art
thou yet alive, my Timotheus, or no? Why did thou thus leave thy Friend
without so much as acquainting him first therewith? Where art thou now
straggling? Have thou forgot all those Discourses we had about Paradise, and how
we used to delight our selves in contemplation of its Beauties? Do thou not
remember how thou and I were wont to send up our extatick Souls into that
happy, most happy place; there to meet, with our Supplications and our Praises,
the good, the gracious, the almighty, the almerciful Prince thereof? Sure thou
can not but remember how graciously he always heard and answered our
Petitions: thou can not but remember his favors that he delighted to shower
down upon us. How often have thou told me thou could never disremember these,
or put Paradise out of thy mind? O my good God, my kind and merciful Father,
ever glorious Prince of the best Abodes, hear me this once, and grant, I
beseech thee, that I may find my lost Friend and thy lost Child. O that these
my Sighs could so prevail on thee, that thou would send back my Friend to
me, and at the same time bring him back to thy self! O that thou would
entertain him as the returning Prodigal! O that thou would receive him again
into the number of thy Servants and thy Pilgrims! This I beg of thee, for the
sake of the Son of thy Love, and that precious Atonement which his Blood makes.
O my dearest God, unlimited in thy Perfections and thy Goodness, holy,
ever-blessed, adorable TRI-VNE Majesty, who art the great Pitier of perishing
Souls, and have sworn that thou delightest not in the death of a sinner; suffer
not that poor sinner to perish: though he is thy Enemy, he is seduced: O recall
him instantly, and undeceive him; reconcile him to thy self, and be thou
reconciled to him: (...), -- Nazianz. Orat. sec. de Pace.
Thou who wilt be known unto all either by Illumination or Condemnation, work
now powerfully upon his heart, and of a profane Enemy, make him thy devout
Adorer. This I hope thou will grant, though thou should be therefore pleased
to lessen my part in thee, and allot me but half a share in thy Paradise. O how
contented would I be with this!

Theosophus thought he would not so soon have ended, but that one, as he
supposed, here came to him; to whom he could hear him say, O Parthenius, I have
been very melancholy since you left me. But tell me, did you hear any body
speak of him? Did you ever see, tell me true, among the Pilgrims, one so lovely
as was Timotheus? Pray, Theophilus (answered the other) do not fear but that
you will find your Friend. Do you say so, dear Parthenius (replied he) indeed I
just now thought I had heard some body tinkle in my ears, Timotheus is
returning. But must I not fear, do thou say? Sure if he were not utterly
lost, if any where he were to be found, I had found him before this. Are not
two years and half of a third that I had sought him, a long while? Come (said
Parthenius unto him, in quite as sorrowful a note, though he strove to comfort)
what, will you, who while Timotheus was among us, was always observed to be the
merriest and pleasantest of us, now vex and pine away your self, so that in a
short while you will not be able to stir after him? Pray now do not trouble
your self so excessively, but depend upon God, and expect his Will. I should be
as glad if I could win Philogynus to put on chaste Pilgrims Weeds, as you could
if you should meet rambling Timotheus. But you know that neither can be
effected but by our great and gracious Master, and through his assistance; unto
whom our Prayers must pierce, if we think to do any good. For a Si Stephanus
non orasset, Ecclesia Paulum non habuisset. Aug.
St. Paul, are we not beholding to the Prayers of the holy Martyr St. Stephen?
And with our Prayers sent upwards with the same fervency, we must look to gain
over those two. Good Theophilus, do not weep so; put this out of your mind for
some while: Do you not hear the News? What do you think will become of us all?
We are all to prepare for suffering: for our Basilius his Army received
yesterday a very sad defeat from the sacrilegious and wicked Theomachus. The
wise Orthodoxus, the Angel-tongu'd Uranius, and the goodcounselling Eubulus,
are all taken from us: we are never like to see that venerable Guide the
suffering Patriarch Cyprianus more: and our Theosophus the best and chief among
us, Theosophus the best Man and best Guide, is sought after by them. Do you not
see those stains upon the Waters, and the devastation round us? What can we now
further do for Basilius, or Basilius do for us? At this, cried Theophilus, God
preserve Basilius, but let him do what he please with us.

Now at the name of Basilius, Theosophus his heart beat very much; yet he was
unwilling to interrupt them, and thought it better to wait a little longer to
see how they would break up their Discourse. What (said Theophilus) is this
your News? I tell you, dear Cosen, I can be angry with you almost for this:
nay, try me whether I cannot be angry. Am I not angry now? I never knew you,
dear Parthenius, a Relator of such sad things. Is it true? But why did I ask
whether that is true that Parthenius tells me? Pray be not angry with me for
it. I think I spoke out of anger, pray pardon me. Truly, though I never wished
so before in my life, I could now wish, my dear Parthenius, that you speak not
truth. Come, let us rise, and go seek, you, Philogynus: I, Timotheus: and when
we shall have found them, we will hold them fast; and to take the Pilgrims VOW,
will bring them to the good Theosophus. But now I speak of Theosophus, let me
see, where is that little Box I had to deliver unto him, which I took up
yonder? would I could but find him now to give it him. Theosophus, who heard
distinctly enough what they said, was somewhat surpised at this, and more when
Theophilus looking after the Box, spoke thus to Parthenius: I remember I laid
it there, you saw me, did not you? how can it then be moved away? for I have
seen no body walking here. Sure I have not lost it: I would not have it lost
for ever so much. The Effigy of the holy Lamb makes me think there is somewhat
in it worthy to be prized. Did not you, Parthenius, take it up? tell me if you
have. But Parthenius assured him he had not; and Theophilus knew not how to
dis-believe Parthenius, though he could not see any other probability, but that
Parthenius had taken it up and laid it somewhere else.

Theosophus, now to put an end to this, went toward the Tree under which they
sat, near unto the place he had taken up those sacred Treasures. They both
rose up to reverence him; but Theophilus thereat startled, looking about him as
if he had lost something and could not find it, very ingenuously confessed,
Sir, I was to search out you, and give you a Box, which I saw one afar off
(whom I supposed to have been either Orthodoxus or Eubulus) throw into the
River. I made haste to take it up, which when I had taken up and looked upon, I
knew whose it was, and esteemed it as much as if I had saved a little Moses
(and perhaps I did) in his Ark, floating on the waters. I designed therefore to
bring it you, my good Father: there, there it was I laid it down, thinking no
body to be here; but now I see it is gone. Pray have you met any one with such
a little Box, walking this way, that I may enquire after, and if it be possible
regain, the same? At this, said the old Father, do not trouble your self, sweet
Theophilus, for he whom you designed to have it, has it already; and therein
contained not only Moses, but a greater than Moses; so far were you from being
deceived. But tell me if you have yet seen your Friend? These last words made
him as sad as the other made him joyful. I think, answered he, weeping very
sadly, I saw him once, but so altered and changed, as I scarce knew him; and
then he would not come near me, but ran away, and never since can I hear of
him: this is now the thirtieth month in which I have not spoke unto him. I have
at last got Parthenius to travel along with me; and he also is seeking for one
that is lost.

The charitably-minded Theosophus gave directions to both, how they should
bring them back, if they lighted at any time into their company: and told them,
that perhaps they might find them either blind or deaf, but that under the
cover of friendship they might apply that which, with the divine blessing,
would cure both their Eyes and Ears. So he parted from them, holding up his
hands, and saying, God bless you, brave Youths, and give you your desired
success.

When they were gone he read over again Eubulus his Letter, it being so
unexpected and so surprising to him, and thought upon it with much concern for
his three Friends, but little for himself. Scarce had he read it, when he heard
a tumultuous noise, which as it approached still nearer, he distinguished to be,
Where is this heretical Dog? did we not see him here? And instantly he was
surrounded by the rude Country-folk (that he had Chap. 3.
lately left) armed with Fails, Forks, and other rustic Weapons that came next
to hand. Amongst whom he saw a young man not like the rest, of more ingenuous
looks, which he thought to have some resemblance of Theophilus, and more of the
old loyal Hegemon whom he loved. But as they were laying their barbarous
clutches upon his aged body, as if they meant to tear and shake him limbmeal
apieces; there fell a very great Storm of Hail and Rain that dispersed them
all, and forced them (against their wills) to leave him unto his escape.
Whereupon his Devotion broke out into Songs of deliverance, and his pious Soul
confessed that so unexpected an Evasion, and so miraculous, could not but be
the effect of his all-powerful Preserver.

But the devout Father had never long time to rejoice: he was soon after set
upon again by some others of a contrary Faction and course of Life, Tories
bravely mounted, (with whom was Santomero in disguise) who in a drolling manner
thus accosted him: Prithee, old Grandsire, can tell us any news of our friend
Theosophus? Sirs (replied he) you cannot easily miss of him. So spurring their
Horses, they left him whom they most sought after, and rode in quest of him
whom they had already found.

Again another time, on a dark Moonless night, as he was repaired to a
melancholy and secret Wood for his Devotions, he lighted, before he was aware,
upon a private Junto of men, who all rising up to him, surprised him with this
Complement: O Father Mariana, are you come? Our Associates Pedro and Loyola bad
us at your arrival expect to receive the Determinations of our supreme Mufty,
and gave us strict charge to follow your Advice. These words started him not a
little, you may be sure; and had he not been opportunely befriended by the
night, his looks would without doubt have manifested the Error. But finding
that he was took for a quite different person, he thought it the safest course
not to disclose who really he was. Assuming therefore courage from the disguise
of a false Mariana, he past confidently by, and with a seeming great haste,
thus abruptly bespoke them: Stay me not now with your discourse, for my
business is urgent upon me, and will not admit of any the least delay. To which
they all as quick replied, Whither hie you so fast? Is it to assassinate the
Tyrant Basilius? Well, after your work is finished, pray fail not to meet us at
Bethaven, where we long to hear you relate the Transactions of St. Peter's
Court. Nor will we our selves be lacking to entertain you with a satisfactory
account of the strange success our Stratagems have hitherto had against that
religious heretical Sot Theosophus and his Adherents. So farewell: Let Hell
prosper your designs. The most pious and peaceable Theosophus not much
regarding their Answer, or wicked Plottings, made haste away; glad to be so
easily rid of his deceived Adversaries, and with but small intent to meet them
at the appointed place. Although the name and practices of Mariana were
notoriously enough infamous, yet this honest Eremite before now could never be
induced to believe him an Accomplice of them, who in public strove to appear
his most inveterate and jarring Enemies. So horrid a confederacy and
familiarity betwixt two such seeming opposite Parties, was too strong for his
Faith, and made him now almost mistrust his Senses. Having got free from them,
he spent the whole night in Prayers for Basilius, and that (once flourishing)
Church which their hellish Complottings had subverted.

He was afterward encountered by several other Companies. And though he came
not off always free from violence, yet still found deliverance; a sure, if not
an easy one. Which Encounters, for that they were many, and the remembrance of
them might perhaps prove troublesome to a few good men, are wholly omitted.

Thus being pursued by all Parties, and oftentimes hardly escaping with life,
he wandered many a weary step through overgrown Woods and dark solitary
Recesses, absconding himself in Caves and Grotto's, till at last he settled in
a poor Hut, that for secrecy and the nearness of a certain Oratory, commended
it self before all others. It was indeed not much indebted to Art, but rarely
well accommodated with all natural Conveniences for a recluse life; and being
immured in by the green and prickly closure of a kind Thicket, was almost
rendered secure from the violence of wild Beasts, and the quest of humane
Malice; as if it had been purposely designed at first by the careful industry
of Providence, a Sanctuary in future times to some persecuted religious
Anchorite. Here that blessed man, the divine Theosophus, rested to expect the
event of the Vision, by making this retreat from the World preparatory and
effectual thereunto; chiefly, I think, encouraged to track the footsteps of
Innocence in such a rural solitude as this, and to chalk out a safe way to the
heavenly Canaan.

CHAP. VI.
A remarkable Accident which during his Concealment happened to him.

ANd accordingly a while before the Celebration of Easter, he used to search
the wild unfrequented places thereabouts, and beat the Hedges and by-ways, to
find out and set aright any solitary wandering Pilgrim. How successful his
Charity proved, you may judge by the event. One day above the rest, walking
out, he was overtaken by a very thick Fog descending from the hills, that
benighten'd all the Valleys round; whereby every thing, at a short distance;
was undiscernable to the eye. The Sun, as if he knew how to commemorate the
Eclipse of the Sun of Righteousness, mantled over his light in black cloudy
Exhalations: such was the darkness (though not universal) that it might not
unfitly represent that mid-day-night wherein all the powers of Infernal
Darkness were scattered and confounded. Which made him revolve in his
contemplative mind all the dire and tragic parts of his Masters most
astonishing Passion; whom the Evangelical Records relate to have offered up his
Soul a bloody Victim (about this time) for the Sins of the whole World.
Thereupon his thoughts crowding too fast upon each other, were forced at length
to burst out into some such Expressions as these, viz.

My Lord and Savior, how great and intolerable were the pains which thou did
endure! How sharp and pungent was thy grief! Who, alas, can express thy
Sorrows, or comprehend the riches and excellency of thy Goodness! What else but
infinite Love could make thee, holy Prince, before whom all knees bow both in
Heaven and Earth, put off thy Celestial Diadem and Glory, to court Infamy,
Servitude and Misery; to be scourged reviled, and spit on; to be forsaken even
of thy Father, and together with Thieves and Robbers nailed upon the accursed
Tree? For whose sake, dear JESV, did thou submit to this? Could it be for the
meanest of thy Vassals, for a depraved mortal Race, thy disloyal rebellious
Subjects, and vile Creatures? Yes, LORD, thou know 'twas for them alone. --
And is thy Death of no more efficacy to them? Do thy precious Wounds avail thus
little? Has thy Blood lost its virtue, or thy Love its power? If not, how can
thou behold them perish for whom thou have done so much to effect the contrary?
Can thou let the World, after all this, be lost? or can thou so far forget
thy Name, as not to be merciful? Look down and see how the Destroyer of Mankind
seems proudly to triumph in thy defeat! Why will thou any longer suffer him to
usurp Dominion and Rule over that which is thine? Thou, LORD, art faithful, and
remembrest the Chap. 4.
Promise made to thy Servant. In vain did thou die, if --

Here Tears gusht out so fast, as to block up all further passage for words,
and leave him no power to speak the rest, except in sighs and tacit grief. He
had not kept silence very long before he heard a small stir, which at first he
little minded, thinking it to be the rushing of a Deer in the Thickets, till
hearing a lamentable groan, he judged it to be of one in a worse case than
himself, and therefore sought him out that he might help him. He was directed
by the frequent reiteration of such mournful notes to a certain Bush hard by,
where he could discern a comely Youth that had been barbarously tortured, and
now ready to expire his breath, stripped of all his Clothes, and rifled of every
thing but his native Beauty and Endowments. He, taking pity on the poor young
man and his hopeful features, threw his Gown over him; and the Air clearing up,
he made a shift to bear him home in his weak arms. But in the way he fell into
a dead Swoon.

CHAP. VII.
The Penitents Sickness, and Signs of Recovery.

AT this the charitable Father, almost struck like him, believing that his
Spirit then had quite vanished, and that now nothing in him of life was any
longer remaining; fell down with him to the ground. Such a desperate lifeless
stupor had indeed benumbed the poor wretches Soul, that although the touch and
pressure of a Prophet has proved vital and salutary to more than one, and the
embraces and the expansion of a man of God reviving to many a dead Sinner, yet
could this produce no effect upon the appearing Corpse.

Whereupon, after the Father had a little recovered himself, and was able, he
went to prepare a Grave. When as he was going, the remembrance of his Vision,
Promises of his God, and late apparition of an enlivened Carcass, soon called
him back, and bad him not distrust the Veracity of him that could not lie.

Being therefore come home into the hole of his devout Hermitage, and having
laid down his sad burden, and wept over it; he made a gentle Fire (for it is
near an impossibility to do any good in this case, if the Fires of Zeal be
either extinct or over- vehement) to expel the cold and noxious Vapors. To it
he brought the senseless body, in which he knew the Soul was buried; and left
not off applying such Revocatives as he had always at hand, till he felt warmth
therein, next breath: And at last came a deep sigh, (a glad note you will say
however of life) which was followed by this short moan, O Eubulus, Eubulus! --
But here he stopped, not able to go further. This so filled the spirits of
Theosophus with joy, that (as his custom was) he could not forbear running out
into Hymns of Praise and thankful Acknowledgments. Besides, it pleased him much
to hear Eubulus named above any other; as either longing perhaps to hear some
news of his long-absent Friend, or else not knowing the true cause, willing to
attribute it to a supernatural Impulse; and even reckon the very calling and
seeking after that reverend Physician of Souls, some kind of presage of
Recovery. Now marking the lines of his face, he recollected how that amongst
the tumultuous Rusticks in their late Assault, he had observed his forward
fury, and had often listened to the Character given him by this same worthy
person, whom returning to himself, he presently called for. All which made him
not desist his labor, until with continual chafing and rubbing, he brought him
wholly to himself again.

But he observes his Patient, in whose pale languid face but just before there
shone the remains of such feminine sweetness and winning prettiness, to be now
covered over with Botches and Plague-sores, with the crust of a Leprosy, and
the ruptures of Violence, scorched up with burning Fevers, and the Calenture of
an intemperate Diet: tortured with sharp Dolours, with grievous twingings of
Conscience; so that he looked upon him as the most deformed and the most
loathsome Monster in the whole Universe, the most miserable Wretch, vile
unhappy Caitive, that ever his eyes beheld. Yet even this increased (not
lessened) his care and hopes. For the breaking out and the knowledge of the
Disease, he took to be the first and most necessary step toward its Cure, and
the surest prognostic of mending.

It would have daunted I believe the most daring Sinner, have stopped him in his
full carriere, but to have beheld here the foulness of Vice unmaskt; whose
ghastly affrighting looks deprived of all their adventitious beauty and false
glozing pleasures, needed no Eloquence to paint them worse. Whilst his Breast
(O all ye who read these Papers) was ransacked by this Ghostly Father, there
appeared such strange forms of Evils, and so numerous, making it the place of
their beastly Revels and licentious Scuffles, as must needs certainly have
struck terror and awful confusion (if not repentance) into the careless
worldly-minded man: yea, made the boldest and atheistical Champion of Hell
quake with cold shiverings. The Doemoniack (so I think I may call him) was
possessed by no less than a whole Legion of Infernal Elves; who were discerned
then in thick swarms crawling about his wicked heart, that most foul Receptacle
of all manner of Impurity, scarified with Libertinism, and even burnt into
ashes with Lust and Youthful Desires.

His Gall had likewise overflown all the rest of his better parts, and filled
his Spirit with bitterness. His vital heat was in danger of being extinguished
by those black putrid humors which rotted his entrails, and made them swell
into such a vast hydropick bigness. The feculent settling of the Wine and strong
Liquors so greedily guzzled down and merrily quaffed off, sent up continually
unwholesome steams to annoy the rational faculties. They were here always
darkened with thick pestilential fumes ascending from those slimy Caverns, his
Bowels. Thus his Reason was disturbed, and Life endangered.

Near his Liver lay a Bag of rank greenish Poison that discharged it self
through all the veins, and instead of blood (the common Substitute of Life)
circulated round this body of Sin. So that every Member was corrupted, all the
powers of his Soul sick and weakened, lamed or dead, common Sense exiled, and
his other Senses made the Caterers for Vice: his Ears tinkled after obscene and
goatish Narratives; his Eyes (like two baleful Torches set on fire with Hell)
still cast forth naught but impure and lustful Flames; his Palate was vitiated
with Asian Luxury; his Hand with Larceny and Fraud; his Head and Brains were
giddy; his Limbs seized with Rottonness; and his Tongue whet with Adders venom.

Good God, how was the Father surprised to behold this Monster of Iniquity, and
Sink of all Uncleanness! How was he appal'd with horror at the dissection of
this so guilty and leprous a Soul, polluted and stained with so many
defilements, depraved with such unheard of Turpitude, and slurred after such a
gross manner with the foulest and deadliest Impieties! But how glad was he to
discover and scent those wild bestial Lusts kennel'd in their proper Dens and
lurking Holes! Thus the prudent and holy Confessor, by prying into the source
and the causes of the Malady, he (like a wise Physician of the Body) learnt to
drive it out the better by a due application of medicinal and effectual means.

And how also did the Wretch himself look! Now the scales fell from his Eyes,
and Vice appeared to him in its ugly terrifying Aspect: All the sweets and the
pleasures of his former lewd actions vanished, and nothing but the Sting was
left behind: Now nothing seemed to be more ridiculously odious than an Habit of
Sinning: Now did those precious Hours which he had saunter'd away in wanton
Dalliance, return to accuse him: His divine and noble Soul upbraided his Sloth
and Negligence; and the beauty of Virtue was so ravishing in his eyes, as to
make him esteem himself the blindest fool in nature, who had never yet courted
her, or not courted her for her self: Now was he heartily sorry that ever he
had offended the supreme Majesty of Heaven, and would not in barter for the
whole World, consent to act over afresh those sins which might provoke him to
anger.

He now confessed Drunkenness to be a poisoned Potion, Sensuality and
Intemperance to be but Swinish Delights and the very baits of Perdition,
Prodigality to be a toyish idle Freak, and Arrogance a swelling Tumor of the
Mind, Profaneness a bold extravagant Frenzy, and all his past course of life
Madness and Folly.

Esteeming these no ordinary Marks of future Health, the good Physician was
still eager in continuing his help. He admonished his Patient to purge his Soul
of that nastiness and filth in which she was bemir'd; to exorcise those Imps of
Hell that were (he saw) industriously effecting his ruin, by sincere and holy
Grief; and to cleanse his Ulcers with penitental Tears, those waters which are
far better than 2 King. 5. 12.
Abana or Pharphar to wash in, and wholsomer than the Pool of Joh. 5. 2.
Bethesda when touched by an Angel.

At this a violent passion seized his heart, and made his eyes gush out into
floods of Tears. Which prepared him to utter with devout affection and humility
this pious ancient Soliloquy, viz. Put me not to rebuke, O Lord --: There is no
health in my flesh --, neither is there any rest in my bones, by reason of my
sin --: My wounds stink and are corrupt through my foolishness --: My loins are
filled with a sore disease, and there is no soundness in my flesh. I am feeble
and sore broken --: I roar therefore for the very disquietness of my heart: my
heart pants, my strength fails me, and the light of my eyes is gone from
me. -- And I truly am set in the plague, -- Psalm. 28.

In this moanful Ditty (which was still now and then interrupted with grievous
fighs and throbs) he went on lamenting the foulness of his Disease, and
soliciting with great earnestness the comfortable succor and healing Touch of
his merciful Redeemer: that Touch which was alone able to cure the Lunacy of a
distempered brain, the complicated ills of an obstructed Spirit, and regenerate
his Mind anew by unlodging those hellish Furies that nested within his breast.
Having used this and some other select forms, he concluded all in the most
excellent Comprizal of devout sorrow, Have mercy upon me -- Psalm. 51. to the
end.

After he had lain a good while in this humble and penitent posture, his looks
began to be cheerful, his paleness to be tinged with a little red, his
deformities grew less, and his sores dried up into scurf. Theosophus, who by
these glad signs was ascertained that his inward parts were now thoroughly
rinced and gargled by those purgative Doses he had before given him, thinks time
to anoint his Sores with a certain generous Balsam. Some call it Balm of
Gilead, others the Panarion of the Gospel, but all know it to be the Blood of
Christ, and that nothing else can cure a broken wounded Soul; nor even that, if
the Wounds be not first made clean (for else how can it operate?) by the drops
of a preparatory Contrition. He bad his Patient rely upon the Mercies of God,
and the saving Name of JESUS; and having discoursed to him about an hour, of
the nature and the effects of Repentance, (which will be too long to insert
here) concluding with some observations on Spiritual Joy, told him that by the
virtue of this heavenly Balsam (if he hindered not its working) he trusted
before the following day should go down, to see him perfectly cured. Adding,
that if on the morrow the nauseousness of his Stomach, all impure Qualms, that
is, all remanent affections to sin, had left him; he might then, after a due
and holy preparation, feed on the miraculous and medicinal Bread of Life.

CHAP. VIII.
The Mystical Feast unto which Theosophus carries his Charge.

THe next day therefore being the great Christian Festival of Easter, the young
man arose betimes to welcome the Morning- Sun of Righteousness, that now began
to dawn upon his Soul, and to dart in thither his beams of Life. He fancied
himself new risen from the death of Sin, freed from the corruption of the
Grave, and the eternal prisons of the nethermost Pit. Of the Miracle of this
day he had so great an Instance upon himself, that ever after he used to
commemorate it as the Festival both of his Lords and (by the virtue thereof) of
his own Resurrection.

He was not long up, before the careful Theosophus came to give him his
customary Visit; who perceiving in his smiling countenance the calmness and the
serenity of his mind, and from the evenness of his pulse (the moderation and
sedateness of his passions) guessing at the regular reparation of his Health;
cannot now any longer forbear to congratulate this his so miraculous a
Recovery. You see, my dear Youth (says he, stretching out his hands to Heaven
in an holy amazedness) the power of that Sovereign Balsam! you know who made
it; and who has been at the expense of a Miracle for your sake, and that also
no ordinary one, even the God of Nature: he has, you see, condescended to form
you anew, and reinstate you in Grace, by giving you another (and a much better)
life. Be thankful therefore, good Son, and pay your Vows this day at his Altar:
run forth, I advise you, and meet now the King of Glory, the Prince of Salem,
the Emperor of the Holy Land. If you do this, he will pardon all your Misdeeds,
will cure all your Diseases, and will enter you into the Bedrol of his
Pilgrims. Now he is preparing to feast you at his Table, he expects to find you
there, that he may number you among his Saints and Followers, the redeemed ones
of Israel. Methinks I see you, dear Friend (my Patient I will call you no
longer) prepared to entertain him within your heart, and am glad to see that
you need not my invitation. Wherefore I shall reserve what I had to say to you,
for them that lack it more. So he left him unto his private Meditations and
Prayers.

When not long after, having invested himself in an holy (but penitential)
dress, he was led by his reverend Guide to a very fair and beautiful Temple not
far off, in the midst of a gloomy religious Wood, commodiously enough seated
for the devout retirement of the persecuted Followers of JESUS. It was elevated
upon a small rising, decently built, and for the convenience thereof a long
while resorted unto by Pilgrims of all Ranks and Conditions. But since the
Roads to Jerusalem began to be unfrequented, this also was scarce ever visited,
unless now and then by a few old decrepit Beggars.

Hither they came, and having entered this holy place, they fell down prostrate
upon their faces, worshipping toward the East. They had not lain long upon the
cold Pavement, breathing out their Souls after JESUS, and the Delights which
are at his right hand, before their ears were touched with the Sighs and soft
Ejaculations of some religious Devotes. When casting their eyes off the ground,
they among the rest spied their dear Eubulus. Very glad you cannot but guess
they were; and very glad was Eubulus, to find the Youth whom he loved so
affectionately, and had so long sought after, in such a place, with such a
Friend; and to receive them both in safety, whom he heard the wild Foragers of
the Voisinage thereabouts had torn and devoured. Nor was their Joy any whit
allayed through the reverence of the place, which hindered them from so much as
speaking to each other; but rather increased by their mutual assistance and
servency of Devotion, with all the increases that a religious Joy is capable of.

The first Solemnities were done, and the Morning-Sacrifice offered up, when
Theosophus made so powerful and divine an Exhortation, highly valuable for its
Eloquence, Solidity, and Piety, to usher in the Feast; that nothing but the
length could tempt me to omit. One passage however I cannot forget; for having
excellently discoursed upon the Author and Dignity of that heavenly Treat, he
tells those few who were present, That it was not meant to pamper their Lusts,
or make them proud or lazy in the way: but to be their Viaticum and spiritual
Repast in their Journey to Heaven; whence the Israelites leaving the Brickkils
and slavery of Egypt, to pass through the Wilderness unto the Land flowing with
Milk and Honey, received it in the posture of traveling, with their Loins
girt, Sandals on their feet, and a Palmers Staff in their hands, Exodus c. 12.
v. 12.

After which, with what humble deportment and veneration did they approach the
holy Altar! With what ravishments of joy did they come to this Celestial
Banquet! With what a steady and firm resolution did they purpose to follow
their prime Leader JESUS, through all Difficulties and Hazards, unto the happy
Land of Promise!

But as soon as the blessed JESUS, the glorious and peaceable Prince of
Jerusalem, descended with Myriads of Angels attending on him, how did their
hearts burn within them! with what transcendency of Love, and vehemence of
Desire, did they address him! But here I am struck dumb with reverence and
amazement, unable to describe this sacred Mystery; which the Angels do with
awful admiration delight to look into.

CHAP. IX.
The Penitents Regeneration.

NEver was its effect more visible upon any, than upon this young happy
Convert. Through the mysterious efficacy hereof, he was wonderfully changed
into another man. It drove away his tyrannick Lusts and pleasant Torturers,
making them lose their hold: made his cursed Executioners flee frightened from
him; his vain Desires, with every cruel Vice and Murderer of his Soul,
disappear. His Senses were released, his Brain disenchanted, all his filthy and
hellish Inmates exorcised, not so much as one left behind, but all driven out,
by the Priests sacred Charm, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ --: those sweet,
those all-powerful words! Thus set at liberty, he became free to give himself
unto him who had freed him. And thus washed and cleansed in the blood of the
holy Lamb, he presented his Body to be from thenceforth a pure and hallowed
Temple, and his Soul a chaste devoted Sanctuary, unto the divine Spirit, the
Spirit of Purity and Holiness.

Fresh and holy thoughts began forthwith to bud and bloom within his mind; all
his Members grew again like unto a little Infants: a clean purified heart was
formed in lieu of the other; and (that which divine Mythologists name) the old
man rotted quite away, through Gods anticreative power. So that the Quere of
that Jewish Rabbi, How can a man that is old be born again? Joh. 3. would here
have been evinced by plain unanswerable matter of fact. Chap. 7.
Those tortures of Conscience which he had endured, were unto him the Pangs and
Throws of this Second Birth. Whence his veins are now all filled with new Sap
and vital Juice; every part of him is regenerate; his breast agitated by Psalm.
51. v 10, 12. The whole Man.
a free, a right Spirit; and that life which brought him hither, converted into
perfect strength, the most healthful and sprightly vigor. There appears such
beauty in his face, such lively Angelical force in his actions, that even his
Guide (though conscious of the change) discards his memory, and mistakes him
for a Citizen dropped down from the Celestial Jerusalem.

It will not be an unpardonable Digression in this place, I hope, to acquaint
you with what I have been told by the Pilgrims of those days, concerning this
blessed Alteration in the young returning sinner. For though the Graces and the
Ornaments of sincere Penitence, and the splendors of a Soul illuminated from
Heaven, are not discerned by the carnal eye; they could not be hid from them. I
am not able to tell you with how much pleasure these loving Pilgrims now looked
upon him; but I know that they were wont to relate how his Visage, which was
somewhile ago The Face.
disfigured with Jocundness and Sadness; with apish Grimaces and fantastic
Merriments; with Revenge, and Love, and Anger, Fears and Jealousies; with
Immodesty and Impudence; with contemptuous Mows, an unhandsome Laughter, and a
proud Mien or Cast; at all times either pale and wan with Envy, or black with
Fury, or wrinkled with Repinnings, or scorched with Choler; came to be adorned
with the comely blushes of Modesty, with a graceful Bashfulness, devout
untainted Mirth and holy Joy; with a strict Severity and Sadness; with the
Image of God, the Image of Humility and Love, of Piety, Meekness, and Candor.

Do not his Eyes, (said they one to another) those lewd treacherous Sentinels,
that have so often betrayed him to The Eyes.
Olympia's imperious beauty, and with their lascivious Gazings and previous
Adulteries been Accessories to all the foolish Defilements of his body; look
more prettily drenched in Tears, or lifted up in Contemplation toward the
Regions of Beauty and Holiness?

They rejoiced extremely (for at the conversion of a Sinner there is joy not
only in Heaven, Luke 15. 7. but The Ears.
upon Earth, by all good men and good women that know it, Psalm. 119. 74.) that
his Ears which were so deaf, should now be open to God's Word; that they should
be sealed up so so fast against all impure and wanton Talk, against all the
temptations of alluring Sirens, against Ribaldry and Profaneness, uncharitable
and offensive Language, biting Raillery, the witty Reproaches of the Age, and
all the vain and all the sinful Excursions of a lawless Member.

As also that his Tongue (that little foolish part) formerly disordered with so
many wild Extravagancies, with The Tongue.
Blasphemies and Obscoenity, Perjuries and Defamations; with the whispers of
Calumny, of Peevishness and Discontent, with a trifling and scoffing Wit, with
smooth Flattery and a vaunting Humor; so as to lash out into all the excesses
of Impiety or Folly; should now be worm'd of that currish madness, and composed
anew to diviner strains, Hymns of Love and Praise.

They could not but admire (O blessed Admiration!) to see his Hands The Hands.
that were not long before filled with Violence, now lifted up in Prayer, and
reached forth in Charity: And to see his Feet, which were once so swift to shed
Blood, The Feet.
now to tread in the ways of Peace and Meekness. They could not but admire to
see such polluted Hands and Feet washed at the Altar, and the Leprosy that
covered them, wiped off. But all this they ceased to admire, as soon as they
considered the Goodness and the Power of his Redeemer, and remembered most of
them the like Change not long before experimented upon themselves.

He has indeed other Desires and other Passions, other Hopes and other
Resolutions, than before The Change universal.
he had: his Labors, his Studies, his very Divertisements; all his Words, and
Endeavors, and Performances, have no Agreeableness with what they were; are
more satisfactory than ever, more eligible and more delightful. For his Cursed
and Wolfish nature is changed into the Simplicity and Meekness of the Lamb; and
the Malice of Serpents that was in him, is expelled by the Innocence of the
Dove. Vastly different are his Sentiments, a great deal calmer and wiser; his
judgment and opinion of things (for the most part) quite contrary to what they
had been: Those toyish Pleasures which he so eagerly pursued and hunted after,
with as great abhorrency he nauseates and loathes: His Palate relishes nothing
but divine and holy Nutriment, nothing of an Earthly (much less of an Hellish)
Gusto, of a Fire and Brimstone-hogo. Even the coarsest Austerities of Religion
afford him more satisfaction and pleasure, than the very Softnesses and
Delicacies of Caelia's bewitching Beauty. All her Fucusses and Charms prove too
weak to prevail against him; for that his mind is fixed upon nobler Objects,
his Soul disengaged from the World and from the Flesh, and all his Senses freed
at length from the Vassallage of Vice. If any man begins to wonder at so
strange Events, at so total and miraculous a Transmutation, and has not, so it
be real, any dislike against it; he is in a fair way, if he persist, willing,
to effect the same upon himself: Otherwise, if he thinks it was not worthy of
the Joy and Admiration that it caused in the charitable Devotes, who were
Contemporaries, and blames them therefore; he must be either very ill-natured,
or very insensible; and, I fear, in a worse state than he apprehends. It
pleases me much that their Charity was as signal as his Conversion; no wonder
if this heavenly Penitent become strait the love and the delight of the little
Tribe.

If one could suppose a deformed Cripple with prominent and distorted Limbs,
his Sinews contracted, his Joints dislocated, his Skin spotted, his Flesh
running with Sores, and every way misshapen; to shift all these for an
handsome and a sound Body, to shake off his Infirmities, and put on a
personable and lovely Mien: if further yet, one could suppose a Brute to become
rational, and discourse; or a natural Idiot to be made wise; or a foul Toad to
leave his poison and his skin, and grow up into a beautiful Man; such was this
Change, that was effected by the gentle Hovering of Gods Spirit upon his Soul:
It was no less, but greater far and nobler: if any Comparison can be made
betwixt a Celestial Substance and an Earthly one.

Thus his stony and obdurate heart, which the Thunders of the Law could not
shiver, is now softened with the Blood of the Passover: He who but a little
while before mattered not the Threats and Terrors of Mount Sinai, is now touched
and moved with the sweet Gospel-Messages of Love and Peace. Whence ever after
he related great things of this Evangelical Feast; how it was the Seal of his
Pardon, the Christian Pasport of his Heavenly Pilgrimage, and the beginning of
his Union with God: And how it gave him all things, even by removing him from
them, and making him desire nothing but JESUS, and to be with him in PARADISE.

CHAP. X.
An Eucharistical Meditation.

AS soon therefore as he was returned back again with the Eremit into his Cell,
and shut himself up in a close apartment thereof, his Soul by rapturous flights
of Joy strove to ascend upward, and exert her self in these following Acts of
devout Acknowledgment.

I.
I am well pleased that the Lord has thus heard the 1. An Act of Thanksgiving
and Adoration.
voice of my Prayer. Blessed is he that now comes in the Name of the Lord:
Hosanna in the highest! Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord:
Hosanna here below! Thrice hail, most triumphant Prince of Heaven! Hail, holy,
wonderful, eternal King, great Deliverer, successful Combatant, the Redemption
of the Captives and the Oppressed, and (upon this day) the First Fruits and
Hopes to those that sleep of a glorious Resurrection! Hallelujah! Salvation,
and Glory, and Honor, and Power, be to the Lord our God. Blessed is he that
comes in the Name of the Lord: Hallelujah! I adore thee, I worship thee, I
love thee, I magnify thee, O thou Conqueror of Hell and Death, victorious
Champion over the Infernal Forces: I will magnify thee as much as I am able,
and will still strive to magnify thee more. All hail! welcome, sweetest
Savior Jesus! welcome, Lamb of God, the Life-giving Sacrifice, the spiritual
Refection, the holy and accepted Peace Offering, the Deliverance and Comfort of
all faithful Souls! Welcome, victorious Lamb; all the mighty Hosts of Heaven
fall down before thee, and with everlasting Praises delight to celebrate the
glories and triumphs of so strange a Love. And here below, under their feet, I
would do the same. Thou art the powerful and wise, the Lord of Hosts, the King
of Loves thou art called, and thy Conquests are spread abroad as far as the
ends of the World. When the terrors of Death encompassed me round, when the
nethermost Hell threatened to devour me quick, and Satan was ready to grasp my
polluted Soul; then found I deliverance, then saw I my returning Victor laden
with their spoils, and having trampled on and crushed their power, bidding me
live. Behold, even he whom I fought against has obtained for me the victory,
and has overcome me with his love, and with his love has made me overcome. The
great God, the mighty Savior of Nations, has pitied a poor perishing wretch;
he has snatched my life from out the paws of the devouring Lion, and the
sulphurous stench and horrors of yonder black Abyss.

II.
But who can tell me how all this came to pass? what 2. An Act of Contrition or
Humility.
was there in me, that I should be thus highly honored; or my life worth, that
it should be ransomed at so dear a rate as the death of my God? Why should God
the Father, whom I had offended, send his Son to die for me? Why should God the
Son, whom I had so sinned against, bear the load and punishment of that sin?
Tell me, what could the Creator see worthy of so great savor, in such an
abominable and filthy Creature: or the Lord of all things, in his proud
presumptuous Vassal; the Holiest in a sinner wallowing in his Lusts? How came
Unworthiness and Pride, Rebellion and Sin, perverse Dust and Ashes, to find
thus instead of the heaviest curse, and dreadfullest execution of a just and
fiery Indignation, so extraordinary a Blessing; so far not only above my
merit, but my comprehension? This is all Prodigy of Mercy. Shall the careless
and disobedient, the refractory and murmuring Servant be rewarded, be feasted
with his Master? Shall the wilful and obstinate offender be pardoned; the
despicable and haughty Villain be pitied? Who can believe there is so great
Charity for an Enemy, or such Honors as these for the vilest of the children
of men? This was indeed too great for me to expect or wish for; will take up
all the wonder of Men and Angels -- Ah! have have not my Crimes crucified him,
my Passions made him bleed; and could he yet do and suffer so much for me? Has
not my Pride, alas, stripped him naked, my Intemperance and Luxury forced him to
fast? And did not my Covetousness make him poor, my Ambition a slave? But he
has covered my Nakedness and Folly, he has feasted me with his holy ones, he
has filled me with the Riches of his Grace, and has freed me from the slavery
of sin. The bitterness of my Spirit has been worse to him than the very Gall
he tasted; my Peevishness and Malice, than the Vinacre he drank: my Honors
have wreathed him a Crown of Thorns. The rude Soldier pierced but his side,
when I pierced his very heart with sorrows. My Jollity was that anguish which
made his Virginal Body to be drained all over bloody droops of Sweat. My Scoffs
at Religion have been far more intolerable, have entered deeper into his Soul,
than the Contempt and Mockeries of the Pretorian Band. Nay, my very Devotion
and Piety has murdered him; my Addresses have been criminal and traitorous,
and with Judas have I studied to betray him with a kiss. O Prodigy of Villainy!
But neither is this all. Ah me! I can scarce utter that which is still more
black. Often would my Wickednesses have offered Violence even to his glorified
Body, and ripped up his Wounds afresh. Thus have I opened his side by violating
those mysterious Sacraments which proceeded thence: my best works put him to
shame. Nor indeed could I any otherwise have claimed his infinite Mercy, but
that I am infinitely vile, and infinitely sinful --

III.
Dearest Jesu, how admirable are the effects of thy 3. An Act of Wonder.
Goodness! How glorious and condescending is thy Love, that could do all this
for me! and how disproportionate are the Returns of thy sovereign Bounty to the
deserts of a perfidious disloyal wretch! I came not unto thee of my self, but
thou have drawn me with Cords: though I refused, yet found I protection. My
Guilt was thy Condemnation; yet through thee am I saved: Thou have reached
forth to me the Scepter, with the same hand which my Vanity had mocked with a
Reed. Could I ever expect to receive life from him whom mine Iniquities
bruised, and even robbed of his? a Cure, through his Stripes, which mine
Immoralities both caused and deserved? Is not this the height of Wonder and
surprising Ecstasy? Was there ever Patience like to that with which my Lord
has forborne me! or ever Love like this with which my Lord has loved me!

IV.
Look down, ye blessed Spirits, and see the Wonders 4. An Act of Devout
Remembrance.
that your God has done here below for a miserable sinning Caitive. I will
declare before the great Congregation the mavelous Operations of his Almighty
Love. O most adorable King, though I confessed my self unworthy, altogether
unworthy to gather up the Crumbs that fall from thy Table; thou have for all
this placed me amongst thy friends and best beloved ones, and wonderfully fed
me with thy own Body and Blood, the choicest Viands of the Gospel. And
therefore will I thank thee, thank thee now, and again, and thank thee for
ever, for that thou have given me this Earnest of a joyful Resurrection, the
Food and the Medicine of Immortality, and Viaticum in this Pilgrimage which I
am now undertaking into a remote Country. Now I know for a certain that thou
have ratified my Pardon by the effusion of thy Blood; and am fully satisfied,
that if I be not wanting to my self, I shall one day be with thee in Paradise.
For what more can thou do for me? Am I not remarked with the most signal
expressions of thy favor, by being this day admitted to the all-powerful and
venerable Mysteries? Am I not united to thee? Am I not incorporated, with the
nearest Union possible, to thy self; and honored with the highest Honors and
Privileges of the Sons of God. Thou have entered into a new Covenant with me,
when I had broke the first; made me one of thy Retinue, and sealed my
Inheritance to an everlasting Crown in the presence of thy Saints. Chap. 8.
According to the word of the man of God, thou have cured all my Diseases, and
entered me into the Roll of thy Pilgrims. For this rejoice in the Lord Jesus, O
my Soul. He is that mysterious Rock, the Rock of Israel, whence gushed out
these refreshing streams in a Wilderness and thirsty Land. He opened the
Treasures of Heaven, and rained down Mannah upon my parched Soul; he filled the
Hungry with good things, and refreshed my drooping Spirits with unwonted Vigor.
Lest I should faint and die in the Wilderness, he has provided for me this
same Wonderful Food, and reached it forth to me by the hands of an Angel; who
touched me with his wings, saying to my Soul, Arise and eat, for this journey
is too great for thee, 1 King. c. 19. v. 7.

V.
O that in the strength of this Meat, I may walk my 5. An Act of Desire.
forty days and forty nights, as did the persecuted Prophet unto Horeb the
Mount of God; or as the ancient Pilgrims in the Desert as many years, and at
last enter the Promised Land, and have my Portion with the Saints of Israel.
The Heart brayeth after the Waterbrooks, so pants and breaths my Soul, O
Jesus, after the Rivers of Joy which are at thy right hand. My Soul is athirst
for the Living God. O when shall I come and appear before the presence of God!

VI.
I have tasted, and I 6. An Act of Acknowledgment mixed with Faith and Love.
know that I shall live for ever, if my corrupt stomach turn it not into death.
For thou have said, and I do believe, that Joh. 6. 54.
whosoever eats thy Flesh, and drinks thy Blood, has everlasting life, and
thou will raise him up at the last day. Thou art the Bread of Heaven, the
living bread which came down thence and was broken for me; of which he that
eats not, cannot live; and he that eats, cannot die: the incomprehensible, the
supersubstantial Food, the Refection of Virgins and elect Souls; both the
Master of the Feast, and the Feast it self; a Priest for ever after the Order
of Melchisedeck, to feed and bless me. Thou art the great Offering of Peace,
the perpetual Atonement, the Lamb still standing as slain, and thy Blood
speaks better things either than that of Abel, or the Sacrifices of old. Thou
have admitted me to thy mysterial Supper; and I know that thou will likewise
call me to sit down at thy Marriage Feast. How joyful will it be to see a
Marriage celebrated in Paradise, and, as was the Mother of Mankind (in Paradise
also) brought by the Deity unto her Husband Adam, to see the Bride given thee
by the Almighty Father, and hear the Nuptials sung by Choires of Angels; to see
thee joined to thy triumphant Church in mysterious and inseparable Union; and
to participate of the joys of thy Sister, thy Love, thy Dove, thy Undefiled,
thy fair Spouse, purchased with thy dearest Blood! O how happy are those that
shall be then invited! And shall I (such an unworthy wretch) be one of those
happy persons? Have I not these Pledges that I shall? Yes I have: and I will
take care lest I break or lose them. Wherefore I love and adore thee, my
bleeding Savior: I love thee, because thou have loved me, and gave thy self
for me, washed me in the Rivers of thy Blood, those waters of Life and Joy. I
love thee; and O that I could love thee more. For how can I but love thee for
this? I will love thee, O Lord, my strength: the Lord is my Rock -- In the
clefts of this Rock, in the waters issuing thence, are my Pollutions cleansed:
my Corruptions are mortified by thy death: I have bathed my self in thy Wounds,
O holy and eternal Victim, I have washed my Sores in the salutary Fountain of
thy Side, and found there health and comfort unto my languishing Spirits.

VII.
How are the Powers of Darkness that gaped for my 7. An Act of Exultation and
Joy.
ruin confounded and disappointed, now to behold this sudden unexpected
Change! How do they fret and gnash their teeth, and with what lamentable
howlings curse themselves, who were not able to hold fast their Prey! Even
Death and Satan are vanquished: the Grave and Sin dismantled and subdued: all
the Enemies of my Soul discomfited and quelled. Yea, they that seek my Soul are
scattered, they are all fled from thy presence, O God of Jacob: Thou have sent
from Heaven, and delivered me from them that would swallow me up. For mine
Adversaries conspired together to take away my life, they fatned me for
destruction: many and strange were the Monsters that sought to devour me. And
who besides Jesus would have entered into the lists, would have set upon so
great, so terrifying an Enterprise as this was, for the sake of a poor
evil-deserving and despised wretch? Who was there in Heaven or in Earth, but
he, whom I had infinitely offended, to take up my Cause? Who was there found
beside, either ready or able, to be my Rescuer? Was there any beside him, who
to be this, suffered in my stead, emptied himself, bore the guilt, underwent
the shame, endured the rage of men and Devils, a lingering and painful
Crucifixion, and the dreadful phials of his Fathers wrath? Could thou then,
my dearest Savior, submit to all this for me; and how weak, how unanswerable
are my Praises! how flat and dull! Lord, I know thou did, and I acknowledge
mine iniquities, but will dispute no longer with such Goodness as thine.
Unsearchable are the depths of thy Mercy, and thy loving kindness past finding
out. I would declare the wonders of thy sovereign love, and speak of all thy
mavelous works; but that they are so great and so astonishing, so secret and
so reserved, that I will rather adore than pry into these Mysteries of my
Redemption. And I will be glad and rejoice in thy Name, because mine Enemies
are turned back and put to confusion: for this will I praise thee as long as I
have any breath, and all that is within me shall eternally magnify thy holy
Name. Thou, my Lord, art my Light and my Salvation; whom then shall I fear?
Thou art the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid? With thy right
hand and thy holy arm have thou rescued me from the powers of Hell; raised me
up like dead Lazarus from the Grave, and killed those Vermin that were gnawing
my flesh and consuming my Spirit. Thou have raised me with thy Call, Joh. 11.
43.
Come forth: See, Lord, at thy call, even the dead obeys, and comes running to
thee. How far do thy Conquests extend? My Lord and my God, thou have gotten thy
self the victory. The Lamb has overcome: the sprinkling of his Blood makes the
destroying Angel pass over, and hurt me not. Worthy is that Lamb that was slain
to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory,
and blessing. Amen. Hallelujah!

Here he bowed down with his face to the ground, in imitation of those
ever-happy adoring Spirits, who inhabit the LAND of GOD; and in a delightsome
Ecstasy cried out several times, Victory! victory! victory! The Lamb has
overcome. His fledged Soul, before the whole Court of the great God, thereupon
made a most solemn Dedication of her self; and with all Humility and Veneration
approaching his Throne, uttered these Purposes and Acts of Holy Resolution: nor
was at all tired with the length.

VIII.
-- But how shall I add 8. An Act of Oblation.
unto the triumphs of the Lamb? What shall I render unto the Lord for all his
Benefits toward me, for all these Manifestations of his Love and Power toward
a poor perishing sinner? I am nothing, and I have nothing but what I received
from thee, blessed God; what therefore shall I give thee? I give thee, having
nothing else to give, that which is thine already, that for which thou wast
content to undergo a painful and ignominious death; I give thee, dearest Lord;
my self: I am thine, do with me as thou pleases. I do here thankfully and
humbly present thee all the Faculties and the Members of my Body and of my
Soul: My Thoughts and Words, my Actions, Intentions, Senses, Passions, Desires,
and Endeavors; my Fame, Liberty, and Life, any Death and all, I offer up to
thee: All the Days that I am to live, all that I Can, all that I Have, or Am,
shall be entirely thine. It is indeed a miserable Oblation, a vile useless Gift
I offer; but it is that which thou demandest, and with which I am sure thou will not be displeased: that which thou have dearly bought, and which ought not
to be mortgaged away by me to any other: that which I cannot, without the
basest Ingratitude and terriblest Sacrilege, keep from thee; which is more
than once, yea than an hundred times, due to thee: a polluted House, an
idolatrous Temple and defiled it is, therein to entertain the Holiest of the
Lord; but polluted and defiled as it is, so much the more it needs him to make
it clean, and purge it from Idolatry.

Cant. c. 3. v. 2, 4. c. 6. 2. c. 7. 10.
Heretofore sought I him whom my Soul loved: I sought him, but I found him not;
for I sought him in the streets and open places, in the World and in my
Pleasures. But no sooner had I passed a little from them, than I found him whom
my Soul loved: I took hold of him, and left him not; till I had brought him
hither, and received him into my heart. Behold, my Beloved is mine, and I am
his: I am my Welbeloveds, and his Desire is toward me. Come in therefore, holy
and ever-blessed Redeemer, my Love, my Dearest, and take possession of me.

I am now restored to my self, by being restored to thee: I am marked for
thine, and I am far better, and more mine own than ever, by being so None in
Heaven or Earth did I desire but thee, blessed Redeemer, and lo thou have given
me thy self, and by this Gift have given me All; for thou art All, and without
thee every thing besides is as nothing: Thou art All that I love or fear, All
that I wish for, and All that I enjoy, All that I delight in, worship, and
admire. For thy sake I will despise all the trifling Pleasures and Vanities of
this lower World, and trample under my feet whatsoever is valued by the Folly
or the Vice of the Sons of Men.

IX.
How sweet are the Conquests 9. The Petition.
of thy Love, dearest Jesu! I am thine, I am wholly thine; and do thou so keep
me still. Besides thee, truly, many Lords I had; but such as would have cast me
into the Prison of Intolerable Burnings: and thou have prevailed against them,
and gotten me to thy self. I adjure thee therefore, blessed Savior, by thy
precious Sufferings and victorious Passion, by the tender bowels of thy Mercy
and whatsoever thou countest dear, never to suffer them to recruit their
Forces; lest they be again too hard for me: never to let them after this take
possession of that which is thine, or profane that place which thou have set
now apart for thy Temple. And that I may bless thee, and exult over the mighty
Armies that come forth against me, defying thee the Lord of Hosts; make me able
to pursuse them, until they be quite scattered: to subdue and foil their weak
Remains.

X.
For I am resolved never more to associate my self with 10. An Act of
Resolution and Dereliction of the World.
thy Murderers, nor will I ever any more harbor thy Persecutors within my
breast; but will bear a professed Enmity to all thy Enemies; and though perhaps
they hide themselves in the inmost recesses of my heart, yet with the justest
anger and violence will I drive them thence. I will not henceforwards be
ashamed to wear thy Badge, or to fight under the sacred Banner of thy Cross: I
will follow thee whithersoever thou call; and though I be beset around with
Temptations and Infirmities, through thy help I will break my way through them
all, and be more than Conqueror. Nor will I be a whit dismayed at the
cloudiness or inconveniences of my Passage; so at last I arrive at the calm
and quiet Regions of Paradise: there to be eternally blessed with the sight of
thee. For have I not this day to my unspeakable satisfaction and refreshment,
tasted of the Fruit of the Tree of Life which grows in the midst thereof? and
how can I be any longer detained from seeking out this place, the place that
thou inhabitest; or be at rest before I gain admittance into this same
Spiritual. Eden, restored us by thee the second Adam? Not all the fiery Trials
I must expect to suffer, nor Genesis 3. 24.
the Angels with their flaming Swords, shall terrify or drive me back, shall
obstruct my passage, or keep me from laying hold on thee who art both the Truth
of the Tree, and Giver of that Paradise. I have tasted and seen how gracious
the Lord is and surely if not for the Miracles sake, yet for the Loaves I
cannot choose but follow him; unless I make my self worse than the worst of all
his Followers leave him sooner than the Multitudes that followed him for Bread.
I know that my divine Soul is to be satisfied with no other Food than this,
that she can never hereafter be contented with the husks and the draff of
Swine, the sordid delights of the World. How can I any longer relish the Apples
of Death, or find pleasure in reaching out my hands after the forbidden Fruit,
after unlawful Lusts and the desires of a disordered Appetite?

I will not depart from this holy persons Cottage, before he has instructed me
in the way, and shown me the Path in which alone thou art to be found. How do I
already long and burn with desire to begin my Pilgrimage, and follow thee
through this thorny and briary World? I come, Lord Jesus, I come, I can no
longer resist the Charms of thy Almighty Goodness. I am heartily sorry that
ever I offended thee, or countenanced thy hated Rivals, preferring a common
Morsel before the holy Bread, and a Lust before my God. But now I am resolved,
as far as weak humane nature will permit, never more to sin against my gracious
Lord; or with my Transgressions to wound the merciful and holy Jesus, who was
wounded for them: to caress and entertain his Enemies, or join my self with
those that afflicted his Soul. Farewell, all my past Delights; farewell, ye
impure and accursed Lusts that have slain the Lord of Life. I bid you all
eternally farewell. From henceforth I hope we are never more to meet. My sins,
those vile Assassins that went along in combination with the high Priests, and
bound themselves together in an horrid Confederacy against his life, I can no
longer endure to see, except it be to crucify them upon his Cross. My unjust
Violences that have pierced his hands and his feet, my wicked Pleasures that
have pierced his Soul, I will lay down at the foot of his Cross, and there put
them to a most just and deserved death. They, even they, were the Nails that
wrenched the tender Body of my Savior: They have crucified that just One, have
slain the Lords Christ, and hanged the great Prophet and Saint of Israel upon a
Tree. For this I will detest and abhor them, I will dash them in pieces upon
the stones, and throw them down headlong from the Rock of my Deliverance.
Adieu, ye sweet and traitorous Vices; the Murderers of my Lord are no fit
Companions for me: I received you into my breast, but ye ingratefully betrayed
me; and if he had not sustained your fury, ye had delivered me up to
everlasting Burnings.

XI. An HYMN of Eucharist.
1.
Rejoice with me now, all ye Heavenly Hosts who take delight in the Conversion
of a Sinner: for I who was dead am alive again, and who was lost am found.
I will rejoice greatly in the Lord, and my Soul shall be joyful in my God:
For he has clothed me with the Garments of Salvation, and covered me with the
Robe of Righteousness:
He has decked me like a Bridegroom, and as a Bride tireth her self with
Jewels.
Behold, God is my Salvation! I will trust and will not fear, for my Lord God
is my strength and my song.
I will magnify thee, O Lord: Thou have exalted me, and have not made my Foes
to rejoice over me.
O Lord, thou have maintained the cause of my Soul, and redeemed my Life.
Thou have delivered me from the choking of the Fire on every side: from the
depth of the Belly of Hell.
Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his Benefits, who has now
forgiven all thy sins, and healed all thy infirmities:
Who saves thy life from destruction, and still crowns thee with Mercy and
Compassions:
Who has satisfied thy mouth with good things, and renewed thy Vigor like the
young Eagles.
He has given Meat to them that fear him, and is ever mindful of his Covenant.
He has prepared a Table before me, against them that trouble me.
He fed me also with the finest Wheat-flour, and with Honey out of the stony
Rock has he satisfied me.
He made a Feast of fat things, a Feast of fined Wines and fat things full of
marrow; of Wines fined and purified.
He brought me into the Wine-Cellar, and stayed me with Flagons: His left hand
is under my head, and his right hand does support me.
He has trodden the Wine Press, and there was none to help: and has given me
thereof this pleasant Wine to drink; a Cordial drawn from his bleeding heart.
He shall show me the Path of Life: in his presence is fullness of Joy, and at
his right hand are Pleasures for evermore.
He strengthens the weak hands, and comfort the feeble knees: He will make
my feet like Hinds feet, and will make me to walk upon high places.
So shall I run and not be weary, and shall walk and not faint.
Thou, my Soul, shall dwell on high: Thy defense shall be the munitions of
Rocks, Bread shall be given thee, and thy Waters shall be sure.
Thine eyes shall see the King in his glory, they shall behold the Land afar
off.
Everlasting joy shall be upon thee, thou shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sorrow and mourning shall flee away.
2.
Thou have brought me, O God, out of the horrible Pit, out of the Mire and
Clay, and set my feet upon the Rock, and ordered my goings: and have put a new
Song in my mouth: a Song of Thanksgiving to my God.
Mighty Jesus, great are the wondrous works which thou have done; like as be
also thy thoughts which are unto me, sweetest Savior.
I would declare and speak of them, but they are more than I am able to express.
The Snares of Death compassed me round, the Pains of Hell gat hold upon me: I
found trouble and sorrow, but thou have heard the voice of my cry and saved me.
My Soul thou have delivered from Death, mine Eyes from Tears, and my Feet from
Falling.
I cried unto thee, and thou have healed me.
Thou have brought up my Soul from the Grave, thou have kept me alive that I
should not go down into Hell.
I will therefore walk before the Lord in the Land of the Living: and thy
Statutes will I make my Songs in the House of my Pilgrimage: yea, my delight
shall be ever in thy Commandments.
I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous Judgments: Away
from me, ye wicked, I will keep the Commandments of my God.
He shall inherit the Land, he shall possess thine holy Mountain, that trusts
in thee.
O quicken thou me in the way; I wait for thee in the way of thy Truth: the
desire of my Soul is to thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee.
How sweet are thy words unto my throat! yea, sweeter are they than honey in my
mouth.
Thy Words are found by me, and I did eat them, and thy Word was unto me the
joy and rejoicing of my heart.
The Lord himself is the Portion of mine Inheritance, and of my Cup: I am my
Welbeloveds, and my Welbeloved is mine.
The Lot is fallen unto me in a fair ground; yea, I have a goodly Heritage.
How amiable are thy dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts! My Soul has a desire and
longing to enter into the Courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh rejoice in
the living God;
Who feeds in pleasant Pastures, and leads me beside the Waters of Comfort.
Therefore my Song shall be always of thy loving kindness: with my mouth will I
ever be showing thy Truth from one Generation to another.
O praise the Lord, all ye his Hosts: sing unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his,
and give thanks at the remembrance of his Holiness.
Let the Heavens rejoice, and the Earth be glad: for this is the day which the
Lord has made; a day to be had in everlasting remembrance.
No sooner had he ended, but his honest Guide came to prepare him to set out on
his Pilgrimage; but entering in upon him, found him almost elevated from the
ground, with his arms stretched forth as if they meant to grasp something very
much desired, and his eyes fixed upwards; whilst a lovely Angel-like brightness
shone upon his face, rendering his Devotion most amiable. The Guide was so
delighted to view this heavenliness in his beloved Charge, that he would have
retired back, through fear of interrupting him.

But the Youth discovers him; and ashamed that he was seen, modestly turns
aside, saying to him, My dear Father, have you brought me my Eubulus with you?
To which he answered, Eubulus indeed left us at the Temple in great haste, but
I judge it was only to set his Pilgrims a little onward the way; after which
he may have better leisure for us. Why sure then (said the Youth) he might have
taken me along with him too. Must I alone be left behind? Once I am confident
he thought me not unworthy of his care and pity; else why did he not suffer me
to perish? why kept he me from dropping into ruin? Has he delivered me from so
many Enemies, Precipices and Dangers, to forsake me at last?

CHAP. XI.
The Fruits of Eubulus his Mission.

JUst then as they were speaking, they thought they heard a clacking at the
outer wicket of the Lodge: And as soon as it was opened, who should they find
waiting there, but this very same Eubulus; whom their joy presently introduced?
Which joy was so great, that a good while was spent in profound gazing on each
other, in mutual Embraces, and in all the Arts of silent endearments; before
they knew how to express it in words, or welcome (any otherwise) their
long-expected Stranger.

The first who broke silence was the young Penitent: Pray tell me (said he) my
dearest Monitor, how you came this day to leave us; tell me, good Eubulus, why
we parted so abrupty at the Temple. I was even afraid you had forgot me. You
see, my dear Son (said Eubulus) that for your sake I am returned again so soon:
nor could I in truth be any longer absent from you, although I knew you here to
be safe enough; yea, as well as my heart could wish you. My rejoicing was
almost unutterable, to find you to day in so holy a place and posture as I did:
and much more to find you (pointing at Theosophus) with this Reverend men. But
pardon me if I could not tarry then to speak unto you, through fear of such
Irregularities as might perchance have happened, had I left the care of those
poor Pilgrims I conducted thither. Whence I carried them strait to a Shepherds
Cottage hard by, who is called Vranius, more innocently pleasant than those of
whom Arcadia boasts; and unto him have committed them, until you also be fitted
for the Journey, so as to bear them company.

The Youth could not here forbear from embracing him again, and telling him how
much he longed to be on this Journey to the Holy Land. And as the two aged
Fathers were discoursing about their great Concerns, he could think of nothing
but his Journey, and the miraculousness of his recovery from the Grave. All
within him was transport of Joy and Gladness, and in the very midst of his
Discourse he would say unto himself, Rejoice therefore, O my Soul, and praise
thy Lord, who has at last brought thee back unto himself. Rejoice with me, ye
glorious Spirits who attend his Throne, being always ready to congratulate the
recovery of a dying Soul; and all ye who have left the World and put on Palmers
Weeds, that there is one more added to your number. I have received the Calice
of Salvation, and will therefore be glad: My Soul shall always praise the Lord.
And then he would start, and speak again to his Friends, and then speak
inwardly to himself, But what made thee to be so kind to me, holy Jesu? What
have I ever done to merit thus thy favor? Could thou see any thing worthy
of thee, in a leprous Soul spotted with those innumerable Stains and
Defilements? Thus was he fixed upon Heaven, and thus conversed with the place
of his Desire: whereas none can conceive the pleasure of his thoughts, but
those good Souls who have at any time felt the like, and are not altogether
unacquainted with Celestial Ravishments. Then presently he took Eubulus, and
with all the expressions of Gratitude imaginable, related unto him aside, what
great things the good and wise Theosophus had done for his Soul, the several
passages of his Sickness, and the whole course of its Cure. He now divided his
Joy with his Grief, so as not one should lessen the other, and so as you could
not guess which was the greatest; while he told him of the many Diseases of his
Sin-sick Soul, and the Infernal Troops that had haunted him, and cohabited with
him, and how miraculously he was rescued from their Tyranny; aggravating the
foulness of his Crimes, and the baseness of his Apostasy, and extolling as high
as he was able the Goodness of his Redeemer. This was very glad News, you may
be sure, to his Eubulus; who would have been content to hear him a longer while
recount those pretty sad Occurrences and joyful Changes.

When Theosophus, the Sun being about setting, called them to sit down to a
frugal Supper. Now because it was a day so solemn, in which, besides, the
divine Goodness brought all these things to pass; a Feast to them of such great
Rejoicing both for what it remembered, and for what had happened in it; one
part of Theosophus his Vision hereby being happily fulfilled, and they so
surprizingly met: Before they sat down, they judged it fit therefore to send
up their Praises (with the Choir of all Creatures) to the supreme Majesty of
Heaven and Earth. For they (good Souls) who thought themselves bound at all
times, and for all things, to pay Him tributary Thanks, could not at this time,
and for so many things, forbear from turning their Congratulations of each
other, into Adorations of Him. Does not (said one of them) every Creature which
is in Heaven, and on the Earth, and under the Earth, and such as are in the
Sea, and all that are in them, bow down and worship our Creator? And can we
alone of all his Creatures be silent? Then they bowed all three, and said,
Glory be to God on high! Blessing, honor, glory, and power, be unto him that
sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever. Blessed be the Lord our
God from everlasting to everlasting. With Seraphins, Cherubins, Thrones,
Virtues, Powers, Dominations, Principalities, Archangels, Angels, the holy
Animals surrounding the Throne of the Great King, the four and twenty Elders,
all the mighty Princes and glorious Lovers in that happy Court, all the
heavenly Hosts, with these and all the Pilgrims arrived there, Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, Widows, holy
Doctors, and all holy and humble Men and Women; we praise thee, we bless thee,
we worship thee, we give thanks unto thee, and shall ever love, O God, to
celebrate thy Glories. -- For this let no profane Person blame their Piety.

After they were seated at the Table, and the Supper was blessed, Theosophus
said to Eubulus, You satisfied me; but now how much Calodulus stirred himself
to get off the imprisonment from you, and both my other Friends and dear
Assistants! but I long to hear how you have succeeded in your Labors. The
Youth told him also, He was impatient to know what had befallen him, since he
was taken from him by those ill men; and where he came to light on those
Pilgrims whom he spoke of. Eubulus promised to tell them in order what they
desired, and thus began.

Most Reverend Father Theosophus, after that you had sent me out, together with
my worthy Fellow Laborers in Christ, Orthodoxus and Vranius, to visit the
Roads and Highways, with charge that we should bring to you all the Sick and
the Lame we could find, to be healed and made whole; and that we should give
Directions to, and set aright as many as straggle out of their way, and proffer
them safe conduct to the Holy Land; and had therefore disposed us for several
parts, that we might bring the more in unto you, and gather a company of
Pilgrims not inconsiderable for their number: We all, after about a years
Travels, met together, according to our promise, in the delightful Valley of
Edena, to give each other an account of our success; but without any intent of
returning back to you as yet. We had sad Stories enough to tell one to another;
and here we passed some weeks, employing them as well as we could. I should be
of a very hard nature, if I could without Tears relate unto you how ill we
succeeded. For though we said never so much, we could not persuade the Sick
that they were so; and those who halted thought themselves to run in the Paths
of Righteousness: they that were poor, esteemed themselves most rich; and they
that were miserable, most happy: If any one was so misled as to lose himself,
he yet verily believed that all the World beside was lost, and he alone in the
Way which would bring him to Paradise. Nay, some thought they should possess
the Canaan of the Blessed, without so much as going through the Red Sea, or
passing over Jordan; without being baptized into the Death of Christ, or
purified in the River of Life that parts our eternal Happiness. As many as were
able ran from us, and those that were not able, made a shift to crawl away, and
kick at us. My Advice was disgustful and harsh: Orthodoxus's Reason not at all
agreeable to their Errors: and even the Pleasantness and divine Eloquence of
our Vranius liked not. We all suffered very much, only I think if there were
any difference of our Sufferings, Orthodoxus had the hardest measure. Having
now past these Storms and Brunts of the World, here I told you we thought to
rest.

But the HOLY WAR growing still more fierce, we could not expect to lie long
hid in our beloved Retirement. The Soldiers who were sent to ravage that part
of the Country, quickly found us out, and made us their Prisoners. As we were
tumultuously carried thence, (Good God!) how many dismal sights had we before
us, and round about us! I am sure it was not over-pleasant to our eyes to see
such Harras and Havoc made everywhere; to see the Earth laden with dead
Bodies, and the Waters mixed and defiled with Blood. The Devils themselves
might glut their Envy, with seeing what we saw. In truth, nothing ever frighted
us more.

My Friends, I have often (said Theosophus) lamented by my self the Folly of
these Pilgrims nowadays, who maintain this Holy War; a War which is not,
alas, to win (as of old it was) the Holy Land, or gain the Jerusalem of the
Lord; but even about the Way thither. Than which, my Eubulus, can any thing be
more ridiculous, more unhappily ridiculous? It would be a very strange madness,
methinks, in any one, to denounce open Hostility against all such as do not go
with him in the same Road.

Yet so it was (said Eubulus) by these Pilgrim-Souldiers who professed to fight
under his Banner who is Lord of all the mighty Hosts; we were seized in that
place, only for not going the way as they did: In that we thought it safest to
be conducted by Moses and Aaron, the Secular and Ecclesiastic Powers; (quietly
following them thorough this World, this Wilderness of Sorrow and mishaps, into
the Land of gread Plenty and Gods faithful Promises, which is on the other
side:) and refused to join with any gainsaying Corah or rebellious Dathan,
against the Priestly or the Kingly Office; so to be swallowed up into Hell with
the Transgressors. I thank my God heartily for whatever I sustained at their
hands, and shall quite pass it over. Only the loss of a small Casket which just
before we were taken I threw unwillingly into the River, does now somewhat
trouble me: for looking back, I think I saw a young man take it up.

With that Theosophus delivers to him the little Box, which had caused such a
Commotion in him, when on the shore of Thamus his melancholy stream, he lay a
while agone so low dejected. This, as he designed it should, surprised Eubulus
very strangely. Who with great signs of wonder taking it into his hands, and
kissing it, desired to know by what Providence he came by it. In answer
whereunto Theosophus gave him the Story, in as few words as he could, of what
had passed since their departure, and of his meeting with the two Youths
Parthenius and Theophilus.

So rising from Supper, satisfied with the good things that Providence had
prepared, and refresht with such pious and profitable Relations; they ended it
with this Paschal Hymn, Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, therefore let
us keep the Feast, -- 1 Cor. c. 5. v. 7, etc. These three Friends, while they
sat at Table, were much more delighted with the sweets of Temperance and
innocent Mirth, than others are usually with all the abundance of a luxurious
Feast; and when they rose, were not rendered unapt to praise him who had fed
them.

Eubulus would have put off what remained, to another opportunity, but that
Theosophus was willing to hear it out, and the young Convert was very uneasy,
till he knew what befell him, after they two were separated.

Well, said Eubulus, I will proceed: We were, as I have told you (speaking to
Theosophus) by the diligent working of that Calodulus, a most faithful Servant,
you know, unto the Loyal Philanax (that but lately was so judicially and yet so
barbarously butchered;) soon set at liberty. You may remember also that I told
you by what Art of his, Theomachus was prevailed with to release Orthodoxus,
who was in danger to tarry behind us. Thus we, who expected none other delivery
but that of Death, were by the gracious appointment of Heaven, after a very
short stay, delivered. Orthodoxus thereupon, I think, meant to leave the
Island; Vranius, as a Shepherd, returned to the charge of his Flock; and I,
lastly, went in search after this Youth who sits by me, purposing never to see
your face, until I should have found out either him, or some other bewildered
Pilgrim, and brought him hither to be set and directed by you into the Way of
Truth. Whom I found indeed heedlesly roving in the Paths of Death: [At this the
abashed Youth modestly casting down his looks upon the ground, with Tears and
Blushes, softly said unto himself, I remember my Folly:] But in which I shall
ever rejoice, I gained him over. Several times before, dear Sir, he had refused;
but now, contrary to his custom, he thanked me for my Charity, and with an
honest freeness consented to follow me.

We were not far from your Lodge, unto which the good old Eusebius had directed
us, when the Tragedy first began. But you both know I am no Tragical Relator,
and always love to pass such things by. Besides, this Youth can tell it better
than I can.

After that you, my dear Youth, was torn from me by those Lictors of Conscience
we met with in the Fields, I for some while heard your pitiful cries and
shrieks; but not any ways able to deliver you out of their bloody hands, I
walked up and down in the Woods sorrowing, and quite despairing then ever to
see you again. While I was thus sorrowfully walking alone, this same Prayer,
which I can yet remember, struck mine ears.

Most merciful, most holy A Prayer for the Church in time of Persecution and
Tumults.
Father, how is thy Name profaned, thy Truth slighted, thy Temples polluted!
how are we driven up and down like Sheep without a Shepherd! Though we are the
Sheep of thy Hand, and part of thy Possession, yet are we scattered. Why do the
People rage, and imagine thus a vain thing against the Lord, and against his
Christ? Behold, O Lord, and have mercy: O let not the Gates of Hell prevail
against thy Church. Thou have promised that they shall not prevail. Be
merciful, be merciful, for thy Names sake have mercy on us; lest we faint and
die in this Wilderness, and enter not into the Land of thy Promises, into the
Regions of Peace and Charity, there to be blessed to all eternity with the
fruition of thy Glory. Do thou, O God, who art the Author of Peace, and the
Lover of Concord, in knowledge of whom stands our eternal Life, whose service
is perfect freedom, the most absolute liberty; defend us thy humble Servants,
thy poor Pilgrims, from all the Assaults either open or secret, from within us
or without us, of our and thine Enemies, that we surely trusting in thy
Defense, may not fear the Power of any Adversaries Spiritual or Temporal,
through the Might of Jesus Christ the Prince of Peace, our Lord and our
Protector. Amen.

As I was considering whence it should come, a Lad running unto me courteously
entreated me to step into the next Cave; for that (he said) several Pilgrims
were hidden therein, to avoid the heat of the Persecution, who against the
approaching Solemnities of Easter, desired to ease themselves by humble
Confession.

I followed him, and having entered the Cave, found there Eusebius, that pious
aged Pilgrim I told you of, the humble Chamalus, the abstemious Sophron, the
weeping Anselmus, the incomparably devout Maria, the chaste and matchless
Parthenia, and the little lovely Child Erastus; all sitting together in a knot,
entertaining each other in their turns with discourses of Piety and Religion. I
heard them striving to celebrate that wonderful, that unknown Sorrow of their
Lord, which was then by Holy Church commemorated, (it being the Passion-week;)
but finding no Words were able to express it, they tried whether Tears could:
and seemed (I think) to speak it best in the flittingness of their Eyes, and
the burstingness of their Hearts. With beholding this goodly Spectacle I was
highly pleased. And through fear lest I should disorder it, I stopped my self
together with the Lad, whose name is Areteus, as soon as we were entered. But
spying us, they came forthwith to the Caves mouth, carried me in, and showed
far greater respect toward me truly than I either deserve, or can with modesty
relate. From thence, after that week of Sorrow was over, I brought them to the
Temple, the place of our happy unexpected meeting.

Then turning to the young Convert, and embracing him, he said, Now, my dearest
Son, (for so I love still to call you) never were my gray hairs delighted with
any thing more than with this your Return into the Bosom of our afflicted
Church; afflicted and despised indeed, like her Lord and Master, crucified
betwixt both the extremes of Superstition and Profaneness. Your Friend
Theophilus has ever since I told him of your Rambling, sought after you
sorrowing, and now concludes that you are dead. How glad will he be when we
shall surprise him with this News!

Eubulus was here called away in haste by a Shepherds Boy, whereupon taking his
leave of them abruptly, he only said, that he hoped ere long to see his young
Friend on his Pilgrimage. Both could discern much sorrow in his looks, and
would very fain have stopped him to know the cause thereof; but he being gone,
were very much (especially the Youth) troubled at his sudden departure.

CHAP. XII.
Timotheus relates his Travels unto the Burning Vale of Tophet.

ON the morrow the good old man and his Guest walking forth into the Fields to
delight themselves with the pleasant resurrection of the Spring, very
melancholy that Eubulus had the night before so left them, they discoursed
together, remembering his parting words concerning this intended Pilgrimage to
seek out the Site of Paradise.

I purposed yesterday, said the good man, forthwith to set you out on your
Journey with Eubulus, had he not been called away from us; but now it has so
fell out, I would have you tarry with me a while longer: and that I may be the
better able to direct you in the Pilgrimage which you design, I must beg, my
Friend, since we are in the open air, and have leisure, to hear from you the
History of your Life and your Travels, and how you came to be left in that
miserable condition wherein I first found you, upon which Eubulus but slightly
touched.

Reverend Father, (answered the Guest) I will, as well as I am able, relate
unto you what you desire; though I am not now the same man I was, and can
therefore only give you a troublesome relation, (which you will not like) of a
third person; having put off and disowned quite my former self, received at
your hands a second Life, and therewith learnt almost to forget my past one.
But thus it was.

I was born on that happy day wherein all Hearts were glad to see the great
Basilius ascend his Fathers Throne; and was soon after solemnly initiated, by
Proxies, into the Christian Faith. Ever since I have worn the Badge thereof,
and am called TIMOTHEVS; for at the sacred Font I received that Name: there the
holy man took me into his arms and blessed me. During my Infancy it was very
difficult to judge which way my natural Bent did incline me. Yet there were
some, who (perhaps to flatter my Parents) would often praise my childish looks
and gestures, and seem to read my future Destiny in the Cradle. As soon as ever
I could prattle and talk, my Mother did her endeavor to infuse into me the
Principles of Religion, and by winning Artifices to betray me to my Duty. And
being afterward continually under the inspection of a Father and a Tutor, I
behaved my self so as not to miss of their Applause; nor could my Nature (being
so restrained) in all this while break out: till at last I was sent to an
Uncle, who inhabits the further part of this Island, to avoid the Infection of
the Town which increased daily. Who received me with great expressions of Joy,
taking truly, whilst I tarried with him, no less care of me than of his own
Son. At his House I became acquainted with an excellent person, one Theophilus,
whom I remember that last night both you and Eubulus spoke concerning; a Youth
indeed of such noble Qualities and heroic Virtues, which made him attract the
hearts of all who ever beheld him. I for my part was ravished with the native
sweetness of his Temper, and found no delight except in his company; whom alone
I made my Friend and Partner of my Breast. But alas! after some few months, I
received the fatal Message of my Mothers death, and of my Fathers taking to the
Wars.

It was a good while before I could recover of that Grief, with which I was
seized by so unwelcome News. But I was no sooner come to my self, when out of a
mad humoursome Frolic, I resolved to forsake my dearest Friends, and amongst
them the good Theophilus also, who has ever since, it seems, been seeking me.
And to this end I persuaded my self, that I was now free from all Encumbrances
of filial Obligations, and at liberty to rove whither my Fancy should lead me.

Thereupon leaving my Uncle's house, I saw (...), etc. D. Barnab. Epist. p.
248. Voss.
two Ways; the one was a small unbeaten Trac, overgrown with Briars and
Bushes, trodden only by a few poor despicable Pilgrims: the other was a large
spacious Road, paved under feet with the richest Marble, impaled with Towns and
Cities on each side, and everywhere adorned with many curious and magnificent
Structures. Which as soon as I perceived to be crowded with such vast
multitudes of people, expressing Mirth and Jollity in their face and gesture, I
could not be long detained from mixing my self among them, to find if there was
any thing worthy to delight so numerous and confused an Oglio of all Languages
and Nations.

But as I was joining my self unto this pleasant Crew, there came up to me a
venerable aged man, who pulling me by the sleeve called me aside. Honest Friend
(says he) I am sorry to find you in this place, and with such Company. You
mistake these men very much, if you guess at them by their looks: they are in
truth the most fool^sh and unhappy Creatures in the World. Is it any pleasure,
think you, to die with Laughter, or to run skipping into the Flames of TOPHET?
Do you count those men the only wise whose Frenzy makes them merry: or those
happy alone who run hoodwinkt upon Misery? Having spoke these few words with
more than ordinary vehemence, he was interrupted by them; for they had now
perceived him discoursing with me, and knew presently what was therein his
design. Wherefore some of them plucked him by the Beard, others flung Dirt at
him, some also spitting in his face, called him Old Dotard, whilst even Boys
too taunted and reviled him, and the most moderate of any bad him depart.

Thus being rid of my cumbersome Monitor, I accepted of their company, and
freely assented to march along with them, and conform my self to their Example
in every thing. I first asked several of those who stood nearest me, to what
place they were traveling so fast? Some said to this place, and some to
another; but the more Ingenuous told me they knew not whither. Although I was
not much satisfied with such Answers, yet was I resolved to follow so jovial a
Gang, if it were even to the Devil.

Then justling presently into the Throng, I was in an instant carried on
several miles, before I knew my self to be moved one step forwards; till we
came to a stately Palace very commodiously placed upon this Road, to entertain
such unhappy misled Travelers as pass continually by. I was glad to rest my
self any-where, and therefore without much ado yielded to take Repast at this
Royal Inn, into which I was easily introduced among the rest. Where to see the
flocking of Courtiers about a Stranger, made me welnigh run beside my Wits.
Some accosted me with many ceremonious Salutations, interfering pretty
fashionable Oaths and modish Curses with their words: Others demanded what News
from the Camp, and what both Armies intended to do that Summer; and one of a
more comical humor than any of the rest, very gravely delivering himself in
Redouts, Mantelets, Courtines, Palisades, and a thousand other as lofty
Bantrums, would needs read to me a Lecture of the Art of War: Another sort
would seem to pry deepest in all the Machivellian Artifices, and Muscovitish
Frauds of crafty Statesmen; delighting to discourse of the Intrigues of
foreign Courts. But the most pleasant of all were in my mind a parcel of
Amorous Fools, as void of Sense as they were of Virtue. Had you but heard their
Vows, their Protestations, their Dyings for Chloe a gaudy painted Queen, a foul
rotten prostituted Strumpet; you would wonder that ever men could arrive to
such a degree of Madness. Their immodest Pranks and filthy Pleasures, their
lascivious Glances, their Dresses, their Motions, Gellies, passionate and
languishing Speeches, had so much of the Devil in them, and so much of foolish
Sin, and frantic Vice, that you I believe would have taken it for the very
Bedlam of Hell. There sat an old decrepit dothing Lover, writhen-faced and
bald-pated, toothless and blear-eyed, wantonly flickering over a young Girl:
and there an old deformed Crone that could neither see nor hear, set off with
her Pencil and Alembick-waters, caterwauling after a lusty Youth. You might
have seen many of these philter'd and bewitched even to a piece of Pastbord, a
painted Fiend, a bedaubed Picture. And if you observed too the effects thereof,
you might have seen Paleness in this man's face, and Flushings in the others:
one was burnt, and another freezed; was either scorched with Flames, or
dissolved into Tears; had either his Blood clodded with cold Damps and
Affrightments, or his Heart tortured with excessive Burnings. These discoursed
to me of their Amors, their Assignations, how many Hearts they had won, and
suchlike: enquired of me with what Ladies I had familiarity; how I liked
Lesbia's Chin, and how the Eyes of Glycerium pleased me: whether Clelia's
strait Limbs, or Chione's curiously curled Hair, did most become them: and
whether the captivating Speech of Pamphila, or the phained Languishings and
pretty Coyness of Philaenis were most worthy.

Whilst we were thus foolishly talking, up there came to us a hussing
Swaggerer, that could speak nothing but Rodomontades and Gasconades, whose
bombast Phrases and lofty far-fetcht Metaphors made us indeed excellent sport.
One that sat by jogged me, saying, This is the Court-Buffoon; he discourses
never but in the Style of Romances, in the same Style he courts his Mistress,
and their high strains he picks out to complement a Stranger with: he will now
run you over his Adventures surpassing all the stories of Knight-Errantry that
ever you have read, and in Military Terms describe you the winning of a sorry
weak Lady. After him a light finical Monsieur came to welcome me, whose
ridiculous and freakish humor was not more to be laughed at than pitied;
though pitied but by few, and laughed at by all the men of Sense; And many
others also whom I have forgotten, not worthy to be remembered.

All this while there sat a Fellow very fullenly eyeing us, which made me
enquire who he was, and wherefore he separated himself: One whispered me in the
ear, that we reverenced him not enough, being too familiar in the presence of
his new Lordship. Telling me he had given no less than two hundred Crowns unto
an Herald, to derive his Pedigree from such a Malo pater tibi sit Thersites,
dummodo tu sis Aeacidae similis -- Juven.
Lord or Marquess, whose Family had lain defunct as many years: and that there
was such ado to prove him descended from that Lords youngest Son, reported to
have died during his Minority; that to bring this about, the old fusty
Registers and worm-eaten Writings are sifted, and Names altered or forged: when
in truth this vainglorious Coxcomb is but just risen from the Dunghill, having
for his true Father a beggarly canting Rogue, who for Burglary, Theft, and
Murder, was hanged upon a Gibbet: and he himself raised to that pitch by
minting false and counterfeit Money, robbing on the Highway, Lifting, Gaming,
Sharking upon raw Country-Gentlemen. One of his Friends (he told me) had stolen
the very Ensigns of Magistracy, because tipped with Ore, and that he balked not
after this to cast his filching eye upon the Diadem and Regal Ornaments: and
his Brother also attainted for the most prodigious Sacrilege that ever was
heard of, who could pretend Piety and a Sacrifice to the God of Heaven, even to
plunder his Sanctuary, and to take thence the Golden Chalice and Sacred
Utensils, in which just before he had received the most adorable Symbols of Life
and Salvation. He showed me others by him who had made themselves by the more
lawful Thieveries of their Trades, by Cheats and Over-witting: and others
advanced by mere Fortune, or their extraordinary Demerit.

I was now ready to bite my fingers for hunger, when there came up with the
Dinner a long train of Waiters and Servitors, as if whole Forests and Rivers
were to be massacred for, and Hecatombs of Lives were not enough to satiate the
Luxury of one Family. My stomach was not very mannerly, for I could scarce
forbear falling to: But before the Dishes were marshalled, the Guests seated,
and the Victuals carved, I thought I should even starve; not liking at all to
be thus tantaliz'd.

With your leave, Father, I will pass over their mysterious Arts of eating,
their ways of provoking a dull Appetite, and the gentile Intricacies of Cookery
here used; which even the most infamous Apitius, the most beastly Voluptuary
might blush to own. But yet their Guts (I can sadly remember) knew not shame:
the keenest Satyrs were not able to pierce them. For highly honorable they
esteemed it thus to pamper their Flesh: in this sense to make Gods of their
Bellies, sacrificing unto them the Preys of both Sea and Land.

I am ashamed to tell how destructive this voluptuous Entertainment proved not
to them alone, but even to our selves, and what a change it wrought upon this
wretched Carcass of mine. Sloth, Heaviness, uneasiness of Mind, straitwith
seized me. The Blood became corrupted, the Humors disordered, the Eyes dim; my
whole Body distempered, my Understanding clogged with indigested loads of
Meat, and clouded with unwholesome Fumes; my Brains dulled, my Spirits
oppressed. So that hereby I was rendered wholly unapt for any Exercise of
Devotion, any Duty of Religion: I was made unable to stir one step to seek out
Paradise, or to turn out of this Road into which I had entered.

Now being detained thus fast by the bewitchings of Intemperance, I was carried
to see a Play. And truly Mr. Bays the Poet bestir'd himself; for methoughts he
dressed up Vice so awkwardly, that we could not choose but laugh, and yet liked it
nevertheless. The Follies and the Indiscretions, and the Humors of a
ridiculous or a puny Sinner, were laughed at, whilst a more gentile and daring
Bravo in Sin, come off with credit, was made the Hero of his Play. Such Arts
had he of wooing the Desires, debauching the Phant'sie, as if the Poets Trade
was to be Pandar unto the Lusts of every Spectator. Nor could the Poet yet with
all his Cunning, afford us Fuel enough for our Vice, without the help of such
gaudy Prostitutes as flocked hither.

Theosophus here interrupts him, saying, It is observed by an Tertull. de
Spectac. Sacrarium Veneris, c. 6
ancient Guide, that when Pompey the Great built his Theater, fearing lest the
leudness and impiety of the Shows, the horrible liscentiousness of the Scenes,
might in aftertimes cause it to be pulled down and utterly demolished; he
under a pretext of Religion dedicated it unto the Goddess Venus, and would have
it called by the name of her Temple; and so I think it ever since has remained.
The Devil that seized a Christian at these Sights, being demanded by the
Exorcist wherefore he durst do this, answered, it was his own Ground, and he
did nothing but what was right. Whether his Plea be now just the same as it was
then, I cannot tell; but the History I am afraid is too daily verified in the
greatest number that frequent that place. It may be the effeminate Gallants of
our Age, who by the burnings of Lust love to antedate their Hell, scarce count
this a Punishment, and are ready almost to think the Devil good company that
can be where such Mirth is. Indeed the Primitive Institution of the Stage was
to correct Vice: now into what a World are we come, when that which ought to
correct, is made to cherish Vice?

Then Timotheus went on again: After this the Ladies had me to a Ball. When I
know not by what chance, looking but up to Heaven, there fell a drop of Gall (I
think it was) into mine eyes, which made them see clearer, and discern it to be
the ghastly Reveiles of impure Satyrs and womanish Devils. But such Witchcraft
was in their eyes, that by but looking on them I my self was transformed into
one of them, and now took them for Angels. For here I first saw, and then
admired, my Corinna.

In such pleasures and disports as these, whilst I tarried here, I lavished
away my time. Having gained so much familiarity in so short a space, I began
now to be more inquisitive, and to ask admittance into the Presence Chamber.
What, says one, you would see the King, the Protector of the afflicted
Pilgrims, and Defender of their Faith: You are much mistaken; that doting
superstitious Prince is not to be found amidst these Revellings and Pleasures,
amidst the Joys and loose Caresses of this courtly and happy life. Believe me,
you nowhere find him upon this Road, which he has left for yonder narrow
scraggie one. We hope the Sanhedrim will ferrit him about. A poor miserable
Prince! his own Subjects rob him of his Crown, and plat a Crown of Thorns upon
his Head.

One day as we were in the midst of our wild Jollity, we heard a noise and
hurry in the Street. Every one went to see what was the matter; so that I was
left alone. I was not long so; for no sooner were they gone, but in steps that
same venerable person, who would have hindered my first ingress into this Road.
Who coming to me before I was aware, thus spoke to me with Tears: What have I
caught you here, young man? At this I was so abashed as not to know what to
answer. Well, (continued he) are you now convinced of that I told you? What
Rest or Pleasure do you think to find in this place, which it seems you have
chosen out for your Quarters? Alas, if you do, you are quite deceived: much
easier are they to be found in humble Cottages and Cells, in the poor Retreats
of contented Pilgrims. For all these, whom perhaps you admire and envy for
their Happiness, are indeed the most miserable Wretches that you can fancy to
your self. What, these men miserable (said I) who are thus attended and waited
upon, who feast splendidly, and see no days of sorrow or melancholy? No, no,
you shall not delude me out of my Senses. Tell me not any more of Misery in
this Jovial and Sportsome Company, in such Feastings as these, and the Pomps
and honorable Retinue of this Great Man, the Riches of another, and the
illustrious Name of a third. It may be you saw not how that Lord was adored,
who sat by me. Ah, poor deceived Youth! (he replied) already you have lost
your sight. The Love and the Dust of this World-hath blinded you: embossed
Titles, glorious Vanities, have put out your eyes. Can there in hellish Beauty
appear such Loveliness, or can the bitterness of Aloes taste luscious to your
Palate? Is it so desirable a bliss to be preyed upon by Parasites, to be killed
with the same breath they flatter you? They hold great Ranks, I confess in the
World, and boast much their Pedigree; but who knows whether that Page who was
caught so often smiling upon his Lady, or another trusted Servant, or that
Gentleman Usher who used to steal into her Chamber, or that Physician whose
frequent Visits were so welcome, be not the Father of the Child? Or else
perhaps the Mother (and so it has been known) prostituted her Body to a Groom
of the Stable, or let a Coachman who was privy to all her wanton Rambles,
himself satisfy her Lust? You admire the Riches and the Happiness of yonder
man, his Gold, his Silver, Jewels, Tapistry, and magnificent abundance of every
thing. Why, what of all this? Is he any thing the happier for these precious
Superfluities? Look you but upon them, and you have then quite as much of them
as he; are altogether as rich and happy as the Possessor himself. Do the bags
of Money hoarded in your Coffers do you any more good than if they were carried
back to the Mines again, or drowned in the bottom of the Sea? Does the Owner
enjoy them any more than any other; nay, than the poor Beggar at the door
begging an Alms? And wherefore have Nobles so many stately Palaces? If they
inhabit them not, they may with as good (nay better) reason be said to be the
Palaces of Mice, or the rich Mansions of Spiders and despised Vermin. Can you
envy any man's Burden, wish for this man's Riches and that is Power, for his
Villa's and Lands, and the others Honors? Afar off they appear Admirable and
Great; but nearer at hand nothing at all, nothing but Vanity and Vexation, but
a Snare and Deceit, painted Deformity and most loathed Ugliness. Pray, Son, be
not angry with me for being so free with you; for I know not how to flatter you
with Lies; and by this Habit which I wear, I am obliged to tell you the Truth.
Is the Dropsy a pain to the Body, and Avarice a pleasure to the Soul; the
Tympany a Disease in one, and Pride an Ornament, a gentile Quality in the
other? Does no man care for a Lethargy, and every one seek Security? If the
Fits of an Epilepsie can be so frightful, how much more the Lapses of an
Apostatizing Sinner? Who can endure the Burnings of a Calenture, and is Lust so
pleasant? How much nobler, I pray, is Sloth than the Scurvie; and what is your
Froliking but the Megrim of a dizzie Brain? Whosoever sure can find
satisfaction in any of these, may with as good reason flatter all the Diseases
of humane Bodies, may court the Gibbet and the Rack, and take Torments for most
pleasing Anodynes. Let me but tell you what I heard from a Traveller in this
very same Road; and as coming from such an one I hope it will pierce deeper
into your breast. He is as daring and presumptuous a Sinner, I believe, as ever
traveled herein, a most profligate Wretch that has tried all the ways of lewd
Delight, and left nothing of Wickedness unessayed. Yet with great seriousness
he once confessed, that in no act of Sin he ever took such pleasure, as was
able to counterpoise the sorrow he afterward felt: that he never committed
what is sinful, but that as soon almost he wished it never committed: nor ever
trod one step further, but that he repented he had gone so far. He told me also
what ghastly frighting thoughts he had when he was alone; what uneasiness he
had within him, and what trouble and perplexity he has all along met with in
his Travels. But (which is almost past belief) he is so bewitched, that still
he foolishly continues to run on in this lamentable course: he still as
wilfully as ever persists in his Wickedness, and cannot be persuaded so much as
to step one step backwards. Pray, consider what I say, before it be too late;
for all this but a short melancholy Fit made him acknowledge unto me. Depart
therefore hence; hereafter possibly you may tell me the same as he. By those
past good Deeds which else will be forgotten, by that Duty which you own unto
your Parents, by that Love which once you did (or at least professed to) bear
unto Theophilus, yea by that Love you bear unto your self; I entreat and adjure
you to return with me, to return back into the Path of Life and everlasting
Rewards: You are else, to all Eternity, undone.

I had not time to resolve what to do, before my Company came back; whom the
old man seeing, slipped from me without being discovered. We have seen (said
they) a slight Quarrel raised about the Love of Phillis. Nothing of Hurt is
done: there is only the Soul of Damocles by an unlucky blow sent in the shape
of a Raven to play in the Flames of Hinnom. And by such mad Laughter as this,
were the words of my dear Monitor driven out. In these Jovial Merriments for
several days we continued.

In which space I became acquainted with the voluptuous Hedonius, the whoring
Pamphilus, the impudent Cynoeus, the plotting Panurgus, the ambitious
Philodoxus, the two Libertines Hippomanes and Atheus, the laughing Buffoon
Gelasinus, and the trifling Adolesches, Philecous the Busie-body, Pseudocheus
the great Liar, and his Brother the Spreader of false News Polymythus, the
Master of Complements Eutrapelus, the lascivious Museus amongst the Rhymers,
Biberius among the Drinkers, Huguccio and Pamphagus among the Feeders, the
inconstant Varius, the sloathful Philypnus, and several others that wore the
Devils Mark. Twould be troublesome and tedious unto you, hard for me (having
now forgot many of them) to characterize their Persons, describe their several
Humors, and relate all the Passages, not more vicious and branded, than
ridiculous and odd, which happened during my Abode with them.

Wherefore to omit all that, I being at last quite tired with this kind of
life, resolved one way or another to break out of this stately Prison. (For
that which at first I took for a Palace, I found to be a Gaol.) So having one
day gained a fit opportunity, I fairly left them But I still continued on apace
in my Journey, which now grew more delicious; whole Stages of it being high
stately Piazza's and broad Streets. At length I came to a turning, which
declined toward the left. For I must tell you, that there is above a thousand
Bypath, which though different, or even directly opposite to each other, do
all alike lead unto the dismal Vale of TOPHET. This way was exceeding broad,
and thronged by Passengers, (and those of no ordinary Quality) as much as the
great one. The Streets were all Taverns and Stews, which made me leave the
other common Road, to turn in here for better Accommodation. Whereof there is a
Description between two and three thousand years old; which I need but to use,
it being so exactly fitted thereto, by not only the Wisest of Men, and most
understanding Observator of Humane Actions, but one who had strayed with me in
this very Way, and had experience enough, no man I believe will deny, as having
1 King. 11. 1, 2, 3.
out of his own and all the bordering Nations, no less than seven hundred Wives
Princesses, and three hundred Concubines at his Will.

It was, I remember very well, the Twilight in the Evening, as the Night began
to be black and dark, when I roved up and down therein; and behold, there met
me a woman (Olympia she calls her self) with the Attire of an Harlot, and
subtle of Heart. She caught me and kissed me, and with an impudent face talked
unto me. Come, said she, let us take our fill of Love until the Morning, let us
solace our selves with Loves. With much fair Speech she caused me to yield,
with the flattering of her Lips she forced me. She caught me again and kissed
me: but mine heart already declined to her ways, I went astray in her Paths, I
(poor Wretch) followed her straightway, as an Ox goes to the slaughter, and as
a Fool to the correction of the Stocks: as an Ox that thinks he is a going to
the Pasture, willingly goes to his own Destruction; and as a Bird hastes to
the Snare, not knowing that she is in danger; so I saw the Bait, and catched
after it, but guessed not that it was for my Life. Not but that her House I
knew well enough to be the way unto Hell, and the going down to the Chambers of
Death, though with her Eyes I was so strangely fascinated, as not to consider
this; but rather to esteem these outer Courts of the Eternal Prison my Heaven
and my Paradise. Here also I lighted upon Corinna and Glycerium, Rhodope and
Pamphila, Philumena and Coelia; and taken with their Beauty, went in unto them;
not knowing (or not thinking) that the Dead were there, and that their Guests
were in the depths of Hell. For their Lips dropped as the Honeycomb, their
Speech was smoother than Oil; but their End proved bitter as Wormwood, sharp as
a two-edged Sword. Their Feet every one could spy went downward, and their
Steps took hold on Everlasting Death: They all hunted for the precious Life.
Hence a Wound and Dishonor I got: I gave mine Honor unto others, and my Years
unto the Cruel: Strangers parted my Wealth, and my Labors were in the house of
a Stranger; and I mourned at last when my Flesh and my Body was consumed. This
is the true sad Account that I can give you of Solomon's simple one, and his
young man that is void of Understanding. Many were my Adventures in this place,
but so bestial, and so foolish, that I think they will be much better passed by
than related.

I was surprised to meet with here those very same men that I had left behind
me at the Palace; who after they had chid me for so leaving them, told me
however they were very glad to find me where they did. And having now at last
by my abode here, got Vice and Impudence enough, I was willing to return with
them to the Princes Court; but was prevented by seeing just before me a very
great City: to which I made haste. Whereinto being entered, I met with so many
Cheats, that I was afraid to tarry long. The Shops were filled with
sophisticated Wares, Lying and Deceit maintained the general Burse; and unto
these every one had served his Apprenticeship. Injustice and Falsehood was in
every place, and in every corner this most excellent Aphorism, viz WHATSOEVER
TE WOULD THAT MEN SHOULD DO TO YOU, DO YOU EVEN SO TO THEM, was inverted.

Departing hence, I went on a good way, without meeting any thing that I
remember considerable; till at last, casting mine eyes about, I chanced to spy
a mad man flinging handfuls of Gold up into the air. This he did, and many
other absurd fantastic Pranks, as ridiculous and expensive, to gain the
Applause of the Bystanders. The Shouts and merry Echoes of the busy
Applauders, and their Peals of loud Laughter had for a pretty while rung in his
ears. He had now emptied since I came several large Coffers in a trice; and to
complete his brave Extravagancy, he takes out of a small iron Chest what was
left of his Patrimony, a bundle of Deeds. Which instead of Love Letters and
Billets-doulx, he sends unto his Mistress Coelia. So not I alone, but every one
also of those who were nearest to him, deserts him forlorn and hopeless.

When I saw an old Beggar, Chrysocancrio by name, a poor wretched wanting
Caitive, bereaved of all the Necessaries of Life, and almost famisht with
pinching Hunger and Cold; scraping together those pieces of Money out of the
Mire. And having therewith filled an huge Trunk, he stood purdieu, like the
Hesperian Dragon, to keep the Fleecy Gold. He appeared to watch very fearfully,
lest his fingers should steal any thing thence, against his will, to buy him a
piece of Bread. Though I laughed at the other, this I could not choose but pity,
and would fain have helped; had I not been called away to see one more raving
mad than either of these.

His Looks were fierce and killing, his Hair bristled, his Eyes sparkled, his
Mouth foamed, his Head joggled, his Voice was shril and piercing, his Brow
frowning, and his Hands clutched. One while he would stamp and rend his
Clothes, then beat his Breast, and tear his Hair; most dreadfully too he glared
on me. This was the miserable raging Thumicus; followed he was by his Wife
Xantippe the Scold.

By this time my old Monitor had again overtaken me; whose Voice ran before, as
fast as he could send it, to call me back, and was ingeminated with bitter
cries. The face of Thumicus began to burn and glow more terribly and direly
than it had before, when my Monitor caught hold on me, and said, You shall
presently see all the Hags in Hell light their Torches at that Wretches face.
But I could not now bear the company or the words of so reverend a man, and
therefore thrust him from me; who departed holding up his hands and praying, I
guess, for my Conversion. But, according as he said, the mad Bedlamwretch was
instantly all in a flame, as if indeed he was preparing to be the Fuel of Hell,
and all the Vices and the Passions were lighted at his hellish fiery
Countenance. They all blazed out together, and could not any of them be now
suppressed. Whereby he was fitted for all acts of Villainy, and even whatsoever
he was most averse to. The most ran away to avoid him, but those who were left
he fell upon, and one amongst the rest he bruised and beat.

From whom I had scarce got free, before I was encountered by somewhat like a
Sceleton just raised from the Grave; a pale, livid, lean, meagre-faced
Gentleman; whom a Devil, unespi'd by him (O Hellish Martyrdom!) lashed with a
Whip of breaded Snakes. His Speech was hoarse, his Chaps fallen, his Eyes sunk
into his Head, with an unwelcoming cast whereof he welcomed me. And too much
pleasantness, God knows, at that time appeared in my looks, to make this poor
tormented Wretch scowl so gastfully.

You may perhaps have heard of one so ridiculously revengeful, as neither to
eat nor to drink, if he whom he envies but lives on better; this was that very
person: He, like the Cantharides, delighted to feast on others Sores, and was
never merry but at others Sadnesses: He had much rather see himself in Misery,
than his Neighbor in Prosperity; and to go to Tophet alone, than with company
to the Paradise of the Blessed. So was he his own Plague, his own cruel
Tormentor, and the greatest Foe unto himself. The sight of him told me Carrion
could not be far off.

And so I guessed right. For running away from him, as being afraid of so
scraggie and mischievous a Fellow, I fell upon a lubberly unthinking Lurdan
hard by, stretched out (just as I have seen him expressed by the Painters fancy
in his Poetic Regions of Crapulia, or the much-fam'd Isle of Lazy) under a
Tree, from whose laden boughs dropped fair Fruit into his mouth; whilst seven
beautiful Dam'sels were ready with Bowls of spiced Wines to quench his costly
Thirst. I cannot tell whether I was infected by him I last met, or whether it
was from my natural aversion to Sloth (the ugliest in my mind of all the deadly
sins) that could not forbear repining at his Happiness: (For Happiness, alas, I
thought it.) But the Apples which looked so fresh, I soon saw to be the Apples
of Sodom, Rottenness and Ashes; the Grapes, such as discovered our Father
Noah's nakedness; and the Wine whereof he drank, the Wine of Iniquity, and of
eternal Vengeance. Now the Dam'sels which ministered the same unto him,
delighted to prick him with Thorns, and so make him shrug; and then, pulling
off their Vizors, with their ghastly looks forced him to leap down into a
fathomless Deep. After which he was never seen more. Whereat, sore
affrighten'd, I left, with great horror, this sad Spectacle of Luxury and
Sloth, and of the hurtful Dalliance of a wanton Fortune that is attended on by
all the deadly sins, those seven flattering Furies in whorish disguise.

But this stopped me not in my Journey, but I rather went on the faster for it.
For having all sorts of Company to divert my self in, such an Accident as this
could not long trouble me. On this side of me passed the Rash and Foolhardy,
and would fain seem valiant; but that every one judged him fitter to rave in an
Hospital of mad men, than in any other place: his Brain was hot. On the other
side of me passed one whose Blood was thick and muddy, and his Brain frozen;
and he would seem, forsooth, to be wary; but his Mind was really perplexed with
Fears and Disquiets, whence he would startle if a Mouse did but stir, or a Fly
buz in his ear; be frightened out of his little wits at Armies under ground: He
was laughed at by every one, and called Poltron and Dastard. In another File
marched the fond Cockering Mothers, and the cruel Step-dames; they with
Kindness, these with Unkindness, both alike destroying their Children: Then the
Busybodies and the Idle both together; for both had equally nothing to do:
There Sir Formal, and here Squire Freak, waited on by Petulance and Levity: A
nice dapper Fellow on that side; a dirty Slouch on this, who took such a Pet at
the other, that, rather than appear like him, he studied how he might be
offensive unto every one, and was well enough pleased to be thought an Enemy to
all Decency and honest Comeliness; one of a sullen Gravity, and a rugged
Behavior; spruce Ruffillus, and slovenly Gorgonius: The Makebates, and the
Flatterers: The Drunkards staggering, those who had lost their limbs in the
Devils service halting, and not a few who were carried on Couches and
Down-beds: Some (like Dogs) grinned, and others barked; some did fawn, and
others bite: The Fingers of them were crooked. and the Tongues of these were
forked: Some had pointed prying Eyes, and others scowling ones: Some had them
misted with Ignorance, and others bloudshot with Revenge.

After I had thus gone on a good way, I fell into the company of some that
appeared to be utter Enemies to the Devil's Kingdom, and therefore I judged my
self safe, and quite out of my way to him. For these were outwardly so fierce
and zealous Opposers of him, as to fight against him (which you will think
strange) in several Set-Battels with Powder and Shot. Their manner was to bring
back those who (they said) were going to him, with Sword or Fire: they would
pistol or faggot you, if you went not along with them; and cried out, all were
damned and in the way to Tophet, that followed them not. So now having their
Encouragement, and Attestation to the truth thereof, I concluded, it is
impossible for me not to be saved: I shall be happy in both Worlds. Then poor
deluded I traveled down apace with them, ran merrily and blindly on; till at
last we met with their Heads, Merozius, Diotrephes, Santomero, Don Hugo Pedro,
and Mariana. But having long before well enough known them by their names, I
began to think my self, for all this, never the farther from the Devil. But
their beloved Principle, that Dominion is founded in Grace, and that we were
the sole Proprietors of the Earth, kept me from starting back. While I was with
them, they used to discourse very irreverently of the sacred Person of
Basilius, and to rail much against the Heresy (as they called it) of Cyprian.
They talked secretly of many mysterious Intrigues and treacherous Designs
against the Life of our pious Prince; and not only so, but I could hear them
closely project the Ruin and Fall of all Principalities under Heaven. I found
now that their Plottings were not against one peculiar place or Monarch, but
against Government and Monarchy it self, and the whole Managery of the
Universe. In such symbolical them as these, they threatened within the period of
a few years, to lay the Northern Lion Couchant, to transplant the
Fleur-de-Luces into another Soil, to pinion the Wings of the Western Eagle, to
pull down the Triumphant Cross, and make the Crescent Moon dwindle into Stars.

Thus wise did they menace Destruction unto every Land, and boasted their
Readiness and their Power to lay all Kingdoms into Rubbish and Ashes, and to
reduce the whole World into Confusion, Anarchy, and Chaos; as there approached
us Martial men terribly accoutred: who lived upon Blood and Booty, and enquired
of us (not after the best Cause, but) the best Pay. But as they rushed into the
Battle, promising themselves great Honor and great Plunder, some of them were
cut off, and the others were miserably mangled.

I cannot omit to tell you of some who were Spectators of this unhappy Tragedy.
They reserved their Plaudit for the last Act, siding the mean while with both
Parties, sure to neither; christening this their Neutrality, Moderation; their
Temporizing, Religion. The most cunning of whom spoke always in dubious Terms,
leaving themselves a liberty to expound the same, as the Victory should decide,
and Times serve.

At this Theosophus bad him stay; so they both perceived afar off a very hot
Scuffle betwixt two Caravans of Pilgrims; one of them, as near as they could
guess, bearing for their Colors the Lion of Judah rampant, and the other the
mild Lamb of God. These last, they could see, made but small Resistance, and
being not many, were soon routed by the first, who were far more numerous.
Yonder (said the good man) I fear there is our Orthodoxus and Eubulus, with
their Pilgrims. At which they both for some while most sadly wept. But
Theosophus desirous to hear out the Narrative of his Friend, bad him go on,
saying he could not be weari'd at the length thereof, or grow unattentive to
what he so sweetly related.

Which accordingly Timotheus did. After so many Scenes of Madness (said he)
were past, I admired to see a man that could look two ways at once, both behind
and before; whose Discourse and Admonition showed the way to Paradise: whose
Life, to the quite contrary place. Sitting in the Chair of Moses and the
Prophets, there he had learnt to speak fluently the Language of Canaan, the
pious Eloquence, the divine Rhetoric of the Blessed; while in his more retired
Privacies he never but used that of Babylon, of Pride, Impiety, and Confusion;
made all his Actions suit with the Idioms of the Beast and of Hell, the Speech
of the Accursed. Thus going one way, he still pointed another; and advised
every body to go in that, whilst he showed them this.

With him there went a pack of griping hollow-hearted Saints, provided with
double Tongues and most heavenly Visages. These I took for men of another World
at first, (though not long) and verily believed again that I was traveling not
up, but down to Paradise; that we were all certainly trooping thither. Do you
see, then said one, yonder demure Precisians, casting up their sanctified looks
to Heaven? They that without appear as mortified and holy as the Primitive
Pilgrims, have within them the Impurities of a Brothel-house, and the
Covetousness of Usurers; come, let us go teaz and make sport at them. Instead
of being daunted, I was mightily pleased, to discover what they were; and began
to be bold and confident, not afraid, that I was in the wrong way. Seeing them
wear the Image and the Livery of God, every one hated them, and laughed at
them, (just as we should at Asses in Lions, or Wolves in Sheep skins; or as we
should at Jackpuddings in the Garb of Senators.) We all detested their painted
Sanctity, thought them Devils transformed into Angels of Light; but we detested
them not as Devils, but as disguised, as them who were ashamed of barefaced
Vice.

A little farther several I saw climing up a steep Precipice, on the top
whereof was the Idol of Honor. So ungrateful were these, as to throw down whom
they had made the means of their Rising; but on a sudden, by a cross Wind, they
were also tumbled headlong down. A few were singular, and would go in those
Paths which none ever before had trodden: Fawning Murderers there were
likewlse that hung upon, and morose Timons, Manhaters, that separated from us:
Many a Narcissus enamoured with himself, and many a biting Mome vomiting up
nothing but Gall and Bitterness. We had also with us a poor Fellow who freely
consented to go to HELL, if so be any of us would but bear his Charges upon the
Road: Another brave Fool I knew, who would venture his Estate and his Soul, at
the Cast of a Dye. Before us trotted very scurvily one of the Devils
Pack-horses, an old Fellow who had broke his back with carrying a great heavy
Chest of Money, and yet notwithstanding this, would not rest till he came to
his Journeys end. He was followed, at least, by half a dozen Asses braying at
him. O my good Father, you have given me too hard a Task; I think I shall never
get through this Scene of Follies. There was one whom I extremely laughed at,
that betwixt Hopes and Fears was, with Lazarillo de Tormes, tossed in a Blanket.
One I saw build, and then pull down what he had built, and then build again,
and so on; never pleased, but striving to outvie even Time in Mutability,
outdo the Inconstancy and Changeableness of whatsoever is most inconstant and
most changeable. I should have wondered more at him, but that I had seen him
before prettily represented in a Draught of Zeuxis, by a naked man snipping into
shreds a piece of Cloth; afraid therewith to apparel himself, because he knows
not the Fashion. Another whose Face was clouded with Sorrow, I and my Camrades
did all we could to comfort; but for this giving us a very unfriendly look, he
turned away. His muttering and odd Demeanor taught us that he was fallen out
with the Times, was an uncontented Admirer of the past, and Hater of the
present; not because bad, but present. His bloted Tongue knew not how to speak
well of any body, was ever inured to Invectives and sinister passionate
Reflections: all those that were either great or good, (or but seemed so) he
was not able to abide: he cursed both his and their Fortunes: Happy he could
not be as he wished, and therefore he would (in Spite) be Miserable. Next went
the Malicious, destroying and pillaging one another. And after these several
others.

Now all these could show me each others Mistake; the Covetous Father preached
excellently against Prodigality and Laxury; the Prodigal Son against
Covetousness; the Sot ran out into an Harangue against the Stews; and those who
frequented them, had as much to say against his Mopish Drunkenness. Nor was
there any Vice, but which was thought blameworthy by the Vicious themselves.
But as for Virtue, (my good Father) that was so amiable, as even against our
Wills, we had a love for it: nay, some, as I have told you, counterfeited it;
and none I ever knew so far gone, but had with reluctance a certain reverence
for virtuous persons. So true is it, that Virtue desires but to appeal to the
Bar of her Accusers, and to be judged by her greatest Enemies; whilst Vice
shuns the Verdict of her chiefest Adorers. Every one knew the other was in the
wrong, though he himself was not in the right; could refute the gross Follies
of the rest, though he the while was as grossly fooled as any.

I observed many more whom I cannot now call to mind; but none I observed so
much (and that too all the way I came) as a cunning Mimick, that could shape
himself into all forms, and vary as often as his Company: could comply with
every man's humor, accommodate himself unto every Time and Place. He would
speak fair, yea words smoother than Oil, unto this man; but unto another that
was his Enemy, he would speak words of him piercing him through, sharper than a
two-edged Sword: He could lie, cog, wheedle, cajole every Party, insinuate
himself into every Breast: with these he could swear, and with them he could
pray; here none was more profane, nor there more devout: none was a better
Pot-companion, and none more a Trencher-Friend; swilling with some, and rioting
with others: He could feast with the Luxurious, fast with the Religious: Was
brisk or grave, merry or sad, according as he pleased: Knew how to tickle the
Ambitious, to pimp for the Incontinent, to rally with the Jocose: Sometimes
would act a Prince, othertimes a Beggar or a Clown; and at several times
personate both a Devil and a Saint. Insomuch that being extraordinarily
delighted with the variableness of his Humors, his wicked cunning and civil
Address; I was always, if it were possible, in his company, thereby at length
acquiring such a Familiarity, as upon the account of sin can be acquired. Now
being equally of all, and equally scoffing all Religions, for our diversion he
would needs one day carry us over into the Religious Quarters.

By this time the day grew hot, and Theosophus perceiving that he was now about
to enter on a fresh Discourse, told him he might leave off a little while, till
they had refreshed their Senses, and recruited their Bodies: So they turned
back into the Lodge. In their return homeward, there happened a pretty odd
Accident, which was thus: Hearing a Cry, I will be the death of her, again and
again repeated, they saw a Lady presently, who appeared very beautiful, ride by
them upon a fair Palfrey, carrying before her a man bound hand and feet.
Timotheus straight knew the man to be the effeminate Philogynus, whom
Parthenius was gone to seek after. He therefore stepped to him, that he might
unbind and set him free. But as soon as he was taken from the Lady and unbound,
he was highly displeased, and bound himself again. It was in vain either for
Timotheus or the old Father to dissuade him; for they found that he was deaf,
and could not hear any thing they said: but had he been only so, the very
sight of Timotheus would have been enough to work upon him; but he was also
blind, and could not see the Beauty and the Amiableness of a young Convert. He
was not indeed speechless, but they could hear him say nothing but sweet
Sirenia, charming Sirenia. This had like to have cost the Lady her life, for
the Fellow behind who made the Cry and ran after with a naked Sword threatening
to kill her, but had missed of her, now returning back, saw her here. Timotheus
knew him to be Pamphilus his old Acquaintance, and running to him stopped his
hand from Murder. But after he was disarmed, and seemed to be very well
reconciled to her, just as Theosophus and Timotheus were leaving them, he fell
upon her again, calling her false Whore, tore off her Dress, and shook her so
violently, that made her catch at her Hair as it was dropping from her, and was
not able to save her borrowed Teeth from falling to the ground. So that the
Spark Erotion, who here overtook her and came in to her Rescue, was startled to
see his fair Lady Sirenia transformed into a foul taudry Queen.

CHAP. XIII.
The Religions: or, a continuation of the Travels of Timotheus.

AFter they had a little refreshed themselves, and offered up (as was the
laudable custom of Theosophus) their Noontide Orisons, the young Guest being
solicited thereunto, thus proceeded in his Narration.

I have told you by whom we were carried into the other Quarters to divert our
selves. Behold (said he) now, whether in Religion there be any thing more than
mere Imposture and Blindness: Judge, I pray'e, but from this View, whether
there can be any such place as an Aetherial Paradise to be desired and sought
after, or as an Infernal Tophet to be feared and avoided. Though there are not
lacking those who can give exact Maps of I know not what Subterraneous and
Supracoelestial Worlds, can describe their Confines, Limbo's, and exterior
Courts, and therein allot you forth and sell you Apartments at good rates:
Shall we therefore be such fearful Fools as to be frighted at the silly created
Phantasms of melancholy Heads, of dull insensible Ascetics, and the Tricks of
the cheating Guides of Souls? Let them but agree about the Way thither, let
them tell me where to find their unfound promised Land, their invisible unknown
Country; I will then (but not otherwise) believe there may be such a place as
the Holy Land above. Thus spoke the foolish blustering Atheist, and commanded us
to look.

I. First he showed us the Kingdoms of Darkness. In these dark Regions which
the Dawn of the Sun of Righteousness and Light eternal, the Dayspring from on
high, has not as yet visited; we saw the blinded Souls bow down to Baalim and
all the Infernal Deities. You may guess how pleasant a sight it was to see so
many miserable men grovelling in the Night, unenlighten'd by any Ray from
Heaven, to give that Honor which is due alone to the Creator, to Creatures and
Apostate Angels. Some worshipped the Heavens, with all their numerous Hosts the
Stars: Some made the Sun their God; Others, their Paradise; praying to dwell in
his Civitas Solis. Campanello.
City, inhabit his Light: The pale Queen of Night, the Moon, and the North-Star
had their Adorers: (By the last they thought to be guided into the place of
their Desires, and in the first a new World was created by some, which by
others was made the Habitation of blessed Spirits:) Some also deified the very
Elements, and accordingly chose to be buried in the Earth, burned in the Fire,
drowned in the Water, or hanged in the Air. We could see a wretched Prince
mangling himself, fall down before an Idol that sat on a fiery Throne, a
Monster crested with four Horns, and crowned with three Crowns. Hither also
Pilgrims resorting stabbed themselves with Knives: These threw pieces of its cut
Flesh into its Face, that was horribly bedaub'd with humane Blood: Others
desired to be crushed to death by the Chariot-wheels; and Women sticked not to
prostitute their Bodies for the Idols maintenance. It was a very sad Spectacle
to behold all their barbarous Sacrifices, their fordid, base, and cruel Gods;
greedy, murtherous, insatiable, Bloud-sucking Devils. The Religion (alas) of so
many consisted not in any thing else, but Howling and Dancing, Singing,
Feasting, and Slashing themselves. Not altogether so ridiculous I think as
these last, were those in another large Field, who prayed to the first thing
they met with that morning, to an Ass or a Goose, a Whelp or a Kitling, a
Marmoset or Jack-an-ape; and so with every new Morn had a new God. The Birds
and the Fishes, Trees and Strawen Gods were sacrificed unto: The very tops of
the Hills were fed with Meat and Drink; nor much unlike were those who feasted
their dead Friends with Bread and boiled Flesh, washed, painted, and
new-clothed them, prayed to them in white Garments, and sent along with them
Provision for several years Travel. Next we observed great Troops to pay such
Devotion unto one of those Rivers supposed to have sprung from the Terrestrial
Paradise, as if by its virtue alone they were little less than sure to regain
the same. So others also washing in a Well, thought therein to cleanse their
sins, and carried away its Sand as sacred Relics. Besides these, there were
Idolaters that believed not one but many Paradises, unto which every peculiar
God was to lead his Worshippers. But with their own they were so in love, as to
drown and stab themselves, to fast and pray themselves to death, and run with
gladness to be cast down from high Precipices by their Gogins; (men truly I
think not disguised like, but rather very Devils.) At this, O God (said the
pious Theosophus) when will be the Fullness of the Gentiles?

II. After these, whose blind Superstition had taught them to fear a burning
Pit toward the West, and pray that they might be carried beyond the Mountains
into Pleasant Gardens, there to dance and rejoice with their Forefathers; we
marked the no less besotted Followers of Mahumed, the victorious Antichrist,
going a Pilgrimage to Mecca. We had time to view their several hypocritical and
impious Orders, and hear rehearsed the absurd ridiculous Tenets of their Law.

III. When we had long enough observed them, we turned our eyes upon numberless
Caravans of Pilgrims, infinite petty divided Sects together by the ears,
bickering and fighting very hotly; all closely overruled by a Necromancer
sitting in the Infallible Chair. Amongst whom were Genevesians, Munzerians, and
Dippers, Catharists also, such as would not pray, Forgive us our Trespasses.
Some went naked, naming this the State of Innocence, and their Meetings,
Paradise. There was the Family of Love, the Brethren of the Mountains, of the
Valleys, of the scattered Flock, the Seekers, the Ranters, the Soul-sleepers,
and the mad senseless Shaking Fraternity, hammered out (as my Atheo Humoroso
told us, and proved from Authentic History) by the busy working Ignatians;
all zealously contending for the Victory. Some there were who professed no
other Duty but Prayer, and others but Silence; a third sort would enjoy no
earthly thing, a fourth said the things of the Earth to be the Lords, and
consequently theirs; a fifth bragged of Revelations, a sixth of Miracles, a
seventh rejected all means, stood still relying upon God, but an eighth trusted
wholly on them, thought by his Righteousness to climb up into Heaven, whilst
the other would not stir one foot of the way. Others denied the Divinity of the
everblessed Jesus, led by Socinus of Siena: Millenaries brought him down from
Heaven to reign upon Earth: Some mad Cabalistical Brains would have no Christ
but Holiness, would have his Virgin Mother to be Love, his Paradise to be
Virtue, and its four Rivers to be Justice, Prudence, Temperance and Fortitude;
so turning all Religion into an Allegory: Even the devilish Theauro John, and
the most blasphemous Enthusiasts, had their Followers. But now some held all
these Religions (or rather Phrensies of a distempered head) to be true; all
Pilgrims to be in the right Way, and not one to be in the wrong; and that to
think, was enough to make, themselves secure: Some would be of the Religion of
the Conqueror, of the strongest side, and whenever he was outed, then they
tacked about to another: Others wandered so long from this Path into that, from
Party to Party, and Religion to Religion; till at last they came to be of none
at all.

Seeing one separate himself from all these, we enquired of him what was his
Faith? who giving us a proud look over his shoulders, told us he was a
Philosopher. At this I wondered much: For I never thought a Philosopher (such an
one as this) was of any. For how can he be of any Faith, who counts it his
Privilege to throw it off; or else to make it truckle under his Reason, and
whatsoever he is pleased to give that name to, though it be never so
unreasonable? Wherefore for confirmation in this lewd course of life, in which
I was so deeply now engaged, I used to hear the shallow Disputes of such
Naturalists, the rigid Requirers of Reason in things above it; and even against
that Reason which to themselves they so proudly arrogate. These corrupt
Philosophers reckon it a greater Honor the being denominated from Aristotle or
Des Carts, than Christ himself: had rather wear the Badge of a found Plato or
a learned Epicurus, than of the humble and the holy Jesus: and think Julian's
Reproach of Galileans highly honorable; if so be the Disciples (not of a
crucified Savior, but) of a Galileo, be thereby meant.

But what, I pray'e, is theirs out yonder? (said I, then first spying a great
company of Religious, marching in another Road.) Interest, answered one. Then
again I asked, observing them to take the most pains of any, for what they did
and suffered so much? For their Interest, said the same person smiling. And
next, Whither were they traveling? Whithersoever Interest (said he) leads: and
where else do you think that is, but to the Devil?

Many of us need not have been advised which of all these Ways to choose; for
the Devil of Gain (though indeed the most pernicious and troublesome one in all
the Squadrons of Ghe-Hinnom) seemed to be a very sociable, a very desirable
Devil. And therefore forthwith they flung themselves into Mammon's Caussey, (so
it was called) trotting on, as fast as ever they could go, Helwards.

As for my part, I presently took the Way of Indifference; not much professing
any side. The rest that were left made Liberty of Conscience their Religion.
Only he that brought us, (I mean my mad Humorist) so shifted from the one to
the other, and dexterously disguised himself among them, with both feigned tone
and looks; that after some while we, much against our Wills, lost the sport of
him.

Afterward in my Travels I met him alone, being sat down to rest himself very
melancholy. Stay a little, Tim (said he to me) you never heard me speak a true
word in my life to you, but now you shall. We are in a sad case, we are not now
many miles from the Flaming Tophet. God bless me, said I, thereat startled; but
did not you tell me there was no such place? I did, says he, and so did the
Philosopher my Friend, but we could not believe so our selves. I told you that
we were nothing but Matter and Motion, and that it was a Contradiction to say
there can be a Substance which is not material: that consequently there could
be no such part within you that can exist without a Body, and that whatsoever
is not Body, is Nothing. But if you and I were nothing but Matter and Motion,
we should be but pretty odd kind of Puppets. For turn and move, condense and
rarifie Matter how you please, I believe you will be scarce able to make it
sensible. Suppose you could outdo Architas his Dove, with the Eagle and the
Fly of the German Artist; suppose you could make humane Images to speak,
artificial Birds not only to fly, but also sing, Serpents to hiss, and Dogs
to bark and bite; Do you think it possible, if by your Art you could do all
this, to ever make them see or hear, to make them eat, and digest what they
eat, to feel, and smell, and taste? It is wholly unconceivable how any thing
should be made sensible by Springs. But I told you fine subtle Matter will do
strange things: therefore I tell you now, that let Matter be never so thin, it
is still Matter; nor is Fire any more capable of Sense than Lead is. Now though
it be never so absurd, suppose that Matter is not altogether insensible, and
that a Board may be made to perceive as well as a Man, or (what a profoundly
learned Atheist said) that a Clock or a Jack are as much Animals as We are; yet
do you think that if it could increase and grow, and were sensible, it would
therefore discourse, and think, and invent, and recollect, and fancy? If you
do, I will not say you are a mad man, but such an one is the Atheist, and
worse: For he believes that all this came to pass (not by any Art, but) by
Chance, by the wild jumbling of Atoms together. I do not ask him who put this
Matter into motion, but surely some body must; for Matter can never put it self
into motion. I tell you, there is no Absurdity so great that he who once sets
up for Libertinism must balk at, so he can rank himself among the Beasts that
perish. Do you blind your self first, and I shall be ready then to prove to
you, that that glorious Planet which now heatens us with his Rays, is not seen
by any, and is a mere Fiction of the Astronomers; with as much ease, as that
his Author is the Device and Phantom of the Spiritual Guides. He that has seen
but the structure of an Eye, or any other, or all the parts together, and
remains an Atheist, is resolved to remain so. But (according to the Lucretian
or Epicurean Doctrine) you will say, all this Variety, Aptness, and Symmetry of
Parts proceeds from the Seeds of the things. An Answer unbecoming a
Philosopher, and altogether as ridiculous as the occult Qualities of the old
Aristotelians. For whence have these Seeds that virtue? is it from their Figure
or Contexture of Parts? Here we are silent. Besides, it has been proved by a
learned Author, that the Matter of the Seed enters not into the composition of
the Body. We cannot, with all our bustle, tell why an invisible point in the
Egg should grow up into a Chick, and why not as well into a Calf. We can say it
is from the Seed or some plastic Virtue in it, from its Fitness or from its
Nature; and then we think we have given a very Philosophical Account. This is
so far from disproving an all-wise Author, that it rather proves him to be. For
what can be more admirable, than that in so small an Atom so small a part of
the Seed, should lie hid the power of Life and Vegetation, and all the Organs
and Parts of a Plant, or a Tree, or an Animal. This seems to me a Convincing
Proof that there is an Author of Nature, and that Nature is nothing but the Art
of God. There are curious Microscopes that will show you enough in a Fly, to
make you admire the Deity; and discover to you the beauty, the evenness, and
smoothness of Contexture in the meanest Works of Nature, a Leaf or Flower; and
the roughness and craggedness of the finest artificial things. He that sees
contained in a Cubick Inch many hundred thousand little Animals, having all
their exact Parts and perfect Life in them, must be very stupid if he can
attribute this to any but a most powerful and expert Artist. He that looks up
upon those many vast Orbs scattered in the Heavens, and by the help of his
Glasses can descry innumerable more, would be very inconsiderate if he should
conclude them the effect of sole Mechanism, and fortuitous justling of an
uncreated eternal Chaos. There is a Quere not much less than two thousand years
ago put to us, which notwithstanding all our study, we have not yet learnt to
baffle; and that is, If all this could be done by Atoms* why might not Atoms
build an House or a Temple, which are far more easy? I tell you truly, you may
as well think that Book of God (which those poor Pilgrims yonder in the Narrow
Way pay such a just Veneration unto) to be made only by the concourse of
Letters ranging themselves into such an Order, and never to have been dictated
or written by any: I say, you may as well believe this, as that this other Book
of God, the vast Volume of Nature, (which so justly deserves our Admiration)
was not made by an Intelligent Author. You may believe this if you please, and
then you are fit to believe any thing, so you may not believe there is a God,
and that you have a Soul to forfeit to him. You may believe that Atoms can rig
out a Fleet of Ships, and build the City as well as make the Men that inhabit
it. For how inconsiderable is this, to the Mass of the whole Earth, and its
Inhabitants? Yet the Earth is held to be scarce a Physical point, if compared
to the rest of the Universe. But though it be never so demonstratively proved
that there is a God, yet there are some few (whom you and I know) that, if they
cannot comprehend him, think they may lawfully doubt whether he is, or not. As
if the most perfect Essence should be comprehensible to such Worms as us: more
justly might Beetles think to comprehend what we are. Have patience a little,
and I will show you how foolish an Evasion this is. I am now very much upon the
supposing: Suppose therefore again, that you were born blind, and knew not what
sight was, how should you be able to conceive what Color is? Suppose also you
had never been able to smell, how could you have been made to apprehend the
odours of a Rose or of Jessamine? I will bid you once more suppose your self
naturally deaf, tell me how could you paint in your phancie a Concert of
Music? Yet I judge there is the same reason why our imperfect and corporaliz'd
Intellect cannot comprehend what Spirit is. Nor is it to be wondered at, that
whatsoever is Spiritual is above our comprehension: the commonest and
ordinariest things in Nature, are almost as unintelligible and hard to unravel,
as many things in Faith that put weak heads to a stand. But those whom the
formation and color but of an Hair would be enough to puzzle, think if they
cannot understand the nature of their Soul, they may deny that it exists: And
though Philosophy cannot give a satisfactory account even of Body, end
determine of what it consists, whether Divisibles or Indivisibles; yet they
look that Theology should give a better account of Spirit. He who because he
could not solve all the Difficulties, denied there was any such thing as Motion
in the World, erred quite as pardonably as he that upon the same reason can
deny a Deity, or an immaterial Being. There are undeniable and demonstrated
truths in the Mathematics themselves, [such as, that there may be an Angle
which cannot be divided; that the two Squares of the two sides of a Triangle
are equal to the square of the Base; that the Center and the Circumference can
be the same; that two Parallelograms upon the same or equal Base, and within
the same Parallels, though one be drawn out a thousand times, or infinitely the
length of the other, are yet both equal:] that are not much more comprehensible
than the greatest Mysteries in Religion. You may believe me, I have found as
much Demonstrativeness in the Principles of Religion, as in the rigid Science
of Geometry; though not of the same kind: for that would be as ridiculous, as
if one by drawing Lines and Triangles should go to demonstrate that Julius
Coesar lived so many hundred years ago, or use Circles to prove that a Bird is
born out of an Egg. And I my self have laughed as heartily at the old
Philosophic Poet, when he persuades his Memmius that the Mind consists of
little round Seeds, as when he would prove the Sun to be no bigger than it
appears. That there is such diversity of Opinions, although I urged it so much,
it proves no more against Religion, than it does against Philosophy: and will
serve for quite as good an Argument against us, that there are malignant fallen
Spirits which cause these Differences, as that these Differences about the Way
should prove there is no Paradise. Since therefore such solid and self-evident
Truth is on Gods side, we do foolishly to be imposed upon by Quibbles, (though
never so ingenious ones.) For if there is a God, he must be just; and if he is
just, there must be a Tophet: so firm is that Conclusion of the wise Heathen,
that either there is no God, or else there is a Punishment for the Wicked after
life. Here I interrupted him, and said, I never thought before that you could
preach: come, answer me but this Objection, and I will get you Preferment. If
this is true that you frighten me with about Tophet, what will become of those
mad Beasts that kill men, break down Hedges, steal Sheep, are cruel, or are
lascivious? Methinks they deserve an Hell as much as us. And since it is agreed
that they have no part which supervives the Body, why should it not be with us,
as it is with them? Answer me; I believe this gravels you. Nothing perchance
(said he) in all Natural Philosophy is obscurer than what concerns the nature
of Brutes: Were this certainly and clearly known, it is likely that your Quere
would appear of small force. However, it is plain, there is difference enough
betwixt our Souls and theirs. For they cannot understand, like us, what Law or
Justice is; are not touched with any sense of Good or Evil, Virtue or Vice;
they are not capable to know what Faith or Religion is; to reflect upon, and
search into their own nature, or the nature of any thing else; and cannot
comprehend in their Brain an easy and demonstrated Axiom, but only know what
concerns them. Now to search out whence proceeds this Difference, if you would
look into every part about you, every little corner and repository of the
Brain, see it Willis Cerebri Anatom. p. 4. and p. 66.
anatomized, you will find it to be almost the same with theirs; whence by
natural consequence it follows, that part by which we differ from them is
purely spiritual, and has not the least cognation with Matter; else (our Brain
being formed like theirs) it were impossible for us to produce Operations
different from theirs. Hence it also follows, that we and they ought not to be
alike accountable for what we do. For whereas it would be absurd to think that
they, who are incapable of acting either what is vicious or virtuous, should be
condemned or rewarded; so would it be equally absurd (the reasons being just
contrary) to think otherwise of us: and though there is no reason why those,
who cannot fear or hope for the Torments and Joys of another State, should go
up into the Garden of Pleasure, or down into the Vale of Lamentation; there is
not the less, but the more reason why we, who can, should go the one way or the
other. Thus you see the weight of your mighty Argument: and I shall look that
you fulfill your Promise. But this is not all; for those mad Beasts you speak
of, if they commit any offense they are subject to Man, and liable to be
punished by him; and is it reasonable, think you, that Man, (who is of a more
understanding nature) should not be under the Cognizance and Judicature of a
superior Being? You asked me to answer you one Objection; but now that is
gone, I long (dear Boy) to be dealing with another. You may remember that I
have told you since we met upon this Road, that the Soul grows up and decays
with the Body, is infirm in Infants, strong in Men, and after that decreases in
Age; has its Diseases as well as the Body, is disordered by Drunkenness, is
raving with Frenzy, is num'd and stupefied in a Lethargy, and dead almost in
a Swoon. I remember you have, (said I) and in my mind it is an unanswerable
Argument: I was thinking to have put it to you at first, but it is as well now:
Sure this will pose you, if any thing can. Confess you are baffled; for it
clearly proves that Souls are mortal, yea as much as Sickness can prove Bodies
to be so. Stop a little (said the melancholy Libertine) I am afraid we shall
find it otherwise. Methinks, notwithstanding you can triumph so, you might
easily see thorough the frivolous weakness of this Objection. The Body may be
compared to a Musical Instrument, and the Soul to an expert Musician: Now if
the Instrument is out of tune, if the Strings be too weak as in Infancy, or
rotted and decayed as in old Age; if they are loose, or strung false, or any of
them broke; do you think the Musician (though he strike never so skilfully) can
make as good Harmony as if it were welltuned, and the Strings in no fault? This
is the reason also why those of an hot Brain are ingenious, and those of a cold
are not; because the Soul cannot so briskly exert her self upon a frigid
unactive Brain, as she can upon one that is well prepared, unclogged and
unstopped. Those that are very cold are Naturals, because in them She is
totally or almost hindered from acting: those that are very hot are Frantic,
because She is disturbed in acting. This will answer all such kind of
Objections, if you have twenty more of them. But pray, the next man that you
see ride upon a foundred Horse, go to him, and persuade him that he himself is
foundred, and not the Horse: or if the Horse is old, tell the Rider it is his
own Age and not his Horses that makes him unable to go faster. When he had
ended, I said to him, Who thought that you could dispute so well against your
own Principles? Presently after which, I was more startled than ever I was in
my life, to hear him say, Come, let us make have to our Journeys end. For I
verily thought he was about to turn back; but I found I was mistaken. I thought
however, I might venture along, as well as he. He said, he believed we should
now get thither within a few days. Though we made as much have as we could, we
had not gone far before he fell down dead. This was in a drunken merry Fit,
soon after he had shaken off his pensive and serious Thoughts. God bless me!
how I shiver at the remembrance of him? Here I leave him: hereafter I shall
come to tell you where I met him again. This Accident chilled my Spirits, and
made me (for a while) go a softer pace, though I still continued on, thinking
it too late to return home.

I no sooner began to mend a little my pace, when I was pushed forward by one,
the beginning of the words of whose mouth I found to be Foolishness, and the
latter end of his mouth to be wicked Madness, Eccles. 10. 13. While on this
hand of me went a Whore wantoning, and on that hand a Pharisaical Guide more
demurely stalking, and Theologizing with an uncouth Gravity; both (not unlike
the twin-Offspring of Agurs Horseleach, Prove. 30. 15.) continually crying,
Give, give. The last had from the Serpent (that old Impostor) learnt this
single Cunning, viz. to deceive the Woman; whom commonly he first sets upon and
studies to pervert. He snared always the Woman, that he might catch the Man:
Her if he could but seduce into his Way, the Husband he was cock-sure would
follow after his seduced Wife, and the Children after their seduced Mother.
This Reverend Impostor was tumultuously compast round by the Giddy Rabble, who
cried up his Nonsense for Gospel, and those Doctrines in which was Death, (yea
though in never so plain legible Characters, there was written on them the
Curse, Thou shall die the Death) for Soul-saving ones. Amongst these was a poor
paltry Fellow, who had somewhat in him, I know not what it was, which he named
Conscience, (for Conscience it was not) that could unhinge Governments,
overthrow States, and tumble down Scepters and Crowns; that so all being turned
topsie-turvy, the first last, and the last first, he might be advanced to the
top. With him joined such as were of Levelling Principles, and such as were any
whit discontented, setting up the Standart of Reformation.

A little further I met with a quaint Controvertist, (in the Rear of these
RELIGIONS) who bandied all this about, and even raised Objections by his
answering them: As also a sly Favorite, who had learnt (from him) how to make
his Praises to be Accusations, and by putting off Doubts to bring Doubts into
ones head. I had the company afterward of a rich old Chuf, who having read
that the Glod of the Land of Havilah was good, came this way to seek out
Paradise.

Having traveled thus far, such was the effect of the Air and of our Travel,
that now every one became lightheaded. Also the Ways which before did seem
curiously laid with Tarras, and the rich sorts of Cement, now appeared to be
paved with dead men's Sculls. And though we now began to view the blazes of the
Fire, yet one would have persuaded us, that it was only a glimpse of the
Celestial Light, and that we were not far from the bright Mansions of the
East, from o^ delightful Eden placed near the Sunrising.

Some of us were willing to believe (...); and some to believe that all things
were made and governed by Chance: which Supposition being hard to maintain,
others holding a fatal Necessity, said they did not go, but were carried. The
Presumptuous thought he continued on as fast or faster than any of us, still
cried, God was merciful, and he should at last arrive at Paradise. But the
Desperate leaping into the Gulf of Flames, (which we now plainly saw) said it
was impossible for him to do otherwise, or to avoid the same by running back.

No Tongue can express the Horrors and the Pangs that I already endured.
Whereupon I stepped a little out of the Road to ease my Grief. But being unable
to move far, I fell down, expecting there I should die. I could discern that
they were Baboons and Monsters in the shape of Men, with whom I had all this
while conversed: could see the Devils preparing their Torments, and ready to
fetch away my Soul. Then first opening a Book which I had hitherto kept, that
was given me by my forgotten Friend Theosophus, I began to read; but Despair
and dreadful Dismayedness of Mind closed up mine Eyes in an horrible
affrighting Sleep.

CHAP. XIV.
The VISION of Tophet.

I Remember to have somewhere read a very remarkable Story of a melancholy
Pilgrim, in the first Ages of this Institution, who having seen HELL but in a
Dream, said he would rather choose to suffer a thousand Deaths, than see the
same again, or for one half hour more, the short turn of a Glass, feel what he
had felt. And such effects had this (says the Historian) upon him, that of a
debauched lewd Liver, he became the greatest Saint, the most resolute Professor
of Christ; and immediately separated from the World, putting on such Weeds as
this poor well-meaning Tract would fain cloth its Pilgrim-Reader in. I do most
heartily wish (O that Wishes were not vain! that what the brave Timotheus in
the same case has seen, may, as on him it did, so (which he prayed for all the
days of his Pilgrimage with unutterable Groans) on all those to whom the
Relation thereof ever comes, work the like effect. O that hereby I could
frighten the stupid out of his Lethargy of Sin, and rouse him up into a sense
of his Condition! O that if such an one shall turn over these leaves, he would
sit down and consider a while to what place he is traveling, ask himself
whether he can dwell with Everlasting Burnings! That he would do so much, if
not out of Religion, yet out of Prudence; lest he come to feel the same at long
run, not in Vision, but Reality: greater too perhaps than this, and far beyond
all Hyperboles of Pain.

My Sleep was such (said the noble and truly pious Convert) as I verily
believed it to be Death; and a Devil (I thought) taking me up with his Claws,
carried me toward the Burning Lake. Which, as I drew near, appeared to me to be
bounded with seven high Banks of solid and unconsumed Fire; and on a spacious
sevenfold Gate of rocky and impenetrable Adamant, which opened to us of its own
accord, I read (with a sorrowful cast of mine Eyes) these words: TOPHET IS
ORDAINED OF OLD; YEA FOR THE WICKED IT IS PREPARED; HE HAS MADE IT LARGE AND
DEEP: THE PILE THEREOF IS MVCH FIRE, AND MVCH FVEL; THE BREATH OF THE LORD LIKE
A STREAM OF BRIMSTONE, DOES ENKINDLE IT. Isai. c. 30. v. 33.

As soon as I was entered I heard a Voice, like the Voice of Thunder, and the
Voice of many Waters, saying, KEEP THESE SOULS BOUND IN CHAINS OF DARKNESS
UNTIL THE GREAT AVDIT OF THE LORD: and another, LET HOT BVRNING COALS FALL UPON
THEM, LET THEM BE CAST INTO THE FIRE, AND INTO THE PIT, THAT THEY NEVER RISE UP
AGAIN. And looking back, I saw great Multitudes behind me, rushing in at the
Gate, who were bound presently, and cast into the Lake.

A wild Wast methought it was of inextinguishable Sulphur and Naphtha; whereon,
as far as ever I could ken, lay rolling hopeless Peoples and Nations, that
striving to blow it out, made it burn the more, and kept it burning. Whence
intolerable Smoke, with gloomy Flakes of unlightsome flame were scattered
upwards, and darkened round the wide Coast. There are perhaps some subtle
Wits, who will say it is impossible for Flame not to be light: but let them
subtilize as they please, before they know the nature of this Flame, they are
not very competent Judges. It was, I remember, every where so black and dismal
a Night, as plagued Egypt sure felt not: such a Night as could not be brooded
even on the face of Chaos: an obscure, a smart, a boundless, and a
never-ending. (I concluded) Night; palpable almost to the Touch. But how vain
am I, that I strive to describe it! For it was greater far than I can express
to you; nay, certainly than any one can dread, or Poetic Phant'sie imagine.
Which yet was rendered more terrible (if any thing possibly could add to such
Terror) by flashes of Lightning breaking it, and horrid Shapes that continually
passed through the thick substantial Darkness. By those dreadful gleams of
Light I could discern sooty deformed Ghosts every moment flying by me; and
sundry black Fiend-like Spirits Thunderstruck, falling down into the Fiery
Gulf.

Most hideous and astonishing was the Din of loud piercing Yells and Screams
insupportable to the Ear, stubborn Lamentations and Doglike Howlings, Cracks of
Thunder, Hisses of Serpents, Gnashing of Teeth, the Clicking of Chains and
Rods, Crackling of Flames, the profane Execrations and Cursings of the hateful
Crew, their roaring Oaths and clamorous Janglings, and the universal Clatter
and Bustle of these impatient Malefactors groaning under the Mass of their Woe:
a most deplorable Jargon of all Tongues, and a Babel of miserable Plaints;
besides all those Voices that the malicious Wits of Devils could invent,
wherewith to terrify and startle their Prisoners.

No soft harmonious Music was here, no pleasant Scenes, nor odorous aromatic
Smells to entertain the effeminate Wretches. Could you fancy a Stink ten
thousand times more malignant than that of Brimstone, than the most fetid
Exhalations of all sorts, and the strong Damps of Mephitis, Arsenical Vapors
and Winds of Smoke: more intolerable than the Nuisance of a Draught or a Common
Shore, than of the Devil of Pentsch in Silesia; than the Air of a Pesthouse or
a Lazaretto, the Nastiness of a Dungeon, the Corruption of Waters that
stagnate, the steams of poisonous Fens and Lakes over which Birds flying fall
down dead, the deadliest Fumes, the rankest Scents of illscented Animals,
pestilential Herbs and Drugs, all unwholesome or lethiferous Smells, the
Putrefaction of wormy Flesh, and the Muck of rotting Carcasses; yet all would
be much short of this damnable Stench here in Tophet, against which so many
foolish living Wights perfume themselves.

Keeping therefore upon wing. I flew (methoughts) many thousand Leagues over
flaming Mountains and Rivers, and Seas of sad Despair; while I could not avoid
meeting a thousand thousand several Horrors on every side of me: Many a rich
Glutton I saw rolling in the streams of liquid Sulphurs, who wished they had
Worlds to give for one drop of Water to cool their Tongues: Myriads of wicked
Angels and wicked Souls I saw bathing themselves, and delighting to bathe
others, in the Flames. --

They were both ready to sink to the ground, which made him here break off
abruptly. But it is impossible (said he, as the Father was fainting) for me to
recount the Torments and Terrors of this Gloomy Prospect: nor do I care to fill
your ears too long (which I am afraid yet I have already done) with such
terrifying Relations as these. A more particular Enumeration of what I saw,
will serve for another Melancholy Discourse; as, whatsoever I dreamed
concerning the Inhabitants of Sodom, Jezabel, Iscariot, Herod, Simon Magus,
Nero, Mahomet, and their peculiar and appropriate Tortures, as likewise theirs
with whom on the Road I came acquainted; concerning also the Book of Death, the
Dungeon of Diseases, the Cataracts and Whirlwinds of Fire, the Consults of
Lucifer and his Peers about the Subversion of the Anglican Church, the uneasy
and restless Disports of the Devils, the Hellishness of Vice, whence every one
was made his own Executioner to kill and torment himself, and how Tophet is not
only the Punishment of sin, but that sin naturally sets it on fire; and many
other things which I dreamed of, that may deserve in their place to be
remembered.

Now as the Fiends (methoughts) were preparing to bind me, and as I was a
dropping down apace, a glorious heavenly Youth catched me. At which I awaked;
when I found at my head my dear Monitor Eubulus, that at my first entrance into
the Road, and several times afterward, warned me of this. He snatched me away
hastily. So I followed him; but not without looking back: And were God so
severe as to mark what is done amiss, I should even then (with Jude v. 7.
Lot's Wife, leaving the Cities Plagued with the Vengeance of eternal Fire)
have been made an everlasting Monument of this.

We opportunely met with an old man called Eusebius, who directed us to your
Lodge. But as we were in sight of this tuft of Trees, I was torn away from my
Eubulus, by my Companions that I had left in the Broad Road; who as soon as
they discovered my Flight, came thus far in pursuit after me. These were they
who then putting on the Visors of Religion, left me in that woeful Plight, in
which you, my dearest Father, found me. Next after God, to you I owe this
Breath: I owe to you my Self, my Life, or if any thing can be dearer to me than
my Self or my Life.

He had scarce made an end, before Orthodoxus came to enquire after Eubulus. To
him, after a short stay, Theosophus committed his young Pilgrim; himself
tarrying behind for others that were to come after. From whom young Timotheus
having first received some Directions (which for that they were almost the same
that another worthy Guide has given his Philotheus, I omit) and charged not to
depart from Orthodoxus, they both went in quest of their Friends and their
eternal Happiness, the Paradise of Blessed Souls. I shall leave them traveling
thither, until I can get leisure to put the next Part of the History into order.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page Lin. Err. Corr. 5 10 Merg. suam, sum. 13 17 for Pontamus, Pontanus. 34 29
than by any, than any. 35 19 Diceus, Dicaeus. 20 Spudeus, Spudaeus. 55 27
pretty, petty. 58 20 Temple, Tempe. 68 17 Shione, Chione. 83 26 tardy, to dye.
84 2 pulling, puling. 86 7 with them to, with, to. 97 15 weared, wearied. 99 8
Sorrowfully painful, sorrowfully tureful. 106 11 best, blessed. 107 28 had, have.
117 19 spit on, spat on. 123 13 Rottenness, Rotteness. 153 10 pursuse, pursue.
154 14 of the, of that. 160 9 feeds in, feeds me in. 170 1 gread, Great.
172 5 set, set aright. 174 29 Areteus, Aretaeus. 193 16 own, owe. 200 18 one,
me. 201 27 that could; that I could.


