A LETTER FROM Mr. Stephen College TO A Person of Quality, upon his Removal to
Oxford, to be Tried upon an Impeachment of High Treason.
Honored Sir,
I Hear I am with Confidence Reported to be a Papist (nay more, a Jesuit;) It Is
their hour and power of Darkness: they have the advantage and power of me, I
was born to suffer, and have no possibility of Righting my self at present, but
I hope e're long I shall by a fair Trial, where all I ask is Justice, no
favor; and had rather dye than live suspected: In the Interim, Sir, I have
sent these following lines, not for your own satisfaction, who I am persuaded
are so already: But for those to whom you shall think fit to communicate them,
that are otherwise, (that they are true Verse I cannot say,) but that the
matter speaks (in short) the Truth of my Case, the Sincerity of my Heart, and
the Sentiments of my Soul, I do most constantly affirm: My Time is precious; I
beg your Prayers, and of all good Protestants (for whom I suffer;) and the
Lord be with us all: Amen.

Stephen College.
Tower, 15 Aug. 1681.
Wrongful Imprisonment
WHat if I am into a Prison cast,
By Hellish Combinations am betrayed,
My Soul is free, although my Body's fast;
Let them Repent that have this Evil laid,
And of Eternal Vengeance be afraid;
Come Racks, and Gibbets, can my Body Kill,
My God is with me, and I fear no Ill.
What boots the Clamours of the Giddy throng?
What Antidotes against a poisonous breath?
What fence is there against a Lying Tongue,
Sharpened by Hell, to wound a man to death?
Snakes, Vipers, Adders do lurk underneath:
Say what you will, or never speak at all,
Our very Prayers (such Wretches) Treason call.
But Walls and Bars, cannot a Prison make,
The freeborn Soul enjoyes it is Liberty;
These Clods of Earth it may incaptivate,
Whilst heavenly Minds are conversant on high,
Ranging the Fields of Blessed Eternity:
So let this Bird sing sweetly in my Breast,
My Conscience clear; a Rush for all the rest.
What I have done, I did with good Intent,
To serve my King, my Country, and the Laws,
Against the Bloody Papist I was bent,
Cost what it will, I Will never repent my Cause.
Nor do I fear their Hell-devouring Jaws:
A Protestant I am, and such I Will dye,
Maugre all deaths, and Popish Cruelty.
But what need I these Protestations make
Actions speak men far better than their words:
What'ere I suffer for my Countrey's sake,
Not Cause I had a Gun, or Horse, or Sword,
Or that my heart did Treason e're affoard:
No it is not me (alone) they do Intend
But thousands more, to gain their cursed Ends.
And sure (of this) the World's so well aware
That here it is needless more for me to say,
I must conclude; no time have I to spare,
My winged hours fly too fast away
My work (Repentance) must I not delay.
I Will add my Prayers to God, for Englands good,
And if he please, will seal them with my blood.
O! blessed God destroy this black Design
Of Popish Consults; it is in thee we trust,
Our Eyes are on thee, help, O Lord, in time,
Thou God of Truth, most merciful and Just,
Do thou defend us, or we perish must;
Save England (Lord) from Popish Cruelty,
My Country bless, thy will be done on me.
Man's Life's a Voyage, through a Sea of Tears,
If he would gain the Haven of his Rest,
His Sighs must fill the Sayls (whilst some men steers)
When storms arise, let each man do his best
And cast the Anchor of his hopes (oppressed)
Till Time, or Death shall bring us to that Shore
Where Time, nor Death, shall never be no more.
Laus Deo: Amen. From my Prison in the Tower, Aug. 15. 1681.
Printed for Francis Smith at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhill, 1681.


