A COLLECTION Of the several Late Petitions, etc.

TO THE Honorable House, VIZ.

I. The Ladies Petition. II. The Batchellors Remonstrance. III. The Chaplains
Petition. IV. The Poets Proposal. V. The Widows Petition. VI. An Act drawn up
by a Committee, of Grievances.
WITH An Addition, never before Printed, of a Preface and a Catalogue of above
Forty Petitions, ordered to be drawn up, and Presented to the Honorable House
at their next Sessions.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1693.

THE BOOKSELLER to the READER.
THE following Papers pretend to nothing but innocent Mirth and Pleasantry, and
were purposely designed to amuse the Politic part of the Town, who are still
troubling themselves and their Neighbors, about matters of State and Debates
of Parliament, with something in their own way, but dressed in a freer and more
entertaining manner. As they bad the good fortune to be well received, I judged
it would not be amiss to print them together in one Book, least they should run
the fate of all loose Papers; and after two or three days incumbring the
Pocket, be thrown into a Corner, and there buried. Besides, as our Modern
Divines judge of the Merits of a Cause by the Success it finds; so I, and the
rest of my Brether Booksellers, judge of the Goodness of a Book by the quick
Sale of it. We don't pretend to be judges of the Sense, the Style, or the
Language, (except two or three of us, that, under the Rose, had better let it
alone) but for all that, if a Book sells apace, and circulates nimbly, without
pretending to be Conjurers, we may safely affirm, that Mercury is no small
Ingredient in the Composition of it. Now these Petitions, or (with my Author's
leave) these Trifles happening to sell well, I soon concluded they were good;
and having gone so far in my way, it was natural to make another Conclusion,
viz. That it was pity they should be lost.

So that if any one shall ask me, Is there any Wit in these Papers? I shall
reply, Sir, they sold well. Is the Language Correct? Sir, they sold well. Is
the Style easy and clear? Sir, they sold well. In short, if they ask me a
thousand Questions to the like purpose, that shall still be the answer. And
herein I justify my self by the example of a certain Wise Philosopher, (whose
name I cannot call to mind at present; but the next Preface I write, you shall
know for certain) who being asked what was the best Qualification to win a
Widow? cried Impudence: What was the second best? Why Impudence: And what was
the third best, Impudence still. You see the old Gentleman kept close to his
Text.

But if any Courteous Reader demands of me, And why honest Friend do you take
upon you to write Prefaces? I design to tell him, That I have an hundred and an
hundred Presidents in Chancery Lane, Paul's Churchyard, and all over the Town,
for so doing. Sometimes it so happens that an Author is out of the way, or out
of Humor, or out of his Wits, or out of the World, and then who is so fit I
pray to perform this Office as the Bookseller, who is principally concerned for
the welfare of the Child; as who so fit to supply Mr. Constable's place as Mr.
Deputy. But Why did you get none of your Friends to do this same Jobb for you.
Under favor, Sir, suppose I have a mind to show my Parts, who shall hinder me?
or secondly and lastly, suppose I intend, one of these days, to turn Author in
my own defense, since good Authors are so scarce, Where Is the mighty harm done?
Come, come, Taurum feret, qui vitulum tulit; the English of which is, Every
thing must have a Beginning: Or he that can write a good Preface, may, in time,
arrive to write a good Book.

So much by way of J^st and Raillery; but now to be Sober: A Neighbor of mine,
four or five Mornings ago, came into my Shop, and after he had shook his Head,
and turned up the Whites of his Eyes, I wonder, says he, you will Print such
dangerous things, it is an hundred pounds to a penny, but you are summoned
before the House. No, no, Neighbor, quo I, there is no danger of that; cur
Representatives are better natured than to vent their Indignation upon a little
harmless Mirth; and better employed than to condescend so low as to take notice
of such humble Trifles. Besides, continued I, can they be offended to see the
People are still Jovial and Brisk, or to find them honestly endeavoring to
turn a Penny to pay their Taxes. Well, but adds he, you have ruined your self
for ever with the Ladies, the Batchellors, the Chaplains and the Widows. Ay,
quo I, if a fine Husband offends the Maids, or a good Wife the Batchellors, or
an experienced Bedfellow the experienced Widows, or three Meals a day, with a
skin full of Flipp or Punch, the Camp-Chaplains, I am as utterly undone as an
Oyster, and not till then. Say you so, cries he, It Is well it is no worse, God
boy' Neighbor; so he made a Leg and went out of the Shop.

And now honest Reader, not to contradict the old Proverb, which says, Charity
begins at home, I wish, in the first place, that I may have the good luck to
sell Ten Thousand of these Petitions: And when that is done, I wish, in the next
place, to meet thee, one Evening at some honest Tavern, where I design to give
thee a Bottle of Wine, drink Prosperity to the King and Parliament, and smoke a
Pipe together.

Yours, etc.

The Petition of the LADIES of London and Westminster to the Honorable House
for HUSBANDS.
WE know you are harrrass'd with Petitions from all Quarters of the Nation; for
to whom should the miserable Subject apply himself for a Redress of his just
Grievances, but to this awful Assembly? At present you have no less than the
Safety of all Europe, and that of England in particular, depending upon your
Supplies and Assistance; yet you sometimes condescend to entertain your selves
with Things of far less Importance, Give us leave therefore to lay our
lamentable Condition before you, and to expect a relief from your generous
appearing in our behalf. We demand nothing but what is highly reasonable and
advantageous to the State, nothing but what the Laws of God, Nature, and the
End of our Creation plead for and next to what immediately employs your
Counsels at this Juncture, we offer a Matter of the highest Consequence that
ever came within your Walls.

You need not be reminded with what Scorn and Contempt the Holy State of
Matrimony has of late year^ been treated: Every nasty Scribler of the Town has
pelted it in his wretched Lampoons; it has been persecuted in Sonnet, ridiculed
at Court, exposed on the Theater, and that so often, that the Subject is now
ex^austed and ba^ren; so that if no new Efforts have been lately made against
our Sexes Grand Charter, we are not to ascribe it either to the good Nature or
Conversion of the Men, but only to the want of fresh Matter and Argument. What
afflicts us most, is to find Persons of good Sense and Gravity, considerable
for their Estates and Fortunes, so shamefully laid aside from their Duty by the
feeble Sophistry of these little unthinking R^^ning Creatures; and to see that
^^ fourrilous Song to the Tune of a Dog with a Bottle, shall make a greater
Impression; upon them than all the wholesome ^recepts of the Apostles put
together.

One, forsooth, is mortally afraid least his head should ache within a
Fortnight, or so, after Marriage; and yet makes no Conscience of filling his
Carcass every Night with filthy stumm'd Wine, which in all probability will
sooner gi^^ him a Fever, than a Wife confer a pai^ of Horns upon him. A second
professes he has an invincible Aversion to the s^^uling of Children, and
rocking of Or^^les, though the So (...) a whole day at Wills, amidst the
eternal Quarrels of the No Wit^, and the endless Disputes of the No-Politi^^^^.
A third is apprehensive of the thing called Cur^^in Lectu^^^, ^s the (...)
Fellows love to talk; and yet suffer themselves to be ^^mely ^id by common,
ungrateful Hackney ^rostitutes: A Fourth has a great respect to his own dear
Person, and thinks a Wife will drain him to mere Skin and Bones, who for all
that so manages himself, as to have occasion to visit Dr. Wall twice a Quarter.
Lastly, the graver sort exclaim at the Caudles, the Pins, the Midvives, the
Nurses, and other Concomitants of Wedlock; they pretend the Taxes run high, and
that a Spouse is an expensive Animal; little considering that they throw away
more upon their dearly beloved Vanities than would maintain a Wife, and half a
dozen Children.

These are the common Topics against Matrimony; and yet, to behold the Vanity
of these Pretenses, they immediately disappear and vanish, as soon as a good
Fortune comes in their way. Show the Sparks but a rich Heiress, or an old
griping Alderman's Daughter, and they s^on forget Curtain Lectures and
Cuckoldom. Consumptions and Skeletons, Pins and C^^dles, Impertinence and
Confinement, with the rest of their terrible Objections. Then you hear not a
Syllable of Liberty; but oh, what a blessed, what a comfortable thing is a
Wife! Nay, a Widow, though past Fifty, and as ugly as one of the Witches in
Macbeth, if she has but store of Money, shall go down as glibly with them ^s
the New Oaths for Pre^^^^ent at Court; without the least w^y Face or remorse of
Conscience; and the vain Coxcomb^ thinks themselves as happy, as if they had
got both the ^^dies in their possession.

But though the Laity, not to mince Matters, have almost universally
degenerated in this wicked Age; yet we bless Heaven that our Sex has still
found the Benefit of the Clergy, and that the Church men have been our furest
and best Friends all along. Had not these pious Gentlemen taken pity of our
Condition, how many super annuated Chamber-Maids had lain neglected, how many
languishing Farmer's Daughters gone the way of all Flesh without propagating
their kind? Whatever Prevarications they have made in other parts of the Bible,
we have to our unspeakable Comfort found that they have kept constant to the
Text, Increase and multiply; and indeed it was but reasonable that these People
who are every Moment trumping their Jure Divino upon the World, should by their
own Example support and countenance that sort of Life, which is as much Jure
Divino as the Priesthood.

We never questioned, notwithstanding the unwearied Attempts of our Adversaries
to render Marriage contemptible both in their Writings and Conversation, but
that Nature, mere Nature without any Endeavors of our own, would have reduced
the Men long since to a true sense of their Duty, had it not been for the two
following Impediments. The first is Wine, which we that are Maids have as much
reason to complain of as those that are married. It Is a burning shame, and it
highly concerns the Wisdom of the Nation to prevent it, that the young Fellows
of the Town should so scandalously abandon themselves to the Bottle. They ply
their Glasses too warmly to think of any thing else; and if the Liquor happens
to inspire them with any kind Inclinations, the next Street furnishes them with
store of Conveniences to relieve their Appetite. And this leads us to the
second Block in our way, which is the intolerable multitude of Mistresses, who
to the great prejudice of the Public, divert the course of those streams,
which would otherwise run in the regular Channel of Matrimony, As long as these
contraband Commodities are encouraged or co^niv^d at, it cannot be expected
that virtuous Women should bear a good Market price, or that Marriage should
flourish.

It would look like Affectation or Vanity in those of our Se^, whom the
malici(...) supposes to be conversant in nothing else but Books of Receipts and
Romances, to aequ^^^^ so experienced and learned a Body as yours is, how highly
Marriage was reverenced, and how industriously cultivated by the wisest
Governments in the World. The Examples of Athens and Sparta are too notorious
to be long in^i^ted upon. Those were glorious Places for us, poor Women, to
live in; a Man there could neither be Church Warden or Constable, nay, nor be
concerned in the meanest, most scoundrel Parish Offices, unless he was married.
An old musty Bachelor was pointed at like a Monster, they looked upon such a
one to be disaffected to the State, and therefore as constantly indicted him
every Quarter Sessions for letting his Talent lie unemployed, as now we do
Jacobites, and false Retailers of News. The same Policy was observed at Rome,
where the Jus T^^um Liberorum, the Privilege of those that had got three
Children, was one of the greatest Favors the Emperor could bestow upon a
Subject, and was courted with as vigorous an Application as a Knighthood is now
adays. By th^^ means that victorious City arrived to the Empire of the World;
and we, if we wou'^ ^eat the French into better Manners, must follow the same
Conduct: But it grieves our hearts to consider that in a Christian, and much
more in a Protestant Country, we are forced to stir up the Charity of
well-disposed Persons by citing Pagan Examples.

We therefore humbly petition you, that for the Increase of their Majesty's
Liege people, in whom the Power and strength of a Nation consists, and for the
utter discouragement of Celebacy, and all its wicked Works, you would be
pleased to en^ct,

First, That all Men of what Quality and Degree soever, should be obliged to
marry as soon as they are one and Twenty; and that those Persons who decline so
doing, shall for their Liberty, as they are pleased to mis call it, pay yearly
to the State, which we leave to your Discretion to make as great or as little
as you shall think fit, one Moiety whereof shall go to the King toward the
Payment of his Army in Flanders, and the rest be distributed amongst poor
Housekeepers, that have not sufficient to maintain their Wives and respective
Families, by such married Officers as you shall nominate and appoint.

Secondly, That no Excuse shall be admitted, but only that of natural Frigidity
or Impotence; which that it may not be pretended when there is no just occasion
for it, and likewise that impotent Persons may not, to the dis appointment of
their Spouses, enter into the holy State of Matrimony, there shall be erected
in every County in England a Court of Judicature, composed of half a score
experienced Matrons or Midvives, who by a Writ de Maritali supellectile
inspicienda, may summon or cause to be summoned all such people as pretend the
abovementioned Excuse, or are justly suspected thereof.

Thirdly, since it is found by Experience that the generality of young Men are
such Idolaters of the Bottle, and that Wine is the most powerful Rival which
the Ladies have reason to be jealous of, that no Person whatsoever shall be
privileged to enter a Tavern who is not married, under pain of having his Wig
and gilt Snuff Box con^scated Totie^ Quoties.

Fourthly, That every Poet, or pretender to be a Poet, or any one that has
hired a Poet to write any Play, Satyr, Song or Lampoon, to the derogation of
the Matrmonial State, shall be obliged to marry before Lady Day next ensuing,
and to make a solemn R^eantation of all, and every wicked thing by him uttered
in any Play, Satyr, Song ^or Lamp^^n to the deroga^ion of the Matrmonial State;
that all such disaffected (...) shall be called in, and publicly buent by the
hands of twelve City-Clergy Men's Wives, on next St. Fa^entine's Day.

La^tly, that to prevent the grievous Maltitudes of, and frequent resorts to
Misses and Ilulots, every Person of Quality pretending to keep a Miss, after
the commencing of ^^is ^ct. shall be enjoined in order to his farther
Punishment, to keep a Regiment of Foot for his Majesty's Service upon the
Rhine; or in case he chooses to disband her, to dispose of her in Marriage to
his Footman and Groom, and allow them wherewith to set up a Co^^ee-house. And
as for the Inferior F^arlots, all Justices of Peace and Constables shall
c^ocute the Laws against them.

Having thus, most noble Patriots, laid open our Grievances before you, we
doubt not but you will take effectual Care to redress them Could you condescend
so low as to ^ebate about making the Rivers Wye and Lug navigable; and will you
not endeavor as much as in you lies to unite the Majestreams with the Female?
Could you think it worth the while to take care o^ the propagation of Woods,
the draining of the Fens, and the converting of Pa^tures into A^able L^uxl; and
will you not much more encourage the propagation of Mankind, the draining of
the superfluous Humors of the Body Politic, and provide that so many longing
young Ladies shall not lie unploughed, unharrowed, and uncultivated? Besides
there was never a sitter occasion for such a Bill, than what oders it self at
present: The mighty numbers of Men that our Wars carry off in Flanders, with
the little or no Increase at home to balance the loss; and what ought to be no
small Argument with you, the few unmarried Sparks that tarry behind are of late
grown so imperious and proud in their demands, that nothing will go down with
them now but an Heiress. Here are an infinite number of Advocates to incline
you to be kind to our C^use, Wit and Youth, Benity and good Nature, besides the
Public Advantage, and the Protestant Religion plead for us; but what cannot
fail to move even hearts of Marble, this very Petition is subscribed by ten
thousand Green Sickness Maidens.

That single Consideration, we know, will prevail with you to espouse our
Quarrel' to restore Matrimony to its P^imitive Splendo^; and fastly to destroy
Celibacy, as effectually as you have done Popery. Which will oblige your
Petitioners,

As in Duty bound ever to pray, etc.
This Petition is Subscribed by Threescore thousand Hands, and never a cracked
Maidenhead or Widow amongst them.

LONDON, Printed for Mary Want-man; the Fore-maid of the Petitioners, and Sold
by A. Roper in Fleetstreet, 1693.

An humble Remonstrance of the BATCHELORS, in and about London, to the
Honorable House, in Answer to a a late Paper, Entitled A Petition of the
Ladies for Husbands.
Gentlemen,
YOu are the Sanctuary of the oppressed; and it is natural for the Subject
whenever he finds himself unjustly treated, to fly to his Representatives for a
Redress. You that have so effectually mortified Arbitrary Power even in a Great
Monarch, will certainly never cherish it in a lower Station; and this inclines
us to hope that the Ladies will not find that Encouragement at your hands which
their Vanity prompted them to expect Though their Petition to you speaks in a
very submissive Style; yet for all that they can assume a different sort of
Language in other Places. There they not only dispute the Superiority with the
Men, but even pretend to the Right of Conquest over them; for their
Grandmother Eve, they say, triumphed over the weakness of our great
Grandfather. Adam in Paradise; and no doubt on it had insisted upon that
Article before you, but that your House last week so punished the unpallatable
Doctrine of Conquest, to disarm them of this illegal pretense, which is
prejudicial to the Liberty and Privilege of our Sex, we have examined all the
Old Records, but cannot find the least appearance to color such a Plea. At
present we shall dismiss this Point to descend into the Particulars of their
Petition, and leave it to you at last to decide the Controversy now depending
between us.

They complain that the Holy State of Matrimony has of late years been very
irreverently spoken of, that it has been rhymed to Death in Sonnet, and
murdered in Effigy upon the Stage. Now we would not be guilty of that ill
breeding, to say that the Ladies all along found the Matter, and the Satyrist
only found the Words. However we are assured from all hands, that those Persons
who have taken the greatest pains to expose that Holy State, were all of 'em
married (to prove which we could name a famous Abdicating Poet, if we were
minded) and we hope the Ladies don't expect we should either defend or condemn
them till we are married our selves and consequently in a Capacity to judge on
which side the Truth lies. At present we know no more of Matrimony, than a mere
Land-man knows of the Sea; every Gazette tells him of abundance of Wrecks; but
for all that he will venture to Sea in hopes of making 50 per Cent. by Exchange
of his Commodities.

But to make amends for this melancholy Scene, they very devoutly thank Heaven
in the next place, that their Sex found the Benefit of the Clergy, when the
Laity had in a manner abandoned them. Pray, Gentlemen, observe what Returns of
Gratitude the Ladies have made their best and surest Cards the Churchmen for
this their Loving Kindness. One would have thought they might at least have
allowed their ancient Friends the first Choice of the Vintage; it is no more
than what the French do to the Scotch Merchants at Bourdeaux out of respect to
their old Alliance; but we find no such thing Old super-annuated Housekeepers
with a Maiden head defunct, and Farmers Daughters, are the best Presents they
give the poor Church; so that on this Account serve the Christian Parsons, as
their Predecessors, the Pagan Priests, did their Deities, who used to
complement Jupiter with the Guts and Garbidge, and reserved the remainder of
the Bullock for themselves. After all, whether this happens by their own Fault,
or no, the Levites are made but a civiler sort of Scavengers to carry off the
Dust and Rubbish of the Sex, so that the Ladies may spare their Thanks to them
if they please; for it is we of the Laity only that are in their Debt for this
great Civility.

After this, Gentlemen, the Ladies are pleased to avouch, that if it had not
been for a certain damned Liquor call Wine, the Men by the mere Impulse of
Nature had been long since reduced to their Duty. Here by the word Duty they
plainly insinuate a Conquest; and therefore we humbly beg that their Petition
may be sent to the Palace-Yard, and there served Secundum usum Sarum. In the
mean time, it is a mystery to us what makes the Ladies vent their Spleen so
furiously upon poor Wine, which by the by^ never meant the least harm in its
Life to the God of Love's Subjects, unless they intend to monopolize all the
drinking to themselves; or else since their Sex has been so familiar with
Brandy, blasphemed by the Name of cold Tea, a Jury of Red nosed Midwives have
pronounced Wine to be a feeble, impotent Creature in comparison of that. They
wonder why the Men should scruple to marry out of fear of Cuckoldom, and yet
not scruple to drink stumm'd Wine for fear of a Fever. To which we reply that
the Case is extremely different. Not one Man in an hundred gets a Fever by
drinking; at the same time, scarce one in a hundred that is married escapes
Cuckoldom. And, Gentlemen, is not that great odds?

They would have you pass it into a Law, That every Man should be obliged to
marry immediately after Twenty one; and in case he refuses so to do, to pay a
good round Sum yearly for his Liberty: Though we are all of us agreed that One
and Twenty is somewhat of the soonest to begin at. For why should a (...) be
forbidden to travel upon the Road, unless he sets out exactly at Sunrising; yet
out of Complaisance to the Ladies we are willing to let it pass, though we are
certain that half the Racers will be foundered before Thirty, provided always
(and to be sure they will never mislike that Word either in an Act of Parliament,
or out of an Act of Parliament) that all Virgins or reputed Virgins, who are
passed the Age of One and twenty, and have wherewithal to set up some honest,
well-chined younger Brother, but tarry in expectation of striking a Country
Square or Alderman's Son, shall be likewise amerced the same Sum for their
Maiden-heads. The Ladies perhaps will here object that it is hard to be taxed
for an invisible Estate; but we say, No. We can name them a hundred Tradesmen
here in the City, that since the Revolution have paid for what they never had;
those for instance that have been rated at 400 l. when they were not really
worth one; and yet so valuable a thing is Reputation, whether we deserve it or
no, lost nothing by the Bargain.

They would have none excused from Marriage, but only the impotent and frigid
(which by the bye, Gentlemen, is full as severe as if you should vote that all
must troop to the Wars but the Parsons) and desire you to erect a Court in
every County, consisting of half a score experienced Matrons, who shall have
full Authority to examine all Persons whom they suspect to carry clipped Money
about them, fo fear they should put upon their Spouses, when it is not in their
Power to change it. Pray not altogether so hasty, fair Ladies. Let your Court
have some Men in it, and not all Women: Then we may expect to have Justice done
us; for experienced Matrons are too much a Party concerned to be trusted by
themselves. We demand whether it be convenient that only. Vintners and
A^e-Drapers should have the sole Right of determining Measures. Vintners never
think the Measures small enough; but it may so happen that your experiended
Matrons, Anglice, your Midwives, may be of a different Opinion, and so think no
Measure large enough. Gentlemen, do but remember the Tryers under the late
Reign of Fanaticism; they were a parcel of Inquisitor-Divines set up by the
then-no-Government, to license all such Persons that were to be dispatched into
the Vineyard. Now these conscientious Judges if they had a Q^arrel to a Man,
certainly rejected him, and put him by though perhaps he was Master of a more
unexceptionable Talent than several others that had passed the Pulpit-Master
before him. This needs no Application.

They complain of the excessive maltitude of Misses and Harlots in and about
the Town, who, as they express it, divert the Course of those Streams that
would otherwise run in the regular Channel of Matrimony. It Is a sad Truth, we
confess it, the number of these Interlopers is very grievous; and yet it is as
sad a Truth that the Petitioning Ladies have occasioned it. Let them but leave
quarrelling about Jointures, and carry a little more Christian Complaisance
about them, and the other Fry would disappear in a moment: For Whores in a
State are like Copper farthings in the way of Trade, only used for the
Convenience of readier Change, But though these obdurate Females are really
accessory to the great Increase of Misses, they would have every Person of
Quality who keeps one in his own Defense, pay a good swinging Fine to the
Government. Is this reasonable or fair? Would Governor Walker, do y^ think,
have done like a Gentleman if he had fined his Heroes of London-Der^y for
feeding on Horseflesh, contrary to the Statute, when they had nothing else to
help themselves with. It Is the same in all Cases where there is no choice but
downright nece^sity.

They would have you enact, since they find Wine is so potent a Rival, that
none but married Men shall have the Privilege of entering into a Tavern, that
is modestly speaking, of being drunk. With all our hearts, Gentlemen, provided
always that none but married Women shall be licensed to appear at the Theater,
Chocolate house, Whitehall or the Park; or if they do, that any vigorous
Cavalier shall have full Liberty to carry them off, without incurring the Fate
of poor Sir John Johnson.

To present you at one view with the Merits of the Cause. The Ladies are weary
of lying alone, and so are we: They would fain be advantageously married, and
so would your humble Servants. The Quarrel therefore on their side is unjustly
begun. They look upon us to be their Adversaries, whereas we have the same kind
Inclinations to their Sex, as any of our Forefathers, the same Desires, the
same Wishes, by the same Token we heartily believe they have equal Beauty, and
equal, if not superior, Charms to any of their Sex before them. But as in a
long Tract of Time Innovations cannot fail to start up; so the Ladies either
presuming on their own Strength, or on the Inadvertency of the Men, have
trump'd up several New Doctrines upon us. A Courtship, as the Ladies are
pleased to order it, is now the greatest Penance any Man in the World can
undergo. We must swear as many Oaths as would serve one of his Majesty's
largest Garrisons for a Twelvemonth, till we are believed. We must treat them
like Goddesses, lie prostrate at their Feet, make Presents so expensive and
numerous, that perhaps the Wive's Portion will scarce make amends for what the
Mistress extorted from us. Because Jacob could serve two Apprenticeships for
his Rachel, they imagine that we must do the same; not considering that the
Race of the Methuselabs and Patriarchs is quite extinct, and that this old
Testament-Lover, were he in our Circumstances, who begin to decay at Thirty,
would have taken wiser and better Measures.

Gentlemen,
These are our Sentiments upon this Subject: And as we don't doubt the Justice
of this Honorable House, so we little question but that our Cause will
prevail* In a Word, Let Love be encouraged, and Cruelty and Coyness be punished,

And your Petitioners as in Duty bound shall ever pray.

LONDON, Printed for, and sold by the Book-selling Ba^^helors in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1693.

THE Chaplains Petition TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE For Redress of Grievances.
By one of the Camp Chaplains.
1.
SInce the Ladies against Men
Have to Paper put Pen
By way of Most humble Petition,
In hope your good pleasure
Will once be at leisure
To mend their now Scurvy Condition.
2.
And since you allow
That impertinent Crew,
Your Patience to weary and vex,
With a thing of no moment,
That has small weight, or none in it,
But's as Idle and Light as their Sex.
3.
We, humble Famelicks,
Divinity's Relics,
In plain English, Chaplains Domestic;
To make known our grievance
For you to relieve once,
On your Door do our earnest Request stick.
4.
Viz. Be it Enacted,
That as we ve contracted,
Our Salaries may be Paid us:
That when we are dismissed ill
We may not go whistle,
As an ordinary Footman or Maid does.
5.
For as to the Land all,
It will be a Scandal
To see Sons of Levi go Threadbare;
Even so to be sure,
If the Pastor is poor,
His Flock will never greet him with Head bare.
6.
Next, when we have said Grace,
Let Us at Table have place,
And not sculk among the Waiters:
Or come in with the Fruit
To give thanks, and sneak out,
To Dine upon half empty Platters.
7.
But besides store of Dishes
(One part of our Wishes)
To fortify Maw Sacerdotal:
Elemosinary Funk,
And leave to be Drunk,
We humbly desire you to Vote all.
8.
Item, Pray make us able
To command Steed in Stable,
When we are disposed ad ridendum:
And if we want Boots,
Whips, Spurs, or Sartoots,
Oblige surly Groom straight to lend them.
9.
Nor let our great Patrons,
Or their ruling Matrons,
Read the Butlers a Juniper Lecture,
If sometimes they pass
To our hands a stolen glass,
Or some little Orts of Confecture.
10.
When long we have served,
And Preferment deserved,
Let Us not miss of our just Expectations;
By every Fopp's Letter
For his Friend, that is no better,
Or our Patron's more Block head Relations.
11.
For it is cause of grieving
To see a good Living
Which our Thoughts had long been fixed on,
Be given to a Wigeon
With no more Religion,
And Learning much less than his Sexton.
12.
Nor yet let Matrimony,
The worst sort of Simony,
Be the Price of our Presentations:
Nor to wed a cast Mistress
When she is in great distress,
Our requisite Qualification.
13.
And if it be our chance
To serve against France,
At Sea, on the Rhine, or in Flanders:
We earnestly sue to ye,
That exempt from all duty
We may Dine with our Pious Commanders.
14.
Then Brandy good store,
With several things more,
Which we Sons of the Church have a right in:
But chiefly w' entreat,
You Will never forget
To excuse us from Preaching and Fighting.
15.
Let not a Commission
So change the condition
Of him that just carried a Halbert;
That a Dunce of no Letters
Should Hector his Betters,
For truly we cannot at all bear ^t.
16.
Nor when the War's done,
Let Us be broke every one,
To languish in Rags and lie idle;
Nor be so ill served,
To be left to be starved,
And kept by a Bear, and a Fiddle.
17.
May it therefore you Please,
For your own and our Ease
To relieve us without hesitation:
For the Grievances told,
Are as frequent and old
As any besides in the Nation.
18.
Then on us take Pity,
And choose a Committee,
Let no other Business prevent ye;
Our request do not spurn,
Nor Vote it to Burn
With a Nemine Contradicente.
19.
To this if you yield,
Our Mouths shall be filled
With Encomiums of your Piety;
Whose excellent Fame
We will loudly Proclaim
And worship next that of the Deity.
20.
When thus you remove
What we disapprove,
We all, down to Z from the Letter A;
By Night and by Day,
Will fervently Pray,
As in Duty bound, etc a.
LONDON, Printed for the use of the Petitioners; and sold by Tho. Ranew in
Fleet Street near Temple Bar. 1693.

A PROPOSAL OF THE POETS To raise Their MAJESTY'S A Sum of Money.
Humbly recommended to the Consideration of the Honorable House.
AT this critical conjuncture, when every good subject ought to set his Hand to
the Plow, and use his utmost endeavors to support the present Establishment,
we have not been wanting in our respective Stations to show the sincerity of
our Affection to it. As Fighting was never the Talent of our Tribe, we don't
pretend to have obliged the Nation that way; nor dare we own our selves guilty
of much praying, for that too is out of our Sphere; but with what alacrity and
cheerfulness we have drawn our Pens in their Majesty's quarrel, let Paul's
Church Yard and Westminster Hall speak. No sooner is any Victory gained by our
Forces in Flanders, but we take the Hint immediately, and Record it in Meter:
Nay we may without vanity affirm, that could Ryming have done the business, the
English had long ago beat their Drums through Paris, sent the mighty Monarch to
Grass, and reduced the Louvre and Versailles to Ashes. What is a farther
indication of our good will to the Government, we have not only only rymed but
prophesied for it, and if in the heat of inspiration we have laid the Scene of
Conquest somewhat too early, and foretold Triumphs that did not happen at the
time appointed, it is an error on the right side, and we hope the Kingdom will
as readily excuse it in us, as they have done some modern Interpreters of the
Revelations, who out of their great zeal to the Protestant Cause Prophesied the
utter downfall of Antichrist would certainly come to pass last year; though to our
great sorrow we all see that the Man of Sin is still alive and lusty, and in
all probability will not be induced to break up Housekeeping under two or
three year more.

Gentlemen,

You have made us happy under a victorious Prince, whose immortal acquisitions
employ our Muses daily. You have preserved our Religion, and it is certain we
Poets have a regard to that above all things; you have likewise secured us in
our properties, and how deeply that point concerns the Sons of Ryme and Harmony
we need not mention. For this therefore, and several other important
considerations, our Fraternity at the last general meeting, after having
considered of several ways to express their gratit^de, did unanimously resolve
to do what none of their Predecessors ever dreamt of, and in case your
illustrious assembly shall think fit to approve of the proposal, ^ffer to raise
his Majesty six hundred thousand pound, and that too out of the Territories of
Poetry. And though as all our ancient Papers inform us, Parnassus is Apollo's
peculiar, and never paid a farthing to any Government before, yet to testify
our Loyalty and Acknowledgement for the mighty things that have been done for
the Nation of late, we shall cheerfully contribute all that in us lies, to the
ease, benefit and advantage of the public.

We need not remind you that Poets in all Ages and Countries of the World have
been the sole dispensers of Fame and Glory. Now this being an Heroic Age,
wherein every person is ambitious of Glory more or less, and yet would rather
purchase it with his Money at home, notwithstanding the present scarcity
thereof, than acquire it by his Merits abroad, we humbly crave leave that under
your authority and protection we may be empowered to Erect a Glory Office in all
the principal Corporations and Towns in the Kingdom.

We have so contrived matters that this Office shall hook in all sorts of
Customers, Lords and Peasants, Court Ladies and Milkmaids, Clergy and Laity, in
short, the whole populace, by what Names or Titles soever dignified and
distinguished.

As there are Masons in the City so dexterous at their Trade, that they can
build a House to last precisely the time you covenant for, nay can so contrive
matters, that the Roof shall tumble the very minute after the Lease is expired:
so in our mystery we have Brethren that can write for a Day, for a Week, for a
Month, for a Year, and so till Doomsday if the Chapman will go up to the price
of it.

In Grub street they seldom write for above a Week. Some of the better sort in
Paul's Cha^ch yard and about the Temple, with good looking after may last half a
dozen years and upwards. The Wits of Covent Garden hold a shorter or longer
space, according as they mix their colors, and some few among them pretend to
confer immortality, and to endure for ever.

Now in proportion to these different Talents of Writing the several prices are
to be regulated. Inferior persons may have their Twelve pennyworth of Glory,
(and under that rate we are agreed to fell none) and because Glory of that
cheap composition cannot be supposed to keep long, we advise them to renew it
twice a year. This branch of the Revenue is to be managed by the good people of
Grubstreet, and the Commodity thus retailed is chiefly calculated for the
Meridian of Dutch Troopers, Prentices, Milk-maids, Porters, Footmen, Farmers
Eldest Sons, and Semstresses.

The middle sort of Glory from half a Crown up to twenty Shilling^ is to be
distributed by the City Poet for the time being, and his assistants. And this
may indifferently serve Vintners that can palm a new Wine upon the World,
Physicians that have broached a new Religion, poor Townsmens Daughtets that
have snapt an University Fortune, Country Attorneys that can set a whole
Corporation together by the Ears, prolifick Divines that to their great renown
have puissantly begotten twenty Children, projectors of Pacing Saddles, and all
such useful inventions to the public, Schoolmasters that have floged their
thousand younger Brothers that have stole great fortunes, puny Tradesmen that
from Pins and Pack-thread have scuffled their way into a Common Council-ship.
And not to mention any more particulars, all people of middle condition who
have done any thing famous and remarkable in their generation.

The highest pitch of Glory, going under the name of Elixir Immortalitatis will
be only sold at Wills Coffee-house in Covent Garden, and will make the
purchasers free of Epistles Dedicatory, Panegyricks, with the great privilege
and emoluments thereunto belonging. The price of it is just twenty Guineas,
(wonderful cheap all things considered) and we doubt not will draw in infinite
numbers to bid for it, such as Favorites and Courtiers, who would rather buy
glory at any rate, than put themselves to the expense of obtaining it by their
own deserts. Penurious Aldermen who having no inclination to purchase
reputation by building of Almshouses, may here get it at a cheaper rate. Lords
Pages that have advanced themselves to a Sea Commission, but have a mortal
aversion to Wooden Legs. The fine dressing talkative Sparks of the Town that
take Garrisons, and model Kingdoms over their Claret. In fine all those persons
who have a passion for Fame and Glory, but cannot be persuaded to sacrifice
their ease, and pleasures, or venture a broken Shin for its sake. The only fear
is, that to save charges some thrifty people will turn Poets in their own
defense; but this inconvenience may easily be obviated by constituting a
Supreme Office here in Town, which shall have full Authority to place and
displace as they shall see fit, and likewise to regulate the numbers of the
City and Country Poets, as they have prudently done the numbers of Chairmen at
While* hall.

We humbly conceive that the revenue belonging to this Office will in a years
time with prudent management raise if not the whole, yet at least four parts of
the sum proposed. However if it should happen to fall short of what we expect
(for since the Gentry in two Welsh Countries have lately renounced their
Gentility to save twenty shillings a quarter, we may probably imagine that some
persons for all their pretended Courtship of Glory will rather let it alone
than turn purchasers) it cannot fail of being made up by the following
expedients. We therefore desire that an Epithalamium Office may be erected
somewhere near the Commons, were all people that pay Scot and Lot to the Parish
may be obliged to come for their Wedding Ballad, (without which no Parson shall
offer to Marry them under penalty of incuring a Poetical Censure) and that they
shall pay either according to their quality, or the goodness of the verse. In
the second place we propose an Elegy-Office, where not only Epitaphs of all
sorts may be had (without which it shall not be lawful to bury the party
deceased) but also Funeral ditties upon Ladies Lap-dogs, Parrots, Monkeys, Lord
Mayor's and Alderman's Horses defunct: adjoining to which may be a
Nativity-Office, where the Children of all such Parents that are qualified as
above mentioned, may have their Nativities Registered in Ryme, and their
Fortunes told into the bargain, which last favor will save their Friends the
expense of going into Morefield, or to Dr. Saffold's worthy Successor. For be
it known to all the World, the Astrologers interlope upon the Poets, when they
pretend to Prrophecy.

These Offices you may order to continue so long as the War lasts, whereby
their Majesty's shall receive six hundred thousand pound yearly. We need not
say any thing of the Circulation of Wit, the employing of many indigent
persons, and lastly the great encouragement of the Paper Manufacture, all which
will by this means be promoted and advanced. We only presume to lay our
proposal at your Feet, and subscribe our selves Your most obedient Servants the
Poets.

We have ordered the City Poet, who drew up this Proposal, to communicate this
design to our dear Brethren the Poets of Holland, and to the rest of the
Confederates whom it may concern.

London, Printed ^or the Assigns of Mr. Jordan and Tubman deceased.

The Petition of the WIDOWS, in and about London and Westminster for a Redress
of their Grievances.
By the same Solicitor that drew up the Petition for the Ladies.
LAst Week a Petition subscribed by the unmarried Ladies came before you, and
what reception it found your selves know best. It Is true we wondered to find an
Army of Maids, from whom the World usually expects modesty and silence, so
emboldened on the sudden as to petition for Husbands, and that in the face of
the World. Widows indeed who lie under no such Restrictions, are allowed in all
Countries to speak for themselves; and it is but reasonable we should, for few
besides will submit to the Trouble. It Is our Privilege to be obstreperous when
we are not heard; and there is one of our Predecessors upon Record in the New
Testament, who by Virtue of her everlasting Clack, forced an old musty
Gentleman of the long Robe at last to grant her Request.

Now Heaven be praised, we are not unacquainted with Mankind, which the Maids,
we suppose, will not pretend to; and therefore may appeal to them without
infringing the Rules of Decency: We have seen them in their best and weakest
Intervals We know what Weapons they carry about them, and how often they can
discharge in an Engagement. We have in our times had very severe Condicts with
them, and sometimes they were uppermost, and then they fell on like Thunder and
Lightning; but for all that your Petitioners obliged them soon to quit the
Field, and leave part of their Ammunition behind them. Give us leave, good
Gentlemen, to talk of these our Combats; for we always fought upon the square,
and therefore have no reason to be ashamed of a recital. As we hinted to you
before, we have been concerned in several fierce Engagements, and the Men
played their Sharps against us when we could only produce Flats on our side;
and, besides, they drew their heavy Canon upon us, while we were forced to lie
by and receive their shot. After all, though we were so disadvantageously set
upon, and the Blood shed that happened in these Occasions was always on our
part; yet when the Fortune of the Battle began to change, and declare herself
in favor of us, we never treated them otherwise than Christians; we never
nailed up their Canon when we had it in our possession, so to render it
unserviceable for the future, but gave them time to recover breath again, and
furnish themselves with a new Train of Artillery: Is not this a generous and
honorable way of treating an Enemy? In short (the Devil take that Word short,
for your Petitioners mortally hate it) But in fine, we have been intimate with
the Men, and the Men have been no less intimate with us; but what is the chief
Errand that sent us here, we have every Woman of us buried her respective Man.

Not that we value our selves upon that score, for God forbid we should; but
Widows will speak the Truth let the consequence be what it will, and should you
make ten thousand Acts to oblige us to hold our Tongues, it would signify just
nothing, we should break them all in a moment, and that with as much Alacrity
as the Vintners in Town daily break the Adultery-Act. Well then we have all of
us buried her respective Man, which we mention not, Heaven knows our Hearts,
out of Ostentation, but with due Grief and Sorrow. We know a Man's value too
well not to regret the loss of so serviceable a Creature. We had all of us good
able Husbands, at least we'll say so now they are gone; and though perhaps we
had some reason to complain of them when they were alive, yet we forgive them
all their Faults and Infirmities, for that single good natured Act of dying,
and leaving us once more to our selves.

The foolish People of Athens after they had lost a good King, would have no
more of the kind, forsooth, lest a bad one should succeed him. But your
Petitioners are not such a scrupulous sort of People: We that have had good
Husbands, are encouraged to try once more, out of hopes of meeting the same
Success; and we that have had bad ones, are not for all that deterred from
Matrimony, but hope to mend our hands in a second Bargain. After all, should we
be deceived in our Expectations, the first may afford to undergo a little
Penance since they were so happy before; and the latter being accustomed of old
to bear Burdens, are therefore the better enabled to support themselves under
them.

The Body of your Petitioners (for after so much Preface it is high time to
come to business) consists of four several Classes; viz. the old Widows, the
young or middle aged Widows, the rich Widows, and the poor Widows, and each of
them presents you with a different Petition.

To begin then with the old Widows, (and that pre-eminence is due to them upon
the score of their Age and Experience) they humbly supplicate that you would he
pleased to take their miserable Condition into Consideration. Old People
according to the Proverb are twice Children; What wonder is it then if they
still have a hankering after Childish Playthings, and long to have their Gums
rubbed with Coral? Pray don't mistake them, good Gentlemen, they mean it in a
lawful, Matrimonial Sense, and hope you will not censure or think the worse of
them for using this Freedom. They appeal to all the World who it is that most
stand in want of warm, comfortable things, the young or the old: That it is the
greatest Charity to relieve the last, needs no formal proof, all the Hospitals
in the Kingdom speak as much; but alas in this uncharitable Age they don't
expect to meet with many Friends. Upon this Consideration they entirely submit
themselves to the Mercy of the House, not presuming to carry their Petition so
high as to request you to force people to marry them; but only that you would
recommend their Case to the benevolence of those Persons, who having lived
wickedly and at large all their Lifetime, are willing to compound for their
Sins, and do Acts of supererrogation in the last Scene of it. Nor are they
difficult in their choice, they will sit down content with any thin; and
Cripples with Wooden Legs will be cheerfully ^ertained if they have received no
damage in the distinguishing part.

Next to these come the rich Widows, and they earnestly beg of your Honorable
House that you would make it Felony without Benefit of the Clergy, for any one
to make Court to them before the mournful Twelfth-month is expired. They are so
perpetually pestered with Suitors of all Complexions, that they can neither
eat, nor sleep, nor pray for them. A new Favorite has not more humble Servants
in a morning at his Levee nor the Commissioners of the Pay-Office a greater
crowd of surly, grumbling Seamen than they have. Nay, some of their passionate
Admirers have had the Impudence to accost them upon this Chapter as they have
been following their Husband's Corpse to the Grave, in the very height of their
Sorrow, and in the midst of the Funeral Pomp, If you think it too severe to
make it Felony in Persons so offending they desire you to commute the
Punishment, and oblige every Person trespassing after that m^nner to marry some
poor Widow as fancy inclines him; Which is all the Favor that the poor Widows
beg at your hands.

And now comes up the main Body of the young and middle-aged Widows, who as
they are by far the most numerous, especially since the Wars have made such
havoc among the Husbands; so they crave leave to lay their Petitions at your
feet. But before they do that, they think it convenient to remove all those
popular Slanders and Objections, which ill natured People have been long
accustomed to level against Widows in genera; and because their Adversaries
shall have no reason to complain that their Arguments are mangled, they will
urge them as home as either themselves or their best Advocates could do it for
them.

It Is in the first place pretended that Widows want several of those
Recommendations that set off the Sex, and particularly a Maiden head, without
which no Wife they say can be acceptable; that they are still trumping up
Stories of their former Husbands, purposely to confront their new ones, and so
excessively talkative that nothing but Deafness is an Antidote against the
Noise; that marrying a Widow is like splitting upon a Rock where others have
been ship-wracked before. After this they run the Metaphor into Long-Lane,
Second-hand Gloves Clothes of another's wearing, and the Lord knows what
impertinent Stuff: But we shall answer them all in order.

To begin then with the loss of a Maidenhead, about which they make so horrid a
Clamor, we could tell them sad Stories of several of their Betters that on the
Wedding-night have satified they have dug up this same Chimerical Treasure,
though it was stolen many Months before: my, we have a hundred and more of our
Company here, that if occasion were, could attest this upon their own personal
knowledge. So certain it is that the nicest Critics among the Men may be as
easily imposed upon in this Affair, as your pretenders to Antiquity in
counterfeit Medals. But if no Woman can please them without this imaginary
Wealth (and indeed it is no more, for most People take it upon Trust) we see no
reason why a young Widow may not be as capable of obliging them as the best
Virgin in the World. It Is but using a few Astringents before, and, at the
critical Minute, crying out, Fie, Sir, pray, Sir, will you split me up? will
you murder me alive? Can you take any pleasure in what is so painful to
another? And the Sparks are satisfied they have made a real Sacrifice, though
in Truth no more Blood was shed in the Encounter, than we see upon the Stage
when one Actor kills another. If this is their dear Diversion (and by the bye
it is a sure sign of their ill Nature that they cannot be pleased but at the
expense of the Party, whom they pretend to love so dearly) rather than lose
them, we promise them to howl, and sigh, and roar every Night in the Year, as
heartily as an Ox, when he is led to the Slaughterhouse, and so entertain them
still with the Ceremony, at least, of their dearly beloved Maidenhead.

In the next place why should we not permitted to refresh the Memory of a dull
lazy husband with the noble performances of his Predecessors. The men in K.
Charles the Second's Reign took the liberty to talk of the Glorious Conquests
of our former fighting Monarchs, and yet for all that thought themselves as
good Subjects as any in the kingdom. If the reproof is just where a God's name
lies the harm, and surely the Wife must be allowed to be the best judge of that
affair. Oh no, say they, it is not the Horse but the Man that best knows whether
he rides easy. Content: But does not the Horse likewise know whether his Rider
carries true Horseman's weight, and whether he sits even in the Saddle. If not,
why would Bucephalus suffer himself to be backed by none but Alexander the
Great?

But then we are excessive talkative. So are they, and so are most of our Sex,
but especially the longing Maids, and under correction, if it is a Sin we are
of opinion it sits better upon us than upon them. This is not all, Marrying a
Widow is like spliting upon a Rock where others have been Shipwrack'd. Well, we
are glad however it is like something. But since one simily is bost drove out by
another. Why not, like drinking in a room where some honest Gentleman has made
merry before. Since nothing will go down with these Squamish Creatures in the
Matrimonial way but a spick and span new Virgin, we wonder why they don't keep
up the frolic in every thing else; why as often as they drink they don't call
still for a Virgin Glass; why they don't every Meal call for a Virgin Plate;
why they don't still pull out a Virgin Snuff Box, lie in Virgin Sheets, talk
Politics in a Virgin Coffee House, and pursue their dearly beloved variety to
the end of the Chapter Lastly, their indignation rises at the thoughts of
Long-lane, and all Second-hand things whatever. If the Sparks are resolved to
be true to their Argument, we are well satisfied they must even say good night
to all thinking and writing and talking: For at present they Tniak at Second
h^^d. and Write and Talk at Second hand, and this objection, as terrible as it
looks, is a thread bare weather-beaten Second-hand Objection with a witness.

A late Monarch of happy Memory, who was inferior to none but Solomon in
Natural Philosophy, and chiefly in what relates to our Sex, was often heard to
say, that getting of a Maiden Head was a drudgery fit for none but Porters, We
save all that I^boar and pains, for there needs no great trouble to enter a
City when a Breach is once made in the Walls, and our Husbands have that
satisfaction as to see their ground ploughed up ready to their hands. To
conclude ^ll, a Widow is a tried Gun, and carries the Tower Mark upon her; now
who knows but a Maid may split in the proving.

Having thus justified the State of Widowhood against all the objections that
are used to be made against it we have nothing more to add but that you would be
pleased to give your consent to the three following Articles.

First, That all Persons who are not of known parts and abilities, may not only
be rendered incapable of marrying Maids or such as are reputed Maids but
consined to the choice of Widows only. This we request not so much for our own
advantage, as for the ease of the Men; for you know several people can make a
shift to keep the King's high way, that are not able to leap a Ditch or break
open a Quickset.

Secondly, That all Persons resolving to marry before the age of twenty one, if
they have made no Natural Experiments before that time, shall be likewise
obliged to take a Widow, as they do P^lots in difficult or unknown places. It Is
an ancient but well grounded complaint, that where two M^den Heads meet they
produce nothing but mere Butter Prints, addle-pated Fops, and dull senseless
sleepy Boobies. Now if you pals this into an Act, in all probability it will
contribute much to the improving of our present degenerate Race, and certainly
if ever we wanted solid heads, 't^s at this conjuncture.

Thirdly, and I (...), That all Widows during their Widow hood may be excused
from the Taxes, for is i^ ^^t hard, good Gentlemen to pay four Shillings in the
Pound for empty Houses. We hope you will consider farther of these our
reasonable Supplications.

And your Petitioners as in Duty, etc
FINIS.
London, Printed for the Use of the Wide -- o's, 1693.

A New Bill drawn up by a Committee of Grievances, in Reply to the Ladies and
Batchelors Petition and Remonstrance, etc.
VIrgins and Batchelors, or rather Ladies and Gentlemen (for that is your safer
name, and so we would advise you to title your selves) we have received both
your Addresses, and both your Suits lie before us. We confess that, to do you
equal right, you both plead strongly, and pray heartily: However, the fervor
of the Suppliant does not always argue the honesty of the Petition. The most
unreasonable most unjust things in the World may be as vigorously prayed for as
the best. A man in his angry moments may as zealously wish to see his honest
Neighbor hanged, as he ever wished in a fit of Sickness to be saved. The same
Tradesmans Wise that at Morning Service could think of nothing but Abraham's
bosom, before night perhaps has altered her note, and prayed with greater
vehemence to meet her Gallant.

The Merit therefore, and not the Oratory of the Plea is the business of our
Examination. But before we descend to particulars, we must so far join with
you, to own your Cause (that we may use your own phrase) a matter of the
greatest consequence that ever came within our Walls. For Hymen and Love,
Generation and Progeny, the fulfilling of the great first Commandment, Increase
and Multiply, is indeed an Importance so high, that not only the present Race
of Mankind, the now occupants of the World, but even the yet unborn are
concerned in it.

Having therefore duly weighed the whole Controversy between the Petitioners
and Remoustrancers, we must declare our ready tenderness, and without
partiality, favorable Inclinations both to the Complaint, and Complainants,
the aggrieved Petitioners. For having considered, that long Customs out of the
memory of man, are by the British Constitution equivalent to the most binding
Laws; we find upon search that England has been always the Heaven of Women, and
also by another customary female Claim, that a Woman never loses her Honor; and
consequently that the practiced Deference and Complaisance to the Sex is an
unalienable Right: Upon the said premises duly considered, as we sit here not
to destroy Fundamentals, but to support 'em, we must allow a great many
unquestioned Prerogatives as their just and natural Right; a fair Magna Charta
on the soft Sexes side.

Nevertheless, not to come to any Conclusive Determination, Causa inandita, we
think it highly consistent with our own Honor and Justice to discuss the main
points in dispute between the Ladies and Batchelors, before we come to any
final decision on either side.

First, then we cannot but take notice that the Batchelors very unjustly charge
the Petitioners with Difficult Courtship; the pretended Servitude of tedious
Jacob-Prenticeships, etc. being in the whole a most notoriously false and
malicious suggestion. For how can any man in his right wits believe that ten
thousand Greensickness Maidens, subscribers to the Petition, can be those
hard-hearted slow Rachel Mistresses (as if Life, Health and Love were so little
dear to them) that they would rather dye Martyrs to Oatmeal, Loam and Chalk,
^han accept such able Doctors and such pleasant Physic for their Recoveries,
in that only Elixir Vitae, Man and Matrimony.

Nay, do not the whole Body of Petitioners most frankly and generonsly avow'
(both for their Majesty's and the Nations Service) their ready Inclinations and
Desires of recruiting the yearly Flandrian Mortality, by an immediate
Consummation and Propagation. Is not the fair Festival-sheet hung out, with all
the heartiest Bridal Compliment, of Wake Sleepers, rise and eat? And can the
ungrateful Batchelors talk of Seven years Courtship after such indearing
Invitations! But however, if by chance, once in an Age, they meet with a
thick-shell'd bitter Almond, must the generality of the Sex, the tenderer
Pistacheres, requiring hot half the cracking labor, and with ten times the
sweeter Kernel, be falsely reproacht and reviled?

And whereas the Batchelors ridiculously object their fear and dread of entering
into the Matrimonial state, from the suggested Erailty and Brittleness of the
weaker Vestels: to obviate the folly of that Fear, and the shallowness of that
argument, we declare, Nemine contradicente, the fair Sex, (not to diminish
their value) to be true precious Porcelane, and it lies only in the gentle
usage and tenderness of the handling, to preserve 'em.

And we farther declare this Petition of the longing Ladies, notwithstanding
the scurrilous Batchelors ridiculing and censorious Reflections, to be as
honest a Supplication, as a Prayer for daily Bread. for every Thing would live.

And whereas one great Bar to Matrimony, are the common pretensions of Good
Husbandry, in choosing rather to buy at Hackney, than keep a Milcher of their
own; us thereby endeavoring to avoid the Expensive Concomitants of Wedlock.
Now as these unthinking Remonstrancers never consider the dangerous Risques of
their own Latitudinarian principles and practices, in incurring the hazard of
coming to Sassaparilla and Guiacu^^, and the rest of the dry Drugs, infinitely
more expensive than the objected Matrimonial Sweetmeats and Caudles,
Gossipings and Christning^, etc. the Confectioners a much easier than the
Apothecaries Bill, and one Dr. Wall a heavier incident charge than two
Cham^erlains.

We therefore think fit to lay before their Eyes the too common and too
threatening malevolence of th^se malignant Ascendants, viz. Venus in the lower
House, and Mercury in the upper one; and withal advise 'em to reflect that the
Nursery of a whole Fireside is not half the expense of rearing of gall^ping
Runners into standing Gouts. We could likewise further convince 'em, that the
u^iversal havoc of all the Ma^ms and Cripples, from French Chain-shot and
Splinters got betwixt Wind and Water, is much the vaster Hospital Rentcharge,
than the Pensions of Chelsey and Chattham.

However, if no Counsel nor Precept can reduce 'em from their infamous
Reprobation to the honorable state, we hereby enact this punishment of their
Apostasy, That they live in their sins, and dye in their shame; and as the last
public brand, be utterly debarred even that common Civility of bribing the
Searchers, and softening the Bill of Mortality, by slurring a shame-fac'd
Consumption upon a scandalous Rot.

But to begin our Examination into the Petitioners greatest and loudest congu'd
Grievance, the Multitude of Misses; and all the fatal Influences from those
reigning Ascendants; that not only (as the Petitioners modestly complain)
divert, but (as we may safely add) poison those wholesome streams which would
otherwise run in the regular Channel of Matrimony; we shall here subjoyn our
Power and Authority for accomplishing a thorough Reformation in this
particular; with the following Inflictions and Punishments for the
discouragement and suppression of the said notorious Vice and Enormity.

Whereas therefore, to the scandal of the Age, it has been too often
experienced, that witty and beautiful Spouse has been abandoned for
hard-favour'd dowdy Miss; under no other shadow of excuse, than the pretended
discovery of having found a Fiddle abroad, and therefore slighting the
unmusical Instrument at home; Now in utter detestation of such abominable
pretenses, and such unnatural Conjugal-Abdication, together with the manifest
Justice of Lex Talionis, we do hereby License and Authorize the aforesaid fair
Abandoned (as well for the Alleviation of doleful Widowed nights, and Virgin
sheets; as for the support of the Family, possibly in no small danger from such
neglect and Defertion) to borrow the Assistance of some dignified Younger
Brother, to raise Hei^, etc. without inc^r^ing the Praemunire of Elopement; or
upon Non-Readiness and Failure of such honorable supply, to have free leave to
take up with some courser Domestic Men^al, though but to the homely Tune of
Drive on Coacbman.

And in like manner it is Resolved and Ordered, That all those Ramblers and
Strays under that misleading Ignis Fatuus, the sweet sin of Variety, that shall
therefore grasp at outlying Pluralities, though possibly, naturally so
weak-gifted, as to be scarce sufficiently qualified for due Incumbence at home,
shall for the said wilful offense of Non Residence, incur the Penalty of
Sequestration, to be supplied by a Curate, from the choice of the Parish.

And whereas the fair Complainants too loudly inveigh against their powerful
Rival Wine, and the present too spreading Idolatry of the Bottle, and the
dangerous concomitants thereof; which the Batchelors endeavor to soften and
sweeten, by insinuating the Juice of the Grape no ill-meaning Enemy to the God
of Love's Subjects. For adjustment of the Dispute, be it resolved, That Wine be
no farther encouraged than as Amorum famulus, a good Servant but a bad Master;
to be indulged and cherisht as a moderate Grace-cup, to make Love chirp, but
not sleep; and be used for Sauce and Relish, not sor Sowse and Pickle. Be it
therefore enacted, That for due punishment of those violent Claret-hunters,
that by abuse of this lawful and limited Indulgence, do outrun all bounds, to
the making a toil of a pleasure, and a tedious tiresome Fox-chase of it; it may
and shall be lawful for the sweet neglected Venus, like the old modest Diana,
to punish all such capital offenders with the Front of an Acteon; it being the
opinion of this Committee, that the wilful neglect of Family Duty, and all
false measures of due Benevolence fall as justly under Parliamentary Censure
and Lash, as the false packing of Butter.

And whereas the crying shame of the daily scandalous Rhimes, the licentious
scurrilous Pamphlet Doggrel and Playhouse Farce upon the holy state of
Matrimony, is no small Grievance of the Petitioners. This Honorable Committee,
as fully empowered to search Papers and Records, have found the said Libels to
be wholly matter of Malice and Calumny, the generality of the Authors being
either some scribbling, aspiring, slighted pretender to some fair disdainful
Celiae; and therefore in pure spite and revenge, pelted and persecuted with
Satyr and Lampoon, for no other sin but her being deaf and invincible to Dity
and Sonnet; and thereupon the whole Honorable state of Wedlock, maliciously
vilified, with the outcry of dry meat, for no other reason but that themselves
are thrown out of the Chase, and excluded the Game: Or otherwise if such
Wedlock-railing be the Venom and Gall of any married Author, we conclude it
the product of some very hard Bargain, as possibly some old-rapp'd leaky Broach
at home, and thereupon his Pallat wholly depraved and sowr'd with this nauseous
Draught of Lees. Nevertheless all the said villainous Ribaldry and Libels, as
hatched and contrived for sowing Sedition and somenting Schism within the
peaceable and united Ecclesiastical Provinces of Hymen and Love, we do hereby
adjudge and sentence to the old doom of Heretico Comburendo.

And whereas our fair Petitioners enforce their Suit, from our condescension to
the humble Debates of cutting the Rivers Lug and Wye, etc. Be it therefore
Resolved and Ordered accordingly, That the present Virgin Shallows, hi^he^to of
no farther use than the driving a poor Watermill, etc. be dug into Deeps and
Channels, and made Navigable for Traders and Voyagers, and so rendered useful
to the public for the serviceable bearing of Bulk and Burden.

Provided still, that all the fair Bridal pretenders shall bring their whole
Loaf to the Spousal Board, and not have any of the Kissing Crust pared off by
any hung^y Sharper for Breakfast, before the good man in Black has said Grace
for the Nuptial-night Supper, with the rest of the usual Ceremonies or Fall to
in Gods Name.

But if by any frail mischance, an unhappy falling Fair, under pretense of a
pure untoucht Domestic Utensil, shall bring a c^az^d Pipkin into play; she
shall be obliged by a true and thorough Reformation, and Engagement of her
future more steady Uprightness, to give good Security that a crack^ Maidenhead,
like a broken Bone, shall be strongest where it is set again, or otherwise to
forseit all Right and Benefit of our favor and protection.

Lastly, be it ordered, in favor to the Petitioners proposed Supply toward
recruiting the humane dearth and scarcity made by the hungry Devourer War, That
a Clause be inserted to root out of all the Female Physick-gardens, and indeed
from out the whole Commonwealth, those dangerous Plants called Cover-shame,
alias Savine, and other anti-conceptive Weeds and Poisons, those notorious
Restoratives of slender Shapes, and tender Reputation, to the loud and crying
shame of Love lost, and a Good Thing thrown away.

As for what relates to the Chaplains, we are willing to allow 'em plenty of
Meat, Drink and Tobacco, the most zealous part of their Supplication; nay, to
sit down at Table with their Patrons, provided they don't take upon them to
censure the management of the Family. But whereas they petition to be freed
from any obligation to marry the Chambermaid; we can by no means assent to it;
the Abigail by immemorial custom being a Deodand, and belonging to Holy Church.

We thank the Poets for their good will to the Government, as appears by their
Proposal to raise a fund of 600000 l. for the support of it; but don't think it
convenient to raise any Money either out of them, or the Ribbon weavers. The
only Tax we lay upon them is to Canonize all our Heroes that dye in Flanders,
and to record their Victories in Verse. And this will be no burdensome
employment for them.

And lastly, as for the Widows, provided they will engage never to talk bawdy,
and quote the sayings, or praise the valor of their dead Husbands, we will
grant all and every Clause in their Petition, viz. The old Widows shall have
their Gu^s rubbed with Coral. The rich shall be indulged a twelvemonths rest.
The poor shall have the forfeitures they beg for; and the young receive full
satisfaction in their three Articles.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of PETITIONS, ordered to be drawn up and Presented to the
Honorable House at their next Session.
A Petition of the Brewers and Butchers, that the former may be incorporated
with the Vintners; and the latter with the Apothecaries.

A Petition of the Banbox-men and Trunk-makers, that the Athenian Mercury, and
all Weekly Papers of the like nature be continued.

A Petition of 20000 Tradesmen, that if their Wives offer to draw Bills more
than once a Night upon them, they may be empowered honorably to reject them.

A Petition of the Quack-Doctors, that the Constables may not disturb the
industrious Night-walkers in the Strand, Fleet Street, and Cheapside.

A Petition of Doctor S-lm-n, and two more of the Fraternity, that they may
have the sole benefit of a new Religion, by them lately Invented, and that no
other Persons presume to interlope upon them.

A Petition of the Quakers, that their bare word may be equivalent to Swearing;
and Nonsense to true Reasoning; and likewise that it may be lawful for them to
Fornicate out of their own Tribe.

A Petition of all the married Women in the Kingdom of England, Dominion of
Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, that the Dog Days be immediately
repealed.

A Petition of the moderate Divines, that the 30th. of Jan. and 29th. of May be
discarded out of the Almanac, as being great Eye sores to the Godly Party.

A Petition of the Maids, that the Mosaical Signs of Virginity, be declared
void and unnecessary, and unfit to be required under the Christian Dispensation.

A Petition of the Ribbon-Weavers, that Shoulder Knots and Pantaloons of happy
Memory be revived.

A Petition of the Booksellers to declare, that Licensing of Books is Popish
and Superstitious, and destructive of the liberty of the Subject.

A Petition of the Inhabitants of White Friars, that their Bounds be enlarged,
that they may have room enough to receive the broken Merchants and Tradesmen
that daily flock in to them.

A Petition of the Poets for a speedy Restoration of Claret, and the utter
Banishment of little diminutive Pagan Bottles.

A Petition of the Midwives and Highway-men that Savin and Hemp be rooted out
of the Commonwealth.

A Petition of the Glasiers and Tallow-Chandlers, that it may be lawful to
break Windows on Thanksgiving-days, where no Lights are set out.

A Petition of Dr. Otes, that every Evidence for the future shall be obliged to
repair to him for a License.

A Petition of the Prisoners in Newgate, that their Confessions and dying
Speeches may not be Printed before they are Hanged.

A Petition of Dr. Partridge that no Almanack-maker pretend to Prophecy for
the Government but himself.

A Petition of the Fiddlers, that kicking down Stairs, and broken Heads be
reckoned no Scandal.

A Petition of the Players, that they may be allowed plurality of Wives, in
order to be sure of a Maidenhead once in their Lives.

A second Petition of the Booksellers, that when a dull heavy Book lies upon
their hands, it may be publicly burnt to promote the Sale of it.

A Petition of Bully D -- son, and the rest of his Brethren, that Swearing and
Roaring be adjudged as effectual a sign of Valor, as Fighting.

A Petition of several young Gentlemen of the Inns of Court, that a Statue be
erected to Dr. Wall, at the public Charge.

A Petition of the Northern Attorneys, for a speedy conclusion of the War,
because at present the People cannot spare Money to go to Law.

A Petition of the Harlots, that Pluralities be denied to all married Women, of
what Degree or Quality soever.

A Petition of the Coffee Houses, that they may be privileged in Fornication
up Stairs, and for Treason and false news below.

A Petition of the Country Parsons, that, in favor of them, the House will be
pleased to take off the additional Duty upon Tobacco.

A Petition of the City Clergymen's Daughters, that Increase and Multiply be
made the Eleventh Commandment.

A Petition of the Knights of the Post, that all the Pillories in the Kingdom
be burnt on the next Thanksgiving-day.

A Petition of the Tradesmen in and about London, to prohibit the exportation
of Leather, loost if the War should com^^^e a Year or two (...), we should be
forced, like our An^^stor^, to (...) in our own Defense.

A Petition of the Drawers about the Temple and Covent Garden, that they may be
allowed to lie a Bed till Eleven.

A Petition of the Royal Society, that the Comb-makers, Mouse-Trap Men, and
Athenians, be suppressed, as Interlopers upon them.

A Petition of the Chimney-Sweepers, that they may have the s^owring of all
Ecclesiastical Consciences every Spring and Fall.

A Petition of the City that none be suffered to talk Treason, but such as are
well-affected to the Commonwealth.

A Petition of the College of Physicians, that the Importation of Dutch Doctors
be prohibited, as prejudicial to the Manufacture of our own Universities.

A Petition of the Tailors, that leave be given to bring in a long Bill to
promote new Fashions.

A Petition of the Seamen, that the Parsons may not meddle with Politics, but
every one keep in his own Element.

A Petition of the Barbers that they may be made Free of the Church, since the
Divines have usurped upon their Trade by turning Trimmers.

A Petition of the Country Innkeepers, that the Soldiers quartered in their
Houses would be content to Tap their Hogsheads, but not their Wives or
Daughters.

A Petition of the Dissenting Divines, that none shall be admitted into the
Class, but Men of strong Lungs, and stronger Backs.

A Petition of the Anabaptists, that they may be empowered to erect a public
Dipping Pond at Lambeth Ferry.

A Petition of the Painters, that they may have leave to enter all the
Conventicles in Town, and draw their respective Pastors in their proper Colors.

A Petition of the Wastcoateers of Wapping, that it may be lawful for them to
go sixteen Months with Child, in cases of necessity.

A Petition of the Printers, that all distinctions of Bawdry, Blasphemy and
Treason be utterly abolished.

A Petition of the Proctors of the Commons to have Fornication encouraged, that
they may have the sole punishing of it afterward.

A Petition of the Claret drinkers, that Red Noses shall qualify People for
all sorts of Preferment.

A Petition of several Mayors and Aldermen that Money be adjudged to comprehend
both Wit and Sense, and good Breeding.

A Petition of several Recorders in the Kingdom, that making of Speeches be
utterly abolished, unless Bulls be tolerated.

A Petition of the Ordinary of Newgate, that all sorts of breaking be declared
sinful, but especially Sabbath-breaking.

A Petition of the Orphans, that the Monument be hung with Mourning once a
Year, and that at the expense of the Chamber.

A Petition of the several Ladies living near Westminster, that all Deserters
be brought to condign punishment.

A Petition of the Athenians, that they may have a Patent for their new
Invention of making second hand Spira's.

A Petition of the Parish Clerks, that a day be set a part to Celebrate the
Pious Memory of Hopkins and Sternhold, and that the City Poet draw up the
Service for the day.

And for your Worships then we'll pray,
For eke, for ever, and for ay.
FINIS.

