THE JEWISH CALENDAR EXPLAINED; OR, OBSERVATIONS ON THE Ancient Hebrew Account,
of the Year, Months, and Festivals used by the PATRIARCHS, and mentioned in
Holy Scripture. Wherein is shown the Order, Names, and Significations of their
MONTHS.

The Reasons for first Instituting their several Feasts, as Passover,
Tabernacles, etc. With the exact days whereon they were Celebrabrated; and what
they were to shadow forth under the Gospel.

Published for assisting weak Capacities better to understand what they read in
Holy Writ, more than two hundred difficult places of which, are here explained.

By HEN. CARE.

London, Printed for T. Passinger, at the the Bibles on London Bridge. 1674.

To the worthily accomplished Mr. William Kiffiin of London, Merchant.
Honored Sir,
THe Holy Scriptures are the Souls Viaticum, the Manna whereby a Christian
militant is sustained in his Pilgrimage to the super-celestial Canaan, to
muffle up those Sacred Oracles from vulgar eyes, and apprehensions has been,
and still is the contrivance of a selfe-designing Generation; but to explain
them what he can, is the Duty, and will be the Glory of every wel-wisher to
Sion: It is confessedly true, the matters here treated of, are not absolutely
necessary, nothing essential to our grand business, Salvation: Every hand is
not furnished to bring gold and silver toward building the Sanctuary; let this
be be reckoned amongst the Goat Skins, and meaner Furniture of the Tabernacle:
Such as it is, permit me, though a Stranger, to shelter it under the Patronage
of your Name, partly as not knowing how better to check some Immerited
aspersions, than by this public testimony of my Respects, and partly as
judging it most Congruous for a discourse of this Nature to address it self to
one that has always endeavored to be acquainted with that most Advantageous
kind of Learning The right understanding of the Sacred Text: The thing is but a
Collection, and Faults and Errors are unhapily become as constant Attendants of
Humanity, as Shadows of Bodies, or Envy of Virtue; so that it is more then
probable my self may have committed some, and the Printer perhaps more
Errataes; I Humbly refer it to your Judgment to distinguish, and to your
goodness to pardon them, together with this Presumption of

Your most respective Servant, Hen. Care.
Nov. 10. 1673.
THE Jewish Calendar Explained.
CHAP. I. Of the measures of Time, Years, Months, and Days, in general: With an
Essay for correcting the account of our common Kalendor.
BEfore we come to treat of the Ancient Hebrew Year in particular, we conceive
it may not be altogether impertinent to peruse some brief considerations
concerning the Reason and Forms of Years in general.

Time is the duration of Created matter, which had the same Horoscope or
Beginning with the World, and continually running on, in a Circular motion,
till the dissolution of the Universe, shall then be swallowed up in the Abiss
of Eternity. The most usual, as well as most proper manner of dividing Time, is
into Years, Months, Days, etc. whereby all the grand actions that happen in the
world: Viz. Their Beginnings, Progress Durations, and Intervals are measured
and computed. A Year (generally speaking) is a periodical Revolution, or a
great Circle of Months and days, in which the four Seasons, Spring, Summer,
Autumn, and Winter are, after one Revolution of the Sun, ordained to return in
their courses; whence the ancient Egyptians before they had the use of
Letters, were wont to represent and signify it by the Hieroglophick of a
Serpent or Snake biting her own Tail. But because the spaces of time called
Years, are diverse with diverse Nations, greater in some, and lesser with
others, and all for good reasons are to be reduced to the rule of the Celestial
motions, by which the years are rightly and naturally measured; therefore must
we divide them into Astronomical and Political. The Astronomical Year is
measured either according to the Periodical motion of the Sun, or the
Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun; and is therefore twofold, Solar and
Lunar. The Solar Year is that space of time, in which the Sun, departing from
one of the Tropical Equinoctial, or Solsticial points, and running through the
whole Ecliptic, returns to the same point again. It is called Natural,
because it seems to be Destinated by Nature for mensuration of Time, and
contains (according to the mean motion) three hundred sixty five days, five
hours, and forty nine minutes: And this is the true Rule, Level, or Standard of
all Years.

The Lunar Year, is that space, wherein the Moon, after some conjunctions with
the Sun, meets and uniteth with him not far from the former place, and is
either commune, containing twelve Months or Synodical Lunations; or Embolismal,
which contains thirteen: The first consists only of three hundred fifty four
days, eight hours, and forty eight minutes; the other of three hundred eighty
three days, one and twenty hours, and two and thirty minutes.

The Political or Civil years be such, as in several Countries and Nations are
used for Distinction of times, wherein respect is had, either to the motion of
the Sun, or Moon only, or to them both together.

The Roman Year, according to Julius Caesar's Constitution, did consist of
three hundred sixty five days, and six hours; which six odd hours, making in
four Years a whole day, is then added, and makes that which we call Leap-Year,
so named, because by this interposition of a day at the 25th. of February, and
repeating the same Letter twice, the fixed Festivals or Holydays, and the like,
do as it were leap one day further into the week, than they were the former
Year.

Now since the mean Tropical Year does consist (according to the Alphonsine
Tables) of 365 days, 5 hours, 49 minutes and 16 seconds; it is evident this
Julian Year exceeds it 10 minutes, and 44 seconds, which therefore must cause
an apparent Anticipation of the Equinoctial and Solsticial points; insomuch
that the Vernal Equinox (whose place at the first council of Nice, was on the
21 of March, is now come to be upon the 9th or 10th of that Month; for
correcting which Error Pope Gregory the 13th. ordered 10 days to be subtracted
from the 4th. of October unto the 15th. thereof, exclusive in that Year, 1582.
that so he might make the Vernal Equinoct (wherein the moveable Feasts do
depend) agree to the 21th. of March, as it was by the Nicen Counsel established
Anno 324, by means whereof all their Months begin ten days sooner than ours,
etc. See Maginus his Secunda Mobilia fo. 40.

This is the Account now chiefly used in Foreign parts, throughout
Christendom; and though it be ten days truer than ours, yet it is not exact by
two days, being reduced not to the Suns place at our Saviors Birth (but only
to the Counsel of Nice) whereas if Authority with us should please to order
that all Bissextiles should be omited for 52 Years, that alone would gradually,
and insensibly, without the least inconveniency about the Dates of our civil
Contracts, Bonds, Rents, etc. bring us two days before the Gregorian, and a
greable to the Suns place at the birth of our Savior: But this we only
mention, and submit to the will of our Superiors and Sentiments of those more
learned in Calculations Astronomical.

The Months by which we measure the year (Menses sic dicti a metiendo seu
mensurando) are likewise two fold, Astronomical and Political.

The Astronomical or Natural are considered according to the motion of the Sun
and Moon, and therefore are either Solar or Lunar.

The Solar are the spaces of time wherein the Sun runs through a twelfth part
of the Zodiac, and (according to the mean or equal motion, which is the rule
of all Solar Months) contains 30 days, 10 hours, and 29 minutes.

The Lunar months are threefold, Periodical, Synodicol, and the month of
Illumination.

The Synodical is the space of Time from one New Moon to the next; which
(according to the mean or equal motions, being the Rule and measure of all
Lunar Months) is twenty nine days, twelve hours, and forty four minutes.

The Month of Illumination (or Apparition) is the space of time spent or
intercepted between the first day whereon the Moon is seen after her
conjunction with the Sun, and the last day of her being visible, which the
vulgar reckon to be 28 days; but it is not always so, for sometimes she is seen
sooner, sometimes later; and accordingly vanishes: (1.) As her Latitude is
Northward or Southward: (2.) Or her motion swifter or slowor: (3.) Or as she is
posited in Signs ascending or descending, right or oblique.

Lastly, the Political Months are civil, or usual, whereby every Nation
distributes the Year as they please; wherein, not only the Denomination, but
also the Length and Proportion of the Months differ, according to variety of
Nations and People.

Thus the Egyptians had 12 Months, each of them consisting of 30 days; and to
the end of their last month, named Mosori, they superadded 5 days more, making
their whole Year consist of 365 days.

The Romans (according to the ordination of Romulus, founder of their City) had
at first but 10 Months in the Year, wherein they included 304 days. This the
most ingenuous Pen of the unfortunate Ovid testifies in that distitch.

Tempora Digereret cum Conditor Vrbis, in Anno
Constituit Menses quinquebis esse suo:
Whilst Romes first founder studies times records,
He to the Year only ten Months affords.
But his successor Numa Pompilius perceiving this Year much too concise, added
two other Months: viz. January and February: to which Julius Caesar (who had
studied the Mathematics at Alexandria) finding it still too short by almost 10
days, and 6 hours, for completing the true Solar Year, by the help of
Sosigenes the Mathematician (whom, after Pompeys overthrow he brought with him
from Egypt to Rome) added 10 days; as you may see in Macrobius l. 1. Saturn
cap. 14. whence that ancient Roman account came to be called the Julian, and
their Months to be numbered as with us at this day.

Ter denos September habet, totidiemque November,
Julius, Aprilis, reliquis super additer unus,
Sit nisi Bissextil viginti Februns octo.
Thirty days has September,
June, April, and November,
The rest with thirty one are freight,
But February twenty eight;
Except when the Leap-Year does come,
Then nine and twenty is its sum.
The Arabians and Turks begin their Year ab Hegira Mahumetana, or flight of
Mahomet, and commencing from their first month Muhartam, allow to one thirty
days, to the next 29 days, and so by turns throughout the Year.

Thus we see, as the Holy Scripture testifies, the Offices of those two great
and glorious Luminaries of Heaven, the Sun and Moon, to be (amongst other
things) for Seasons, and for days, and for Years, so even to this day amongst
all Nations in their accounts there is still some respect had to their motions,
they being as it were the two grand Clocks or Dyals of the Universe, the Suns
revolution making a Year, and the Moons a month.

Let this therefore suffice to have been said in general on that, wherein we
gratefully acknowledge our weaker Pen to be much endebted to the Judicious
observations of the most Loyal, Learned, and Ingenuous George Wharton Esquire;

Gratum and Pium est agnoscere per quos prefeceris;

CHAP. II. Of the time of the Worlds Creation, and Natural beginning of a Year,
and how the Patriarchs did commence it.
THat the World was Created by God at the Vernal Equinoxe, or beginning of the
Spring is the concurrent opinion of almost all the Ancients, as well
Astronomers as Ecclesiastic Writers; whence it clearly follows in reason, that
the true and natural commencement of the Year (the measure of parts of time)
ought to be accounted from thence, or that instant, when time its self received
its being: and so we do not doubt the Patriarchs did account, for it is more
then probable that Adam was endowed by God with an excellent knowledge of
natural things, as well Celestial as Terrestial, (for without the first he
could not perfectly comprehend the last) and did understand the uses and
Offices of the Planets, as well as of Plants and Animals; and therefore could
not but well perceive the reason and true account of the natural Year, and
communicated it to his Posterity, who observed it at least till the confusion
of Languages, which is thought to have brought no small confusion of Science
upon mankind, thereby dispersed into several Regions: however the ancient form
of the Year was retained for some time, especially (as we have reason to
suppose) in the Family of Heber (which God had designed for the repositaries of
Truth) and we conceive not changed, till the time of their going down into
Egypt, where after the death of the twelve Patriarchs, the Children of Israel
might, and did begin to imitate the Egyptians in their Account, who it is
probable began their Year at the Autumnal Equinox, when the waters of the
wonderful River Milus (to whose overflow that Country ows its fertility) were
dried up, and they began to return to their Husbandry: But at their deliverance
from that Egyptian thraldom, Almighty God at once, to put them in mind
thereof, and of the Worlds Creation, commands them to resume the old true
account, and commence their Year from the Spring; for thus we find him speaking
to his Servant Moses; This month (called then Abib, Exodus 34.18. Since Nisan)
shall be (as our Translation reads it) to you the first of months: From which
words shall be, some have imagined, that God had then instituted a new form of
beginning the Year, not known, or ever practiced before; whereas indeed that
Verb in the future Tense is not in the Hebrew Text, as may be seen by the
different character in our English Bibles, but Ibi Locum verbi substantivi est
supplet proenomen Ipse ex proprietate Sermonis Hebraei, as the learned Sympson
observes: the Pronoun supplies the place of a Verb substantive of the present
tense; and God therefore reduces the beginning of the Israelitish. Year to the
first Spring month, because the same was simply and naturally the the first
month of the Year; however the common people did still in some cases account
their Year to begin from Tisri or Harvest (as the Egyptians did) especially
Husbandmen, because they then made an end of their Harvest; and in this respect
must those two Texts, Exodus 23.16, and 34.22. be understood where the Feast of
In-gathering their fruits or end of Harvest celebrated in the said month Tisri)
is said to be at the Years end, or at the Revolution of the Year.

It is true the Sabatical Years, and their Years of Jubilee did commence then,
and very properly, since from the end of Harvest the Land was to rest; and
though it consisted of two civil Years, yet it was called only the seventh
Year, taking the denomination from the more worthy part: Viz. That wherein they
ceased from Husbandry, released their Servants, and forgave their Debts; so
likewise we call it the five and twentieth Year of the Kings Reign, though that
time include part of two of our Civil Years.

CHAP. III. Of the true form of the ancient Hebrew year.
THat the year in use amongst the Ancient Israelites, did consist of twelve
civil months is evident from 1 Kings 4.7. and 1 Chronicles. 27. Where it is recorded
that David and Solomon made twelve Captains and Officers of the Royal Household,
one for each Month in the year.

Nor is it less plain, that in the days of the Patriarks, each month consisted
of thirty days, from the History of the Deluge, since there from the 17th. day
of the second month, to the seventeenth of the seventh month are reckoned up
150 days complete, Genesis 7.11. and 24. Compared with the eight Chapter. V. 3.
and 4.

Their year (says Lydiat in his learned Treatise, De variis anuorum formis) was
partly adopted or suited to the course of the Sun, partly to the course of the
Moon, and partly different from either; yet so that it still had respect to
both: It regarding the Suns motion so far as to begin always about the Spring
Equinox, and the Moons, as to commence always about the Change; yet as to the
distinct Lymits of each month, it seems ordered by civil custom so as all of
them (except one) had equal thirty days a piece. But one to adjust or suit the
Lunar or Solar year, was unequal; for since to make the year answer the Suns
course, 'twas necessary every year to allow this month five days above thirty,
yet it was often deprived not only of them, but five more, and then another
year to make up these Arrears, had 22 or 23 Days more allowed it, two Lunar
months by way of Intercalation, being made one civil one.

Thus Lilius Giraldus in his Book De Annis and Mensibus affirms, Hebraei Annum
Duodecim mensibus Metiuntur, Verum Tertio quoque Anno Tredecim Mensium
constituunt, etc. The Hebrews measure their years by twelve months, but every
third year they make it consist of thirteen months, and so by that
Intercalation or Inserting, keep their account even with the course of the Sun,
which month so added they call Ve-Adar, or the second Adar, see for this also,
Munsters Calendorium Hebraicum, P. 62.

Thus on the whole matter we may see, that the ancient Hebrews from their
departure out of Egypt, to the time of the Alex andrean Era, (at least)
reguarded in their year both the Luminaries: for in that interval of time, they
instituted the Ceremonies of the Temple according to Gods Command and the
motion of the Moon: and although they retained something of the pristine
Egyptian form, so that their year was as it were mixed, being partly Solar
running back in some sort to the Equinoxes and Solstices, partly Lunar
according to which their Ferioe or Festivities were directed, yet by little and
little they anticipated the Equinoxes, until at length Alexander the great
being dead, they (for some time at least) received the Grecian year as may be
rationally supposed by the book of the Macchabees.

The modern Jews about the time of Constable antine the great framed a pemliar
Calender to themselves by the Industry of Habbi Hillel, wherein they brought
the Moons motion (which defines the Feasts) to agree precisely enough with the
Suns, so that the Equinoxes and Solstices could not easily be removed from
their places.

CHAP. IIII. Of the particular Hebrew months.
AS for the particular names of months, it is apparent in the first Ages of the
World, they were only taken from their order, for rarely shall we meet in the
Holy Scriptures before the Babylonish Captivity, that they are called otherwise
than by their number: as the second month, the third month, etc. Only the first
month it seems in Moses his time began to be called Abib, the second in the
time of Solomon, Ziv, or Zif. As also the seventh was then called Ethanim, and
the 8th. Bull. But these are supposed to have been originally Tyrian. However
during the Captivity the Jews learnt Babylonish (or as some say) Assyrian names
for their months, which they brought with them back into their Country, and
used them as follows.

1. The first month was called Abib, which signifies a Green Ear; for then
Barley in those Eastern Countries began to be eared: It is also called Nisan a
Banner, or flying, because then Israel fled with Banners displayed out of
Egypt: it began at the new Moon next after the Spring Equinox: and so answers
to the latter part of our March, and the first part of April; see Exodus 13.4.
and 18, compared with Chapter 17. v. 15.

2. The second Ziv, which signifies Brightness, called from the Caldee Jiar
signifieing to flourish: for that now Nature dresses all her productions in the
Richest Liveries, and renders Plants and Flowers amiable to the Eye; with
variety of Birds and Blossoms: This Answered to part of April, and part of May.

3. The third Sivan from Savah, a Veil or Hideing; because Trees are now as it
were veiled with Beaves, and men, and Cattle begin to hide themselves in shades
from the too fervent kisses of the Sun, it contains part of May, and part of
June.

The fourth month was called Tamuz, but neither that nor the fifth are
mentioned by their proper names in Scripture: The Word signifies Burnt up or
consumed, because of the violent heat that happens usually at the time, It
containing part of our June, and part of July.

5. The fifth called Abb, signifieing father, so termed as some think, because
Aron the Father of Priests Dyed the first Day of it: as appears, Numb. 33.38.
This fell part in July, part in August.

6. The Sixth Elul, signifies naught, because the Reapers have now made bare
the Ground and left nothing: It answered part of August, and part of September,
Neh. 6.15.

7. The seventh Tisri from Thirosch, which signifies sweet Wines, for now they
gathered in their Vintage called likewise Ethanim (strengths) It happens part
in September; part in October.

8. The eight Bull, 1 Kings 6.38. From Iebul (fruit) or rather from Mabbul
(falling) for now is the fall of the Leaf, and store of Rain, whence it is also
called Marcheshuan, signifiing the breaking out of waters: It answers part of
October, and part of November.

9. The ninth Kistev, Zech. 7.1. From Kosil, which signifies the Constellation
of Orion, which now arises, or denotes Inconstancy, as the weather by means
thereof is usually about this time, being part of November, and part of
December.

10. The Tenth Tebeth, Esther 2.16. Seems to be derived from Tobah (Good or
Goodness, whence the names Tobit and Tobias) because (say the Rabbis) Gods
Goodness is most conspicuous in the Winter of man's adversity, It holds part of
December, and part of January.

11. The Eleventh Schebat, Zech. 1.7. A Rod and also a Tribe, so called it is
thought because now Israel kept a fast, because a Tribe was (al most) cut off,
see Judges 21. v. 6. and 3. It falls part in January, part in February.

12. The Twelfth and last Adar, Esther 3.7. Signifieing strength or excelling,
whether because Moses that excelling Governor dyed in it, Exodus 15.10. Or
because the Temple was then finished, Exodus 6.15. It answers to part of
February, and part of March, and so concludes the year: Thus as the Prince of
Latin Poets sings. -- In se sua per Vestigia Valvitur Annuus.

Yet note here that as near as they could they made all their Months begin at
the New Moon: as may be gathered from Numb. 10.10. (after the Septuagint) with
Psalm. 81.3. Psalm. 104.19. Genesis 1.14. Which must be understood not at the true
Conjunction as Astrologers reckon, but at the time of her first appearing to
their view after her Congress with the Sun.

CHAP. V. The Jewish Sabbath, and Sabbatical year.
THe Sabbath takes its name from the Hebrew Sabbath, which signifies a day of
rest, or a time set apart for Holy Rest: This Day God himself consecrated to
his Worship, because he thereon rested from his Work of Creation.

It began, or was accounted amongst the Jews, from Sun set the day before, and
continued till the next Sunset, see Math. the 28. v. 1. Compared with Mark
16.1. and John 20.1. But the preparation of the Sabbath mentioned in Mark
15.42. began at three a Clock in the afternoon, before which they called the
Sabbath-Eve, see Josephus in his Antiquities, L. 16. Ca. 10.

The end of instituting the Sabbath we conceive may be threefold.

First, Civil and Oeconomical for the ease and refreshment of men's bodies,
whose strength had been exhausted otherwise by continual labor and toil: Six
days shall thou do all that thou have to do, but on the seventh day shall
Rest, that thy Ox and thy Ass, and the Son of thy Bond woman, and the
stranger, with thee may have rest, Exodus the 23.

Secondly, Ecclesiastial, for the Worship of God in Public, and Meditation
upon his Divine Works.

Thirdly, Spiritual, and that twofold. 1. As being a Type of that spiritual
rest, whereby we should cease from the work of the World and the flesh, that
God might work in us by his Word and Spirit; not thinking our own thoughts,
etc. Secondly, As shaddowing unto us that endless rest, which all of us hope
to enjoy in the World to come.

We read in Scripture of a Sabbath days journey, why so called and how far it
was, is apparent to every Capacity, we conceive it may be this: we find Joshua
3.4. That when the Children of Israel marched, the Ark of the Covenant was to
be 2000 Cubits before them; and in all probability the same proportion was
observed when they rested, which distant space of ground some interpret to be
one Mile, others two: They measuring it by a Lesser, these by a longer Cubit;
now on the Sabbath Day I apprehend it might be their use and order to repair
all to the Ark being the place of Gods public worship, which being 2000
Cubits as aforesaid, from those whose Tents were nearest, such a space or
distance became to be generally called and accounted a Sabbath Days Journey.

The Septennial Sabbath or Sabbathical year took beginning from the tenth day of
the seventh month (or Tisri) For as the Jews themselves every seventh day: so
their whole Land every seventh year kept a Sabbath, the observation whereof
principally did consist in these two particulars.

1. That the Grounds should lie until'd. 2. That all Debts should be remitted
and forgiven.
And therefore the sacred Historian. Deuteronomy. 15. calls this year the year of
Shemita that is of Dismission, for that both Husbandry or Tillage and Debts
were in this year commanded by God to be forborne and remitted, Exodus 23.

The causes of this feast were partly Civil, partly Mystical.

1. To teach them not by continual Exercise to suck out the earth and make it
barren, because as all other Creatures, so likewise the Earth (our Common
Mother) has need of Intermission and Rest.

2. To teach them gratitude and mercy, Gratitude to God for the fruits of the
Earth. Mercy to the poor, of whom is had a principal regard in this Law.


3. To mind them of Adams first and blessed estate of Innocence wherein the
earth voluntarily without man's Labor or the constraint of Tillage, brought
forth sufficient for his plentiful sustenance.

Lastly to shadow unto them that Eternal Sabbath, that is, that Blessed Life
and Kingdom prepared for the Saints: wherein all the Miseries and Labors of
the present, together with the Exactions of Creditors shall have an end, and
the Sins of Believers be wholly remitted.

CHAP. VI. The Feasts of the passover, pentecost, and Tabernacles.
THe feast of the passe-over is called Pascha, from the Hebrew Pesach (others
read it Phase) which signifies to leap over or pass by: For so the eternal
verity makes out the Etymology himself, Exodus 12.27. This was instituted in the
year of the Worlds Creation, 2447. and celebrated yearly from the fifteenth of
the first month Abib (called afterward as we have said Nisan) to the one and
twentieth of the same inclusively that is for seven days together, yet so as
that the first and last thereof, ( Viz. the 15th. and 21) were held more sacred
and observed with greater solemnity than the rest, Lev. 23.5, 6. etc.

These seven days were likewise called the feast of unleavened Bread, and the
first of them the passe-over, because that thereon the Paschal Lamb was eaten.

The ends of this Festival were.

1. To put the Israelites in mind of, and as it were, consecrate to Eternity
Gods miraculous Deliverance of them out of their Egyptian Bondange.

2. For a sure Testimony of his power, and that perpetual Mercy he would show
his People.

Thirdly, and principally to Typifie Christ Jesus, and our deliverance
perfected by him? whence the Apostle says: Christ is our Passover, 1. Cor. 5.
And therefore be pleased here to observe the great Amalogy or agreement between
the Type and the Antitype, the shadow and substance in these thirteen
particulars.

The Paschal Lamb was 1. One of the Flock. 2. Without Blemish. 3. To be
Sacrificed and roasted. 4. His Bones not being broken. 5. In or about the
Evening. 6. Their Door-posts were be-sprinkled with its Blood. 7. That the
punishing Angel might pass over them. 8. It was eaten in every Family. 9. The
whole Lamb. 10. Without Leaven. 11. With bitter Herbs. 12. In have and as
Travelers. 13. Only by the Circumcised.


Christ was 1. Perfect Man, John 1. 2. Without Sin. 3. He suffered and dyed. 4.
They broke not his legs. 5. In the end of the world, see Heb. 9.26. 6. The
Blood of Christ purges our Consciences, and is called blood of sprinkling. 7.
That Sin and Death might not prevail aagainst us. 8. He must be particularly
applied by faith. 9. According to his whole Gospel in all his offices. 10.
Without Hypocrisy, 1 Cor. 5. 11. With patience under the Cross. 12. With an
earnest and longing Expectation of Salvation. 13. Only by the faithful, 1 Cor.
11.


The feast of Pentecost, is so called from the Greek Word Pentecoste, but is
termed in Hebrew Schefuotht, that is, the feasts of weeks, because it was
celebrated after the seventh week, (that is on the fiftieth day as the word in
Greek signifies) after or from the former feast of passover: as may be seen in
several Texts: as Exodus 34. Lev. 23. Deuteronomy. 16, etc.

But really and properly it signifies and is used for the fiftieth Solemn and
Festival Day from the second day of the feast of unleavened Bread: In which
sense St. Luke takes it, Acts the second, when the day of Pentecost was fully
come, and Chap. the 20th. speaking of St. Paul. He hasten by all means that he
might keep Pentecost at Jerusalem. But in a larger sense are meant by this
word all those fifty days, betwixt the second day of the feast of unleavened
Bread, and the said fiftieth festival day (and so it seems the Author of the
Vulgar Translation) be it Jerome or who else) understood it, when he rendered
that Text of the second of the Acts, in the Plural number, Cum implerentur dies
Pentecostes, when the days of Pentecosts were fulfilled.

This Feast we may conceive was instituted for three reasons.

1. In memory of the Decalogue or Law given by God on Mount Sinai the fiftieth
day after the Israelites departed out of Egypt.

2. That by the Ceremonial Oblation of two leaves then made of the new fruits
to the Lord, men might be admonished that they received all fruits and other
things for preservation of Life from the bountiful hands of Almighty
providence, and thence be excited to beseech God not only for a Blessing
thereupon, but likewise make a sanctified use thereof.

Thirdly, to Typifie that Pentecost, wherein Christ after he had ascended
proclaimed the Law (not that of Sinai in Tables of stone, but) in the heart and
mind, the Law of the new Covenant that happy day on which the first fruits of
the Holy Spirit were miraculously poured down on the Apostles, Acts the second.

For we must note that this feast was also called the feast of the first fruits
from those Primitiae, or Bread offering, which was then made of the new fruits,
Exodus 23. For these fifty days bounded their Harvest, on the day after the
passe-over. Viz. the 16. Of Abib or Nisan, they offered a sheaf of the first
fruits of their Harvest, Lev. 23.30. On the fiftieth day they offered 2 wave
Loaves as is commanded, Lev. 23.17.

Where observe the difference between their Harvest and ours, occasioned by the
difference of Clymates and their Anticipation of time for both the Canaanites
and Egyptians begin their Harvest in April, and finish by the end of May, or
half June: As Pliny (that great Clerk of Natures Cabinet) relates L. 18. Ca.
18. which Leo Africanus an Eyewitness of it, likewise confirms in his
Description of Afrique, L. 8. Ca. 4.

The feast of Tabernacles is called by the Hebrews Chag Husuks, and celebrated
from the fifteenth of the month Tisri to the one and twentieth thereof
Inclusively, that is for seven days together, yet so as that the first day was
more solemn and festivous than the rest, as may be seen in Lev. 23. Where you
likewise have the end of this feast expressed: that your Children may know that
I made Israel to dwell in Tents when I brought them out of Egypt.

And accordingly during this Feast they dwelt in Booths made of Boughs of 4
distinct kinds, Lev. 23.40. Which are said by the Rabbis to be, the Cytrine
tree, the Palm tree, the Myrhe tree, and willow of the Brock, and he that did
not bring a burden of them in the morning was to fast all day. This burden
they called Hosanna: In allusion to which the people cutting down Branches from
Trees, and strewing them in the way when our Savior did Ride into Jerusalem:
Cried Hosanna to the Son of David, Mat. 21.9. And indeed not only the Boughs,
but the Days of this whole Feast of Tabernacles were termed Hosannath, and the
22th. of Tisri a distinct feast by it self: yet following immediately after the
feast of Tabernacles was reckoned as belonging thereto, and called Hosannah
Rabbi, the great Hosanna, or the great day of the feast as it is rendered, John
7.37. See Tremelius on that Text: whereas truly and properly this 22. day of
Tisri was the feast of the Congregation or great and solemn Assembly called by
the Hebrews Hadsiph, and also Azaereth; that is an Assembly, or Collection, or
a Retention and Prohibition: Because that when the feast of Tabernacles was
expired, the people restrained it one day longer, or because on that day they
were prohibited doing any work, or from the Collection of fruits, for that on
this day were offered the first of the later fruits and thanks therefore given
to God, or lastly because it shaddowed out a Collection of all Nations, or a
gathering together of the Elect in the Kingdom of Heaven, of this feast you
read, 1 Kings 8.10.

But observe that Jeroboam, who revolted from Reboam the Son of Solomon with
the ten Tribes commanded the aforesaid solemnity of Tabernacles (which God in
his Law had commanded to be celebrated in the seventh month Tisri) to be kept
in the eight month Marhesuan: that so in all things he might wean the Sons of
Israel from the Rites and Customs of their Fathers, as in 1 Kings 13.

CHAP. VII. Of the Feasts of Trumpets and Expiation.
THe feast of Trumpets called by Hebrews Sichron theruah, for that on the first
Day of Tisri (their seventh Ecclesiastical but first political month) the sound
of Trumpets or Cornets were every where heard, and this by the command of God,
Lev. 33.

For the cause of this feast; some of the Jewish Rabbin's do believe it was
ordained in memory of Isaac's deliverance from being sacrificed, and that God
commanded a noise should be then made by the trumpet (or Horn of a Ram) for
that a Ram was caught by the Horn in a Bush, and sacrificed in his stead, Genesis
22. Others think it unlikely that so public and solemn a feast should be
instituted for the deliverance of a single person, but rather to Commemorate
those grievous Wars which the Israelites undertook, first against the
Amalekites, and afterward against Heathen, and to the end they might be
admonished that this humane Life of ours is nothing but a continual warfare on
earth, which last opinion seems most consonant to Reason.

On the Tenth day of the same Month Tisri (which you will find to be the most
Festival Month in the Year) was celebrated the Feast of the Expiation, as you
may read it commanded. Lev. 16. when both Priest and People afflicted their
souls before the Lord by fasting; whence 'twas called, Dies Dejunij, The Day of
Fasting, Jer. 36.6. and may so help to interpret that in Acts 27.9. Sailing was
now a days dangerous, because the Fast was already past; that is this Feast of
Expiation, when Winter grew on, it answering to our September.

In this Annual Solemnity, an Universal Expiatory or Propitiatory Sacrifice was
performed for the sins of the People: The Jews say it was instituted in memory
of Gods favor to them, in forgiving their sin of Idolatry committed by the
making of the Calf in the Desert.

But indeed the whole Passion and fruits of our Saviors Death, were hereby
shadowed out to the life to the whole Church; the High Priest in the matter of
the Scapegoat, etc. being a most evident Type of Christ: Observe the Parrallel.

Aron. Christ. 1. The High Priest went into the Holiest of all, Lev. 16.3. 1.
Christ our High Priest went into the Holy-Place; that is to say, the Heavens,
Heb. 9.12. 2. He went once a year, Exodus 30.10. 2. He entered once for all, Heb.
9.12. 3. He with the blood of Goats, etc. 3. He by his own blood, Ibidem. 4.
Only he 4. He alone has trodden the Wine Press, Isaiah 63.3. 5. He clothed
with his Priestly Robes, Lev. 16.4. 5. He sealed to this Office by his Father.
6. He took two Goats. 6. He took two Natures, the impossibility of his
Godhead, shadowed by the Scapegoat; the sufferings of his manhood by that
which was Sacrificed. Lastly, The Goat was to bear the Peoples iniquities.
Lastly, The Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all, Isa. 63.

CHAP. VIII. Of their New Mons, and Year of Jubilee.
THe Neomeniae, or Feasts of New Mons were celebrated the first day of every
Month, initiating with the New Mood (as we said before) wherein are observable
these solemnities.

1. They then repaired to the Prophets for hearing the Word as they did on the
Sabaths, whence that saying 2 Kings 4.23. It is neither New Mood nor Sabath-day.

2. It was then unlawful to buy or sell, as appears by that of Amos 5.8. When
will the Newmoon be gone, that we may sell Corn: But whereas at other New Mons
they blew no trumpets, yet at the New Mood of Tisri (called the Feast of
Trumpets before mentioned) they blew Trumpets all day long, whence we learn
what New Mood David means, Psalm. 81.3. Blow the Trumpet in the time appointed
at our Feast Day.

The reason for instituting this Festival of New Mons is supposed to be in
memory of the light created by God, to the end.

1. That by this means his people might be aleinated from the Superstitions and
Idolatries of the Heathen, (who subjected the months to to the Planets Stars,
and Signs Celestial) and know that God is the only Lord, Moderator, and
Governor of the Stars, and Signs themselves, and consequently of the months,
and years, and time in general; and therefore pay into God the greater thanks,
who ordained all these things for the use and benefit of mankind.

2. To Typifie man's Renovation, by the Illumination of the Holy Spirit, which
is required of all the Faithful.

The Year of Jubilee was an extraordinary Feast instituted by God, Lev. 25.
Celebrated every fiftieth Year: so says the Text; Thou shall number to thy
self seven weeks of Years: That is to say, seven times seven, which makes 49
Years, therefore the Year next following this was the fiftieth, and wholly
Sabatical, whence (if you count exclusively to another Year of Jubilee) you have
only 49 Year; and so it is numbered in the 8 verse of the last cited Chapter,
but if conclusively, that is, if you account both the former and latter, you
have fifty; and so it is reckoned in the 10 verse of the same Chapter, which
manner of Account is most used: Thus we may say, a week has eight days,
counting both the Sundays, but one of them excluded, there remains but a true
week, or a sennight.

The Word Jubilee denotes Rejoicing or Remission, and was very proper in both
significations; for in this Year, not only the Bondmen of Israel were by God's
command set free from their Masters, and the prison doors thrown open, but all
debts were not likewise remitted and forgiven, and mortgaged Grounds,
Vineyards, Houses, and other Possessions returned to their first owners; so
that there no man could make over, or convey to another an absolute Feesimple
of his inheritance (as our common Lawyers speak) but only the use and profits
thereof till the Year of Jubilee: see it largely expressed, Lev. 25.

The end of this great Festival was partly Civil, partly mystical: For,

1. God so ordained things, that the Families of the Israelites should not be
destroyed, but more especially that Family out of which the Messiah was to come.

2. The show to us what a special regard he has of the poor, to put them in
hope of a better condition for the future, and lay down a way to Brotherly
Communion, as far as the condition of this life would permit.

3. That as the Olympiads were in use amongst the Greeks, the Lustra amongst
the Ancient (but the Indictions amongst the latter) Romans whereby they
supputated time, so the Hebrews should be accustomed to number their times by
Jubiles, soon as possessed of the Holy Land.

Lastly, And principally to shadow unto them by this public Jubilee and solemn
Joy the Lord Jesus, and the whole business of their Salvation, which alludes to
saying, I am that acceptable time, now is the day of Salvation L.

CHAP. IX. Of some other Festivals of the Jews, instituted by Humane Authority;
and also how they counted and divided their days and hours.
BEsides the several Feasts before treated of instituted immediately by Divine
Authority and Command, there were several other Solemnities instituted by men,
and received of the Church to commemorate some remarkable dealings of
Providence: As,

1. The four Solemn Fasting days mentioned by the Prophet, Zach. 8.

The first of which is, the Fast of Jerusalem besieged, celebrated the 10th.
day of the 10th. Month Thebeth, on which day Nebuchadnezar first pitched his
Tents before Jerusalem, to besiege it, 2 Kings 25.

The Second, The Fast of Jerusalem taken by Nebuchodonozar, observed the 9th.
of the 4th. Month Tamuz.

The third, The Fast of the City Desolate celebrated the 9th. of the 5th. Month
Ab, because on that day the City and Temple were twice set on fire; first by
Nebuchodonozor, and after that by Titus.

The last, The Fast of Godolia, or Gedalia, who was left in Judea by Nebuzarda,
and slain by the Treachery of Ismael celebrated the third day of the 7th. Month
Tisri.

To these four Fasts after the Captivity they added the solemn Fast of Queen
Hester in memory of the three days Fast which she commanded when about to apply
her self to King Asuerus on behalf of the Jews, Hester 4. This was celebrated
the third day of the 12th. Month Ader, which afterward became more famous for
the signal Victory of Judas Machabeus, who on this day overthrew Antiochus his
Army, with Nicanor the Captain of it; see 2 Match. Chapter last.

2. The Days of Purim, or the Feast of Lots, so called, because Haman had cast
the life and death as it were of the Jews upon the hazard of a Lot, and
celebrated in memory of God's Protection, and their deliverance, the 14th. and
15th. days of the last Month Adar.

There was likewise the Feast of Comportion, or bringing of Wood (mentioned by
Josephus, l. 2. cap. 17.) kept in the month Ab, in memory of the wood brought
for perpetual nourishment of the Holy Temple of Jerusalem according to God's
Law, Neh. 10.

The Feast of Dedication of the Temple after Antiochus Epiphanes had prophained
it; Read 1 Match. 1. this was celebrated eight days together, beginning from the
25th. of the Month Ciller, 1 Match. 4. and is mentioned by St. John the
Evangelist, and at which he writes our Savior himself was present.

These are the Feasts and Solemnities celebrated by the Ancient Jews, where of
mention is made in Scripture, for others instituted after their Destruction and
Repudiation, and observed at this day by the modern Jews as the Feast of the
New-Year: the Feast of Reconciliation, the Feast of Gladness or Joy of the
Equinoxes and Solsticies, etc. there being no footsteps of them in the Old
Testament, I wilfully omit them.

Only observe here, that the Ancient Jews on their great Festivals (or
Holy Day) Eves, which they termed Days of Preparation, held it unlawful for
their Judges to sit on Life and Death: Hence it is they would not go into the
Common Hall themselves, lest they should be defiled, John 18.28. And for that
reason also they brought Jesus to Pilate the Roman Deputy, and said; It is not
lawful for us to put any man to death, at the 31 verse. That is, upon this, or
such a like day: for though their great Court of Sanedrim were now put down,
yet all power in cases of Life and Death was not taken from them, as it is
employed in the 32 verse: which intimates that that unlawfulness was urged by
the special Providence of God, that he might be Crucified, being Judged by the
Romans; for if the Jews had been his Judges, they used no such kind of Death
for any Persons concondemned. Again, Stephen was after this condemned by them
to be stoned, Acts 7. And they complained before Felix, that when they were
about to proceed against Paul, according to their: own Law, the chief Captain
Lysias with violence took him out of their hands: all which argues that they
were not absolutely deprived of power in Cases Capital.

We shall only add a word or two concerning days and hours as they accounted
them, and therewith conclude.

Their Day was twofold: Natural, comprehending Day and Night, and consisting of
24 hours: or Artificial, beginning at Sunrising, and ending at Sunset; of
which is that in John 11.19. Are there not twelve hours in the day?

Their Day Natural was likewise twofold, Civil, a working Day designed for
ordinary business; which began at Sunrising, and held till the next
Sunrising: Or Sacred, a Festival Day, dedicated to Holy Duties, beginning at
Sunset, and continuing till the next Sunset; see Mat. 28.1. Compared with
Mark 16. and John 20.1.

Note that if any of these festival days happened to fall on a Sabhath day:
that was called Sabbathum Magnum, a great Sabbath (or as our translation reads
it) a high day, Io. 19.3. For on that Sabbath day of which St. John there
speaks, the Feast of the Passover fell that year.

The Night they distinguished into four Quarters, or greater hours, which they
called Watches: containing each three lesser or common hours apeice.

The first they called Caput Vigiliarum, the first watch, Lam. 2.19. The second
the middle watch Judges 7.10. (Not because there were but three, but) because
it continued till midnight. The third till three in the morning: If he come in
the second or third Watch, Luke 12.38. The last called the Evening Watch, Exodus
12.24. continued till six in the Evening, see Mat. 14.25.

The first was also called the Even, the second midnight, the third
Cockcrowing, and the fourth the Dawnings: all which are expressed, Mark 13.35.

In like manner was their day divided as appears by the parable of the
Laborers Mat. 20. The first from six a Clock in the morning till nine was
called the third hour, the second ending at twelve the sixth hour, the third at
three in the afternoon, the ninth hour, and the fourth ending at six at night,
was called the eleventh hour.

Where note, that the three first Quarters take their names from that hour of
the Day, which closed the Quarter (for they began to count their lesser hours
from six a clock in the morning, and so Our 6 7 8 9 10. 11. 12. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
6 Was their 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12


Only the last great hour or quarter: Is called by our Savior the eleventh
hour, whereas amongst the Common people: It was, or should by proportion with
the rest have been called the twelfth hour: But it may be Christ might rather
mention the eleventh: To show us that although God in his mercy accept
Laborers eleven hours in the day, yet he rarely calls any at the twelfth, for
that is an hour rather to Discharge Servants, than to admit new ones.

Thus have we, we hope, by this brief Collection given the inquisitive Reader
some glimmering Light (though not full satisfaction) in these obscure walks of
sacred Antiquity.

What remains but that we wind up this discourse of Years, Months, and Days,
etc. With some Moral or Theological Reflections on the worth and use of time:
As there is nothing can more further us toward happiness, than that being
rightly improved so there is nothing we shall more bewail than the unprofitable
wasting it, what would, or rather what would not a dying sinner give for a few
moments to make his peace with Heaven: though we cannot recall time misspent,
there is a way, and the Apostle charges us to make use of it to Redcem the
time: Not unworthy observation is the Moto of a Sundial in that noble Monument
of Charity: The Charter House, Teners non Potes, Potes non Perdere: Though we
cannot shop times motion, yet it lies in our power, not to trifle it away: But,
alas! how few consider the true worth of this Jewel, wherewith some
inconsiderates, think themselves so overstockt, that they are forced to Invent
a thousand Vanities to pass away the time (as they call it) never regarding how
soon their time (at least) will be no more, but they with horror shall be
launched out into the Ocean of a Wretched Eternity, It was too great a truth of
most men, which I saw once ingraved on the Blade of a Dutch Ladies Knife.

Omnia Si repetas Humanae Tempora Vitae,
Vel male, vel Temere, vel nihil Egit Homo.
Which at her Request was Extempore turned into this dull English.

Survey man's Life, view all his boasted Facts,
Things ill, or vain, or naught at all, he Acts.
To conclude, since time is so swift of foot, and that in all his measures of
years, months, and days, we can never at once be masters of above one moment
(for what is past is Irrevocable, that which is to come Uncertain) Let this warn
us to live every day, as if it were (as we cannot know but it may prove) our
last: that so when we arrive at the end of our days, we may attain the end of
our Hope: Viz. The Slavation of our Immortal Souls, through the Meritorious
passion of the ever Blessed Jesus: Amen.

FINIS.

