A COLLECTION OF Such of the ORDERS Heretofore used in CHANCERY; With such
Alterations and Additions thereunto, as the right Honorable Edward Earl of
Clarendon Lord Chancellor of England,

By and with the advice and assistance of the Honorable Sir Harbottle Grimston
Barronet, Master of the ROLLS, Have thought fit at present to Ordain and
Publish.

For Reforming of several Abuses in the said Court, preventing multiplicity of
Suits, Motions, and unnecessary Charge to the Suitors, and for their more
expeditious and certain course for Relief.

London, Printed for Henry Chase, and are to be sold at his shop at the Rolls
in Chancery Lane, over against the six Clerks Office; and by Humphery Tuckey at
the black-spread-Eagle in Fleetstreet, 1661.

I do appoint Henry Chase to print these Rules, and that no other person or
persons do presume to print the same.

May 22. 1661. Clarendon. Harbottle Grimston.

A COLLECTION of such of the ORDERS heretofore used in Chancery
Bills.
THAT no Councellor do put his hand to any Bill, Answer, or other Pleading,
unless it be drawn, or at least perused by himself in the paper draught before
it be engrossed (which they shall do well for their own discharge, to sign also
after perusal) And Council are to take care that the same be not stuffed with
repetition of Deeds, Writings, or Records, in haec verba: but the effect and
substance of so much of them only as is pertinent and material to be set down,
and that in brief terms, without long and needless traverses of points not
traversable, tautologies, multiplication of words, or other impertinencies
occasioning needless prolixity, to the end the ancient Brevity and Succinctness
in Bills, and other pleadings, may be restored and observed: Much less may any
Council insert therein matter merely criminous or scandalous, under the penalty
of good costs to be laid on such Council, and paid to the party grieved, before
such Council be heard in Court.

That all Bills be dated the same day they are brought into the Six Clerks
Office, and that no Six Clerk presume to Antedate any Bill, and that no
Under-clerk presume to keep any Bill by him, but with the first opportunity
deliver the same to the Six Clerk, or his allowed Deputy, in his absence to be
accordingly filed.

No Bill, Answer, or other pleading shall be said to be of Record, or to be of
any effect in Court, until the same be filed with such of the Six Clerks with
whom it ought properly to remain.

Subpoena's.
THat all plaintifs may have liberty to take forth Subpoena's ad respondendum,
before the filing of their Bills, if they please, notwithstanding any late
Order or usage to the contrary.

That every Subpoena to answer, revive, review, rejoyn to testify or to hear
judgment, shall be served personally, or left at the Defendants dwelling house
or place of residence, with one of that Family. And to Clerk of this Court
shall issue any Attachment for not appearing, but upon Affidavit first made,
positive and certain of the day and place of such service of the Subpoena, and
the time of the return thereof, whereby it shall appear that such service was
made, if in London, or within twenty miles thereof four days at the least,
excluding the day of such service. And if above twenty miles then to have been
eight days before such Attachment entered: And that such Attachment shall not
be discharged but upon payment of usual costs, and so the succeeding costs to
be double.

Pleas and Demurrers.
FOrasmuch as the Defendant being served with process to answer, may by advice
of Council upon sight of the Bill, only be enabled to demurre thereunto, if
there because, or may by like advice be enabled to put in any just plea which
he has in disability of the person of the Plaintiff, or to the jurisdiction of
the Court: It is therefore Ordered, That such Demurrer, or such plea in
disability, or to the jurisdiction of the Court, under the hand of Council
learned, shall be received and filed, although the Defendant do not deliver the
same in person, or by Commission. And therefore if the Defendant shall pray a
Commission, and thereby return Demurrer only, or only such plea, which shall be
afterward overruled, the Defendant shall pay five marks costs: and a though it
be allowed, the Defendant shall have no costs in respect of the Plaintiffs need
less trouble occasioned by such Commission.

Every Demurrer shall express the several causes of Demurrer, and shall be
determined in open Court. And such pleas also as are grounded upon the
substance and body of the matter, or extend to the jurisdiction of the Court,
shall be determined in open Court, And for that purpose, the Defendant is to
enter the same with the Register, within eight days after the filing thereof;
or in default of such entry made, the same shall be disallowed of course, as
put in for delay. And the Plaintiff may then take out process to enforce the
Defendant to make a better answer, and pay forty shillings costs: and the same
shall not afterwrads be admitted to be set down or debated, unless upon motion
it shall be Ordered by the Court: And if any cause of Demurrer shall arise, and
be insisted on at the debate of the Demurrer (more than is particularly
alleged, yet the Defendant shall pay the ordinary costs of Overruling a
Demurrer (which is here by Ordered to be five marks costs) if those causes
which are particularly alleged be disallowed: although the Bill, in respect of
that particular so newly alleged shall be dismissed by the Court.

A Plea of Outlawry, as it be in any suit for that duty, touching which relief
is sought by the Bill, is insufficient according to the Rule of Law, and shall
be disallowed of course as put in for delay: And the Plaintiff may
notwithstanding such Plea, take out process to enforce the Defendant to make a
better answer, and pay five Marks costs; otherwise a plea of Outlawry is
always a good plea, so long as the Outlawry remains in force: And therefore
the Defendant shall not be put to set it down with the Register: And after the
said Outlawry reversed, the Defendant upon a new subpoena served on him, and
payment unto him of twenty shillings costs, shall answer the same Bill, as if
such Outlawry had not been* But if the Plaintiff conceive such plea of Outlawry
thorough mispleading, or otherwise to be insufficient, he may, upon notice
given to the Clerk on the other side, set it down with the Register, to be
debated with the rest of the Plea's and Demurrers in course: But if the
Plaintiff shall not in such Case enter it with the Register within eight days
after the same shall be filed, the Defendant may take out process against the
Plaintiff for his Ordinary costs of five marks, as if the same had been heard.

The Dependancy of a former suit for the same matter, is also a good plea, and
therefore the Defendant shall not be put to set it down with the Register; But
if the Plaintiff be not satisfied therewith, the same shall be referred to one
of the Masters of the Court to certify the truth thereof; and if it shall be
determined against the Plaintiff, he shall pay five pounds costs to the
Defendant; But such reference shall be procured by the Plaintiff, and a report
thereupon within one month after the filing of such plea, otherwise the Bill to
stand dismissed of course with the ordinary costs of seven Nobles.

If after a suit commenced at the Common Law, or any other inferior Court, a
Bill shall be exhibited in this Court to be relieved for the same matter, the
dependancy of the former suit shall be admitted as a good plea, and the
Defendant not be put to motions for an Election or Dismission, and that plea
shall be proceeded in, as in case of a plea of a former suit depending in this
Court for the same matter.

After a Contempt duly prosecuted to an Attachment with proclamation returned,
no Commission to answer shall be made; nor no plea or demurrer admitted, but
upon motion in Court, and Affidavit made of the parties inability to travel, or
other good matter to satisfy the Court touching that delay.

Answers.
AFter a Commission once obtained to answer, no second Commission shall be
granted without special Order of Court upon good reason showed to induce the
same, or the Plaintiffs own assent.

An Answer to a matter charged as a Defendants own fact, must regularly be
without saying, To his remembrance, or As he believes, if it be laid to be
done within seven years before, unless the Court upon exception taken, shall
find special cause to dispense with so positive an answer: And if the Defendant
deny the fact, he must traverse or deny it (as the cause requires) directly,
and not by way of negative pregnant. As if he be charged with a receipt of a
sum of money, he must deny or traverse that he has not received that sum, or
any part thereof, or else set forth what part he has received. And if a fact
be laid to be done with diverse circumstances, the Defendant must not deny or
traverse it literally, as it is laid in the bill, but must answer the point of
substance positively and certainly.

When the Defendants have answered, the Plaintiffs and their Council are
seriously to advise of the Answers, and if they find that upon the Answer
alone, without further proof, there be sufficient ground for a final Order or
Decree, to proceed upon the Answer without further lengthening of the cause. Or
if it be needful to prove one or a few particular points to reply unto those
points, and not to draw into pleading or proofs any more than those necessary
points, thereby making wrong books, and putting both sides to unnecessary
Charges, the Defaulters herein to be punished by paying the charge of the
Copies, or otherwise, as the cause shall require.

If a hearing be prayed upon Bill and Answer, the Answer must be admitted to be
true in all points, and no other Evidence to be admitted, unless it be matter
of Record to which the Answer referres, and is proveable by the Record: The
Plaintiff is therefore to be well advised, that the Court be not put to an
unnecessary trouble, and himself to a certain charge, in bringing his cause to
hearing which will nor bear a Decree.

Exceptions.
WHen a Plaintiff excepteth to a Defendants Answer, he shall set down his
Exceptions in Writing; and if the Answer be filed in Term time, he shall the
same Term, or within eight days after that Term, deliver the same Exceptions
to the Council whose hand is to the Answer, or to the Defendants Clerk in
Court; And if the Defendant do within eight days after such delivery, satisfy
the Plaintiff of the invalidity of those exceptions, or amend the Answer in the
same time, or agree with the Plaintiff, or his Clerk, or Solicitor, to amend
it by such time as they shall agree upon, and do amend it accordingly, and pay
twenty shillings costs, the Plaintiff shall go on to Reply; But if the
Desendant shall fail to do the same, or put in a second insufficient Answer,
the Plaintiff may get the Answer or Answers referred: and if the same shall be
ruled insufficient, the defendant shall pay forty shillings costs. But if an
Answer be pled in Vacation-time, then the Plaintiff shall have eight days in
the beginning of the next Term, if he see cause to put in his Exceptions, and
deliver them in writing in like manner, as before is appointed: and the
Defendant within eight days after such delivery to proceed as before is ordered.

If the Plaintiff shall procure a reference of an insufficient Answer within
the time before limited, and the same be reported good, the Plaintiff shall pay
the Defendant forty shillings costs.

If the first Answer be certified insufficient, and ruled so, the Defendant
shall pay forty shillings costs as aforesaid: if the Answer was put in in
person: But if the same came in by Commission, the Defendant shall have fifty
shillings costs, and no new Commission shall be awarded for taking a second
Answer, unless it be by Order, upon Affidavit made of the parties inability to
travel, or other good matter, to satisfy the Court touching that delay, and
first paying the costs of such insufficient Answer, or by the Plaintiff, or his
Clerks assent for expediting the cause. If the second Answer be reported
insufficient unto any the points formerly certified, the Defendant shall have
three pounds costs: And upon the third insufficient, four pounds costs: And
upon a fourth Answer certified insufficient, he shall pay five pounds costs,
and be examined upon Interrogatories to the points reported insufficient, and
shall be committed, until he has perfectly answered those Interrogatories, and
paid the costs, in respect of the great vexation and delay which in such cases
will happen to the Plaintiff.

No Subpoena ad rejungendum, shall be of force, unless there be a Replication
filed in the cause according to the course of the Court, before the issuing out
of the said Subpoena, or at least before the return thereof: And the parties
upon whom such Subpoena shall be served, finding no replication filed before
the return thereof, shall have the ordinary costs taxed according to the course
of the Court.

Examination of Witnesses.
When the parties are at issue, and proceed to examine Witnesses, the
Interrogatories are to be penned with care, that the same be pertinent, and
only to the points necessary, and the Witnesses are to be sorted and examined
on those Interrogatories only that their Testimony does extend unto, without
the needless Interrogatories of matters unnecessary, immaterial, as well to
avoid the charge of both parties, Plaintiff and Defendant, in superfluous
examinations, as that apt Interrogatories (which are the life of the cause) may
be exhibited.

No Witness shall be examined in Court by the Examiner, without the privity of
the adverse party, or of his Clerk who deals for the adverse party, to whom the
person to be examined shall be showed, and a Note of his name and place of
dwelling delivered in Writing, by such as shall produce him, and the Examiner
is to take care, and be well satisfied that such notice be given, and then
shall added to the Title of the Witnesses Examination the time of such notice
given, and the name of that person to whom it is given, and by whom, that at
the hearing of the cause the Suitor be not delayed upon pretense of want of
notice.

When Witnesses are examined in Court upon a Schedale of Interrogatories, there
shall be no new Interrogatories put in to examine the same Witnesses, nor shall
any Witnesses be examined in Court after the day of Publication, though they
were sworn before, so as a Copy of the Rule or Order whereby Publication
passed, be delivered to the Examiner, that he may take notice thereof.

That all Copies of Bills, Answers, Depositions, or other Record, or thing
whatsoever belonging to the Six Clerks to Copy, shall contain fifteen lines at
the least in every sheet of paper, written fairly, and orderly, and
unwastefully: And that no such Copy shall be henceforth delivered out of the
Office, before it be signed by such Six Clerk to whom it belongs, with his
own proper handwriting, or by his Deputy in his absence. Nor any Copy not so
signed, shall be made use of in Court, or before any Master, which all Clyents
are to take notice of, to the end they may be prepared with such Copies at the
hearing of their causes.

And whereas many inconveniences do frequently arise by undue Copying Bills,
Answers, and other Pleadings, before they be filed; so as they are either never
filed, or very irregularly, to the prejudice of the Clyent, and trouble to the
Court, by unnecessary motions: It is therefore ordered, That no Under-clerk, or
his man, or other for him, do from henceforth presume to copy any Bill, or
other Pleading whatsoever, before it be duly filed with the proper Six Clerk,
who ought to file the same.

For preventing of perjury, and other Mischiefs often appearing to the Court,
the Examiner is to examine the Deponent to the Interrogatories directed
seriatem, and not to permit him to read over, or hear read any other
Interrogatories, until, that in hand be fully finished, much (...) to have the
Interrogatories, (...) Witness, but by special Order of the Court, which is
sparingly to be granted, and upon Exception first put into writing and filed
with the Examiner without fee, and notice thereof given to the adverse party,
of his Clerk, together with a true Copy of the said Exceptions at the charge of
the party so examining.

The Examiners (in whom the Court reposeth much confidence) are themselves in
person to be diligent in Examination of Witnesses, and not entrust the same to
(...) and inferior Clerks; and (...) to take care to hold the Witness to the
point interrogated, and not to run into extravagances, and matters not
pertinent to the Question, thereby wasting paper for their own profit, of which
the Court will expect a strict account.

The Examiners are to take care that they employ under them in their Office,
none but persons of known integrity and ability, who shall take an Oath, Not to
deliver or make known directly, or indirectly, to the adverse party, or any
other, save the Deponent, who comes to be examined any (...) (...) Examinant
cannot depose. And in case such impertinence be observed by the Court, the
Examiner is to recommence the charge thereof to the party grieved, as the Court
shall award.

That after Witnesses examined in Court, there shall be two Rules only given
for Publication, ( viz.) An Ordinary Rule, and then a day to show cause why
Publication should not pass, and upon the return of a Commission, one Rule only
to be given, within which times aforesaid, if the other side do not show unto
the Coure good cause to the contrary, Publication shall pass accordingly.

All Pleadings, Commssiions, Certificates, belonging to the Six Clerks to
receive, shall immediately, upon the bringing in, or return thereof into this
Court, be delivered to such Six Clerks own hands as shall be Attorney in the
cause; or to the hands of his Deputy in his absence, (...) Clerks Office, or
lodgings there. And so soon as any Clerk shall have engrossed, enrolled,
copyed, or used any such (...), Pleading, Commission, Decree, or other (...)

Commissions.
WHen a Commission is awarded to examine Witnesses, if by default of him that
has the carriage of the Commission, or by his Commissioners nothing is done,
he shall bear all the charges that the other side was put unto about that
Commission, either for Fees of Court, bringing or entertaining Commissioners,
or Witnesses, or otherwise to be ascertained by the Oath of the party, or of
him that disbursed the money for him, and shall renew the Commission at his own
charges.

When a Commission is awarded to examine Witnesses, and the one side produces
and examineth all his Witnesses, and the other side does not, but pray a new
Commission, if it be granted, he shall bear all the charges of the renewed
Commission, both in Court, and in the Country, as well for the charge and
entertainment of his own Commissioners, as of the Commissioners of the other
side, and the other side shall be permitted to crossexamine (...) all his
Witnesses by that renewed Commission, or examine them in Court by the end of
the Term, wherein that renewed Commission is retournable without any more or
further delay.

That no Commission ad examinandum testes be executed in London, or within ten
Miles thereof, without special order first obtained upon Affidavit made of the
parties inabilitie to travel, or other good matter, And that all Depositions
taken by Commission in London, or within ten Miles thereof, without special
order as aforesaid, shall stand superseded and suppressed ipso facto, and not
allowed to be read as Evidence at the hearing of the Cause. And the parties who
shall cause the same to be so executed, shall suffer such punishment for their
contempt and irregularitie as the Court shall think fit.

Depositions.
WHere either party Plaintiff or Defendant, obteineth an Order to use
Depositions of Witnesses taken in another cause, the adverse parties may
likewise use the same without motion, unless he be upon special reason showed
to the Court by that party first desiring the same, inhibited by the same
order so to do.

No motion shall be made in Court, or by petition for suppressing of
Depositions as irregularly taken, until the six Clarke not toward the cause
have been first attended with the complaint of the party greived, and shall
certify the true state of the Fact to the Court, with their opinion: If the
Attourneys or Clerks on either side, shall not for the ease of their Clyents
agree before them, for which purpose a rule for attendance of the six Clarke in
such case, shall be entered of course with the Register at the desire of the
party complaining, which shall warrant their proceedings, and certificate to
the Court.

Causes to be set down for hearing.
THe six Clerks who are the only Attourneys in this Court, ought to inform
themselves continually of the state and proceedings of their Clyents causes,
whereby they may be able to defend their Clyents, and to give account to the
Court as the Attourneys in all other Courts do, and not to leave the care and
knowledge thereof upon their under Clarks who attend not in Court, and the
Clyents and such as follow their causes, are to acquaint their Attourneys for
that purpose.

Such as desire to have their causes set down for hearing, must repair to the
six Clarke that is Attorney in the cause, at least six days before the end of
the Term, that the six Clark may inform himself of the state of the Cause,
of the long or short dependence thereof in Court, of the Antiquity of the
publication, of the weight or value of the causes, and all other Circumstances
material to inform the Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or Master of the Rolls
of the time of the setting down of causes, and the six Clark may not refuse to
offer the same to be set down, if he be attended in such time as a foresaid,
nor come unprepared to inform the Lord Chancelour, Lord Keeper, or the Master
of the Rolls, of the nature and circumstance of the cause aforesaid. And
neither he, nor any of his under Clarks, nor any of the Registers, are to take
any Fee, Gratuity, or Reward for the same.

No money, or other reward, shall in any wise be exacted, or taken directly or
indirectly by any of the six Clarks, or any of the Registers for, or in their
behalf, for the preferring, and setting down of any cause for hearing, but
only such Fees as are behind, and unpaid of their termly Fees and Duties, (if
any be) and if any cause happen to be set down for hearing, wherein they shall
not have been satisfied their due Fees and Duties, they may allege the same
in stay of hearing of the cause.

Proceedings in hearing Causes.
WHere no Council appears for the Defendant at the hearing, and process appears
to have been duly served, the answer of such Defendant shall be read, and if
the Court upon such hearing shall find cause to Decree for the Plaintiff, yet
a day shall regularly be given to the Defendant to show cause against the same,
but before he be admitted thereunto, he shall pay down to the plaintiff, or
his Attorney in Court, such costs as the Court upon that hearing shall
assesse, and the Order is to be penned by the Register accordingly, (Viz.) It
is decreed so and so, etc. Unless the Defendant shall by such a day pay to the
Plaintiff, or his Attorney in Court costs, and show good cause to the
contrary, and such Defendant upon his showing cause, shall first produce a
Certificate from the Plaintiffs Attorney in Court, that he has paid the
costs, or Affidavit of tender or refusal thereof.

Contempts.
ALL process of contempt shall be made out into the County where the party
prosecuted is resident, unless he shall be then in, or about London, in which
case it may be made into the County where the party then is. And if any person
shall be taken upon process otherwise, or irregularly issued, the party so taken
first appearing unto, and satisfying the process which did regularly issue
against him, shall be discharged of his contempt, and have his full costs to be
taxed of course by the six Clerks not toward the cause, for such undue or
irregular prosecution from the time that the error first grew, without motion
or other order.

Every Suitor who prosecuteth a Contempt, shall do his best endeavor to
procure each several process to be duly served, and executed upon the party
prosecuted, and his willful default therein appearing to the Court, such Person
offending shall pay unto the party greived good costs, and lose the benefit of
the process returned without such endeavor.

All Attachments in process shall be discharged upon the defendants payment, or
tender to the Plaintiffs Clark and refusal of the ordinary costs of the Court,
and fileing his Plea, Answer or Demurrer (as the case regularly requires) but
upon motion in Court, or petition in that behalf.

And if after such conformity and payment of the costs (or tender and refusal
thereof) any further prosecution shall be had of the said contempt, the party
prosecuted shall be discharged with his costs.

If after appearance, and Interrogatories exhibited as aforesaid, the party
appearing shall depart before he be examined (without leave of the Court) he is
upon motion and certificate from the Register of such his departing and not
being examined, and of the Interrogatories exhibited from the Examiner to stand
committed without further Day given unto him, and is not to be discharged from
such his contempt until he has been examined and cleared of his contempt; And
if he shall upon his examinations, or by proofs be found in Contempt, he shall
clear such his contempt, and pay the Prosecutor his costs, before he be
discharged of his Imprisonment. And although he be cleared of his said
contempt, yet he shall have no costs, in respect of his disobedience in not
being examined without the Prosecutors trouble and charges in moving the Court
as aforesaid.

In Case of prosecution of a Contempt for breach of an Order of the Court, or
otherwise grounded upon an Affidavit, the Interrogatories shall not be extended
to any other matter then what is comprehended in the said Affidavit or Order.
And if any other shall be exhibited, the party examined may for that reason
Demurre unto them, or refuse to answer them.

Where the party prosecuted upon a Contempt, has denied it, or the same does
not clearly appear by his examinations, the Prosecutor may take out a
Commission of Course to prove the Contempt, and in such case the party
prosecuted may name one Commissioner to be present at the Execution of the
Commission, and may henceforth (notwithstanding the former usage to the
contrary) cross Examine the Witnesses produced against him to prove the
Contempt, but is not to examine any Witnesses on his part, unless he shall
satisfy the Court touching some matter of fact, necessary to be proved for
clearing the truth. In which case the Court if there be cause, will give leave
to him to Examine witnesses to such particular points set down; and the
otherside may cross Examine such Witnesses, But the Interrogatories on both
sides are to be included in the Commission.

Where a Contempt is prosecuted against one, who by reason of Age, Sickness,
or other cause is not able to travel* Or in case the same be against many
Persons who are Servants or Workmen, that live far off the Court, will upon
Motion and Affidavit thereof, grant a Commission to Examine them in the
Country, which Commission shall be sued out and Executed at the charge of the
Person or Persons desiring it, Directed to such indifferent Commissioners as
the Prosecutors of the Contempt shall name (as in other cases) and one
Commissioner only at the Nomination of the party prosecuted as aforesaid.
Which Commission shall be Executed at such convenient time and place, as the
six Clerks not toward the cause upon hearing the Clerks upon both sides
shall set down.

Upon every Examination and proof of a Contempt referred to any of the Masters
of the Court, to Certify whether the Contempt be confessed or proved, or not:
The Master in his Certificate thereof made to the Court, shall likewise assesse
and certify the costs to either party as there shall be cause, without other
Order or Motion made for that purpose

Commitment.
THE Court being tender of the liberty of men's Persons, and to avoid their
Imprisonment upon mallicious Affidavits, which are often made by one mean and
ignorant Person, and which has heretofore by the course of the Court drawn on
a Commitment, Does order that from henceforth, where Oath shall be made of
misdemeanour in beating or abusing, the party upon sueing the Process or
Orders of the Court, the party offending shall stand committed upon motion,
and no examination is in that case to be admitted.

And when Affidavit shall be made by two persons of Scandalous or Contemptuous
words against the Court or the process thereof, the party offending shall
likewise stand committed upon motion, without any further examination. And a
single Affidavit in such case shall be sufficient to ground an Attachment,
Whereupon such Person shall be brought in to be examined: And if the
misdemeanour shall be confessed, or proved against him, he shall stand
committed until he satisfy the Court touching his said misdemeanour, and pay
the Prosecutor his costs. And if he shall not be thereof found guilty, save by
the Oath of the party who made such Affidavit, he shall be discharged, but
without any costs, in respect of the Oath made against him as aforesaid.

Decrees and Dismissions.
THat all Decrees and Dismissions pronounced upon hearing the cause in this
Court be Drawn up, Signed, and Enrolled before the first Day after the next
Michaelmus, or Easter Term, after the same shall be so pronounced
respectively, and not at any time after, without special leave of the Court.

When the party is committed, or brought in by a Sergeant at Arms for breach
of a Decree, he is not to be enlarged until he has performed the Decree in
all things that are to be presently done, and given Security by Recognizance
with Suerties, as the Court shall order to perform the other parts of the
Decree (if any be to be performed) at future days and times appointed by the
Decree.

No Decree or Dismission shall be presented by the Register of this Court, or
his Deputy, or any other, to the Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or Master of the
Rolls, to be Signed, before it be Signed by that six Clarke to whom it
belongs, of his proper hand writing: Or by his Deputy in his absence.

To the intent the Decrees and Dismissions of this Court may be easily found
upon search, the six Clerks are to keep a public Book for the entering all
Decrees and Dismissions which has been made and Signed by the Lord Chancellor
since the Nine and Twentieth day of May last, and which shall be made and so
Signed in this Court: And to that end the Register shall at the beginning of
every Term, deliver into one of the six Clerks a list of all Decrees and
Dismissions Signed by the Lord Chancellor, the Term and Vacation before.

If a Bill be regularly and justly dismissed of Course, or by order for want of
prosecution, no motion shall be admitted for the retainer thereof, without a
Certificate from the Defendants Attorney in Court, that the costs of the
Dismission are paid, to the end unnecessary charge to the parties by several
motions for one and the same matter, may henceforth be avoided.

Masters.
THat the Masters do not pass any exemplifications of Depositions taken in
Chancery upon a bare sight of the Copies only, without first calling the
Officer or Officers, who have the custody of the Records, or Originalls of such
Copies, or some sworn Clark of his, or their Office, who are to produce the
same before them, to warrant their Signing thereof.

The Masters are not upon the importunity of Council, (how eminent soever) or
their Clyents, to return special Certificates to the Court, unless they are
required by the Court so to do, or that their own judgment in respect of
difficulty leads them unto it, such kind of Certificates for the most part
occasioning a needless trouble, rather then ease to the Court, and certain
expense to the Suitor.

Their Certificates and Reports are to be drawn as succinctly as may be
(preserving the matter clearly for the judgment of the Court) and without
recital of the several points of the Orders of Reference (which do sufficiently
appear by the Orders themselves) or the several Debates of Council before them:
unless that in case where they are doubtful, they shortly represent to the
Court the reasons which induce them so to be.

The Masters of the Court are to take notice, That when the Court requires to
be satisfied from them, touching any matter alleged to be confessed, or set
forth in the Defendants answer. It is intended, that without further Order,
they should take consideration of the whole Answer or Answers of the
Defendants, and certify not only whether the matter be so confessed or set
forth, but also any other matter avoiding that confession, or ballancing the
same, that the Court may receive a clear and true Information.

The Masters in taking Affidavits, and administering of Oaths, in Cases duly
presented unto them, are to be circumspect and wary, that the same be
reverently and knowingly given and taken, and are therefore to administer the
same themselves to the party, and where they discern him rash or ignorant, to
give him some conscionable admonition of his duty, and be sure he understand
the matter contained in his Affidavit, and read the same over, or hear it read
in his presence, and subscribe his name or mark thereunto, before the same be
certified by the Master, who is not to receive or certify any Affidavit,
unless the same be fairly and legibly written without blotting, or
Interlineation of any word of substance.

In all matters referred to the Masters of the Court, their Certificate (not
being to ground a Decree) if it be positive, is to stand, and process may be
taken out to enforce performance thereof, without further motion, unless the
adverse party, upon notice given (to his Attorney or Clark in Court,) that
such report is filled against him, shall within eight days after such notice
(if it be given in Term, or whiles the general Seals for Motions are held, or
within four days of the next Term, if it be given after) obtain some Order
in Court to control or suspend the same, And in case of an insufficient Answer
certified by the Masters, the Plaintiff may immediately take out Process
against the Defendant for his costs, and to make a better Answer, as has
formerly been used.

Where after Certificate or Report made by the Masters of the Court, either
Party shall Appeal from the same, to the judgment of the Court, he shall first
File his Exceptions thereunto briefly, with the Register, and deposite with him
forty shillings to be paid to the other party for his Costs, if he prevail
not in such Appeal: And then the Register shall enter such causes of Appeal in
a paper, in order as they are brought unto him to be determined by the Court,
in course upon days of Motions, And notice thereof to be given by the party
Appealing, to the Clerk of the Other side. And also the Registers paper to be
set up in the Office two days before, And if the Court shall not alter the
Masters Report, then the forty shillings deposited to be paid to the party
defending the same, with such increase as the Court shall find cause to
impose, otherwise to be restored to the party Appealing, and both without
charge.

The Masters Extraordinary shall not within twenty miles of London, take any
Affidavits, or Acknowledgment of Deeds, or Recognizances, or do any other Act
incident to the place of Master of the Chancery. And to the end it may appear,
whether any Master Extraordinary shall notwithstanding presume so to do, Every
such Master shall express the name of the Town and County where he shall take
any Affidavit, or the Acknowledgment of any Deed or Recognizance, otherwise the
same shall not be held Authentical, nor admitted to be Filed or Enrolled.

Cursitor.
WHereas there is an Irregular practice lately Introduced, of making forth
Original Writs of Clausum fregit, in Trespass, without any other Cause of
Action therein expressed of Returns past, when in truth the proper cause of
Action, is either Debt, Case, Ejectment, or some other cause of Action; And by
process thereupon, the Defendant is not only usually arrested, but frequently
proceeded against to the Outlawry, to the great damage of the Subject, and the
loss and diminution not only of the proper Original Writs issueing out of this
Court, but also of his MAJESTY'S revenue for the casual Fines thereupon due
and payable. It is therefore Ordered,

That no Cursitor of this Court from, and after the first Day of Trinity Term
next ensuing, make, or cause to be made any Writs of Clausum fregitt, or
Clausum and Domum fregitt, within the City of London, without special Warrant
from the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, or
Master of the Rolls for the time being, unless it be made appear by Affidavit,
or some other probable evidence that the same is the true and proper cause of
Action.

That no Cursitor of any other Country do make, or permit to be made within his
respective Devision any of the said Writs of Clausum fregitt, or Clausum and
Domum fregitt, of any other return, then of the last return of every
respective Term, unless it be to warrant Arrests, and Testatum Capias only.

That no Cursitor shall from and after the end of Michaelmas Term next ensuing
make, or permit to be made within his respective Office and Devision, any
Original Writs whatsoever of any return past, unless he shall receive the
Instructions for making thereof within the Term wherein the said Writs are to
be retournable, Or at the farthest, on, or before the first Eisoigne day of the
next Succeeding Term, without special. Warrant from the Lord Chancellor, or
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, of Master of the Rolls for the time
being, Or good cause to be allowed of by the Principal, and Assistants of the
Company of the Cursitors for the time being, or the Major part of them, at
their Public meetings according as heretofore has been used.

The Cursitors are to take care that they employ under them in their Office,
none but Persons of known integrity and abillity, And if any Clarks, or Persons
so employed, shall be found faulty in the premises, he shall be expulsed the
Office, And the Cursitor who so employed him, shall be answerable to the Court
for such Misdemeanors, And such Person, or Persons, who shall be discovered to
do, or proceed otherwise then is before mentioned, shall be liable to such
censure for his offense, As the Court shall find just to inflict upon him.

Petitions.
No Injunction for stay of Suite at Law shall be granted, revived, dissolved,
or stayed upon Petition, Nor any Injunction of any other nature, shall pass by
Order upon Petition, without notice, and a Copy of the Petiton first given to
the other side, And the Petition filed with the Register, and the Order entered.

No Sequestration, Dismission, Retainers upon Dismissions, or final Orders,
are to be granted upon Petition.

No former Order made in Court is to be altered, or explained upon a Petition;
Or Commitment of any Person taken upon Process of Contempt to be discharged,
but upon hearing the adverse party, his Attorney or Clark toward the Cause.

Paupers.
AFter an admittance In forma pauperis, No Fee, Profit, or Reward shall be
taken of such party admitted by any Councellor or Attorney, for the dispatch of
the Paupers business, during the time it shall depend in Court, and he continued
in forma pauperis; nor any Contract, nor Agreement be made for any Recompense,
or Reward afterward. And if any person offending herein shall be discovered to
the Court, he shall undergo the displeasure of the Court, and such further
punishment as the Court shall think fit to inflict upon him, and the party
admitted, who shall give any such Fees or Reward, or make any such Contract or
Agreement, shall be from thenceforth dispaupered, and not be afterward
admitted again in that Suit to prosecure in forma pauperis.

If it shall be made appear to the Court, That any person prosecuting in forma
pauperis, has sold or contracted for the benefit of the Suit, or any part
thereof, whiles the same depends, such cause shall be from thenceforth totally
dismissed the Court, and never again retained.

Such Council or Attorney as shall be assigned by the Court, to assist the
person admitted in forma pauperis, either to prosecute or defend, may not
refuse so to do, unless they satisfy the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of
England, or Master of the Rolls, who granted the admittance, with some good
reason of their forbearance.

That Counselor who shall move any thing to the Court, on the behalf of a
person admitted in forma pauperis, ought to have the Order of Admittance with
him, and first to move the same before any other motion. And if the Register
shall find that such person was not admitted in forma pauperis, he shall not
draw up any Order upon the second motion, made by any such Council, but he
shall lose the fruit of such second motion, in respect of his abuse to the
Court.

No process of Contempt shall be made forth, and sent to the Great Seal, at the
Suit of any person prosecuting as Plaintiff in forma Pauperis, until it be
signed by the six Clerk, who deals for him and the six Clerks, are to take
care, that such process be not taken out needlessly, or for vexation, but upon
just and good grounds, as they will answer it to the Court, if the contrary
shall appear.

And lastly, It is Ordered, that all Masters of the Court of Chancery,
Counselors, and all Officers, Ministers, Clerks, and Solicitors in the said
Court, do observe these Orders, which are to continue, until upon further
consideration and experience, any Alterations shall be thought fit to be made
therein.

Clarendon. HAR. GRIMSTON.
FINIS.
THE TABLE.
ANswers, and all such Orders as do relate thereunto. fol. 20 Bills, and all
such Orders as do relate thereunto. 5 Commissions, and all such Orders as do
relate thereunto. 46 Causes to be set down for hearing, and all such Orders as
do relate thereunto. 52 Proceedings in hearing of Causes. 55 Contempt, and all
such Orders as do relate thereunto. 57 Commitment, and all such Orders as do
relate thereunto. 65 Cursitors Proceedings, and all such as do relate
thereunto. 80 Depositions, and all such Orders as do relate thereunto, 50
Decrees and Dismissions, and all such Orders as do relate thereunto. 68
Exceptions, and all such Orders as do relate thereunto. 24 Examinations of
Witnesses, and all Orders relating thereunto. 30 Masters Proceedings, and all
Orders relating thereunto. 72 Pleas and Demurrers, and all such Orders as do
relate thereunto. 10 Petitions, and all such Orders as do relate thereunto. 85
Paupers, and all such Orders as do relate thereunto. 86 Subpoenaes, and all
such Orders as do relate thereunto. 8
FINIS.

