Imprimatur,

February 15th. 1686. Jo. Edinburgh.

A COLLECTION OF DISCOURSES Lately Written by some DIVINES of the CHURCH OF
ENGLAND AGAINST THE ERRORS and CORRUPTIONS OF THE Church OF Rome,

To which is prefixed a Catalogue of the several Discourses

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by John Reid, for Thomas Brown, Gideon Schaw, Alexander
Ogston, and George Mosman, Stationers, to be sold at their Shops, Anno DOM.
1687,

THE CATALOGUE Of the DISCOURSES contained in this Book.
I. A Discourse concerning the Guide in Matters of Faith, with Respect
especially to the Romish pretense of the necessity of such an One as is
infallible. Page 1 II. The Protestants Resolution of Faith, being an Answer to
three Questions. First, How far we must depend on the Authority of the Church
for the true sense of the Scripture. Secondly, Whither a visible Succession
from Christ to this day makes a Church which has this Succession, an Infallible
Interpreter of Scripture? And whither no Church which has not this Succession,
can teach the true sense of Scripture. Thirdly, Whither the Church of England
can make out such a Visible Succession. Page 31
III. A Discourse about the Charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists, asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther? Page 57 IV. A Discourse about Tradition showing what is mean'd
by it, and what Tradition is to be Received, and what Tradition is to be
rejected. Page 82 V. A Discourse concerning the Unity of the Catholic Church
maintained in the Church of England. Page 117 VI. A Discourse concerning the
Object of Religious Worship, or a Scripture proof of the unlawfulness of givng
any Religious Worship to any other Being besides the One supreme GOD. Page 158
VII. A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an unknown
Tongue. Page 212 VIII. A Discourse concerning the Devotions of the Church of
Rome, especially as compared with those of the Church of England, in which is
shown that what ever the Romanists pretend, there is not so true Devotion
amongst them, nor such a Rational Provision for it, nor encouragement to it, as
in the Church established by Law among Us. Page 250 IX. A Discourse concerning
Invocation of Saints. Page 295 X. A Discourse against Transubstantiation. Page
345 XI. A Discourse concerning the Adoration of the Host, as it is taught and
practiced in the Church of Rome, wherein an Answer is given to T. G. on that
subject: and to Monsuer Boileau's late Book de Adoratione Eucharistiae, Paris
1685. Page 375 XII. A Discourse against Purgatory, Page 421 XIII. A Discourse
concerning Auricular Confession as it is prescribed by the Council of Trent,
and practiced in the Church of Rome; With a Postscript on occasion of a Book
lately Printed in France, called Historia Confessionis Auricularis. Page 447.
FINIS.
A DISCOURSE CONCERNING A GUIDE IN MATTERS OF FAITH.
THE design of this Discourse is the Resolution of the following Query.

Whither a Man who lives where Christianity is The Question
professed, and refuses to submit his judgment to the Infallibility of any
Guide on Earth, and particularly to the Church or Bishop of Rome, has,
notwithstanding that refusal, sufficient means still left him whereby he may
arrive at certainty in those Doctrines which are generally necessary to the
Salvation of a Christian Man.

Satisfaction in this Inquiry is of great Moment. For The moment of this
Question.
it relates to our great end, and to the way which leads to it. And it nearly
concerns both the Romanists and the Reformed. If there be not such a Guide,
the Estate of the Romanists, is extremely dangerous. For then the Blind take
the Blind for their unerring Leaders; and being once misled, they wander on
without correcting their Error, having taken up this first as their fixed
Principle, that their Guide cannot mistake the way. On the other hand, If God
has set up in his Church a Light so very clear and steady as is pretended; the
Reformed are guilty of great presumption, and expose themselves to great
uncertainty, by shutting their Eyes against it.

Now, there lies before Men a double Temptation to a belief The Temptations to
believe the Affirmative part of this Question.
of the being of such a Guide in the Christian Church; Sloth and Vicious
Humility of mind. Sloth inclines Men rather to take up in an Implicit Faith,
then to give themselves the trouble of a strict Examination of things. For
there is less Pain in Cred^lity, then in bending of the Head by long and strict
Attention and severe Study.

Also there is a Show of Humility, in the deference which our understandings
pay unto Authority; especially to that which pretends to be under Christ,
Supreme on Earth. Although, in the paying of it without good reason first
understood, Men are not Humble but Slavish.

But these Temptations prevail not upon honest and considerate Minds, which
inquire, without prejudice, The true Resolution of the Query.
after Truth, and submit to the Powerful Evidence of it. Such will resolve the
Question in the Affirmative; and they may reasonably so do by considering these
propositions which I shall treat of in their order.

First, The Christian Church never yet wanted, nor shall it ever want, either
the Doctrines of necessary Faith, or the Belief and Profession of them.

Secondly, Wheresoever GOD requires the Belief of them, he gives means
sufficient for Information and unerring Ass^nt.

Thirdly, Whatsoever th^se means are, every Man's Personal reason gives to the
Mind that last Weigh which turns Deliberation into Faith.

Fourthly, The means which God has given us toward necessary Faith and the
ce^^ain^y of it, is not the Authority of any infallible Guide on Earth.

Yet, Fifthly, All (...) is not to be rejected, in our pursuance of the (...),
in the finding out or ^^ating of which it is a very (...).

Sixthly, By the (...) to us the Holy Scriptures in the (...), ^^ans sufficient
to lead us to certainty (...) to ^i^e Eternal.

First, (...) and Profession of the n^^ess^r (...) Faith, are annexed Prop. I,
(...) the Chri^^^^^ Church.

There ^^ but (...) and acc^^^ing ^^ he saying of Leo the great Nisi (...)
Fides, non est. ^. M Ser. 2^.
If (...) at all: For it cannot be contrary ^^ it se^^. And though it be (...),
^et Men o^ di^^ering Creeds ^ret (...) it, as the Merchants of Reli^^s in the
Church of (...) show, in several places, the one ^^amless Coat of Christ ^ee
Ferrand. l. 1. c. 1. Sect 4. disquis. Relig.
.

This one Faith never did, nor ever shall in all places fail.

The Apostles were themselves without error both in their own assent to the
Fundamentals of the Christian Faith, and in the delivery of them.

They heard the Oracles of Christ from his own mouth, and they were Witnesses
of his Resurrection; And they spoke Act. 4. 19, 20.
what they had seen and heard. And they gave to the World Assurance of the
Truth, by the miraculous signs of their Apostolical Office. And if they had not
had such Assurance themselves, and could not have given proof to others of
their mission, there would have been a defect in the first promulgation of the
Gospel; and such as could not afterward have been amended. That which, at
first, had been delivered with uncertainty, would, with greater uncertainty,
have been conveyed down to after Ages; and Men, who, in process of time,
graft error upon certain Truth, would much more have grafted error upon
uncertain Opinion.

Ever since the Apostles times there has been True Faith, and the Profession of
it in the Catholic Church: And it will be so till Faith shall expire, and Men
shall see him on whom they before believed. For a Church cannot subsist without
the Fundamentals of Christianity. And Christ has Sealed this Truth with his
promise, that there shall be a Church as long as this World continues. S. Mat.
28. 20.
I mean by a Church a visible Society of Christians both Ministers and People;
for public Worship on Earth cannot be invisible.

But the True Faith and the Profession of it is not fixed to any place, or to
any succession of Men in it. God's Providence has written the contrary in the
very Ashes of the Seven Churches of the lesser Asia.

Neither is any particular Church, though so far infallible in Fundamentals as
to be preserved from actual error, an infallible Rule to all other Christians.
If they follow the Doctrine of it, they err not, because it is true; but if
they follow that Church as an unerring Guide or Canon, they mistake in the Rule
and Motive of their Faith. For that particular Church which Teaches Truth,
might possibly have erred; and the Church which erres, might have shined with
the True Light. But the whole Church cannot err in any Age; for then the very
being of a Church would cease.

Neither does it, hence, follow, that the Faith of the Roman Church, when
Luther arose, was the only true and certain Doctrine. For that Church was not
then the only visible Church on Earth. The Greek Church (for instance sake) was
then more visible than now it is, and more Orthodox: The Rich Papacy having
much prevailed upon the necessities of it by Arguments gilded with Interest.
That Church did not err in Fundamental Points; the Article of the Procession
of the Holy Ghost from the Father by the Son, which the Romans accuse of
Heresy, being easily acquitted of it, if Men, agreeing in the sense, forbear
contention about the Phrases. Besides, if our Forefathers under the Papacy
embraced the True Faith, we have it still, the Faith not being removed, but the
Corruption. Their Question therefore (Where was your Religion before Luther?)
is not more pertinent amongst Disputers than this amongst Husbandmen, (Where
was the Corn before it was weeded?)

We have seen that necessary Faith is perpetual, and it is as Prop. II
manifest that wheresoever God requires the belief of it, he vouchsafes
sufficient means for information, and unerring Assent.

Of all he does not require this belief, for to all the Gospel is not preached,
and where it is preached there are Infants, and Persons of Age so distempered
in Mind, as to remain unavoidably Children in understanding.

And though the same sum of Doctrines is generally necessary to Salvation, yet
the Creed of all men is not of equal length, seeing they have unequal capacities.

But wheresoever, there is a particular Society of Men, who call themselves a
Church, yet err actually in the necessary Articles of the Faith, it is certain
they were not forced into that error for want of external means. For the Just
Judge of the World would never have required Unity in the Faith upon pain of
his Eternal displeasure, if he had not given to Men Power sufficient for such
Unity. No Tyran^ on Earth has been guilty of such undisguised injustice as that
is, which makes a Law for the punishment of the Blind because they miss their
way. The Articles of Christian Religion come not to the Mind by natural reason,
but by Faith; and Faith comes by hearing or reading; and where these means are
not offered, a Man is rather an Ignorant Person then an Unbeliever. Wherefore
our Savior told the perverse Jews, Joh. 15. 22, 23.
that if the Messiah had never been revealed to them, they had not been
answerable for the Sin of Infidelity: But that, since he was come to them, and
by them despised, their Infidelity was blackned with great aggravation.

The means, then, are sufficient wheresoever the end Prop. III.
is absolutely required; but whatsoever those means are, the Act of Assent is
to be utlimately resolved into each Man's Personal reason. For no Man can
believe or assent but upon some ground or motive which appears credible to him.
He could not believe unless he had some reason or other why he believed. When
all is done (said Mr. Thorndike To the Reader of the Dis. of Govern: of Churches
) Men must and will be Judges for themselves. I do not quote the saying because
it is extraordinary, but because that Learned Man said it, who was careful to
pay to Authority, its minutest dues. If a man believe upon Authority, he has a
farther reason for the believing of it. He is not willing to take Pains in
examining that which is proposed to him; or he thinks himself of less Ability
in understanding then those from whom he borrows his Light. If he desires
another to judge for him, his choice is determined by the Opinion he has
conceived of him. Every Man has his reason, though it be a weak one, and such
as cannot justify it self or him. Something at last turns the Balance though
it be but a Feather.

This the Romanists own as well as the Reformed, till it touches them in the
case of a new Convert. To induce a Man of another particular Church to embrace
their Communion, they submit these weighty points to his private Judgment:
What is a True Church, and which are the marks of it? What is the Roman Church?
And whither the marks of the True Church do only belong unto the Roman? What
Men or what Books sp^^k the sense of that Church? They tell us R. H. Guide in
Controv. in Pref. p. 3.
That the Light of a Man's own reason first serves him so far as to the
discovery of a Guide; Also that, in this discovery, the Divine Providence has
left it so clear and evident, that a sincere and unbyassed quest cannot
miscarry. But when once this Guide is found ou^, the Man is afterward, for all
other things that are prescribed by this Guide, to subject and resign his
reason. As if it were not as difficult to judge of such a Guide, as of his
direction.

It seems, the Roman Church is like a Cave, into which a Man has Light enough
to enter; but when once he is entered, he is in thick Darkness.

But, how subservient soever our reason may be to our Faith; The means which
Go^ has given us toward the certain Prop. IV.
attaining of it, is not the Authority of any infallible Guide on Earth.

This will not be disbelieved by those who weigh well the following
considerations.

First, God did not set up such a constant, infallible Guide among the Jews;
though, at first, he gave Assurance Consid. I.
to them by Miracle, that Moses had received his Commission from him, and had
brought to them the Tables which he had Written, for their direction, with his
own finger.

Some of the Sanedrim were of the Sect of the Sadducees, who erred in the
Fundamental point of a future State. Most of them erred in the Quality of the
Messiah, not considering their Scriptures so much as their Traditions. And of
the errors of the Levitical Priesthood there is, in the Old Testament, Isai. 56
10. Jer. 2. 8. Ez. 7. 26. C. 22. 26.
frequent mention, and great complaint. And the Prophet Malachy, Mal 2. 7. 8.
as soon as he had said, The Priests lips shall preserve Knowledge, he adds
this reproof, but ye are departed out of the way.

It is true, the Israelites were, by God, directed in difficult cases to an
Assembly of Judges Deuteronomy. 17, 8. to 12.
. But they were not Judges of controversies in Doctrine, but in Property. To
their sentence the People were to submit, as to an expedient for Peace; though
Judgment might be perverted, or mistaken. See Levit. 4. 13.


It must be, also, confessed that God spoke to them by the Oracle of Vrim, and
that the voice of it was infallible. But its answers concerned not the
necessary Rudiments of the Mosaic Law, but emergencies in their civil affairs;
those especially of Peace and War.

But if we admit that there was under Judaism a living infallible Guide; it
does not, thence, follow, that it must be so under Christianity. For their
small precinct (the People of which were thrice in a year to come up to the
Temple) was much more capable of such a Judge then the Christian Church, which
is as wide as the World. Also the new Revelation is more clear and disti^ct
then the old one was, and stands not in such need of an Interpreter.

Secondly, God has, no where, promised Christians such a Judge: He has no
where said that he has given such a Consid. II.
one to the Christian Church. And seeing such a one cannot be had without God's
supernatural assistance, the most knowing amongst Men being subject both to
Error and to Falsehood; it is great arrogance, whilst the Scripture is silent,
to say he is in being. And to affirm that if there were not such a Guide, God
would be wanting in means sufficient for the maintenance of Peace and Truth, is
presumptuously to obtrude the schemes of Man's fancy upon God's Wisdom. He can
Govern his Church without our methods.

Now, God has no where promised such a Judge to Christian Men; though he has
promised help on Earth, and assistance from Heaven, to Men diligent and sincere
in their inquiries after truths which are necessary for them. There are two
places of Scripture, which are by some taken for promises of such a nature,
though they were not, by the Divine Wisdom, so intended.

Of these, the First is that which was spoken by Christ unto St. Peter. S. Mat.
16. 18.
The gates of Hell shall not prevail against (the Church.)

Which Promise concerns the Church in general, and the necessary Faith of it,
and not any particular persons, or places, or successions of persons in them.

And Christ does here assure us, that the Gates of the Grave, shall not swallow
up the Church; that it shall not enter in at them; that it shall not die or
perish But he does not say he will preserve it by the means of any Earthly
infallible Guide. He can, by other waves, continue it till time it self shall
fail.

The other place of Scripture is, the promise of Christ a little while before
his Ascension into the Heavens. S. Mat. 28. 20.
Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the World: As long as this Age
of the Messiah shall last, and that is the last time or Age. This promise is,
indeed, made to the Apostles, and to their successorrs also. But it is a
promise of general assistance; and it is made upon condition that they go forth
and make Disciples of all Men of all Nations, and Baptize them, and give them
farther instruction in the things which Christ gave in charge to them. And some
of the successors of the Apostles have not performed these conditions: and the
Governor of the Church of Sard^s had not held fast what he had received and
heard. Rev. 3. 1. 2, 3

As GOD has not promised an unerring Guide, so neither has he said he has
set up such an one in any Church on Earth.

He has not said it, either directly, (...) by consequence.

T^^ places which are supposed directly to affirm this, are two, and both
mistaken.

One of them is that of Christ to his Disciples, after he had given Commission
to them to preach the Gospel. Luke 10. 16.
He that hears you, hears Me; Me the infallible way and the Truth.

This Speech, if it be extended to all Ministers, it makes them all infallible
Guides. And it is certain they are so, as long as they deliver to the People
what they received from Christ. But the words are especially directed to the
seventy Disciples who were taught to preach a plain Fundamental Truth, that the
Kingdom of GOD was come nigh to the Jews. S. Luke 10. 1, 9.
And these Disciples were able to give to the Jews a demonstration of the Truth
of that Doctrine which they taught, by miraculous signs: By healing the sick,
verse 12.
and do^ng among them, mighty works.

Another place, used as an express Testimony, 1 ^im. 3. 15.
is that in the first to Timothy to whom St. Paul says, that the Church is the
Pillar and Ground of Truth. But this place also is misapplied. It seems to be
spoken of that Church of Ephesus in which St. Paul advised Timothy to behave
himself with singular care: Which place has so far failed that the lo^ty
Building called St. John's Church, is now become a Turkish Mosch. But i^ it
Ryc. of the Greek Chapter p. 44.
were spoken in a general sense, it would amount only to this meaning: A
Christian Church is like a Pillar sustained by a Pedestal on which a writing is
so fixed, that all who pass by may see it. It is (as Jerusalem once was to the
Heathen-World) a City on a Hill: It is a visible Society which gives notice to
Jews and Gentiles of Christianity, and is instrumental to awaken their
observation, and by their sense to prepare the way to their belief. For, this
advertisement being so publicly given to them they have fair occasion of
examining the grounds of Christian Truth, which when they find, they will be
induced to build upon them. In this sense likewise, though not in this alone,
Apostolical Men were called Lights and Pillars. In the Book of the Revelation *
this promise is made to ^i^ who persevereth in his Christianity, Rev. 3. 12.
notwithstanding the cross which it brings upon him. Him will I make a Pillar
in the Temple of my God, and I will write my name upon him, and the name of his
God, and the name of the City of his God which is new Jerusalem [or the
Christian Church.)

And St. Chrisostom In 1 Cor. 9. 2. To pho^on Eccesion, ho Themelios tes
pisteos, ho Stylos, etc
gives St. Paul the Titles of the Light of the Churches, the Foundation of the
Faith, the Pillar and Ground of Truth. The Governors of the Church do
ministerially exhibit Christian Truth: they do not by mere Authority impose it.

Among the Places which are said to prove, by good consequence, that there is ^
living Guide of Faith, that in the eighteenth of St. Matthews Gospel S. Mat.
18. 15, 16, 17.
is the Principal.

There our Savior, requires his Followers, if their Brethren persisted in
their offenses, to tell it to the Church, and to esteem them no longer Members
of their Society, if they despised the Sentence of it. From whence they
conclude with strange Inadvertence, that such a Decree is therefore infallible.

But our Lord speaks of their Brothers Trespasses against See Deuteronomy. 17. 6.
them, and not of his Heresy: And of the Discipline, and not of the Doctrine,
either of the Synagogue or the Church. In which case if we submit, even where
there is error in the Sentence for Peace sake, and because we are come to the
last Appeal; We worthily sacrifice private Good to public Order. And such
Submission is sat in point of property, though not in point of Doctrine; for
we may, without Sin, depart from our property, but not from our Faith.

Now, much of this that has been said in order to the explication of the
foregoing places, might have been well omitted, if I had designed this little
Discou^se for the use only of such Romanists as had been conversant with the
writings of the Fathers. For then I should have needed only to have cited those
Ancients, and showed that their sense of these* several places was plainly
different from the modern interpretations of the Church Men of Rome. And, by
this way of arguing, they are self condemned. For they fall * Launoy in Epist.
ad Carol magistru^ ad Jacob. ^evil. ad Guil. Voell. ad Raeim. Formentinum in S.
par. Epi.
according to their own Rule of expounding Scripture by the unanimous consent
of the Primitive Fathers, who with one voice, speak another sense. Those who
doubt of this may receive satisfaction from the Learned Letters of Monsieur
Launoy.

If God had promised an infallible Guide, or told us be had given one to his
Church, he would, doubtless, Consid. III.
have added some directions for the finding of him. For, to say in general, you
shall have a Star which will always Guide you without all dangerous error; and
not to inform us in what part of the Firmament it is to be seen, is to emuse
rather then to promise.

Now, God has no where given us such direction. He has no where pointed us to
this Church, or that Council; to this Person, or that Local succession of Men.
He has not said the Guide is at Antioch, or Jerusalem; at Nice, or
Constantinople; at Rome or Avignon.

You will say, he has directed us to St. Peter. Answer, no more than to the
rest of the Apostles, to whom he gave equal power in their Ordination Joh. 20.
21.
; All of whom he made equally Shepherds of the Flock^; S Mat. 9. 36. C. 10. 6.
2. Pet. 5. 2.
to all of whom he gave equal Commission to make Proselytes of all Nations. S.
Mat. 28. 16, 17, ^8, 19.
And in this sense St. Chrysostom S. Chrysostom: in 1 Cor. 9. 2. Ten oikoymenen
hapasan egkecheirismenos, etc.
affirmed concerning St. Paul that the whole World (or the World of the Roman
Empire) was his Diocese. You will reply, that he promised, on him particularly,
upon this Rock, or Stone, this Kipha (a Syriac Word of the Masculine Gender See
R. H. Guide in Controv. Dis. 1. p. 5. and Socin. in Loc.
) this Peter; to build his Church. I answer, the Ancients took the Word as
Feminine, S. Hill. de Trin. ^. 6. dixit Petras, Tu es filius Dei, etc. super
hane igitur Confessionis Petram Ecclesiae edificatio est. v. Launoy in Epist.
ad Voellum.
and understood it rather of his Confession then of his Person. If it was
spoken of his Person, it was spoken by way of Emphasis, not Exclusion; for
there were twelve Foundations Revel. 21. 14. Ephesians. 2. 20.
of these he might be called the first, having first preached the Gospel to
Jews and Gentiles, Act. 2. 14. 41, 47 IV. Consid.
the Eleven standing up with him, and he speaking as the Mouth of the
Apostolical College.

We cannot, by the strictest ennumeration, find out any living infallible Guide
existing in any Age after St. Peter in the Christian Church.

1. This Guide could not be the Church diffusive of the first Ages. For the
suffrages of every Christian were never gathered. And if we will have their
sense, they must rise from the dead and give it us.

2. This Guide cannot be the Faith (as such) of all the Governors of all the
Primitive Churches. The sum of it was never collected. There were anciently
general Creeds, but such as especially related to the Here^ies then on foot;
and who can affirm, upon grounds of certainty, that each Bishop in the World
consented to each Article, or to each so expressed?

3. This Guide is not a Council perfectly free and universal. For a Guide which
cannot be had, is none. If such a Council could assemble, it would not err in
the necessaries of Faith, or there cannot be a regular Flock without a
Shepherd; and if all the Spiritual Shepherds in the World should at once, and
by consent, go so much astray; the whole Flock of the Church Catholic would be
scattered. And that would contradict the promise of Christ the Supreme,
Faithful, Infallible Pastor. But there never was yet an universal Council
properly so called: Neither can we suppose the probability of it but by
supposing the being of one Temporal Christian Monarch of the World who might,
call, or suffer, it. In the Councils called General, if we speak comparatively,
there were not many Southern or Western Bishops present at them. It was thus,
at that first. Occumenical Council, the Council of Nice though, in one sacred
place (as Eusebius Eusebius. l. 3. vit constable. c. 7. 8. p. 487^
has noted) there were assembled, Syrians and Cilicians, Phoenicians, and
Arabians; Palaestinians, Egyptians, Thebaeans, Libyans, Mesopotamians; a
Persia^, a Socrat. ^. H^l. c. 8. p. 19.
Scythian Bishop; and many others from other Countries. But there was but one
Bishop for Africa, one for Spain, one for Gaul; two Priests as Deputies of the
infirm and Aged Bishop of Rome. Whilst (for Instance sake) there were seventeen
Bishops for the small Province of V. Council. Labb. Tom. 2. p. 50. etc.
Isauria; yet such Councils are very useful; such we reverence; but God did not
set them up as the only and the infallible Guides of Faith. If there were such
Guides, what Guided the Church which was before them? By what rule was Ebion
judged before the Council of Nice? How can we be infallibly Guided by them in
Controversies of Faith not determined by them; nay not brought before them; nay
scarce moved till these latter days? Such (for the purpose) are the
Controversies about the virtue of the Sacrifice of Christ, and of Justification
by the Faith of mere recumbence upon his Merits. Or how shall a private Man
who erres in the Faith, be delivered from his Heresy, seeing he may die some
years ere a Council can assemble, or, being assembled, can form its decrees.
Arius vented his Heresy about ten years before the Council of Nice was called
for the suppressing of it. And soon after he had given vent to it, it spread
throughout Egypt and Lybia and the upper Thebes, as Socrates has reported: And
in a short time many other Provinces and Cities were Socr. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c.
6. p. 9.
infected with the contagion of it. And, in the pretended Council of Trent, no
less then five Popes were successively concerned; and it lasted, in several
places longer then two legal lives of a Man. From A. 1545. to A. 1563.
There was indeed, a Canon in the Western Church V. Council Constable. sess. 39.
for the holding of a Council once in the space of each ten years: But that
Canon has not been, hitherto, obeyed; and as affairs stand in the Church, it is
impracticable. For the Pope will exclude all the Greek and Reformed Bishops: He
will crowd the Assembly with Bishops of his own Creation; and with Abbots also;
he will not admit of former Councils unless they serve his purpose; not so much
as that of Nice it self. V. Greg. magn. Ep. 6. 31. Leo. 1. Ep. 53. Gelas. 1.
Ep. 13.
He will be the Judge, though about his own Supremacy. He will multiply
Italians and others who, upon Oath Council. Labb. Tom. 10. p. 23. 379. and
Pontific. Roman.
owe their votes to him. He will not hold a Council upon the terms approved by
all Romish Princes. Nor did they agree at their last Council; the Emperor
would no^ send his Bishops to Bologna, nor the French King his to Tren'. And
though the French Church believed the Doctrines of that Synod, yet they did not
receive them from the Authority of it, but they embraced them as the former
Doctrines of the Roman Church. And the Parisian' Faculty A. D. 1542, in coll.
So^b. See Richer. H. conc. general, vol. 4. p. 162, 163. etc.
prepared the way to the Articles of Trent.

Notwithstanding all this, we firmly believe that at least the first four
general Councils did not err in Faith; and it is pious to think that God would
not suffer so great a temptation in the Church on Earth. Yet still we believe
those Councils not to be infallible in their constitution, but so far as they
followed an infallible rule. For the grea^est Truth is not always with the
greatest number: And great numbers may appear on contrary sides. The Council of
Constantinople under Constantine Copronymus, consisting of three hundred thirty
eight Bishops, decreed against the use of Images in Churches. Yet the 2d Synod
of Nice consisting of about three hundred and fifty Bishops determined for it.
And, a while after, in the West, the council of Frankford consisting of about
three hundred Bishops, reversed that decree And, after that, the council of
Trent did re-establish it; though there the voting Persons were not fifty. With
such uncertain doubts of belief must they move who follow a Guide in Religion
without reference to a farther rule.

But, here, there is offered to us, by the Guide in Controversi^^, * an
Objection, of which this is the sum. The fifth Canon of the Church of England
does declare Object. R. H. Annot. on D. Still. Answer. p. 82, 83.
that the thirty nine Articles were agreed upon for the avoidance of the
diversities of opinions and the establishing of consent touching true Religion
Consent touching true Religion is consent in Matters, of Faith. Establishing of
consent relates both to Layety and Clergy. The third and fourth Canons of
1640. Decree the Excommunication of those who will not-abjure their holding
Popery and Socinianism. The Reformed Churches in France teach the like
Doctrine, threatening to cut them off from the Church who acquiesce not in the
resolution of a National Synod. Art. 31. chapter 5, du consis^^ire. si un ou
plusieurs, etc.
The same course was taken with the Remonstrants in the Synod of Dort. Syn.
Dord. sess. 138.
Wherefore Protestants ought not to detract from the Authority of general
Councils, whilst they assume to themselves so great a Power in their particular
Synods.

The force of this Objection is thus removed. it an infallible Guide; but
rather for this, because it has sincerely and with Gods assistance follows a
rule which is infallible. And, upon this supposition, it imposes Doctrines,
and excludes such as with co^umacy dissent from them See Artic. 20. 21, 22.


4. This Guide is not the present Church declaring to particular Christians the
sense of the church of former Ages, How can this declaration be made, seeing
Churches differ, and each Church calls it self the true one, and pretends to
the Primitive pattern. The Church of Rome has, on her side; the suffrages of
all the Councils and Fathers, the first, the middle, the last, if Campiain the
Jesuit may be believed camp, Rat. 3. p. 180. Rat. 5. p. 185.
On the other hand Monsieur Larroque has Written a Book of the confirmity of
the Protestant churches in France, with the Discipline of the Christian Ancient
church, taking it for granted that their Doctrine was catholic. And we
likewise pretend both to the Doctrine and Discipline of it. All of us cannot be
in the right. The Roman church, without any proof, calls her self the church
catholic; and she pretends to conveigh to us the sense of the Ancient
Fathers and councils; which sense was that they understood formerly by the word
Tradition. Lib. diurn. Pontif p. 35. eten^m hujus Apostolicae Traditinis normam
quam venerandam Sanctorum 318. Pa^rum concilium quod in Nicaea, etc. and p. 43.
hujusmodi Evangelicam Traditionem.
And in this sense a Romanist said of Pope Honorius Ant. Dezallier in Histor.
Monoth. p. 123.
, that he had broken the rule of Tradition. But how can we esteem that church a
faithful representer of the sense of the Ancients whilst the Reformed consult
the Ancients with equal ability, and find a contrary sense in them? Whilst the
church of Rome, conc. ^rid. Sess. 4. decr. 1.
by a kind of Ecclesiastical coinage, stampeth Divine Authority upon B^^ks
esteemed by the councils and Fathers to be Apochryphal? V. constit. Apost. can.
Apost. conc. Laod. conc. Nic. 1. S. Hieron. prolog. etc. Eusebius. E. H. l. 4. c
26. p. 149. cron. l. 2. etc.
Whilst it has forged decrees of Popes, V. Blondelli Pseudo. Isodorum.
and (like a deceitful Gibeonite) rendered that which was really new, in
appearance old and moldy, on purpose to promote imposture? How does it give us
the sense of the Ancients, when it owneth what it formerly disowned as
canonical, the Epistle to the Hebrews V. S. Hieron. in Isai. c. 6 8.
? When it takes away the cup which Pope Gelasius called a grand Sacrilege
Gratian in de consecr. did, 2. cap. 2.
? When it now rejects the communicating of Infants, which, in former times
was esteemed by many a very necessary point? When a former Pope Gregory
condemns the Title of Universal Pastor as Antichristian, and a latter insists
upon it as the choicest flower in the Papal prerogative? When St. August S.
Aug. tract. 30. in Joh. and tract. 50.
and from him the very Breviary Brev. Romans Dom infra. oct. Asc. 3. noct. lect.
7. p. 440.
shall expound Christ's promise, of being always with his Church, of the
presence of his Divinity and of his Spirit, and not of his Body: And Pope
Innocent the third shall interpret them as meant also of his corporal presence
Innoc. 3. Mist. miss. l. 4. p. 196.
?

And, if the Roman Church falsifieth written Tradition, how shall we trust her
for Oral? And how and at what time did that Oral Tradition remove from Greece
to Rome where the Greek church, which it allows to have been once possessed
of the true Tradition, is accused of Heresy? At the same time (I suppose) that
the chapel of the Virgin removed from Nazareth to Loretto. This principle of
Oral Tradition is most uncertain to their Judges; and to those to whom they
offer it, it is most obscure. It is a principle on which they can serve a
purpose in justifying novel Doctrines as Oral Traditions not known to any but
the Roman church, which pretends to the custody of them.

5. GOD has not set up any one Person in the Catholic Church in the Quality
of an unerring Guide in the Christian Faith. The Bishops of Rome who pretend to
this Prerogative, do but pretend: It is a tender point; and the Popes Legates,
in the Council of Trent, H. conc. Trid. l. 2.
were enjoined to give forth this Advertisement that the Fathers, upon no
account whatsoever, should touch it, or dispute about it. They who examine it,
will soon reject it as false and useless.

And, 1. Whither the Pope be or be not the Guide, Roman Communion are exposed
to dangerous uncertainty. For, it is not yet determined amongst them, whither
they are to follow the Pope, with, or without, or against a Council. Yet a Pope
has owned a Council which deposed other Popes, and by decree, set it self
above them, or rather vindicated the superiority due to it. Thus Martin the
fifth received the Papal Mitre from the Council of Constance, after it had
deposed Gregory the twelfth, Beuedict the thirteenth, and John the twenty
third. Again, there have been, by the account given us in their own Historians,
See the Index of Onuphrii, vit Pontif. ed. colon. 1610.
more then twenty formed Schisms in that Church; two or more Popes pretending
at the same time to the infallible chair, and each of them not being without
their followers and giving Holy Orders. And at this time there is risen an
Apologist Steph Baluz. in miscellan. l. 3. p. 471. to 514.
for Mauritius, Burdin or Gregory the eight, though he was ejected by the Roman
church, which received Gelasius into his place; Burdin being disliked by them
as a creature of Henry the Emperor. This Schism (says S. Bernard) S. Bern.
Ep. 219.
distracted that church and gave it a wound only not incurable. And Baluzius
Baluz. ibid. p. 514. difficile tum erat, etc.
professes that it was then difficult to understand which of the two, Gregory
or Gelasius, was the Legitimate successor of of Pope Paschal. Now, how useless,
to them, is the pretense of a Guide, when they want some other Guide who should
tell them which of the Pretenders they may securely follow;

Arg. II. Secondly, the Popes themselves in their solemn profession, suppose
themselves liable to the misleading of the People even in Matters of Faith.
For, having owned the Faith of the Six general councils, Lib. diurn. Pontif. 2.
professio fidei. p. 43. Vnde and districti Anathematis interdictioni
subjicimus, siquis unquam, seu nos, sive est alius, qui novum aliquid praesumat
contra hujusmodi Evangelicam Traditionem, and Orthodoxae fidei, Christianaeque
Religionis integritatem, etc. Arg. III.
They further profess themselves and others to be subject to an Anathema, if
they advance novelty contrary to the aforesaid Evangelical Tradition, and the
integrity of the Orthodox and Christian Faith.

Thirdly, If the Pope challenges this Power of infallible Guidance, he must
lay claim to it by his succeeding of S. Peter in the chair Apostolical. But,
then, by equal reason, the successors of each Apostle may challenge the office
of an infallible Guide. For the Power which Christ gave to St Peter, he gave to
the rest: It was not special. And for the Bishops of Antioch who first
succeeded S. Peter, they have a much fairer pretense then those of Rome. The
Truth is, Jerusalem was properly the Mother Church: Though Rome was the
Imperial city; and if, by this means, the Popes had not sat higher, they would
not have pretended to see farther then others.

Arg. IV. Fourthly, Those who have considered the writings of many Popes, and
the decrees made by them, have found no reason to lay their Faith at their
Golden Sandal. It is manifest to every Learned Man that the Eyes of the Pope
are not (metaphorically) like those of Augustus in which (it is said) there
appeared a brightness like that of the Sun. If we had more of their History,
and more of their Writings, we should find more of their errors. They have
showed both ignorance and extravagance in opinion, and error in the Faith it
self. There are not, perhaps, weaker or more absurd passages in any
Ecclesiastical Writer, than we may find in the works of Pope Innocent the
third, who was called the Wonder of the World. Mat. par. A. 1217. stupor mundi
He says of Subdeacons that they represented the Nethinims Ezra. 8. 20.
^ (or Nathinnims as he calls them;) and that Nathaniel was one of that Order.
Innoc. 3. Mist. missael. 1. c. 2. fol 15^.
That the Pope does not use a Pastoral rod, because St. Peter sent his S^^ff to
Eucharius the first Bishop of Treves, to whom Maternus succeeded, who, by the
same Staff, was raised from the dead. Iunoc. 3. ibid. c. 62 fol. 165.
That the People have seven Salvations in the Mass, in order to the expelling
the seven deadly Sins, and receiving the seven fold Grace of God. Ibid. l. 2.
c. 24. fol. 170.
That an Epistle, signifying in Greek an Over-sending or supererogation, the
word agrees very well to the Apostolical Epistle, which are supperadded to the
Gospel Ibid. c, 29. fol. 171.
He allots to each Article of the Apostolical and Constantinopolitan Creeds, a
particular Apostle, and finds the mystery in all things that are twelve in
number. For example sake, in the twelve loaves of Shewbread; in the twelve
Tribes; twelve hours, twelve Months.

He gives this reason why Water is by the Bishop mixed with Wine in the Holy
chal^ce; because it is said in the Revelation, that many Waters signify many
People, and that Christ shed his Blood for the People; Ibid. c. 58. fol. 177.
. He says that Judas was not at the Sacrament Ibid. l. 4. c. 13. fol. 189.
because he was not to drink it new with Christ in his Kingdom, which
privilege he had promised to all the partakers. He teached that Mice eat only
the Shows of consecrated Bread Ibid. c. 16, fol. 190.
. He professes rather to venerate Sacraments then to pry into them Ibid. c.
19.
because it is written in Exodus the twelfth, concerning the Pafchal Lamb, Eat
not of it raw, nor sodden at all with Water, but roast with Fire. I have not
narrowly ransacked the plaits of the Popes Vestments, for this is obvious
enough; and so were a great many other sayings of equal weakness, but I am
weary of the folly of them. There have been other Popes, also, injudicious even
to Duncery. Eugeniout the third approved of the Prophesies or Enthusiastic
Dreams of Hildegardis, in the Synod of Tryers, as Inspirations, Pope Zachary
judged the true Doctrine of Antipodes, to be heretical in the case of the more
Learned and Knowing Virgilius Epist, Zach. p. ad Bonifac. inter op. M. Velseri.
in l. 5. Rer. Boic. p. 148. deperversa autem [Virgilii) Doctrina^, quam contra
Dominum and animam suam locutus est, quod scil. alius mundus and alii homines
sub terra sint, aliusque Sol and Luna, si convictus fuerit ita confiteri, hunc
accito Concilio ab Ecclesia^ pelle Sacerdotii honor privatum.
. Herein the Pope committed a greater error than the poor Priest who Baptized in
nomina Patria and Filia and Spiritus Sancta; Velser. op. Ibid. p. 147.
and whose lack of Latin Boniface the German Apostle would have punished by the
Rebaptization of his Proselytes, if the said Virgilius had not; by application
to that Pope, prevented it, It is true, Virgilius was accused as an Heretic
who had set up another Sun and another Moon, as well as another world of Men
whose feet were oposite to ours. But Velserus himself Vels. Ibid. p. 149.
has the ingenuity to confess this was meant only of the Sun and Moon as
shining to our Ant-podes, as well as to us: And that the accusation was framed
by ignorant Men who had not the acuteness to understand the Globular form of
the Earth, and the sc^eme of the prop^ser. Neither had Pope Zachary himself
sagacity enough to disce^n the nature of this ridiculous charge. He who can
mistake Truth for Heresy, may mistake Heresy for Truth.

Now that Popes have erred not only in lesser things, but even in Matters of
Faith, is plain from History I will instance, only, in Vigilius, and Honorius,
forbearing to speak of Liberius and diverse others who swerved from the truly
Ancient Catholic Faith.

Pope Vigilius framed a constitution in favor of the three chapters or
Nestorian-Writings of Ibas Bishop of Edessa, Theodorus of Mopsuestia, and
Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus. This Constitution was published by Cardinal Baronius
Baron. Anal. A. 553. N. 48. ed. colon. p. 486.
out of an Ancient Manuscript in the Vatican Library: And he calls it a Decree
Id. Ibid. N. 218. p. 419.
in defense of these chapters. In this Decree the Pope does not only justify
these Heretical Writings, but, with the Followers of Theodorus, he falsely
charge upon the council of Chalcedon the Epistle of Ibas, Id. An. 553. N.
292. p. 511.
and calls it Orthodox. This charge the Fathers of the fifth general Council
Conc. Constant. 2. colat. 6.
show to be unjust and false. That Council condemns those three Chapters as
Heretical. And together with them, it condemns Defin. conc. col. 8.
Pope Vigilius and others under the name of Sequaces or Followers of Nestorius
and Theodorus. Baronius himself acknowledges that the decree of that council
was set up against the decree of that Pope; Baron Annal. 553. N. 212. p. 417.
-- Actumque est (ut apparet) adversus Vigili. constitutum, licet prae
reverentia^ ipsum non nominaverint.
. These Chapters had not been condemned if they had not contained in them the
Nestorian-Heresie. The Epistle of Ibas does, in particular manner, extol
Theodorus. And the council affirms concerning his Creed, that the father of
lies composed it. And it denounces a curse against both the composer and the
Believers of it. Yet doubtless, these writings were, in themselves
inconsiderable enough. But the council opposed them with such rigor, because
the Faction had made them very popular, and advanced them into the Quality of a
kind of Bible of the Party.

For Pope Honorius, he fell into the, Heresy of the Monotholites. Dezall.
Hist. mon. scrut. 5. p. 192. 193. Altera phrasis Honoriana long difficilior,
Minime tamen dissimulanda, ea est, quod dicat aperte. Unde and unam voluntatem
fatemur Dom nostri Jesu Christi.
That is, of those who held that there is but one Will in both the Natures of
Christ. This Doctrine he published in his Epistles; This he declared in the
sixth General Council Syn: 6. Act. 13. See Richer. Hist: conc. General vol. 1.
p. 569, etc.
he is, in the seventh Council Syn. 7. Act. ult. p. 886. Con. in Labb. Richer.
H. Conc. Genesis vol. 1. p. 658. Ad calc. ejusd. act. 7 in omn. editionibus
council. legitur Epist. Synod. quam Tarasius, etc. -- Et diserte narrat cunctos
Patres -- Honorium damnasse.
condemned as a Monothilite. And he was expressly anathematized for confirming
the wicked Doctrine of Sergius.

The guilt of Heresy in Honorius, is owned in the Solemn Profession of Faith
made by the Popes at their entrance on the Papacy Lib. diurn. Pontif. con. sid.
2. p. 41. Autores vero novi hoeretici dogmatis, Sergium, Pyrrhum. Paulum, and
Petru^ Episcopos, una cum Honorio (qui pravis eorum assertionibut fomentum
impendit) pariterque and Theodorum Pharamitanum, and Cyrum Alexandrinum, cum
eorum imitatoribus, etc.
. This matter is so manifest that Melchior Canus Melch, can. Loci com. l. 6. c.
ult. p. 242, 243. etc.
professes, no Sophistry is artful enough to put the Color of a plausible
defense upon it. A late Romanist has undertaken to write the History of the
Monothilites Anton. Dez. Hist. Mon. Par: 1678.
and the Defense of Honorius seems to be the principal motive to that
undertaking. Yet so great is the power of Truth, and such, in this case is the
plainness of it, that in the Apologist himself, we find these concessions: That
the Pope Id. ib. p. 224. 325, 226 218.
was condemned by the Council, and that the Council was not to be blamed; that
Pope Leo the second owned both the Council and the Sentence, and that Honorius
was Sentenced as an Heretic. Id. p. 220.
He would abate this guilt by saying P. 207, 208.
that Honorius erred as a private Person, and not as Head of the Church,
because his Epistle was hortatory, and not compulsive. It is true, he erred not
as Head of the Church, for such he was not, neither as such was he owned. But
he erred as a public person and with Heretical obstinacy. For Pope Leo, as he
notes, said concerning him, that he had made it his business to betray and
subvert the Holy Faith. Id. p. 122. profana^ proditione immaculatam fidem
subvertere conatus est. -- Flammam confovit, p. 123.


Now this matter of Fact suffices for the refuting all the fallacious
reasonings of the patrons of Papal infallibility. For all must agree that they
d de Socer. Christ p. 40,
are not unerring Guides who actually err. The Sieur de Balzac Socr. Chr. p.
40.
mocks at the weakness of one of the Romish Fathers who offered four reasons to
prove that the Duke D' Espernon was not returned out of England: And offered
them to a Gentleman who had seen him since his return.

There seems no fitness in the constituting of such a necessity for it.

Had it been agreeable to Gods Wisdom, his Wisdom would not have been wanting
to it self. God having made Man a Reasonable Creature, would not make void the
use of deliberation, and the freedom of his judgment. There is no virtue in the
Assent where the Eye is forced open, and Light held directly to it. It is
enough that God, the rewarder of them who believe, has given Men sufficient
faculties, and sufficient means.

And, seeing Holiness is as necessary to the pleasing of GOD, and to the peace
of the World, as Union in Doctrine (to which there is too frequently given a
lifeless assent;) seeing there must be Christian Obedience as long as there is a
Church; seeing (as the Guide in Controversy R. H. Annot. on D. St. Answ. p. 81.
himself urges) the Catholic Church and all the parts of it are believed, in
the Creed, to be Holy as well as Orthodox. We ask not the Romanists an
impertinent Question when we desire them to tell us, why a means to
infallibility in the judgment, rather than irresistibleness in the pious
choice of the Will, is to be, by Heaven, provided in the Church? Both seem a
kind of Destination of equal necessity.

But, though the Reformed, especially those of the Prop. V.
Church of England see no necessity for an infallible Guide, nor believe there
is one on the face of the earth, yet they do not reject all Ecclesiastical
Guidance; but allow it great place in matters of Discipline and Order; and some
place also (though not that of an unerring Judge) in Matters of Faith.

At the beginning of the Reformation the Protestants, though they refused the
judgment of the Pope their Enemy, yet they declined not the determination of a
Council. And, in the Assembly at Ausburgh, the Romanists, and Protestants
agreed in a council as the Umpire of their public difference. At this the Pope
was so alarumed (says the Sieur de Mezary Hij. A. 1.
) that he wrote to the Kings of France and England, that he would do all they
would desire, provided they hindered the calling of a Council.

In the Reformation of the Church of England great regard was had to the
Primitive Fathers and Councils. And the aforesaid French Historian was as much
mistaken in the affairs of Our Church, when he said of our Religion, that it
was a medly of the Opinions of Calvin and Luther A.
, as he was afterward in the affairs of our State, when he said King James was
elected at the Guild Hall King of England 10. A. 1603.
.

The Romanists represent us very falsely, whilst they fix upon us a private
Spirit, as it stands in opposition to the Authority of the Catholic Church.

Mr. Alabaster See J. Racsters 7 motives of W. A p. 11, 12.
expresses one motive to his conversion to the Roman Church in these Words:
Weigh together the Spouse of Christ, with Luther, Calvin, Melancthon:
Ecumenical councils with private opinions. The Reverend learned Fathers with
Arius, Actius, Vigilantius, Men always in their time Burned for Heretics [of
which words, the former are false reasoning, the latter is false History.] The
Bishop of Meaux Confer avec M. claut de p. 110.
reasons after the same fallacious manner, Supposing a Protestant to be of this
persuasion that he can understand the Scriptures better than all the rest of
the Church together, of which persuasion he says very truly, that it exalts
Pride, and removes Docility.

The Guide in controversies R. H. Annot. on. D. St. Answ. p. 84.
puts the Question wrong in these terms. Whither a Protestant, in refusing the
submission of his judgment to the Authority or Infallibility of the Catholic
Church in her Councils, can have, in several Articles of necessary Faith,
wherein the sense of Scripture is controverted, as sure a Foundation of his
Faith, as he who submits his judgment to the foresaid Authority, or also
Infallibility? Here the Catholic Church is put in place of the Roman,
Authority and Infallibility are joined together; and it is suggested
dishonestly concerning the Reformed, that they lay aside the Authority of the
Catholic Church in her general Councils. Authority may be owned where there is
no infallibility; for it is not in Parents Natural or Civil: Yet both teach and
govern us.

If others reject Church Authority, let them who are guilty of such disorderly
irreverence, see to it. The Christians of the Church of England are of another
Spirit. Of that Church this is one of the Articles: The Church has power Art.
20.
to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority in controversies of Faith. There
is a Question (says Mr. Seldom Mr. Seldom in his colloquies; a Ms. in the Word
Church, Sect. 5
) about that Article concerning the power of the Church, whither these words
(of having power in controversies of Faith) were not stolen in. But, it is most
certain, they were in the Book of Articles that was confirmed; though, in some
Editions, they have been left out. They were so in Dr. Mocket's Doctr. and
Polit. Eccl. Angl. A. 1617. p. 129.
; but he is to be considered in that Edition as a private Man. Now this Article
does not make the Church an infallible Guide in the Articles of Faith, but a
Moderator in the controversies about Faith. The Church does not assume that
Authority to it self in this Article which, in the foregoing Artic 19.
, is denied to the Churches of Jerusalem, Alexandria, Antioch and Rome. When
perverse Men will raise such controversies, who is so fit, for Peace sake, to
interpose, as that Church where the Flame is kindled? There can be no Church
without a creed; and each particular Church ought to believe her creed to be
true, and, by consequence, must exercise her Authority in the defense of
presumed Truth. Otherwise she is not true to her own constitution. But still
she acts under the caution given by St. Augustine S. Aug. de verb. Dom. super
Mat. Ser. 16.
You bind a Man on Earth: Take heed they be just b^nds in which you retain him.
For Justice will break such as are unjust in sunder. And whilst the Church of
England challenges this Authority, she does not pretend to it from any
supernatural gift of infallibility, but so far only as she believes she has
sincerely followed an infallible Rule. For of this importance are the next
words of the Article before remembered. -- It is not Lawful for the Church to
ordain any thing that is contrary to Gods word written. -- And besides the same
it ought not to enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of Salvation
Art. 20.
.

After this manner the Church of England asserteth her own Authority; and she
runs not into any extreme about the Authority of Councils, or the Catholic
Church.

We make confession of the Ancient Faith expressed in the Apostolical, Nicene,
or Constantinopolitan and Athanasian Creeds, The canons of forty reject the
Heresy of Socinus as contrary to the first four General Councils can. 5.
; Our very Statute-Book has respect to them in the adjudging of Heresy. 1
Eliz. 1. Sect 36.
Yet our Church still teaches concerning them Art. 21.
, that things by them ordained have neither Strength nor Authority, unless it
may be declared that they be taken out of Holy Scripture.

When controversies arise, especially when the doubts concern not so much the
Article of Faith it self, as the Modes of it, we grant to such venerable
Assemblies a Potiority of Judgment: Or if we Assent not, yet for Peace sake we
are humbly silent: We do not altogether refuse their Umpirage. We think their
Definitions good Arguments against unquiet Men, who are chiefly moved by
Authority. We believe them very useful in the Controversies betwixt us and the
Church of Rome; and as often as they appeal to Primitive Fathers and Councils;
to Fathers and Councils we are willing to go with them, and to be tried by
those who were nigher to the Apostles, in the Quality of Witnesses rather then
Judges. We believe that in matters of Truth of which we are already well
persuaded, there may be added by the Suffrages of Councils and Fathers, a
degree of corroboration to our Assent. In some we say, with St. Augustine Ep.
118. council. in Eccl. Dei saluberimam esse Authoritatem.
that there is of councils in the church of God a most wholesome (though not an
infallible) Authority. And if S. Gregory Nazianzen never saw (as he says) a
happy effect of any Synod, Greg. Naz. Ep. 42, ad Procopium.
this came not to pass from the Nature of the means as not conducive to that
end, but from the looseness of Government, and the depraved manners of the Age
in which he lived: For such were the times of Valens the Emperor.

It is true, there are some among us, though not of us, who with disdainful
insolence, contemn all Authority; even that of the Sacred Scripture it self.
These pretend to an infallible Light of immediate and personal Revelation. It
has happened according to the Proverb, every Man of them has a Pope within
him. Henry Nicholas puffed up many vain ignorant People with this proud
Imagination. Hetherington a Mechanic, about the end of the Reign o^ King
James, advanced this notion of Personal Infallibility His followers believed
they could not err in giving deliberate Sentence in Religion. See D. Dennisons
white wolf
And this was the principle of Wynstanley and the first Quakers, though the
Leaders since they were embodied, have in part forsaken it.

But these Enthusiasts have entitled the Holy Spirit of God to their own
Dreams. They have pretended to Revelations which are contrary to one another.
They can be Guides to themselves only, because they cannot by any supernatural
sign prove to others that they are inspired.

And such Enthusiasm is not otherwise favored in the Church of England then by
Christian pity in consideration of the infirmity of Humane Nature; but in the
Church of Rome, it has been favored to that Degree, that it has founded many
orders and Religious Houses, and given Reputation to some Doctrines, and
canonized not a few Saints amongst them. The Inspiration of S. Hildegardis, S.
Catharine of Siena, S. Teresa and and many others seems to have been vapor
making impression on a devout fancy: Yet the Church of Rome in a Council under
Leo the Tenth, has too much encouraged such a distemper as prophecy conc.
Lat. sess. 11. A. 1516. inter Labb conc. Max. p, 291. Caeterum si quibusdam
eorum Dominus futur a quaeda^ in Dei Ecclesia inspiratione quapium revelaverit
ut per Amos prophetam ipse permittit, and Paulus Ap. Praedicatoru^ princeps
Spiritu^ inquit, nolite extinguere prophetas nolite spernere, hos aliorum
fabulosorum and mendacium gregi co^^umerari vel aliter impediri minime volumus.
.

For private Reason, it is the handmaid of Faith; we use it, and not separately
from the Authority of the Church, but as a help in distinguishing true from
false Authority. And in so plain a case as Heresy, if our Church thinks, a
private Man may without an infallible Guide on Earth, judge aright of it, it
does but believe as Pope Adrian believed, as he professed in a Synod of Rome,
of which profession report is made in the 2d. Synod of Nice Syn. Nic. 2. art 7
sec. verse. Anastasii Licet enim Honorio post mortem anathema sit dictum ab
Orientalibus, sciendum tamen est quia fuerat super haeresi accusatus propter
quam solam licitum est minoribus majorum suorum moribus resistendi, vel pravos
sensus libere respuendi, etc.
. For, speaking of the Sentence against Pope Honorius, he excuses it in point
of good behavior, because it was given in the case of Heresy. For in that
case, and that case alone, he allowed Inferiors (so he was pleased to call the
Oriental Bishops) to reject the corrupt sense of those who are superior to
them.

I will hasten to the next Proposition, after I have added one thing more which
relates to the guidance of Ecclesiastical Authority: And it is this. Those of
the unlearned. Laity who are Members of the Church of England, have much more
of the just guidance of Ecclesiastical Authority than the like order of Men in
the Church of Rome. For the Authentic Books of that Church being all written
in the Latin Tongue the illiterate People resolve their Faith into the ability
and honesty of their Confessor or Parish Priest. They take it upon his word,
that this is the Doctrine this the Discipline, this the Worship, of their
Church. Whereas each Minister in our Church can direct the People to the Holy
Bible, to the Books of Homilies, Articles, Canons, Common Prayer, Ordination,
as set forth in their native Tongue, by public Authority. Of this they may be
assured by their own Eyes, as many as can but competently read. They do not
only take this from the mouth of a Priest, but from the Church it self. Where
the Laws of the Church and the Statutes of the Civil Government are written in
an unknown Tongue, there the Unlearned depend more upon private than public
Authority; for they receive the Law from particular Priests or Judges.

Though Ecclesiastical Authority be a help to our Prop. VI.
Faith, yet the Holy Scripture is the only infallible Rule of it; and by this
Rule and the Ministeral Aids of the Christian Church, we have sufficient means
without Submission to papal Infallability, to attain to certainty in that Faith
which is generally necessary to Salvation.

I do not mean that, by believing the whole Canon of the Scripture in the
gross, we thereby believe all the necessary Articles of the Faith, because they
are therein contained. That looks too like a fallacy; and it gives countenance
to an useless Faith. For he that believes on this manner, has as it were
swallowed a Creed in the lump only, whereas it is necessary for a Christian to
know each particular Article and the general Nature and Tendency of it.
Otherwise his Faith will not have a distinct influence upon his Christian
behavior to which if it were not useful, it were not necessary. To believe in
general as the Scripture believes, is with the Blind and Flexible Faith of a
Romanist, to believe at adventure. He believes as his Church believes, but he
knows not what is the belief of his Church; and therefore is not instructed by
that Faith to behave himself as a Member of it.

The Scripture is that rule of Faith which gives us all the particular
Articles which are necessary to eternal Life.

By this rule the Primitive Fathers governed themselves, and this they
commended to the Churches. And Clemens Alexandrinus Cl. Alex. Strom. 2. Kanon
Ekklesiastikos he Synodia, etc. and Strom. 7 -- Alethon kai pseudon kriterion.
does in terms; call the Consent of the Old and New Testament the
Ecclesiastical Canon, and the Touchstone of true and false. I will not
multiply Testimonies; enough of them are already collected V. Davenant. de
Judice and norma^ fidei c. 12. p. 53. etc. D. Till. Rule of Faith. part. 4.
sect. 2. p. 320. etc.
.

I will rather pursue the Argument before me, in these three Assertions

First, a Protestant without the submission of his Judgment to the Roman
Church, may be certainly directed to the Canonical Books of Holy Scripture.

Secondly, He may without such submission, sufficiently understand the Rule of
Faith, and find out the Sense of such places in those Canonical Books, as is
necessary to the belief of a true Christian.

Thirdly, This rule of Faith is the principal means of Union in Faith in the
Christian Church.

First, a Protestant without the submission of his Assert. I.
Judgment to the Roman Church may be certainly directed to the Holy Scriptures.

It is commonly said by Men of the Roman persuasion, but injudiciously enough,
that we may as well receive our Creed from them, as we do our Bible. The
Scribes and Pharisees might have said the like to the People of the Jews. But
with the good Text, they conveyed down to them a very false gloss, and
misinterpreted the Prophesies, as meant of a pompous temporal Messiah. But, for
the Reformed, they have received neither Creed nor Bible from the Church of
Rome. The first enumeration of those Books they find in the Apostolical Canons
and in those of the Council of Laodecea; no Westren writings. They have
received the Scriptures from the Universal Church of all Ages and Places, the
Copies of them having been as widely dispersed as the Christians themselves.
And they receive them not from the infallibility of any particular Church, but
upon the validity of this sure principle, that all the Christian World, so
widely dispersed, could not possibly conspire in the imposing of false Books
upon them.

For particular Churches, we may, of all others suspect the Roman, in reference
to the Scriptures. For what sincerity of dealing may we hope for from such a
Cabal of Men as has forged decrees of Councils and Popes, obtruded upon the
World Apocryphal Books, as Books Canonical, purged out of the writings of the
Fathers such places as were contrary to their Innovations, depressed the
Originals under an imperfect Latin Copy, and left on purpose in that Copy, some
places uncorrected for the serving of turns For example sake, they have not
either in the Bible of Sintus, or in that of Clement (both which, though in War
against each other are made their Canon) changed the word (She) in the third of
Genesis, Genesis 3. 15.
for (That, or, He.) But, contrary to the Hebrew Text, to the Translation of
the Seventy, to the Readings of the Fathers, They persist in rendering of it
after this manner; She shall break thy Head. They believe this Reading tends
most to the Honor of the blessed Virgin, whom they are too much inclined to
exalt, in the Quality of a Mother, above her Son. The English Translation of
Doway has followed this plain and partial corruption.

Secondly, A Protestant may without Submission Assert. II.
of his judgment to the Roman Church, find out, in the Books of Holy
Scripture, the necessary Articles of Christian Faith.

Two things are here supposed; and both of them are true.

First, That the Scriptures contain in them all the necessary Articles of our
Faith.

Secondly, That the sense of the Words in which these Articles are expressed in
Scripture may be found out by a Protestant, without the Submission of his
Judgment to the Papacy.

First, The Scriptures contain in them all the necessary Articles of the Faith.
This is true, if the Scriptures themselves be so: For this they Witness See S.
Joh. 20. 30. 31. c. 21. 25.
. St. Paul 2 Timothy 3. 15. 16, 17.
says of the Old Testament, as expounded of Christ, that it was able to make a
Man wise unto Salvation. Much more may this be affirmed of the entire Canon.
The Apostles preached the necessaries to Salvation, and what they had preached
they wrote down Iren. l. 3. c. 1.
concerning the manner of it, Eusebius may be consulted Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 2.
c. 14.
. For the Primitive Fathers, they allowed the Scriptures to be a sufficient
Rule. Irenaeus said of them they were perfect Iren. l. 2. c. 47. S. Aug. de
doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 9.
; and of the words of St. Austine this is the sense; Among those things which
are plainly set down in Scripture, all those things are to be found which
comprehend Faith and Good Manners. Nay, the Romanists themselves attempt to
prove their very additional Articles out of the Bible. That there are in it the
Articles of the Apostolical Creed, is evident enough to a common Reader. But
how the Romish Articles should be found in that Bible which was written some
hundreds of years before they were invented, is a riddle beyond the skill of
Apollo.

Secondly, the sense of the Scriptures, in matters necessary to Salvation, may
be found out by Men of the Reformed Religion, without Submission to Roman
Infallibility. The Learned know the Originals, and the true ways of
Interpretation. And amongst us, those of the Episcopal Clergy have obliged the
World with such an Edition of the Bible in many Languages as was not before
extant in the Roman Church. And a Romanist who writes with great mastery in
such matters, prefers it before the great Bible of Paris. V. P. S. p. Hist.
Critique. p. 583 -- Mais elle est plus ample and plus commode, etc.
For those of the Laity who are Unlearned, they have before them a Translation
which erres not in the Faith. And the phrases are not so obscure, but that, by
study and Ministerial helps, they may understand them.

They have, before them, a Translation which erres not in the Faith. Of this
the Italians and the French may be convinced by comparing the Translations of
James de Voragine, and the Divines of Lovain with those of Signior Diodati, and
Olivetan or Calvin, And the English may receive satisfaction in this matter by
comparing their Translations with that of Doway. In all of them they will find
the same Fundamental Doctrines of Faith. And were there any such material
alteration made in our Bible, it would appear by the notorious inconsistence of
one part of the Canon with another: It would have been, long ago, detected, and
exposed to public shame, both by the Romanists and the other Dissenters from
our Communion. But the former are not able to produce one instance; and the
latter agree with us in the use and excellence of the Translation; though in
other things, they extremely differ from us; And where they do but dream we
er^e, they forbear not to proclaim it. In so much that a difference in the
Translations of the Psalter which concerns not Faith or Manners See Hook. Eccl.
Pol. Book fifth. Sect. 19.
and a supposed defect in the Table for keeping Easter have been made by them
public Objections Mr. Hs. peaceable design renewed, p. 14.
, and stumbling blocks in the way to their Conformity. It is true, there is a
Romanist who has raved against the Bible of the Reformed, in these extravagant
words; A. S. Reconciler of Religions, Printed 1663. c. 11. p. 38, 39.
The Sectaries have as many different Bibles, in Canon, Version, and sense, as
are days in the year. -- The Sectarian Bible is no more the Word of GOD then
the Alcoran, Almanac, or Aesops Fables. Of great corruption he speaks in
general, but his Madness has admitted of so much caution, that he forbears the
mention of any one particular place.

The Learned Romanists understand much better, and the Ingenuous will confess
it. And they are not ignorant that we Translate from the Original Tongues,
after having compared the Readings of the most Ancient Copies, and of the
Fathers: Whilst they Translate the Bible from the Vulgar Latin, which, indeed,
in the New Testament is a tolerable, but in the Old, a very imperfect Version.
If our English Bible were turned into any one of the Modern Tongues by a
Judicious Romanists who could keep Counsel, it would pass amongst many of that
Church for a good Catholic Translation. And this is, the rather, my
persuasion, because I have read, in Father Simon History critique. chapter 25. p.
392. 393.
, that not unpleasant story concerning the Translation of Mr. Rene Benoist a
Doctor of the Faculty of Paris. This Doctor had observed that a new Latin
Translation of the Organon of Aristotle, performed by a person who understood
not the Greek Tongue, had been very well received: Upon this occasion he was
moved to turn the Bible into the French Tongue, though he was ignorant of those
of the Greek and Hebrew. For the accomplishing of this Design, he served
himself upon the French Translation of Geneva; changing only a few words, and
putting others of the same signification in their room. But, it seems, he was
not exact enough in this change of words. For he having overlooked some words
which were used by the Genevians and not the Romanists, a discovery was made by
the Divines of Paris, and this Edition of the Bible was condemned by them,
though published under the name of one of their Brethren.

I do not say that such places of Scripture as contain Matters of Faith, are
plain to every Man. But those who have a competence of capacity, who are not
prejudiced against the Truth, who pray to God for his assistance, who attend to
what they read, who use the Ministerial helps which are offered to them, shall
find enough in Holy Writ to Guide them to everlasting life. In finding out the
sense of the Scriptures, the Church gives them help, but it does not, by its
Authority, obtrude the sense upon them. The Guides of it are as Expositors and
Schoolmasters to them: And by comparing phrase with phrase, and place with
place, and by other such ways, they teach them how to judge of the meaning
themselves. They give them light into the nature of the Doctrine, they do not
require them to take it upon trust. They endeavor to open their understandings
that they may, themselves, understand the Scriptures. And if they cannot
themselves understand the Doctrine, it will be of little use to them in their
lives. For they then believe in general that it is a necessary Truth; but what
Truth it is, or for what ends it is necessary, they apprehend not. A Foolish
Master in the Mathematics may require his Scholars to take it upon his word
that a Problem is demonstrated: But a w^se and useful teacher will give them
light into the manner of the demonstration in such sort that they themselves
shall at last be able to judge that it is truly performed: And till they can do
this, they are not instructed. St. Hierom relates it in praise of Marcella a
Roman Lady S. Hieron. in praef. ad comment. in Epist. ad Galat. -- Vt sentirem
me non tam Discipulam habere quam Judicem. v. Psalm. ^19 99.
that she would not receive any thing from him after the Pythagorean manner, or
upon bare Authority. She would, with such care examine all things, that She
seemed to him, not so much his Scholar as his Judge.

It is certain that there are great depths and obscure Mysteries in the Holy
Bible. But the Doctrines of Christian Faith are, to the sincere and industrious
and such as wait on God in the way of the Reformed Church, sufficiently plain.
But to the Idle, the prejudiced, the captious, Light it self is Darkness.

The Romanists affright with this pretense of obscurity and profoundness; as if
we must not adventure into any part of the Waters, because in some places, we
may go beyond our depth. If there are hard and difficult places which the
Unstable wrest; who required their meanness to make a Judgment of that for
which they might perceive themselves to be insufficient? But whilst St. Peter
speaks of some few places in St. Paul's writtings which are obscure, he does,
at the same time, suppose many others to be plain enough for the capacities of
the Unlearned. And if they be evil Men, though very Learned, they will wrest
the plainest places; and (as some did in St. Hieroms S. Hieron, in Ep. ad
Paulin. ad sensum suum incongrua aptant testimonia -- Et ad voluntatem sua^ S
Scripturam repugnantem trahunt.
days) they will draw violently to their private sense a Text of Scripture
which is incongruously, and with reluctance applied to it.

It is true all Sects of Christians cite the Scriptures, but that does not
prove the obscurity of those Sacred writings: It rather shows the Partiality,
Boldness, and Sophistry of those who allege them. All Laws are obscure if this
Argument has force in it. For every Man, in his own case, has the Law on his
side. Men take up their opinions and Heresies from other reasons; and then,
because the name of Scripture is venerable, they rake into the several Books of
it, and they bend and torture places, and force them on their side by unnatural
construction. So do the Socinians, producing all niceties of Grammar and
Criticism in a matter of Faith. Yet the Guide in Controversies R. H. Guide etc.
Disc. 4. p. 375, 376, 377, 378. etc.
uses it as an Argument against the plainness of this Rule of Faith, that the
Socinians cite the Holy Scriptures in favor of their Heresy. But is not this
Argument two-edged? And will it not cut as well on the other side, and do
Execution against the words, of Fathers and Councils, and the Apostolical Creed
it self? For the Socinians (those especially who are turned Arians) since
Petavius has furnished them with Quotations, will cite the writings of the
Ancients: And Slichtingius, a mere Socinian, V. Confess. fid. Christ. ed. nom.
Eccl. Polon. etc.
has expounded every Article of the Creed in a sense agreeable to the Heresy
of his Master.

But, if the Scriptures were so obscure in necessary matters, what remedy would
be administered by the Roman Church? They cannot offer to us any Ancient;
Infallible exposition. What the Antien^s have said, the Reformed generally
understand much better then Popes, amongst whom there have been some who could
scarce read the Holy Gospel in Latin. For the Fathers of the earliest Ages,
they were more busied in writing against Heresies, then in explaining of
Scriptures. Nor, to this day has the Roman Church, given any Authentic
Collection of Expositions, either of the Ancients or of her own. And if we must
go to any Church for a comment on the Scriptures, let the Roman be one of our
last Refuges. For it is manifest that the Key the Papalins use, is the Wordly
Polity of that Church. And as they like, so they interpret. Had not they
governed themselves by this art; we should not have found in the writings of
their Popes, and in the very Ca^^^ Law it self, those words which were spoken
to Jeremiah expounded of the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome V. Innoc. 3. in
decret. Greg. l. 1. tit. 33. c. 6. Greg. Ep: 12 Extrav de Major, and Obed. 1.
P. Pi. 5. in Bulla Cont. R. Eliz. in Camd. Annal. A. 1570.
I have set thee over Kings, to root out, to pluck up, and to destroy. Jerem.
1. 10.
The Donatists found their Church in these words of the Canticles, Tell me
(thou whom my Soul loves) where thou feedest; where thou make thy Flock to
rest at noon. For they expounded this (as it (...) them best) of the Flock of
their (...) the Southern Country of Africa. Such Ex^^unders of Scripture are
those Popish Writers who interpret (Feed my sheep) of the Universal Monarchy of
the Bishop of Rome, and conclude that a Past^r must drive away Wolves, or
depose Princes hu^^ul to the Church. But the straining of such Metaphorical
expressions (as an excellent Person D. Falkner in Christ. Loy. p. 315.
says) proves only that they want better proofs. And, by a like way of
interpretation, from the same Text it might be concluded that all Christians
are Fools because Sheep are silly Creatures.

No expositions are more besides the sense of the Text, or more ridiculous,
then some of those which may be found in the Roman Church. And those who
composed them appear to have looked asquint on the Scriptures. For whilst they
looked on them, they seemed to have looked another way. I will instance only in
a few of those many absurd expositions, with which the Roman Breviary abounds.

The words of the Angel to the Holy Virgin (a sword shall go through thine own
soul also) are Domin. infr^. Octav. Nati v. in 2. nocturno Lect. 8. p. 175.
interpreted of that word of God which is quick and powerful, and sharper then
any two-edged sword. And this sense is designed as an evasion of their
reasoning, who from that Text, conclude concerning the blessed Virgin, that she
died, and was not miraculously assumed. The Ascension of Elias is thus
expounded. Dom. infra Oct. Asc. in 3. Noct. p. 443.
He was taken up into the Aerial, not the Aetherial, Heavens; from whence he
was dropped in an obscure place on Earth, there to remain to the end of the
World, and then to expire with it. They say Infra Oct. Asc 3. Noct. Lect. 8. p.
447.
of Job, That when he spoke of a Bird, and of her path in the Air, he, by a
figure, called Christ a Bird, and, by the motion of it in the Air, figured also
our Lords Ascension.

We may perceive, by these few Instances, what an entrance into the sense of
Scripture is like to be given, whilst a Pope has the Key of Knowledge in his
keeping.

Thirdly, If Men would use the Church as their Assert. III.
Ministerial Guide, and admit of the scripture as the only Rule by which all
Matters of Faith are to be measured, they would agree in the proper means to
the blessed end of Unity in the Faith. This was the persuasion of St. Austine
who thus applies himself to Maximinus S. Aug cont Max. l. 3.
; Neither ought I at this time to allege the Council of Nice, nor you that of
Ariminum: For neither am I bound to the authority of the one, nor you to that
of the other* Let us both dispute with the Authorities of scripture which* are
Witnes^es common to both of us.

Whilst the Romanists ascribe the differences which arise amongst the Reformed
to their want of an infallible Guide, and to their different interpretations of
the scriptures, they unskilfully derive effects from causes which are not the
natural Parents of them. There is (says St. Austine) one Mother of all
strifes, and she is Pride. Neither does the scripture divide us, nor does the
infallibility of their judge unite them. Their Union (such as it is) arises
from the mighty force of their external Polity; and they speak not differently
because they dare not; and the strength of that Polity arose at first from
Rome, not as the Chair of St. Peter, but as the Seat of the Empire. Our
divisions like theirs, arise (as all Wars do, be they Ecclesiastical or Civil)
from the unruly Lusts and Passions of Men. And from these likewise arise
generally the misinterpretations of plain Laws, and Rules; the sense of which
must be made to chime according to the Interest of prejudiced Men, or else they
will not give attention to them. If the Lusts and Passions of Men were
mortified; all Christians agreeing in the certainty of the Scriptures, though
not of any Living Guide; and the words of one being as intelligible as those of
the other: All might agree in one Creed, and put an end to those unnecessary
Controversies which entangle Truth, and extinguish Charity.

FINIS.
THE PROTESTANT RESOLUTION OF FAITH, Being an Answer to THREE QUESTIONS.

I. How far we must depend on the Authority of the Church for the true sense of
the Scripture.

II. Whither a visible Succession from CHRIST to this day makes a Church, which
has this Succession, an infallible Interpreter of Scripture; and whither no
Church, which has not this Succession, can teach the true sense of Scripture?

III. Whither the Church of ENGLAND can make out such a visible Succession?

London Printed, And Edinburgh Reprinted by J. Reid, for T: Brown, G: Schaw,
A: Ogston, and G: Mosman, Stationers in Edinburgh, to be sold at their Shops,
1686.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THese Papers, which are here presented to thee, were write for the use of a
private Person, and by the Advice of some Friends, are now made Public. We
find how busy the Romish Emissaries are to corrupt our People, and think our
selves equally concerned to Antiaote them against Pop^^y and Phanaticism: Two
extremes equally dangerous to the Government of Church and State in these
Kingdoms, both in their Principles and Practices; and both of them very great
Corruptions of the Christian Religion, and very dangerous to men's Souls. Some
of our Clergy have already been so charitable to our Dissenters, as to warn
them of their danger, and by the Strength and Evidence of Scripture and Reason,
to Convince them of their mistakes; and I pray God forgive those men, and turn
their Hearts, who will not contribute so much to their own Conviction and
Satisfaction, as diligently and impartially to read and consider what is so
charitably offered to them. Ignorance and mistake may excuse men, wh^ have no
opportunities of knowing better, but such wilful and resolved Ignorance, which
bars up men's mi^ds against all means of better Information, will as soon damn
them, as sins against knowledge.

And now it might justly be thought want of charity to those of the Roman
communion, should we take no care at all of them; nay, want of charity to those
of our own communion, and to Dissenters themselves, who are daily assaulted by
the busy Factors for Rome. For the Disputes against the church of Rome, as
well as against Dissenters, are for the most part too Learned, and too
Voluminous for the instruction of ordinary People, and therefore some short and
plain Discourses about the principal Matters in dispute between us, is the most
effectual way we can take to confirm men in their Religion, and preserve them
from the crafty Insinuations of such as lie in wait to deceive.

Some few Attempts, which have been already made of that kind, give me some
hope, that several other Tracts will follow, that the ruin of the church of
England (if God shall please ever to permit such a thing) whither by Popery, or
Phanaticism, may not be charged upon our neglect to instruct People better.

Some Persons, it seems, whose Talent lies more in censuring what others do,
then in doing any good themselves, are pleased to put some sinister
constructions on this Design; as it is imposible to design any thing so well,
but men of ill minds, who know not what it means to do good for goods sake,
shall be able to find some bad name for it. Some guess that we now write
against Popery only to play an after-Game, and to regain the Favor and good
Opinion of Dissenters which we have lost by writing against them: But I know
not that any man has lost their Favor by it, nor that any man values their
Favor for any other reason, then to have the greater advantage of doing them
good. If so good a work, as confuting the Errors of the church of Rome, will
give the Dissenters such a good Opinion of us, as to make them more impartially
consider what has been writ to persuade them to communion with the church of
England, I know ^^ reason any man has to be ashamed to own it, though it were
part of his design; but whither it is or not, is more then I know; I dare
undertake for those Persons I am acquainted with, that they neither value the
favor, nor fear the displeasure either of Phanaticks or Papists, but yet
heartily desire to do good to them both.

But there is a more mischievous suggestion then this, that the design of such
Papers is only to raise a new cry, and noise about Popery, and to alarm the
People, and disturb the Government with new Fears and Jealousies: Truly, if I
thought this would be the effect of it, I would burn my Papers presently; for I
am sure the church of England will get nothing by a Tumultuary and clamorous
Zeal against the Church of Rome, and I had much rather suffer under Popery,
then contribute any thing toward raising a Popular Fury to keep it out. We
profess our selves as irreconcilable Enemies to Popery, as we are to
Phanaticism, and desire that all the World may know i^; but we will never
Rebel, nor countenance any Rebellion against our lawful Sovereign, to keep out
either, we leave such Principles and Practices to Papists and Phanaticks. But
when we find our People Assaulted by the Agents of Rome, and do not think our
selves secure from Popish Designs, we think it our Duty to give them the best
Instructions we can to preserve them from such Errors, as we believe will
destroy their Souls; and cannot but wonder, that any men, who are as much
concerned to take care of Souls as we are; should think this a needless or a
scandalous undertaking. I wish such men would speak out, and tell us plainly,
what they think of Popery themselves. If they think this Design not well
managed, by those who undertake it, it would more become them to commend the
Design, and do it better themselves. I know no man, but would very gladly be
excused, as having other work enough to employ his time, but yet I had rather
spend my vacant minutes this way, then in censuring the good that other men do,
while I do none my self.

The Words of the Paper, which was sent to me are these.
IT is my Opinion that the infinite Goodness of our Legislator, has left to us
a means of knowing the true sense and meaning of the Holy Scriptures, which is
the Church: Now J judge this Church must be known to be the true Church, by its
continual visible Succession from Christ till our Days. But I doubt whither or
no the Protestant Church can make out this continual visible Succession, and
desire to be informed.

ANSWER.

THAT Christ has lest a means of knowing the true sense and meaning of the Holy
Scriptures, I readily grant; or else it had been to no purpose to have left us
the Scriptures. But the latter Clause is very ambiguous, for the meaning may
either be, that we may understand by the Scriptures, which is the Church; or
that the Church is the means whereby we must understand the true sense and
meaning of the Scripture.

The first is a true Protestant Principle, and therefore I presume not intended
by this Objector. For how we should know that there is any Church without the
Information we receive by the Scripture, I cannot Divine; and yet we may as
easily know that there is a Church, as we can know which is the true Church
without the Scripture. For there is no other means of knowing, either that
there is a Church, or what this Church is, or what are the Properties of a True
and Sound and Orthodox Church, but by Revelation, and we have no other
Revelation of this but what is contained in the Holy Scriptures.

As for the Second, That the Church is the means of knowing the true sense and
meaning of the Scriptures, it is in some sense very true, in some sense very
false.

1. It is in some sense true, and acknowledged by all sober Protestants. As, 1.
If by the Church we understand the Universal Church of all Ages, as we receive
the Scriptures themselves handed down by them to our time, so what ever
Doctrines of Faith have been universally received by them, is one of the best
means to find out the true sense of Scripture. For the nearer they were to the
times of the Apostles, the more likely they were to understand the true sense
of their Writings, being instructed by the Apostles themselves in the meaning
of them. And thus we have a certain Rule to secure us from all dangerous Errors
in expounding Scripture. For the great and fundamental Doctrines of the
Christian Religion, are as plainly contained in the Writings of the first*
Fathers of the Church, and as unanimously asserted by them, as the Authority of
the Scriptures themselves: and therefore though we have not a Traditionary
Exposition of every particular Text of Scripture; yet we have of the great and
fundamental Doctrines of Faith, and therefore must never expound Scripture so
as to contradict the known and avowed sense of the Catholic Church. And this
course the Church of England takes; she receives the Definitions of the four
first General Councils, and requires her Bishops and Clorgy to Expound the
Scriptures according to the professed Doctrines of those first and purest Ages of
the Church.

2. We ought to pay great deference to, and not lightly and want only oppose
the Judgment and Authority of the Particular Church, wherein we live, when her
Expositions of Scripture do not evidently and notoriously contradict the sense
of the Catholic church, especially of the first and best Ages of it. For it
does not become private men to oppose their Sentiments and Opinions to the
Judgment of the church, unless in such plain cases, as every honest man may be
presumed a very competent Judge in the matter; and no church, nor all the
churches in the World have such Authority, that we must renounce our senses,
and deny the first principles of Reason, to follow them with a blind and
implicit Faith.

And thus the church, that is, the sense and Judgment of the catholic church,
is a means for the finding out the true sense of Scripture; and though we may
mistake the sense of some particular Texts, (which the Romanists themselves
will not deny, but that even infallible councils may do, who though they are
infallible in their conclusions, yet are not always so in the Arguments or
Mediums, whither drawn from Scripture or Reason, whereby they prove them) yet
it is Morally impossible we should be guilty of any dangerous mistake, while we
make the catholic Doctrine of the church our Rule; and in other matters follow
the Judgment, and submit to the Authority of the church, wherein we live; which
is as absolutely necessary, as Peace and Order and good Government in the church,

2. But then this is very false, if we mean that the church is the only means
of finding out the true sense of the Scriptures; on if by the church we
understand any particular church, as I suppose this Person does, the Roman
Catholic, that is, the particular universal church of Rome; or if we mean the
church of the present Age, or by Means understand, such a Decretory sentence,
as must determine our Faith, and command out Assent; that we must seek for no
other Reason of our Faith, but the Authority of the church in expounding
Scriptures. I shall discourse something briefly of each of these.

1. To say that the church is the only Means to find out the true sense of
Scripture, is very false and absurd. For, 1. This supposes the Holy Scriptures
to be a very unintelligible Book, which is a great reproach to the Holy Spirit,
by which it was Indicted* that he either could not, or would not speak
intelligibly to the World.

2. This is a direct contradiction to those Exhortations of Christ and his
Apostles to study the Scriptures, which were made to private Men, and therefore
necessarly supposes, that the Holy Scriptures are to be understood as other
Writtings are, by consideing the Propriety of the Words and ^^nguage wherein
they are written, the scope and design of the place, and such other means; as
honest and studious Inquirers use to find out the meaning of any other Book.

3. If the Scriptures are so unintelligible, that an honest man cannot find out
the meaning of them, without the infall^ble interpretation of the Church, I
would desire to know whither Christ and his Apostles Preached intelligibly to
their Hearers? If they did not, to what purpose did they Preach at all? By what
means were men Converted to the Faith? If they did, how come these Sermons to
be so unintelligible now they are written, which were so intelligible when they
were spoken? For the Gospels contain a plain History of what Christ did, and of
what he said; and the Apostles Wrote the same things to the Churches when they
were absent, which they Preached to them when they were present; and we
reasonably suppose, that they as much designed that the Churches should
understand what they wrote, as what they Preached, and therefore that they
generally used the same form of words in their writting and in their Preaching:
And this makes it a great Riddle, how one should be very plain and easy to be
understood, and the other signify nothing without an infallible Interpreter.

4. If the Scriptures be in themselves unintelligible, I would desire to know
how the Church comes to understand them? If by any humane means, together with
the ordinary Assistances of the Divine Spirit, then they are to be understood,
and then why may not every Christian in proportion to his skill in Language^,
and in the Rules of Reason and Discourse, understand them also?

If the Church cannot understand the Scriptures by any humane means, but only
by Inspiration, (for there is no Medium between these two) to what purpose were
the Scriptures written? For we might as well have learned the will of God from
the Church, without the Scriptures; as with them. GOD could have immediately
revealed his will to the Church without a written Rule, as well as reveal the
meaning of that written Rule, which it seems has no signification at all, till
the Church, by Inspiration, gives an Orthodox meaning to it.

5. And i^ we cannot understand the Scriptures, till the Church Expounds them
to us, how shall we know, which is the Church, and that this Church is such an
infallible Interpreter of Scriptures? The Church is to be known only by the
Scriptures, and the Scriptures are to be understood only by the Church; if we
will know the Church, we must first understand the Scriptures, and if we will
understand the Scriptures, we must first know the Church, and when both must be
known first, or we can know neither, it is impossible in this way; either to
understand the Scriptures, or find out the Church.

For, suppose the Church does expound Scripture by Inspiration; how shall we be
assured that it does so? Must we believe every Man, or every Church, which
pretends to Inspiration? This is a contradiction to the Apostles Rule, not to
believe every Spirit, but to try the Spirits. How then shall they be tried? I
know but two ways, either by Miracles, or by Scripture, Miracles are now
ceased, unless we will believe some fabulous Legends, which all wise men in the
Church of Rome are ashamed of; and if there were real Miracles wrought, they
are of no Authority against a standing Rule of Faith, which the Apostle calls a
more sure word of Prophecy. If then we must judge of these pretenses to
Revelation by the Scriptures, which is the only way now left, then there is a
way of understanding the Scriptures without this Revelation; for if we must
understand the Scriptures by Revelation, and Revelation by the Scriptures, we
are got into a new Circle and can understand neither.

Obj. But do we not see how many Schisms and Heresies have been occasioned, by
suffering every one to Expound Scripture for himself? How many Divisions and
Sub-divisions are there among Protestants, who agree in little else, besides
their opposition to Popery? And is it possible to cure this without an an
Infallible Interpreter of Scripture^? Is it not a contradiction to common
Experience, to say, that the sense of Scripture is plain and certain, when so
few men can agree what it is?

Ans. 1. Yes, we do see this, and lament it, and are beholden to the Church of
Rome, and her Emissaries in a great measure for it. But yet we know, thus it
has been in all Ages of the Christian Church, as well as now; and we take the
same way to confute these Heresies, and to preserve the purity of the Faith,
and the Unity of the Church, which the Primitive Fathers did, by appealing to
Scripture, and the Doctrine and Practice of the Catholic Church which is the
best way any Church can take, when there is no infallible Judge of
controversies: And if the Primitive Church had known any such infallible Judge,
they would certainly have appealed to him, at one time or other; and it had
been impossible, that any Errors or Heresies should for any long time together
have disturbed the Church: but we hear nothing of him for many hundred years
after Christ; but the ancient Fathers took the same way to confute the Heresies
of their days, which we do now, which is a good proable Argument, that they
knew no better. And the present Divisions of the Christian Church, are no
greater Argument against us, then the Ancient Heresies were against the
Primitive Church, or then the Protestant Heresies (as they are pleased to call
them) are against the church of Rome? For what advantage has the church of Rome
upon this account above any other profession of Christians. Those who are of
the same communion are of the same Mind. Thus it is among us, and it is no
better among them; for we are no more of their mind, then they are of ours; nay
notwithstanding all their pretenses to infallibility, most of the Disputes,
which divide the Protestant churches, are as fairly disputed among themselves,
witness the famous controversy between the Jansenists, and Molinists; which
their infallible Judge never thought fit to determine to this day: They live
indeed in the communion of the same church, notwithstanding these Disputes,
because it is a very dangerous thing to leave it; but they are more beholden to
the Inquisition, then to infallibility for this Unity.

2. How do these Divisions and Heresies, which disturb the Church, prove, that
no man can be certain of his Religion? If we can certainly know what the sense
of Scripture is, notwithstanding there are many different Opinions about it,
then the diversity of Opinions is no Argument against us; if we cannot be
certain of any thing, which others deny, dispute, or doubt of, then how can any
Papist be certain that his Church is infallible? For all the rest of the
Christian Church deny this, and scorn their Pretensions to it. I may indeed
safely acquiesce in the Determinations of an infallible Judge, whom I am
infallibly assured to be infallible, how many contrary Opinions soever there
are in the World; But when infallibility it self is the matter of the dispute,
and I have no infallible way to know whither there be any such thing, or where
this infallibility is seated, if diversity of Opinions be an Argument against
the certainty of any thing, which I am not, and cannot be infallibly assured
of, then it is a certain demonstration against infallibility it self.

Unless we will take the Church of Romes word for her own infallibility, we
cannot have the Decision of an infallible Judge in this matter, for she will
allow no other infallible Judge, but her self; and yet this is so absurd a way,
that it supposes, that we believe, and that we dis-believe the same thing at
the same time. For unless we beforehand believe the Church to be infallible,
her saying so is no infallible proof that she is infallible; and yet the very
demand of a proof supposes that we are not certain of it, that we doubt of it,
or dis-believe it. When we ask the Church whither she be infallible, it
supposes that we are not certain of it, otherwise we should need no proof; and
when we believe the Church to be infallible, because she says so, it supposes,
that we did beforehand believe that she is infallible, otherwise, her saying
so is no proof.

The greatest Champions for the Church of Rome, never pretended that they could
produce any infallible proof^, which is the true Church. Cardinal Bellarmine
attempts no more, then to allege some Motives of Credibility, to make the
thing probable, and to incline Men to believe it; and yet it is impossible we
can be more certain of the Infallibility of the Church, then we are, that it is
a true Church; and if a Papist have only some motives of Credibility, to
believe the Church of Rome, to be a true Church, he can have no greater
probabilities, that it is an infallible Church.

Now not to take notice, what a tottering Foundation some high probabilities,
though they amounted to a moral assurance, is for the belief of infallibility,
which is to put more in the Conclusion then there is in the Premises. The only
use I shall make of it at present is this, That we can at least be as certain
of the meaning of Scripture, as the Papists are, that their Church is
infallible, for they can be no more infallibly assured of this, then we are of
our interpretations of Scripture; and therefore, if the diversity of Opinions
about the sense of Scriptures, proves that we cannot be certain what the true
sense of it is, the same Argument proves, that they cannot be certain that
their Church is infallible, because this is not only doubted, but absolutely
denied by the greatest part of the Christian World, and was never thought of by
the best and purest Ages of it. So this Argument proves too much, and recoils
upon themselves, like a Gun which is overcharged; and if, for their own sakes,
they will grant that we may be certain of some things, which are as confidently
denied, and disputed by others; then the diversity of Opinions in the Church,
is no Argument, that we cannot be certain of our Religion, but only teaches us
greater caution, and diligence, and Honesty, in our inquiries after Truth.

3. These Divisions and Heresies that are in the Christian Church, are no
better Argument against the truth and certainty of our Religion, then the
diversities of Religions that are in the World, are against the truth of
Christianity. The whole World is far enough from being Christian; great part of
it are Jews, or Pagans, or Mahumetanes still; and this is as good an Argument,
to prove the uncertainty of all Religions, as the different Parties and
Professions of Christians are to prove, that we cannot be certain, what the
true Christian Church, nor what true Christianity is. The Gospel of our Savior
was not designed to offer any force or violence to men's Faith or understanding,
no more then to their wills. Were there such an irresistible and compulsory
Evidence in the Gospel, that wherever it was Preached, it should be impossible
for any man, though never so wicked and ill disposed, to continue an Infidel,
or to prove a Heretic, Faith would be no greater a Virtue, then forced
Obedience and Compliance is. The Gospel has Evidence enough to Convince honest
Minds, and is plain enough to be understood, by those who are honest and
teachable; and therefore has its Effects upon those who are Curable, which is
all that it was designed for. Those, who will not believe, may continue
Infidels, and those, who will not understand, may fall into Errors, and
believe a Lie; and yet there is Evidence enough to Convince, and Plainness
enough to Instruct well disposed minds, and certainty enough in each to be the
foundation of a Divine Faith.

The sum is this, Though the Instructions of the Church are a very good means
for the understanding of the sense of Scripture, yet they are not the only
means; the Holy Scripture is a very intelligible Book, in such matters as are
absolutely necessary to Salvation; and could we suppose, that a man, who never
heard of a Church, should have the use of the Bible, in a Language which he
understood, by a diligent reading of it, he might understand enough to be saved.

2. If by Church is mean'd any Particular Church; as suppose the Roman
Catholic Church, or the Church of the present Age, it is absolutely false to
say, that the Church, in this sense, is always a sure and safe means of
understanding the Scripture. What has been Universally believed by all
Christian Churches, in all Ages, or at least, by all Churches of the first and
purest Ages of Christianity. which were nearest the times of the Apostles, and
might be presumed best to understand the sense of the Apostles in the great
Articles of our Faith, is a very safe Rule for the interpretation of Scripture;
and the general Practice of those Primitive Apostolic Churches, in matters of
Government and Discipline, before they were corrupted by worldly Ambition, and
secular Interest, is a very safe Rule for our Practice also, and this is the
Rule whereby our Church is reformed, and to which we appeal.

There are but three things necessary to be understood by Christians, either
the Articles of Faith or the Rules of Life, or the external Order and
Discipline of the Church, and Administration of Religious Offices.

1. As for the Rules of Life, all those Duties which we owe to GOD and Men,
they are so plainly contained in the Holy Scriptures, that no honest man can
mistake them; I suppose the church of Rome her self, will not pretend, that
there is any need of an infallible Interpreter to teach men what is mean'd by
Loving GOD with all our Heart, and our Neighbor as our selves.

2. As for the Articles of Faith, those which are fundamental to the christian
Religion, and which every Christian ought to believe, are so plain in
Scripture, that every honest and unprejudiced man may understand them; but
however, as I observed before, we govern our selves in these things by the
received Doctrine of the catholic church of the first and purest Ages, and if
this be not a safe Rule, we can be certain of nothing. And what the catholic
Faith was, we learn from those short summaries of Faith, which were universally
owned by all catholic churches. For what we now call the Apostles creed, was
very anciently received in all churches, with some little variety indeed of
Words and Phrase, but without any difference of sense; and the catholic Faith
was not only preserved in such short Summaries and creeds, which were as liable
to be perverted by Heretics, as the Scriptures themselves, but was more
largely explained in the Writings of the ancient Fathers; and though this will
not enable us to understand every Phrase and Expression of Scripture, but we
must use other means to do that, as Skill in the Original Languages, a
knowledge of ancient customs, and ancient Disputes, to which the Apostles
frequently aflude, a consideration of the Scope and Design of the place, etc.
Yet the catholic Faith received and owned by the Primitive Church, is so far a
Rule, as, it directs us to Expound Scripture to a true catholic sense. As St.
Paul commands the Romans, that those who prophecy, should Prophecy according
to the proportion of Faith, Romans 12. 6. Kat' analogian pisteos, according to
the Analogy of Faith: That is, that in the interpreting the Scriptures of the
Old Testament they should expound them to a christian sense, according to those
Doctrines of the christian Faith, which he had taught them; and this was a safe
Rule for expounding the Old Testament, which contained the Types, and Figures,
and Prophesies of the Gospel-State. And thus in expounding the new Testament,
now it is committed to writting, we must Prohpesie according to the Analogy of
Faith, or as he commands Timothy in his Preaching, Hold fast the form of sound
words, which thou have heard from me; 2. Tim. 1. 13. It seems the Apostle had
given him a form of sound words, according to which he was to direct his
Preaching; whither this refers to a short summary of Faith, such as our Creed
is, I cannot say, though it is not improbable it may; but it is plain, we have
a form of sound words delivered to us by the Catholic Church, which contains
the true Catholic Faith, and therefore ought to be so far a Rule to us in
expounding Scripture, as never to contradict any thing which is contained in
it, for that is to contradict the Faith of the Catholic Church.

And when one great Article of this Faith, concerning the Eternal Godhead of
Christ the Son of God, was corrupted by Arius, a Presbyter of the Church of
Alexandria, it gave an occasion for a full Declaration of the sense of the
Catholic Church about it. And though the effects of that Controversy were
very fatal to the Church, yet it was very happy that it broke out in such an
Age, when it could be determined with greater certainty and greater Authority,
then it could have been in any succeeding Age of the Church; by men, who were
venerable for their Age, for their Wisdom, for their Piety, for their undaunted
Confessions under Heathen and Persecuring Emperors, who knew what the sense of
the Catholic Church was, before this Controversy broke out, and before
External Prosperity had, through ease and wantonness, corrupted the Faith; as
well as the Manners of Christians.

3. As for matters of External Order, Discipline. and Government, the
Universal Practice of the Catholic Church is the best and safest Comment on
these General Rules and Directions we have laid down in Scripture. There is no
doubt at all, but the Apostles did appoint Governors, and Rules of Order and
Discipline, in the Churches planted by them: what these were the Christians of
those days saw with their eyes ^ in the daily practice of the Church; and
therefore the Apostles, in those Epistles which they wrote to their several
Churches, did not give them so punctual, and particular an account of those
matters, which they so well knew before, but, as occasion: served, make only
some accidental mention of these things, and that in such general terms, as
were well enough understood by them, who knew the practice of the Church in
that Age, but it may be, cannot merely by the force of the words, which may be
capable of several Senses, be so certainly and demonstratively determined to
any one sense (by us, who did not see what was done in those days) as to avoid
all possible Cavils of contentious men.

This has occasioned those disputes concerning Infant Baptism, the several
Orders and Degrees of Church Governors, the Rites and ceremonies of Religious
Worship, and the like. Those who lived in those days, and saw what the
Apostles did in these matters, could not doubt of these things, thought it were
not in express words said, that infants should be baptized with their Parents,
or that Bishops are a Superior Order to Presbyters, and Presbyters to Deacons,
or that it is lawful for the Governors of the Church to institute and appoint
some significant Rites and ceremonies, for the more decent and orderly
Administration of Religious Offices. But because there is not a precise and
punctual account given of these matters, in the Writings of the Apostles, which
there was no need of then, when these things were obvious to their very Senses,
some perverse and unreasonable Disputers, who obstinately reject all other
Evidence, will judge of these things just as they please themselves, and alter
their Opinions and Fancies, as often as they please.

But now if there be any certain way to know, what the practice of the Apostles
was in these cases, this is the best comment we can possibly have on such
Texts, as are not sufficiently plain and express without it. Now me thinks any
reasonable man must acknowledge, that the best way to understand the Practice
of the Apostles, is from the Practice of the Catholic Church in succeeding
Ages, especially while the memory of the Apostles was fresh, and the Church
Governed by Apostolical Men; when we cannot reasonably suspect any Deviation
from the Primitive Practice; and this is the Rule which the Church of England
owns in such matters, and by which she rejects and confutes both the
Innovations and corruptions of the Church of Rome, and the wild pretenses of
Phanaticism.

So that we do in the most proper sense own the Belief and Practice of the
Primitive Church, to be the best means for Expounding Scripture. We do not
leave every man to Expound Scripture by a private Spirit, as our Adversaries of
the Church of Rome reproach us; we adhere to the ancient Catholic Church,
which the Church of Rome on one side, and the Phanaticks on the other, have
forsaken: And though we reject the new invention of an infallible Judge, yet we
are no Friends at all to Skepticism, but can give a more Rational account of
our Faith, then the Church of Rome can.

Had we no other way of understanding the sense of Scripture, but by Propriety
of the Language, and the Grammatical construction of the Words, and the scope
and design of the Texts, their connection and Dependence on what goes before,
and what follows, and such like means as we use for the understanding any other
Books of humane composition; I doubt not, but honest and diligent Inquirers
might discover the true meaning of Scripture, in all the great Articles of our
Faith; but yet this alone is a more uncertain way, and liable to the Abuses of
Heretics and Impostors. The Socinians are a famous Example, what Wit and
Criticism will do to pervert the plainst Text; and some other Sectaries are as
plain a demonstration, what w^rk Dullness and Stupidity, and Enthusiasm will
make with Scripture; but when we have the practice of the Catholic Church, and
an ancient and venerable summary of the Christian Faith, which has been the
common Faith of Christians in all Ages, to be our Rule in Expounding Scripture,
though we may after all mistake the sense of some particular Texts, yet we
cannot be guilty of any great and dangerous mistakes.

This use the Church of England makes of the Catholic Church in Expounding
Scripture, that she Religiously maintains the ancient Catholic Faith, and will
not suffer any man to Expound Scriptures in opposition to the ancient Faith and
Practice of the Catholic Church.

But though the Belief and Practice of the Catholic Church be the best means
of understanding the true sense of Scripture, yet we cannot affirm this of any
particular Church, or of the Church of any particular Age, excepting the
Apostolic Age, or those Ages which immediately succeeded the Apostles.
Notwithstanding this, the Church of Rome may be no good Expositor of Scripture,
for the Church of Rome, though she usurp the name of the Catholic Church as
presuming her self to be the Head and Fountain of catholic Unity, yet she is
but a part of the catholic Church, as the Church of England, and the Churches
of France aind Holland are; and has no more right to impose her Expositions of
Scripture upon other Churches, then they have to impose upon her. If there
happen any controversy between them, it is not the Authority of either Church
can decide it, but this must be done by an appeal to Scripture, and the sense
of the Catholic Church, in the first and purest Ages of it.

For when we say, that the belief and Practice of the Catholic Church is the
best means to find out the true sense of Scripture, we do not mean that the
Church is the Sovereign and absolute Judge of the sense of Scripture, but the
meaning is, that those Churches, which were founded by the Apostles, and
received the Faith immediately from them, and were afterward, sor some Ages,
governed by Apostolical men, or those who were taught by them, and conversed
with them, are the best Witnesses what the Doctrine of the Apostles was, and
therefore as far as we can be certain, what the Faith of these Primitive
Churches was, they are the best Guides for the Expounding Scripture.

So that the Authority of the Church in Expounding Scripture being only the
Authority of Witnesses, it can reach no farther then those Ages, which may
reasonably be presumed to be Authentic and credible Witnesses of the Doctrines
of the Apostles, and therefore if we extend it to the four first general
councils; it is as far as we can do it with any pretense of Reason; and thus
far the Church of England owns the Authority of the Church, and commands her
Ministers to Expound the Scriptures according to the Catholic Faith. owned and
professed in those days; but as for the later Ages of the church, which were
removed too far from the Apostles days, to be Witnesses of their Doctrine,
they have no more Authority in this matter, then we have at this day, nor has
one church any more Authority then another.

3. And therefore, if by the church being the means of knowing the sense and
meaning of the Holy Scriptures be understood the Judgment and Sentence, and
Decree of the church, that we must seek no farther for the reason of our Faith,
then the infallible Authority of the church, in Expounding Scripture* this also
is absolutely false and absurd.

This is more then Christ and his Apostles assumed to themselves, while they
were on Earth; they were indeed infallible Interpreters of Scripture, but yet
they never bore down their Hearers merely with their Authority, but Expounded
the Scriptures, and applied ancient Prophesies to their Events, and took the
vail off of Moses's Face, and showed them the Gospel state concealed under
those Types and Figures; they confirmed their Expositions of Scripture by the
force of Reason, and appealed to the Judgments and consciences of their
Hearers, whither these things were not so; Christ commands the Jews nor merely
to take his own word, and to rely on his Authority for the truth of what he
said, but to study the Scriptures themselves; and the Bereans are commended for
this generous temper of mind, that they were more noble then those of
Thessalonica, for they daily searched the Scriptures, to see whither the
Doctrine the Apostles preached were to be found there or not? Now I think no
Church can pretend to be more infallible then Christ and his Apostles, and
therefore, certainly ought not to assume more to themselves then they did; and
if the Church of Rome, or any other Church, will convince us of the truth of
their Expositions of Scripture, as Christ and his Apostles convinced their
Hearers, that is by enlightening our Understandings, and convincing our
Judgments by proper Arguments, we will gladly learn of them.

This course the Primitive Christians took, as is evident in all the Writings
of the ancient Fathers against Jews and Heretics; they argue from the
Scriptures themselves to prove what the sense of Scripture i^; they appeal
indeed sometimes to the sense of the Catholic Church, not as an infallible
Judge of Scripture, but as the best Witnesses of the Apostolical Doctrine: Thus
Tertulli^^ argues against Heretics, in his Book De Praescriplionibus; ^^t when
they reason about the sense of Scripture, they never direct us to any
infallible Judge, but use such Arguments, as they think proper to convince
Gainsayers.

Nay, this is the way, which was observed in all the Ancient Councils; the
Bishops of the church met together for common counsel and advice, and in
matters of Discipline and Government, which were subject to their Authority,
they considered what was' most for the public benefit of the church, and
determined them by their Authority, not as infallible Judges, but as Supreme
Governors of the church. In the disputes of Faith, they reason from Scripture,
and the sense of the catholic church, not from their own Authority; and what
upon a serious debate and inquiry they found to be most agreeable to the sense
of Scripture, and the Doctrine of the church of former Ages, that they
determined, and decreed to be received in all churches, as the catholic Faith.
That this is so, is evident from all the Histories of the most Ancient, and
celebrated councils, which any man may consult, who pleases.

Now I would ask some few Questions about this matter. 1. Whither-these*
councils took a sure and safe way to find out Truth? If they did not, what
reason have we to believe that they determined right? If they did, then we may
use the same way, which they did; for that which is a good way in one Age, is
so in another, and then there is no necessity of an Infallible Judge, to find
out the sense of Scripture, because we have other certain ways of doing this;
the same which all the ancient Councils observed.

2. I would know, whither it be not sufficient for every Christian to receive
the Decrees and Determinations of these councils, upon the same Reason and
Authority which moved the Fathers assembled in council to make these Decrees?
Whither, for instance, we must not believe the Eternal Godhead of Christ, and
that he is of the same substance with his Father^, for the same Reasons for
which the Nicene Fathers believed this, and required all christians to believe
it? If we must, then Scripture, and the sense of the catholic church, not the
Authority of a general council, or any Infallible Judge, is the Reason of our
Faith: For the Nicene Fathers, who were the first that met in a General
council, could not believe this, upon the Authority of any other General
council much less upon their own Authority; unless we will say, that they first
Decreed this, then believed it, because they themselves Decreed it. If
Scripture, and the sense of the Catholic Church, antecedently to the
determinations of a General council, or any other pretended Infallible Judge,
be not a sufficient foundation for our Faith, then the whole christian World,
before the council of Nice, which was the first general council, had no
sufficient Foundation for their Faith, for there was no particular Bishop, or
church in those days, which pretended to be the Infallible Interpreter of
Scriptures. We Protestants have the same way to understand the Scriptures, have
the same Reason and Foundation of our Faith, which the Nicene Fathers
themselves had, or which any christan could have, before there was any general
council, and if the church of Rome do not think this enough, we cannot help
that, we are abundantly satisfied with it.

The Authority of a general council in those days, was deservedly sacred and
venerable, not as an infallible Judge, which they never pretended to, but as
the most certain means they could possibly have to understand, what was, and in
all Ages had been the received Doctrine of the catholic church. They met
together not to make new Articles of Faith, which no council in the World ever
had any Authority to do, but to declare what was the truly ancient and.
Apostolic Faith; and to put it into such words, as might plainly express the
catholic sense, and meet with the distempers of that Age.

For this end Grave and Reverend Bishops assembled from all parts of the
christian World, not merely to give their private Opinions of things, but to
Declare what was the received Doctrine o^ those churches, over which they
presided; and I know no better Argument of an Apostolic Tradition, then the
consent of all churches, as remote from each other as East and West, which were
planted by several Apostles, and differed very much from each other, in some
External Rites and Usages, but yet all agreed in the same Faith. And this is
the true Authority of those ancient councils, that they were most likely to
understand the true sense of Scripture, and of the Catholic Church. This is
the Protestant Resolution of Faith, and the Nicene Fathers themselves had no
other way, nor pretended to any other.

Nay, the church of Rome her self, as much as she talks of Infallibility, makes
very little use of it. She has never given us an infallible comment on
Scripture, but suffers her Doctors to write as fallible comments, and in many
things as contrary to each other, as any Protestant Divines do: And I cannot
imagine what good Infallibility does, if an infallible Church has no better
means of understanding Scripture, then the comments of fallible men; that is,
no better means then every fallible Church has; for no man can understand the
Scripture ever the better for the Churches being infallible, unless this
infallible Church improve this glorious Talent of Infallibility in Expounding
Scripture; which she has not done to this day, and I believe never will*

Indeed it is apparent, that infallibility, as it is pretended to by the church
of Rome, can be of no use, either in the Refolution of Faith, or in confuting
Heretics, who deny this Infallibility, and then I cannot imagine what it is
good for, but to multiply Disputes, instead of ending them.

As for the Resolution of Faith; suppose I ask a Papist; why he believes such
Articles, as the Divinity of Christ, or the Resurrection of the dead, to be
contained in Scripture? If he answer, as he must do, Because he is taught so by
the church, which is infallible; my next Question is, How he knows the Church
to be infallible? If he says he learns this from Scripture; I ask him how he
comes to understand the Scripture, and how he knows that this is the sense of
it? If he know this by the infallible interpretation of the church, then he
runs round in a circle, and knows the Scripture by the church, and the church
by the Scripture, as I observed before; if he can find out the Churches
infallibility by the Scripture, without the help of an infallible Judge, then
it seems the Scripture is, to be understood without the infallible
interpretation of the Church; and if men can find out infallibility in
Scripture without the Church, I am confident they may find out any thing else
in Scripture as well, without the Churches infallibility: For there i^ no
Article of our creed so hard to be found there, as the Churches infallibility
is. But however that be, after all this boast of infallibility, a Papist has no
more infallible Foundation for his Faith, then a Protestant has, nor half so
much. We believe the Articles of the Christian Faith, because we find them
plainly taught in Scripture, and universally received as the sense of Scripture
by the Catholic church in the best and purest Ages of it: A Papist believes
the Church to be Infallible, because he thinks he finds it in Scripture, though
the Catholic church for many Ages never found it there, and the greatest part
of the Christian church to this day cannot find it there: Now if they will but
allow, that a Protestant (though a poor fallible Creature) may reason about the
sense of Scripture, as well as a Papist, and that the Evidence of reason is the
same to both, then we Protestants stand upon as firm ground as the Papists
here; and are at least as certain of all those Doctrines of Faith, which we
find in the Scripture, and are ready to prove by it, as they are of their
Churches infallibility; but then we have an additional Security, that we
Expound the Scriptures right, which they want, and that is the Doctrine and
Practice of the Primitive Church, which confirms all the Articles of our Faith,
and Rules of Worship and Discipline, but gives not the least intimation, that
the Pope or Church of Rome, was thought infallible by them, and if the
Primitive Church was ignorant of this, which is the best witness of Apostolical
Tradition, it is most probable, that no such thing is contained in Scripture,
though some mercenary Flatterers of the Pope have endeavored to persuade the
World, that they found it there.

So that we have a greater assurance of all the Articles of our Religion, from
Scripture and Catholic Tradition, then a Papist can have of the Churches
Infallibility, and yet he can have no greater assurance of any other Doctrines
of Religion, which he believes upon the Churches Infallibility, then he has of
Infallibility it self. So that in the last Resolution of Faith, the Protestant
has much the advantage of the Papist, for the Protestant resolves his Faith
into the Authority of the Scriptures, Expounded by the Doctrine and Practice of
the Primitive Church, the Papist resolves his into the Infallibility of the
Church; which he finds out only by Expounding Scripture by a private Spirit,
without the Authority of any church, but that whose Authority is under dispute,

And as the Doctrine of Infallibility is of no use in the last Resolution of
Faith, so it is wholly useless in disputing with such Heretics as we are, who
deny Infallibility: for it is a vain thing to attempt to impose any absurd, or
groundless, and uncatholick Doctrines upon us, by the Churches infallible
Authority, who believe there is no such infallible Judge; but are resolved to
trust our own Eyes, and to adhere to Scripture and the Catholic Faith of the
Primitive Church in these matters. And therefore the great Advocats for the
Church of Rome are forced to take the same course in confuting Heresies, as
they call them, that we do: They allege the Authority of Scripture, the
Authority of Fathers and Councils, to justify their Innovations, and here we
willingl join issue with them, and are ready to prove, that Scripture and all
true Antiquity is on our side; and this has been often and unanswerably proved
by the learned Patrons of the Reformation.

But there are some very material things to be observed from hence, for our
present purpose. For either they think this a good way to prove what they
intend, and to convince Gainsayers the Authority of Scripture, and Primitive
Antiquity, or they do not. If they do not think this a good way, to what
purpose are there so many Volumes of Controversy written? Why do they produce
Scripture, and Fathers, and Councils, to justify the Us^^pations of their
Church, and those new Additions they have made to the Christian Faith and
Worship? If this be not a good way to convince a Heretic, why do they give
themselves and us such an impertinent trouble.

If this be a good way, then we are in a good way already; we take that very
way for our satisfaction which by their own Confession and Practice, is a very
proper means for the conviction of Heretics, and to discover the Truth, and
after the most diligent inquiries we can make, we are satisfied that the Truth
is on our side.

If the Authority of Scripture signify any thing in this matter, then it seems
Heretics, who reject ^he Authority of an Infallible Judge, may understand
Scripture without an Infallible Interpreter, by the Exercise of Reason and
Judgment in studying of them, otherwise why do they pretend to expound
Scripture to us, and to convince us by Reason and Argument, what the true sense
of Scripture is.

If the Authority of the Primitive Church, and first Christian Writers, be
considerable, (as they acknowledge it is, by their appeals to them) then, at
least, the present Pope or Church, is not the sole infallible Judge of
controversies; unless they will say, that we must not Judge of the Doctrine or
Practice of the Primitive Church, by ancient records, (and then Baronius his
Annals are worth nothing) but by the Judgment and Practice of the present
Church.

The sum is this, There is great reason to suspect that the Church of Rome her
self, does not believe her own Infallibility, no more than we Protestants do;
for if she does, she ought not to suffer her Doctors to dispute with Heretics,
from any other Topic, but her own Authority; when they vie Reasons and
Ar^uments with us, and dispute from Scripture and Antiquity: they appeal from
the infallibility of the present church, to every man's private Reason and
Judgment, as much as any Protestant does: and if the Articles of the Christian
Faith may be established by Scripture and Antiquity, without an infallible
Judge, as they suppose they may be, by their frequent attempts to do it; this
plainly overthrows the necessity of an infallible Judge. In a word, not to take
notice now, how weak and groundless this pretense of Infallibility is, it is
evident, that it is a very useless Doctrine; for those who believe the churches
Infallibility, have no greater assurance of their Faith, then we have, who do
not believe it; and those who do not believe the churches Infallibility, can
never be confuted by it. So that it can neither establish any man's Faith, nor
confute any Heresies; that is, it is of no use at all.

The Church of England Reverences the Authority of the Primitive Church, as the
best witness of the Apostolical Faith and practice, but yet resolves her Faith
at last into the Authority of the Scriptures. She receives nothing for an
Article of Faith, which she does not find plainly enough taught in Scripture,
but it is a great confirmation of her interpretation of Scripture, that the
Primitive church owned the same Doctrines, which she does; and she looks upon
it as a just prejudice against any Expositions of Scripture, if they contradict
the common Faith of the first Christians; and therefore when the words of
Scripture are fairly capable of different senses, she chooses that sense which
is most agreeable with the Catholic Faith, and practice of the Primitive
Church; but should any Doctrines be imposed upon her, as Articles of Faith,
which are no where to be found in Scripture, or which are plainly contrary to
it, (as the new Trent Creed is) whatever pretense there be for the Antiquity of
such Doctrines, she utterly rejects them; she will not put out her Eyes to
follow any other Guide; and thanks be to God, she needs not reject any truly
Catholic Doctrine in this way. We still retain the Faith of the Primitive
Church, and are greatly confirmed in it, from that admirable consent there is
between the Scriptures, as Expounded by us, and that Faith which was anciently
owned and received by all Christians.

Having thus shown in what sense the Church is the Interpreter of Scripture: I
proceed now to the Second thing contained in this Paper, That this Church must
be known to be the true Church, by its continual visible Succession from Christ
till our days. Now these few words contain a great many, and very great
mistakes. The subject of the inquiry is, how we may find out such a Church,
whose word we may safely take for the true sense and meaning of Scripture.

Now, 1. The Author of this Paper, whither, ignorantly, or designedly, I know
not, alters the state of the Question, and in stead of a Church, which is an
unerring and Infallible Interpreter of Scripture, which would be very well
worth finding, he tells us how we may know a true Church; now I take a true
Church, and and an infallible Interpreter of Scripture, to be very different
things. A Church may be guilty of Schism and Heresy, and yet may be a true
Church, though not a sound, Orthodox, and Catholic Church; for a true Church
is such a Church, as has all things necessary, and essential to the Being and
Constitution of a Church; this a Church may have, and superadd other things,
which are destructive of the Christian Faith, and very dangerous and fatal
mistakes; as we believe, and are able to prove the Church of R^me has done; and
yet we acknowledge her a true Church, because she retains the true Christian
Faith, though miserably Corrupted by Additions of her own; as a man is a true
man, though he be sick of a mortal Disease. Now if a true Church may corrupt
the Christian Faith, we have no reason to rely on the Authority of every true
Church, for the true sense and meaning of Scripture.

2. Let us suppose, that by a true Church, he means an Infallible Church, whose
Authority we may safely rely on in Expounding Scriptures; this Church, he
says, is to be known by a continual visible Succession from Christ, till our
days: Now if this visible uninterrupted Succession be the mark of such a true
Church, as is an infallible Interpreter of Scripture, then, 1. The Greek Church
is an infallible Interpreter of Scripture; for she has as visible uninterrupted
a Succession, from Christ and his Apostles to this day, as the Church of Rome
has; and so we have two infallible Churches (not to instance in any more at
present, who have as good a Succession as either of them) which are directly
opposite to each other; and what shall we do in this Case? Must we believe
Contradictions, or must we dis-believe infallible Churches?

3. If a visible Succession from Christ and his Apostles makes a^y church an
infallible Interpreter of Scripture, then all the churches, which were planted
by the Apostles, were infallible. All the churches which were planted by the
Apostles, have an equally visible Succession from Christ; those churches which
were planted by the Apostles, may be presumed as infallible while the Apostles
were present with them, as they were afterward; and those churches which
succeeded these Apostolical churches, at the distance of an Age or two, may be
supposed as infallible as any church of this Age is; for if a visible
Succession from Christ makes a church infallible, why should not a Succession
of a hundred, or two hundred years make them as infallible as a Succession of
sixteen hundred years, unless they think that Infallibility increases with the
Age of the Church, which I could wish true, but we see very little sign of it.
Now according to these Principles all the churches which were planted by the
Apostles, and have a continual visible Succession from Apostolical Churches,
through all Ages since the time of the Apostles, must be infallible; for if a
continual visible Succession confers Infallibility, and is the mark whereby we
must know it, then every Church, which ever had, or has to this day this
visible Succession, must have Infallibility also, which, it seems, is entailed
on Succession. And thus we have found out a World of infallibility, and it is
wonderful, how any Apostolical Church came to be overrun with so many Errors
and Heresies, and to grow so corrupt and degenerate, as to provoke GOD to root
them up; if every Apostolical Church was infallible, I cannot imagine how whole
Churches, which visibly succeeded the Apostles, should be infected with
Heresy; for if Infallibility it self will not secure a Church from Heresy,
the LORD have mercy upon us.

3. This mark he gives how to find out such a true Church at is an infallible
Interpre^er of Scripture, viz. A continual visible Succession from Christ till
this day, includes another great mistake; for it supposes, that there is some
church now in being, on whose Authority we must rely for the sense of
Scripture; for otherwise there can be no use of a visible Succession to this
day, in this Controversy: If, as I have already Proved at large, we must rely
only on the Authority of the Primitive Church, not of the church of this
present Age, for the sense of Scripture, and that not as an infallible Judge,
bu^ as the most Authentic Witness of the Apostolical Doctrine and Practice,
then we cannot find out this church by a visible Succession to this day, but by
examining the ancient Records of the Primitive Church, where we shall find what
the Faith and Practice of the Church in those days was, which is the safest
Rule to guide us in the Exposition of Scripture. Though there were no Church in
the World at this day, which could prove a continual visible Succession from
Christ and his Apostles, yet while we have the Scriptures, and the Records of
the Primitive church we have very sufficient means for the understanding the
true meaning of Scripture: So that of whatever use this talk of a continual
visible Succession may be in other cases, it is wholly impertinent in this. A
church which cannot prove such a continual visible Succession; which was not
founded by any Apostle, or Apostolical men, or has lost the Memory or Records
of its first Plantation, may yet have very certain means of knowing the true
sense of Scripture, from the Scripture it self, and the Doctrine and Practice
of Apostolical and Primitive Churches, and a Church which has the most visible
uninterrupted Succession from Christ and his Apostles, may be so far from being
an infallible Interpreter of Scripture, that she may be very corrupt and
erroneous her self, if she forsake the Apostolical Tradition, contained in the
Writings, of the new Testament, and Expounded by the Catholic Faith and
Practice of the first Churches; as we know the Church of Rome has done, which
is so far from being an infallible Church, that we believe her to be the most
corrupt Church in the World.

And thus I think we are prepared to venture upon the last Clause of this
Paper, wherein the whole force of the Argument, such as it is, is turned upon
the poor Protestant Churches. But I doubt (says the Author of this Paper)
whither or no the Protestant Church can make out this continual visible
Succession, and desire to be informed. The sting of which Argument lies in
this, that we Protestants have no certain way of knowing the true se^nse and
meaning of Scripture, because we cannot prove the continual visible Succession
of our Church, from Christ unto this day; and therefore we ought to go over to
the church of Rome, who has this visible Succession, and receive all her
Dictates as infallible Oracles. But, for Answer to this, consider.

1. That suppose the Protestant Church could not make out such a continual
visible Succession, yet we may understand the Scriptures very well without it,
and need not go to the church of Rome to Expound Scripture for us, as I have
already shown at large. Had he proved that we had been no church, for want of a
visible Succession of church Officers, or that our Religion were a Novelty,
which was never heard of it in the world before Luther, this had been something
more to the purpose; but to pretend that we cannot understand the Scriptures,
for want of a visible Succession, is such a loose and inconsequent way of
reasoning, as a poor fallible Protestant would be ashamed of.

2. But pray, why cannot the Protestant Church of England prove her continual
visible Succession from Christ till this day, as well as the church of Rome?
Here was a Christian Church planted in this Nation, as very good Historians
say, as early as at Rome, and it has continued here ever since, to this day:
when Austin the Monk came over to England, he found here a company of resolute
British Bishops and Monks, who would not submit to the Usurpations of Rome,
and the English and British Churches under several Changes and Alterations,
have continued to this day, with a visible Succession of Christian Bishops, and
what better Succession can Rome show than this?

I suppose no Roman Catholic will disown the Succession of the church of
England, till the Reformation, and I pray, how came we to lose our Succession
then? Did the Reformation of those Abuses and Corruptions, which had crept into
the Church, unchurch us? Just as much as a man ceases to be the same man, when
he is cured of some mortal Disease: Did not the Church of England consist of
the same Persons, before the Reformation and after? A great many indeed
disowned the Reformation; but were not all those Persons who were so active and
zealous in the Reformation, formerly of the Roman communion? And did they lose
their Succession too, when they became Reformers? When a Church consists of the
same Bishops, Priests, and People, which she had before, though she have not
all the same that she had; when she retains the same ancient Catholic and
Apostolic Faith, which she did before, only renounces some Errors and
Innovations, which she owned before, how does this forfeit her Succession? The
Church of England is the very same Church now, since the Reformation, which she
was before, and therefore has the very same Succession, though not the same
Errors, to this day, that ever she had; and that, I think, is as good a
Succession as the Church of Rome has.

There are but two things to be considered in the case of Succession: Either a
Succession of Church Officers, or a Succession of the Faith and Doctrines of
the Church.

1. As for a Succession of Church Officers, we have the same that the Church of
Rome has, Those English Bishops who embraced the Reformation, received their
Orders in the Communion of the Church of Rome, and therefore they had as good
Orders, as any are in the Church of Rome; and these were the Persons, who
Consecrated other Bishops, and so in Succession to this day. For as for the
story of the Nags-head Ordination, that is so transparent a Forgery, invented
many years after to Reproach the Reformation that I presume no sober Roman
Catholic will insist on it.

But we are Heretics and Schismatics, and this forfeits our Orders, and our
Succession together. But, 1. This charge ought first to be proved against us,
that we are Heretics and Schismatics we deny and abhor both the name and
thing, and if we be not Heretics, and Schismatics, as we are sure we are not,
and as the Church of Rome can never prove us to be, then according to their own
Confession, our Orders must be good.

2. However be we Heretics, or Schismatics, or what ever they please to call
us, how does this destroy our Orders and Succession? The Catholic Church would
not allow in former Ages, that Heresy or Schism destroyed the validity of
Orders. St. Jerome disputes against this at large, in his Book Contra
Luciferianos. And St. Austin allows the Donatists Bishops to have valid Orders,
though they were Schismatics, and therefore that the Sacraments adminstred by
them were valid. And indeed, if Heresy will destroy Orders and Succession, the
Church of Rome will be as much to seek for their Orders and Succession, as we
are, which, by their own Confession, have had several Heretical Popes, and no
body knows how many Bishops Ordained by them.

2. As for Succession of Doctrine, which is as considerable to the full, as
Succession of Orders, the great Articles of our Faith are not only plainly
contained in Scripture, but have been delivered down to us, through all ages of
the Church by an uninterrupted Succession.

The Church of Rome her self, in her greatest Degeneracy, did own all that we
do in pure matters of Faith: When we reformed the Church we did not make a new
Religion, but only separated the old Faith from new and corrupt Additions; and
therefore the quarrel of the Church of Rome with us. is not that we believe any
thing which they do not believe, but that we do not believe all that they would
have us.

The Doctrine of the Church of England is truly Primitive and Catholic, taught
by Christ and his Apostles, owned by the Primitive Church, and excepting the
Dispute between the Latin and Greek Church, about the Filioque, or the Holy
Spirits proceeding from the Father and the Son, received by all catholic
churches to this day; which is as complete and perfect Succession, as any
Doctrine can have; therefore when the Church of Rome asks us, Where was our
Religion before Luther? we tell them it was all the World over, all Catholic
churches believed what we do, though we do not believe all that they do, they
themselves did, and do to this Day own our creeds, and Articles of Faith,
excepting such of them as are directly opposed to their Innovations.

So that we are on a ^ure Foundation, our Faith has been received in the
catholic church in all Ages. But now the church of Rome cannot show such a
Succession for her new Doctrines and Articles of Faith, which were unknown to
the Primitive church for many Ages, which were rejected by many flourishing
churches, since the first appearance of them, which never had a quiet
possession in her own communion, and were never formed into Articles of Faith,
till the packt conventicle of Trent.

This I think is a sufficient Answer to this Paper, and it pities me to see so
many well-meaning Persons abused with such transparent Sophistry.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE About the Charge of NOVELTY Upon the Reformed CHURCH OF ENGLAND
Made by the PAPISTS Asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion before
LVTHER?

LONDON. Printed, and Edinburgh Reprinted by J. Reid, for T. Brown, and G.
Schaw, and A. Ogston, and G. Mosman, Stationers in the Parliament Closs, 1686.

A DISCOURSE About the Charge of NOVELTY Upon the Reformed Church of England
made by the Papists, etc.
THe Christian Doctrine was once, by the way of trust delivered by Christ and
his Apostles unto the Saints, Men of Care and Honesty, and who should preserve
it in its first purity and Spiritual intention, only to prescribe methods unto
Men by Faith, and an Honest conversation, how they might arrive at Heaven; that
this Religion might make a deeper impression upon their minds and memories and
be more faithfully kept, it was set down in plain and significant Terms, and
reduced into 2 Timothy 1. 13, 14. Romans 6. 17. 1. Tim. 6. 20.
short summaries called a form of sound words, that good thing, that Form of
Doctrine, a depositum, or trust and by the Church afterward a creed. That it
might be believed and valued, it was in its own Nature of the greatest
importance, confirmed with variety of the best of Arguments, Miracles,
Prophecies, innocent carriage, and Death of its numerous Disciples, and severe
curses denounced against any that should add to or take from it, till Gal. 1.
8. 9 Rev. 22. 18.
their great Master, And its Author, Jesus should come from Heaven again. Yet
notwithstanding all this, by the Malice and Subtility of the Devil, the Designs
and Passions of Men, the Ignorance and Negligence of some, the Cunning and
Industry of others, this plain and simple Religion began by degrees to be
corrupted by the mixtures of Philosophy and niceness, by the Rules of Stat
Craft and Policy, by idle Traditions, and Inventions; by the Melancholy of
some, and the gayety of others; and the natural Face of it was so strangely
changed that it seemed another Gospel, and you might seek Christianity in the
Christian World and yet scarce find it. Many Kingdoms and People were to blame
in this, being Teacherous to their Master, and false to their trust, suffering
so Pure, and chaste a Religion to be corrupted 2. Cor. 11. 2
or Stolen away, but the Church of Rome seems the most Guilty of them all,
(especially upon her own grounds, her Bishop being the Infallible Vicar of
Jesus, to whom are committed the Oracles of GOD) once indeed renowned Cyp.
Epist. Ox. Edit. p. 5. 6. Rom 18. Platina vit^ Bon 7. p. 159. vide quaeso
quantum degeneraverint, etc.
for her Faith and Pious Governors, but now as famous for their Degeneracy as
well in Religion as in their Lives. Whose Ambition or Interest prostituted the
Faith to those Designs, and made it Earthly and Sensual, or their Negligence
and Stupidity suffered the Enemy in the night of Ignorance to sow the tares,
which so grew up and choakt the Wheat, that Faith was turned into Fables and
Lies, Foppery and Superstition were Nick-nam'd Devotion, Ridiculous Gestures
and Habits past for Repentance and Mortification, the Bible was shut up and
contemned, and the Legends opened and praised, Honest and Good Men were
butchered, and unknown Persons and Malefactors, canonized, Saints with their
Pictures and Relics were made Rivals to Christ in Mediation and Intercession,
Good Works were spoiled by Merit and Arrogance, or done by way of composition
for vices, the fear of Hell was abated by the invention of Purgatory, Christ
was fetch from Glory by the Magic of a Priest, and put into a Wafer, or into a
more sordid place, riddles and quirks of their Schools were made Articles of
Faith; in short, old truths were rooted up, and new errors grafted on them,
Power and Profit were Styled the church; the court of Rome was brought into the
Temple and called the Holy of Holies. Such errors as these in the christian
Faith came from Rome, and infected our Ancient British church (not at first
planted by the Labors of the Romish Bishops of old, but corrupted by their
later Emissaries) and lasted a long time among us, being supported by Power,
twisted with Interest, suitable to the pleasures and vices of Men, incorporated
into the Government, having put out Men's reason to try and discern between
Truth and Error, and at length became Fashionable, Legal, Terrible with Fires
and censures which made us Sick unto death, absolute almost and beyond
recovery; Such was our condition here of Slavery and Ignorance, but it pleased
him that dwells between the Golden Candlesticks, to dispel our Darkness and
restore the Ancient light of Primitive Christianity. His Wisdom and Goodness
improving the passions and inclinations of some in temporal changes and
concerns to Spiritual purposes, encouraging the secret groans and desires of
others, putting many more upon search and enquiry after Truth, and infusing
courage for it, at length came to a resolution of Arguing and Debating the
Errors of the Romish Faith and manners, of reforming the abuses in Discipline
and Devotion and to call back True Christianity again, and being dispossessed of
the Spirit of Rome which often tore them and rent them till they foamed again,
are now clothed and in their Wits once more; upon this account the Friends of
Rome call us Heretics, Schismatics and Innovators, Discharge Censures and
Excommunications and Eternal Damnation against us, are full of Wrath and
indignation, and to show a little Wit in their Anger, And pretended reason,
pertly ask the Question, where was our Religion before Luther.

This is the common and trite objection against our Religion, very frequent not
only in the Mouths of their Bellarmine. Campian. Smith.
more Ordinary Disciples, but also of their more Learned Writers, who (whatever
strength they really fancy may be in the Argument it self) think it a very
proper Weapon to attempt the Vulgar and the Weak withal, to amuse and dazzle
the less discerning eve, at least when back^ and set off with the stately Names
of Infallibility, Succession, An^iquity, and the like; and they tell us roundly
our Faith was but yesterday, our Religion is new and upstart, as only Henry the
Eights and ^romwels contrivance (they may truly say as much as their Treason
was Cecils Plot,) That our Faith began only in the year 1517, in Saxony by one
Martin Luther an Apostate Friar, who for the sake of a fair Nun and other
designs renounced the Ancient Faith, and set up his new Device of Protestantism
at Spires; which did not quietly last much above seven years, for in the year
Bellar. Tom. lib. 4. p. 287
1. 25. starts up Zuinglius, and after two years more he Anabaptists, who
change and correct Luther's Religion, and draw great numbers of his disciples
from him; and himself for his reward dyed a strange Death, great Noises and
Crackings were heard in his Tomb, which being opened, neither Body nor Bones
were found, and the smell of Brimstone was ready to stifle the standers by. And
therefore they say, we ought to look from whence we are fallen, to repent of our
Heresy, and return to our first Love, and not stick so close to our Religion,
the new invention of so ill a Man. That we may therefore keep those firm that
are members of our Religion, and bring those back that have revolted from us
into the Romish Communion, we have endeavored to give a satisfactory Answer to
this their Question, Where was your Religion before the times of Luther? Not to
trouble our selves with such Legends as these, and Uncharitableness along with
them, the Answer is thus.

1. Telling them plainly where our Religion was before Luthers time.

2. By showing what Errors and Mistakes are included in the Question

3. To turn the Question upon themselves, and ask them some others of the like
nature.

1. The plain Answer to the Question is this: That our Religion was long before
the times of Luther, and believed and settled in many Kingdoms and Nations of
the World, and has neither Novelty nor Singularity in it. It Is an old
Religion, I am sure it is of Age and can speak for it self. It has lasted now
these 1600 years and more, founded at first by Christ and his Apostles, handed
down to us through many Sufferings and Persecutions, and here it is preserved.
It contracted indeed in the coming down a great deal of rust by the Falseness
and Carelessness of its keepers, particularly by the Church of Rome, we scowr'd
off the rust, and kept the metal; that is the Romish Religon, this is the
English. They added False Doctrines to the Christian Faith, we left the one and
kept to the other; this is Ancient, those are New. Our Religion is the same
with that of the Early Christians, Martyrs, and Confessors, believed in the
first 300 years, and defended by all Councils truly General; Our Religion in
those first Ages was in Palestine and Greece, in Egypt, in Antioch where the
Disc^^les Acts 11. 26.
were first called Christians and in Rome it self, and wherever the great
labors of her first Apostles carried her to the different and re^ote Countries
of the World: Then and there our Religion l^v'd, where Peter, Linus, and
Cletus, and all the first and Pious Bishops of Rome did. It suffered indeed
great variety of changes and conditions, by the interest and wickedness of men,
sometimes more Adulterated, and sometimes more Pure, it flitted from Country to
Country, sometimes greater and sometimes smaller in its number, sometimes in a
dejected, and sometimes in a more flourishing state, but somewhere or other it
was entire and without mixture, as it was at first given unto the world, and
such an old Religion as this we are of, holding fast neither more nor less,
neither adding to, nor diminishing what Christ and his Apostles taught; and i^
Antiquity must evidence the Truth of our Religion, we are safe and secure that
we have right on our side. And this will appear if we consider these following
things.

1. What Conformity our Religion carries to that of Christ and his Apostles.
Let any impartial eye compare them both together, and he will find the features
and complexion, the whole body of Religion the same in both. Whatever they
delivered out at first, as Fundamental to Salvation, whatever they instituted
as parts of Devotion, Discipline, and Order, we still faithfully retain in our
Church, and if any Truth of moment hitherto by Fraud or Negligence be concealed
from her, she is ready to receive it, when ever it is made plain, not having
stopped up the way of Truth by a pretense of Infallibility or want of Modesty to
confess an error. She has the same sense of the Nature, Offices, the Design
and whole Undertakings of Christ, that the truly Ancient Church had; She
receives the Creed and Bible, and any Traditions that can be made out to be
truly Divine, in the same meaning and understanding that Christ and his
Apostles gave to the first Christians, and they to us. What their thoughts of
Saints and holy Souls departed were, ours are, thoughts of respect, remembrance
and imitation, not divine Worship. Christ instituted proper Figures, and
Symbols of Bread and Wine, to represent and confirm, to conveigh and
commemorate his bloody Passion and Benefits to Mankind; in this sense She
preserves the Institution sacred, and does not really Sacrifice or Crucify the
LORD of Life again. Christ commanded good works under the penalty of eternal
Damnation, She does the same, and in our Masters language bids the doers of
them call themselves unprofitable Servants, beating down Pride and Merit.
Christ and his Apostles told the World what departing Souls must expect; Her
sense is the same, that there are no second Ventures and Trials to be made,
neither can a kind Friend with a good Estate, left for Masses or Monks,
compound for a Life ill spent. Run through the whole constitution of our Church
in Articles of Faith, and Rules of Manners, you may trace them to Christ and
his Apostles time, and all other parts of her Government and Order are truly
Primitive. And it must needs be so, if She sincerely follo^s her rule of Faith,
the holy Scriptures, so Ancient, so Divine, and whatever is declared there
essential to Salvation She brings into her Creed, and resolves to keep it, like
a mighty Treasure, faithfully unto death. And indeed the Church of Rome
confesses, that what we do retain is ancient and Apostolical; but pretends that
we are defective in many things, and want some necessaries which they have, to
make an entire Faith. But we challenge them to prove that those opinions
wherein we differ from them were delivered by Christ or any men divinely
inspired in those times. And they seem to acknowledge we do not, and therefore
to make up the matter, pretend a Divine Authority in the Church, to cast new
Articles, and Truths fere de fide, almost fit for a Creed, and some others of
them confess that some of their Opinions as Image Worship and others were not
maintained in the first Ages of Christianity for fear of coming too near the
Heathens Worship and out of other Prudential considerations, so that whosoever
does compare the Doctrine of our Church, with that of Christ and his Apostles,
must needs conclude that our Religion is Ancient Christianity, and that the
charge of Novelty is groundless.

2. The Nature of Reformation, which was not to found a New Church but correct
an old one, Christianity that Pearl of great price, was hid with trash and Mat,
13. 3.
filth, that the Romish Church had heaped upon it, our Reformers removed only
what loaded and obscured it, and restored it to its first Beauty and Luster.
Such a Reformation indeed is later then their errors, and it must needs be so,
it naturally supposing them before, otherwise it is not Reformation but a
destructive change; but Primitive Christianity which is our Religion was long
before the D^sease of Popery, though the cure of this Disease was after, or
later then the disease it self, but the sound Body of Christianity for which we
are concerned, was before them both, for it is not Reformation barely that we
are pleased withal, no more then with a Pill or Potion, but only as necessary
to drive away an inveterate Disease, and recover an old Religion to its ^ormer
Health. When Christ reformed the Jewish Religion from the false senses and
glosses that the Scribes and Pharisees had put upon it, and grafted
Christianity upon the old stock, will the Romanists call this a New Religion,
or rather an old one well amended and improved by Divine Authority, Bellarmin
does allow this for Truth, and says that Christianity was rather a new State
and Condition then a new church, and he that can call our Religion New, because
it is mended, and made now, what it was about 1600 years ago, may affirm that
Christ built a new Temple when he Whipped the buyers and sellers out of the old.
And that Hezekiah built a 2 Chronicles. 305
New Sanctuary, and Instituted a New Passover, because he cleans'd the one and
restored the other to its first Institution; our Reformation did no more, it
only scaled off the Leprosy that stuck to the Body of the Romish church, it
only paired off those Additions that Interest or Superstition, Niceness or
Foppery, had glew'd to it; what after remained, was our Religion, the same that
Christ and his Apostles taught the world at first. And if they can show that
any thing has been added since, pernicious to the Nature of the True and Old
Religion, our church is ready to remove it, or that any thing is wanting that
is necessary to its complement and perfection, she is ready to entertain it
with the same spirit of meekness and Wisdom, and Regard to the Gospel, that she
used in the Reformation; but hitherto upon good grounds and strict inquiry She
is fully satisfied that Her Religion is absolute and complete Christianity.

3. We have many and impartial Judges on our side, that our Religion is Pure
and Old Christianity. The particular church of Rome indeed, that supports her
self by a pretended Infallibility, to be true to her Principle, refuses to be
tried by any other Church but will be only Judge of her self, and others too;
yet we that are certain and sure of the Truth of our Religion, though not
Infallible, dare appeal to the Judgment of other Christian churches. The Greek
church condemns their half Communion, the Doctrines of Purgatory, Merit and
Supererogation. The Adoration of Images, their locking up the Scriptures in an
unknown Tongue, their extreme Unction, and sale of Masses, and laughs at their
Infallibility, the thing that makes their errors in Faith incorrigible; the
Arminian Christians reject the Supremacy Baron. Tom. 10. P. 256.
of the Pope, Transubstantiation, Purgary, and excommunicat those that worship
Images. The Jacobites, the Indians of St. Thomas, the Egyptian and Abassine
Christians, dissent from most or all of the Romish errors which we condemn. We
have all the truly ancient Christian Churches on our side, and most of the
Modern whom the busy Emissaries of Rome have not terrified or seduced into
their Party: Our Writters have appealed with great success to the Ancient
Councils, the holy Fathers, and to the Learned and Pious Bishops and Priests of
old, and from thence discovered the Novelty of the Romish Faith, and the good
old way of the English Church. And they dare not stand the trial, when we
desire to be determined by the best and infallible Judge, the holy Scriptures,
exept they must give the meaning of them, otherwise they load them with
Ignominious Names, of ^ Lesbian rule, mere Ink and Paper, and a Nose of Wax.
Who will they be tried by? by a Council truly General? No, except it be called,
managed, and Confirmed by the Pope. Will they be Judged by any that differ from
them, yet are men of good, honest, and unprejudiced Judgments? No, they are
out of the pale of the Church, and stubborn Heretics. And the best reason they
have for their assurance, that they are in the right, is, that they are sure
they are so, and keep themselves safe in their Enchanted Castle of
Infallibility. The Arabian Philosopher was offended at, and abhorred their
barbarous Doctrine of Transubstantiation. and eating of their God, and resolved
to stick to his Philosophical rather then be of such a Christian Religion. The
Roman Images, and the Worship of them, have laid a Stumbling block before the
Jews, who therefore approved our Sentence and condemnation of them; having
therefore such a number of good Testimonies and Judgments on our side, we rise
up and reverence the gray Hairs of our Religion, which Rome once clothed in a
wanton and fantastic dress, and made it ridiculous; which because we have
pulled off, and put on its ancient habit, and made it look manly with the Image
of GOD and Christ upon it, they call us Innovators. Many of their own Writers
have spoke in favor of the English Church, and many of their distinctions in a
fair sense have concluded for her Doctrine, and shown their dislike of many
opinions of their own Church.

4. That our Religion was long before Luther will appear from the oppositions
that were made to the Papal corruptions, which did not enjoy so quiet a life,
but were frequently disturbed, and cried o^t against, not only by other
Churches, but by many honest and considering men in their own Communion. Men
they were, not of Interest and Discontent, Peevishness, and given to change, of
little Learning and less conscience, and not in the World, but men eminent in
their Generation, men of Probity and Studies, of Temper and consideration; men
that stood not alone, but had great numbers of Disciples, a visible Society of
Christians, who followed their Judgments. Some of these sadly bewailed the
degenerate state of the Roman church; others petitioned for, and advised not
only the correction of the abuses of good Doctrines and innocent Institutions,
but the Reformation of gross Errors and scandalous Additions to the christian
Faith, and others in great Authority promised an amendment and to reduce the
whole frame of christianity to its Primitive sense and Model. And the famous
council of Trent was promised and begun to rectify Errors and Abuses creept
into the Romish Faith and Government, yet after a long Sitting it fatally
concluded, confirming those corruptions which was hoped after so many
complaints and addresses with strong reasons for them, should have been
thoroughly redrest and reformed. The Original of their barbarous Inquisition
will be a standing record of the frequent and stout oppositions that were made
against the Romish Innovation in the christian Faith. And so long as the Blood
of the numerous Albigenses and Waldenses cries to Heaven for Vengeance against
the Papal cruelty, we have a cloud of Witnesses for this Truth, who resisted
unto Death the new Doctrines of Rome. The carriage of old Wicliff and his
Followers, tells us plainly in story, that the corruptions of Rome had no such
quiet possession, but ever and anon some or other inconsiderable numbers did
endeavor to eject them out of their hold, though they paid dear for it. And so
long as the Treachery of their council of Constance about the safe conduct
granted to poor Huss, and his Disciples in number above forty thousand, remains
upon record never to be forgotten or forgiven, so long we have clear evidences
of strong resistance made to the Romish Religion before the times of Luther.
And in most Countries and times, where and when the Romish corruptions began
from small and obscure beginings to be gross and plain some or other in greater
or lesser numbers began to Renounce and Protest against them. What though some
of these early Reformers might hold some erroneous Opinions which we our selves
condemn, yet however they opposed the Romish Church in her corruptions and
these tended to a Reformation, which was completed only by degr^e^^ and it is
no wonder some Stumbled in such a night of Ignorance. And have not the Agents
of Rome destroyed the Papers and Records, disguised their Adversaries, and
falsify'd their Opinions to serve the power and Interest of their great
Mistress? They therefore branded the Waldenses with the name of Manichaism, and
that they affirmed two Principles or Originals of all things, because they
asserted that the Emperor was independent of the Pope, and that they denied
CHRIST to be the Son of GOD, because they could not believe a crust of Bread to
be CHRIST. And they have framed as lewd stories against many excellent Men of
the lat^r Ages who withstood the approaches of their Doctrine and Government,
which we certainly know, and the more ingenuous among them confess, to be
notoriously false. Though we have reason to believe (because of the severity
and industry of the Romish Factors ever warm against those who opposed her
Practices) a great number of Honest and Learned Men (as those Ages would
afford) are buried in obscurity and their names unknown, there being an
Expurgatorian Index for the merits of such Men as well as Books and Editions,
yet we have a sufficient Catalogue of them who kept up the Title and claim of
old Christianity, and would not suffer their new Errors to plead prescription.

2. By showing what Errors and Mistakes are included in the Question.

1. That these new Errors of Rome are absolutely necessary to the being of a
Christian Church: For though we believe all that Christ and his Apostles
taught, all things that are contained in the Holy Scriptures, all things that
undoubted Tradition, or good Reason proves to drive themselves from both or
either, yet because we do not assent and Subscribe to the new Articles of Faith
that Rome has invented for us, we cease to be a Christian Church, are marked
for Heretics, which are worse than Pagans with them, and must be certainly
damned. Nay, should we embrace all the other Doctrines of Rome, and deny only
the Popes Authority and Supremacy, (that Epitome of their Christianity) it
would avail us little, we are Heathens still. Should we reject but one Article
of Pope Pius's Creed, suppose the Doctrine of Purgatory or Merit, yet because
this questions Infallibility, the cent^e of all their Religion, we are in the
state of Damnation still: Should we receive their Doctrines as probable and in
a larger and more fav^urable meaning, yet because we do not entertain them as
Articles of Faith in the sense of the Church, our case is not mended, we shall
mee^ with Fires here and hereaf^er for our reward. Should we wink and swallow
them all down with a good Catholic stomach, yet i^ the Bishop of Rome should
give out a new Edition of Faith, enlarged with many more monstrous Doctrines
and Opinions, yet if we boggle and kick at them, all our former Righteousness
shall not not be remembered, we are Apostates worse than Truks and Infidels; and
who can tell what this Infallible and powerful Guide of ^^^^stendom will do?
For when things obscure, or of an indifferent Nature, when things wherein they
differ among themselves, and only serve a temporal Interest, when Opinions
which they can dispense withal upon occasion, when only the modes and manner of
Truth, when Contradictories, and Doctrines directly leading unto impiety, and
things Barbarous and Blasphemous have been christened Articles of Faith and
Fundamentals of Religion, have we not just reason to suspect as ill or worse
may be done again? And the intrigues of Trent may be acted once more, and as
many new Articles of Faith as Titular Bishops, by the same Spirit moving in the
same manner: were not the first and early Christians sound Members of Christ's
Body though they never thought of such wild Opinions as these, and published
truths directly contrary to them? And could I suppose them to have known these
Innovations, out of Zeal and Fidelity to their trust, would have detested and
abhorred them. Was Christ negligent in the discharge of his mighty Office, and
his Apostles defective in their Duties and Ministry, not to acquaint the first
Christians with these great truths, and were they revealed in the Tridentine
Council only to us upon whom the ends of the world are come. These Primitive
Disciples of Christ thought themselves secure of Heaven by this short Creed,
that Jesus was the Christ the Son of God. And the contrary was the character of
the Man of Sin, that denied that Jesus was come in the Flesh, that he was the
God incarnate and the true Messiah, and were scandalized at his meanness and
obscurity. S. Paul told the Jailer, that certainly he would be saved if he
believed that Jesus was the Christ, all other Fundamentals of Christianity one
way or other being necessarily included in that belief: And thought that he
made sincere and sound Disciples, if they believed what he preached only Jesus
and the Resurrection, in their full compass and latitude. Though we believe all
this in a more express and explicit sense, all that is contained in Scripture,
in the Apostles Creed, or the two other Creeds drawn up by the Church to
explain the Christian Religion in some Articles, and to oppose the Doctrines of
Heretics, yet the first Christians shall be saved and we shall be damned; they
shall be the Elect and the Church of GOD, we must be Reprobates and the
Synagogue of Satan. Or let Rome show her wonted Charity, and say she doubts
also of their Salvation. Or did Christ connive at that time of Ignorance, or
had he as a Lawgiver forgot to declare some part of the Will and Pleasure of
GOD, and upon better remembrance after so many hundred years, suggested it to
his careful Vicar? Or did Christ, knowing their Nature and Circumstances of it,
that they could not bear them at that time, therefore delay the discovery so
long? Or did these new Articles lie hid so long concealed by his Apostles, or
buried by some lewd Heretics in the rubbish of those Churches they pulled
down, but afterward found, (as they say the Cross was) and now stored to
light? Or are these new Articles some way or other contained in the ancient
Creeds which we believe, and by easy and natural consequences deduced from
them. Some such fine reasons as these must be pretended, otherwise we can
safely conclude that our Church is truly ancient and Apostolical, though she
disowns the late inventions of the Romish Bishop and is known to be the Spouse
of Christ by her first features and complexion, though she has cast off the
new Italian dress. For, was the Christian Church the House of GOD, irregular in
its building, wanting of Beams and Pillars, the Essentials of Religion, till
Romes curious and careful Builder cast it into a new Model and completed it?

2. This Question supposes that the Christian Church ought always to be
visible, which is not so strictly true. For Visible or Invisible make not two
Churches, but different States, Conditions or Respects of one and the same.
'Twas designed by Christ, that all that are baptized into the Communion of his
Faith, and Church, should make an Outward and Vissible Profession of it, by
their Religious Assemblies and Worship, by their Sacraments, Discipline, and
Government, whereby being United among themselves, and to Christ their Head,
they should constitute one Body called the Catholic church, in whose Communion
they must live and dye. But so it came to pass, that the number of Christian
People so pro^essing and owning the Faith of Jesus, was lesser or greater, more
conspicuous or obscure, as Persecutions or Heresies grew and prevailed among
them, which like raging Plagues wasted whole Countries. destroying some,
perverting others, and making many fly into remoter Kingdoms, and only some
scattered and solitary Christians living in Caves and Wildernesses remained
behind, or only the face of a distressed Christian Church, as it happened to the
Seven Asian and African Churches, which now labor under a Mahumetan Pride and
Superstition: But as it lost in one Country it gained in another, the Jewish
Persecution and others driving several Colonies of Christians into remoter
Countries, where they spread and enlarged their Religion, and many times the
distress or triumph of the Church followed the changes and revolutions in the
Civil State, suffering or flourishing with it. And often the abuse of Religion,
Prostituting of it to Hypocrisy and secular ends, the wicked lives of its
Disciples, or want of Courage or Resolution in its defense, has tempted
Providence to permit pestilent Heresies (worse then that in these Northren
parts) to prevail, and Paganism to return again, but still the promise of
Christ to his Church was firm, and the Gates of Hell did not prevail against
her. And though he was forced sometimes to travel from Country to Country,
and look^ small and obscure in the number of her Followers, yet still some or
other parts and corners of the World, and true and zealous Christians in them
made up the little flock, and shall never faill while the World endures. Popery
like the Egyptian darkness had overspread this and other Nations, yet here and
there was as the Israelite that had light in his dwellings, and a counter-charm
against the Enchantments of Egypt, the Gospel that at length did prevail
against corruptions, and made its Followers visible and numerous. They ask us,
Where was our Religion before Luther? As though it was not, because it did not
visibly appear; or no where in the World, because not here in England or in
other parts where Popery did domineer, and the Romish Faction was all and whole
Christianity in the World, the Catholic Church, which implies contradiction
and absurdity. Christianity here indeed was obscured, and like the Sun under
the cloud; but still the Sun was the same, and at length conquered the Mists:
it is a fine Question to ask, Where was the Sun before Noon day? We will suppose
her Followers to be few, yet Christ is true, though others are liars; for he
never promised that the Members of the true Catholic church should be always
famous for their numbers, or that multitudes should always follow Truth, nor
ever directed men to follow the Multitude in search of Truth, which is found
otherwise. not by Votes and Polling for her. Did not our Savior ask the
question, when he should come again, whither at the Destruction of Jerusalem,
or at the Judgment day whereof the other was a Type and Prefiguration, whither
he should find Faith on Earth or no: Did not the Prophet Luke 1^. ^
sadly complain in the Reign of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah,
that the good man is perished out Mich, 7. 2
of the Land, and there is none righteous among men; they could not then reckon
up of the Tribe of Judah Twelve thousand, and yet there was true Faith, and a
Church of GOD though little and Obscure. Does not King David cry Psalm. 12. 1.
out, Help Lord, for the Godly man cease, for the faithful faill from among
the children of Men, corruption in Faith and Manners usually going together.
And Elijah tells a sad story of the Children of Israel, that they 1 Kin. 19. 10
had broken their Covenant, and destroyed the Altars, and the Prophets, and he
only was left alive, that they sought his life also, God tells him that yet for
all that he had seven verse. 18.
thousand knees that had not bowed to Baal; still there was a small Church not
infected with Idolatry, though obscure and unknown to Elijah. Have not some of
the Romish Writers told us, that at Christ's Passion the Church was only left in
the Virgin Mary, all then forsaking Christ but the holy Mother. The Shepherd
was smitten and the Sheep dispersed. And they farther confess, that in the times
of Antichrist there shall be neither Pope, Monk, nor. Mass, (if this be all,
that Monster is not so terrible as he is painted) and their Annalists complain
of such sad things as these in the tenth Century. And certainly they have read
of Ver. 12. 6. 11. 7. 1 Cor. 3. 12.
the Woman in the Wilderness, and the Witnesses slain, and of Hay and Stuble
co^ering the Foundation, Which describe the deplorable condition of the
Christian Church, and Fopperies, Niceties, and Inventions of men obscuring the
Essentials of the Christian Faith, Should a Revolt happen (which GOD divert)
from the Reformed Church of England to Romanism again, might not others ask
them the same Question, Where was your Religion before Eighty three or Eighty
four, before snch a time? Would they not answer at Rome and in England also,
only kept under and obscured by Heretics and Tyrannical Princes. Ours was also
here locked up in Bibles, owned by some numbers, desired by more, only frighted
from a visible profession of it, by the Torments that did attend it. And
Christianity though not so visible, yet was purer when it, and its professors
dwelt in Rocks and Mountains and Den^, places of Privacy and obscurity, in the
Reigns of Nero and Di^clesian, then when some Kings were its Nursing Fathers,
and Qu^ens its Nursing Mothers, and took possession of the seven Hills. And
there was a true Church of God though overlay'd and groaning under Arrianism as
before Persecution, and in Cyprians time, as ours once under the Popish Yoke.
And Cypr, Epist. p. 59 Ox, Edit. aspice totum orbem pene vastum, etc.
the truth of Christianity, like the truth and essence of other things, depends
not upon splendid entertainment or judgment of others, nor the Church upon the
Visible number of its Members, but it may be a true Church whither visible or
hid, which this Question denies.

3. This Question supposes that the Roman Church cannot err, but that it
remained pure and undefiled, as it came from the hands of Christ, through the
many Centuries of years, till it came to the times of Luther, and from thence
shall so continue till the Worlds end, and therefore we made a false charge
against them of corruptions in their Religion, to excuse our Innovation. But we
have reason to conclude She has foully erred from the Faith, and that more
fatally and obstinately, because She pretends She cannot err. For upon what
grounds does She found Her Infallibility? Upon the Scriptures? They are only
so many dead Letters, till the breadth of the Church does give them life, and
they are then to do the Church a good turn and give her Infallibility, which is
such a Circle, as makes men's Brains so giddy turning round in it, that they
scarce know what, he Scriptures, and what the Church do mean: the places of
Scripture to prove Infallibility are such, which have only reference to the
Apostles themselves, their Doctrines or Confessions of Faith, as Divine and
Infallible, but not to their pretended Successors. Or else they are
restrained, not simply Mat. 16. 18. Ioh. 16. 13. Mat. 28. 20
unto all truth, but only unto all truth that is necessary to Salvation, in
which the Pope or a Council cannot err, while they follow the Spirit of Truth
in the Scriptures, and not compel the Spirit and Scriptures to follow them. For
they do not irresistibly force the minds of Christians into truth: Or else
relate only to the Catholic Church and not Mat. 18. 20.
to the particular Roman, or else are applicable to priva^e Assemblies and
their Worship of God, which no body but Quakers and Enthusiasts think to be
infallible. And all the first Ages of Christianity and undoubted Tradition
never in the least imagined such an Infallibility as now the Church of Rome
dreams of. They are at War among themselves where this Infallibility is lodged,
either in the Pope alone, or in a General Council alons, or in both together,
the Pope sitting in person there, or by his Legates, or in the council
confirmed by the Pope; till they agree among themselves and prove it better, we
say it is no where placed but in the Scriptures, and they do not prove any other
person or persons upon Earth to be infallible in their determinations. To say
such an infallible Judge of Controversies to guide the Church, is absolutely
necessary; and therefore Divine Providence has placed him some where or other,
and who but the Pope can be the man? is only to prescribe methods unto GOD, and
teach him how to govern his Church, and not be thankful for the good old ways
of Salvation and Peace (Scriptures, an honest Judgment with Divine assistance
and humane means) he has chalkt out for us, but contrive some new ones of
their own. Such infallibility must be of no use to the Church of GOD, for upon
the Romish principles, it cannot be known, for the Pope before he be Infallible
must be Bishop of Rome, but the Sacrament of Order, according to the Council of
Trent, receives its validity from the intention of the Priest, that when he
ordained him Bishop, he did what the Church intended, and who can tell upon
these grounds, what this supposed Priest was, who gave this Order, or dyve into
his thoughts and intentions, which their Casuists confess may sometimes be very
perverse. But if there be this Infallibility at Rome, why do not the Countries
and Religious Orders in Archbishop Laud against Fisher, 27 2.
them still under their Dominion receive the blessed Fruits of it, and still
all the brawls and squables among themselves, if his Holiness be at leisure,
and it be worth his while: And why should not the Champions of Rome bend all
their power to prove this main point of Infallibility, when all other
controversies would fall under and submit unto its power, a compendious way to
make the Christian world at Peace and Unity with its self. But why need we
labor to disprove the Popes Infallibility, when themselves put their shoulders
to it, and do the work for us, in disputing among themselves, whither the Pope
being an Heretic may be deposed, by which Question they confess that he may
fall into heresy; which is error of the highest nature, carrying wilfulness
and obstinacy with it. And acordingly these Infallible men have been guilty of
Heresies, as Pope Honorius of Monothelitism; and Liberius of Arrianism and the
like, and many of them lived most debauched lives, as fatal to Christianity as
Heresy, and Fallibility, and wherein Providence is highly concerned. This
Doctrine of Infallibility looks like a plain contrivance of the Romish Church,
having some way or other slipped into these gross errors from small beginings, and
finding them not defensible by all the sleights and arts of their cunning
heads, are forced to quit their hold and betake themselves to their common
Sanctuary of Infallibility, that let these things be what they will in dispute
between us and them. they are sure they are great Truths by virtue of
Infallibility, which is one of the Miracles of Rome, which can change the
nature of things, Fowlis hist. Preface p. 1.
which may be true in England, and the quite contrary at Rome, as Father Cotton
and other Jesuits affirmed at Paris. For it is plain to all impartial
judgments, that their Doctrine of Purgatory, Transubstantiation, and the like,
are not to be found in the Scriptures, are utterly unknown to the truly
ancient Fathers and the eldest and purest times of Christianity, and contrary
to the reason of mankind. They may as well tell us that the City of Rome was
never sacked and spoiled because some Flatterers humored her Pride and
arrogance calling her Vrbs aeterna and immobile saxum. Grot in Apoc. c. 17.
the immortal city and impregnable Rock, as that these gross errors never
invaded and ruined the Christian faith, because of the fine name of
Infallibility, which they arrogate to themselves. And may as well put out our
eyes, and then bid us see if we can discover any errors in the Romish Church.
And St. Peter's being at Rome proves no more that he left Infallibility behind
him, then consecrated clouts sent from Rome that the Infant that wears them
shall ever after be a firm defender of the Romish Faith.

4. This Question will serve any Heresies or errors that have got some
Antiquity on their side against a Reformation. If it be true in this case, it is
so in all others, and then what a shelter have they provided for all Heresies,
if they chance to live long, to be safe and secure in, and escape correction.
And there are many errors contemporary with Christianity it self in its first
plantation in the World, at least followed it very close at the heels, such
were the Ancient Gnostics, the Carpocrations or Ebionites, the spawn of Magus
and others, who can plead great Antiquity on their side, and as properly ask
any Reformer of their Heresies, Where was his Religion before such a time, as
the inconstant World began to favor his new Faith and Innovation. And so
Errors once superinduced upon the Truth, will become by Age Truth it self, and
are never to be mended for fear of this pert Question, and charge of
Innovation. And it is plain that new and old are but uncertain Characters to
judge of Truth and Falsehood by, there being sometimes a new Truth that is
lately discovered to be so, but really old, and an old error kept up a long
time by force or art, and walking in the garb of Truth, but truly new, having
come in after the Truth it vies with: Time like a River many times bringing
down Straw and Trash, and leaving weightier things behind, which when they come
to be retrieved are called new Fashions and Inventions. When Abraham restored
the true Worship of GOD, and stripped it of Idolatry and Superstition, the
Chaldean Priests, whose Power and Interest was shaken by it, were very brisk
and ready to charge this pious and mighty Man from the East, with Novelty and
Singularity in his Religion, the false service of GOD in Isaiah 41. 2.
these Countries being then ancient and almost universal, though the Patriarchs
Religion did derive it self from a very ancient stock, that of Adams in
Paradise, kept up by an Enoch and a Noah in single Families, when all Flesh had
corrupted their ways, and now delivered unto Abraham, and now all the Genesis 6.
11.
sticklers for a false Religion began to upbraid the Sons and Followers of
Abraham's Faith with Novelty, and asked them, Where was your Religion before the
times of Abraham? who set up his but yesterday, and scorns and uncharitably
damns all his Forefathers, who of old lived beyond the River in our Religion.
The same Objection might have been cast in the teeth of Moses, when he was
settlling a Religion delivered to him by GOD, in opposition to the Idolatries
and false Devotions of the World, and to serve his farther designs of
providence; that he affected Novelty and Singularity; that all the World stood
against him in this; and one of his Disciples afterward was inhumane and
uncharitable in praying Psalm 79. 6.
GOD to pour out his indignation upon the Heathen, who had not known his Laws.
And his Successor Joshua might have met Josb. 24. 15.
with the same fare, when he bids his People choose whom they will serve,
either the Gods beyond the Flood, and in Egypt, or the Gods of the Amorites,
Old and great Nations, who might have had this Objection in its full strength
on their side, or the GOD of Abraham, and stoutly tells them, Let that
plausible Argument weigh withthem what it will, as for my self and his Family
they would serve the LORD. And as this Religion might degenerate in descending
Ages, so any Restorer of it might be set upon by the same frivolous Objection,
and so it happened to our Messiah (and his forerunner who was to restore all
things) who when he began to reform the false glosses, and corrupt senses,
which the Scribes and Pharisees had put upon the Law of Moses, and cry down
their Traditions which made the Commands of GOD of none effect, was looked upon
as an Enemy to Moses, a Blasphemer of the Law, a Prophaner of the Temple, and a
Changer of all their Religion, whose Design was only to fill up their Law, and
restore it to its Natural Beauty and Perfection, and before Abraham was, I am,
not only in his Divine Nature, and designation to his Office, but in his
Religion also, which now he was going to to teach the jew and Genti^e too. And
Heb. 9. 10.
now the times of a general Reformation being come and the Apostles were
Preaching this excellent Religion unto all the World, Jew and Gentile conspire
together in the same Language and call them setters forth of strange Gods and
new Acts 24. 14. Acts 28. 22
Heresies, Heads and Contrivers of new Sects* and Ways, and are whipped for
Vagrants and Impostors, who would cheat the World out of their old paternal
Religions, that were entailed upon them, teach them to speak ill of the Gods of
their Fathers, and Predecessors, and to think they all dyed in a false
Religion, and to embrace a newfangled Faith of a few illiterate and rambling
fellows who had turned the World upside down. And had this Argument prevailed
then, as much as the Romanists do desire it should new, we should have had no
Christianity among us, the Idol-Gods of our, Ancestors in this Island, their
Woodens and Twisters would have prescribed against Christ himself.

3. To turn the Question upon them, and ask them some others of the like
nature. Men that are insolent, and ever boasting of the Antiquity of their
Family, and upbraiding others with their obscure Birth and Extraction, do many
times meet with some cross Questions about the Head and Fountain of their
Families, which many times proves only to be a Shepherd, or meaner Original,
made glorious with arrogant Titles and borrowed Names. Search into the Pedigree
of Romes Religion, we do not find Christ, or St. Peter, or any of his Apostles
to be the Authors of it; but Pride, Interest, and Design, old Vices indeed, but
new Fathers of a Christian church, which brought in a late and new generation
of Opinions, and additions to Christ's Religion, clothing them with the
venerable Names of Primitive and Apostolical. Where was the Romish Religion
before the Council of Trent concluded only about the year 1563. of a latter
date then when Luther first began, which legitimated all their Innovations, the
issue of Scholastic Wranglings, pretended Drea^^s, and Visions, forced and
unnatural, Senses of Scripture, Ambition and Profit, the Fxchequer of Rome, to
be made Sons of the Church and Fundamentals of the Christian Faith. Many of
their own Writers confess that for 1400 or ^ 500 years the Pope was not
believed to be infallible, till of late some of their flaming Zealots have
vested him with infallibility, whereby the Roman Church is sick unto death, and
no cure is to be applied, because she is so certain and sure that she is well.
Their lewd Doctrine of Transubstantiation, was not made an Article of Faith,
till the Council of La^eran under Innocent the third, above 1200 years after
Christ, and many of their own Writers are still dissatisfied about it. The
Title of Universal Bishop was obtained by Pope Boniface the Third, not till
about 600 years after Christ, fearing a powerful Rival the Constantinopolitan
Bishop, who affected the same, and therefore by the Popes themselves was
declaimed against as proud and Antichristian, but now by Hypocrisy and base
compliance with the wicked Phocas, who was guilty of Treason and Murder against
the Emperor Mauritius, Rome gained the delicious point, and has made it a
fundamental Article of her new Religion, though the Popes came not up to their
swaggering temper and Power of Hectoring Christian Princes some hundred of
years af^erwards. The Doctrine of Purgatory, which some derive from the
Platonic Fancies of Origin, the Montanism of Tertullian, pretended Visions,
and Pagan Stories, Rhetorical Flourishes, and doubtful Expressions of the later
Fathers, yet it was not positively affirmed till about the year 1140. and not
made an Article of Faith till the Council of Trent, then indeed a good Estate
became a surer way to Heaven then a good Life and Conversation. The use of
indulgences was the Moral to the Fable of Purgatory, and began to grow much
what about the same time, though it came not to the height and perfection till
Pope Leo the Tenths time, when Luther so stoutly opposed them, then Heaven was
set to sale, and the best Chapman was the greatest Saint, though they boast of
the second Council of Nice for the Antiquity of their Image -- Worship, (And
if it will do thern any good, so they may of Simon Magus, who was of an elder
date, and a very fit Patron of Acts 11. 13
such an Opinion) yet the Council of Frankfurt condemned it, and the purest
times did not so much as allow the making of Images. And it was not the
Catholic Doctrine in France for almost 900 years after Christ, nor in Germany
till after the 12th C^^tury; then indeed such a Doctrine might be very proper,
when true Religion was turned into Pageantry and a form of Godliness. The
number of the seven Sacraments is now an Article of the Romish Faith, yet the
Council of Florence ended in the year 1439 was the first Council, and Peter
Lombard the first man that precisely fixed that number. That the Laity ought to
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper only in one kind was never made an
Article of Faith till the Council of Constance concluded in the year 1418; then
indeed that Council with the greatest insolence, and a direct Invasion of the
Authority of CHRIST, took the Cup from the Laymens mouths, notwithstanding (as
it was then acknowledged) the Institution of CHRIST to the contrary, and they
may as well Christen the Laics Children only in the name of the Holy Ghost,
leaving out the Father and the Son by the way of concomitancy, it being as
Lawful to Baptize as Communicate by the halfes: For what cannot such a pretended
Power do?

The prohibiting of Priests to Marry was not in perfection, as it is now, till
Pope Gregory the Sevenths time. Let them tell us where it is said by Christ, or
his Apostles, or any of the truly Ancient Writers of the christian Church, that
Penance is a Sacrament, or that Auricular Confession is necessary to
Salvation, or that Prayers ought to be made in an unknown Tongue, or that good
works are strictly meritorious, or where can they find the many Impieties and
absurdities of their Mass in those early times of Antiquity. And since they are
fond of asking us this Question, we might ask them many more, about the many
Fopperies and Innovations in their Faith and Devotion, and many they are, and
large is the inventory, almost as many as are the Christian Truths in direct
opposition to them, or prevarication from them: But they seem to confess the
newness of their Religion, when they arrogantly set up a Power in their Church,
to frame new Articles of Faith, and many things; only Opinions and Notions at
first, have grown up by degrees to Fundamental Truths, and having once slipped
into error, they are bound to maintain it, for the Reputation and Aut^ority of
Holy Church. And who knows how many of this Nature are upon the Romish forge,
ready to be put into their Creed, and where must we end; not till it be
believed. that consecrated Feathers and Holy Water, can convey Divine Grace to
us, and drive away wicked Spirits, and the Weathercocks of our Churches be
thought P^illars of it. Would the Champions of Rome speak out, they would tells
us, as their Eckius did the Duke of Bavaria, That the Doctrine of Luther might
be overthrown by the Fathers, though not by the Scriptures; it is a plain
confession that we have the truest Antiquity on our side, and in the beginning
it was not so. But we add, that we have the Fathers also on our side, for
otherwise what mean their Expurgat orian Indices of the Fathers, and other
Ancient Writters, but that they very well know, that these are old Enemies to
Pope Pins's new Creed, and the Truth in them confounds their error. Such an
account as this, about the Original and Progress of their new Additions to the
old Faith was convenient to be given, not because the Nature of the thing did
necessarily require it, for it had been sufficient only to have proved, that
these Romish Additions to the Christian Faith, are contrary to the Word of GOD,
and no where to be found in any of the Divine Writings, the only Infallible
Rule of Faith, and that they have no power of minting new Articles Fundamental
to Salvation* but because the Disciples of Rome so frequently ask us the
Question, and lay so much stress upon it, Bellar. Tom. 2. p. 286.
if these are Innovations creept into their Church, who was the first Author of
them? when did he begin? in whose Reign and in what place did he live? who did
oppose him? what company believed on him? and what his new Opinions were as
they instance in Arrianism and other Heresies? And because they fancy we cannot
make all these particulars so absolutely plain. therefore they say we have
falsely charged the Romish Church with new errors, and that their Faith is
truly ancient and by an uninterrupted Succession of Infallible Bishops has
been conveyed down from Christ and his Apostles in its full purity to this
present Age. To satisfy their curiosity, the defenders of the Reformation have
done this; but suppose they could not have been so particular about the birth
of these new Errors, or had made some mistakes in the compass of time, yet
however the charge of Innovation against the Romish Church stands firm and good
upon these accounts.

1. That Reformation carries not so much a respect to the Error when it began,
as to the Error it self. Not whither it be sooner or later, but whither it be
an error contrary to the true Christian Faith. It may serve some honest
purposes to know the who, and the when, the where, and the how, and other
circumstances of its beginning, and proceeding; but the necessity of Reformation
springs from the nature of the Error, which came from the invention of men,
and not the Authority of Christ. And matters not much, whither Simon Magus, who
was contemporary with the Apostles, was the first Author of it, or Pope
Hildebr^^d at so great a distance. It Is enough, that we are certain and sure,
that the Popish Doctrines which we condemn, by comparing them with the
Scriptures, are not Christ's and his Apostles, have none of their Images or
Superscriptions upon them, who only had full Authority to make them current,
and true Articles of Faith. They have indeed indeed Christianity among them,
but like Joseph's coat, so dipped in blood, so over-laced with Fopperies and
undecent Ceremonies, and so many new pieces stitched to the old Cloth, that
the old Fathers, if alive, would scarce know it to be the true Joseph's, and
would not trouble themselves so much, to ask the time when this came to pass,
as lament the sadness of the change. And the Apostles did not so much care to
tell the punctual time to the Disciples when Antichrist should discover
himself, as to make them stand upon their guard to defend that Faith which he
would invade, where and whenever he should come, or whosoever he was.

2. The difficuity of knowing the precise and punctual times when Errors first
began. In many sorts of Changes or Innovations, it is hard to know the nice time
of their beginning, but some latitude of Judging is allowed, and why not in
things especially relating to Religion. Are there not wild Opinions left upon
Record among the Pagan Writers, whose Authors are either unknown, or which are
fasely fathered upon others, and as hard to be known as the head of Nile. Can
the nicest Romanist tell us what Rabbi; and in what place and age first
superinduced the several false Glosses and Senses to the Law of Moses, yet our
Savior (though he knew them well) thought it sufficient to tell them, that in
the beginning it was not so, and by comparing the Mosaic Religion, it plainly
appears they were new additions to the good old way And how many Errors sprung
up in times of Christianity, of whose Original and other Circumstances both the
Romanists and our selves are yet uncertain. And how many things of this nature
more near our own times are we puzzled about, and the difficulty of knowing them
arises principally from this twofold account.

1. From the subtilty of the contrivers of Errors: Which many times are the
cunning and the wise in their Generation, which the necessity of their cause
requires; Truth being strong, and Error nuturally weak, and that sly
deceiving Spirits lends it his utmost assistance to serve the design. Such men
know how to disguise new Falsehoods in the old habits of Truth, to make them
look ancient and venerable; they feel and know the temper of the age, and fit
their Opinions to the interest and pleasure of it. They prepare their errors
to be received by degrees, and one part must draw on the other, and the who^e
must be ins^^sibly swallowed down. So it happened in the adoration and invocation
of Saints and Images, and the whole structure of the Romish* Religion, which by
several steps and in many ages advanced to its mighty bulk. The cunning knew
the consequences of their own positions, how far the^ would reach, which the
vulgar eye discerned not; they well foresaw how their Hey and Stuble, variety
of Phrases, and changes of Syllables, would at ^ength fire the Foundation of
Religion, yet being invented at first by the Angelical Doctors and leaders of
an Age, for fame and reputation sake, they and their followers first defended
them for bare Truths, afterward for Sacred and Fundamental ones; and things at
first only piously believed, soon after have been adopted into a Creed: and men
of Rashness and Superstition only great in Place and Office, have vented
opinions whose fatal conclusions they at first, we hope; did not know, yet the
cunning many times have hatched* what they left, and improved it fatally to
Religion; the greatness of the man, whither an Innocent or an Hildebrand gave
the error its first reputation, and the cunning of others its strength and
argument. Many of the great and knowing heads of the World being corrupted unto
the Roman side, to defend those errors which had got footing in the Church.
But how can we unlock the secret methods of Rome, or describe the ways and
policies by which the mystery of Iniquity works; Yet we are sure it is carried
on, by the windings and turnings of the Serpent, and men that he imploys upon
design to ruin truth; for when the Apostle describes the sad Apostacies and
defections from the Faith, they are said to be wrought by men of Skill Ephesians. 4.
14.
and Art, who lie in wait to deceive.

2, From the Passions and Infirmities of other men. These give the false and
busy deceiver an easy Victory. When Opinions are so contrived as to serve the
designs of Pride and Covetousness, Ambition and Lust, and other Vices they
easily pass for mighty Truths, their Original is not inquired into, the
Judgment is bribed and they bear the title of ancient and Primitive, or what
the deceiver pleases: For these Passions have effeminated the mind, made it
soft and slug^ish, and any bold error shall slip down, rather then be at the
charge of a farther search and enquiry to know whither these things be so or
no. The Roman Religion being so well cut out in its different Doctrines, to hit
men's Vices and Passions, Gaiety or Melancholy, Enthusiasm or Fury, Power or
Design, it is no wonder, it did prevail in a sly and silent manner, interest
having put out their eyes, this Kingdom came not with observation, and the
approaches of the Enemy in the night of Ignorance, viz. the darkness that could
be felt of the ninth, tenth, and eleventh century, when all good Learning and
Manners too were fast asleep, the time when many of the new devices of Rome
were hammering out, and the noise not heard, were not discovered, till they had
taken possession, and then by virtue of Power and great Names defended their
Title. And their own Writers confess, that many of the great Guardians of
Faith, the Popes of Rome, were very Vicious and Illiterate persons, whose Vice
and Ignorance kept them nodding, while the little Theives, the Notions, and
Speculations of men of Wit and Interest set open the Churches doors for the
greater Errors to come crouding in. Our Savior confirms the truth of this
when he compares his Church to a Field which had been sown by him, and his
Apostles, with very good seed, Wheat or some other Grain; but while men sleept,
when Christians were grown wicked and careless, ignorant or factious, comes the
Enemy and scatters the Tares, and a new harvest of Weeds, Heretical Doctrines,
Superstitious Practices, Foppish and Fantastic Mat. 13. 24, 25.
Rites, overran and choakt the purer Grain. And the Apostle tells his
Disciples, that men of dangerous principles abusing the grace of God, speaking
evil of Dignities and despising Dominions and denying Christ that bought them,
had creept in unawares, being well disguised with fine Names and pretenses,
Jude 4.
while good men were careless and sleept. And when most begin to broach n^w
Errors, and spread their inventions for mighty Truths, they do it with all the
skill and artifice that so bad a design can possibly require. Error and
Innovation necessarily calling for the utmost cunning and slyness to its aid
and assistance. Religion therefore may easily suffer a considerable change, yet
good men know not how, neither the time nor authors of it.

It being therefore only absolutely necessary for us to know that whenever
and howsoever these errors in the Church first sprung up, that they were
contrary to the Primitive Faith of Christ and his Apostles, and therefore were
to be amended and weeded up notwithstanding the common question, where was our
harvest of Wheat before the Weeders our Reformers came? for the Church of
England finding old Christianity strangely overgrown with the new Doctrines
and Creeds of Rome, contrary to the Offices of CHRIST, the design of his
undertaking for Mankind, and the true spirit of his Religion, it became a duty,
as much as they loved their Souls, and would be true and loyal unto CHRIST, to
shake off these new and sinful Impositions, and restore true and primitive
Christianity. Had our differences with Rome consisted only in things less fit
and proper, used by them in their religious Offices, or in Rituals or Gestures
not so decent, they might have had some pretense to roar against us, for
breaking off Communion with her, but when they plow up the very Foundation, as
one of her Pagan Captains did the Walls of Jerusalems Temple; and lay all waste
before them, their new additions eating out the very Heart of old Religion, to
thunder out damnation against us, because we renounce her Communion in this, is
to add uncharitableness and other gross Vices to their former sin, as though
they could not preserve Christianity, but by defacing of it more. Our Prince
being constituted by GOD a nursing Father of the Church, and our Bishops in
their Episcopal power being coordinate with him of Rome, or any other in the
Christian World, ought under the penalty of Damnation, and did accordingly,
reform the Romish corruptions, which had tainted the Vitals of Christianity; an
indispensable duty it was to preserve the Primitive Faith, like a chaste Virgin,
and not to suffer it to be 2 Cor. 11. 2.
longer prostituted to the Designs and Passions of men by a solemn Vow, and our
Souls were at stake, we had engaged to preserve it pure and undefiled, and
therefore with all just and proper ways and methods we were bound earnestly to
contend for it. In duty therefore to our Lord and Masters Command, at such a
time we began our Reformation, but wish that it had been promoted and
completed many years before, though the same Question would have been as fitly
asked then, or any other time, except they think that errors must be immortal,
and the gates of Heaven shall not prevail against them. The goodness and wisdom
of our Reformation, would be readily acknowledged and imitated, did not Fame
and Ambition, Power, and Secular Interest, infect the Eye, and change the
natural shape and color of things; and it is a sign the cause of Rome wants
strength, when such a trifling, only popular, Objection against our Reformation
is made so powerful to preserve their Disciples in their Communion, and amuse
our own. And we need say no more against it but this, and it is no Roman
uncharitableness and rigor. That if Rome, notwithstanding all the clear
evidence against her new and upstart Opinions, shall obstinately defend them,
and contemn a wise and pious Reformation, let her suffer the just punishment of
her wilful errors. He that will prefer an old Disease before a new Cure, let
him be for ever sick. For we have healed Babylon, and she was not healed.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE ABOUT TRADITION: Showing what is meant by it. AND WHAT TRADITION
Is to be Received, AND WHAT TRADITION: Is to be Rejected.

The third EDITION.

EDINBURGH, Printed by J. Reid, 1686.

A DISCOURSE ABOUT TRADITION
AN Obligation being laid upon us at our Baptism, to believe and to do the
whole will of GOD, revealed unto us by Christ Jesus; it concerns every one that
would be saved, to enquire where that whole, entire Will of God is to be found?
where he may so certainly meet with it, and be so informed about it, that he
may rest satisfied he has it all?

And there would be no difficulty in this matter, had not the worldly interest
of some men, raised Controversies about it; and made that intricate and
perplexed, which, in it self, is easy and plain. For the Rehearsal of the
Apostles Creed at Baptism, and of that alone, as a Summary of the Faith, whose
sincere profession intitles us to the Grace there conferred, warrants the
Doctrine of the Church of England, in its VI Article, that the Holy Scripture
contains all things necessary to Salvation, so that whatsoever is not read
therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man, that it
should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary
to Salvation.

But this strickes off so many of the Doctrines of the present Roman Church,
which are not to be found in the Scripture, nor have any countenance there,
that they are forced to say, the Faith once delivered to the Saints (mentioned
by St. Jude) is not entirely delivered in the Scripture, but we must seek for
the rest in the Traditions of the Church. Which Traditions, say they, are to be
received as a part of the Rule of Faith, with the same Religious Reverence that
we do the Holy Scripture.

Now, though this is not really the bottom of their heart (as will appear
before I have done) but they finally rest for their satisfaction in matters of
Faith somewhere else; yet this being plausibly pretended by them, in their own
Justification, that they follow Tradition; and in their Accusations of us, that
we foresake Tradition: I shall briefly let all our People see, who are not
willing to be deceived, what they are to judge and say in this business of
Tradition. About which a great noise is made, as if we durst not stand to it,
and as if they of the Roman Church steadfastly kept it, without any variation:
neither of which is true. I shall plainly show in this short Discourse.

The meaning of the Word.
Which for clearness sake shall begin with the meaning of the word TRADITION:
which in English is no more than delivering unto another; and by a Figure,
signifies the matter which is delivered; and among Christians, the Doctrine of
our Religion delivered to us. And there being two ways of delivering Doctrines
to us, either by writing or by word of mouth; it signifies either of them
indifferently: the Scriptures, as you shall see presently being Traditions. But
custom has determined this word to the last of these ways, and distinguished
Tradition from Scriptures, or writings: at least from the Holy Writings; and
made it signify that which is not delivered in the Holy Scriptures, or
Writings. For though the Scripture be Tradition also, and the very first
Tradition and the Fountain of all true and legitimate Antiquity; yet in common
Language Traditions now are such ancient Doctrines, as are conveyed to us some
other way: whither by word of mouth, as some will have it, from one Generation
to another; or by humane Writings, which are not of the same authority with the
Holy Scriptures.

How to judge of them.
Now there is no better way to judge aright of such Traditions, then by
considering these four things.

First, The Authors of them, whence they come.

Secondly, the matter of them.

Thirdly, Their Authority,

Fourthly, The means by which we come to know they derive themselves from such
Authors as they pretend unto; and consequently have any authority to demand
admission into our belief-

1. For the first of these, every body knows and confesses that all Traditions
suppose some Author, from whom they originally come, and who is the diliverer
of those Doctrines to Christian people: who being told by the present Church,
or any person in it, that such and such Doctrines are to be received, though
not contained in the Holy Scriptures, because they are Traditions; ought in
Conscience to inquire from whom those Traditions come, or who first delivered
them: By which means they will be able to judge what credit is to be given to
them, when it is once cleared to them from what Authors they really come. Now
whatsoever is delivered to us in Christianity, comes either from Christ, or
from his Apostles, or from the Church [either in General, or in part) or from
private Doctors in the Church. There is nothing now called a Tradition in the
Christian World, but proceeds from one or from all of these four Originals.

2. And the matter which they deliver to us, (which is next to be considered) is
either concerning that Faith, and godly life, which is necessary to Salvation;
or concerning Opinions, Rites, Ceremonies, Customs, and things belonging to
Order. Both which, as I said, may be conveyed either by writing or without
writing; by the Divine Writings, or by Humane Writings; though these two ways
are not alike certain.

3. Now it is evident to every understanding, that things of both sorts which
are delivered to us, have their Authority, from the credit of the Author from
whence they first come. If that be Divine, their Authority is Divine; if it be
only Humane, their Authority can be no more. And among Humane Authors, if
their Credit be great, the Authority of what they deliver it great; if it be
little, its Authority is little: and accordingly must be accepted with greater
or lesser Reverence.

Upon which score whatsoever can be made appear to come from Christ, it has
the highest authority, and ought to be received with absolute submission to it,
because he is the Son of God. And likewise whatsoever appears to have been
delivered by the Apostles in his Name, has the same Authority; they being his
Ministers, sent by Him, as He was by God the Father; and endued with a Divine
Power, which attested unto them. In like manner, whatsoever is delivered by the
Church, has the same Authority which the Church has: which though it be not
equal to the foregoing, (the Church having no such Divine Power, nor infallible
Judgment, as the Apostles had) yet is of such weight and moment, that it ought
to be reverenced next to theirs. I mean, the sense of the whole Church; which
must be acknowledged also to be of greater or lesser Authority, as it was
nearer or farther off from the times of the Apostles. What was delivered by
their immediate Followers, ought to weigh so much with us, as to have the
greatest Humane Authority; and to be looked upon as little less then Divine The
Universal consent of the next Generation, is an Authority approaching as near
to the former, As the Ages do one to another. But what is delivered in latter
times, has less humane Authority, though pretending to come, but without
proof, from more early days: and has no Authority at all, if it contradict
the sense of the Church, when it was capable to be better acquainted with the
mind of Christ, and of his Apostles.

As for particular Churches, their Authority ought to be reverenced by every
Member of them, when they profess to deliver sincerely the sense of the Church
Universal; and when they determine, as they have power to do, Controversies of
Faith, or decree Rites and Ceremonies (not contrary to GOD's Word) in which
every one ought to acquiesce.

But we cannot say the same of that which comes from any private Doctor in the
Church, Modern or Ancient: which can have no greater Authority than he himself
was of; but is more or less credible, according as he was more or less
diligent, knowing, and strictly religious.

4. But to all this, it is necessary that it do sufficiently appear, that such
Doctrines do really come from those Authors, whose Traditions they pretend to
be. This is the great, and the only thing, about which there is any question
among sober and judicious persons. How to be sufficiently assured, that any
thing which is not delivered unto us in the Scriptures, does certainly come,
for instance, from CHRIST, or his holy Apostles. For in this all Christians are
agreed, that whatsoever was delivered by CHRIST, from GOD the Father, or by the
Apostles from CHRIST, is to be embraced and firmly retained, whither it be
written or not written: that makes no difference at all, if we can be certain
it came from Him, or them. For what is contained in the Holy Scripture, has
not its Authority, because it is written; but because it came from GOD. If
CHRIST said a thing, it is enough; we ought to submit unto it: But we must
first know that he said it; and let the means of knowing it be what they will,
if we can certainly know He said it, we yield to it.

But how we can be certain (at this distance of time, from his being in the
World) that any thing now pretending to it, was said by CHRIST, which is not
recorded in the Holy Scriptures; there is the business. And it is a matter of
such importance, that it cannot be expected any man should be satisfied without
very good evidence of it: but he may very reasonably question, whither many
things be not falsely ascribed unto Him, and unto his Apostles; which never
came from them. Nay, whither those things which are affirmed to be the
Doctrines of the Primitive Church, and of the whole Church, be not of some
later Original, and of some particular Church, or private Doctors in the
Church: unto whose Authority that Reverence is not due, which ought to be paid,
and which we willingly give unto the former.

Now according to this state of the matter, any good Christian among us (who is
desirous to know the Truth, and to preserve himself from Error) may easily
discern what Traditions ought to be received, and held fast; and what we are
not bound unto, without any alteration; and what are not to be received at all,
but to be rejected; and how far those things are from being credible, which the
Roman Church now would obtrude upon us, under the name of Apostolical, or
ancient Traditions; without any Authority from the Holy Scriptures, or (in
truth) any Authority but their own, and some private Doctors, whose Opinions
cannot challenge an absolute submission to them.

But to give every one, that would be rightly informed, fuller satisfaction in
this business, I shall not content my self with this General Discourse; but
shall particularly and distinctly show what Traditions we own, and heartily
receive; and then what Traditions we cannot own, but with good reason re^use.
These shall be the two Parts of this short Treatise: wherein I shall endeavor
that our people may be instructed not merely to reject Errors, but also to
affirm the Truth.

PART I. What Traditions we receive.
1 AND in the first place we acknowledge that what is now Holy Scripture, was
once only Tradition, properly so called; that is Doctrine by word of mouth. In
this we all agree, I say, that the whole Gospel or Doctrine of CHRIST, which is
now upon record in those Books, we call the Scriptures; was once unwritten,
when it was first preached by our blessed Savior and his Apostles.

Which must be noted, to remove that small Objection with which they of the
Roman Church are wont to trouble some peoples minds, merely from the Name of
Traditions: which St. Paul in his Epistles, requires those to whom he writes,
carefully to observe; particularly in that famous place, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. Where
we find this Exhortation, Therefore, Brethren, stand fast, and hold the
Traditions which ye have been taught, whither by word, or our Epistle.

Behold, say they, here are things not written; but delivered by word of mouth;
which the Thessalonians are commanded to hold. Very true, (should the people of
our Church say, to those that insist upon this) but, behold also, we beseech
you, what the Traditions are of which the Apostle here writes; and mark also
when it was that the^ were partly unwritten.

For the first of these, it is manifest that he means by Traditions, the
Doctrines which we now read in the holy Scriptures. For the very first word
therefore, is an indication that this verse is an inference, from what he had
said in the foregoing. Now the things he before treated of, are the grand
Doctrines of the Gospel, or the way of Salvation revealed unto us by Christ
Jesus, from God the Father: who has from the beginning (says he, v. 13, 14.)
chosen you to Salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of
the truth, whereunto he has called you, etc. This is the sum of the Gospel,
and whatsoever he had delivered unto them about these matters, of their
Sanctification, or of their Faith, or of their Salvation, by obtaining the
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, (to which they were chosen, and called, through
their Sanctification and Faith) this he exhorts them to hold fast; whither it
was contained in this Epistle, or in his former preaching: for he had not
occasion now to write all that he had formerly delivered by word of mouth.

Which afterward was put in writing: for mark (which is the second thing) the
time when some things remained unwritten; which was, When this Epistle was sent
to the Thessalonians. Then some things concerning their salvat^on, were not
contained in this Letter; but, as yet, delivered only by word of mouth unto
this Church. I say, to this Church: for it does not follow, that all Churches
whatsoever, were, at the time of the writing of this Epistle, without the
Doctrine of the Gospel completely written; because among the Thessalonians,
some Traditious or Doctrines were as yet unwritten Which can in reason be
extended no farther then to themselves, and to this Epistle; which did contain
all the Evangelical Doctrine, though other writings, which it is possible were
then extant in some other Churches, did.

And, I say, as yet unwritten in that Church; because the Thessalonians, no
doubt, had afterward more communicated to them in writing, besides this
Epistle, or the former either: viz. all the Gospels, and the Acts of Apostles,
and other Apostolical Epistles, which we now enj^y. Which Writings, we may be
confident, contain the Traditions which the Apostle had delivered to the
Thessalonians, by Word, concerning the Incarnation, Birth, Life, Miracles,
Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of our blessed Savior; and concerning the
coming of the holy Ghost, and the mission of the Apostles: and all the rest
which is there recorded for our everlasting instruction.

And therefore it is in vain to argue from this place, that there are still, at
this day, some unwriten Traditions, which we are to follow; unless the Apostle
had said, Hold the Traditions which ye have been taught by word, which shall
never be written. And it is in vain for us to inquire after any such
Traditions, or rely upon them, when they are offered unto us; unless we were
sure that there was something, necessary to our Salvation, delivered in their
Sermons, which was never to be delivered in writting; and unless we know where
to find it, as certainly as we do that which they have committed to writing.

And it is to no more purpose to show us the word Tradition, in other places of
St. Paul's Writings; particularly in the third Chapter of the same Epistle, v.
6. where, by Tradition, St Chrys^ston understands the Apostles Example, which
he had given them; and so it follows, v. 7. For your selves know how you ought
to follow us, etc, or it may refer to the commandment he had given them in his
former Epistle, 4. 11. (which the Reader may be pleased to compare with this)
but cannot with any color be expounded to signify any Doctrine of Faith,
about which the Roman Church now contends with us. For it is plain, it has
respect to their good manners, and orderly living: for the information of
which, we need go no where, but to the holy Scriptures; wherein we are taught
full enough, how we ought to walk and please GOD in all things.

The same may be said of that place, 1 Cor. 11. 2. Now I praise you, Brethren,
that you remember me in all things, and keep the Traditions (or Ordinances, as
we render it, or Precepts, as the vulgar Latin it self has it) as I have
delivered them unto you. For we are so observant of what he has delivered,
that we are confident, if Saint Paul were now alive, and in this Church, he
would praise us (as he does the Corinthians) for keeping the Traditions as be
delivered them; and on the contrary, reprove and condemn the Roman Church, for
not keeping them as they were first delivered. And we have good ground for this
confidence; there being an instance in that very Chapter, which demonstrates
our fidelity in preserving the very first Traditions, and their unfaithfulness
in letting them go. For he tells us, v. 23. that he had delivered to them what
he had received of the Lord: and that which he received and delivered, was
about the whole Communion (as you may read there and in the following verses,
24, 25.) in both kinds; the Cup, as well as the Bread. Thus, he says, the Lord
appointed it, and thus he delivered it: and this Tradition we keep entire, as
he received it of the Lord, and delivered it to his Church, in this Epistle,
which is a part of the holy Scripture: whereas they do not keep it, but have
broken this Divine Tradition, and give the Communion of Christ's Body and Blood
otherwise than St. Paul delivered, keeping the Cup from the People.

By which I desire all, that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, to judge which
Church keeps closest to the Apostolical Tradition (for so St. Paul calls this
Doctrine of the Communion in both kinds; that which he delivered, or left as a
Tradition with them) they that stick to what is unquestionably the Apostolical
Doctrine, or they that leave it, to follow those Doctrines (or Presumptions
rather) which at the best, are very dubious and uncertain.

And farther, I desire all that read this Paper, to consider whither it be
reasonable to think, that those Ri^es which have no Authority in the holy
Scripture (but were instituted perhaps by the Apostles) have been kept pure and
uncorrup^ed, according to their first intention: when these sacred Rites (for
instance, the holy E^charist) are not preserved entire, which are manifestly
ordained in the holy Writings.

And so much may serve for the first thing: for it would be too long, to
explain all the rest of the places of holy Scripture, which they are wont to
allege (though the word Tradition be not mentioned in them) to give a color
to their present pretenses; how pertinently may be judged by these places now
considered.

II. Secondly then, That Word of God which was once unwritten, being now
written, we acknowledge our selves to be much indebted to the Church of God in
all foregoing Ages, which has preserved the Scriptures, and delivered them
down to us, as his Word: which we ought to do unto those that shall succeed us;
as our Church teaches us in its Twentieth Article, where the Church is
affirmed to be a Witness and a keeper of holy Writ.

This Tradition we own, it being universal, continued, uninterrupted, and
undenied. Though, in truth, this is Tradition in another sense of the word; not
signifying the Doctrine delivered unto us, but the manner and means of its
delivery.

And therefore, if any Member of our Church be pressed by those of the Romish
Persuasion, with this Argument, for their present Traditions, that Scripture it
self is come to us by Tradition, let them answer thus: Very right, it is so,
and we thank God for it; therefore let this be no part of our dispute, it being
a thing presupposed in all Discourses about Religion, a thing agreed among all
Christian people, that we read the Word of GOD when we read the holy
Scriptures, Which being delivered to us, and accepted by us as his Word; we see
no necessity of any other Tradition or Doctrine, which is not to be found
there, or cannot be proved from thence: for they tell us, they are able to
make, even the men of God, wise unto Salvation.

And if they press you again, and say, How do you know that some Books are
Canonical, and others not, is it not by a constant Tradition? Answer them again
in this manner: Yes, this is true also, and would to GOD you would stand to
this universal Tradition, and receive no other Books, but what have been so
delivered. But know withal, that this universal Tradition of the Books of
Scripture (unto which you have added several Apocryphal Writings, which have
not been constantly delivered, as t^^se we receive) is no part of the Tradition
or Doctrine delivered. That is, no Doctrine distinct from the Scriptures; but
only the instrument or means of conveying that Doctrine unto us.

In short, it is the fidelity of the Church with whom the Canon of Scripture
was deposed; but is no more a Doctrine, not written in the Scripture, then the
Tradition or delivery of the Code, or Book of the Civil Law, is any Opinion or
Law not written in that Code.

And we are more assured of the fidelity of the Church herein, then the
Civilians can be assured of the Faithfulness of their Predecessors in
preserving and delivering the Books of their Law to them, because these holy
Books were always kept with a greater care, then any other Books whatsoever;
and in the acceptance of them also, we find there was a great caution used,
that they might not be deceived: all Christians looking upon them to be of such
importance, that all Religion, they thought, was concerned in them.

Of which, this is an Argument, that they who sought to destroy the Christian
Religion, in the Primitive times, sought nothing more then to destroy the
Bible. Which they were wont to demand of those who were suspected to be
Christians, to be delivered up to them, that they might burn it. And according
as men behaved themselves in this trial, so they were reputed to be Christians
or not Christians. And the Traditours, as they were called, that is, they who
delivered the holy Scriptures into the hands of the Pagans, were looked upon by
Christians, as men that were content to part with their Religion. For which
there could be no reason, but that they thought Christian Religion to be
therein contained, and to be betrayed by those who delivered them to be burnt.

By which I have proved more then I intended, in this part of my Discourse;
that in the holy Scriptures, the whole Will of God concerning our Salvation, is
contained. Which is the true Question between us and the Church of Rome^ Not
whither the Scripture be delivered to us as the Word of GOD, or no, (in this
our People ought to tell them we are all agreed) but whither they have been
delivered to us as the whole Will of GOD. And from that Argument now mentioned,
and many more, we conclude, that Universal Tradition having directed us unto
these Books and no other, they direct us sufficiently, without any other
Doctrines, unto GOD, and to our everlasting rest.

And if they urge you farther, and say, that the very Credit of the Scripture
depends upon Tradition: tell them that it is a Speech not to be endured, if
they mean thereby that it gives the Scripture its authority, (and if they mean
less, we are agreed, as has been already said) for it is to say, that Man
gives authority to GOD's Word. Whereas in truth, the holy Scriptures are not
therefore of Divine Authority, because the Church has delivered them so to be;
but the Church has delivered them so to be, because it knew them to be of such
authority. And if the Church should have conceived, or taught otherwise, of
these Writings, then as of the undoubted Oracles of GOD, she would have erred
damnably in such a Tradition.

I shall sum up what has been said in this second particular, in a few words.
Christ and his Apostles at first taught the Church by. word of mouth; but
afterward that which they preached was by the commandment of GOD committed to
writing, and delivered unto the Church, to be the ground of our Faith. Which is
no more then Irenaeus has said in express words. (L. 3. C. 1.) speaking of
them by whom the Gospel came unto all Nations: Which they then preached, but
afterward, by the Will of GOD delivered unto us in the Scriptures, to be, in
time to come, the Foundation and Pillar of our Faith.

III. And farther we likewise acknowledge, that the sum and substance of the
Christian Religion, contained in the Scriptures, has been delivered down to
us, even from the Apostles days, in other ways or forms, besides the
Scriptures. For instance, in the Baptismal Vow, in the Creed, in the Prayers
and Hymns of the Church. Which we may call Traditions, if we please, but they
bring down to us no new Doctrine, but only deliver in an abridgment, the same
Christianity which we find in the Scriptures.

Upon this there is no need that I should enlarge; but I proceed farther to
affirm.

IV. That we reverently receive also the unanimous Tradition or Doctrine of the
Church in all Ages, which determines the meaning of the holy Scripture, and
makes it more clear and unquestionable in any point of Faith, wherein we can
find it has declared its sense. For we look upon this Tradition as nothing
else but the Scripture unfolded; not a new thing, which is not in the Scripture
but the Scripture explained and made more evident.

And thus some part of the Nicene Creed may be called a Tradition; as it has
expressly delivered unto us the sense of the Church of GOD concerning that great
Article of our Faith, That JESUS CHRIST is the Son of GOD. Which they teach us
was always thus understood, the Son of GOD, begotten of his Father before all
worlds, and of the same substance with the Father.

But this Tradition supposes the Scripture for its ground, and delivers nothing
but what the Fathers, assembled at Nice, believed to be contained there, and
was first fetched from thence. For we find in Theodoret (L. 1. C. 6.) that the
famous Emperor Constantine, admonished those Fathers, in all their Questions
and Debates to consult only with these heavenly inspired Writings; Because the
Evangelical and Apostolical Books, and the Oracles of the old Prophets, do
evidently instruct us what to think in Divine matters. This is so clear a
Testimony, that in those days they made this complete Rule of their Faith,
whereby they ended Controversies, (which was the reason that in several other
Synods we find they were wont to lay the Bible before them) and that there is
nothing in the Nicene Creed, but what is to be found in the Bible; that
Cardinal Bellarmine has nothing to reply to it, but this, Constantine was
indeed a great Emperor, but no great Doctor. Which is rather a Scoff, than an
Answer; and casts a scorn not only upon him, but upon the great Council, who,
as the same Theodoret, witnesses, assented unto that speech of Constantine. So
it there follows in these words That most of the Synod were obedient to what he
had discoursed, and embraced both mutual Concord, and sound Doctrine.

And accordingly, St. Hilary a little after extols his Son Constantius for
this, that he adhered to the Scriptures; and blames him only for not attending
to the true Catholic sense of them. His words are these, (in his little Book
which he delivered to Constantius) I truly admire thee, O Lord Constantius the
Emperor, who desire a Faith according to what is written. They pretended to
no other in those days; but (as he speaks a little after) looked upon him that
refused this, as Antichrist. It was only required that they should receive
their Faith out of God's Books, not merely according to the words of them, but
according to their true meaning, (because many spoke Scripture without
Scripture, and pretended to Faith without Faith, as his words are;) and herein
Catholic and constant Tradition was to guide them. For whatsoever was contrary
to what the whole Church had received and held from the beginning, could not in
reason be thought to be the meaning of that Scripture which was alleged to
prove it. And, on the other side, the Church pretended to no more then to be a
Witness of the received sense of the Scriptures; which were the bottom upon
which they built this Faith.

Thus I observe Hegesippus says, (in Eusebius. his History, L. 4. C. 22.) that
when he was at Rome, he met with a great many Bishops, and that he received the
very same Doctrine from them all. And then a little after, tells us what that
was, and whence they derived it; saying, That in every succession of Bishops,
and i^ every City, so they held; as the Law preached, and as the Prophets, and
as the Lord. That is, according to the Doctrine of the Old and New Testament.

I shall conclude this particular with a pregnant passage, which I remember in
a famous Divine of our Church, (Dr. Jacksons, in his Treatise of the Catholic
Church, Chap. 22.) who writes to this effect;

That Tradition which was of so much use in the Primitive Church, was not
unwritten Traditions or Customs, commended or ratified by the supposed
infallibility of any visible Church, but did especially consist in the
Confessions, or Registers of particular Churches. And the unanimous consent of
so many several Churches, as exhibited their Consessions to the Nicene Council,
out of such Forms as had been framed and taught before this Controversy arose,
about the Divinity of CHRIST, and that volunta^ily and freely (these Churches
being not dependent one upon another, nor overswayed by any Authority over
them, nor misled by Faction to frame their Confessions of Faith by imitation,
or according to some pattern set them) was a pregnant argument that this Faith
wherein they all agreed, had been delivered to them by the Apostles and their
Followers, and was he true meaning of the holy Writings in this great Article:
and evidently proved, that Arius did obtrude such interprerations of Scripture,
as had not been heard of before; or were but the sense of some private persons
in the Church, and not of the generality of Believers.

In short, the unanimous consent of so many distinct visible Churches, as
exhibited their several Consessions, Catechisms, or Testimonies of their own
Forefathers Faith, unto the Council of Nice, was an argument of the same force
and efficacy against Arius and his Partakers, as the general consent and
practice of all Nations, in worshipping a Divine Power in all Ages, is against
Atheists. Nothing but the ingrafted notion of a Deity, could have induced so
many several Nations, so much different in natural disposition, in civil
Discipline and Education, to effect or practice the duty of Adoration. And
nothing but the evidence of the ingrafied word, (as St. James calls the Gospel)
delivered by CHRIST and his Apostles in the holy Scriptures, could have kept so
many several Churches, as communicated their Confessions unto that Council, in
the unity of the same Faith.

The like may be said of the rest of the four first General Councils; whose
Decrees are a great confirmation of our belief, because they deliver to us the
consent of the Churches of CHRIST, in those great Truths which they assert out
of the holy Scriptures.

And could there any Traditive Interpretation of the whole Scripture be
produced upon the Authority of such Original Tradition, as that now named, we
would most thankfully and joyfully receive it. But there never was any such
pretended; no, not by the Roman Church, whose Doctors differ among themselves
about the meaning of hundreds of places in the Bible. Which they would not do
sure, nor spend their time unprofi^ably in making the best conjectures they are
able; if they knew of any exposition of those places in which all Christian
Doctors had agreed from the beginning.

V. But more then this, we allow that Tradition gives us a considerable
assistance in such points as are not in so many letters and syllables contained
in the Scriptures, but may be gathered from thence, by good and manifest
reasoning. Or, in plainer words perhaps, whatsoever Tradition justifies any
Doctrine that may be proved by the Scriptures, though not found in express
terms there, we acknowledge to be of great use, and readily receive and follow
it; as serving very much to establish us more firmly in that Truth, when we see
all Christians have adhered to it.

This may be called a confirming Tradition: of which we have an instance in the
Doctrine of Infant Baptism, which some ancient Fathers call an Apostolical
Tradition. Not, that it cannot be proved by any place of Scripture; no such
matter: for though we do not find it written in so many words that Infants are
to be baptized, or that the Apostles baptized Infants; yet it may be proved out
of the Scriptures, and the Fathers themselves, who call it an Apostolical
Tradition, do allege testimonies of the Scriptures to make it good. And
therefore we may be sure they comprehend the Scriptures within the name of
Apostolical Tradition; and believed that this Doctrine was gathered out of the
Scriptures, though not expressly treated of there.

In like manner we, in this Church, assert the authority of Bishops above
Presbyters, by a Divine right, as appears by the Book of Consecration of
Bishops, where the persons to be ordained to this Office, expresses his belief,
That he is truly called to this Ministration, according to the will of our LORD
JESUS CHRIST. Now this we are persuaded may be plainly enough proved to any man
that is ingenuous, and will fairly consider things, out of the holy Scriptures,
without the help of Tradition: but we also take in the assistance of this for
the conviction of gainsayers; and by the perpetual practice and Tradition of
the Church from the beginning confirm our Scripture proofs so strongly, that he
seems to us very obstinate, or extremely prejudiced, that yields not to them.
And therefore to make our Doctrine in this point the more authentic, our
Church has put both these Proofs together, in the Preface to the Form of
giving Orders; which begins in these words: It is evident unto all men,
diligently reading the holy Scripture and ancient Authors, that from the
Apostles time there have been three Orders of Ministers in Christ's Church;
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

I hope no body among us is so weak, as to imagine, when he reads this, that by
admitting Tradition to be of such use and force as I have mentioned, we yield
too much to the Popish Cause, which supports it self by this pretense. But if
any one shall suggest: his to any of our people, let them reply, That it is but
the pretense, and only by the Name of Tradition, that the Romish Church
supports it self: For true Tradition is as great a proof against Popery, as it
is for Episcopacy, The very foundation of the Popes Empire (which is, his
succession in St. Peter's Supremacy) is u^terly subverted by this; the constant
Tradition of the Church being evidently against it. And therefore let us not
lose this Advantage we have against them, by ignorantly refusing to receive
true and constant Tradition; which will be so far from leading us into their
Church, that it will never suffer us to think of being of it, while it remains
so opposite to that which is truly Apostolical.

I conclude this with the Direction which our Church gives to Preachers in the
Books of Canons, 1^71, (in the Title Concionatores) That no man shall teach the
people any thing to be held and believed by them religiously, but what is
consentaneous to the Doctrine of the Old and New Testament; and what the
Catholic Fathers and Ancient Bishops have gathered out of that very Doctrine.
This is our Rule, whereby we are to guide our selves; which was set us on
purpose to preserve our Preachers from broaching any idle, novel, or popish
Doctrines; as appears by the conclusion of that Injunction: Vain and old Wives
Opinions, and Heresies, and Popish Errors, abhorring from the Doctrine and
Faith of Christ, they shall not teach; nor any thing at all whereby the
unskilful multitude may be infla^ed either to the study of Novelty, or to
Contention.

VI. But though nothing may be taught as a piece of Religion; which has not
the forenamed Original; yet I must add, that those things which have been
universally believed, and not contrary to Scripture, though not written at all
there, nor to be proved from thence, we do receive as pious Opinions. For
instance, the perpetual Virginity of the Mother of GOD our Savior; which is so
likely a thing, and so universally received, that I do not see why we should
not look upon it as a genuine Apostolical Tradition.

VII. I have but one thing more to add, which is, that we allow also the
Traditions of the Church, about matters of Order, Rites, and Ceremonies. Only
we do not take them to be parts of GOD's worship; and if they be not appointed
in the holy Scriptures, we believe they may be altered by the same or the like
authority, with that which ordained them. So our Church has excellently and
fully resolved us concerning such matters, in the XXXIV Article of Religion?
where there are three things asserted concerning such Traditions as these.

First, It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies (they are the very
first words of the Article) be in all places, one or utterly alike for at all
times they have been diverse, and may be changed according to the diversities of
countries, times, and men's manners, so that nothing be ordained against God's
Word. But then to prevent all disorders and confusions, that men might make in
the Church, by following their own private fancies and humors; the next thing
which is decreed, is this:

Secondly, That whosoever through his own private judgment, willingly and
purposelie does openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the Church,
which be not repugnant to the Word of GOD, and be ordained and approved by
common authority; ought to be rebuked openly (that others may fear to do the
like) as he that offends against the common Order of the church, and hurts
the Authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the consciences of the weak
Brethren.

Lastly, It is there declared, That every particular or National church, has
authority to ordain, change, and abolish ceremonies or Rites of the church,
ordained only by man's authority, so that all things be done to edifying.

This is sufficient to show what we believe concerning Traditions, about
matters of Order and Decency.

VIII. As for what is delivered in matters of Doctrine, or Order, by any
private Doctor in the church, or by any particular church, it appears by what
has been said, that it cannot be taken to be more then the private Opinion of
that man, or the particular Decree of that church, and can have no more
authority then they have: that is, cannot oblidge all christians, unless it be
contained in the holy Scripture.

Now such are the Traditions which the Roman church would impose upon us, and
impose upon us after a strange fashion, as you shall see in the Second Part of
this Discourse: unto which I shall proceed presently, when I have left with you
this brief Reflection on what has been said in this First Part.

Our people may hereby be admonished not to suffer themselves to be deceived
and abused by words and empty names, without their sense and meaning. Nothing
is more common then this; especially in the business of Traditions. About which
a great stir is raised, and it is commonly given out, that we refuse all
Traditions, Then which, nothing is more false: for we refuse none truly so
called; that is, Doctrines delivered by Christ, or his Apostles. No, we refuse
nothing at all, because it is unwritten; but merely because we are not sure it
is delivered by that Authority to which we ought to submit.

Whatsoever is delivered to us by our LORD and his Apostles, we receive as the
very word of God; which we think is sufficiently declared in the holy
Scriptures. But if any can certainly prove, by any Authority equal to that
which brings the Scriptures to us, that there is any thing else delivered by
them, we receive that also. The Controversy will soon be at an end. For we are
ready to embrace it, when any such thing can be produced.

Nay, we have that reverence for those who succeeded the Apostles, that what
they have unanimously delivered to us, as the sense of any doubtful place, we
receive it, and seek no farther. There is no dispute, whither or no we should
entertain it.

To the Decrees of the Church also we submit in matters of Decency and Order;
yea, and acquiesce in its authority, when it determines doubtful Opinions.

But we cannot receive that as a Doctrine of Christ, which we know is but the
Tradition of man, nor keep the Ordinances of the ancient Church in matters of
Decency, so unalterably as never to vary from them; because they themselves did
not intend them to be of everlasting obligation. As appears by the changes that
have been made in several times and places; even in some things which are
mentioned in the holy Scriptures, being but Customs suited to those Ages and
Countries.

In short, Traditions we do receive; but not all that are called by that name.
Those which have sufficient Authority; but not those which are imposed upon us,
by the sole authority of one particular Church, assuming a power over all the
rest. And so I come to the Second Part.

PART II. What Traditions we do not receive.
AND in the first place we do not believe that there is any Tradition which
contains another Word of God; which is not in the Scripture, or cannot be
proved from thence. In this consists the main difference between us and them of
the Romish Persuasion, who affirm that Divine Truth which we are all bound to
receive, to be partly written, partly delivered by word of mouth without
writting. Which is not only the affirmation of the Council of Trent, but
delivered in more express t^rms, in the Bresace to the Roman Catechism, drawn
up by their order; where we find these words (toward the conclusion of it)
The whole Doctrine to be delivered to the faithful, is contained in the Word
of GOD; which (Word of GOD) is distributed into Scripture and Tradition.

This is a full and plain declaration of their mind; with which we can by no
means agree, for diverse unanswerable reasons.

1. Not only because the Scriptures testify to their own perfection; which
they assirm to be so great, as to be able to complete, the divinest men in the
Church of CHRIST, in all points of heavenly wisdom, 2 Timothy 3. 15. 16. 17. but,

2. Because the constant Tradition of the Church (even of the Roman Church
anciently) is, that in the Scriptures we may find all that is necessary to be
known and believed to salvation. I must not fill up this Paper with Authorities
to this purpose; but we avow this unto the people of our Church for a certain
Truth, which has been demonstrated by many of our Writers; who have shown that
the ancient Doctors universally speak the language of St. Baul, 1. Cor. 4. 7.
Not to think above that which is written. I will mention only these memorable
words of Tertullian, who is as earnest an Advocat as any for ritual Traditions,
but having to deal with Hermogenes in a question of Faith, Whither all things
in the beginning were made of nothing, urges him in this manner. I have no
where yet read, that all things were made out of a subject matter. If it be
written, let those of Hermogenes his shop show it; if it be not written, let
them fear th^^ (...) which is alloted to such ^^ add or take away. The very
same Answer should our People make to those that would have them receive any
thing as an Article of Faith, which is not delivered to them by this truly
Apostolical Church wherein we live. If it he written, let us see it; if it be
not, take heed how you add to the undoubted Word of GOD. We receive the holy
Scriptures, as able to make us wise to Salvation. So they themselves tell us;
and so runs the true Tradition of the Church: which you of the Romish
persuasion have forsaken; but we adhere unto.

3 And we have this farther reason so to do, because if part of God's Word had
been written, and part unwritten, we cannot but believe there would have been
some care taken, in the written Word, not only to let us know so much, but
also inform us whither, we should resort to find it, and how we should know it;
if it be absolutely necessary for us to be acquainted with it. But there is no
such notice, nor any such directions left us; nor can any man give us any
certain Rule to follow in this matter, but only this: To examine all
Traditions by the Scripture, as the supreme Rule of Faith and to a^mit only
such as are con^ormable thereunto.

4. For which we have still this farther reason, that no sooner were they that
first delivered and received the holy Scriptures gone out of the world, but we
find men began to add their own fancies unto the Catholic Truth; which made
it absolutely necessary to keep to the Tradition in the holy Scriptures, all
other growing uncertain. This is observed by Hegesippus himself (in Eusebius. l.
3. c. 32) that the Church remained a chaste Virgin, and the spouse of Christ,
till the Sacred Quire of the Apostles, and the next Generation of them, who had
had the honor to be their Auditonrs, were extinct; and then there began a
plain Conspiracy of impious atheistical error, by the fraud of Teachers, who
delivered other Doctrine, Which was a thing Saint Paul feared even in his own
life time, about the Church of Corinth [2 Cor 1. 3.) lest the Devil, like a
wily Serpent, should beguil them, and corrupt their minds from the original
simplicity of the Christian Doctrine wherein they were first instructed. And if
it were attempted then, it was less difficult, and therefore more endeavored
afterward; as shall appear anon by plain History, which tells how several
persons pretended they received this and that from an Apostle. Some of which
Traditions were presently rejected; others received, and afterward found to be
impostures. Which shows there was so much false dealing in the case, that it
was hard for men to know what was truly Apostolical in those days, if it came
to them this way only; and therefore impossible to be discerned by us now, at
this great distance of time from the Apostles, who we know delivered the true
Faith; but we have no reason to rely upon mere Tradition, without Scripture,
for any part of that Faith; when we see what Cheats were put upon men by that
means, even then when they had better helps to detect them then we have.

It is true, the Fathers sometime urge, Tradition a as proof of what they say.
But we must know, that the Scriptures were not presently communicated among
some barbarous Nations, and there were some Heretics also who either denied
the Scriptures, or some part of them, and in these cases it was necessary to
appeal to the Tradition that was in the Church, and to convince them by the
Doctrine taught every where by all the Bishops. But that (mark this, I pray
you) of which they convinced them by this Argument, was nothing but what is
taught in the Scripture.

5. With which we cannot suffer any thing to be equalled in authority, unless
we would see it confirmed by the same or equal Testimony. This is the great
reason of all, why we cannot admit any unwritten Traditions to be a part of the
Word of GOD, which we are bound to believe, because we cannot find any truths
so delivered to us, as those in the holy Scriptures. They come to us with as
full a Testimony as can be desired, of their Divine Original; but so do none of
those things which are now obtruded on us by the Romish Church, under the name
of Tradition or unwritten Word of God.

For the Primitive Church had the very first Copies and authentic Writings of
those Books called the New Testament, delivered by the Apostles own hands to
them. And those Book confirm the Scriptures of the Old Testament: and they were
both delivered to Posterity by that Primitive Church, witnessing from whom they
received them; who carefully kept them as the most precious Treasure: so that
this written Word has had the general approbation and testimony of the whole
Church of Christ in every Age, until this day, witnessing that it is Divine.
And it has been the constant business of Doctors of the Church, to expound
this Word of GOD to the People: and their Books are full of Citations out of
the Scripture; all agreeing in substance with what we now read in them. Nay,
the very Enemies of christianity, such as Celsus, Porphyry, Julian, never
questioned but these are the Writings of which the Apostles were the Authors,
and which they delivered. Besides, the Marks they have in themselves of a
Divine Spirit, which indicted them, they all tending to breed and preserve in
men a sense of GOD, and to make them truly virtuous.

Not one word of which can be said for any of those unwritten Traditions, which
the Roman Church pretend to be a part of GOD's Word. For we have no testimony
of them in the holy Scriptures. Nor does the Primitive church affirm she
received them from the Apostles, as she did the written Word. Nor have they the
perpetual consent and general approbation of the whole church ever since. Nor
are they frequently quoted, as the words of Scripture are upon all occasions,
by the Doctors of the Church. Nor do we find them to be the Doctrine, which was
constantly taught the People. Nor is there any notice taken of them by the
enemies of our Faith, whose Assaults are all against the Scriptures. In short,
they are so far from having any true authority, that counter^eit Testimonies
and forged Writings have been their great Supporters, Besides, the plain drist
of them, which is not to make all men better, but to make same richer; and the
manifest danger men are in by many of them, to be drawn away from GOD, to put
their trust and confidence in Creatures. As might be shown, if this Paper would
contain it, in their Doctrines of Papal Supremacy, Purgatory, Invocation of
Saints, Image. Worship, and diverse others.

Concerening which, we say, as Saint Cyprian does to Pompeius, about another
ma^ter, If it be commanded in the Gospels, or in the Epistles of the Apostles,
or in their Acts, that they should not be baptized who return from any Heresy,
but only be received by imposition of han^s, LET THIS DIVINE and HOLY TRADITION
BE OBSERVED. The same say we, if there be any thing in the Gosples, in the
Epistles, in the Acts, concerning Invocations of Saints, concerning the praying
Souls out of Purgatory, etc. Let that divine, that holy Tradition be observed.
But if it be not there, What obstinacy is this (as it follows a little after in
that Epist l. 24. (what presumption, to prefer human Tradition, before the
Divine Disposition or Ordinance?

A great deal more there is in that place, and in others of that holy Martyr,
to bring all to the source, the root, the original of the Divine Tradition; for
then human errors ceases: which original Tradition he affirms to be what is
delivered in the holy Scriptures; which delivering to us the whole Will of GOD
concerning us, we look after no other Tradition, but what explains and
confirms, and is consonant to this. For we believe that what is delivered to us
by the Scriptures, and what is delivered by true Tradition, are but two several
waves of bringing us acquainted with the same Christian Truth, not with
different parts of that Truth.

And so I have done with the first thing; the sum of which, is this: We do not
receive any Tradition or Doctrine to supply the defect of the Scripture, in
some necessary Article of Faith; which Doctrines they of Rome pretend to have
one and the same Author with the Scripture, viz. God: and therefore to be
received with the same pious affection and reverence. But cannot tell us where
we may find them, how we shall discern true from false, nor give us any
assurance of their Truth, but we must take them purely upon their word.

Now how little reason we have to trust to that, will appear in the second
thing I have to add, which is this:

11. That we dare not receive any thing whatsoever, merely upon the Credit of
the Roman Church; no not that divine, that holy Tradition before spoken of,
viz. the Scripture. Which we do not believe only upon their testimony, both
because they are but a part of the Church, and therefore not the sole Keepers
of Divine Truth; and they are a corrupted part who have not approved themselves
faithful in the keeping what was committed to them.

Let our People diligently mark this, That Traditions never were, nor are now,
only in the keeping of the Roman Church: and that these things are widely
different; the Tradition of the whole Church, or of the greatest and best part
of it; and the Tradition of one part of the Church, and the least part of it:
and the worst part also and most depraved.

What is warranted by the Authority of the whole Church, I have shown before,
we reverently receive: but we cannot take that for current Tradition, which is
warranted only by a small part of the Church, and we give very little credit to
what is warranted only by that part of it which is Roman. Because,

1. First, This Church has not preserved so carefully as other Churches have
done, the first and orginal Tradition, which is in the Scriptures; but suffered
them to be shamefully corrupted. Every one knows that there is a Latin Vulgar
Edition of the Bible (which they of that Church prefer before the Original)
none of which they preserved heretofore from manifest depravations; nor have
been able, since they were told of the faults, to purge away; so as to canonize
any Edition without permitting great numbers in their newest and most approved
Bibles. Isidore Clarius in his Preface to his Edition, complains that he fo^nd
these holy Writings defaced with innumerable errors: Eight thousand of which,
that he thought most material, he says he amended; and yet left he knew not
how many lesser ones untouched: After which (the Council of Trent having
vouched this Vulgar Latin Edition, for the only authentic) Pope Sixtus the
Fifth, published, out of the several Copies that were abroad, one which he
straightly charged to be received, as the only true Vulgar; from which none
should dare to vary in a tittle. And yet two years were scarce passed, before
Clement the Eight, found many defects and corruptions still remaining in that
Edition; and therefore published another with the very same charge, that none
else should be received.

Which evidently shows they have suffered the holy Books to be so foully abused,
that they know not how to amend the errors that are crept into them, nor can
tell which is the true Bible. For these two Bibles thus equally authorized as
the only authentic ones, abound not only with manifest diversities, but with
contradictions, or contrarieties one to the other. Whereby all Romanists are
reduced to this miserable necessity, either to make use of no Bible at all; or
to fall under the curse of Sixtus, if he make use of that of Clement: or the
curse of Clement, if he use the Bible of Sixtus. For they are both of them
enjoined with the exclusion of all other Editions; and with the penalty of a
Curse upon them, who disobey the one or the other; and it is impossible to obey
both.

This might be sufficient to demonstrate how unfaithful that Church has been,
in the weightiest concerns. Whereby all the Members of are plunged beyond all
power of redemption, into a dismal necessity, either of laying a side the
Scriptures, or of offending against the sacred Decrees (as they account them)
of one or other of the heads of their Church (which some take to be infallible)
and being accursed of them.

2, But for every one's fuller satisfaction, it may be fit farther to represent
how negligent they have been in preserving other Traditions, which were
certainly once in the Church, but now utterly lost. There is no question to be
made, but the Apostles taught the first Christians the meaning of those hard
places which we find in their and other holy Writings. But who can tell us
where to find certainly so much as one of them? And therefore where is the
fidelity of this Church, which boasts so much to be the Keeper of sacred
Traditions? For nothing is more desirable then these Apostolical
Interpretations of Scripture; nothing could be more useful; and yet we have no
hope to meet with them either there, or indeed any where else. Which is no
reproach to other Churches, who do not pretend to more then is written; but
refl^cts much upon them, and discredits them, who challeng the power of the
whole Church entirely, and would pass not only for the sole Keepers and
Witnesses of Divine Truth; but for careful preservers of it. For of what should
they have been more careful then of these useful things, whereof they can tell
us nothing? when of unprofitable Ceremonies they have most devoutly kept, if we
could believe them, a very great number.

3. They tell us indeed of some doctrinal Traditions also which they have
religiously preserved; but mark I beseech you with what sincerity. For to
justify these, they have forged great numbers of Writings and Books under the
name of such Authors, a^ it is evident had no hand in them; which is another
reason why we cannot give credit to their reports, if we have no other
authority. There are very few persons now that are ignorant how many Decretal
Epistles of the ancient Bishops of Rome have been devised, to establish the
Papal Empire; and how shamefully a Donation of Constantine has been pretended,
wherein he gave away the Roman Empire and all its Rights to the Pope. Which
puts me in mind (as a notorious proof of this) of the Forgeries that are in the
Breviary it self, where we read of Constantine's Leprosy; and the cure of it
by Sylvester's baptizing him (which are egregious Fables) and of the Decrees of
the second Roman Synod under that Pope Sylvester, wherein the Breviary affirms
Photinus was condemned: when all the world knows that Photinus his Heresy did
not spring up till diverse years after the death of Sylvester. And there are so
many other Arguments which prove the Decrees of that Synod to be a vile
forgery, that we may see, by the way, what reason they have to keep their
Liturgy in an unknown Language; least the people perceiving what untruths they
are taught, instead of God's Word, should abhor that Divine Service, as justly
they might, which is stuffed with so many Fables.

It would be endless to show how many passages they have foisted into ancient
Writers to countenance their Traditions, particularly about the Papal
Supremacy; by which so great a man as Thomas Aquinas was deceived: who
frequently quotes Authorities which are mere Forgeries, though not invented by
him, I verily think, but imposed upon him by the fraud which had been long
practiced in that Church. For we find that the Canons of so famous and
universally known Council as that of the first at Nice, have been falsely
alleged even by Popes themselves. Boniface for instance, and Zosimus alleged
a counterfeit Nicene Canon to the African Bishops in the sixth Council of
Carthage; who to convince the false dealing of these Popes, sought out with
great labor and diligence, the ancient and authentic Copies of the Nicene
Canons; and having obtained them both from Alexandria and from Constantinople,
they found them for number and for sense to be the very same which themselves
already had; but not one word in them of what the Popes pretended. The same I
might say of Pope Innocent, and others, whom I purposely omit, because I study
brevity.

4. And have this farther to add, that as they have pretended Tradition; where
there is none; so where there is, they have left that Tradition: and therefore
have no reason to expect that we should be governed by them in this matter, who
take the liberty to neglect, as they please, better Tradition then they would
impose upon us. None are to be charged with this, if it be a guilt, more then
themselves. For instance, the three Immersions: i. e. dipping the Persons three
times in Baptism, was certainly an ancient practice, and said, by many Authors,
to be an Apostolical Tradition; and to be ordained in signification of the
blessed Trinity, into whose name they were baptized, And yet there is no such
thing now in use in their Church, no more then in ours; who justify our
selves, as I showed above, by a true opinion, that Rites and Ceremonies are not
un^lterable: which it is impossible for them to do, unless they will cease to
press the necessity of other Traditions upon us, which never were so generally
received, as this which is now abolished. To which may be added the custom of
giving the Eucharist to Infants, which prevailed for several Ages, and is
called by St. Austin an Apostolical Tradition; the custom of administering
Baptism only at Easter and Whitsontide; with a great heap more, which would be
too long to enumerate. Nor it is necessary I should trouble the Reader with
them, these being sufficient to show the partiality of that Church in this
matter; and that we have no reason to be tied to that, merely upon their
Authority, which they will not observe, though having a far greater. Nay, all
discreet persons may easily see what a wide difference there is between them
who have abrogated such Traditions as had long gone even in their Church, under
the name of Apostolical; and us who therefore do not follow pretended
Traditions now, because we believe them not to be Apostolical, but merely
Roman. He is strangely blind, who does not see how much more sincere this
Church is then that, in this regard.

5. Besides this, we can demonstrate, that as in these things they have
forsaken Traditions, so in other cases they have perverted and abused them,
turning them into quite another thing. As appears to all that understand any
thing of ancient Learning, in the business of Purgatory; which none of the most
ancient Writers so much as dreamed to be such a place as they have now devised;
but only asserted a Purgatory-Fire: through which all, both good and bad, even
the blessed Virgin her self, must pass, at the great and dreadful day of
Judgment. This was the old Tradition, as we may call it, which was among
Christians; which they have changed into such a Tradition as was among the
Pagans.

6. But it is time to have done with this; else I should have insisted upon
this a while, which I touched before, and is of great moment, That the
Tradition which now runs in that Church, is contrary to the certain Tradition
of the Apostles and the universal Church; particularly in the Canon of
Scripture. In which no more Books have been numbered by the Catholic Church in
all Ages, since the Apostles time, then are in the VI. Article of Religion in
the Church of England? till the late council of Trent took the boldness to
thrust the Apoeryphal Books into the holy Canon, as nothing inferior to the
acknowledged Divine Writings, This has been so evidently demonstrated by a
late Reverend Prelate of our Church, in his Scholastical History of the Canon
of the Scriptures, out of undoubted Records, that no fair answer can be made to
it.

But I must leave a little room for other things that ought to be noted.

III. And the next is a consequence from what has been now said. That there
being so little credit to be given to the Roman Church only, we cannot receive
those Doctrines of Truth which that Church now presses upon our belief, upon
the account of Tradition. For instance, That the Church of Rome is the Mother
and Mistress of all other Churches; That the Pope of Rome is the Monarch or
Head of the universal visible Church: That all Scriptures must be expounded
according to the sense of this Church; That there are truly and properly seven
Sacraments, neither more nor less, instituted by our blessed Lord himself in
the New Testament: That there is a proper and propiciatory Sacrifice offered in
the Mass for the quick and dead, the same that Christ offered on the Cross. In
short, the half communion, and all the rest of the Articles of their New Faith,
in the Creed published by Pope Pius IV. which are Traditions of the Roman
Church alone, not of the Universal; and rely solely upon their own Authority.
And therefore we refuse them; and in our Disputes about Traditions, we mean
these things; which we reject, because they have no foundation, either in the
holy Scripture, or in universal Tradition; but depend, as I said, upon the sole
Authority of that Church, which witnesses in its own behalf.

For whatsoever is pretended, to make the better show, all resolves at last
into that; as I intimated in the beginning of this Discourse. Scripture and
Tradition can do nothing at all for them, without their Churches definition.
Though their whole infallible Rule of Faith seem to be made up of those three,
yet in truth, the last of these alone, the Churches definition, is the whole
Rule, and the very bottom upon which their Faith stands. For what is Tradition,
is no more apparent, then what is Scripture, according to their Principles,
without the Authority of their church, which pretends an unlimited power to
supply the defect even of Tradition it self.

In short as Tradition among them is taken in to supply the defect of
Scripture; so the Authority of their Church is taken in to supply the defect of
Tradition: But this Authority undermines them both, because neither Scripture
nor Tradition signify any thing, without their Churches Authority. Which
therefore is the Rule of their Faith; that is, they believe themselves.

To which absurdity they are driven, because it is made evident by us, that
there have been great diversities of Traditions, and many changes and
alterations made, even in things called Apostolical, etc. And therefore they
have no other way, but to fly to the judgment of the present Church, to
determine what are Traditions Apostolical, and what are not: by which Judgment
all mankind must be governed; that is, we must believe them, and they believe
themselves: which they would have done well to have said in one word, without
putting us to the trouble of seeking for Traditions in Books, and in other
Churches. But they would willingly color their pretenses by as many fair words
as possible, and so make mention of Scripture, Tradition, Antiquity; which when
we have examined, they will not stand to them, but take fanctuary in their own
Authority, saying, They are the sole Judges what is Scripture, and what
Tradition, and what Antiquity; nay, have a power to declare any new point of
Faith, which the Church never heard of before. This is the Doctrine of Salmeron
and others of his fellows: That the Doctrine of Faith admits of additions in
essential things. For all things were not taught by the Apostles, but such as
were then necessary and fit for the Salvation of Believers.

By which means we can never know when the Christian Religion will be
perfected; but their Church may bring in Traditions by its sole Authority,
without end.

Nay, some among them have been contented to resolve all their Faith into the
sole Authority of the present Roman Bishop; according to that famous saying of
Cornelius Mussus (promoted by Paul the Third to a Bishopric) upon the
fourteenth Chapter to the Romans: To confess the truth ingenuously, I would
give greater credit to one Pope, in those things which touch the mysteries of
Faith then to a thousand Hierom's, Austin's, Gregory's; to say nothing of
Richard's, Scotus's, etc. For I believe and know that the Pope cannot err in
matters of Faith. Which contemptuous Speech he would never have uttered, to the
discredit of those greatmen whom they pretend to reverence, if he had not known
more certainly that the Tradition which runs among the ancient Fathers is
against them, then he could know the Pope to be infallible.

There is no Tradition, I am sure for that; nor for abundance of other things,
which rest merely upon their own credit; as is fairly acknowledged in two great
Articles of their present Creed by our Countryman Bishop Fisher, with whose
words I conclude this particular. Many perhaps have the less confidence in
Indulgences, because their use seems to have been newer in the Church, and very
lately found among Christians. To whom I answer, that it does not appear
certainly by whom they began to be first delivered. For the Ancients make no
mention, or very rare, of Purgatory; and the Greeks to this very day do not
believe it: nor was the belief either of Purgatory or of Indulgences so
necessary in the Primitive Church, as it is new. And as long as there was no
care about Purgatory, no body sought for Indulgences: for all their esteem
depends upon that. If you take away Purgatory, to what purpose are Indulgences?
Since therefore Purgatory was so lately known and received in the Catholic
Church, who can wonder that there was no use of Indulgences in the beginning of
our Religion?

Which is a full Confession what kind of Traditions that Church commends unto
us: things lately invented; their own private Opinions, of which the ancient
Christians knew nothing. In one word, their Tradition is no Tradition, in that
sense wherein the Church always understood it.

IV. And what has been said of them, must be applied to other particular
Churches; though some have been more sincere then they. None of them has any
Authority to commend any thing as an Article of Faith unto Posterity, which
has not been commended to them by all foregoing Ages, derived from the
Apostles. For Vincentius his Rule is to guide us all in this: That is Catholic
(and consequently to be received) which has been held by all, and in all
churches, and at all times.

V. Which puts me in mind of another thing to be briefly touched, that the
Ecclesiastical Tradition contained in the Confessions or Registers of
particular Churches in these days wherein we live, is not received by us, nor
allowed to have the same Authority which such Tradition had at the time of the
Nicene Council, for the conviction of Heresy. The joint consent I mean of so
many Bishops as were there assembled, and the unanimous Confessions of so many
several Churches of several Provinces, as were there delivered, has not now
such a force to induce belief as it had then. The reason of which is given by
the same Vicentius, who so highly commends that way which was then taken of
reproving Heresy; but adds this most wise Caution (in the last Chapter but one
of the first part of his commonitorium,) But you must not think that all
Heresies, and all ways, are thus to be opposed; but only new and fresh
Heresies: when they first rise up, that is, before they have falsified the
Rules of the ancient Faith, etc. As for inveterate Heresies, which have spread
themselves, they are in no wise to be assaulted this way; because in a long
tract of time many opportunities may have presented themselves to Heretics of
stealing Truth out of the ancient Records, and of corrupting the Volumes of our
Ancestors.

Which if it be applied to the present state of things, it is evident the Roman
Church has had such opportunities of falsifying Antiquity ever since the first
acknowledgment of the Papal Supremacy that we cannot rely merely upon any
written Testimonies, or unwritten Traditions, which never so great a number of
their Bishops met together shall produce; which amount not to so much as one
legal Testimony, but they are to be looked upon or suspected as a multitude of
false Witnesses, conspiring together in their own cause.

How then, may some say, can Heresies of long standing, be confuted? The same
Vincentius resolves us in this, in the very next words: We may convince them,
if need be, by the sole authority of the Scriptures? or eschew them as already
convicted and condemned in ancient times, by the general Councils of Catholic
Priests.

The Tradition which is found there, must direct all future councils not the
Opinions of their present churches.

IV. I will add but one thing more; which is, That the Tradition called Oral,
because it comes by word of mouth from one Age to another, without any written
Record, is the most uncertain, and can be least relied upon of all other. This
has been demonstrated so fully by the Writers of our Church, and there are
such pregnant instances of the errors into which men have been led by it, that
it needs no long discourse.

Two instances of it are very common, and I shall add a third.

1. The first is that which Papias, who lived presently after the Apostles
times, and conversed with those who had seen them set on foot. His way was, as
Eusebius relates out of his Works, not so much to read, as to enquire of the
Elders what Saint Andrew or Saint Peter said; what was the Saying of Saint
Thomas, Saint James, and the rest of the Disciples of our LORD. And he
pretended that some of them told him, among other things, that after the
resurrection of our Bodies, we shall reign a thousand years here upon Earth:
which he gathered, says Eusebius, from some Saying of the Apostles, wrong
understood. But this Fancy was embraced very greedily, and was taught for two
whole Ages, as an Apostolical Tradition; no body opposing it: and yet having
nothing to say for it, but only the antiquity of the man (as Eusebius his
words are, L. 3. cap. ult) who delivered it to them: yet this Tradition has
been generally since taken for an imposture, and teaches us no more then this:
That if one man could set a going such a Doctrine, and make it pass so current
for so long a time, upon no other pretense then that an Apostle said so in
private discourse; we have great reason to think that other Traditions have had
no better beginning, or not so good; especially since they never so universally
prevailed as that did.

2. A second instance is that famous contention about the observation of
Easter; which miserably afflicted the Church in the days of Victor Bishop of
Rome, by dividing the Eastern Christians from the Western. One pretending
Tradition from Saint John, and Saint Philip; the other from Saint Peter, and
Saint Paul. Concerning which I will not say, as Rigaltius does (in his sharp
note upon the words of Firmilian, who pretended Tradition for the rebaptizing
of Heretics,) That under the Names and Persons of great men, there were
sottish and sophistical things delivered for Apostolical Traditions, by Fools
and Sophisters. But this I affirm, that there are many more instances of men's
forwardness, and they neither Fools nor Sophisters, but only wedded to the
Opinions of their own Churches, to obtrude things as Apostolical, for which
they had no proof at all. For when they knew not how to defend themselves,
presently they flew to Tradition Apostolical.

3. A third instance of whose uncertainty we have in Irenaeus, (L. 2. c. 39.)
concerning the age of our blessed Savior when he died, which he confidently
affirms to have been forty, if not fifty years: and says the Elders which knew
St. John, and were his Scholar^, received this relation from him. And yet all
agree, that he beginning to preach at thirty years of age, was crucified about
three years and an half after.

The like relation Clement makes of his preaching but one year; which he calls
a secret Tradition from the Apostles: but has no more truth in it then the
other.

Now if in the first Ages, when they were so near the fountain and beginning of
Tradition, men were deceived, nay such great men as these were deceived, and
led others into errors in these matters; we cannot with any safety trust to
Traditions that have passed, men pretend, from one to another until now; but we
can find no mention of in any Writer, till some Ages after the Apostles; and
then were by some body or other, who had authority in those days, called
Apostolical Traditions; merely to gain them the more credit. Thus Andreas
Caesariensis in his commentaries upon the Book of Revelation, p. 743. Says,
that the coming of Enoch and Elias before the second coming of Christ (though
it be not found in Scripture) was a constant report received by Tradition
without any variation, from the Teachers of the Church.

Which is sufficient to show how ready they were to father their own private
Opinions upon ancient universal Tradition; and how little reason we have to
trust to that which was so uncertain, even in the first Ages; and therefore
must needs be more dubious now.

Thus I have endeavored to lay before the eyes of those who will be pleased to
look over this short Treatise, what they are to think and speak about
Tradition. It is a calumny to affirm, that the Church of England rejects all
Tradition; and I hope none of her true Children are so ignorant, as when they
hear that word, to imagine they must rise up and oppose it. No, the Scripture
it self is a Tradition; and we admit all other Traditions which are
subordinate, and agreeable unto that; together with all those things which can
be proved to be Apostolical by the general Testimony of the Church in all Ages:
nay, if any thing not contained in Scripture, which the Roman Church now
pretends to be a part of GOD's Word, were delivered to us by as universal
uncontroulled Tradition as the Scripture is, we should receive it as we do the
Scripture.

But it appears plainly that such things were at first but private Opinions,
which now are become the Doctrines of that particular Church; who would impose
her Decrees upon us under the Venerable Name of Apostolical Universal
Tradition; which I have shown you has been an ancient Cheat, and that we ought
not to be so easy as to be deceived by it. But to be very wary, and afraid of
trusting the Traditions of such a Church, as has not only perverted some,
abolished others, and pretended them where there has been none; but been a
very unfaithful preserver of them and that in matters of great moment, where
there were some; and lastly, warrants those which it pretends to have kept, by
nothing but its own infallibility. For which there is no Tradition, but much
against it, even in the Orignal Tradition, the holy Scriptures; which plainly
suppose the Roman Church may not only err, but utterly fall and be cut off
from the Body of Christ: as they that please may read, who will consult the
Eleventh Chapter to the Romans, v. 20, 21, 22. Of which they are in the greater
danger, because they proudly claim so high a Prerogative as that now mentioned;
directly contrary to the Apostolical Admonition in that place: Be not high
minded, but fear.

CONCLUSION
I Shall end this Discourse with a brief Admonition, relating to our Christian
Practice.

And what is there more proper, or more seasonable then this? While we reject
all spurious Traditions, let us be sure to keep close to the genuine and true.
Let us hold them fast, and not let them go.

Let us not not dispute our selves out of all Religion, while we condemn that
which is false; nor break all Christian Discipline and Order, because we cannot
submit to all humane Impositions.

In plain words, let us not throw off Episcopacy, together with the Papal
Tyranny.

We ought to be the more careful in observing the Divine Tradition delivered to
us in the Scripture; and according to the Scripture, because we are not bound
to other.

While we contend against the half Communion, let us make a conscience to
receive the whole frequently. It looks like Faction rather then Religion, to be
earnest for that which we mean not to use.

In like manner, while we look upon additions to the Scripture as vain, let us
not neglect to read and ponder those holy Writtings.

When we reject Purgatory as a Fable, let us really dread Hellfire.

And while we do not tie our selves to all usages that have been in the Church,
let us be carful to observe, first, all the substantial Duties of
Righteousness, Charity, Sobriety, and Godliness, which are unquestionably
delivered to us by our LORD himself and his holy Apostles: and secondly, all
the Ordinances of the Church wherein we live, which are not contrary to the
Word of GOD. For so has the same Divine Authority delivered, that the people
should obey those that are their Guides and Governors, submitting themselves
to their authority, and avoiding all contention with them, as most undecent in
it self, and pernicious to Religion; which suffers extremely, when neither
Ecclesiastical Authority, nor Ecclesiastical Custom, can end disputes about
Rites and Ceremonies.

Read. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. Heb. 13. 17. 1 Cor. 11. 16. and read such places, as you
ought to do all the other Scriptures, till your hearts be deeply affected with
them.

For be admonished, in the last place, of this; which is of general use, and
must never be forgotten, because we shall lose the benefit of that Celestial
Doctrine which is delivered unto us; if we do not strictly observe it^ That as
this Evangelical Doctrine is delivered down to us, so we must be delivered up
to it. Thus St. Paul teaches us to speak, in 6. Romans 17. where he thanks GOD
that they who formerly had been servants of sin, did now obey from the heart
that form of Doctrine unto which they were delivered. So the words run in the
Greek (as the Margin of our Bibles inform you) cis bon paredothnie.

This is the Tradition which we must be sure to retain, and hold fast above all
other; as that without which, all our belief will be ineffectual.

This is the very end for which all Divine Truth is delivered unto us, that we
may be delivered and make a surrender of our selves unto it.

Observe the force of the Apostles words; which tell us, first, that there was
a certain form of Christian Doctrine which the Apostles taught, compared here
to a mould (so the word Typos, form, may be translated) into which Metal or
suchlike matter is cast, that it may receive the figure and shape of that
mould.

2. Now he compares the Roman Christians to such ductile, pliable matter; they
being so delivered or cast into this form or mould of Christian Doctrine, that
they were entirely framed and fashioned according to it, and had all the
lineaments, as I may say, of it expressed upon their souls.

3. And having so received it, they were obedient to it: for without this all
the impressions, which by knowledge of Faith were made upon their souls, were
but an imperfect draught of what was intended in the Christian Tradition.

4. And it was hearty obedience, sincere compliance with the Divine Will; such
obedience as became those who understood their Religion to be a great
deliverance and liberty from the slavery of sin (before spoken of) into the
happy freedom of the service of God.

5. All which, lastly, he ascribes to the grace of God, which had both
delivered to them that Doctrine, and drawn them to deliver up themselves to it,
made their hearts soft and ductile to be cast into that mould, and quickened
them to Christian Obedience, and given them a willing mind to obey cheerfully.
All this was from God's grace, and not their merits; and therefore the thanks
was to be ascribed to him, who succeeds and blesses all pious endeavors.

Now according to this pattern, let us frame our selves, who, blessed be God,
have a form of Doctrine delivered to us in this Church, exactly agreeable to
the holy Scriptures, which lie open before us; and we are exhorted not only to
look into them, but we feel that grace which has brought them to us, clearly
demonstrating that we ought to be formed according to the holy Doctrine therein
delivered, by the delivery of our selves to it. By the delivery of our mind,
that is, to think of God, and our selves, and of our duty in every point, just
as this instructs us. And by the delivery of our wills and affections, to be
governed and regulated, according to its directions. And when we have consented
to this, we find the Divine grace representing to us the necessity of an hearty
obedience, to what we know and believe, and have embraced as the very Truth of
God. To this we are continually drawn and mightily moved; and if we would show
our thankfulness for it, let us follow these godly motions, and conform our
selves in all things to the heavenly prescriptions of this Book, being
confident that if we do, we need not trouble our selves about any other model
of Religion, which we find not here delivered.

For if you desire to know what form of Doctrine it is, to which the Apostle
would have us delivered, it is certain it is a Doctrine directly opposite to
all vice and wickedness. For herein the grace of God was manifested, he tells
the Romans, in that it had brought them from being slaves of sin, heartily to
obey the Christian Doctrine; which taught, that is, Virtue and Piety.

Now to this the present Romanists can pretend to add nothing. All the parts
of a godly life are sufficiently taught us in the holy Scriptures. And if we
would seriously practice and follow this Doctrine from the very heart, we
should easily see there is no other but what is there delivered. For whatsoever
is pretended to be necessary besides, is not a Doctrine according unto
godliness (as the Apostle calls Christianity) but the very design of it is to
open an easier way to Heaven then that laid before us in the holy Scriptures,
by Masses for the dead, by Indulgences, by Sanctifications, and the merits of
the Saints, and several other such like inventions; which have no foundation in
the Scriptures, nor in true Antiquity.

That is a word indeed which is very much pretended. Antiquity, they say, is on
their side; but it is nothing different from what has been said about
Tradition. And if we will run up to the true Antiquity, there is nothing so
ancient as the holy Scriptures. They are the oldest records of Religion; and by
them if we frame our lives, we are sure it is according to the most authentic
and ancient directions of Piety, delivered in the holy Oracles of God. So both
sides confess them to be. And if the old Rule be safe. that is true which is
first, we are safe enough: for there is nothing before this to be our Guide;
and there can be nothing after this, but must be tried by it. According to
another Rule, as old as Reason it self; The first in every kind, is the measure
of all the rest. And, as sure as that there is a Gospel of GOD'S grace, they
that walk after this Rule (this Divine Canon) peace shall be upon them, and
mercy; they being the true Israel; or Church, of God.

THE END,
A DISCOURSE Concerning the UNITY OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH Maintained in the
CHURCH OF ENGLAND.

EDINBURGH, Reprinted by J. Reid, Anno DOM. 1686.

THE UNITY OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH Maintained in the CHURCH of ENGLAND.
WHosoever with an impartial eye, and a truly religious concern for the Honor
of GOD, the Credit of the Gospel, and the Salvation of Men, looks into the
estate of Christendom; he will scarce find any greater cause of sorrowful
Reflections then from the many Divisions, and Animosities, which have
distracted, and separated its parts.

These have opened the mouths, and whet the tongues of professed enemies to
reviling Invictives and profane Scoffs against our Blessed Lord himself, and
his holy Religion, and stifled the first thoughts of admitting the most
convincing Truths to a debate among Jews, Turks, or Pagans, and stopped their
ears against the wisest Charms.

To no one cause can we more reasonably impute the small progress which
Christianity has made in the World for a thousand years past. The same
contests have as pernicious influence at home upon the Faith or manners of
those within the Pale of the Church.

Men are hereby too soon tempted into some degrees of Skepticism about very
material Points of Christian Doctrine, in which they observe so many to differ
among themselves. Others are the more easily seduced to seek and make much of
all Arguments, whereby to baffle or weaken the clearest evidences for their
conviction: and they seldom continue long in the same persuasion with those,
with whom they will not maintain the same Communion. Thus Schisms have
generally ended in Heresies.

As mischievous are the effects of these Distractions upon the manners of
Christians. There are many vicious, and disorderly passions; such as Anger,
Wrath, Hatred, Revenge, Pride, Censoriousness, etc. which take Sanctuary
therein, and under that shelter put in their claim for the height of Christian
Graces, and the most holy zeal for GOD and his Cause. Every where they break,
or loosen the Discipline of the Church, which should guard its children from
doing amiss, or restore them after it, when the last and most capital
punishment of being thrust out of its Communion is like to be little dreaded,
where many voluntarily desert it with the higest pretenses of better advantage
elsewhere.

Now though this matter of fact, confirmed by woeful experience, be a subject
too sad for a long meditation, or passionate enlargement, yet is it no more
then what might have been foreseen, without a Spirit of Prophecy, to follow
from the corrupt nature, and depraved estate of mankind not otherwise
rectified. Wherefore we must suppose that our ever blessed Savior, in the
Foundations of his holy Institution, made all needful provision to prevent
these fatal miscariages.

By the sufficient Revelation of all Fundamental Articles of Belief. By the as
full Declaration of all the necessary precepts of a good life. By inculcating
frequently, and pressing most emphatically those commands concerning Love,
Peace, Unity, Good Order, Humility, Meekness, Patience, etc. directly opposed
to those contentions, in every Page of the New Testament: These it may suffice
but to name.

It will soon be granted, after the best provision of Rules, and most
convincing Arguments and Motives to strengthen them, that there will be need of
some Government to encourage all in their performance, to restrain some from
offering violence to them, and to provide for many emergencies.

Our Blessed LORD and Master, therefore, for the better security of his Truth,
and the safer conduct of those which adhere to it, established a Society or
Church in the World, which he purchased with the most inestimable price,
dignified with the highest Privileges, encouraged with the largest Promises,
backed with the most ample Authority, and will always defend with the
strongest Guard, against all Power, or Policy on Earth or under the Earth; so
that, as he has told us, the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.

But now where this Church is to be found, and what are the measures of our
Obligation to it, has been a long and great debate, especially between us and
the Romanists. In most of their late Controversial Books they have seemed ready
to wave disputes about particular points, in hopes of greater advantage, which
they promise themselves from this venerable name, and that bold, though most
false and presumptuous claim which they lay to the thing it self, even
exclusive to all others; which will appear from the true, but short and plain
state of the case between us, the chief design of this attempt,

Now that we may not charge them, nor they us falsely or rashly;

I. It may be convenient first, to lay down some Principles concerning this
Church in which they and we seem mostly agreed though all our Writers express
not themselves alike clearly herein.

II. To propound the chief Bands of Unity within this Church.

III. To mark out the most obvious Defections from them by the Romanists.

IV. To show the Reformation in the Church of England proceeded, and was framed
with all due regard to the preservation of them.

V. To clear it of the most common Objections.

VI. To consider the strong obligations from hence upon all sorts of Dissenters
among us to embrace, and continue in its ommunion.

I. The former will soon be dispatched, which I reduce to the following
particulars.

1. That our Blessed Savior always had, and always will have a Church in the
World, in which his Doctrine has been, and shall be so far professed, and his
Sacraments so effectually administered, that they who rightly improve them may
not want necessary supplies for their present spiritual life, or future hopes
of Salvation: though the extent of the Church as to its boundaries, and the
perfection of it in degrees may be vastly different at one time, and in one
place from another. This many Prophesies in the Old Testament, and Promises
from our Savior in the New give abundant ground for our Faith to rely upon,
and the experience of all Ages hitherto has confirmed.

2. That this Church is a distinct Society within it self, furnished with
sufficient Authority in some to Govern, and Obligation in others to be subject,
necessary to every Society; which the power of the Keys given by our Lord to
received in or shut out, and the exercise of Discipline from Divine Precept,
and Scripture Example evince beyond all exception. But then this Ecclesiastical
Power in whomsoever placed, or strained to what height soever, can never extend
to vacate, or change the express Institution of Christ, or take away our
Obligation to his revealed Truth and direct Commands. In case of any
competition the Apostles defense may be ours, We must obey God rather then man.
And St. Paul's profession, We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the
Truth. And again, If we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel, etc.
let him be accursed, Gal. 1. 8.

3. This Church must be visible, as every Society is more or less, whose parts
are so, and whose Profession must be so. Our entrance into it is in a visible
manner by Baptismal Initiation. Our oblidged Communion with it is in diverse
outward sensible Acts, which the representation of it by a Body or Building
might prove. More clearly is it likened to a city on a Hill, which cannot be
hid, Mat. 5. 14. Set up as the Light of the World, an Ensign to the Gentiles,
which all Nations should flee unto, or else it would witness against them:
wherein its Followers should take Sanctuary, and find a Refuge.

4. Within these Boundaries we have the only hopes of safety here and happiness
hereafter. What GOD may do by his supereminent unaccountable power in an
extraordinary case is presumption for us but to inquire into. Out of this Atk
there is no prospect given to us of any escape from the Universal Deluge. S.
Cyprian Ep. 60 p. 143. Ed. Ox. Si aliquis ex talibus fuerit apprehensus; non
est quod sibi quasi in confessione Nominis blandiatur, cum constet si occisi
ejusmodi extra Ecclesiam fuerint, Fidei coronam non esse, sed poenam potius
esse perfidiae. Nec in Domo Dei inter unanimes habitaturos esse, quos videmus
de pacifica and Divina Domo furore discordiae recessisse. S. August. and
Caeteri in Conc. Cirtensi adv. Donatistas, Ep. 152. T. 2. p. 696. Edit. Frob.
556. Quisquis ergo ab hac Ecclesia Catholica fuerit separatus, quantumlibet
laudabiliter se vivere existimet, hoc solo scelere quod a Christi unitate
disjunctus est, non habebit vitam. Sed ira Dei manet super eum. Quisquis autem
in hac Ecclesia been vixerit, nihil ei praejudicant aliena peccata. Idem Ep.
204. ad Donatum Presbyterum Donatist. T. 2. p. 834. Foris autem ab Ecclesia
constitutus, and separatus a compage unitatis, and vinculo Charitatis, aeterno
supplicio punireris, etiamsi pro Christi nomine vivus incendereris.
All the spiritual Promises concerning this life or a better are made to this
Church, the Members of this Body who is the Head. Therefore the Apostles preach
to Jews and Gentiles the necessity of receiving this Character. Seeing there is
no other name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved, as St,
Peter attests, Acts 4. 12.

5. This church is but one. It is an Article of our Faith, expressed in our Creed
to believe it so. For there be many members, yet but one Body. One Spirit
quickening all; One LORD, and Head over all; One GOD and Father of all; one
Faith; one Baptism; one Hope of our Calling in all, as the Apostle argues, Ephesians.
4. 4. 5. 6. 7, etc.

II. Now we are to enquire what are the chief Bands of Unity in the Church
which make, keep, and evidence it to be one; How we may secure our selves
within this Garden enclosed, this Spring shut up, this Fountain sealed, as the
Ancients usually apply that Cant 4. 12. to this one Enclosure of the Church.

1. This appears in the Unity of Belief, not only inwardly, but in the outward
profession of the same Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, and has
been generally preserved, and continued down throughout all Ages of the Church.
In testimony whereof the most eminent Bishops upon their first Consecration
sent to their Brethren confessions of their Faith.

2. In the Unity of Tertullian de praescript. Haeret. c. 20. p. 209. Sic omnes
primae, and Apostolicae dum una omnes probant unitatem. Dum est communicatio
Pacis, and appellatio Fraternitatis, contesseratio Hospitalitatis, quae jura
non alia ratio regit, quam ejusdem Sacramenti una traditio.

S. August. adv. literas ^e^iliani, T. 7. p. 132. Charitas Christiana nisi in
unitate Ecclesiae non potest custodiri. and Ibid. p. 473. de bapt adv.
Donatist. l. 6. Etiamsi Christi Baptismum usque and Sacramenti celebrationem
perceperunt, tamen vitam aeternam nisi per Charitatis unitatem non
consequuntur, Et Ibid, de unitate Ecclesiae, c. 2 p. 510. Ecclesia corpus
Christi est, unde utique manises^um est eum, qui non est in membris Christi,
^hristianam salutem habere non posse, membra autem Christi per unitatis
charitatem sibi copulantur, and per eandem capiti suo cohaerent, quod est
christus.


Charity, and Affection as Fellow Members one of another as well as of the same
Head; that if one suffer, all the rest suffer with it, and if one rejoice, all
rejoice with it. Having an intimate Fellow-^elling of all the Good, or Evil,
which befalls any joined in so near a Relation, beyond the compassion of
ordinary Humanity: whereby we are bound not only to pray for, but by all
offices of kindness, and most intimate Affection especially to assist, and
relieve each other in the same Household of Faith. So that by our Personal
Consecration all our Labors, and Estates are in some measure devoted to the
Honor of GOD, the Service of his Church, and the Necessities of any of its
Members.

3. In the Unity of Worship, whereby we are oblidged not only to offer up the
same Worship for substance, but also in the outward Act to join, and
communicate with each other therein, to present the same Prayers, and Praises,
to celebrate together the same Sacraments, to hear the same Instructions, to
frequent the same Religious Assemblies, as much as possible; that we may with
one mind, and with one mouth glorify GOD even the Father of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, Romans 15. 6. For as the Command of GOD, the Honor of his Religion, the
Edification of his Church, the Propagation of his Truth, and the peculiar
Promise of his Presence, and Blessing require a solemn public exercise of all
Religious Worship in united Congregations; so hereby we most sensibly prove,
and secure our unity therein. S. Austin. adv. literas Petiliani, T. 7. p. 124.
Huic Ecclesiae, quae per totam terram diffunditur, quisquis non communicate,
vides cui non communicate.

Idem Ep. 50. ad Bonifacium. T. 2. p. 230. Ecclesia Catholica sola est corpus
CHRISTI, cujus ille caput est Salvator corporis sui. Extra hoc corpus neminem
vivificat Spiritus Sanctus, quia sicut ipse dicit Apostolus charitas DEI
diffusa est in cordibus nostris per Spiritum Sanctum qui datus est nobis, non
est autem particeps Divinae charitatis qui hostis est unitatis. Et de Bapt.
adv. Donatist. l. 3. c. 16. T. 7. p. 409. Ipsa est enim charitas quam non
habent, qui ab Ecclesiae Catholicae communione praecisi sunt, etc. Non habet
DEI charitatem, qui non diligit Ecclesiae unitatem.

S. Cyprian. de Unitate Ecclesiae, p. 113. Inexpiabilis, and gravis culpa
discordiae nec passione purgatur. Esse Martyr non potest qui in Ecclesia non
est: ad regnum pervenire non potest, qui eam quae regnatura est, derelinquit.


Whoever then needlessly separates himself from this Church, or refuses to join
in Communion with its Members, so far as it is in his power, where he may,
without violence to any Doctrine or Precept of CHRIST, such an one divides
himself from his Body, and so from all the Promises that we know of the Sacred
and comfortable Influences of that one Head, and one Spirit.

4. In the Unity of Discipline, Tertullian. Apolog. c. 39. corpus sumus de
conscientia religionis and disciplinae unitate and spei foedere. Clerus ad D:
Cyprian. Ep. 30 Ox. Ed. p. 56. Idem enim omnes credimur operati, in quo
deprehendimur eadem omnes censurae and disciplinae consensione sociati.

Ita etiam argumentatur idem clerus Romans adv. Marcionem excommunicatum a Patre
suo, and ab iis non receptum, in S. Epiphanio, Haer. 42. l. 1. T. 3. p. 303.
Par. Edit. Ou dynametha aneu tes epitropes tu Patros su tuto poiesai, mia
gar^estin he pistis, kai mia, he homonoia, etc.

Synesius Epist. 58. p. 203. de censura in Andronicum, Thoantem, and eorum
consortes, Eide it is hos micropolitin aposkybalisei ten Ecclesian, kai dexetai
tous apokeryctous autes, isto schisas ten Ecclesian hen mian ho Christos einai
bouletai.


whereby every Act of any particular Church conformable to the Institutions of
our Savior, and the universally received practice of his Church stands
confirmed as an Act of the whole Church. Particularly whoever is admitted into
it accordingly by Baptism in one place is to be accounted a Member of the
Church Catholic, and received into its Communion wherever he comes, if no
evidence appear of his exclusion by any after regular censure. Likewise into
whatever Office, or Ministration any are orderly admitted in one part thereof,
in the same are they to be acknowledged in all others, though without that
particular Jurisdiction which they had in their own. But whosoever lies under
any censure in one Church, he is to be supposed under the same in all others,
and not to be received into communion till the Sentence be reversed by the same
power, or a style higher, and greater Authority; according to the Fifth Canon
of the Council of Nice, and the design of their formed and communicatory
Letters, without which none were to pass from one Church to another. Thus every
Church is accountable to its Neighbor Churches, and so to the whole Church for
its Actions, that one may not do, what the other undoes, without any regard to
this Unity, which would lead to the confusion and distraction of all. Wherefore
to put an end to such differences when risen, or obviate any growing mischief
thereby, and to receive Appeals from persons who think themselves aggrieved or
injured by their own Bishop or Church, a Council of all Bishops in each
Province is appointed twice in the year by the same Canon, and in many others.
But there was no mention then of any farther, or higher Appeal. S. Cyprian ad
Antonianum, p. 112. Ox. Ed. Cum sit a Christo una Ecclesia per totum mundum in
multa membra divisa, item Episcopatus unus Episcoporum mu^torum concordi
numerositate diffusus. Et Ep. 3. p. 71. Omnes enim nos decet pro corpore totius
Ecclesiae; cujus per varias quasque provincias membra digesia sunt excubare.

S. August. de unitate Ecclesiae, c. 12. T. 7. p. 534. Neque enim quia and in
orb terrarum plerumque Regna dividuntur, ideo Christiana unitas dividitur, cum
in utraque part Catholica inveniatur Ecclesia.


Thus an amicable correspondence, and intimate communication was maintained
between the Neighbor Churches, and their Governors, and by them with others
removed at a greater distance throughout the World.

These need no long proof, but may be taken as generally grantted; the main
dispute will lie in the particular application of the two last.

Now to prevent as much as may be all difficulties about them, it may be added
to the third of Unity of Worship, that it will be very convenient, if not
absolutely necessary in any settled established Church, that there be some set
Forms of public Ministrations, without which it is hard for any to know before
hand what they join with, especially for strangers.

But then these forms should be as plain, and simple as possible, with as
little pretense as can be of any danger to the known Will, and Word of God. For
no Obligation whatsoever can tie me to communicate with another in that which
he forbids; and it will be a great temptation to more then suspect this danger,
when men's private opinions, or fanciful transports are mingled with them, which
have little show of Scripture or the general practice of the Church in all Ages
to justify them.

The readiest way I know of to prevent that hazard, after all other care about
the matters contained, is to endeavor that these Offices be as near alike in
all places as can well be, yet every difference in Judgment, when no violence
is offered to the Foundation of Catholic Faith and Unity, must not break this
Communion according to that profession of St. Cyprian P. 229. Ox. Ed. in
Council. Carthaginensi de baptizandis Haereticis. Neminem judicantes aut a jure
communionis, si diversum senserit amoventes.
Judging no man, nor excluding him from the right of communion if he think
otherwise; where the dispute was thought of no mean concern, especially in this
cause. Which De Bapt. adv. Donat. l. 2. T. 7. p. 391. and sape ibid.
St. Augustine often alleges against the Donatists, that boasted so much of St.
Cyprians judgment against his declared practice. To the same purpose may be
applied the treatment of Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 26.
St. Polycarp in Rome by Anicetus the Bishop, though they differed about the
time of the celebration of Easter, and in other points, which could not be
agreed between them; yet this last not only invited the former to communion
with him, but also to celebrate the sacred Eucharist in his Church, as the
words are generally interpreted; which St. Irenaeus not long after urges
strongly against Victor, who was hastening to excommunicate the Asian Churches
for the same difference, contrary to his Predecessors Practice.

As to the Fourth of Unity of Discipline, if Unity of Government in all parts
be not indispensably necessary to it, yet it will be so far, as not to
abrogate, or invade the positive Institutions of our Savior himself herein,
and be more then convenient, that it be as conformable, as it is in our power
to make it in one place, to what it is in another. It seems horribly
presumptuous, violently to thrust out of the Church that Government under the
influence of which Christianity has been conveyed, and preserved from the Age
of the Apostles in the most distant places, upon pretense of erecting a new
better Scheme or model of our own, or because of the intricate use of one or
two terms in Scripture, when the Church was in its first formation, though
against the plain current of it in other places, and the uninterrupted
tradition of the whole Church. A Church indeed must be more or less perfect
according to its Government, for suitable will be the Exercise and Authority of
its Discipline. What allowance may be made for those, who desire to come as
near as they can to the Primitive Pattern, though it be not in their power to
reach it in many considerable points, I am not now to dispute. But most
inexcusable, and highly obnoxious are they, that by extreme violence, and
usurpation endeavor to destroy what they found regularly established to their
hands.

III. But we are here most concerned with the bold claims of the Romanists
amidst their most obvious Defections, who have made it the principal Band of
Unity in the Catholic Church to be subject to the Sea of Rome, and the
pretended Vicar of Christ therein, as the Universal Head, and Monarch of the
Church: this they have determined as de fide, and put into their very Creed,
and excluded all that do not expressly own it.

But against this as a great breach of Christian Unity we have many just
exceptions, and been always ready to prove them so Bishop Carleton of threefold
jurisdiction Dr. Barrow's Treatise of the Popes Supremacy.


1. In that no evidence from Scripture appears of any such Authority, conferred
upon him, or them: But many strong intimations of the contrary. The places
usually alleged to make good their Claim are so far fetched, and so little to
their purpose, that they contain alone a strong presumption against them, and
their own Authors sometimes speak of them with great distrust. Here if any
where sure we may safely argue without darring to prescribe Rules to the most
High, that in a matter of so great moment, had it been designed, It would have
been most explicitly delivered, and solemnly inculcated.

2. But that it was not, we have farther evidence from the silence of the most
Ancient, and best Fathers of the Church herein, when they have occasion to
explain the places insisted on: S. Cyprian de unitate Ecclesiae post loca
communiter allegata, p. 107. quamvis Apostolis omnibus parem potestatem
tribuat, etc. paulo post. Hoc erant utique caeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus
pari consortio praediti honoris and potestatis.

Idem and alii in Council Carthaginensi, p. 229. Neque enim quisquam nostrum
Episcopum se Episcoporum constituit, aut Tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi
necessitatem collegat suos adigit.

S. Hieron. in Epist. ad Euagrium T. 2. p. 329. Si authoritas quaeritur, orbis
major est urbe. Vbicunque fuerit episcopus sive Romae, sive eugubii, sive
Constantinopoli, sive Rhegii, sive Alexandriae, sive Tanis, ejusdem meriti,
ejusdem est and Sacerdotii. Potentia divitiarum, and paupertatis humilitas vel
sublimiorem vel inferiorem Episcopum non facit. Caeterum omnes Apostolorum
successores sunt.


nay expressly expounding them to a quite different Sense, and disowning any
such Authority of one Church, or Bishop over others. And when the Roman Bishop
began any thing tending toward this, and grounded this claim upon a falsely
alleged Canon of the Council of Nice, not on any Divine Character, after
examination, and proof of the Forgery, other Bishops wholly disclaim it, and
declare against it, and warn him for the future not to disturb their Regular
proceedings by such unwarrantable practices. Vide Epist. concilii Africani ad
Bonifacium, T. 2. p. 1670. 1674. Council. ult. Ed.
As the African Bishops, and the great St. Austin among them in the case of
Appeals. It will be hard for them to find any thing like an argument, or
Example of it within the first five Centuries, at least which was not disowned,
and condemned by the rest of the Church, unless from such forged Writings,
which they themselves will scare now defend.

3. In the following Ages we have as good Testimony from History as almost in
any other matter of Fact, by what steps, and in what manner this still growing
power of the Church and Bishop of Rome advanced it self to the height which it
now claims. See D. Caves dissertation of ancient Church Government, and Dr.
Parker of the Government of the Church for the first 600. years.


1. By Usurpation upon the Rights of other Churches, every degree of Exaltation
gained being the depression and diminution of them, till all power was in a
manner swallowed up by the Papal ambition, and none left to any other, which
was not dependent hereupon in its Original, and altogether precarious in its
administration. So that here alone it must be immediately derived from Christ,
but to all others by commission from Him. Thus in the choice of the chief
Governors of the Church all must await his consent, and confirmation, where he
does not alone forcibly obtrude them, and must pay for it a round sum for an
acknowledgement at their entrance, and an after Tributary Pension out of their
income, and take a formal Oath of subjection at their admittance, and own their
own Authority from his Delegation, and be liable to have their sentences
reversed at his pleasure, and flee as far as his Judicatory, and stand to the
trial of it, when he is pleased to call any cause to himself. Nay, if a
controversy arise between him and any Prince, or State, the whole Kindom or
Nation shall lie at once under his Interdict, the Clergy be withheld from the
exercise of their Function, and the People from the benefit of public Divine
Worship and Sacraments. Of these and such like effects of the plenitude of
Apostolic Power so much talked of lately, they would do well to show us any
thing like a Plea from Scripture or Antiquity within the bounds forementioned,
or for some Ages after in the greater part: certainly so great a change could
not be effected without some notice and complaints, struglings and contentions,
of which Church History is f^ll.

Their early Faith spoken of throughout the world in St. Paul's time. The
eminent Zeal of the first Bishops of that Church, most of whom, if we may
credit the account generally received of them, sealed to the former with their
blood. Their continued constancy in the Orthodox Profession thereof amidst the
corruptions or defections of so many others, particularly in the time of the
Arrian Persecution. The concurrent opinion of the Foundation of their Church
being laid by the two chief Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul; and the honor of
the Imperial Seat wherein they were placed, etc. gave them great repute, and
advantageous recommendation in those first Ages. None will much contend with
them about priority of Order or Precedence. But when the pre-eminence of the
first Bishop came to be improved into a Patriarchate, and that swelled into the
Title of the Universal Bishop, which S. Greg. l. 4 Reg. Ep. 32. Absit a
cordibus Christianornm nomen islud blasphemiae in quod omnium Sacerdotum honor
adimitur dum ab uno sibi demen^er arrogatur, etc. Et alibi in Epist. passim.
St. Gregory so severely condemned in the Bishop of Constantinople, and that at
last grew into the style of the sole Vicar of Christ, and Sovereign Monarch of
the whole Church: when the interposition of a Friendly, and Brotherly
Arbitration, which all persons in distress, or under the apprehensions of
injury are apt to flee unto, and amplify, made way by degrees for the
challenge of an ordinary Jurisdiction, and that at first from the pretense of
Canonical privilege to that Divine Right and Sanction, and then to prevent all
scruple about its determinations these must be backed with the vindication of
an infallible conduct: When instead of that charitable support they at first
readily bestowed on other Churches in their distress, they now made use of this
power to rob them of what was left, taking the advantage of the poverty, and
oppression of some under the common Enemy, or the confusion of others through
Domestic distractions, to raise themselves out of their spoils; then no wonder
if other Churches complain and strugle under the yoke which they could not
presently, or easily throw off.

Indeed, had not this claim of the Church and Bishop of Ro^e risen to such an
extravagant height in the arrogance of its pretended Title, and been strained
to that excess in the exercise of its assumed Authority; so as not to leave it
in the power of other churches to take all due and necessary care of their own
members, or provide for them all needful supplies, these might more easily have
born their usurpation of more power then ever they could prove belonged to
them. They that have learnt the Humility of Christ's School, and who are more
concerned to perform their Duty then vindicate their Privilege, and know how
much safer it is to obey then command, and easier to be Governed then to
Govern, will not be much moved at what others fondly assume, knowing still that
the more difficult account awaits them. But then this power became most
intolerable when it was made use of to purposes so much worse then it self,
which were beside the former;

2. The weakening of the power of Temporal Princes, and disturbing the Civil
Rights of men. Cracanthorp's defense of Constantine; and against the Popes
temporal Monarchy.
Although our blessed Savior assured Pilate his Kingdom was not of this world,
yet his pretended Vicar here on earth can hardly say so: for beside the
Temporal Dominions unto which he has entitled himself a Sovereign Prince,
there are few other Kingdoms, or States on this side of the world in which he
has not, or had not almost as great a share of the Government, as their
immediate Princes; at least so far as to prescribe bounds to their
Administrations, and subject in great measure all Laws, and Persons to his
Foreign Courts, Jurisdiction, and Decrees, yea, their Purses to his Exactions;
and upon the least dispute has withdrawn so great a number of his immediate
dependants, who scarce own any other Governors, and raised so many
disturbances, that great Princes and States have been forced at last to yield.
Not to mention the Arrogance it at length grew up unto in dethroning Princes,
giving their Kingdoms to others, authorizing their Subjects to rebel against
them, or all ways to oppose them, and what often follows, if not expressed, to
murder them: as in their late Sentence against some of our Neighbor Princes.

But before, much of this may be seen in the long contentions between some of
the Western Emperors, particularly Henry the Third, and Fourth, and the Popes,
as we have them discribed in their own Authors Sigonius de regno Italiae;
Also to go no farther, their various contests with several of our Kings,
especially Henry the second and the almost continual complaints in all our
Parliaments before the Reformation of the encroachments made by them upon the
Civil Rights of Prince and Subject by vexatious and chargeable suits and
appeals as far as Rome; by Insolences and diverse Rapines committed under the
shelter of their protection, and defended from due punishment, and by their
extravagant Extortions, etc. abundantly prove.

Now though these Usurpations grew by degrees, and were practiced in a
different manner according to the condition of those they had to do with, or
the temper of him that managed them; yet they must needs seem more or less
grievous to all, when power sufficient was not left to the greatest Monarchs to
defend themselves, or protect their Subjects, preserve the peace, or promote
the welfare, and provide for the security of their own Countries. Then no
marvel if some of them grow weary of so insupportable oppressions, and at last
take courage to grapple with, and extricate themselves from such manifest
encroachments upon their own, and the Peoples Civil Rights, as well as the
Ecclesiastical of the Church in their Dominions, and be forced to some harsh
and almost violent methods, when the more gentle and benign could prevail
nothing.

3. But beside these more public Invasions upon Church and State, that which
made the usurpation more odious and insufferable was the farther abuse of the
same extravagant power to bring in strange and dangerous Doctrines, corrupt,
and unlawful practices into the Church, and impose them upon all in their
Communion, exactly fitted to feed their Ambition, enrich their Coffers, secure
their Authority, and promote their ease and Luxury. Such of the first sort are
their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and Purgatory, of Merit, and
Supererogation, the multiplicity of Vows, and delusions in the Principles of
Repentance, and ministration of Penance. Of the latter sort are the Invocation
of Saints, and Angels, Adoration of Relics and Images, their half Communion,
the Scripture locked up, and Divine Service performed in an unknown tongue, etc.

These and diverse like them have proved great Scandals abroad, and stumbling
blocks at home, and whatever varnish they may put upon them by the fairest
pretenses, or however they may cast a mist before the eyes of their Disciples
by nice distinctions, yet they have so disfigured the face of Christianity,
that he who compares the late appearances of it in the world with the model of
it laid down in Scripture, or the Records of the Primitive Church, can hardly
believe it the same thing.

But the particulars are not here to be disputed, they have sufficiently been
confuted, and exposed by Protestant Writers, and were by several before
excepted against, and disclaimed, though some suffered severely for so doing,
and many more we may suppose waited an opportunity to free themselves from
their pressure. That which I am now most to insist upon is this, that if the
charge we draw up against these of falsehood in judgment, gross Superstition or
Idolatry in Worship, and immorality in manners, be true and impartial, as we
have been ever ready to make good, and shall do against all the Artifices of
the Defendants; Then no Authority whatever regularly founded, or
unexceptionably conveyed, can oblidge us to these, against the revealed Will,
or Word of God, the Dictates of our Consciences, as we hope carefully, and
righty informed; the sense and reason of mankind, and the Belief and practice
of the Church in the first and purest Ages.

Greater cause was there to endeavor by all lawful means to throw off such an
usurped power, that made so ill use of what it had unjustly gotten, and to
restore Religion to its primitive beauty in Doctrine, Worship, and Precepts of
Life.

But alas many difficulties lay in the way of its accomplishment, and all
possible struglings, and contentions by force and policy were used by the
adverse Party to prevent its beginning, or obstruct it Progress. Great was
their Interest in every place; Strong was the influence they had upon persons
in Authority; Numerous were their Assistants and Dependants at home and abroad;
Weighty was their concern which lay at stake, and many were the advantages
which they had of any that opposed them: So that no wonder if a Reformation so
long wished for, and much wanted were so slowly effected. It is rather more
strange that in so many places it did master these and such like encumbrances,
and in so short a time made so considerable a progress. If in some places it
proceeded with less Order, Uniformity, and calmness then could have been wished
for in a Religious Reformation, Necessity in part, with many perplexed
difficulties and encumbrances, may in some measure excuse what no Law before
hand fully warrants.

IV. But leaving others to answer for themselves, in my next particular I am to
consider how regularly, and sedately it proceeded in the church of England
within the bounds of catholic Unity.

1. With the concurrence, and encouragement all along of the Supreme Power to
free it from any but suspicion of Rebellion. So it began at first with the
breaking of the Papal yoke of Supremacy, the Translation of the Bible, and some
like preparatives to Reformation under Henry the Eight, and the united
Suffrages of his Parliaments, and the Bishops themselves therein. It proceeded
suitably to a further improvement in most particulars under his Son Edward the
Sixth. And at last it came to its full settlement and establishment under Queen
Elizabeth. The beginning and carrying on of the Reformation here was by such
loyalty of Principles, and Practices that we challenge any Church in the World
to a Comparison therein. Indeed this was so notorious, that her Roman
Adversares have turned her Glory into a Reproach by upbraiding her, though most
invidiously, with the name of a Parliamentary Religion; because it received all
along so much countenance and assistance from those great Assemblies of all the
three Estates of the Kingdom under their Head and Soveriagn.

2. But farther to clear her of all just imputation from hence, it must be
added that the whole work was carried on with the advice, and mature
deliberation of the Clergy assembled in Convocation, representing the entire
body of them, and therein a National Council. That they from their Education,
and presumed Knowledge, as well as from their Office, and Ecclesiastical
Authority are ordinarily fittest to judge, debate, and determine of Religious
matters will be soon granted: But that the civil Power may and ought sometimes
to remind them of their Duty, and restrain them from gross Defections from it,
may be proved by several Scripture Examples in the Old Testament, and the
Supereminence of their place. But happy is that Order and Unity in which both
Powers are joined together for the service of GOD, the security of his Church,
and promotion of his true Religion, as it was here: though it could not be
expected but the first attempts would meet with several difficulties, fierce
Debates, and Controversies, yet still the entire establishment was ratified by
the regular determination of the Clergy so assembled as before, as well as was
after confirmed by the Royal Assent.

3 Yet farther to justify themselves from any affected innovation in such a
change, all was done with the greatest Reverence, Respect, and Deference to the
Ancient Church to clear their continued Unity therewith.

1. In Doctrine. The ancient Creeds were taken for the foundation of its
Confession, the four first General Councils are received with great Veneration,
and a particular In libro canonum in Synodo Londinensi, an. 1571. titulo de
concionatoribus. Imprimis videbunt ne quid unquam doceant pro concione, quod a
populoreligiose teneri, and credi velint, (...) quod consentaneum sit doctrinae
Veteris and Novi Testamenti, quodquo ex illa ipsa doctrina catholici Patres and
Veteres Episcopi collegerint.
Injunction was laid upon its Ministers to press upon none the necessary belief
of any Doctrine, but what may be proved from Scripture, and the general
current of the Expositions of the Fathers thereupon. So careful it has been
in all points to keep within the bounds of catholic Principles, in those first
instilled into its young Disciples in the catechisms, and in those delivered in
its Articles to be subscribed by such to whom it entrusts any Office, that the
positive part of them will hardly be disowned by our very Adversaries, and can
scarce appear otherwise to any, then the common Faith of all christians of
Orthodox repute in all Ages. And for other determinations in the Negative she
only declares thereby how little concerned she is to receive or own the false
or corrupt additions to the first unalterable Rule. No church has professed
and evidenced a more awful and tender regard to Antiquity next to the express
Word of GOD. Both which she often appeals to, desires to be ruled by; and where
their footsteps are not sufficiently clear, chooses not to impose upon her own
Children, nor censure her Neighbors; keeps within the most safe, and modest
boundaries; is not forward in determining nice and intricate disputes, which
have perplexed and confounded many in their hasty and bold Positions,
particularly about the Divine Decrees, and such like sublime Points. In which
few understand where the main stress of the Controversy lies. It may be none
can comprehend the depth of the matters upon which the Decision ought to
grounded. But alas how many have been forward to lay down, and fiercely contend
for, on each side, their private opinions herein as the first Rudiments of
Theology, to be placed in their very Creeds or Catechisms, and so a foundation
must be laid for endless Contests and Divisions? But most cautious has our
Church been in not laying such occasions to fall in the way of any: So that
both sorts of Adversaries have made their complaints against her for not being
positive, and particularly in such Declarations, though none can charge her
justly with defect in any point of Faith so owned in the best Ages of the
Church.

2. As clear, and unexceptionable has been her proceeding in Church
Government, preserving that form, which from all Testimonies of Antiquity has
continued in the Church from the very Apostles, under the conduct, and happy
Influence of which Christianity has been propagated, and continued throughout
the World whatever different measures some other Reformed Churches have taken,
whither forced by necessity, or swayed by particular inclination, or prejudice.
The Church of England kept up the universally received distinct prime Orders of
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons: not desiring to censure others, who can best
answer for themselves, but endeavoring to confine her self to what was most
Canonical, and Regular, and to show how little affected she was to alteration
from any establishment, except in notorious corruptions and abuses: And how
necessary she thought due Order and Subordination in the Church to prevent
Schisms and Heresies, and to give the greater Authority and advantage to her
Ministrations; and finally to free her self from all suspicion of irregularity
in her Succession, derived down from Christ and his Apostles, which she, as
much as any Church in the World, may pretend unto. And though some intermediate
Ages have been blemished with much degeneracy, yet she was concerned only to
separate this, but retain, and convey down to others whatsoever good and
wholesome provision she received from those before. Farther, to evince this,
particular care was taken by express Law See the Statute 25 of Henry the 8.
cap. 19. Sect. 7 expressly revived 1 Eliz, c. 1. sect. 6.
to confirm the Rules of Government, or Canon Law before received in the Church
till some better provision could be made so far as it contradicts not the Law
of the Land, or the Word of GOD; making as few changes in the outward face of
the Church as was possible, and sensibly proving it her design properly not to
destroy, but build, nor yet therein to erect a new, but reform an old Church.

3. Alike Canonical, and orderly has been her Constitution in matters of
Worship. Her Forms of Prayer and Praise with the whole order of her Liturgy are
composed with the greatest temper, and expressed in the most plain and
comprehensive terms to help forward uniform devotion, pious Affection, the most
Orthodox Profession, and catholic communion. So that I think it may be
universally affirmed, that there is not any thing required in her public
Service necessary to those who communicate with her, which any that own the
name of christians, or are owned for such by the general body of them, can
almost scruple: unless because it is a Form, by one sort, and because it is
ours by another sort. But how unreasonable herein are both? So careful she has
been to lay the ground of most catholic Unity, and to remove whatever might
obstruct it.

This our Adversaries the Romanists confirmed by their own practice, when for
several years, as we have been told Camdeni Eliz. an. 1570
in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, they frequented our churches,
joined in our Prayers and Praises, attended on our Sermons and other
Instructions, and received (as some add) our Sacraments, according to the order
for substance the same as now, and had it is like done so still, having nothing
to object against them but from the after-prohibition of the Pope, who had
reason to fear they who were so well provided of all needful supply, and
defense at home might thus by degrees be withdrawn from subjection to his
Authority abroad; that darling point never to be dispensed, or parted with,
whatever else might have been yielded Camd. Eliz. an. 1560.


Our Reformers who composed our Liturgy carefuly collected the remainders of
true Primitive Devotion camdeni Eliz. an. 1560.
then in use, and separated from them all those corrupt additions, which
ignorance, superstition, and crafty policy had mixed therewith. Therefore it is
so far from being an objection, that any part of our Liturgy was translated
from the Roman Offices, that while nothing is retained contrary to wholesome
Doctrine, and sound Piety, it is a convincing argument of her impartial
Sincerity, and desire to preserve Uniformity, as much as possible, with all
christians abroad, as well as at home in her own Members: securing all the
Substantials of Worship according to the plain sense of Scripture, and the
pattern of the Primitive church.

And as to Circumstantials and Ceremonies, she is sensible when they are too
numerous how apt they are to darken the inward, and more essential luster of
Religion, and prove a burden instead of a Relief to its Worship, which she
takes notice Preface to the common prayer concerning Ceremonies why some are
abolished.
St. Augustine complained of in his time: But have since so increased in the
Eastern, as well as Western Churches, that it must argue a great aw to make the
Service look like any thing serious and Sacred. However this number alone,
where the particulars are not otherwise obnoxious, tempts some to spend all
their zeal therein, and diverts them from things more necessary, or gives too
much occasion to others to quarrel about them. Yet withal being apprehensive
how needful it would be to maintain Order, and Decency, She has kept some,
though very few, and those most plain, and unexceptionable in their nature,
most significative of the end for which they were appointed, and most ancient,
and universal in their Institution, and practice, hinted in the tittle of our
Liturgy as it is changed from the former. And to prevent all differences
hereabout, she has expressed her sense of them so clearly, and explicitly,
that one would think no peevish obstinacy had room to interpose a scruple
however the event has proved.

Thus abundantly has the Church of England vindicated her Reformation from all
pretense of Apostasy from the True Ancient, Catholic and Apostolic Church,
and showed in all instances how careful she has been to preserve the Unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace with all the Members thereof. Nor has she been
wanting in any respect or reverence due thereunto. No Church being more
cautious, and sparing in its determinations, more Canonical in its Impositions,
more Regular in its Succession, and more charitable in its Censures: making all
necessary provision, for her own Children so within the bounds of Catholic
Unity, that had other Churches observed the like method, or measures, way had
been made for an universal consent; Touto gar en pote tes Ecclesias to kauchema
hoti apo ton peraton tes oikumenes epi ta perata microis symbolaiois
ephodiazomennoi hoi ex hekastes Ecclesias adelphoi pantas pateras kai adelphous
euriscon. S. Basil. Ep. 198. T. 3. p. 409.
and every true Christian where ever he came would have found his own Church
wherewith to communicate without hesitancy in all Religious Offices. And as (b)
St. Augustine observed in his time, he would have needed but to enquire for the
Catholic Church, and no Schismatic would have darred to divert him to their
Conventicles.

But if after the confusions, and disorders of so many Centuries amidst such a
depraved state by corrupt manners, diversities of opinions, and perplexed
Interests, so great a happiness be not to be hoped for now: that private
person, or particular Church will clear themselves before GOD, and all good
men, that do what is in their power toward it, and pray to Him to amend what
they cannot change, and in the mean time make the best use of what means they
enjoy.

Upon which Premises an easy Solution is given to the old cavilling question,
Where was your Church before the Reformation, or that time?

We answer, Just where it is: Thereby no new Church was set up; no new Articles
of Faith brought in: no new Sacraments; no new order of Priesthood to minister
in holy things: all which would have indeed required new Miracles, and a new
immediate Authority from Heaven so attested; only the old were purged from
impurities in Doctrine, Worship, and Practice, which, in passing through so
many degenerate Ages, they had contracted, and that an ordinary Power might
suffice to do. If we were in the Catholic Church before, we are so still, and
hope, to better purpose. We are not therefore out of it, because there rash
Censures have excluded us, and then they unreasonably take advantage to argue
against us from their own act: We never formally shut them out what ever they
have done to us.

What degrees of corruption in Faith or Manners may be consistent with the bare
being of a Church, or the possibility of salvation therein, is needless and
dangerous for us nicely to enquire: it may be impossible for us to know. I am
sure it is most safe for us to reform what we know to be amiss, and to leave
those who do not, to stand or fall by their own Master. It is a very ill
requital of our Charity if it be turned into a weapon of offense to wound. or
slay us, by that, by which we showed our desire of their Cure, But they and we
must stand another trial, and await a final infallible Sentence, which ours
here cannot change. The best security that we know to meet it with comfort will
be to use the most strict impartiality with our selves, and the greatest
Charity to others.

Yet our Adversaries glory in nothing more then in the name of the Catholic
Church, and boast in no Title so much as that of Catholics, which has had
deservedly so great veneration in all Antiquity.

But their claim here truly examined will prove as fallacious and arrogant as
in any other instance. For the term Catholic if we respect the notation of the
word, or the most constant use of it, is the same as Universal, and so joined
to the Church signifies the general Body of all Christians dispersed throughout
the World, opposed to any distinct Party, or separate Communion.

Thus we find it constantly applied by St. Augustine in all his Tracts against
the Donatists, St. August. de unitate Ecclesiae, c 2. T. 7. p. 5. 10. Quaestio
certe inter nos versatar ubi sit Ecclesia, utrum apud nos, an apud illos quae
utique und est, quam majores nostri Catholicam nominarunt, ut ex eo ipso nomine
ostenderent. quia per totum est, Ibid. c. 3. p. 514. Christi Ecclesia
canonicarum Scripturarum Divinis and certissimis testimoniis in omnibus
Gentibus designata est. Et c. 4. ab ejus corpore quod est Ecclesia it a
dissentiunt, ut eorum communio non sit cum toto, quacunque ea diffunditur, sed
in aliqua part separata inveniatur, manifestum est eos non esse in Ecclesia
catholica. Et. c. 12. p. 533. aliud Evangelizat qui periisse dicit de caetero
mundo Ecclesiam, and in part Donati, in sola A^rica remansisse. Item de fide
and symbolo, in eam partem de Ecclesia catholica, T. 3. p. 149. Haeretici de
Deo falsa sentiendo ipsam fidem violant, Schismatici autem discissionibus
iniquis a fraterna Caritate dissiliunt: quapropter nec Haereticus pertinet ad
Ecclesiam Catholicam, quae diligit Deum, nec Schismaticus quoniam diligit
proximum.
and so opposed to them who went about to shut it up within their own Party,
and straightened Communion; therein too closely imitated by our Adversaries, who,
in spite of name or thing make the same enclosures about the Catholic as about
the Roman Church, and are as free in their severest censures of all others, and
as haughty in what they assume to themselves alone as they were, though not
proceeding upon the same grounds. But what that holy Father every where
presses upon them reaches as nearly our Antagonists; the indispensable
necessity of Charity, that great bond of Unity in the Church, and principal
evidence of the Divine Spirit, which animates the whole, without which the
highest gifts, and most Sacred Ministrations are rendered ineffectual. This is
one of the prime characteristick notes of the true Catholic Church, and every
living Member thereof, and nothing is more opposite to their Principles and
Practices, who have formally excluded all other christians and churches from
any share therein, not only those in the West, that have deservedly cast off
that Power, which they had unjustly arrogated, and tyrannical exercised, but
also the Greeks, and others in the East, that never owned any subjection to
them.

But most securely may the Church of England glory in true Catholicism, which
to all her other privileges, and advantages that she may boast of above almost
any other Church, still maintains, and evidences the greatest charity to others
of any that I know in the world; makes no other enclosures then those which GOD
himself has made, not assuming any Authority to command, yea, or to pass hasty
judgment upon any, but only to provide for her own the best she can, and with
such tender regard to common Christianity, and the Rights of all other
Churches, that she seems designedly to have chalked out the way of restoring
the most desirable ^^uits of Christian Unity throughout the whole Church; and
we should have been sensible of considerable effects by it, had other Churches
pursued like methods.

That Church sure is most Catholic that makes provision for the most Catholic
Communion, Peace, and Unity, and which imposes no other terms or conditions of
it but those most universally received throughout all Ages, in all places, and
by almost all Christians; which may soon decide the competition, whither the
Church of England more truly vindicates to her self a part of the Catholic
Church, or they of Rome arrogate to themselves the whole? Or which are the
Schismatics from it, they which exclude none, whom they own no power over, but
invite all to them, and join with any in what is good, and agreeable to the
Institutions of our common LORD; or they who shut out all but those who will
subject themselves to their usurped Authority, and most unjustfiable
Impositions. Firmilianus de Stephano Episcopo Romans ad Cyprianum, Ep. 7^. p.
228. Ox. Ed. Siquidem ille vere Schismaticus, qui se a Communione
Ecclesiasticae unitatis Apostatam fecerit; dum enim putas omnes a te abstineri
posse, solum te ab omnibus abstinuisli.


Farther the term Catholic is sometimes taken for Orthodox, and so the
Catholic Church interpreted for that which holds the Catholic Faith opposed
to heretical Opinions and Doctrines as well as to Schismatical Separations. S.
Cyril. Hieros. Cat. 18. p. 2. Catholic men ^^^ kaletai dia to kata pases einai
tes oihoumenes apo peraton ges, heos peraton, kai dia to didaskein catholics
kai anellei pos hapanta ta cis guosin anthropon elthein ophelonta dogmata
Sozomen Hist. L. 7. c. 4.
In this sense the Church of England has as good a claim in the Catholic
Church as any whatever; Receiving all the Articles of Christian Faith delivered
in Scripture, and received in the Primitive Ages for more than five hundred
years. No Principles having been so formally declared then, and for some time
after, as the catholic Faith of all christians, and as such necessary to be
owned which she rejects: whatever private opinions there might be then among
some eminent Doctors of the Church in which they often differed one from the
other, or although there might be some observances then generally received
which she thinks her self not bound to retain.

But ill will this charecter agree to the Romanists. who have added so many new
dangerous Articles to the common Faith of Christians, not only beside the
original Rule, which they cannot but own with us, but too often against it, and
the professed belief of the first and best Ages of the church. Wherefore we
reject not these Innovations merely from negative arguments, because not
sufficiently proved; (and yet that way of arguing has been always allowed in
the Fundamentals of Faith, which must be grounded upon express Divine Authority
and Testimony.) But we lay the greatest stress of our aversations to them upon
that direct opposition, which we undertake to prove most of them have to the
common Faith, and revealed Will of GOD which they and we both own. And surely
that Church in this acceptance is most Catholic, that relies on such
Catholic Principles, and refers all others to be examined by this touchstone.

V. But in the fifth place some Objections lie in our way fit to be answered.

Object. 1. They urge against us that we reject several Doctrines since
formally determined in the Church by the known and received Authority thereof
in Councils more general, or particular, which they pretend were believed
through all Ages, but then established when they came first to be called in
question.

Answ. We are not much concerned in the first part of the objection, though
very many exceptions might come in especially as to the formality, and
regularity of those Councils: but as to the latter part in which the main
stress lies here, we never refused a fair trial thereof.

1. From Scripture against which no Authority Civil, or Ecclesiastical, in
single persons, or the greatest Assemblies, no time, or custom of whatever
date can prescribe. Tertullian. de velandis virginibus, c. 1. p. 172. hoc
exigere veritatem cui nemo prescribere potest, non spatium temporum, non
patrocinia personarum, non privilegium regionum.

S. Cyprian, Ep. 63. p. 155. Quare si solus Christus audiendus est, non debemus
attendere, quid alius ante nos faciendum putaverit, sed quid qui ante omnes est
Chriflus prior fecit, neque enim hominis consuetudinem sequi oportet; sed Dei
veritatem.

S. Basil, de judicio Dei, T. 2, p. 392. and ejus moral, T. 2. p. 423.

S. Hierom. adv. Joh. Hieros. T. 2. p. 185. and in eodem T. ex Ep. Aug. ad
Hierom. p. 353. 359, etc.


This has been ever received till of late as the perfect, and entire Rule of
all necessary doctrines of Faith, and practice; of which abundant Testimonies
may be seen in most Protestant Writers.

2. We appeal also to the Primitive, and best Ages of Christianity which either
knew nothing of these Additions that we can find, or sometimes give as express
declarations against them, as could be expected at this distance. But to take
off much of the strangeness of so harsh an imputation at first sight, wherewith
we charge a great part of the Church for a considerable time, and that they and
we may be less scandalized at the first mention of these defections.

3. We may consider the various Cautions in the New Testament against corrupt
Doctrines, and Manners, which at the least in general are foretold would creep
into the Church, if some of them we now charge be not particularly described
therein.

4. We may compare matter of fact with the experience of the like degeneracy of
the Jewish Church in various instances so nearly resembling these as nothing
more, and from the same plea of Oral Tradition, ^et against as clear evidence,
and as emphatical promises to preserve them from Apostasy as any particular
Church at least can now pretend to.

5. We may consult the tendency of lapsed mankind, In the best how weak it is,
and apt to be imposed on; In others how prone to corrupt, and distort the best
Institutions, cast a mist before the clearest discoveries, and offer violence
to the strongest convictions to shelter their vices, and promote their
unwarrantable interests, especially in times of ease, plenty, and outward
prosperity. In which we may compare common experience in lesser Societies,
which however wisely directed at first, regularly founded, and strongly guarded
on all sides, without a very careful Inspection, and sometimes vigorus
opposition, so many corruptions will creep in as to need frequent reformations
to reduce them back to their primitive Constitution. And although an especial
providence be concerned for the guard and conduct of Gods Church, yet neither
Scripture, nor experience warrant us to expect its happy Influence by miracles
now, for the effecting of that which may be accomplished by the use of ordinary
and regular means of his own appointment.

6. We may reflect upon the particular Ages of the Church, which we charge
especially with these defections from about the eight century to the
Reformation, wherein if all or most of them did not come in, yet they grew to
that extravagant height, as to gain establishment for Principles of
Christianity. These Ages are charged by their own Authors, as well as ours, and
stand most sensibly convict of the grossest Barbarism, Stupidity, Ignorance,
depraved Manners, and all such corrupt Inclinations in all Orders and Degrees,
especially the ruling part, as were most likely to make way for such changes,
and Innovations.

7. We have some farther sensible proof of a design in many within that time to
impose upon the credulity of others, and bring in strange Doctrines, and
unwarrantable Practices, by the many Fabulous Stories, feigned Apparitions, and
Revelations, several of which they themselves will hardly now defend, then
brought into the Church to confirm these points in difference, and which almost
only the people then received for their Instructions, to entice them first into
an awful opinion of, and then a confident relyance upon these things.

Nay farther, among the many spurious Writings which then crept into the World
under the most venerable names of the renowned Fathers of the Church, now
mostly discarded by themselves, when their shameless Impudence has been so
full exposed, yet few of them there are in which this contrivance is not
legible throughout to advance these Opinions, and Practices. So that we are
indebted to the Reformation, those great men which labored in it, and some of
the most moderate and learned of their own side, with the Art of Printing then
newly found out, that almost all Ancient Authors, and Records have not lost
their Authority, which would have been much endangered among such gross
depravers of Antiquity, whose constant business it was to mar good Authors by
their Interpolations, Additions, or Substractions: or vent new ones under
counterfeit old names to serve corrupt ends. But we are somewhat beholden to
their ignorance, and stupidity, for doing it so grossly that there was need of
little skill or observation to discover their Impostures.

8. To which may be added in the last place against the supposed presumption in
private persons, or particular Churches to judge of public Establishments by a
seeming Superior Authority: that without some judgment of discretion in the
former there is no room for a proper Moral Act, much less are they capable of a
truly Religious Obligation, which an absolute implicit faith perfectly
destroys. But whilst every man is bound to prove his own work, and must bear
his own burden, he must examine the grounds of his assent according to his
capacity, and determine himself by the best motives he can procure, and is
concerned at his utmost peril to do it with all due respect to the Authority
and Judgment of his Superiors, as well as the evidence of the things
themselves, which are no where in any Government beside thought inconsistent.

These considerations duly weighed may obviate those first prejudices which
usually lie in the way to intercept all thoughts of farther trial, and
examination of particular points in controversy, and may silence or shame the
late idle vaunts of such who pretend to reason us out of our senses and
undertake to demonstrate it a priori impossible that ever any false opinion
should get into the Church, or prevail therein. I wish these men would try
their pains, and subtilty to prove it impossible there could be any such thing
as wilful sin in the world. I presume they might have as good Topics to
pretend to it from all convictions of Reason or Interest. But after the most
artificial composures herein they would hardly believe themselves or be
credited by others against their experience. It were well if they might prevail
to make that less frequent which all must own so unreasonable in it self, and
destructive to us.

Object. 2. But our Adversaries will yet urge upon us, that supposing, not
granting such a degeneracy in the Church, and need of Reformation: yet this
should have been done in order to preserve Catholic Unity by common consent in
a general Council, and with most mature deliberation, and consultation.

Answ. 1. This was most earnestly desired, and insisted on by the first
Reformers, witness the great Importunities of Charles the Fifth with the Pope
upon their instance.

2. When this seemingly prevailed, and a pretended Council was called, it was
far from being free or general. The Italian and mere titular Bishops outnumbred
all the rest, and both one and the other were overawed by the Popes immediate
Dependants or Delegates, and all things carried by such stratagems of Policy,
or partiality of interest that the only care taken was to fix the disease, and
not provide for the cure by the best account we have of those transactions: So
that some Princes of their own communion entered their Protestations against its
proceedings, disowning any Obligation to be tied up to their determinations.

3. As the divided state of Christendom now stands, it is rather to be wished
for, then supposed almost possible.

From the different Interests and inclinations of Princes, who will hardly
agree together in the Summons, place, or time of meeting, or about the persons
who are to resort to it from their several Dominions. While the Roman Empire
was entire, the Emperors Edict alone was Summons sufficient to almost the
whole Christian Church. But now who shall take upon him to call or invite so
many from so distant places no way under his Authority? And that the Pope ever
pretended to this power till of late can scarce be pleaded against such clear
evidences, and Examples; and where he is so much concerned, it will be judged
more unreasonable for him to demand it, If this difficulty were overcome by any
consent, or condescension: yet so many jealousies, and cross interests are
behind, that will be, and have been laid in the way of their first meeting
together with a requisite peaceable disposition, as are not easily foreseen,
and less readily governed; not to interpose the difficulties of the journeys
from such distant places, and of the discontinuance so long from home of the
chief Governors of the Church: many doubts and controversies of the number,
and quality of persons having right to vote therein by themselves, or
representatives will not soon be adjusted, and without these and such like be
determined there is no preparation made for so venerable an Assembly.

After all, when never so duly met, we have neither Reason, Promise, or
Example to suppose them now infallibly Ecclesia non numerus Episcoporum.
Tertullian. de pudicitia, c. 22.
guided in their determinations, but that they or the greater part may be
mistaken themselves, or mislead others, through passion, and false interest, or
be carried away in the noise or torrent of a multitude, or be imposed on by the
crafty. He that considers matter of fact, more then the finest Schemes, and
most subtle Reasonings of his own brain, how things are often strangely and
unaccountably carried in public meetings of men of extraordinary Fame: yea, in
some Councils themselves, and some of very sacred Repute in the Church, Greg.
Naz. Epist. 55. p. 814. and Ep. 72. p. 829 and Ep. 135. p. 864. ejusd. Orat. 15
init. p 451. Theod. Ep. 112. Vol. 3. p. 582, 983.
will think this no hard supposal, though their orderly Sentence carries the
most venerable Authority below Heaven. It seems to argue the height of
Blasphemy to arreign God himself of indiscretion, if it be possible for any
man, or number of men to err from their Duty: And very presumptuous it is to
charge the Supreme Providence of defect in the provision, for the continuance
of his Church if they be capable to fall away: yea, let GOD be true but every
man a liar when brought in competition, He will not be tied up by our most
plausible Methods in the way of securing his own Truth, which shall at last
prevail though condemned: Whose wisdom is unsearchable, and his ways often past
our finding out. He will bring to pass his own holy designs, though by means to
us most unlikely, or it may be seemingly opposite.

Whoever seriously reflects upon these things will have little reason to
quarrel at the Reformation for want of this formal establishment in Council.

No Christian, or Church is chargeable with the lack of that which is not in
their power to procure. Men may please themselves with remote Speculations, and
the fairest hopes, and wishes of such an Authoritative Decision of the disputes
in controversy: but if it be not to be had, we must rest content with, and
make the best use we can of that provision which GOD in mercy has indulged us
for our sufficient satisfaction, and safety.

Every particular National Church directly subject to no other may, and ought
to reform it self from known Abuses: keeping within the Rule of GODS Word,
avoiding as much as possible giving just offense to any beside, and being ready
to give an account of its proceedings therein to all, and to alter any thing
that shall be found amiss, or add whatever may be proved wanting, to receive
others into its Communion, and to communicate with them so far as may be
consistent with common Christianity owned by all, endeavoring to preserve
Peace, and Unity, with all that call upon the same LORD, praying to GOD to
increase, and improve them more and more; such has been the continued aim, and
proceeding of the Church of England.

We believe no true Member of this would have refused the general communion of
the truly Catholic church in St. Augustine's Age, or for some after, though
possibly every opinion, or practice then current be not suited to their present
judgment, or wish. Neither can we think after so strange alteration of
circumstances through so many degenerate Ages, that holy Father in his eminent
zeal for the most S. Aug. adv Crescon Grammat l. 3. T. 7. p. 273. Ego in
Ecclesia sum cujus membra sunt illae omnes Ecclesiae, qua^ ex laboribus
Apostolorum notas, atque firmatas simul literis canonitis novimus. Earum
communionem sive in Africa sive ubicunque non deseram.
Catholic Communion therein would now have been much moved by our present
Adversaries arrogant claims of it to themselnes alone, though against the Rules
and Principles of it with all others. No Foundation is laid for it here but by
the absolute submission of all others to their usurped Authority, and rash, or
impious determinations. Now who can hope for an universal Peace and Unity from
such terms of accommodation, only fit for an insulting Conqueror to impose,
like those which Nabash the Ammonite propounded to the men of Jabesh Gilead to
thrust out all their eyes, and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel, 1 Samuel
11. 2.

Object. 3. Sometimes they object to us the personal miscarriages of some
engaged in the Reformation.

Answ. If any did what they ought not, or with unjustifiable designs what they
ought, the Church is no way accountable; if what they did in the Reformation,
as such, were good, and they had sufficient Authority for doing it, which we
are ready to maintain, that is all she is responsible for, were other
imputations really true, which they often are not: However it will be an endless
dispute, and if determined would add little to the cause. I may add, few great
and public changes are brought about, where so many interests are concerned
either way to promote, or hinder them in which all things are carried with that
clearness and evenness that were to be desired. Private Persons are not
chargeable with the supposed defects of publict Administrations, of which they
have not the management if nothing be required of them against their express
Duty, and they be provided of all necessary means of their Salvation, though
they may be inclined to wish some things had been ordered otherwise.

Object. 4. Our Enemies on both sides are apt to object to us the want of due
Discipline, if not absolutely necessary to the being of the Church, yet so far
useful to the well-being, and perfection of it, that it ought to have great
weight in determining our choice to one Communion, before another, and is one
of the most sensible bands of Unity in the Church.

Answ. 1. The restoration of the Primitive Vigor of this has been always
wished for by our Church, as in the Preface to the Commination, but the
accomplishment is very difficult.

From the degeneracy of the Age, which would hardly bear it. He that Governs in
a less Sphere will find how often he must bear with things, which he does not
approve: and much easier it is to find fault with, then to amend what sometimes
we know to be amiss.

From the multiplicity of Divisions, which weaken all endeavors toward it,
and then froward men unworthily charge the Church with what they themselves
make almost unavoidable; whereas, if executed, it would reach themselves as
nearly as any who are now so clamorous against the most tender, and charitable
endeavors toward it as cruel and inhumane.

2. The Pretenses to it in the Church of Rome according to general practice, so
far as it can appear to us, and we can judge by nothing else, are more
dangerous then any of these Omissions, when turned into a constant circle of
sinning, private Confession, and Priestly Absolution upon the imposition of
very insignificant Penance, and so over again. For hereby men have the
Authority of their Church to confirm in them the dangerous presumption that
they have thus readily cleared themselves before GOD, and so soon perfected
their Repentance for such Sins, which we find them not so watchful against
afterward, as that ought to suppose, or make them.

Whereas the Church of England commands private Confession for our clearer
satisfaction, and direction in difficult cases as most needful: but cannot
truly say that it is an indispensable condition of our pardon, which was never
so believed, or practiced in the church for many Centuries. If people will not
be persuaded to their Privilege, unless they be forced to it by false
denounciations, they must look to that; if they miscarry it lies at their own
door, while they have no hopes here given them of pardon, but upon such an
entire Repentance as destroys the habit of sin, and plants the contrary Grace;
and what need they may have of the Assistance of a Spiritual Guide, and other
helps in many cases in order to this effect, they may best consider.

3. However the due administration of Discipline is to be placed among
conveniences, and advantages to be wished for, rather then necessaries we
cannot be without; and it has been, and will be in all Ages of the church more
or less perfect according to a great many contingencies not to be stated before
hand. The church has ever judged it the best measure of using it so as may
most serve the ends of Religion, and the general benefit of the community, and
not that she is bound always up to the strict merit of the persons falling
under it; and yet after all the strictest care, and impartiality there will be
room for the final Separation, when our LORD shall send his Angels to gather
out of his own Kingdom all offenses, and them which do iniquity. If we will
shun all communication with these, though only in what is good, we must fly
out of any church that ever yet was, or will be, so far as we know, in this
World, and so from any hopes in that to come: yet scarce any considerable
Schism has appeared in the Church, which did not shelter it self under this
pretense.

4. Father it may be alleged that several restraints may be upon the Church
from the Civil Power. When this had suffered so much by former Encroachments,
and Usurpations no wonder if it still retain some jealousy of that Yoke which
with so much difficulty it cast off, and provide as securely as it can for its
future preservation, though by suspending s^^e of that outward assistance very
conduceable to the due effect of Church censures, and sometimes by putting a
stop to their sensible progress, in some cases where no such danger or
necessity required it. Men by mistakes, or prejudice may strain each power too
far. Better experience of the Regular management of the Ecclesiastical, may in
due time encourage the Secular farther to enlarge their Liberty, and encourage
their proceedings so as may be most subservient to the ends of true Religion,
and the advancement of the common security of Church and State, All the power
which the Church pretends to as such, is spiritual, and that can make no
alteration in the Civil Rights of men.

5. Yet after all, the Church amongst us has not only sufficient Authority
committed to her by CHRIST; but reserved, and countenanced by the Laws of the
Land to testify her Abhorrence of all notorious Scandals, to the shame, and
confusion of gross Offenders, and as a direful earnest of a worse doom that
awaits them hereafter, not here prevented by a satisfactory Repentance. I need
not refer to particular instances when we have frequent examples thereof. If
this be not always exercised by those with whom it is entrusted with all due
vigor, and sincerity, after just abatement for necessity and a favorable
allowance for such perplexed difficulties, of which scarce any private person
can make a fair and competent judgment, the fault will lie only at their doors
whose is the neglect, and private Christians shall not fare the worse in the
performance of their duty, nor fail of the salutary effects of the ordinary
means of Grace by GODS own appointment, because every public ministration is
not performed with that Religious care which becomes such concerns.

6. Little pretense can they have from this Objection that desert the
Established National Church, and that most advantageous outward Bond of Unity
therein, in pursuit of private Assemblies, and select Congregations, where all
acts of Discipline must needs be supposed Arbitrary on one side, and precarious
on the other. When he or they who inflict them own no power over them to aw, or
direct their proceeding, or upon just occasion to reverse their Sentence; nor
he who falls under them has any other engagement to submission then his own
free Act, nor can suffer any farther prejudice without it, then to be forced it
may be to change his Company, or place of meeting. What ever grave, and solemn
appearance this may carry at the first setting up of such a new Government, it
will soon degenerate into Mockery, or Confusion, Whatsoever destroys the Unity
of the Church overturns the main strength, and Foundation of all Discipline;
the defects hereof we may hope to see repaired with the preservation of that,
but without that no prospect appears of any overtures toward it.

7. To which may be added in the last place, whatever want of Discipline any
may lay to the charge of the Church of England, none can complain of her breach
of that Unity therein, which all Christian Churches ought to maintain. She
neither invades the Rights, nor pretends to reverse the just and regular
Censures, nor countenances the Schismatics, nor disallows the ministrations of
any other Church so far as consistent with the express Institutions of our
blessed Savior; and the universally received practice of his Church, though
otherwise mixed with several corruptions which she wishes removed.

Object. 5. Lastly, our Roman Adversaries object to us the many obstinate
Schisms, and gross Heresies, which have sprung up since the Reformation, and as
they pretend out of it, from the forsaking of that bond of Unity in the
Catholic Church, only to be hoped for in their Communion, where alone they say
these are prevented, or soon cured.

Answ. The first part of matter of fact is too notorious to be denied, and too
scandalous to be defended: but against the latter part of the original of these
Schisms, and Heresies many just exceptions may be interposed.

1. The Reformation gives no countenance to them, but severely condemns them,
and provides sufficient means to prevent or remove them; if notwithstanding
wicked men of corrupt Principles, and depraved manners flee hither for shelter
to hide their enormities, and abuse or pervert the most wholesome Institutions,
and advantageous opportunities for their spiritual proficiency to the most
contrary purposes; The guilt and ill consequence will lie only at their own
doors. Christians must not debarred of the ordinary means of Grace, because
some turn this Grace into wantonness. St. Peter tells us of some who wrest the
Scriptures unto their own destruction; but neither he nor any other then, or
for many Ages after thought this motive sufficient to deprive the People of the
use of them, made it rather an argument of consulting them with greater caution
and and diligence, lest being led away with the errrour of the wicked they fall
from their own stedfastness.

2. There were many Schisms and Heresies sprung up in the first and best Ages
of the Church, even in the times of the Apostles themselves, as appears by
several intimations in their Writings, and in the immediately succeeding, while
many Apostolical men were living, and if we compare the account we have of them
in the most ancient Authors, particularly in Irenaeus, they were as wild, and
extravagant as any of the later date: yet the Apologists for true Christianity
thought themselves very injuriously charged with those blasphemous Principles,
or flagitious Practices which they wholly renounced, or disowned. The evil one
is always most busy to sow his Tares amongst the beast Wheat. But that which
is most to our purpose here to observe, is that the same method which the
Orthodox Christians then made use of for the Confutation, and Conviction of
Heretics and Schismatics, we still appeal to, by bringing them to the
touchstone of Scripture, and next to that the most Orthodox, and Catholic
Tradition. Whereas how short and easy a decision to all debates might have
been fetched hence, had they the same apprehension of the Authority and Efficacy
thereof by referring all Controversies depending to the determination of the
Roman Church, the Mother, and Mistress of all, and to that infallible conduct
settled therein: but not one word of that, only when they make their appeals to
her after the express Word of GOD, it is in common with many other Churches,
especially those of Apostolical foundation, as in Tertullian, Irenaeus, St.
Augustine, etc. Where they have to deal with such persons. Tertullian. adv.
Marcion. l. 4. c. 5. p. 415.

Videamus quod lac e Paulo Corinthii hauserint; ad quam regulam, Galatae sunt
recorrecti; quid legant Philippenses, Thessalonicenses-Ehpesii, quid etiam
Romani de proximo sonent, quibus Evangelium and Petrus, and Paulus sanguine
quoque suo signatum reliquerunt; habemus and Johannis alumnas Ecclesias.

Idem de praescript. adv. Haer. c. 36. p. 215. Percurre Apostolicas and proxima
est tibi Achaia, habes Corinthium, si non long es a Mecedonia, habes
Philippos, habes Thessalonicenses; sipotes in Asiam tendere habes Ephesum, si
autem Italiae adjaces, habes Romam. Et ibid. c. 32. p. 213. de aliis. Quae
denique instituuntur tamen in eadem fide conspirantes non minus Apostolicae
deputantur pro consanguinitate doctrinae.

S, Irenaeus adv. Her. l. 3. c. 3. p. 232.

S. Augustine. de unitate Ecclesiae, c. 10. T. 7, p. 531. ad Corinthios, ad
Ephesios, ad Thessalonicenses, ad Colossenses. Vos solas Apostoli epistolas in
lectione, nos antem Epistolas in Lectione, ac fide, and ipsas Ecclesias in
Communione retinemus. Ibid. c. 16. p. 546. Vtrum ipsi Ecclesiam teneant non
nisi Divinarum Scripturarum Canonicis libris oftendant: quia nec nos propterea
dicimus nobis credere oportere quod in Ecclesia Christi sumus, quia ipsam quam
tenemus commendavit Milevitanus, Optatus, vel Mediolaneusis Ambrosius, vel alii
innumerabiles nostrae communionis Episcopi, aut, quia nostrorum collegarum
conciliis ipsa praedicata est; aut quia per totum orbem in locis sanctis tanta
mirabilia vel exauditionum vel santitatum fiunt etc. quaecunque talia in
catholica fiunt, ideo sunt approbanda quia in catholica fiunt, non ideo ipsa
manifestatur catholica, quia haec in ea fiunt.




3. The pretense of the most absolute Authority in the one part, and the
extortion of the most implicit Belief, and blind Obedience in the other among
them have not been able to secure themselves from considerable dissentions, and
Divisions in opinion, and practice. If these have not broke out ordinarily into
the most open Schisms, and Heresies, the stop is more due to the craft and
policy whereby they often compromise the matter between both parties, or to that
outward force and violence which restrains them, rather then to any opinion
which they themselves have of this ready means of ending all disputes. We find
in the fiercest debates among them how little heed is given to this infalllible
cure farther then interest or necessity inclines them. There may be a way of
preventing controversies, which destroys all Religion, and makes way for
Atheism; in such a case I need not enquire where the advantage lies.

4. We may answer, most of those mischiefs had their rise from the ruins of
the Church of England. when that was violently assaulted and broken, its
Authority despised, its constitutions vilified, its Order defaced, its faithful
Adherents persecuted, then Faction, and Disorder, strange Doctrines. Phrensical
Opinions, and all manner of looseness in Principles, and Practices came in like
a torrent, and overspread the Land, which before skulkt in corners, and were
little taken notice of. The Restitution of the church has in great measure put
a stop to their progress; I know not of any Sect, which has started up since
that time: But almost every year before brought forth several. If her pains and
care have not yet been so successfully prevalent as to recover, and restore all
that have gone astray, she has not been wanting in her endeavors toward it,
which have reduced many; and it is no little time, nor easy task to repair the
the Ruins of such long confusions, and Desolations.

5. We owe a great part of these calamities to the same persons, who now charge
them upon us; for beside the influence with their Agents, Principles, and
Examples had his contriving and promoting those unnatural Commotions, and
Rebellions in the State which I am not now concerned to examine; let matter of
fact determine that as it has been found more or less plain: Thus far we have
abundant evidence that several of their Emissaries have herded with the Chief
of our Dissenters, and if some of the grossest Sects were not framed among them
first, as seems very probable, yet most of them have been often found acting
their parts under that disguise, and have employed on all occasions their
interest to shelter, and protect them, according to the known maxim of their
Policy, that the readiest way of effecting our ruin was by increasing, and
fomenting our Divisions; here they have found their greatest harvest. For when
Men's minds are unsettled, and they grown giddy with being long turned about by
every new wind of Doctrine, and are weary of tumbling and tossing from one
Party to another, they will easily catch hold of any fancied support, and be
sooner betrayed to yield themselves captives to the delusory hopes of rest and
settlement amongst them.

6. To all which may be added, much of that irreverence, and contempt of
Persons, and things Sacred, which have made way for the forementioned sad
calamities amongst us, are mostly due to their Oppressions, Insolences, or
Delusions. When the People had so long groaned under their tyrannical yoke, and
intolerable burdens, and found themselves so often cheated by their manifest
impostures, no marvel if they be over-fearful of what they had suffered so much
from, and afterward too suspicious of being deluded again, and be soon tempted
to transgress due measure in the use of their liberty, being just recovered
from extreme slavery, though so many years have passed since, as will hardly
admit of a tolerable excuse; Yet better experience, and longer consideration we
hope in time may teach them to distinguish between the certain Interests of
true Religion, and the hypocritical wiles of worldly Craft and Policy, and so
to think a due respect, and Obsequiousness to those who sincerely manage the
former, necessary to preserve them from being imposed on by the latter, and
prevent their falling into the like miscarriages which they observe in others;
And that Apostolical Government, good Order, wholesome Discipline, sound
Doctrine, and Uniform Devotion may no longer suffer under the false, but most
odious charge of Popery, and that they who have under GOD been most
instrumental in reforming, and defending the church from the real, and gross
corruptions thereof, may not still be oppressed with the unreasonable clamor
of a mere invidious name, which they that use most know very little what they
mean by it, only that it denotes somewhat favored by them of whom they have
deservedly an ill opinion. The case has been too like exemplified in another
Instance, especially of late years, in which many Hypocrites have so
scandalously abused the most solemn pretenses to Sanctity and Devotion for a
covering or continuance to the most horrid Opressions, Schisms, and Rebellions,
that they have emboldned profane men to scorn, and send out open Defiances
against the very appearance of Religion, and possibly tempted others serious,
and hearty lovers of its cause to be too modest, and shamefaced in its defense:
yet we hope unfeigned Piety will be always justified of its Children. Sutably
truly Catholic principles, and Observances may vindicate themselves, though
gross Errors and Impostures have long passed under that disguise:
Notwithstanding ordinary People, not always the best distinguishers, and who
are often hurried from one extreme to another, do not readily discern one from
the other, but having found themselves once cheated: be a long time over
jealous of a like design upon them.

VI. From the Premises duly considered, will I hope, in the close be inferred
the strongest motive, and Obligation upon all among us, heartily to embrace,
and stedily to persevere in the Communion of our Church, to share in those
happy Advantages and Blessings, which all who rightly improve it may promise
themselves therein. She desires by all means possible to convince their
Consciences, and incline their Affections to a willing compliance with their
indispensable Duty, and highest Privilege, rather then over-aw their persons
by severe Censures, or the following condign punishments. Nay, if necessity
force uponany the execution of the last, when they will not harken to the
former, she pleads the same Charity for the Principle of both, not only to
prevent others from being seduced by the same Errors: But also thus to deter
them from more dismal Ruin here, and hereafter, which hangs over them
persisting still in the same obstinacy. S. Augustine adv. Epist. Petiliani, l.
2. T. 7. p. 101. Non vos occidimus, sed ipsivosmet vera morteocciditis, cum vos
ab anitatis viva radice praeciditis.
Of all she has the tenderest compassion, though making a difference, but
without partiality. Some must be saved with Fear, and almost violently pulled
out of the Fire.

Men may make a noise with the odious name of Persecution: yet our Adversaries
of both extremes have little reason to object that, of which they themselves
stand so deeply chargeable when in their power, But we rely not on that Plea,
which however it offend them, would not clear us. No settled Government, Civil,
or Sacred, was ever, or is more gentle, and compassionate in its inflictions
then ours: If when this Tenderness was required with new and greather
Insolence, and more obstinate Contempt, Authority begin to put on a more harsh,
and severe Countenance, and make use of the rod of its power to correct the
peevishness of some, or restrain the extravagancies of others, it is to be
hoped they will in the end find it for their edification, and not for their
destruction, and may see cause to bless God, and thank their Governors for
those benign Penalties, which almost forceably opened their eyes to discern
that evidence which pertinacious obstinacy had shut them against in all other
Perswasives, as S. Aug. Epist. 48. ad Vince^^^um. T. 2. p. 167. 174.
S. Auguststin declares several of the Donatists had professed to him, and
therefore saw great reason to recall, and recant the many clamours they had
raised on this ocsion. I hope we are not without many sensible Instances of the
good effect hereof among our selves, though it be very different in some from
what it is in others; but the tendency of it is certainly to what is good in
all.

Experience, and farther consideration may have made all prudent and sober
Friends to true Piety, Virtue, and good Order ashamed of the popular Plea of
Liberty, or that men ought to be left free from any restraint, or Impositions
in matters of Religion, and Conscience; which must needs confound all peace,
and overturn all Government in every Society, and so destroy the being of the
Church as such, and expose private persons to all manner of strange delusions,
and extravagant enterprises without the least guard or defense; beside the ill
aspect it has on the Civil Peace; I may add, It never was, and I doubt never
will be practiced by any Party of men, when they can do otherwise, who flee to
it only for Sanctuary when they can find shelter no where beside. Would men but
impartially look abroad, or consult former times, or but really consider what
were like to be their state under any other settled Constitution by whatever
favorable Character it may have been represented, they might find little
temptation to querulous uneasiness in their present condition, and small
encouragement to seek, and improve every occasion to quarrel at those few, and
mild restraints laid on them especially if withal they would faithfully
reflect upon the ill use which has been made of more remisness.

Indeed Christianity, which is the Gospel of Love, and Peace, and is almost
wholly made up of Charity; inclines us first, and most, to the mildest methods,
as most grateful, most likely to win upon other men's good affections, and to
testify our own. But then this mildness may be turned into the greatest
cruelty to the guilty as well as to the innocent, yea, to the whole Community.
Our great wisdom will be so to pursue the former as we may avoid the latter,
and I know not where it is done more cautiously then here.

If we were to examine the strange and stiff Aversations in many to the
Communion of our Church, we still find them mostly owing to blind prejudice,
and gross Ignorance of what is required of them, more then to any other
principles. They have been brought up in a very ill opinion of our Service
merely by odious names, sly and invidious Characters given to it from persons
whose sincerity and judgment they rely on, and so are before resolved against
any farther inquiry, and industriously shun all opportunities of better
information either by personal Conference, or reading our Books. They think
themselves sufficiently satisfied, and go on to hate and revile, but they often
know not what, nor why. If we could bring them to make their own trial, who are
always jealous of any attempts from us, matter of fact would be their
confutation, and their own Eyes and Ears prove their most effectual conviction,
so as to wonder at their former obstinacy, which some of them have confessed
upon this experience. I believe were some fierce Dissenters asked, they can
scarce say, that they ever seriously read, or attentively heard the Liturgy,
and know very little what it is therein which offends them; I am sure they will
hardly tell us. Sometimes mere novelty startles them, and they are afraid only
for not being used to it.

These, and many little Objections, that we can scarce guess at would soon be
removed by this sensible proof reached down to all capacities; and a sober,
steady temper of mind, with a firm, and well grounded belief in most of the
material Points of Christian Doctrine, variously inculcated in the several
Offices of our Liturgy, would grow up more and more in them; for want of this
we find in several Zealots very little knowledge of the first Principles of
Christian Religion, and indeed very little to be learned from those manner of
discourses and Phrases to which they have been hitherto used. But more
particularly may these Reflections be applied to invite the Romanists amongst
us unto the free, sincere, and cordial Communion with the Church of England,
which once, though only to outward appearance, they generally observed, and
have almost nothing to object against it but the rash, and Schismatical
Interdict of a foreign usurped Power. That the terms of our communion are most
truly Catholic has been the chief design of this small Tractat to prove, and
thereby to prevent the common prejudice from the name of the Catholic, and
Apostolic Church, in which, whatever they assume to themselves, we have as
good a tittle to our share as any Church in the world. And no sensible evidence
have we of our Communion with that Catholic Church, but by communicating with
the more particular Church in which Divine Providence has placed us, where
nothing is required of us repugnant to the Bond of Unity in the whole.

Many of our Church, yea, our Constitution it self have been often charged, and
reviled, though most unjustly, with too favorable an inclination to them of
Rome: because whatever of good Order, and decent Solemnity, as well as sound
Doctrine, and wholesome Instruction was sound among them, is still retained and
cherished by us. And that we are not so hasty and peremptory in unchurching
them all together, or damning presently all that have been, or are still of
their communion, as some would have us: which is in effect for being more
tender in preserving the principles of true Catholic Unity then in pleasing
private humors or prejudices.

Still we must be aware that no pretended Charity to them, nor yet compliance
with those who pretend the greatest opposition to them must tempt us to betray
the Truth of GOD, or violate our Obligation to his commands on either side; and
within those bounds to consult, as much as possible, the Peace and Unity of his
church, and continue therein. If the former retort our kindness upon us in new
Oppositions: If the latter load our religious care and modest caution with all
those dreadful imputations due to others: If we suffer from both besides,
whilst it is only for speaking the Truth, and doing our Duty, which we have no
power to alter; we may justify our selves before God, and our own Consciences,
and in due time with all good reasonable, and considerative men, and then it is
no matter what the clamours, and captious cavils of others lay upon us.

But yet our Adver^aries of the Romish Persuasion must take notice, that while
we are so warry, and sparing in our Censures of them, we are not the less
apprehensive of the extreme danger which attends those gross Errors and
Superstitions, wherewith we charge them, which have a direct tendency to their
ruin, and very much undermine the foundations of Faith, and good Life, which
they own in common with us. What may be their influence upon any particular
persons is more then we dare determine, and think always more ^ase to incline
to the favorable side, where it may be without prejudice to what is certainly
true and good. Notwithstanding whatever our opinion be, that will not alter the
case at last, and thus far we are most determinate that the corruptions among
them are such which every Church is bound to reform, and every true Christian
to keep a distance from, as much as is in his power.

Whatsoever were the condition of those who lived in that Communion before the
Reformation, many of them groaned under those Oppressions from which we are
happily freed: nay, whatever charitable allowance may still be made for them,
who now live within those Boundaries where they have little opportunity of
knowing better, and are under va^^ prejudices by contrary Education, and the
severest awe over them: Now far, I say, these cases may be pleadable, must be
left to GOD and their own Consciences.

As for those born, and bred among us, who have been treacherously deluded into
Apostasy from us, or will persist in their hereditary obstinate averseness to
us against the Clearest conviction, which they may receive, and in opposition
to the express Laws of GOD, and of the Land, to the perpetual disturbance of
the State, and confusion of the Church; there appears no room for any excuse to
lessen their Crime, or alleviate their doom, which will be mightly increased,
when all manner of hidden and crafty Artifices, or open violence against the
common Rights of Humane Society, and moral Honesty, as well as the Faith, and
Charity of Christ's Church are employed, and consecrated into a religious but
blind Zeal for the destruction of both.

No marvel if the Nation awakened with the effects hereof, which it has
sometimes felt, and oftener had reason to fear, have provided some severe Laws
for an aw over them, and to stop the first beginnings of such exorbitant
attempts, ready to break through all ordinary enclosures, and which will hardly
be restrained by the usual methods of Government. No temper is more difficulty
mastered, or more mischievous, if let loose, then such a false fiery zeal,
which neglected burns all before it.

But whatever may have been their Treatment of us formerly, or we may justly
apprehend would be still, had they any opportunity, which GOD pervent: we ought
not, and hope shall not ever desist from wishing, and endeavoring, as much as
is in our power, their real welfa^e, and so of all our implacable Enemies, and
therein their hearty Union with us in the holy Offices of Religion, and
Fellowship of GODs Church where they live, with the sincere renounciation of
those dangerous Errors, and Practices that hitherto keep them at a distance
from us.

In Conclusion, instead of querulous expostulations, or catching occasions to
find fault, we have great reason to admire and adore that gracious Providence,
which amidst so many Confusions, Disorders, and Corruptions that prevail too
much in most places ^ound about, has placed our Lot in so happy a soil, and
provided for us so goodly a Heritage, and safe Retreat in the Bosom of that
Church, whose Charity is as eminent as its Faith, and its Order as signal as
its Purity; whose Arms are always open to receive its returning Enemies with
the most tender Compassions, as well as to cherish its faithful Friends with
the wholesome and indulgent provisions; where nothing is wanting to ensure our
safety, and encourage our proficiency in every thing that is good and
excellent: Which upon former t^al of both the opposite extremes, the whole
Kingdom has seen necessary to f^ee back into, to repair the Confusions and
Devastions they had brought: and in its most dangerous Convulsions here has
found the readiest Cure, and under whose name her very Enemies desire to
shelter themselves: which finally engages us to express our gratitude for so
peculiar Privileges by ^ ready and impartial Obedience to the holy Doctrine we
are taught, and a fruitful improvement of all those happy Advantages which we
enjoy therein. That our Lives may be answerable to our Profession, and our
pious* virtuous, peaceable, and charitable Conversation may be in some
proportion as defensible, and remarkable, as the Principles we proceed upon, or
the benefit^ we lay claim to.

This would most effectually silence the captious Cavils of our Enemies on
every side, and more powerfully invite them to our communion then all other the
most demonstrative Arguments: When their very senses would bear witness that
GOD is in us of a truth. I hope we are not distitute of some such eminent
Examples of unfeigned Piety, true Holiness, and universal Probity. GOD Almighty
increase their number more, and more: Yet whatsoever may be the effect thereof
upon other men, this method would unquestionably ensure our own firmest Peace
here, and everlasting Salvation hereafter. Here we keep certainly within our
own bounds, and may most safely, and profitably spend all our Zeal, while other
men please themselves in diverting it a^road to what they have no power over.
It seems horribly ^^useous to hear men quarrel fiercely about the best church,
who live in the most open defiance to all Religion, and I doubt there are too
many of all denominations chargeable herewith. Yet whatever the case of others
prove, it will be most safe, and pious to bring it home, and close to our
selves. Be our Church, or our Profession never so much better then any other,
if we be not also suitably better then other men, they will rise up in judgment
against us at the last.

But by a careful and diligent observance of its sacred Prescriptions we shall
justify our Reformation throughout, put a stop to the Reproaches, and shame
the calumnies of our Adversaries, and which is the Summary of all good
intentions, and endeavors, bring honor to our great LORD and Master, the
Author and Finisher of our Faith.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE Concerning the Object of RELIGIOUS WORSHIP OR A SCRIPTURE PROOF OF
THE UNLAWFULNESS of giving any Religious Worship to any other Being. BESIDES
THE ONE SUPREME GOD

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by J. Reid, MDC LXXXVI.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the Object of Religious Worship. The INTRODVCTION.
OF all the Disputes between ^s and the Church of Rome, there is none of
greater concernment, then that about the Object of Religious Worship.

We affirm, as the Scripture has taught us, that we must worship the LORD our
GOD and serve him only; the Church Mat. 4. 10.
of Rome teaches, that there is a degree of Religious Worship which we may give
to some excellent Creatures, to Angels and Saints and Images, and the Host, and
to the Relics of Saints and Martyrs. If they are in the right, we may be
thought very rude and uncivil at least, in denying to pay that Worship which is
due to such excellent Creatures, and very injurious to our selves in it, by
losing the benefit of their Prayers and Patronage. If we be in the right, the
Church of Rome is guilty of giving worship to Creatures which is due to GOD
alone; which is acknowledged on all hands to be the greatest of sins; and
therefore this is a dispue which can never be compromised, though we were never
so desirous of an union and reconciliation with the Church of Rome; for the
Incommunicable glory of GOD and the salvation of our Souls, are too dear things
to be given away in complement to any Church.

And should it appear in the next world (for I believe it will never appear to
be so in this) that we were mistaken, that we were over-nice and curious in
refusing to worship Saints and Angels, yet ours is a much more innocent and
pardonable mistake, then that which the church of Rome is guilty of, if they
should prove to be mistaken. We are only wanting in some Religious courtship,
which we might innocently have given to Saints and Angels* but which we were
not bound to give, (as the Church of Rome will not say, that we are) by any
express Divine Law; and therefore it is no sin against GOD not to do it; and
when this neglect is not owing to any designed contempt and dis-regard of those
excellent Spirits, but to a great reverence for GOD, and jealousy for his
incommunicable glory, if it were a fault, we need not doubt but that GOD would
pardon it, and that all good spirits, who have such profound veneration for
GOD, will easily excuse the neglect of some ceremonies to themselves upon so
great a reason.

But if the Church of Rome be mistaken, and gives that worship to creatures,
which is due only to the Supreme God, they have nothing to pretend in excuse of
it; neither any positive Law of God, which expressly forbids all
Creature-worship (as I doubt not to prove, to the satisfaction of all impartial
Readers) nor the principles of Natural Reason; which, whatever Apologies it may
make for the worship of Saints and Angels, can never prove the necessity of it;
and it highly concerns the Church of Rome, and all of her communion to
consider, whither, if their distinctions and little appearances of reason
cannot justify their worship of creatures, they will be able to excuse them
from the guilt of so great a sin.

But not to insist on these things now; I shall divide this discourse into
three parts.

1. I shall prove from the plain evidence of Scripture, That God alone is to be
worshipped.

2. I shall examine what that worship is, which is proper and particular to the
Supreme God.

3. I shall consider those distinctions, whereby the Church of Rome justifies
her worship of Saints and Angels, and Images, etc.

SECTION I. That GOD alone must be Worshipped.
TO make good the first point, that we must worship Sect. 1.
no other being, but only GOD, I shall principally confine my self to Scripture
evidence, which is the most certain authority to determine this matter, For
though I confess, it seems to me a self evident and fundamental principle in
natural Religion, that we must worship none but that Supreme Being, who made,
and who governs the World, yet I find men reason very differently about these
matters.

The Heathen Philosophers, who generally acknowledge one Supreme and Sovereign
Deity, did not think it incongruous, nor any affront or dimimition to the
Supreme God, to ascribe an inferior kind of Divinity, nor to pay an inferior
degree of Religious Worship to those excellent Spirits, which are so much above
us, and have so great a share in the government of this lower world, no more
then it is an affront to a Sovereign Monarch, to honor and reverence his great
Ministers of State, or peculiar Favorites. And the Church of Rome, as she has
corrupted Christianity with the worship of Angels, and Saints departed, so she
defends her self with the same Arguments and reasons, which were long since
alleged by Celsus and Porphyrie, and other Heathen Philosophers, in defense of
their Pagan Idolatry.

And it must be confessed, that these Arguments are very popular, and have
something so agreeable in them, to the natural notions of Civil Honor and
respect, which admits of great variety of degrees, that I do not wonder that
such vast numbers of men, both wise and unwise, have been imposed on by them.

For there is certainly a proportionable reverence and respect due even to
created excellencies, and every degree of power challenges and commands a just
regard, and we are bound to be very thankful not only to GOD who is the first
cause, and the supreme giver of all good things, but to our immediate
Benefactors also. And therefore if there be a sort of middle Beeings, as the
Heathens believed, and as the Church of Rome asserts, between us and the
Supreme God, who take particular care of us, and either by their power and
interest in the government of the world, or by their Intercessions with the
Supreme GOD, can and do bestow a great many Blessings on us, it eems as natural
and necessary to fear and reverence, to honor and worship, them, and to give
them thanks for their care and patronage of us, as it is to court a powerful
Favorite, who by his interest and authority can obtain any request we make to
our Prince; and the first seems to be no greater injury to God, then the second
2. Col. 18.
to a Prince. Thus St. Paul observes, that there is a show of humility in
worshipping Angels; that men dare not immediately approach so glorious a
Majesty as God is, but make their addresses to those excellent spirits which
attend the Throne of God, and are the Ministers of his Providence.

But then every one who believes that there is one Supreme God, who made all
other Beeings, though never so perfect and excellent, must acknowledge, that as
there is nothing common to God and Creatures, so there must be a particular
Worship due to God, which no Creatures can challenge any share in. It is no
affront to a Prince to pay some inferior degrees of civil honor and respect
to his Ministers and Favorites, because as the difference between a Prince and
his subjects is not founded in nature, but in civil order; so there are
different degrees of civil respect proportioned to the different ranks and
degrees of men in the Commonwealth. There is a degree of preheminency which is
sacred and peculiar to the Person of the Prince, and no Prince will suffer his
greatest Favorite to usurp the Prerogative honors which belong to the Crown;
but while they are contented with such respects as are due to their rank and
station, this is no injury to the Prince; for all civil honor is not peculiar
to the Prince, but only a supereminent degree of it, and therefore inferior
degrees of honor may be given to other persons.

But though there are different degrees of civil honor proper to different
ranks and degrees of men, who all partake in the same nature, and are
distinguished only by their different places in the Commonwealth; yet in this
sense there are no different degrees of Religious Worship, All Religious
Worship is peculiar to the Divine Nature, which is but one, and common only to
three Divine Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one God blessed for ever,
Amen. Civil honor and Religious Worship differ in the whole kind and species of
actions, and have as different objects as God and Creatures; and we may as well
argue from those different degrees of civil honor among men, to prove that
there is an inferior degree of civil honor due to beasts, as that there is an
inferior degree of Religious Worship due to some men. For all degrees of
Religious Worship are as peculiar and appropriate to God, as civil respects are
to men, and as the highest degree of civil honor is to a Sovereign Prince.

However should we grant, that some excellent Creatures might be capable of
some inferior degrees of Religious Worship; yet as the Prince is the fountain
of civil honor, which no subject must presume to usurp, without a grant from
his Prince; so no creature, how excellent soever; has any natural and inherent
right to any degree of Religious Worship, and therefore we must not presume to
worship any Creature without Gods command, nor to pay any other degree of
worship to them, but what God has prescribed and instituted; and the only way
to know this, is to examine the Scriptures, which is the only external
revelation we have of the will of God.

Let us then inquire, what the sense of Scripture is in this controversy; and
I shall distinctly examine the testimonies both of the Old and New Testament,
concerning the object of Religious Worship.

SECT II. The Testimonies of the Mosaical Law considered.
TO begin with the Old Testament; and nothing is Sect, 3. 1.
more plain in all the Scripture, then that the Laws of Moses confine ^
Religious worship to that one Supreme God, the Lord Jehovah, who Created the
Heavens and the Earth. For,

1. The Israelites were expressly commanded to worship the Lord Jehovah, and to
worship no other Being; as our Savior himself assures us, who I suppose will
be allowed for a very good Expositor of the Laws of Moses. It is written,
Matthew. 4. 10. Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Deutr 10. 10.
thou shall worship the Lord they God, and him only shall thou serve. In the
Hebrew Text, from whence our Savior cites this Law, it is only said, Thou
shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, without that addition, of him only.
And yet both the Septuagint and the vulgar Latin, read the words as our
Savior does, him only shall thou serve; and the authority of our Savior is
sufficient to justify this Interpretation; and withal, gives us a general
rule, which puts an end to this controversy; that as often as we are commanded
in Scripture to worship God, we are commanded also to worship none besides him.

For indeed the first Commandment is very express in this matter, and all other
Laws which concern the object of Worship, must in all reason be expounded by
that. Thou shall have none other Gods before me. The Septuagint 20 Exodus 3.
renders it plen emu besides me; so does the Chaldee, Syriack, and Arabic to
the same sense. And it is universally concluded by all Expositors that I have
seen, that the true interpretation of this Commandment is, that we must worship
no other God, but the Lord Jehovah. To pay Religious Worship to any Being,
does in the Scriptures notion, make that Being our God, which is the only
reason, why they are commanded not to have any other Gods. For there is but one
true God; and therefore in a strict sense, they can have no other GODS, because
there are no other Gods to be had; but whatever Beeings they worship, they make
that their God by worshipping it; and so the Heathens had a great many Gods, but
the Jews are commanded to have but one GOD, that is, to worship none else
besides him.

In other places GOD expressly forbids them to worship any strange Gods, or the
Gods of the people, or those Nations Deuteronomy. 6. 14
that were round about them. And least we should suspect, that they were forbid
to worship the Gods of the people, only because those Heathen Idolaters worship
Devils, and wicked Spirits, the Prophet Jeremiah gives us a general notion, who
are to be reputed false GODS, and not to be worshipped. Thus shall ye say unto
them, the Gods that have not made the Heavens and the Jer. 10. 11.
Earth, even they shall perish from the Earth, and from under these Heavens. So
that whatever Being is worshipped, whither it be a good or a bad Spirit, which
did not make the Heavens and the Earth, is a false GOD to such Worshippers: and
I suppose the Church of Rome will not say, that Saints or Angels, or the Virgin
Mary (as much as they magnify her) made the Heavens and the Earth, And then
according to this rule they ought not to be worshipped.

But to put this past doubt, that the true meaning of these Laws is to forbid
the worship of any other Being besides the Supreme GOD, I shall observe two or
three things in our Saviors answer to the Devils temptation which will give
great light and strength to it.

1. That our Savior absolutely rejects the worship of any other Being
together with the Supreme GOD. The thing our Savior condemns, is not the
renouncing the worship of God for the worship of Creatures, (for the Devil
never tempted him to his) but the worship of any other being besides GOD,
though we still continue to worship the Supreme GOD. It is written, thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Which is a plain
demonstration, that men may believe and worship the Supreme God, and yet be
Idolaters, if they worship any thing else besides him. The Devil did not desire
our Savior to renounce the worship of the supreme God, but was contented, that
he should worship God still, so he would but worship him also. And therefore it
is no reason to excuse the Church of Rome from Idolatry, because they worship
the supreme God, as well as Saints and Angels: this they may do, and be
Idolaters still; for Idolatry does not consist merely in renouncing the worship
of the supreme God, but in worshipping any thing else, though we continue to
worship him. When the Jews worshipped their Baalims and false gods, they did not
wholly renounce the worship of the God of Israel; and the Heathens themselves,
especially the wisest men amongst them, did acknowledge one supreme God, though
they worshipped a great many inferior Deities with him.

2. Our Savior in his answer to the Devils temptation, does not urge his being
a wicked and Apostate Spirit, an enemy and a rebel against God, but gives such
a reason why he could not worship him, as equally excludes all Creatures,
whither good or bad Spirits, from any right to Divine Worship, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Him and none else,
whither they be good or bad spirits, for our Savior does not confine his
answer to either, and therefore includes them both.

When we charge the church of Rome with too plain an imitation of the Pagan
Idolatry in that worship they paid to their inferior Demons, which was
nothing more, then what the Church of Rome now gives to Saints and Angels; they
think it a sufficient answer, that the Heathens worshipped Devils and Apostate
Spirits, but they worship only the Friends and Favorites of God, blessed
Saints and Angels.

Now I shall not at present examine the truth of this pretense, but shall refer
my Reader to a more Learned Stillingfleet's Defense of the discourse of
Idolatry.
person for satisfaction in this matter, but if it were true, yet it is nothing
to the purpose, if our Saviors answer to the Devil be good.

For let us suppose, that the Pope of Rome, who calls himself Christ's Vicar,
had at this time been in Christ's stead to have answered the Devils
temptations, and let us be so charitable for once as to suppose that (saving
always his indirect power over the Kingdoms of this world in ordine ad
spiritualia) he would not worship the Devil to gain all the Kingdoms of the
World and the Glory of them. Consider then, how the Pope of Rome could answer
this Temptation; All this I will give the, if thou will fall down and worship
me: could he answer as our Savior does? It is written, thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. How easily might the Devil reply,
Is this indeed your infallible Opinion; and the judgment and practice of your
Church to serve God only? do you not also serve and worship St. Paul and St.
Peter, and the Virgin Mary, besides a great many other obscure and doubtful
Saints? This is down right Heresy to confine all Religious Worship to God;
Here now is matter of fact against the Pope, that he does worship other Beeings
beside God, and if he will show any reason for his not worshipping the Devil;
he must quite alter our Saviors answer, and not plead for himself, that he is
bound to worship God and him only, but that he is bound to worship only God and
good Spirits; and therefore the Devil being a wicked and Apostat Spirit, it is
not lawful to worship him. So that if our Savior gave a sufficient answer to
the Devils temptation, it must be equally unlawful to worship good and bad
spirits; there may be some peculiar aggravations in having communion with
Devils, but the Idolatry of worshipping good and bad spirits is the same.

3. Our Saviors answer to the Devil, appropriates all kinds and degrees of
Religious Worship to God alone. The Devil was not then so good a School-man, as
nicely to distinguish and dispute the degrees of Religious Worship with our
Savior, but would have been contented with any degree of Religious Worship. He
did not pretend to be the Supreme God, nor to have the disposal of all the
Kingdoms of the World in his own right: Luke 4. 6.
but acknowledges, that it was delivered to him, and now by virtue of that
grant, he gives it to whom he will. Now it is impossible in the nature of the
thing to worship any Being as Supreme: whom at the same time, we acknowledge
not to be Supreme, And therefore the Devil asks no more of our Saviors, then
that he would fall down and worship him; which is such an inferior degree of
Worship, as Papists every day pay to Images and Saints, and yet this our
Savior refuses to do, and that for this reason that we must worship God only,
which must signify, that we must not give the least degree of divine Worship
to any Creatures; or else it is not a satisfactory answer to the Devils
Temptation, who did not require any certain and determinate degree of worship,
but le^t him at liberty to use what distinctions he pleased, and to pay what
degree of worship he saw fit; whither absolute or relative, supreme or
subordinate, terminative or transient, so he would but fall down and worship
him any way, or in any degree, he left him to be his own Schoolman and Casuist;
but of this more presently.

11. As the Laws of Moses in general, appropriate all Religious Worship to God,
commands us to worship God and him only, so the whole Jewish Religion was
fitted only for the worship of the Lord Jehovah.

I suppose our Adversaries will not deny, that the Tabernacle and Temple at
Jerusalem was peculiarly consecrated to the honor and worship of the Lord
Jehovah: this was the house where he dwelt, where he placed his Name: and the
Symbols of his presence. It was a great profanation of that holy place, to have
the worship of any strange Gods set up in it; and yet this was the only place
of Worship appointed by the Law of Moses; and they had but one Temple to
worship in, and this one Temple consecrated to the particular worship of one
God; which is a plain demonstration, that they were not allowed to worship any
other God, because they had no place to worship him in.

And this I think is a plain proof, that all that worship which was confined to
their Temple, or related to it, was peculiar to the Lord Jehovah, because that
was his house, and then all the Jewish worship was so, which was either to be
performed at the Temple, or had a relation and dependence on the Temple worship.

Sacrifice was the principle part of the Jewish worship, and this we know was
confined to the Temple. Moses expressly commands Israel, take head to thy self,
that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in every place that thou Deuteronomy. 12. 13.
14.
see. But in the place which the Lord shall choose in one of thy Tribes,
there shall thou offer thy burnt offerings; and there shall thou do all that I
command thee. The Prophets indeed, especially before the building of the
Temple, did erect Altars at other places for occasional Sacrifices, for as God
reserved a liberty to himself to dispense with his own Law in extraordinary
cases, so it was presumed, that what was done by Prophets was done by a Divine
command; but there was to be no ordinary or standing Altar for Sacrifice but at
the Tabernacle or Temple; this we may see in that dispute which had like to
have happened between the Children of Israel and the Tribes of Reuben and Gad,
and the half Tribe of Manasseh, about the Altar of Testimony, which these two
Joshua 22.
Tribes and a half built on the other side of Jordan. It was agreed on all
hands, that it had been intended for an Altar for Sacrifice, it had been
Rebellion against the Lord to have built any Altar beside the Altar of the v.
16, 19. 22, 23.
Lord, though they had offered no Sacrifice but to the Lord Jehovah. The same
is evident from Gods dislike of their offering Sacrifices in their high places,
though they sacrificed only to the God of Israel. So that all Sacrifices were
to be offered at the Temple on the Altar of God, and therefore were offered
only to that God, whose Altar and Temple it was. And indeed this is expressly
provided for in the Law. He that sacrifices to any God, but to the Lord only,
shall be utterly destroyed. Exodus 22. 20.


And as their Sacrifices were appropriated to the Temple, so in some sense were
their Prayers, which were offered up in virtue of their Sacrifice. And
therefore Isa. 56. 7. Mat. 21. 13. 1 King. 8.
this is a peculiar name for the Temple, that it was the House of Prayer. Here
GOD was more immediately present to hear those Prayers which were offered to
him according to Solomon's Prayer at the Dedication of the Temple. It is true,
the devout Jews did pray to God where ever they were, though at a great
distance from the Temple, whither in the land of Canaan, or out of it, but then
there are two things, which show that relation their prayers had to the Temple
Worship. 1. That their stated hours of prayer were the hours of Sacrifice,
which plainly signified, that they offered up their Prayers in conjunction with
those Sacrifices, which were at that time offered in the Temple; and therefore
that they prayed only to that GOD to whom they sacrified; for we must consider,
that the constant morning and evening Sacrifices, were not particular
sacrifices, but were offered for the whole Congregation of Israel; and
therefore every man had a share in them. Hence the time of offering the
Sacrifice, is called the hour of Prayer. Thus Peter and John went up into the
temple, at the hour of Prayer, being the ninth hour, that is the time of the
Evening Sacrifice, Hence are such expressions as that of the Psalmist Acts. 3.
1.
Let my Prayer be set before thee as Incense, and the lifting up of my hands,
as the Evening Sacrifice. Nay, it is most probable, that when Jerusalem and the
Temple were destroyed, and the people carried captive into Babylon, and the
daily Sacrifice ceased, yet the devout people observed the hour of Sacrifice
for the prayers. Thus Daniel prayed three times a day, which most likely were
Evening and Morning, and Noon. Where Evening and Morning no doubt signify the
time of the Evening and Morning Dan. 6. 10. Psalm. 55. 17.
Sacrifice; and we are told, that the Angel Gabriel came to Daniel while he was
praying, and touched him about the time of the Evening oblation. But 2ly
besides Dan. 9. 21.
this, when they offered up their Prayers to GOD in other parts of the Nation,
or in other Countries. they prayed toward Jerusalem, and the Temple of God, as
we now lift up our eyes to Heaven, where God dwells. Thus Solomon in his Prayer
of Dedication, does not only beg of God to hear those Prayers, which were made
toward it, as the words must signify in several places. In general he prays,
Hearken thou to the Prayer of thy servant, and of the people Israel, when they
shall pray 1 King. 8. 30.
toward this place; (The word in the Hebrew) may signify both in and toward
this place, and includes both, as appears from the following instances, which
refer both to Prayers made in the Temple, and to those prayers which were made
toward the Temple by persons who were at a distance. Thus in what ever part of
the Nation they wanted rain, which might be at a great distance from Jerusalem,
they were to pray toward this place. ver. 35.
The same was to be done in case of Famine and Pestilence, etc. or if they were
besiged in any of their Cities, when they could not go to the Temple to pray.
Nay, What Prayer or supplication soever shall be made by any man, or by all thy
people Israel, which shall know every man the plague of his verse. 37. ver. 39.
own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house, then hear thou in
Heaven thy dwelling place and forgive. Thus when they went out to battle, they
were to pray toward the City of Jerusalem, and toward the Temple. verse. 44.
And when they were carried captive into their enemies land, they were to pray
to God toward the land which God had given them, toward the Holy City, and
toward the Temple. And accordingly it was the constant practice verse. 48.
of Daniel, when he was in Babylon, to pray three times a day to God, with his
windows open in his chamber toward Dan. 6. 10.
Jerusalem

So that though the Temple were not the only place where they might lawfully
pray to God; yet all their Prayers were to be directed to the Temple, and
receive their virtue and acceptance from their relation to the Temple and the
Temple-worship. This was a standing rule for the whole Jewish Nation, that
whenever they prayed, they offered up their prayers in the Temple or toward
it; and this is generally observed by them to this day: For the reason why they
generally now turn themselves toward the East when they pray, is not out of any
respect to the rising of the Sun, but because they live in Western Countries;
and so by turning to the East, they look toward Jerusalem, and the place where
the Temple stood. And this is as plain an evidence, that all Buxtorfii Synag.
Jud. p. 222.
their prayers as well as Sacrifices, were to be offered only to that GOD who
dwelt in the Temple. And therefore as they are commanded to pray to God, and
this is made the peculiar attribute of God, that he hears Psalm 65. 2. Josh.
23. 7.
prayers, and therefore unto him shall all flesh come; so they are expressly
commanded not to make mention of the name of the Heathen gods; that is, not to
pray to them; the prayers of the Heathens consisting of a frequent repetition
of the names of their gods, as we see in the priests of Baal, who cried from
morning till evening, saying, O Baal hear us. 1 Kin. 18. 26


Thus the Jews were commanded to bring all their Vows, first Fruits, Tithes,
and offerings, to the Temple, which is a plain sign to whom they were offered.
The Seventh-day Sabbath was a sign that they worshipped that God who created the
world in six days, and rested on the seventh, and delivered them from their
Egyptian Bondage, and gave them rest in that good Land, both which reasons are
assigned by Moses, and therefore God command them by the prophet Ezekiel,
Nallow my sabbaths, Ezekiel. 20. 20
and they shall be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am the
Lord your God.

They had but three solemn Festivals every year, and they were all in
remembrance of the great Works of God, and all the Males were to go up to
Jerusalem to keep these Feasts; and therefore al^ these were the Feasts of the
Lord Jehovab.

And as they were to pray only to God, so they were only to swear by his Name
which is another part of Religious Worship; and therefore to swear by the Lord
of Hosts is called Deuteronomy. 10. 21 Isa. 12. 1^.
the Language of Canaan.

So that all the parts of the Jewish Worship were appropriated to the Lord
Jehovah, he was the only object of their dread and fear, and religious
Adorations. And when we consider that God had chosen them to be a peculiar
people to himself, that the Land was a Holy Land, Gods peculiar Inheritance,
which he gave by promise to their Fathers; and the Temple was his House where
he dwelt among them, it cannot be expected that any other Gods might be
worshipped by such a people, in such a Land and in such a house, as God had
appropriated to himself.

3. It is very considerable, that we have no approved example under the Law, of
any worship paid to Saints or Angels, or any other Being, but God alone. We
have too many sad examples of the Idolatry of the Jews both in worshipping the
Molten Calf which Aaron made, and Jeroboams Calves and Baalim's, and other
Heathen gods; but had it been allowed by their Law to have paid any inferior
degree of Religious Worship to Saints and Angels (which is now asserted by the
Church of Rome, to be a matter of such great benefit and advantage to mankind)
it is a very strange, that we should not have one example of it throughout the
Scripture, nor any authentic Records among the Jewish Writers: All the Psalms
of David are directed to God alone, and yet we cannot think but such a devout
man would have bestowed some Hymns upon his Patron and tutelar Saints, had he
worshipped any such, as well as the Pap^sts do now.

This the Church of Rome sees and acknowledges, and thinksshe answers too, when
she gives us the reason why it could not be so under the Law; because those Old
Testament-Saints were not then admitted into Heaven, to the immediate vision
and fruition of God; Heavengates were not opened till the resurrection and
Ascension of our Savior, and therefore those blessed Spirits were not in a
condition to be our Intercessors and Mediators, till they were received into
Heaven; but now Saints and Martyrs ascend directly into Heaven, and reign with
Christ in Glory, and it seems share with him in his peculiar Worship and
Glory too.

Now 1. Whither this be so or not, the Scriptures assign no such reason for it;
and therefore it is likely there might be other reasons, and I think I have made
it very plain that there was. We are not inquiring for what reasons the Jewish
Church did not worship Saints and Angels, but whither they did worship them or
not; and it appears that they never did; so that we have neither precept nor
example for this, during all the time of the Jewish Church: which is all we
intend to prove by this argument.

2. But yet it is evident, that this is not a good reason why the Jews did not
worship Angels under the Law. For certainly Angels were as much in Heaven then,
as they are now, whatever Saints were. They are represented in the Old
Testament, as the constant Attendants and R^tinue of God, and the great
Ministers of his Providence, and therefore they were as capable of Divine
Worship in the time of the Law as they are now, nay, I think, a little more.
For the Law it self, was given by the Ministry of Angels, and their appearances
were more frequent and familiar* and the world seemed to be more under the
Government of Angels then, then it is now, since Christ is made the Head of the
Church, and exalted above all principalities and powers.

And therefore sometimes the Advocates of the Church of Rome, make some little
offers to prove the worship of Angels in those days: to this purpose they
allege that form of benediction, which Jacob used in blessing the Sons of
Josheph, The Genesis 44. 16.
Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the Lads.

But 1. This is not a direct prayer to the Angel, but only his committing of
them to the care and patronage of that Angel, with a prayer to God for that
purpose; And if he by experience had found that God had appointed his Angel to
defend and protect him, it was but reasonable to pray to God, that the same
Angel might protect his posterity.

2. But yet according to the sense of the Ancient Fathers, this was no created
Angel and Spirit, but the Son and Word of God, the Angel of the presence, who
is so often in Scripture styled Jehovah, a name which can belong to no created
Spirit. And it is no hard matter to make it highly probable, that this is that
Angel who redeemed Jacob out of all his troubles. But it is strange if Angels
were worshipped under the Old Testament, we should have no clearer and plainer
evidence of it, then such a single Text, which was never expounded either by
any Jewish or Christian Writers to this sense, till of late days; and here the
Priests of the Church of Rome are to be put in mind of their Oath to expound
Scripture according to the unanimous consent of the Ancient Fathers.

SECT. III. The Testimonies of the Gospel considered; whither Chr^^^ and his
Apostles have made any alteration in the object ^f our Worship.
LEt us now proceed in the second place, to consider Sect. 3.
the writings of the New Testament, and examine what they teach us concerning
the object of our Worship. And that Christ and his Apostles have made no change
in the object of our worship, will appear from these considerations.

1. That they could not do it. Had they ever attempted to set up the worship of
any other Beeings besides the One Supreme God, the Lord Jehovah, the Jews were
expressly commanded by their Law not to believe them, nor hearken to them,
whatever signs and wonders and miracles they had wrought. If there arise among
you a Prophet or a dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
sign or wonder; and the sign or wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto
thee saying, let us go after other Gods (which thou have not known) and let us
serve them; Thou shall not hearken unto the words of the Prophet, or that
dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your GOD proves you, to know whither you love
the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your Soul. Ye shall walk
after the Lord your God, and fear him, and keep his Commandments, and obey his
voice, and you shall serve him, and cleave unto him. And that Prophet or
dreamer, of dreams shall be put to death, etc. in which Law there are some
things very matterial to be obsered in this present dispu^e.

1. When they are forbidden to hearken to any Prophet, who seduces them to the
worship of any other Gods, this must be extended to all those instances of
Idolatrous worship, which are forbid by the Law of Moses, whatever is opposed
to the worship of one Supreme and Sovereign Being, the Lord Jehovah. And
therefore whither these Prophets seduced them from the worship of the Lord
Jehovah, to the worship of other Gods; or persuaded them to worship other Gods
besides the Lord Jehovah, whither they were any of those Gods which were at
that time worshipped by other Nations, or any other Gods, whom the ignorance and
superstition of the people should create in after ages, whither good or bad
Spirits, the case is the same: whoever persuaded them to worship any other
Being with or besides the Supreme God, was to be rejected by them; for this is
the sense of the Mosaical Laws concerning the worship of one Supreme God, as I
have already proved, and the serving other Gods in this place, is opposed to
the worship of one God, and therefore must include whatever according to the
Law of Moses is contrary to the worship of one Supreme Being.

2. This Law makes the worship of one God eternal and un^^^geable. There is no
way of altering any Divine Laws, but by a new revelation of Gods will, and
there is no way to give Authority to such a revelation, but by Miracles or
Prophecy; but in this case Miracles and Prophecy it self can give no
authority, because God himself has expressly forbid us to hearken to any
Prophet, whatever signs or wonders are wrought by him, who teaches the worship
of any other Being besides the one Supreme God. So that the Law of Moses
having expressly forbid the worship of any other Being besides God, and as
expressly forbid us to hearken to any Prophet, though a worker of Miracles, who
teaches any other worship, it is impossible, this Law should ever be altered,
because we are beforehand warned by God himself, not to give credit to any
Prophet whatever he be, or whatever he do, who attempts any alteration of it.
And therefore had Christ or his Apostle taught the worship of Saints and
Angels, it had been a just reason for the unbelief of the Jews, notwithstanding
all the Miracles that were wrought by them; and it is well the Jews never had
any just occasion to make this objection against our Savior, for if they had,
I know not how it would have been answered. I say a just occasion, for the Jews
did urge this very Law against him before Pilate. We have a Law and by our Law
he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God. In which they refer to
Joh. 19. 7.
that discourse of our Savior, John 10. 29, 30. where he affirms that God is
his Father, and plainly tells them, I and my Father are one, for which saying
they attempt to stone him for blasphemy, and that being a man, he made himself
a God. v. 33. But though he did indeed (as the Jews rightly inferred) make
himself a God by this saying, yet he did not preach any new God to them, but
affirmed himself to be one with the Father, that same Supreme God, the Lord
Jehovah, whom they were commanded to worship by their Law; he made no
alteration in the object of their worship, but only did more clearly and
distinctly reveal the Father to them, as manifesting himself in and by his only
begotten Son. And therefore he did not offend against this Law, by seducing
them to the worship of any other Gods besides the Lord Jehovah; which if he had
done, their accusation had been just, and all the Miracles which he did, could
not have secured him from the guilt and punishment of an Impostor.

Which shows us, what force there is in that Argument which the Church of Rome
urges from these Miracles, which have been wrought at the Tombs of Martyrs, to
prove the Religious invocation of them; if such Miracles were ever wrought, it
was in testimony to the truth of Christianity, for which they suffered, not to
betray men to a superstitious and idolatrous worship of them; ten thousand
Miracles should never convince me of the lawfulness of praying to Saints
departed while I have such a plain and express Law against believing all
Miracles upon any such account.

Nor can it reasonably be said, that this Law was given only to the Jews, and
therefore oblidges none but them; for we must remember, that Christ was
originally sent to the Jews, to the lost sheep of the house of Israel; and
therefore by this Law, he was bound not to teach the worship of any other
Beeings, under the penalty of death; and they were bound not to own and receive
him if he did; and therefore it was impossible for the true Messiah to
introduce the worship of any Being, besides the one supreme God; and if Christ
could not teach any such Doctrine, I know not how the worship of Saints and
Angels should ever come to be a Doctrine of Christianity. For what Christ
himself cannot do, none of his Followers may, who had no other Commission but
to teach those things which they had learned from him; and he could not give
commission to preach such Doctrines, as he himself had no authority to preach.

So that though this Law was not originally given to the Gentiles, but only to
the Jews: yet it equally oblidges the Christian Church, whither Jews or
Gentiles, because Christ himself, who was the Author of our Religion was
oblidged by it. The worship of one Supreme God, and of none else, is as
fundamental to Christianity, as it is to Judaism; for Christianity is now, or
ought to be, the Religion of the Jews, as well as Gentiles; and yet the Jews
are expressly forbid by this Law ever to own any Religion, which allows the
worship of any Being besides God: and therefore the worship of one God and
none else, must be fundamental in Christianity, if the people of the Jews are,
or ever were bound to embrace the Faith of Christ.

SECT. IV.
2 ANd therefore I observe in the next place, that Christ and his Apostles have
made no alteration at all in the object of our worship. Christ urges, that Old
Testament Law in answer to the Devils Temptation: It is written, thou shall
worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve. Which it seems, is as
^. Matthew. 10.
standing a Law after the appearance of Christ, as it was before. He gives no
other direction to his Disciples, but to pray. To their Heavenly Father, and in
that form of prayer which he gave them, he teaches them to address their prayer
neither to Saints nor Angels, but to God only. Our Father which art in Heaven.

When St. Paul charges the Heathens with Idolatry, he does it upon this
account, that they joined the worship of Creatures, with the worship of the
Supreme God. Because that when they knew God they glorified him not as God,
neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish
heart was darkened. Where the Apostle acknowledges, that they did know God, that
Romans 1. 21.
they did own that Supreme and Sovereign Being who made the world: and does
suppose, that they did worship him also. For he does not charge them with
renouncing the worship of that God who made the world, but that they did not
glorify him as God; which only taxes the manner of their worship. And wherein
that was faulty he declares in the following verses. As that they made mean and
vile representations of him, that they verse. 23.
changed the Glory of the uncorruptible God, into an Image made like to
corruptible man, and to birds and four footed beasts, and creeping things. And
thus changed the the truth of God into a lie. But this was not the only fault,
but they also gave his incommunicable worship to Creatures, and worshipped and
served the Creature more then the Creator, who is blessed for ever, Amen. Which
words do verse. 25.
plainly suppose, that they did worship the Creator of all things, but besides
the Creator, (for so para may signify) they worshipped the creature also;
which proves that the worship of the Supreme God will not excuse those from
Idolatry, who worship any thing else besides him. For the opposition lies
between the Creator, and the creature, be it good or a bad creature, it matters
not as to Religious Worship, which must be given to neither. Or if we render
the words, as our Translators do, more then the Creator, (for para is often
used comparatively) yet so it supposes, that they did worship the Creator, and
when they are said to worship the Creature more, that cannot signify a higher
degree of worship, but more frequent addresses (and thus the Church of Rome
worships the Virgin Mary, more then the Creator; for they say ten prayers (if
they be prayers) to the Virgin Mary for one to God ten Ave Mary's for one Pater
noster.

The same Apostle determines this matter in as plain words as can be: For
though there can be, that are called 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6
Gods, whither in Heaven or Earth, as there be Gods many, and Lords many; but
to us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him,
and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. Where in
opposition to the Pagan Idolatry, who worshipped a great many Gods, not as
Supreme Independent Deities (for they acknowledged but one Supreme God, who
made all the other Gods) but either as sharers in the Government of the World,
or Mediators and Intercessors for them with the Supreme GOD, the Apostle
plainly asserts, That to us Christians there is but one GOD the maker of all
Things, and one LORD JESUS CHRIST our great Mediator and Advocate with GOD the
Father; that is, that we must worship none else. And that none of the
distinctions, which are used by the Church of Rome to justify that Worship,
which they pay to Saints and Angels, can have any place here, is evident from
this consideration: For either these distinctions were known, or they were not
known, when the Apostle wrote this, and in both cases silence is an argument
against them, If they were known, he rejects them, and determines against them;
for he affirms absolutely without the salvo of any distinctions, that we have
but one GOD, and one Mediator; that is, that we must worship no more. If they
were not known (as it is likely they were not, because the Apostles takes no
notice of them) it is a plain argument, that these distinctions are of no use,
unless they will say, that St. Paul, who was guided by an Infallible Spirit,
was ignorant of some very useful and material notions about the object of
Worship. If the Apostle did not know these distinctions, it is evident they are
of a late date, and therefore can have no authority against an Apostolical
determination: If he did not know them, he could have no regard to them, and
therefore made no allowance for such exceptions.

Nay, the same Apostle does not only give us such general rules, as necessarily
exclude the worship of Saints and Angels, but does expressly condemn it, and
warns the Christians against it. He fortels of the Apostasy of the latter
days, wherein some shall depart from the Faith, 1 Timothy 4. 1.
giving heed to sedu^ing Spirits, and the doctrine of Devils, didaskaliais
daimonion, the doctrine of Demons, the doctrine of worshipping Demons, or
some new inferior Deity, Saints, or Angels, or whatever they are, as Mediators
and Intercessors between GOD and men. This is the true notion of the doctrine
of Demons amongst See Mr. Joseph Medes Apostasy of the latter times.
the Heathens, and the Apostle tells us, the time shall come, when some
Christians (for it is evident he speaks here of the Apostasy of Christians)
shall fall into the same Idolatry; which is an exact prophecy of what we now
see done in the Church of Rome, who have the same notion of their Saints and
Angels, and pay the same worship to them, which the Heathens formerly did to
their Demons or inferior Gods.

3. And as a farther confirmation of this, I observe, that the Gospel of our
Savor forbids Idolatry, without giving us any new notion of Idolatry; and
therefore it has made no alteration at all in this Doctrine, of the worship of
one God, which Moses so expressly commanded the Jews to observe. For the Gospel
was preached to the Jews as well as to the Gentiles; nay, the Jews had the
first and most undoubted right to it, as being the posterity of Abraham, to
whom the promise of the Messiah was made; and therefore as the Law was at first
given them by Moses, so it did still oblidge them in all such cases, wherein
the Gospel did not in express terms make a change and alteration of the Law;
and therefore since there was no such alteration made, and yet the Law against
Idolatry renewed and confirmed by the authority of the Gospel, what could the
Jews understand else by Idolatry, but what was accounted Idolatry by the Law of
Moses; that is, the worship of any other Being besides the Supreme GOD, the
Lord Jehovah. And since it is evident, that there are not two Gospels, one for
the Jews, and another for the Gentiles, all Christians, whither Jews or
Gentiles, must be under the obligation of the same Law, to worship only one God.

The notion of Idolatry must alter as the object of Religious Worship does. If
we must worship one God, and none besides him, then it is Idolatry to worship
any other Being but the Supreme God, for Idolatry consists in giving Religious
worship to such Beeings, as we ought not to worship; and by the Law of Moses
they were to worship none but God; and therefore the worship of any other
Being was Idolatry. But if the object of our worship be enlarged, and the
Gospel has made it lawful to Worship Saints and Angels, then we must seek out
some other notion of Idolatry, that it consists in worshipping wicked Spirits,
or in giving Supreme and Sovereign worship to inferior Deities, which the
Church of Rome thinks impossible in the nature of the thing, for any man to do,
who knows them to be inferior Spirits. But if Idolatry be the same under the
New Testament, that it was under the Old, the object of our worship must be the
same too; and we have reason to believe, that it is the same, when we are
commanded to keep our selves from Idols, and to fly from Idolatry, but are no
where in the New Testament expressly told, what this Idolatry is; which
supposes, that we must learn what it is, from some antecedent Laws, and there
were no such Laws in being but the Laws of Moses.

The only thing that can be said in this case, is, that the Apostle refers them
not to any written Law, but to the natural notions of Idolatry: but with what
reason this is said, will soon appear, if we consider to whom the Apostle
writes; and they were but Jewish and Heathen Converts. As for the Heathens,
they had corrupted all their natural notions of Idolatry, and had no sense at
all of this sin till they were converted to Christianity; and therefore they
were not likely to understand the true notion of Idolatry without being taught
it; and it is not probable the Apostles would leave them to guess what Idolatry
is. As for the Jews, God would not from the beginning trust to their natural
notions, but gave them express Laws about Idolatry, which though they are the
same Laws which natural reason dictates to us, as most agreeable to the nature
and worship of God, yet since the experience of the world, which was overrun
by Idolatrous worship, sufficiently prove, that all men do not use their reason
aright in these matters, God would not trust to the use of their reason in the
weighty concernments of his own worship and glory, but gives them an express
positive Law about it; and Christ and his Apostles having done nothing to
repeal this Law, they leave them under the authority of it; and when they warn
them against Idols and Idolatry, without giving them any new Laws about it,
must in all reason be presumed to refer them to those Laws, which they already
had.

SECT. V.
4. AS a farther proof of this, I observe, that Christ and his Apostles did not
abrogate, but only complete and perfect the Mosaical Laws. Our Savior with
great zeal and earnestness disowns any such intention or design. Think not that
I am come to destroy the Law and the Prophets, I am not come to destroy but to
fulfill. plerosai to fill it up, by fulfilling the types and prophecies 5. Mat.
17.
of it, by exchanging a ceremonial for a real righteousness, or by perfecting
its moral precepts with new instances and degrees of virtue. And therefore he
adds, For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one
tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled. And St. Paul,
who was looked on by the believing Jews as a great enemy to the Law of Moses,
does renounce all such pretenses. Do we then make void the Acts 21. 21. 22. Rom
3. 31.
Law through Faith? God forbid; yea, we establish the Law.

Indeed had Christ or his Apostles attempted to have given any new Laws
contrary to the Laws of Moses, it had justified the Jews in their unbelief, for
God by his Prophet Isaiah, had given this express rule to examine all new
Doctrines by; To the law and the testimony, if they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them; and that Isai. 8. 20.
Christ himself is not excepted from this rule, appears in this, that this is
joined with the prophecy of the Messiah, both before and after; as you may see
in Isai. 8 13. 14. and Chapter 9. 6. 7. and therefore Christ and his Apostles
always make their appeals to the writings of the Old Testament, and St. Paul
in all his disputes with the Jews urges them with no other authority but the
Scriptures; and tho the Miracles which were wrought by the Apostles did move
the Jews to hearken to them, and greatly dispose them to believe their
Doctrine, yet it was the authority of the Scriptures whereon their Faith was
founded. As S. Peter tells those to whom he wrote, that though they preached
nothing to them concerning the coming of Christ, but what they were
eyewitnesses of; and though God had given testimony to him by a voice from
Heaven, which they heard, when they were with him in the holy Mount, yet he
adds, We have also a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well, that ye
take heed, as to a light, Pet. 1. 16. 7. 18. 19.
that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the daystar arise in
your hearts. That is the Scriptures of the Old Testament; and therefore the
Jews of Berea are greatly commended for their diligence in searching the
Scriptures, and examining St. Paul's Doctrine by them; and this is assigned Acts
17. 10. 11.
as the reasons why many of them believed.

To apply this then to our present purpose, I observe,

1. That if Christ did not make any new Laws in contradiction to the Law of
Moses, then he could make no alteration in the object of Religious Worship. He
could not introduce the worship of Saints and Angels without contradicting that
Law, which commands us to worship no other Being but the one Supreme God. For
the worship of Saints and Angels together with the Supreme God, is a direct
contradiction to that Law, which commands us to worship God alone; though we
should suppose, that in the nature of the thing, the worship of Saints and
Angels were consistent with the worship of the Supreme God, yet it is not
consistent with that Law, which commands us to worship none but God. So that
let this be a natural or positive Law, or whatever men please to call it, it is
a very plain and express Law, and Christ never did contradict any express Law
of God.

It is true, that Typical and Ceremonial Worship, which God commanded the Jews
to observe, is now out of date under the Gospel, and does no longer oblidge
Christians; but the reason of that is, because it has received its
accomplishment and perfection in Christ. Christ has perfected the Jewish
Sacrifices, and put an end to them, by offering a more perfect and meritorious
sacrifice, even the sacrifice of himself. The Circumcision, washings,
Purifications of the Law, are perfected by the Laws of internal purity. The
external Ceremonies of the Law cease, but they are perfected by an Evangelical
righteousness. But this I say, that Christ never repealed any Mosaical Law, but
by fulfilling and perfecting it. He came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill.
Now methinks I need not prove, that the worship of Sain^s and Angels is not a
fulfilling, but a destroying that Law, which commands us to worship none but
God. And it is not enough to say, that these are positive Laws given to the
Jews, (though that be said without any reason) for let them show me any
positive Law relating to the worship of GOD, which Christ has wholly abrogated
without fulfilling it.

2. Yet as a farther proof, that Christ has made no alteration in the object of
our worship, that he has not introduced the worship of Saints or Angels, or
Images, into the Christian Church, which was so expressly forbid by the Jewish
Law, I observe that according to our Saviors own rule, that he came not to
destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill; these Laws of worshipping one
God, and none besides him, were not liable to any change and alteration,
because there was nothing to be perfected or fulfilled in them. He made no
change or alteration but by way of perfecting and fulfilling; and therefore
those Laws which had nothing to be fulfilled, must remain as they were without
any change.

To perfect or fulfill a law, must either signify to accomplish what was
prefigured by it, and thus Christ fulfilled all the types and prophecies of the
Law, which related to his Person, or his undertaking, as the Jewish Priesthood,
and Sacrifices, etc. or to prescribe that real righteousness which was
signified and represented by the outward ceremony, and so Christ fulfilled the
Laws of circumcision, Washing, Purifications, Sabbaths, etc. by commanding the
Circumcision of the heart, and the purity of mind and spirit: or by supplying
what was defective; and thus he fulfilled the moral Law by new instances of
virtue, by requiring something more perfect of us, then what the letter of the
Mosaical Law enjoined. These are all the ways that I know of and all that we
have any instances of in Scripture of fulfilling Laws.

Now I suppose, no man will say, that the first Commandment, which forbids ^he
worship of any other Gods besides the Lord Jehovah, is a Typical Law, for pray
what is it a Type of? nor can any pretend that the first Commandment is a
ceremonial Law, for it prescribes no rite of worship at all, but onl^
determines the object of worship.

As for the third way of fulfilling Laws, by perfecting them with some new
instances and degrees of virtue, it can have no place here, for this Law is as
perfect as it can be. For it is a Negative Law, Thou shall have none other GOD.
Now that which is forbid without any reserve o^ limitation, is perfectly and
absolutely forbid. There are no degrees of nothing, though there are several
degrees of perfection in things which have being; and therefore though there
are degrees in affirmative Laws, for some Laws may require greater seize
then other; and one man may do better then another, and yet both do that which
is good; yet there are no degrees in not doing a thing, and no Law can do more
then forbid that, which the Lawgiver will not have done.

And besides, ^his way of fulfilling Laws, does not abrogate any command, but
adds to it; it may restrain those liberties which were formerly indulged, but
it does not forbid any thing which was formerly our duty to do; for when GOD
requires greater degrees of virtue from us, he does not forbid the less. And
therefore in this way Christ might forbid more then was forbid by the Law of
Moses, but we cannot suppose that he gave liberty to do that which the law
forbids, which is not to perfect, but to abrogate a Law.

But to put an end to this dispute; if Christ have perfected these Laws by
indulging the worship of Saints and Angels under the Gospel, which was so
expreslly forbidden by the Law, then it seems the worship of Saints and Angels
is a more perfect state of Religion, then the worship of the one supreme God
alone.

If this be true, then though the Heathens might mistake in the object of their
worship was yet the manner of their worship was more perfect and excellent,
then what God himself prescribed the Jews. For they worshipped a great many
inferior Deities, as well as the supreme God; and if this be the most perfect
and excellent worship it is wonderful to me, that God should forbid it in the
worship of himself; that he should prescribe a more imperfect worship to his
own people, then the Heathens paid to their Gods.

For to say that God forbade the worship of any Being besides himself, because
this liberty had been abused by the Heathens to Idolatry, is no reason at all.
For though we should suppose that the Heathens worshipped evil spirits for Gods,
this had been easily prevented, had God told them what Saints and Angels they
should have made their addresses to; and this had been a more likely way to
cure them of Idolatry then to have forbid the worship of all inferiors
Deities; for when they had such numerous Dieties of their own to have made
their application to, they would have been more easily weaned from the Gods of
other Countries.

And we have reason to believe, so it would have been, had GOD been pleased
with this way of worship, for he would not reject any part of religious
worship, merely, because it had been abused by Idolaters. The Heathens
sacrificed to Idols, and yet he commands the Jews to offer Sacrifices to
himself, and so no doubt he would have commanded the worship of Saints and
Angels, had he been as well pleased with this, as he was with Sacrifices; had
it been a more perfect state of Religion then to worship God only, and without
any Image.

When God chose the people Israel, and separated them from the rest of the
world, to his own peculiar worship and service, we cannot suppose that he did
intend to forbid any acts of worship, which were a real honor to the Divine
Nature, much less to forbid the most excellent and perfect acts of worship; for
he who is so jealous of his glory, will no more part with it himself, then he
will give it to another; and therefore excepting the Typical nature of that
dispensation, the whole intention of the Mosaical Law was to correct those
abuses, which the rest of the world was guilty of in their Religious Worship,
which either respected the object or the acts of worship; that they worshipped
that for God, which was not God; or that they thought to honor God by such
acts, as were so far from being an honor, that they were a reproach to the
Divine Nature. And whatever is forbid in the worship of God, unless there be
some Mystical and Typical reasons for it, must be reduced to one of those
causes. This account God himself gives, why he forbids the worship of any
Being besides himself, or the worship of graven Images I am the Lord, that is
my Name, and my glory will I not give to Isa. 42. 8.
another, nor my praise to graven Images. Whatever is his true glory, he
reserves to himself, and therefore never did forbid any act of worship which
was truly so; but he will not give his glory to another, and for that reason
forbids the worship of graven Images, or any thing besides himself; and if this
was not his glory then much less the most perfect and excellent part of
worship, I know not how it should come to be his glory now, unless the Divine
Nature changes and alters too.

So that God having forbid by the Law of Moses the worship of any other Being
besides himself, is a very strong presumption, that the worship of Saints and
Angels, (whatever fine excuses and Apologies may be made for it, yet at least)
is not a more perfect state of Religion, then to worship God alone. For though
God may not always think fit to command the highest degrees of perfection, yet
there never can be any reason to forbid it. But let us now consider the nature
and reason of the thing, whither it be a more perfect state of Religion to
worship God alone, or to worship Saints and Angels, etc. together with the
Supreme God. Now the perfection of any acts of Religion must either respect God
or our selves, that they signify some greater perfections in God, or more
perfect seize in us, and a nearer union and conjunction with the Deity.
Let us then briefly examine the worship of Saints and Angels. both with respect
to God and ourselves, and see whither we can discover any greater perfection in
this way of worship, then the worship of the Supreme B^eing alone, without any
Rival or partner in worship; and if it appears, that it is neither for the
glory of God, nor for the happiness and perfection of those who worship, we may
certainly conclude, that our Savior has made no alteration in the object of
our worship, for he made no alteration for the worse but for the better, he
fulfills and perfects Laws, which, I suppose, does not signify, making them
less perfect then they were before.

SECT. VI.
1. THen let us consider, whither the worship of Saints and Angels be more for
the glory of God, then to pay all Religious Worship to God alone. Now if
Religious Worship be for the glory of God then all religious worship is more
for Gods glory then a part of it; unless men will venture to say, that a part
is as great as the whole. And yet whoever worships Saints and Angels, though he
be never so devout a worshiper of God also, yet he gives part of Religious
Worship to Creatures, and therefore God cannot have the whole, unless they can
divide their worship between God and Creatures, and yet give the whole to God.

If it be objected, that those who worship Saints and Angels, do not give that
worship to them, which is peculiar and appropriate to the Supreme God, and
therefore they reserve that worship which is due to GOD, wholly to himself,
though they pay an inferior degree of Religions Worship to Saints and Angels.
I answer what that worship is, which is peculiar to the Supreme God, I shall
consider more hereafter; but for the present, supposing that they gave only an
inferior degree of worship to creatures, is this Religious Worship, or is it
not? If it be, is a degree of Worship a part of Worship? if it be, then God has
not the whole, and therefore is not so much honored, as if he had the whole;
as to show this in a plain instance.

Those who pray to Saints and Angels, though they do not pray to them, as to
the Supreme God, but as to Mediators and Intercessors for them with the Supreme
God, yet they place an inferior degree of hope and trust and affiance in them,
or else it is nonsense to pray to them at all; so that though God may be the
Spreme Object of their relyance and hope, yet he is not the only Object; he has
part, and the greatest part, but not the whole, for they divide their hope and
trust between God and Creatures; and it be a greater glory to God to trust
wholly in him, then to trust in him in part, then it is a greater glory to God
to pray to him only, then to pray also to Saints and Angels.

Nay it is more then probable, that those who pray to Saints and Angels, as
trusting in their merits and intercession for them, do not make God, but these
Saints and Angels, to whom they pray, the Supreme Object of their hope. This it
may be well be thought an extravagant charge against men who profess to
believe, that God is the Supreme Lord of the world, and the sole giver of all
good things; but this is no argument to me, but that notwithstanding this
belief, they may trust more in Saints and Angels, then in God, and consequently
give the Supreme Worship to them. For men do not always trust most in those
who have the greatest power, but in those by whose interest and intercession,
they hope to obtain their desires of the Sovereign power. Thus I am sure it is
in the Courts of earthly Princes; though men know, that the King only has power
to grant what they desire, yet they place more confidence in a powerful
Favorite then in their prince, and when they have obtained their requests, pay
more acknowledgments to their Patron; for let the power be where it will, our
hope and trust is placed there where our expectations are. And when men's
expectations are not from the Prince* who has the power, but from the Favorite,
whose interest directs the influences of this power to them, which otherwise
would never reach them, such Favorites have more numerous dependents, more
frequent addresses, more formal courtships, then the Prince himself. And when
men model the heavenly Court according to the pattern of earthly Courts; and
expect the conveyance of the Divine Blessings to them as much from the
intercession of Saints and Angels, as they do to to obtain their desires of
their Prince, by the mediation of some powerful Favorite, no wonder, if they
love, and honor, and fear, reverence and adore, trust and depend on Saints and
Angels, as much or more then they do on the Supreme GOD. For there is not a
more natural notion, then to honor those for our GODS, from whose hands we
receive all good things, whither we receive it from their own inherent power or
not. -- Deus nobis haec otia fecit.
Namque erit ille mihi semper Deus, illius aram
Saepe tener nos^ris ab ovilibus imbuet agnus.


Men may acknowledge GOD to be the Supreme Being, and ascribe incommunicable
perfections to him, and yet may pray more frequently, more devoutly, more
ardently, with greater trust and affiance to Saints and Angels, then to GOD, as
it is apparent many Devotoes of the Virgin Mary do; and this is to give Supreme
and Sovereign Worship to them, without acknowledging them to be Supreme Beeings.

Indeed it is morally impossible, but our Religious Worship, and affiance, must
be at least equally shared between the Supreme God and our Mediator, whatever
he be, as men do not less trust in the interest of their Patron, then in the
power of their Prince; for it is not mere power but favor, which is the
immediate object of our trust; and therefore God appointed his only begotten
Son to be our Mediator, as for other great and wise reasons, so to prevent
Idolatry by giving us a God incarnate, who is a proper object of Religious
adoration, to be our Mediator, that seeing men will worship their Mediator, they
may have a God for their Mediator to worship. The sum is this: If it be more
for the glory of God to have all Religious Worship appropriated to himself,
then to have only a part of it, and it may be the least share and part too,
then the worship of Saints and Angels cannot be for Gods glory.

But besides this, the worship of Saints and Angels, together with God, does
mightily obs^ure and lessen the Divine perfections, and therefore it cannot be
for his glory. It represents him indeed like a great Temporal Monarch, but it
does not represent him like a God.

That which we ignorantly think a piece of state and greatness in earthly
Monarchs, to administer the great affairs of their Kingdoms, to receive
Petitions and Addresses, to bestow Favors, to administer justice by other
hands, to have some great Ministers and Favorites to interpose between them
and their Subject, is nothing else, but want of power to do otherwise. He would
be a much greater Prince, more beloved and reverenced, who could do all this
himself; but no Prince can be present in all parts of his Kingdom, nor know
every particular subject, much less their particular cases, and conditions,
deserts and merits; and therefore is forced to divide this care into many
hands, and in so doing shares his power and honor with his Subjects. But
whoever imagines any such thing of God, denies his omnipresence, his
omnipotence, his omniscience, and his particular care and providence over his
Creatures. God indeed does not always govern the world by an immediate power,
but makes use both of the Ministry of Angels and Men; but he governs all things
by his immediate direction, or at least by his immediate inspection. He
overlooks every thing himself, while all Creatures either obey his commands, or
submit to his power. If this be the true notion of Gods governing the world,
that he has the concernments of the whole Creation under his eye, and keeps the
disposal of all things in his own hands, so that nothing can be done, but
either by his order or permission; then the most perfect and glorious Angels,
the greatest Ministers of the Divine Providence, can challenge no share in
Religious Worship, cannot be the objects of our trust or hope, because they are
only Ministers of the Divine Will, can do nothing from themselves, as civil
Ministers of State, and Officers of great trust can in Temporal Kingdoms, but
are always under the eye, and always move at the command of God. In such a
state of things all the peculiar rights of Sovereign Power and Dominion God
reserves wholly to himself, as any wise Prince would, among which the receiving
the Prayers and Petitions of his Creatures is none of the least; to hear
Prayers is made the peculiar attribute of God in Scripture, Thou art a God that
hear prayers, therefore unto thee shall all flesh come. And reason tells us,
that it is the most eminent part of Soveraignity and Majesty; and the reason
why Temporal Princes do not reserve this wholly to themselves, is because they
cannot do it; but God can, and he challenges it to himself, and will not allow
any Creature to do it; and there is no temptation to pray to any creature, when
we know, that they cannot help us, that they must receive their orders and
commands from God, and do not act by their own will and inclinations.

Thus Princes have their Favorites, to whom they express a very partial
fondness and respect, to whom they will deny nothing that they ask, nor hardly
show any grace or favor to their Subjects without them; and this forces
Subjects to address themselves to their Prince by them; but it is a reproach to
the Divine goodness and universal Providence, to conceive any such thing of
God; which yet is the foundation of the worship of Patron Saints and Angels, as
persons so dear to God, that he cannot deny their requests, and will not grant
our Petitions without them, or at least, that is the most certain and effectual
way to obtain what we desire, to offer up our Prayers and Petitions to God by
their hands.

No doubt but all good men on earth, much more Blessed Saints and Angels in
Heaven, as being more perfect and excellent Creatures, are very dear to God;
but yet God is not fond and partial in his kindness, as earthly Princes are,
but has an equal regard to all his Creatures, and delights in doing good to
them, and needs not to be importuned by any powerful Favorites to hear their
cries and prayers; he will as soon attend to the Prayers of an humble penitent
sinner, as of the most glorious saint, and is more ready to grant then they are
to ask.

A Mediator of Redemption is very consistent with the perfections of the Divine
Nature, and does mightily recommend both the goodness and wisdom of God to the
world. When Mankind had transgressed the Laws of their creation, they forfeited
their natural ^ight and interest in the care and goodness of their Maker; The
Divine Justice, and the wisdom of God in the government of the world, required
an atonement and expiation for sin; and it was an amazing demonstration of the
Divine goodness to sinners, that he found one himself, that he gave his Son to
be a propitiation for our sins. When men by sin had forfeit their original
innocence and happiness together, they could expect nothing from God, but by
way of convenant and promise; and every covenant between contending parties,
must be transacted in the hands of a Mediator, and none so fit to be our
Mediator, as he who is our ransom too.

And a Mediator must be invested with power and authority to see the terms of
this covenant performed, and this is his Mediatory Intercession. He interceeds
not merely as a powerful Favorite, but as the Author and Surety of the
covenant, not merely by entreaties and prayers, but in virtue of his blood,
which sealed the covenant, and made atonement and expiation for sin.

Thus Christ is our Mediator of redemption, who has redeemed us by his blood;
and we must offer up all our prayers to God in his name and powerful
intercession, because we can expect no blessings from God, but by virtue of
that covenant, which he purchased and sealed with his blood.

But now a Mediator of pure intercession, without regard to any atonement made
for sin, or any covenant of redemption (such as Saints and Angels and the
blessed Virgin are made by the church of Rome) is a mighty reproach to the
Divine Nature and perfections. It clothes God with the passions and infirmities
of earthly Princes; represents him as extremely fond of some of his Creatures,
and very regardless of others; as if his kindness to some favorite Saint, were
a more powerful motive to him to do good, then his own love to goodness; as if
he knew not when, nor to whom, to show mercy with out their direction or
counsel, or would not do it without their importunity; as if some of his
Creatures had as much the ascendant over him, as some favorites have over
their Princes, who can with a words speaking have any thing of them and extort
favors from them, even against their wills and inclinations. No man can think
there is any need of such Intercessours and Mediators with God, who believes
him to be infinitely wise, and to be infinitely good; to know when it is fit to
hear and to answer, and to be always ready to do, what his own wisdom judges
fit to be done. There can be no place for such intercessions and entreaties, to
an infinitely perfect Being (For they always suppose some great weakness or
defect in him who want them, for even a wise and a good man wants no Mediators
to persuade him to do that good, which is fit to be done. The Objection against
this is very obvious, and the Answer, I think, is as easy. The Objection is
this: If God be so good, that he needs not such Prayers and Intercessions, to
move him to do good, Why do we pray for our selves? Why do we pray for one
another? Why do we desire the Prayers of good men here on earth? Why is it a
greater reproach to the Divine Perfections to beg the Prayers of St. Paul, or
St. Peter, now they are in Heaven, then to have begged their Prayers, while
they had been on Earth?

To this I answer: When we pray for our selves, I suppose, we do no^ pray as
Mediators, but as Supplicants, and nothing can be more reasonable, then that
those, who want mercy, or any other blessing should ask for it. It is certainly
no reproach to the Divine goodness, that God makes Prayer the condition of our
receiving, which is a very easy condition, and very necessary to maintain a
constant sense and reverence of God, and a constant dependence on him. And when
we pray for one another on earth, we are as mere supplicants, as when we pray
for our selves, and to pray as supplicants is a very different thing from
praying as Advocates, as Mediators, as Patrons. The virtue of the first
consists only in the power and efficacy of Prayer; the second in the favor and
interest of the person. This the Church of Rome her self owns, when she allows
no Mediators and Advocats, but Saints in Heaven, which is a sign, she makes a
vast difference between the prayers of Saints on earth, and Saints in Heaven.

There are great and wise reasons, why God should command and encourage our
mutual prayers for each other while we are on earth; for this is the noblest
exercise of universal love and charity. which is a necessary qualification to
render our prayers acceptable to God, this preserves the unity of the body of
Christ, which requires a sympathy and fellow-feeling of each others sufferings,
this is the foundation of public worship when we meet together to pray with,
and for each other to our common Father; and it gives a great reputation to
virtue and Religion in this world, when God hears the prayers of good men for
the wicked, and removes or diverts those judgments which they were afraid of,
this becomes the wisdom of God, and is no blemish^to his goodness, to dispense
his mercies and favors in such a manner as may best serve the great ends of
Religion in this world.

God does not command us to pray for our selves or others, because he wants our
importunities and solicitations to do good; but because it serves the public
ends of Religion and Government, and is that natural homage and worship, which
Creatures owe to their great Creator and Bene^actor, and Sovereign Lord. But to
imagine, that God needs Advocats and Mediators to solicit our cause for us in
the Court of Heaven, where none of these ends can be served by it, this is a
plain impeachment of his wisdom and goodness, as if he wanted great
importunities to do good, and were more moved by a partial kindness and respect
to some powerful Favorites, then by the care of his Creatures, or his love to
goodness.

From hence it evidently appears, how inconsequent that reasoning is, from our
begging the prayers of good men on earth; to prove the lawfulness of our
praying to the Saints in Heaven to pray and interceed for us; the first makes
them our fellow supplicants, the second makes them our Mediators and
Intercessors; and how little the Church of Rome gains by that distinction,
between a Mediator of Redemption, and Mediators of pure Intercession; for
though they pray to Saints and Angels only as Mediators of Intercession, yet
this is a real reproach to the nature and government of God; a Mediator of
Redemption is very consistent with the Divine glory and perfections, a Mediator
of pure intercession is not. And the sum of all is this, That it is so far from
advancing the Divine glory to worship Saints and Angels together with God, that
it is a real reproach and dishonor to him; and therefore this can be no Law
nor Institution of our Savior, who came not to abrogate the Divine Laws, but
to fulfill and perfect them. Some think there is no danger of dishonouring God
by that honor they give to Saints and Angels, because they honor them as Gods
Friends and Favorites, as those whom God has honored and advanced to great
glory; and therefore whatever honor they do to them, rebounds back again on
God, and this may be true, while we give no honor to Saints and Angels, but
what is consistent with the Divine glory; but when the very nature of that
honor and worship we pay to them, is a diminution of Gods glory, and a
reproach to his infinite perfections, as I have made it appear, the worship of
Saints and Angels is, surely it cannot be for Gods glory to advance his
Creatures by lessening himself.

SECT VII.
2. LEt us now consider, whither the worship of Saints and Angels together with
God, be a more perfect state of Religion then the worship of God alone, with
respect to our selves; whither it puts us into a more perfect and excellent
state. It does indeed mightily gratify the superstition of mankind to have a
multitude of Advocats and Mediators to address to, but there are three
considerations which may satisfy any man, how far this is from a perfect state
of Religion.

1. That it argues very mean and low conceits of God, for did men believe God
to be so wise, so good, and so powerful, as really he is, they would be
contented with one infinite God, instead of ten thousand meaner Advocats. The
worship of Saints and Angels, as I have already proved, is a great reproach to
the Divine perfections, and therefore such worshippers must have very imperfect
and childish apprehensions of the Supreme Being, which is a plain proof what
an imperfect state of Religion this is; for the perfection of Religion is
always proportioned to that knowledge we have of God, who is the object of it.

2. This worship of Saints and Angels is a very servile state, it subjects us
to our fellow creatures, who are by nature but our equals, however are not our
Gods. It is a state of liberty, freedom and honor, to be subject to God; who
is our natural Lord and Sovereign, But to fall down to our fellow creatures,
and to worship them with Divine honors, with all humility of address, and
sacred and awful regards, is to debase our selves as much below the dignity of
our natures, as we advance them above it. The excellency and perfection of
reasonable Creatures principally consists in their Religion, and that is the
most perfect Religion, which does most advance, adorn, and perfect our Natures;
but it is an argument of an abject mind, to be contented to worship the most
excellent creatures, which is a greater dishonor then to own the vilest Slave
for our Prince. Mean objects of worship do more debase the Soul, then any other
the vilest submissions; and the more our dependencies are, and the meaner they
are, the more imperfect our ^tate and Religion is.

3. The greatest perfection of Religion, consists in the nearest and most
immediate approach to God; which I think, these men cannot pretend to, who fly
to the patronage and intercession of Saints and Angels, to obtain their
Petitions of him. Though we should allow it lawful to pray to Saints and Angels
to meditate for us with God, yet we cannot but own it a more perfect state to
do as the Saints and Angels themselves do, go to God without any other Advocat
but Christ himself. It is a great happiness to have a friend at Court, to
commend us to our Prince, when we have no interest of our own, but it is a
greater privilege to go immediately to our Prince when we please, without any
Favorite to introduce us. This is the perfect state of the Gospel, that we
have received The adoption of Sons, and because Gal. 4. 5. 6.
we are Sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying
Abba Father. This is, this Holy Spirit which dwells in us, teaches us to call
God Father, and to pray to him with the humble assurance and confidence of
Children. This is the effect of Christ's intercession for us. That we may now
come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, Heb. 4. 16.
and find grace to help in a time of need. The throne of Grace certainly is not
the shrine of any Saints, but the immediate throne and presence of God, whither
we may immediately direct our prayers through the merits and intercession of
Christ. Upon the same account the whole body of the Christians are called a
Spiritual house, that is, the Temple of God, where he is peculiarly present to
hear these Prayers that are made to him, An holy Priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifices acceptable to GOD through Jesus 1 Pet. 2. 5. 6.
Christ. And a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a
peculiar people: This is a privilege above what the Jews enjoyed, they had a
Priesthood to minister in holy things, and to offer their Sacrifices to them,
but the whole Nation was not a Priesthood, nor had such immediate access to
God; but now every Christian has as near an access to God as the Priests
themselves under the Law had; can offer up his Prayers and Spiritual Sacrifices
immediately to GOD; and that very acceptably too, through Jesus Christ our
great High Priest and Mediator; and if our Prayers be acceptable to God by
Jesus Christ, we need no other Mediators or Advocats. This is the only
direction our Savior gave his Disciples a little before his death, to ask in
his name, with this promise, If ye ask any thing in my name, I will do it.
Hitherto have you asked nothing in my name, ask and ye shall Joh. 14. 13, 15.
Joh. 16. 24.
receive, that your joy may be full. and to give them the greater assurance of
acceptance, he acquaints them with Gods great and tender affection for them,
such as a Father has for his Children. At that day ye shall ask in my name; and
I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father ver. 26, 27.
for you, for the Father himself loves you because ye have loved me, and have
believed, that I came out from God; a reason which equally extends to all those
who shall believe in Christ, to the end of the world. And can we now imagine,
that when our Savior has purchased for us this liberty of access to God, he
should send us round about by the shrines and Altars of numerous and unknown
Saints to the Throne of Grace. When he will not assert the necessity of his own
prayers for us, while we pray in his name, because our heavenly Father has
such a tender affection for all the Disciples of Christ, can we think it
necessary to pray to St. Paul and St. Peter, and the Virgin Mary to pray for
us. This is none of our Saviors institution, nor can it be, because Christ by
his death and sufferings and intercessions brings us nearer to God, as the Heb.
10. 19 20, 21, 22.
Apostle to the Hebrews speaks, Having therefore Brethren boldness to enter
into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he has
consecrated for us through the vail, that is to say, his flesh, and having an
high Priest over the house of God, let us draw near with a true heart, in full
assurance of Faith. But the worship of Saints and Angels removes us at a great
distance from God, as not daring to approach his presence without the mediation
of some Favorite Saint. And though the Church of Rome does sometimes pray
directly to God only, in the Name and Mediation of Christ, as the Pagans
themselves sometime did to their Supreme Deity: yet it seems this is what they
dare not trust to, and therefore join the Meditation of Saints with their
prayers to God, and never pray to God without it.

SECT. VIII.
5. THat the Gospel of our Savior has made no alteration in the object of our
worship, appears from that Analogy which there is and ought to be, between the
Jewish and Christian Worship. The Jewish and Christian Church are but one
Church, and their worship the same worship, only with this difference, that the
Jewish worship was in Type and Figure, and Ceremony, the Christian worship in
Truth and Substance. And therefore if this Evangelical worship be the same it
must have the same object, for the object is the most essential part of worship.

So that if it appear, not only from the express letter of the Law of Moses,
but from all the Types and Figures of the Law, that God only was to be
worshipped by the Jewish Church; if Christ was to fulfill all these Types and
Figures in his own person, and in the Evangelical worship, then it is certain,
that the object of our worship must be the same still; for if the Type was
confined in its nature and signification to the worship of one God, then the
whole Christian worship, which was signified and prefigured by these Types,
must be peculiar and appropriate to the one Supreme GOD.

As for instance. I have already proved at large, that the Jews were to worship
but one God, because they had but one Temple to worship in, and all their
worship had some relation or other to this one Temple, and therefore all their
worship was appropriated to that one God, whose Temple it was; now we know Gods
dwelling in the Temple at Jerusalem, was only a Type and Figure of Gods
dwelling in Humane Nature, upon which account Christ calls his body the Temple;
and St. John tells us, That the word was made flesh and dwelt among us, es
kenosen en hemin tabernacled 2 John 19. 21. 1 John 14. 2 Coloss, 3.
among us; as God formerly dwelt in the Jewish Tabernacle or Temple; and St.
Paul adds, That the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in Christ bodily, somatikos
realy substantially, as an accomplishment of Gods dwelling by Types and
Figures, and shadows in the Jewish Temple.

Now if all the Jewish worship was confined to the Temple, or had a necessary
relation to it, as I have already proved. and this Temple was but a figure of
the Incarnation of Christ, who should dwell among us in humane nature, then all
the Christian worship must be offered up to God through Jesus Christ, as all
the Jewish worship was offered to God at the Temple: for Christ is the only
Temple (in a strict and proper sense) of the Christian Church, and therefore he
alone can render all our services acceptable to God. So that God, who is the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the only object of our worship, and Christ
considered as God Incarnate, as God dwelling in humane nature is the only
Temple where all our worship must be offered to GOD, that is, we shall find
acceptance with God only in his name and mediation: we must worship no other
Being but only the Supreme God, and that only through Jesus Christ.

Thus under the Law the Priests were to interceed for the people, but not
without Sacrifice; their Intercession was founded in making atonement and
expiation for sin; which plainly signified, that under the Gospel we can have
no other Mediator, but only him, who expiates our sins, and interceeds in the
merits of his Sacrifice; who is our Priest and our Sacrifice, and therefore our
Mediator; as St. John observes. If any man sin, we have 1 John 2. 1, 2.
an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins. The Law knew no such thing as a Mediator of pure
intercession, a Mediator, who is no Priest, and offers no Sacrifice for us, and
therefore the Gospel allows of no such Mediators neither, who mediate only by
their prayers, without a Sacrifice, such Mediators as the Church of Rome makes
of Saints and Angels and the Virgin Mary; but we have only one Mediator; a
Mediator of redemption, who has purchased us with his Blood, of whom the
Priests under the Law were Types and Figures.

Thus under the Law* none but the High Priest was to enter into the Holy of
Holies; with the blood of the Sacrifice; now the Holy of Holies was a Type of
Heaven, Heb. 1. 12.
and therefore this plainly signified, that under the Gospel, there should be
but one High Priest and Mediator, to offer up our Prayers and Supplications in
Heaven, He and He only, who enters into Heaven with his own Blood, as the High
Priest went into the Holy of Holies with the blood of the Sacrifice. There may
be a great many Priests and Advocates on Earth to interceed for us, as there
were under the Law, great numbers of Priests, the Sons of Aaron, to attend the
Service and Ministry of the Temple, but we have, and can have, but one Priest
and Mediator in Heaven.

Whoever acknowledges that the Priesthood and Ministry of the Law was Typical
of the Evangelical Priesthood and Worship, cannot avoid the force of this
argument, and whoever will not acknowledge this, must reject most of St. Paul's
Epistles, especially the Epistle to the Hebrews, which proceeds wholly upon
this way of reasoning: Now this manifestly justifies the worship of the Church
of England, as true Christian worship, for we worship One God through one
Mediator, who offered himself a sacrifice for us, when he was on Earth, and
interceeds for us as our High Priest in Heaven, which answers to the One
Temple, and the One High Priest under the Law: But though the Church of Rome
does what we do, worship the Supreme GOD through Jesus Christ, yet she spoils
the Analogy between the Type and the Antitype, the legal and Evangelical
worship, by doing more; when she sends us to the Shrines and Altars of so many
several Saints, surely this cannot answer to that one Temple at Jerusalem,
where God alone was to be worshipped, there are many Temples and Mercyseats
now, as there are Shrines and Altars of Saints and Angels, by whose
Intercession we may obtain our requests of God. When she advances Saints and
Angels to the Office of Mediators and Intercessors in Heaven, this contradicts
the Type of One High Priest, who alone might enter into the Holy of Holies,
which was a type of Heaven; for there is some difference between having one
Mediator in Heaven, (and there can be no more under the Gospel to answer to the
Typical High Priest under the Law) and having a hundred Mediators in Heaven
together with our Typical High Priest. To have a Mediator of pure Intercession
in Heaven, who never offered any Sacrifice for us, cannot answer to the High
Priest under the Law, who could not enter into the Holy of Holies without the
blood of sacrifice. The High Priests entering but once a year into the Holy of
Holies, which was typical of Christ's entering once into Heaven to interceed for
us, cannot be reconciled with a new succession of Mediators, as often as the
Pope of Rome pleases to canonize them. So that either the Law was not typical
of the state of the Gospel, or the Worship of Saints and Angels, which is so
contrary to all the types and figures of the Law, cannot be true Christian
Worship.

Sixthly, I shall add but one thing more; that Christ and his Apostles have
made no alteration in the object of the worship, appears from hence, that de
facto there is no such Law in the Gospel for the worship of any other Being
besides the One supreme God. There is a great deal against it, as I have
already shown; but if there had been nothing against it, it had been argument
enough against any such alteration, that there is no express positive Law for
it. The force of which argument does not consist merely in the silence of the
Gospel, that there is nothing said for it, (which the most Learned Advocates of
the Church of Rome readily grant, and give their reasons, such as they are, why
this was not done, why we are not directed to pray to Saints and Angels, and
Images, etc.) but the argument lies in this, that there can be no alteration
made in the object of worship without an express Law, and therefore there is no
alteration made because there is no such Law in the Gospel.

The Jews were expressly commanded to worship no other Being, but the Lord
Jehovah as I have already proved, which Law appropriates all the acts of
Religious worship to one God; and therefore all those who were under the
obligation of this Law (as to be sure all natural Jews were) could not without
the guilt of Idolatry give any Religious worship to any other Being, till this
Law were expressly repeated, and express leave given to worship some other
Divine Beeings besides the Supreme God; so that at least our Savior himself,
while he was on Earth and subject to the Law, and his Apostles, and all
believing Jews were oblidged by this Law to worship none but God, unless we can
show where Christ by his Legislative Authority, or his Apostles by Commission
from him, have expressly repealed this Law; nay indeed, unless we can show, that
Christ himself repealed this Law, and taught the worship of Saints and Angels,
Mat. 28. 20
the Apostles themselves could have no authority to do it, for their Commission
was only to teach what Christ had commanded them, which though it does not
extend to matters of order and discipline, and the external circumstances of
worship, yet it does as to all essentials of Faith and worship and I think the
right object of Worship is the most essential thing in Religious Worship.

From hence it appears, that at least all the Jewish Christians in the Apostles
days, and all succeeding Ages to this day, cannot worship Saints and Angels
without Idolatry, because the Law, which was given to them, and never yet
repealed, commands them to worship none but God; and if Gentile Converts were
received into the Jewish Christian Church (and Christ has but one Church of
Jews and Gentiles) they must also be oblidged by all those Laws, which were
then, and are still obligatory to all believing Jews, and therefore Gentile as
well as Jewish Christians, are still bound to worship none but God.

Now I think I need not prove, that an express Law can be repealed only by an
express Law. That Law which commands us to worship God, and him only, must
continue in full force, till GOD do as expressly declare, that he allows us to
pay some degree of Religious Worship to other Beeings besides himself: When a
Lawgiver has declared his will and pleasure by a Law, it is not fit that
Subjects should be allowed to guess at his mind, and dispute away an express
Law by some surmises and consequences, how probable soever they may appear; for
at this rate a Law signifies nothing, if we may guess at the will of our
Lawgiver, without and against an express Law. And yet none of the Advocates of
the Church of Rome (though they are not usually guilty of too much modesty)
ever had the confidence to pretend an express Law for the worship of Saints and
Angels, and Images, etc. and though they sometimes allege Scripture to prove
this by, yet they do not pretend that they are direct proofs, but only attempt
to prove some other Doctrines from Scripture, from which they think they may
prove by some probable consequences that which the Scripture no where plainly
teaches, nay the contrary to which is expressly taught in the Scripture. And if
this may be allowed, I know no law of God so plain and express, but a witty man
may find ways to escape the obligation of it. This is a consideration of great
moment, and therefore I shall discourse more particularly of it.

The Law of Moses expressly commands us to worship GOD, and him only; Our
Savior Christ owns and confirms the authority of this Law in the Gospel; the
Church of Rome notwithstanding this Law, gives Religious Worship to Creatures,
the question then is, how she avoids the force of this Law since it is no where
expressly repealed, and she does not pretend that it is. Now the Patrons of
Creature-worship thinks to justify themselves from the breach of this Law,
these three ways. 1. By consequences drawn, as they pretend, from other
Scripture-Doctrines. 2. By distinctions. And 3. By authority. Let us then
examine, whither all this have any force against an express Law, which was
never expressly repealed.

1. By consequences drawn, as they pretend, from other Scripture-Doctrines; and
I shall discourse this with a particular reference to the Invocation of Saints.
For when they would prove the lawfulness of praying to Saints, they allege no
direct proof of this from Scripture^; but because they must make a show of
saying something from Scripture, when they are to deal with such Heretics as
will be satisfied with no less authority, they endeavor to prove something
else from Scripture, from whence they think by an easy consequence, they can
prove the lawfulness of praying to Saints.

Thus they very easily prove, that we may and ought to pray for one another,
and to desire each others prayers while we are on Earth; and from hence they
presently conclude, that we may as lawfully pray to Saints in Heaven to pray
for us, as beg and desire their prayers, while they are one Earth.

And to confirm this, they endeavor to prove, that some extraordinary Saints,
whose merits are very great, do directly ascend up into Heaven unto the
immediate presence of God, and a participation of his Glory; and hence they
conclude, that they have authority and power to help us and to intercede for
us, and that they are so far advanced above us in this mortal state, that they
deserve some kind of Religious Honor and Worship from us, as being Dii per
participationem, Gods by participation, that is, by partaking in the Divine
Nature and Glory by their advancement to Heaven.

And if after all this they can prove, that the Saints in Heaven do pray and
intercede for us on Earth, they think the demonstration is complete and
perfect, that therefore Bonum atque utile esse suppliciter Sanctos invocare,
and ad beneficia impetranda a Deo per filium ej us Jesum Christum Dominum
nostrum; qui solus noster Redemptor and Salvator est, ad eorum orationes opem
auxlium que confugere. Conc. Trin. 16. 25. de Invocat.
It is good and profitable (as the Council of Trent words it) humbly to invock
the Saints after the manner of Suplicants, and to ^^y to their prayers and help
and aid to obtain blessings of God by his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who is our
only (not Intercessor and Advocate, but) Redeemer and Savior.

Now how they prove all this, is not my business at present to enquire; but my
inquiry is whither such arguments as these be sufficient to oppose against the
authority of an express Law; and if they be, truly I think it a very vain
thing, either for God or men to make any Laws. For,

1. I desire to know, what these Gentlemen would prove by such ki^^ of
arguments as these. Suppose we should grant them, that the Saints are received
into Heaven before the Resurrection, and are actually possessed of all that Glory
and Hapiness, which they say they are; suppose we should grant them, that by
some means unknown to us, Saints and Angels are acquainted with all that we do
and suffer in this world, hea^ all o^r vocal or mental prayers, which we offer
to GOD or to themselves, and that they do actually pray and interceed for us,
what follows from hence? Therefore we may pray to Saints, not I hope if there
can be an express Law against it. These arguments a^ most can only prove, that
in the nature of the thing it might be fitting and reasonable to pray to
Saints, if God thought fit to allow it, no^ that we must pray to Saints, though
God has forbid it. For those are powerful reasons indeed, which can justify
Saint-worship against the express Law and declared Will of God. Could they
first prove one of these three things: Either 1. that there is no such Law
against the worship of any other Being besides God. Or 2. that this is not the
sense of the Law, that they must not pray to Saints or Angels, that the Law,
which forbids us to worship any Being but God, does not forbid the worship of
Saints. Or 3. that though there was such a Law, and this were the sense of it,
and this Law were never formally repealed by God, yet it disappears of it self,
and oblidges no longer since the discovery such reasons as these for the
worship of Saints and Angels. I say, could they prove any thing of this in the
first place, then there would be as much reason for the worship of Saints, as
there is strength and validity in their Arguments; but no reason can take place
against an express Law, till it be as expressly repealed. For,

2. If an express Law may be disobeyed, as often as men fancy they see reason
to do what the Law forbids, this overthrows the whole authority of making Laws,
and makes every Subject a Judge, whither the Laws of a Sovereign Prince shall
be obeyed or not. At this rate he has the greatest authority, who has the best
reason; and since every man believes his own reason to be best, every man is
the Sovereign Lord of his own actions. It is to be presumed, that no Prince
makes a Law, but what he apprehends some reason for, and to oppose any man's
private reason against a Law. is to set up a private man's reason against the
public reason of government: and yet it is much worse to oppose our reason
against a Divine Law, which is to oppose the reason of Creatures against the
reason of God, unless we will say, that GOD makes Laws without reason, and
those who can believe that, may as easily imagine, that God will expect that
those Laws he makes without reason, should be obeyed without reason also, and
then to be sure all their reasons cannot repeal a Law, nor justify them in the
breach of it. It becomes every Creature to believe the will of God to be the
^ighest reason, and therefore when God has declared his will by an express Law,
while this Law continues in force, (as it must do, till it be as expressly
repealed) it is an impudent thing to urge our reasons against the obligations
of it. So that since God has expressly forbid us to worship any Being besides
himself, unless we can prove, that God has repealed this Law, it will never
justify the worship of Saints and Angels, though we could by the plainest and
easiest arguments prove to the conviction of all Mankind, that Saints and
Angels are very fit objects of our Religious Worship, and that it is no
diminution to the glory of God to pay some degree of Religious worship to them.

3. Especially, when the matter of the Law is such, that whatever reasons may
be pretended on one side or the other, it most still be acknowledged to be
wholly at the will and pleasure of the Lawgiver, which fide he will choose. As
for instance, suppose there were no natural and necessary reason against the
worship of Saints and Angels, yet there is no natural and necessary reason for
it neither, and therefore God may either allow or forbid it, as he himself
pleases, without assigning any reason why he does either. And when it appears
that God might forbid it if he pleases, and that he has actually forbid it by
an express Law, it is time to leave off reasoning about it: natural reason can
give us no assurance of any thing, which it cannot prove to be necessary,
whatever in the nature and reason of things may be, or may not be, can never be
proved either to be, or not to be, by mere reason; for it is a contradiction to
say, that there is no necessary reason why such a thing should be, and yet that
I can prove by reason* that it must be, which supposes, that there is a
necessary reason, why it should be; for I cannot prove, that it must be, unless
I can prove that it most necessarily be; that is, that there is a necessary
reason, why it should be.

To apply this then to our present Case. The Law expressly forbids us to worship
any other Being besides the supreme God, the Church of Rome prays to Saints
and Angels and Images. which is an essential part of Divine Worship; and
without ever attempting to prove this Law to be repealed, she justifies her
worship by such reasons and consequences, as I have now cited from their most
celebrated Doctors, and some of which are the principles, whereon the Council
of Trent founds their praying to Saints and Angels. I ask then, whither these
arguments, whereby they endeavor to justify the worship of Saints and Angels,
prove that we must worship them, that such worship is their natural right, and
our duty. No, this the Church of Rome will not own: the most the Council of
Trent says, is, that it is bonum and utile, good and profitable to do it; but,
say I, if they do not prove it to be necessary, they prove nothing; for if
Saints and Angels have not a natural right to our worship though we should
suppose them to be very fit objects of some degrees of worship, yet it is at
Gods choice, whither he will allow it or not, and they can challenge no
worship, and we must give none, if God forbids it; and therefore since God has
forbid the worship of any Being, but himself (and therefore of the most
excellent Saints and Angels) by an express Law; and it no where appears, where
or when, or in what manner this Law was repealed, a hundred such arguments as
these cannot prove it lawful to worship Saints and Angels against an express
Law not to do it. Though we should grant that God, if he pleased, might allow
us to worship Saints and Angels, as the Church of Rome does, without any
diminution of his own Glory, which is the most that all their arguments can
pretend to prove, yet it does not hence follow, that we may worship them, when
God by an express Law has declared, that he will not allow it. No arguments nor
consequences can prove, that God allows us to do that, which by an express Law
he has forbid us to do. No reason can prove that to be Gods will, which he has
publicly declared in his Law to be against his will.

4. That no reason or arguments can absolve us from our obedience to any
express Law, till it be as expressly repealed, appears from this, that our
obligation to obedience does not depend merely upon the reason of the Law, but
upon the authority of the Lawgiver, and therefore though the reason of the Law
should cease, yet while it is enforced by the same authority, it oblidges
still, Thus I am sure, it is in humane Laws, and it is very fiting it should be
so; mere reason cannot make a Law, for then every thing which is reasonable,
would be a necessary duty; that which is reasonable may be fit matter for a
Law, but it is the authority of the Lawgiver which makes the Law, and the same
authority which at first made it a Law, continues it to be a Law while the
authority lasts, though the particular reason for which it was enacted into a
Law, may cease.

So that though the Church of Rome could prove, that there is no reason now
against the worship of Saints and Angels, that all those reasons for which God
forbad the Jews to worship any one but himself, were now ceased; yet till the
Law be repealed too, it is utterly unlawful to worship any Being besides the
Supreme God, and yet this is the most that all their reasonings come to, that
there is not the same reason for this Law under the State of the Gospel, that
there was under the Jewish Economy.

They suppose, that God forbad the Jews to worship any one but himself, because
they were in great danger of falling into Pagan Idolatries, and worshipping the
Gods of the Egyptians, and other Neighbour-Nations, and that this was the case
also of the Christian Church at the first planting of the Gospel; but now there
is no danger of worshipping false Gods, we may very securely worship the
Friends and Favorites of God.

They suppose, that all the ancient Patriarchs who lived before the
Resurrection of Christ, were not received into Heaven, and therefore not being
in a state of Bliss and Glory themselves, were not yet capable of Divine
Honors, could neither know our Prayers, nor intercede for us. But now at last
some eminent Saints and Martyrs ascend directly into Heaven, and are the Beati,
advanced to such a state of Happiness and Glory; that they are fit objects of
Religious Worship, and are so powerful in the Court of Heaven; that God denies
them nothing which they ask; and so tender and eompassionate to us, that they
readily undertake our Cause, and intercede for us, and therefore it is very
good and profitable now to invoke their aid and assistance by solemn and devout
Prayers.

And though the learndest men among them are put to miserable shifts to prove
the least part of all this; yet let us for argument-sake, suppose all this to
be true, that things are mightily changed since the making of this Law, and
that there is not the same reason now to confine all Religious Worship to God
alone, that there was in the time of Moses, what follows from hence, that
therefore we may now worship Saints and Angels, notwithstanding this Law which
forbids it? by no means, unless they can prove that the Law is repealed too, as
well as the reason ceased: Here is the authority of the Lawgiver still, though
we should supose, that we had lost the reason of the Law; till the Law is as
expressly repealed as it was given, it is God Will still, and that is reason
enough to bind the Law upon us, though other reasons fail. The reason (if we
speak of such reasons as these, which the Church of Rome assigns, for it is a
different case, if we speak of eternal and necessary reason, which is nothing
else but the eternal and immutable nature and will of God. which is an eternal
Law) did not make the Law, and the change of the reason cannot repeal it. And
since we see, that God has not repealed this Law, we rather ought to conclude,
that we are mistaken in the reasons, for which God made this Law, or that there
are other reasons, which we know not of, for which he continues it: we may
indeed reasonably suppose, that God will repeal a Law, when the reasons, for
which it was given, ceases, though earthly Princes may not always do so; but
still the Law binds till it be repealed; and it is more reasonable to conclude,
that the reason of the Law continues, while we see God does not repeal it, then
first to persuade our selves, that the reason of Law is changed, and thence
infer the repeal and abrogation of the Law, when we see no such thing done.

5, That these arguments which the Roman Doctors urge, to justify their
worship of Saints and Angels, are of no force to repeal that Law, which forbids
the worship of any other Being besides the Supreme God, appears from this,
that they had no force in them to prevent the making of this Law, and therefore
much less can they repeal it now it is made: The reasons which they use, had
the same force then, which they have now, and if notwithstanding all the
reasons, God though^ fit to forbid the worship of all Created Beings, it is
ridiculous to imagine, that these reasons should supersede the obligation of
that Law, which is made in contradiction to all such reasonings: as to show
this briefly.

They prove, that we may pray to Saints and Angels to pray for us, because we
may desire good men on earth to pray for us. Now suppose we could not assign
the difference between praying to Saints in Heaven, and desiring the prayers of
Saints on earth, yet I would desire to know, whither good men did not pray for
one another, and desire each others prayers, before and after God gave this Law
on Mount Sinai, which forbids the Religious worship and invocation of any other
Being but himself: if good men did in all ages pray for one another, and
desire one another prayers, and God allowed and approved of this, then it
seems God did not think this a good reason for praying to Saints and Angels in
Heaven, because good men might beg each others prayers on earth, for if he had,
he would not have made that Law, which forbids such a Religious Invocation of
any Creature. And if notwithstanding this reason, which had as much force then,
as it has now, God made and promulged this Law, this reason can never repeal
it, nor dissolve the obligation of it.

Thus if the Saints and Angels being in Heaven be a good reason why they should
be worshipped, this was as good a reason at the giving of of the Law, as it is
now; for tho we should suppose with the Church of Rome, that Saints departed
were not in Heaven then, yet certainly the Angels were, and if their being in
Heaven made them fit objects of our worship, why did God so expressly forbid it;
and if he forbad it then, when there was as much reason to allow the worship of
of those heavenly Inhabitants, as there is now, this argument cannot prove, but
that God forbids it still.

The same may be said of the Intercession of Saints and Angels. The Papists
suppose, that the Saints and Angels pray and intercede for us in Heaven, and
obtain for, and convey many blessings to us, and therefore it is good and
profitable to pray to them, and to fly to their patronage; now though indeed
they date the Intercession of Saints, (as they do their admission into heaven)
from the Resurrection of our Savior, yet there is as much evidence for the
aids and intercessions of Angels before and under the Law, as there is now;
nay, I think somewhat more; for the government of the world was much more under
the administration of Angels, in the time of the Law, then it is now; and yet
notwithstanding this, God did by an express law forbid the worship of any being
but himself, and therefore of these Angelical powers; who are somewhat
superior to Saints in Heaven; and if this were no good reason against making
this law, it can be no good reason to prove the abrogation of it.

^. The next way they take to evade the obligation of this law of worshipping
God only, is by distinctions. As to name the chief of them.

They tell us, that this law is only opposed to the worship of false Gods, such
Gods as the Heathens worshipped, not to the worship of Saints and Angels, who
are the Friends and Favorites of God.

And then they distinguish about the nature of worship; they confess there is a
worship which is peculiar to God, Supreme and Sovereign worship, which is
peculiar to the Supreme Being, and this, for what reason I know not, they call
Latria; but then there is an inferior degree of worship, which they call
Dulia, which may be given to excellent Creatures, to Saints and Angels, who
reign with Christ in Heaven.

They farther distinguish between absolute and relative worship. Absolute
worship is, when we worship a Being for its self, and thus God only is to be
worshipped; but relative worship is, when we worship one Being out of respect
to another, and thus we may worship Saints and Angels upon account of their
relation to God.

Now I shall have occasion to examine these distinctions more particularly
hereafter, my business at present is to examine, how far these distinctions can
justify the worship of Saints and Angels against an express Law, which
commands us to worship God only. And I have three things to say on this
argument. 1. That the letter of the law will admit of no such distinctions as
these. 2. That the Scripture no where allows any such distinctions. And 3. That
no distinctions can justify our acting against the letter of a law, which have
not the same authority which the Law has.

1. The letter of the Law will admit of no such distinctions Exodus 20
as these. The Law is, Thou shall have none other Gods before ME. The
explication of this Law is, Deuteronomy. 10 20.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, him shall thou serve, and to him shall thou
cleave and swear by his name. Or as Matthew 4 10
our Savior expounds it, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve.

Now these words do plainly exclude the worship of all other Beeings besides
the Supreme God: They exclude indeed the worship of all the Heathen Gods, which
were at that time worshipped in the world, but they are not confined to the
worship of the Heathen Gods, nor merely to the worship of those Gods who were
at that time worshipped, but should any new Gods start up in after Ages,
whither among Jews or Christians, the words extend to all that are, and all
that ever shall be worshipped. Thou shall have noe other Gods before Me,
signifies, that we must worship no other Being but the Supreme God, for to
have a God, is to give religious worship to some Being; as appears from that
exposition, which both Moses and our Savior Christ gives of it. Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. For it is impossible
to have any God besides the Supreme God, in any other sense then as we worship
some other Being, besides the Supreme God, with Divine honors; and whatever
being we so worship, become our God, and therefore this Law forbids the worship
of any Being, which is not God, be it Saint or Angel, or the Virgin Mary; how
excellent and perfect Creatures soever they be, they are not our God, and
therefore must not be worshipped. If we must worship and serve God only, as our
Savior expressly tells us, that we must worship no creature whatever it be, the
worship of saints and Angels is as expressly forbid by this Law, as the worship
of the Heathen Gods, for that Law which commands us to worship GOD only,
excludes the worship of all Creatures whatever they be.

But may not the meaning of this Law be only this: That we must not give
supreme and sovereign worship to any other ^eeing, but the supreme GOD, but we
may give an inferior degree of worship to some excellent spirits, who under
God have the care of us. And is not this plainly signified in the very letter
of the Law, when it says, Thou shall have none other Gods before me. For no
other worship makes any Being a God, but that which is supreme and sovereign,
peculiar and appropriate to the One supreme God; and therefore not to have any
other Being for our God, is not to give Supreme and Sovereign Worship to it.
Now what that worship is, which is peculiar and appropriate to the Supreme God,
I shall discourse particularly in the second part; our present inquiry is,
whither this Law makes any such distinction. The Laws says, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve; Here is no distinction
between supreme and subordinate worship; whatever is an Act of worship must be
given to God only. But the Law says, Thou shall have no other Gods before me,
and therefore it must signify supreme and sovereign worship; for no other
degree of worship makes a God. Did the Heathens then worship no inferior gods?
did those who worshipped so many several gods, look upon them all as supreme
and absolute? or were they so senseless as to give supreme and sovereign
worship to inferior Deities? or does not this Law forbid the worship of those
Gods, whom the Heathens worshipped as inferior Demons, but only the worship
of those Gods, whom they accounted Supreme and Sovereign? If this Law forbids
the worship of all Heathen Gods and it is certain, that they worshipped a great
many Gods, whom they did not account Supreme, then there can be no place for
this distinction here, for such an inferior worship as makes an inferior God,
is as well forbid, as supreme and sovereign worship.

The Law says, Thou shall have none other Gods before me: or besides me; which
as I observed before, does not exclude the worship of the supreme God, but
forbids the worship of any other Being together with him. The meaning is not,
Thou shall not renounce my worship, for the worship of any other Gods, but thou
shall worship me, and no other God besides me: now I would only ask this
question, whither a Jew who worshipped the God of Israel, who declared himself
to be the Supreme God, could give supreme worship to any other God? this is
contrary to the sense of all mankind, to worship him as Supreme, whom they do
not believe to be Supreme. And therefore when God forbad them to join the
worship of any other Gods with the worship of himself, he must forbid all kinds
and degrees of worship, even the most inferior worship, which the Heathens
paid to their inferior Deities.

If you say, that God did indeed forbid all kinds and degrees of worship to be
paid to the Heathen Gods, which were impure and wicked spirits, but still it is
lawful to pay inferior worship to Saints and Angels, who are the friends of
God. I answer, the Law makes no distinction between the worship of good and bad
Spirits, and therefore as far as this Law is concerned, we must either deny
this inferior degrees of Worship to all, or grant it to all. If this Law does
not forbid giving inferior degrees of worship to other Beeings, then it does
not forbid the inferior worship of Heathen Gods; that may be faulty upon other
accounts, but is no breach of this law; and then the Heathens were not guilty
of Idolatry in worshipping their inferior D^^mons with an inferior worship.
If this Law does forbid even this inferior degree of worship, then it forbids
the worship of good Spirits too, though with an inferior worship, which
transforms true Saints and Angels into false and fictitious Deities.

But I have another argument to prove, that this Law can have no respect to the
different degrees of worship. The Roman Doctors themselves grant, that the
difference between supreme and subordinate or inferior worship, does not
consist in the outward Act, that all or most of the external Acts of worship
may belong to both kinds, they except indeed Sacrifice, but contrary to the
sense of all men; for the Heathens offered Sacrifice to their inferior
Deities, as well as to the supreme; and there is no imaginable reason to be
assigned why Sacrifice, as well as Prayer, may not be an act of inferior, as
well as of supreme worship. The difference then between supreme and inferior
worship, is only in the intention and devotion of the worshippers, and no man
can by the external act know whither this be supreme or inferior worship. Now
from hence I thus argue: if the worship forbidden by this Law be such, as can
be known by the external act, then this Law can have no regard to the degrees
of worship, for the degrees of worship are not in the external acts, but in the
mind of the worshipper, which cannot be known by external acts. Now that the
Law did forbid the external acts of worship, without any regard to the
intention of the worshipper, appears in this, that this Idolatrous worship was
to be punished with death, and therefore it must be such external Idolatry as
falls under the cognizance of humane Judicatures. Had there been Deutr. 13. 6
7. etc.
any regard to the degrees of worship, no man could have been convicted of
Idolatry by the external act, and could not have been liable to punishment,
unless he had confessed his intention of giving supreme worship to a false God,
and so this Law of putting such Idolaters to death had signified nothing,
because it had been impossible for them to convict any man of Idolatry, but by
his own confession: but when the external act which is visible to all men, is
sufficient to convict any man of Idolatry, it is next to a demonstration, that
the Law had no respect to the degrees, but to the acts of worship.

And that our Savior in that Law, thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve, had no regard to the different degrees of worship, I
have already proved at large, for allowing that distinction, he had not given a
good answer to the Devils temptation.

Thus as for their distinction between absolute and relative worship, that
though we must not worship any Creature, the most excellent Saints and Angels,
for themselves, yet we may worship them upon account of that relation they have
to God; that is, we may worship them for Gods sake, though not for their own; I
find no intimation of any such distinction in the Law. We are there commanded
to have no other Gods, to worship God and him only, which excludes Saints and
Angels from being the object of our worship, as well as Devils.

2. But possibly it may be said; that though the Law takes no notice of such
distinctions, yet the Scripture in the explication of this Law may make
allowances for it. Now in answer to this, I only desire to know, where the
Scripture has made any such distinction between worshipping good and evil
Spirits, the enemies and Rivals, or the Friends of God, between supreme and
subordinate, absolute or relative worship; I can find no such distinctions in
Scripture, and I have a material reason to believe no such can be found, viz
because there was no occasion for them. The Scripture no where allows us to
give any kind of worship to any Creature, and therefore there was no need to
distinguish between the kind and degrees of worship.

The most material thing that can be said in this cause is this: that when the
Scripture mentions this Law of worshipping One God, it opposes it to the
worship of the false Gods of the Heathens; from whence some may conclude, that
God Deuteronomy 6. 13. 14 Deuteronomy 13. 7.
forbade the worship only of these false Gods. But we must consider, that the
Law is conceived in such general terms, as to exclude the worship of all
Beeings besides the Supreme God; but it could not be thought, that God should
at that time immediately apply this Law against the worship of any other
Beeings, but those which were at that time worshipped in the world. If God
gives a Law, which forbids the worship of any Beeings besides himself; and
particularly applies this Law to prohibit the worship of all those Gods which
were then worshipped in the world, will any one in theirs wits hence conclude,
that if the folly and superstition of men should set up a new race and
generation of Gods in after ages, that the worship of these new Gods is not as
well forbidden by this general Law, as the worship of those gods which were
worshipped at that time when this Law was given? If this were true, possibly
Pagan Rome it self was not guilty of Idolatry; for most, if not all of their
Gods might be of a later date then the giving the Law.

3. Now since no such distinctions as these appear in Scripture, it is
impossible they should justify the worship of Saints and Angels; which is so
expressly forbidden by the Law, if we will acknowledge them to be distinct
Beeings from the Supreme God; for if they are not the Supreme GOD, we must not
worship them, for we must worship none but God. No distinctions can justify us
in this case, but such as GOD himself makes; for otherwise it were easy to
distinguish away any Law of God. Humane Laws will admit of no distinctions, but
such as they make themselves; for a distinction does either confine and
streighten, or enlarge the Law, and he who has power to distinguish upon a Law,
has so far power to make it. If the Law says, that we shall worship no other
Being besides God, and we have power, if we have but wit enough, to invent
some new distinctions, between the worship of good and bad spirits, between
Supreme and Subordinate, absolute and relative worship; this makes a new Law of
it; for it is one thing to say thou shall worship GOD only, and quite contrary
to say, thou shall worship God only and good Spirits, God with a supreme and
absolute, good Spirits with a subordinate and relative worship. This I think is
sufficient to show, that we must admit of no distinctions upon a Divine Law,
but what the Scripture it self owns, and therefore since those distinctions,
with which the Church of Rome justifies her worship of Saints and Angels, are
no where to be found in Scripture, they have no authority against an express
Law.

3. The next course the Papists take to justify their Creature-worship, in
contradiction to that Law, which expressly commands us to worship none but God,
is an appeal to such authorities, as they think sufficient to decide this
matter.

Now I shall not say much to this, for I believe all Mankind will acknowledge,
that no Authority less then Divine, can repeal a Divine Law; and therefore
unless God himself, or such persons as act by a Divine Authority, have repealed
this Law, no other Authority can do it. That Christ and his Apostles have not
repealed this Law, I have already proved, that the whole Church in after Ages
had any Authority to repeal this Law, I desire them to prove.

For the authority of the Church, as to the essentials of Faith and Worship, is
not the authority of Lawgivers, but of Witnesses, The Church never pretended
in former Ages to make or to repeal any Divine Laws, but to declare and
testify what the belief and practice of the Primitive and Apostolic Churches
was; and it is unreasonable to think, that they should have any such Authority;
for then Christ and his Apostles preached the Gospel to little purpose, if it
were in the power of the Church to make a new Gospel of it when they pleased.

But indeed could it appear, that the Apostles did teach the Christians of that
Age, and the Church in those Ages, which immediately succeeded the Apostles,
did practice the worship of Saints and Angels, we should have reason to
suspect, that we, and not they, are mistaken in the sense of that Law, which
commands us to worship none but God.

But then none can be admitted as competent witnesses of this matter, but those
who did immediately succeed the Apostles, or conversed with Apostolical men and
Churches. And thanks be to God, there is no appearance of creature-worship in
those Ages, we dare appeal to the testimony of Fathers and Councils for above
three hundred years; and those who come after, come a little too late to be
witnesses of what was done in the Apostolic Churches: especially, when all the
intermediate Ages knew nothing of it.

I shall not fill up this discourse with particular ^itations, which learned
men know where to find; since the Roman Doctors can find nothing in the
Writings of the first Fathers to justify the worship of Saints and Angels, and
the Protestant Write^s find a great deal in those Ages against it.

Indeed at the latter end of the fourth Century, some of the Fathers used some
Rhetorical Apostrophes to the Saints and Martyrs in in their Orations, which
the Church of Rome interprets to be Prayers to them, but though other See
Bishops Ushers Answer to the Jesuits Challenge.
Learned men have vindicated those passages so far, as to show the vast
difference between them, and solemn and formal Invocation, which is not my
business at this time, yet there are several things very well worth our
observation toward the true stating of this matter, As,

1. That these Fathers came too late to be witnesses of the Apostolical
practice, which they could know no otherwise, then we might know it, if there
had been any such thing, viz. by the testimony and practice of the Church, from
the Apostles till that time: This was no where pretended by them, that the
Invocation of Saints had been the practice of the Catholic Church in all ages,
and they could have no proof of this, unless they had better Records of former
times, then we have at this day, and such as contradicted all the Records which
we now have of the Apostolic and Primitive Churches, and I believe few men
will be so hardy, as to assert this; and me thinks there should be as few, who
are so credulous as to believe it, and I am sure, there is no man living who is
able to prove it.

2. Nay, the particular sayings of these Fathers, by which the Romanists prove
the Invocation of Saints, do not prove, that it was the Judgment and practice
of the Church of that age. They no where say, that it was, and it does not
appear to be so by any other Records. Let them show me any Council before, or
in those times, when these Fathers lived, that is in the fourth Century, which
decreed the worship of Saints and Angels. Let them produce any public offices
of Religion in in those days, which allows this worship; and if no such thing
appears, those men must be very well prepared to believe this, who will without
any other evidence judge of the practice of the Church, only from some
extravagant slights of Poets and Orators: and if even in those days, the
worship of Saints was not received into the public offices of the Church,
methinks we may as well live without it still, and they must either grant, that
these Fathers, whose authority they allege, mean'd no such thing by these
Rhetorical flourishes, as they extract out of them, or else that they
introduced a new and unknown worship into the Christian Church; and then let
them prove, that some few Fathers of the fourth Century, without the public
authority of the Church had authority enough of their own to change the object
of worship, contrary as the Church in former Ages believed, to an express
Divine Law, which commands us to worship none but God.

3. Nay, I farther observe, that these Fathers, whose authority is urged for
the invocation of Saints by the Church of Rome, do no where dogmatically and
positively assert the lawfulness of Praying to Saints and Angels, and many
Fathers of the same Age do positively deny the lawfulness of it, which is a
plain argument, that it was not the judgment and practice of the Church of
that Age, and a good reasonable presumption that these Fathers never intended
any such thing in what they said, how liable soever their words may be to be
expounded to such a sense.

Greg^ry Nazianzen, indeed in this Book against Julian the Apostate, speaks to
the Soul of Constantius, in this manner: Hear O thou Soul of great Constantius
(if thou have any sense of these things,) etc. But will you call this a Prayer
to Constantius? does this Father any where assert in plain terms that it is
lawful to pray to Saints departed? a hundred such sayings as these, which are
no Prayers to Saints, cannot prove the lawfulness of praying to Saints against
the Doctrine of the Fathers of that Age. Thus is his Funeral Oration for his
Sister Gorgonia, he bespeaks her to this purpose, that if she knew what he was
now a doing, and if holy Souls Greg. Naz. Orat. 2. in Gorg.
did receive this favor from God to know such matters as these, that then she
would kindly accept that Oration which he made in her praise, instead of other
Funeral Ocsequ^es. Is this a Prayer to Gorgonia to intercede for him with God?
by no means! He only desires if she heard what he said of her (which he was not
sure she did) that she would take it kindly. Whereas in that very Age the
Fathers asserted, that we must pray only to God, and therefore they define
Prayer by its relation to God; That Prayer is a request of some good things,
made Basil, Orat in. Julit. Martyr. Greg. Naz. Orat. 1. de Oratione. Chrysostom. in
Genes. Homil. 30. Aug. De clvit. Dei, l, 22 cap. 10.
by devout Souls to God, that it is a conference with God, that it is a request
offered with supplication to God. Which is a very imperfect definition of
Prayer, were it lawful to pray to any other Being besides God.

St. Austin tells us, that when the names of the Martyrs were rehearsed in
their public Liturgies, it was not to invoke them, or pray to them, but only
for an honorable remembrance; nay, he expressly tells us, that the worship of
dead men; must be no part of our Religion, for if they were pious men, they do
not desire this kind of honor, but would have us worship Id^^ de vera
Religione, cap. ^5.
GOD: honorandi ergo sunt propter imitationem, non adorandi propter Religionem,
they are to be honored for imitation, not to be adored as an act of Religion.

The Council of Laodicea condemned the Worship of Angels: and so does
Theodoret, Oecumenius, and others of that Age. It is notoriously known, that
the Arrians were condemned as guilty of Idolatry for worshipping Christ, whom
they would not own to be the true GOD, though they owned him to be far exalted
above all Saints and Angels, and to be as like to GOD, as it is for any
creature to be: and those who upon these Principles, condemned the worship of
the most perfect and excellent Creature, could never allow, the worship of
Saints and Angels.

So that through the worship of Saints and Angels, did begin about this time to
creep into the Church, yet it was opposed by these pious and learned Fathers,
and condemned in the first smallest appearances of it; which shows, that this
was no Catholic Doctrine and Practice in that Age, much less that it had been
so from the Apostles; and I think, after this time there was no authority in
the Church to alter the object of worship, nor to justify such an Innovation
as the worship of Saints and Angels, in opposition to the express law of God.

The sum of this Argument is this: Since there is an express Law against the
worship of any other Being besides the supreme God, the Lord Jehovah, which
never was expressly repealed, whatever plausible reasons ^ay be urged for the
worship of Saints and Angels, they cannot justify us in acting contrary to an
express Law of God.

THE END.
A DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE CELEBRATION OF Divine Service. IN AN UNKNOWN TONGUE
UPon this Argument the Church of England does fully declare it self in these
words. It is a Article 24.
thing plainly repugnant to the Word of God, and the Custom of the Primitive
Church, to have public Prayers in the church, or to minister the Sacraments in
a Tongue not understood of the people.

But if we consult the Doctors of the Church of Rome about it, we shall find
them, as in most other Comment. in Eccles, 5. 1.
points, differing extremely amongst themselves. Mercer, a very learned person,
and Professor of Hebrew at Paris, is so free as to say, Temere fecerunt, etc.
They amongst us have done rashly, that brought in the Custom of praying in an
Unknown Tongue, which very often neither they themselves, nor our people
understand. And Cardinal Cajetan says, Melius est, etc. It is better for our
Church that the public Prayers in the Congregation be said in a Tongue common
to the In 1. Ep. Corinth. c. 14.
Priests and People, and not in Latin. Others of them are of another Mind, and
say that the having Divine Service in a Tongue known to the people is new and
profane, and the Doctrine requiring it Diaboli calliditatem s^pit, smells of
the craft of the Devil. And that the Church in making use of the Latin Tongue
therein, received it by inspiration from the Holy Ghost; as a late Author
says. Stapleton. Quaest. quodl. Quaest. 2. Sixtus Senens. biblioth. l. 6.
^nnot. 263. Portraiture of the church of Jesus Christ; c, 14.


With what consistence soever the former sort may speak to Truth and Reason,
yet I am sure the later speak with consistence enough to the Opinion,
Declarations and Practice of their church; as is evident from the Council of
Tre^t (the present Standard of the Doctrine of the church of Rome) which I find
thus Englished to my Hands by a noted person of their Cone. Trid. Sess. 22. c.
8. S. c. Answ. to Dr. Pierce, c. 15.
church. Though the Mass contain [great] instruction for GODS faithful people,
yet it seemed not expedient to the Fathers (of the council) that it should be
celebrated every where in the Vulgar Tongue: Wherefore retaining in all
churches, the ancient Rite (or rather in all places the ancient Rite of every
church) Retento ubiqque eujusqque Ecclesiae antiquo ritu.
approved by the Holy Roman church, the Mother and Mistress of all churches;
lest Christ's Sheep should hunger, and the children asking Bread, none should be
found to break it to them, the Holy Synod commands Pastors and all that have
care of Souls, that during the celebration of Mass, they should frequently
either by themselves, or others, expound some part of those things, which are
read in it, and among others things let them explain the Mystery of the most
Holy Sacrifice, Sanctissimi hujus Sacrificii aliquod mysterium: canon 9.
(the words are, Some of this Holy Sacrifice) es^pecially on Sundays and Feasts.

And they conclude, If any one shall say, that Mass ought to be celebrated only
in the Vulgar Tongue, let him be Anathema.

To this I shall add for a conclusion, the Judgment collectio quorundam Author.
etc. cum Decretis, etc. 1661.
of the late Pope Alexander the Seventh, in a Brief he sent to the clergy of
France about a Translation of the Missal into that Language, at that time newly
published; in which he says, that Some Sons of Perdition had arrived to that
madness, as to Translate and publish it, etc. A Novelty we abhor and detest as
the Seed-plot of disobedience, rashness, sedition, and schism, and of many
other evils, and therefore that French Missal, or what shall hereafter be
published in any other manner, we condemn. reprobate and forbid.

From all which we may perceive, what an evident repugnancy there is betwixt
the Doctrine of the Church of England, and that of Rome in the matter before
us: And therefore for the better understanding the Case and discerning which is
in the Right, and which in the Wrong; I shall discourse of it in the following
order.

First, I shall consider the Phrase, an Unknown Tongue.

Secondly, I shall inquire into the lawfulness and expediency of celebrating
Divine Service in a Tongue not understood by the People. For so much is
affirmed by the Council of Trent, and denied by the Church of England.

Thirdly, I shall inquire, whither the celebrating Service in a Tongue not
understood by the people, has been the ancient custom of every Church? For so
much also is affirmed by that Council, and denied by the Church of England.

Fourthly, I shall consider, whither the Provision made by the foresaid
Council, of having Some part of the Mass expounded; be sufficient to
countervail the mischief of having the whole in a Tongue not understood by the
people, and to excuse that Church in their injunction of it.

Fifthly, I shall inquire whither'upon the whole, the public Service of God
ought not to be celebrated in a Tongue vulgarly understood? Which Proposition
whosoever holds, is anathematized by the foresaid Council: And yet is owned by
the Church of England.

SECT. I. Of the Phrase Service in an Unknown Tongue.
TOward the fixing the sense of this Phrase, we are to observe, 1. That there
is the Vulgar Tongue of a Country, which is universally understood by the
Natives of what rank or quality soever. Such was the Latin Tongue formerly in
Rome; such now is English with us.

Before we dismiss this, it is to be farther considered,

1. That there are different D^alects or waves of expressing and pronouncing
the same Tongue: which differences of Words, or pronounciation do not so alter
the Tongue, but that throughout under all these variations it agrees in much
more then it differs; so that he that speaks the one, is generally understood
by him that that uses the other. Such anciently were the different Dialects of
the Greek Tongue: well known to the learned: And such are the Northern,
Southren and Western ways of speaking amongst our selves in this Nation.

2. Where there are these different Dialects, there generally is one way of
speaking, which either from the eloquence, or fashionableness of it, so far
prevails, as to be the Standard of the Tongue, and to be used in Writing Books,
Letters, etc. And is understood by all. Such I conceive was anciently that
which is called the common Dialect in Greek: And of the like kind is that which
is spoken in and about the court, and by Scholars and persons of a liberal
education amongst us; and elsewhere.

3. If a Tongue in process of time, by a mixture De script. Div. and Missae
sacr. celebr. ling. vulg. c. 30. n 5
of other Nations, or by the removal of a people from one Country to another,
or by any other cause comes to be so altered, as the Mother and Original Tongue
is not to be understood (as Ledesma says it is in Spain) then it is no longer
a Vulgar Tongue, but is to be reckoned amongst the unknown.

II. There is a Common Tongue, which though not the Mother or National Tongue,
is however with that commonly and generally understood.

Thus it was anciently in many places with the Greek and Latin. The former of
which, was once the common Tongue of a great part of the then known World, and
continued so to be from the time of Cicero, to that of St. Jerome, for the space
that is of 400. If not 500. Years. In so much, that not only the Scriptures were
read in Greek in the public Congregations cic. pro. Archta Hieron. Tom. 9. l.
2. proem. ad Galat. Tom. 3. praes. l. in paralip. Ledesma 6. 33.
from Egypt to Constantinople, as St. Jerome informs us; but the christians
also had their Worship (as is confessed) and the Fathers preached to them in
that Language. So did St. Chrysostom, S. Basil, S. Cryril and S. Athanasius in
their several Sees of Antioch, Caesarea, Jerusalem, and Alexandria.

And the Latin was so well known, understood, L. Valla Eleg. praef. Ledesm^, ^.
3. n. 7.
and commonly spoken together with the Vulgar Tongue in diverse countries,
(through the industry of the Romans in their several Provinces) that the Vulgar
was scarcely more. Thus we find it in the Proconsular Africa, where (though
accurately spoken then at Rome) it was so well understood, that St. Austin
says, L. 1. consess. c. 14. Retract. l. 1. c. 20. In Ps. 138. De verb.
Apostol. Sermon. 24. De Doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 14.
he learned that Language of his Nurse, and at play, and did write as well as
preach in it for the use of the Vulgar: And calls it our Speech, whereas the
P^^ick was the Vulgar Tongue of that Country.

And such a common Tongue is French in Flanders, Lingua Franca in the
Streights, and English in some parts of Wales.

III. There is a Learned Tongue, which though common amongst the Learned, yet
they being few in comparison of the Vulgar, that understand it not, it cannot
be called a common Tongue: Such are Greek and Latin now.

IV. Their is a Tongue understood and spoken by none in a Nation, or so few, as
are next to none; and which if used in Divine Offices would be wholly
unintelligible. Such are Persick and Indian with us,

The use of all this niceness, is partly to clear the state of the Question,
and partly to prevent many of the Objections which the case is cumbred with:
And without the observing of which, the Dispute will be turned from the point
that is contraverted, to that which is not. As it happens for the most part
among those of the Church of Rome that undertake the management of this Cause;
who do either distinguish where they are not to distinguish, or do not
distinguish where they should distinguish. For sometimes they oppose the
Dialects of a Tongue to that Tongue of which they are the Dialects: At other
times they oppose the common Tongue to the Vulgar: Sometimes they confound the
Learned Tongue with the common: And then again oppose the learned and utterly
unknown, as if these two were of as different kinds as known and unknown.

To give an instance of each of these. Ledesma, c. 9. n. 4, 5. 9. c. 20. n. 2.
Sanders orat. de Ling. Offic. eccl


Do they undertake to show how unfit and unreasonable it is to translate the
Service or Scriptures into a Vulgar Tongue? They endeavor to make it out by
showing how unfit it is to think of Translating, and how unreasonable it is to
expect they should be translated into the several Dialects of each Tongue?
Would they farther show that the Divine Offices, etc. were not of old so
translated? they attempt to prove it from their not having been translated?
into different Dialects. As if the Dialects of a Tongue differed as much from
each other, and all from the main Tongue of a Nation, as a learned Tongue
differs from the Vulgar. which is (to speak charitably) for want of observing,
that the Dialects are but several modes of speaking the same Tongue; and that
ordinarily there is some common Standard, which (as I have said) overrules the
rest, and i^ a guide common to all: As here in England, notwithstanding there
be several Dialects and that there is one in Scotland differs much from them
all: yet there is but one Translation of the Bible, and one Service for the use
of the whole, and that is fully if not equally understood by all.

Farthermore, would they prove, that anciently the Christian Churches used not
a Vulgar Tongue in Divine L^desma, c. 9. n. 6.
Service? they presently multiply Authorities to show, that in many places they
used Greek and Latin, and that Greek and Latin were oftentimes Lik^^^^ de SS.
in vulg. non vert. p. 51.
not the Vulgar Tongues where they were so used. As if the common Tongue (for
such were those two in elder in times, where they were not the Vulgar) was
opposed to the Vulgar as much as unknown is to known^; and each was
inconsistent with the other. Bellarm. de verbo, l. 2. c. 15.
Thus they tell us from S. Jerome, That the Vulgar Tongue in Galatia was in
effect the same with that of the Treviri in Germany: And yet there, and in the
neighboring Countries, they had the Scriptures, if not their Divine Service in
Greek. Not observing that Greek was the common Tongue of those parts, and that
both that and a Vulgar were there freely and generally spoken, as Greek and
Latin, as well as the Gallick Tongues were so frequent in Massilia, that it
was called Trilinguis, as S. Jerome shows in the same Dissertation of his. So
that these two, the Common and Vulgar, are so far from being inconsistent, that
(notwithstanding the bold saying of our Countreyman Sanders, That the common
people understand nothing but their Mother Tongue.) The experience of Orat. ut
antea.
all Ages, as well as our own shows that they are frequently met together.

But to proceed would they demonstrate that they do and may lawfully use the
Latin now in Divine Service, they attempt with great industry to prove that
both that and the Greek were anciently Ledesma; c. 9. n. 1. c. 27. n. 9.
used therein. And so they confound the learned and the common Tongues, and
compare those times and places, in which the Latin and Greek were commonly
known and understood, with our times and places, in which neither of them are
understood but by the learned.

Lastly, Would they show that S. Paul; in 1 Corinthia^s, Ledesma, c. 27. n. 9.
Sanders orat. Bellarm. de. verb. l. 2. c. 16.
14. does not oppose Service in Latin, they undertake to show, That he
opposes no other Service then what is altogether unknown and no Body
understands, as Persick and Arabic, and that he does not condemn a Learned
Tongue; thereby supposing the Learned Tongue and Tongue altogether unknown to
be different in kind. whereas they only differ so, that the one is rarely
understood and by very few, in comparison, and other is understood by none.

Now in all this they say little or nothing to the purpose. For if they plead
for their Latin Service, as Greek was in Galatia, and Latin in Africa, who is
their Adversary? For these Tongues were (as I have showed) in those and the
like places as well or little less spoken and understood then the Vulgar and
Mother Tongues. And the Protestants do not think it unlawful to have the common
Service in a Tongue which is commonly understood (though it be not the Vulgar
Tongue of the Nation) especially in Maritim and Provincial Countries, where
there is a concourse of diverse Nations, and where either these several
Languages are understood, or there is a componnd Language that serves for all,
as the Lingua Franca before spoken of.

But if they plead for Latin, as it is now (when a Dead and Learned Tongue)
that is where it is not known at all, as in the West Indies (where yet it is as
much used by those of the Roman communion in Mass, as in Europe) or where it is
not known to the Vulgar people, as it is with us, and every where else, then
they speak to the purpose, (for that the Reformed do oppose) but then the way
of arguing hitherto taken notice of is of no use to them in the World; and is
no more to the purpose then if they would undertake to prove that there is at
this day a famous University at Athens, and that Latin is the Vulgar Tongue now
at Rome, because these were so formerly.

So that if we will know where the Controversy lies, and what is contended for
and against, we must restore things to their proper places; and I think all may
be brought to an Issue, by putting and resolving this plain Question, viz.

SECT II. Qu. Whither it be lawful and expedient to use such a Tongue in the
public Worship of GOD, as is not vulgarly or commonly understood by the
people; acording to the way at this day required and practiced in the Church of
Rome?
If we would inquire into the lawfulness of such things as appertain to Divine
Worship, we must apply our selves to the Holy Scripture; being in matters of
that nature to determine of Right and Wrong, Lawful and Unlawful, according to
the Directions, Commands, and Prohibitions of it. If we would be satisfied
about their Expedience, we must consider the Nature, Ends, and Use of what we
inquire about. This therefore is a proper method for the Resolution of the
foregoing Question: But because the Apostle (in his Discourse upon this
Subject, 1. Corinthians, 14.) does argue from the ends and use of the several
Offices belonging to Divine Worship, and because the like Order may give some
light and force to what follows; I shall first of all,

I. Treat of the Ends for which Divine Worship, and the several Offices of it
were instituted.

II. Consider whither those Ends may be attained when the Worship is performed
in a Tongue not understood?

III. Whither the worship so performed as to leave those ends unattainable,
will be accepted by GOD?

IV. I shall consider the Apostle's Discourse upon this Argument; and whither
it can be reasonably concluded from thence, That Divine Worship so administered
as not to be understood of the people is unlawful.

I. In the first of these the Masters of Controversy in the Romish Church do
proceed with great tenderness and no little obscurity. For would we know what
the Worship is they would have in an Unknown Tongue? they answer, it is the
public only they defend.

For as for private. says one, It is lawful for P. Sancta not. in Epist. P.
Molinaei, c. 17. n. 6. T. G. First reply to Dr. Stelingfleet, sect. 3.
every one to offer his lesser Prayers to GOD in what Tongue soever he
pleases. And says another, All Catholics are ^aught to say their private
Prayers in their Mother Tongue.

As if it were possible to assign such a vast difference betwixt them (when the
Dispositions, Reasons and Ends, required and intended, are the same) that what
is lawful, expedient, and necessary in the one, is unlawful, inexpedient and
unnecessary in the other; Or as if the saying private Prayers in Latin, was
never heard of, practise^, or encouraged in their church.

Again, Would we understand to what purposes the Divine Offices do serve; and
whither the Edification, Instruction and consolation of the people be not some
of those Ends. Bellarmin answers, De verbo. l. 2. c, 16. Sect, obj. quart,


1.) That the principal end of Divine Offices is not the instruction or
consolation of the People, but a worship due to GOD from the Church. As if
there were no regard to be had to the special ends of those Offices, such as
the Instruction and Consolation of the people: Or as if GOD could be honored
by that Worship, where those ends are not regarded.

2.) The Rhemists add, That Prayers are not made to teach, make learned, or
increase knowledge, Annot. 1. cor, 14. P. 63.
though by occasion they sometimes instruct; but their especial use is to offer
our Hearts, desires and Wants to God, etc. As if there were no Offices in God's
Worship appointed for Instruction, and increase of Knowledge; and which are
performed in an Unknown Tongue amongst them, as well as Prayer. Or as if their
Adversaries did either deny it to be the special use of Prayer, To offer our
hearts, etc. to God: Or did affirm that the special use of it is, To teach,
make learned, and increase knowledge; as they with others Censur. proposit
Erasmi, prop. 5. Poncet dis: cord de L' Auvis. chapter 1.
do falsely suggest, and would fain have believed.

But to set this in a better light: and that we may understand what are the
Ends and Uses for which Divine Worship was appointed, and after what manner
they are to be respected; It is to be observed.

1. That Divine Worship in its first notion respects God as its Object; and so
the end of it in general, is the giving Honor to him by suitable Thoughts,
Words, and Actions.

2. That he has appointed several ways and Offices by which he will be so
honored; and in which, as the Honor does terminate in him, so there redounds
from thence benefit to the church,

3. That the Benefits redound to the church according to the nature of those
Offices, and the special Ends they were designed unto; As the Word of God is
for our instruction and comfor^, etc. The Lord's Supper for the increase of
Faith in God, and love to him through Jesus Christ. The praising of God is to
raise our Affections, and to make us more sensible of his goodness, and to
quicken us in our duty. The special use of Prayer (that I may use the Words
forecited) Rhem. Annot.
is to offer up our Hearts, Wants and Desires to God; and that by conversing
with him, Part. 4. c. 2. Sect 7. 8.
we may be the more ardently excited to the love and adoration of him (as the
Trent Catechism does express it.)

4. That those Offices are to be performed so as may effectually answer those
Ends, and as we may receive the benefits they were appointed for: From whence
it follows,

5. That if the Offices of Divine Worship are to be performed by Words, those
Words and that Tongue (in which they are administered) must be such as will not
obstruct but promote, and in their nature are qualified to attain those Ends.
And if those Ends cannot be a^^ained without the Tongue in which the service is
performed be understood: It makes that means as necessary in its kind as the
End; and it is as necessary that the Tongue used for those Ends in Divine
Worship be understood, as that those Ends should be respected, or that there
should be a Tongue used at all. For it is not God but Man that is immediately
respected in the Words (since there is no more need of Words to GOD, then of
Words that are vulgarly understood) and so it is not for him but Man, that this
Tongue or that, or indeed that any Tongue at all is used. And if it be
requisite that there be a a Tongue and Words used in public Worship, and which
all persons present are supposed to join in, and receive benefit by; then it is
as necessary for the same reason to use Words significant and understood, as to
De Doct. Christ. l. 4. c. 19.
use any Words at all. For, says S. Austin, what does the soundness of speech
profit, if not followed with the Understanding of the ^earer? seeing there is no
reason at all for our speaking, if what we speak is not understood by them, for
whom, that they might understand, we spoke at all.

From what has been said, we may be able to vindicate such Arguments of the
Protestants Divine service in a known and vulgar Tongue, as were taken from the
Ends of worship, against the replies made to them by their adversaries of the
Romish Church. As,

1. The Protestants argue in general, that the End of Divine Offices is for the
Edification, Instruction and Consolation of the people; but these Ends cannot
be attained in a Tongue not understood by them.

To this it is replied, That the Proposition is false, because the chief end of
Divine Offices Bellarm. de verbo, l. 2. c. 16, Seb. Object. 4.
is not the Instruction or Consolation of the people, but* a worship or Honor
due to GOD.

An answer that became not so great a Man. For (1) He argues as if those Ends
were opposed which are not only consistent, as Principal and Subordinate, but
also inseparable in the Case; such are the Honor of God, and the Edification
of the Church.

(2( The Answer is not to the purpose, unless it could be proved; That either
the Edification of the People, i^ no End of the Divine Offices; or that the
worship is complete, though that End be not respected or attained in them, But
if it be an End, and the Service defective without that End be pursued; then it
is not, that this is a subordinate End, and the other a Principal; that will
destroy the force of the Argument, and justify the use of an Unknown Tongue,
when persons are not edified by it.

2. The Protestants argue in particular that there can no profit proceed to the
Church from Prayers not understood.

To this it is answered, That it is false, because the prayer of the Church is
not made to Bellarm. ibid Sect. Object. 2. Ledesma, c. 13. n. 11,
the people, but to God for the people, And so there is no need that the people
understand, and it is sufficient if God understands.

But (1) if this argument hold, it will prove that which they do decline, and
be a reason as well for private as public Prayers in an unknown Tongue. For
Private Prayer is also made to GOD, and by this way of reasoning it will
follow, That it is sufficient that God understands it, though it is not
understood by him that uses it.

(2) Grant we to them what is not to be denied, That Prayer is not made to the
people, but to GOD for the people: Yet grant they must and do to us, that It is
the offering up our Hearts, Wants and Desires to God, and is to excite us to
the ut supr^.
Love and Adoration of him.

But if we cannot offer up our Hearts, Wants and Desires to GOD, nor to be
excited to the Love and Adoration of him, by what we do not understand; then it
is as necessary for us to understaud, as it is to have those Qualifications
when we pray. For both are supposed; for that we pray, respects GOD, but that
we speak in public prayer respects the Church: And though the principal End
(as they call it) be regarded, and it be an Honor and worship given to GOD:
Yet if the less principal be neglected, and the Service is not ordered to the
increase of Faith, Love and Devotion in those that offer it (as it cannot be
where the Words, and so the things prayed for in those Words, are not
understood) it makes the Honor, said to be given to God, next to none; And it
is much at one, whither there was no end at all propounded in Worship, or such
an End, as through a defect in it shall render the service no better in it
self, and no more acceptable to GOD, then if there were none. But of this more
anon.

II. I shall consider whither these Ends for which Divine Service is appointed,
can be attained, when it is performed in a Tongue that is not understood? The
Apostle says, That the Offices of Divine Worship are intended and should be
ordered for the Edification of the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 4, 5. That is, say the
Rhemists, (explaining that Phrase Page 461.
For increase of Faith, true Knowledge, and a good Life: But when this comes to
be applied to the Case of Divine Service administered in an unknown Tongue, they
set aside the increase of Knowledge and Instruction, as if it were not
concerned in it So does Bellarm^n, who says, Though the Minds of common people
be not instructed by De verbo, l. 2. c. 16. Sect. Obj^ 2.
Service in an Unknown Tongue; yet their affections are not without the benefit
of it.

If this Argument signifies any thing, it must be either because Divine Service
is not a^means appointed for our Instruction, and then he must thwart not only
the Apostle (who says it is for Edification, and consequently for Instruction,
a Branch of it) but also their own Church in the Council of Trent, which says,
That the Mass does Sess. 22. c. 8.
contain great Instruction for the Faithful. Or else he must say that the means
of Instruction may be rendered ineffectual at the pleasure of the Church, (as it
is granted it is by being in an unknown Tongue) and yet neither the Church be
blamed, nor the Institution of such means for such an End be disparaged, nor
the Souls of Men receive any damage by the want of that Instruction, and the
Means appointed for it. So that as far as Instruction is an end, and the Divine
Service is a means for that Eend, it is granted that the keeping it in an
Unknown Tongue does defeat that end: For he says, That the Minds of common
people are not instructed by Service in an Unknown Tongue. And now what an
usurpation is this upon God, to withhold that means that he has appointed, or
to defeat the Means of that End that he has appointed it for? What an injury
to the Souls of Men? And how much accessory must that Church be to the
Miscarriage and Damnation of such as perish for want of that knowledge and
Instruction the Service and Offices of the Church do contain, and they might
receive from it.

But suppose that end be lost, and the peoples Minds be not instructed, yet
their Affections are not without the benefit of it. This is spoken with a
Caution and Reservation becoming one that saw farther into the consequences of
what he said, then he cared to own. He says at large, their Affections are not
without the benefit of it: But how the Affections could be benefited, without
the Mind is instructed; or what the benefit is which the Affections are not
without, he is sparing to tell us. But however the Rhemists advance a little
farther; for they with no little confidence do determine, Annotat. in 1 Cor.
14. p. 462.
It is plain that such as pray in Latin, though they understand not what they
say, do pray with as little tediousness, with as great Affection and Devotion,
and oftentimes more then others, that pray in a Tongue they understand. The
Cardinal told us, that the Affections are not without benefit, though the mind
be not instructed: But now it is to a Demonstration plain (in these Men's,
account) that not only the benefit is as great, as if people do understand, but
oftentimes greater then if they did understand. So that what more self evident,
then that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion? But yet as plain as it is, the
saying is so downright a contradiction to the common sense of Mankind, that I
think a Man may venture as roundly to assert, that it is plain a Man may see
without Light, as that he may pray without Affection and Devotion, though he do
not understand, and with as great as if he did: And he may with as good a Grace
maintain, that the best way to see, is to put out the Light, as affirm with
them, That such as pray in Latin, though they do not understand, oftentimes
pray with more Affection and Devotion then they that do understand.

But because this is asserted with so much confidence, and that, To say that
people are not profited without they Ledesma. c. 13. n. 13. Censura proposit.
Erasmi. prop. 5.
understand, is condemned not only as an erroneous, but wicked assertion; I
shall look back, and (leaving the extravagancy of the latter as self-exposed)
consider whither the Affections are not without benefit, and that the Soul can
be devout and affected, where the Understanding is not instructed, nor the Mind
is concerned in the service we are conversant in? The resolution of which
depends upon the consideration of the Soul of Man, and the several faculties of
it.

Concerning which it shall suffice to observe,

1. That in all reasonable and deliberate Acts, there is more or less so
necessary a concurrance of the prime faculties of the Soul, viz. the
Understanding, Will and Affections, that none of them can be said to be
excluded. 2. That in all such Acts if the Understanding be not the leading
faculty, and of such influence, that the others cannot act without it (which
must be supposed, for how can a person affect or choose what he does not know?)
Yet without that, the acts cannot be termed reasonable. So Cassiodore, No body
does any thing wisely which he does not understand. 3. That in the Acts of
Religion, the presence of the understanding In Psalm. 46.
is as much required as in any other rational Acts whatsoever; The renewing of
the Mind being there Romans 12. 1, 2.
the Spring of all spiritual Action; and the whole called from thence a
reasonable Service. And therefore if in other Cases the affections cannot move
or be profited without the help of the Understanding, then as little can it be
supposed in Religion, and the Offices belonging to it, where the Understanding
is Sonus Cordis (as St. Austin calls it, applying it to our purpose) The note of
the Heart.

Now to say, That the affections are not without In Genes Lit. L. c. 8. and in
Ps. 99.
profit, though the Mind be not instructed; and that they that do not
understand, do pray with as little tediousness and as great Affection and
Devotion as they that do understand (not to repeat the rest of the stuff before
cited) is to say, that the Affections have no dependence in Nature upon the
Understanding; or that Religion requires less of us then any other reasonable
acts whatsoever, and that what we cannot do without being Lunaticks or Idiots
in other matters, we may there creditably do, and speak, and Act, as absurdly
as we will, with allowance.

But this kind of Doctrine is only to serve a turn, being fitted to those that
are fitted for it, and to whom nothing can be absurd, which some Men say: For
there are those amongst them cannot digest it; and do determine otherwise. So
Salmeron the Jesuit, If any one prays privately, and the things prayed for are
not understood by by him, he wastes his time: So he that speaks publicly in
an Unknown Tongue, which others do not understand, In 1 Cor. 14
be does yield no Fruit; And then certainly others can receive none. others
receive none. This the Council of Trent does acknowledge, when it declares, (as
abovesaid) It seems not expedient to the Fathers, That the Mass be celebrated
in the Vulgar Tongue: And presently adds, Lest the Sheep of Christ should
hunger, and when the little ones ask bread, there is none to break to them; the
Holy Synod commands all that have the care of Souls, frequently, etc, to
expound somewhat of it. So that they grant without Explication, the Faithful
may hunger and be without profit, for what need would there be of exposition,
if the people may be as devout without it as with it? I shall conclude this
with that of S. Austin, We ought to understand, that we may sing with humane
reason, Eposit in Psalm. 8.
not as it were with the Voice of Birds. For both Parrots, and Crows, and Pies,
and the like; are often taught by Men to pronounce what they do not know -- But
to sing with understanding is granted by the Divine Will to mankind. So that
according to him, if we set aside the Understanding, the Parrot of the Cardinal
Ascanius, had it been taught the LORD'S Prayer, or other Forms of Devotion, as
well as the Creed, Rhodiginus, l. 3. c. 32.
might have contended in competition with those that hear, and sing, and pray,
with Words, without understanding. Since whatever Affection and Devotion is
pretended to without Knowledge, is like a Vision of a man's own Heart, and not
of Jerem. 23. 16.
Divine Illumination, that does either proceed from Imagination or Imposture.

But that we may not think this Assertion of theirs, (that there may be profit
without understanding, and Devotion without knowledge) to be unreasonable, they
both produce Experience, and endeavor also to give a rational account of it.
The former is appealed to by the Rhemists; As for Page. 461. Hosius. p. 9.
Edification, that is, for increase of Faith, truth Knowledge, and a good Life,
the experience of a few Years has given all the World a full demonstration,
whither our Forefathers were not, etc. as devout, as we are in all our
Tongues, translations and English Prayers.

And we are told, That the people know what is done in the general, to wit,
that GOD is worshipped Ledesma, c. 21 n. 23.
and honored; that the Priest prays to him; that good things are asked of him
for the People; and thanks given to him, that the memory of Christ and his
Passion are celebrated, and the Sacrifice offered to GOD. This no Clown is
ignorant of, and this is enough.

This is somewhat like the course taken by S^crates, that said, He only prayed
in general, because what particular things were good for him, the Gods knew
better then himself. But whither this be done among them, with as much reason;
and whither with any respect to our Religion, and the several Offices of it, is
now to be considered.

For our satisfaction herein we may observe,

I. They grant, that the People can, and do understand no more by their Service
then the general intent, and points of it.

II. That the People cannot apply these generals to the particular Points of
it. So the Rhemists; The simple People are not bound to know to what Petition
their part pertains, etc. It is enough that the people can P. 463.
tell this holy Oraison (the Pater noster) to be appointed to call upon God,
etc.

III. That no more is necessary; and though they are to ask special things of
God, yet it is not needful to understand what, or how, or when, or if at all
they are especially prayed for. For then they would understand the specials.

But now this state of the Case will not solve the Point. For,

I. This is contrary to the Apostle, who does maintain, that as the public
Service of God is to be ordered so, as to be for edification of the Church; so
the Church cannot be edified, without the Offices are administered in a Tongue
that shall as distinctly 1 Cor. 14. 7, 8, 9, 16.
and particularly signify and point to the thing thereby to be expressed, as a
Trumpet or other Instrument does give notice by a distinction of Sounds, when
to advance or retreat, when to fight and when to forbear. And that every
person, the unlearned as well as the learned may know how to apply his Amen
thereunto; but which he can no more do without understanding the Tongue, then
He can know what motion or posture he is to observe that has the Trumpet
sounding to him without any distinction, and whose Sounds and Notes being
confounded, give no direction to those that are to be guided by it. So Aquinas,
How shall he say Amen, when he In 1 Cor. 11.
knows not what is prayed for; because he cannot understand, Quid boni dic^s,
nisi quod benedi^as; What good thou say, except that thou do bless?

II. The nature of the thing is against it. For as the Offices are various, and
distinguished by their Ends and Uses; and we cannot attain those Ends, nor make
use of those Offices, without the understanding of those Ends and Uses: So
there are particular things respected in those Offices, which unless we also
respect, we lose the benefit of them; but that we cannot do without a
particular knowledge of them. As for example, the Part. 4. c. 1. Sect. 3. c. 2.
Sect. 2, 4. 10. c. 4. Sect. 3. 7. c. 6. Sect. 2. de orat. Dom.
Romish Catechism says, That prayer is the Interpreter of the Soul, and is
directed to God or the Saints. That therein Men do confess their sins, and pray
for the pardon of them; that they beg for others and themselves things
Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal, that therein also they give Thanks for
whatever good they have received, and do enjoy. Now as these things are of
different kinds, so according to their kind they require different
dispositions, and so what are suitable to the one will not be suitable to the
other. But if the knowledge be only general, that cannot produce special
dispositions; and he that ventures to be particular therein, may rejoice and
give Thanks when he is to mourn and confess; may mind Earthly things when the
Prayer is for Heavenly; may imprecate when he should bless, and instead of Ora
pro nobis, may say Miserere nobis, that is Catechis. c. 6. Sect. 3.
make a Saint to be God, and apply that to the Officer of the Court of Heaven,
which he should address only to the Judge. He may be all the while in a posture
of contradiction to the Church, and have his dispositions so little suited to
the solemnities of it, that the Priests may say to such, with some little
variation, in the Words of the Gospel, We have piped unto you, and ye have
mourned; we have mourned unto you, and ye have daunced. So that unless they
will say, There are no need of particular dispositions, according to the kinds,
and special uses of the Offices of Religion, they must say, That Service in an
Unknown Tongue, is not for the edification of the Church. So Aquinas again, He
who does hear and not understand, is not edified as far as he understands not,
although he Ibid.
he understand it in general.

III. If this were true, That a confused general knowledge is sufficient, yet
this will not help them, or justify them in the use of an Unknown Tongue: For
even the general knowledge they pretend to, does not proceed from the Tongue
(for that they understand not) but is obtained some other way that is by some
actions and Postures, some particular Words and Phrases, some Ceremon^es and
Signals given in the administration of their Service: And which would signify
as Much for the most part without the Tongue and Words, as with the Tongue that
is not understood.

IV. I shall add, That whereas they pretend experience in the case, and which
for the present we shall not so far question, as u^te^ly to deny, but that
there may be some Devotion amongst the ignorant sort of them; yet so far as
this Devotion of theirs is real, it must be because of somewhat understood,
but so far as it is without Instruction, so far unquestionably it proceeds only
from the Imagination; and if it rises from no better or higher a cause,
whatsoever semblance it may have of Devotion, yet it has no right to that
Character. I shall make this clear by an instance or two. Not many years since,
in a certain City of Brabant, there was for ornament a large Statue erected at
a conduit near the Marketplace, to which the Country People as they passed to
and fro, did often pay their Devotions (not discerning any differen^ betwixt
that and an image of a Saint) so much to the public scand^ (...) ^at (to
prevent any such mistake for the future) it was by command transformed into a
little Boy, with a change also of the posture. Now if we would enquire into
this Devotion, it is much what the same we are discoursing of. There wanted not
an inward disposition, that inclined the people to it; there wanted not outward
expressions, for they bowed before it, kissed the Feet of it, said their Pater
nosters, etc. before it, and all with as much Devotion, as if it had been the
Image of S. Roch, or S. Sebastian, or S. Michael himself (the Protector and
Patron of the place). And yet all this being applied to a common, and not a
religious Object, and being only the Fruit of Imagination and not of
Instruction, it deserved another name then Devotion, and was not so accounted
by themselves. And now, why what is given, suppose to a right Object, but
without knowledge, should not be equivalent to the other, that was intended to
a right, but was addressed, by mistake, to a wrong, is not easy to discern?
Farthermore, Let us suppose a Case, A person being before hand possessed with a
report of certain persons met together upon a design of Conjuration, comes to
the place, and finds the Company there assembled; and hearing all that they
say, performed in a Language he understands not, he presently is seized with a
pannick fear, and is every moment in expectation of the foul Fiends's
appearance at their summons, but is all this while abused, and under a mistake,
for the persons were there met for Religious worship, and so the ground of his
fear imaginary. On the other hand, a person comes into a place, where he finds
several met together, who using much the like postures as if they were at their
Devotions, and also Words he understands not, but what for ought he knows are
the same that are used in the Church service, he falls upon his Knees, pulls
out his beads, says an Ave Maria, or Pater noster, or what he has been used to
in that kind. And now can there be any reason after all to conclude, That this
Man's Devotion arose from any other cause then the others Fear, and that both
did not proceed from the imagination? And can there be any reason to think,
that what proceeds from such a cause, is fit to be Sainted, and be entitled to
the name of true Piety and Devotion? So that to talk of Devotion without
Instruction, or Instruction sufficient to create it, is to talk against the
sense of Mankind; in which there may be, for ought I see, as much of mystery,
but no more sense then in the wonted saying of Anthony of Padua, produced by
Bellarmin on this occasion, That is a perfect De verbo, l. 2. c. 16. Sect. Obj.
2. praterea.
Prayer, in which the mind is so swallowed up into God, that it does not
understand its own Words. In this they agree, that in both Cases the Words and
the Understanding are separated, but in this they differ, That His
Understanding was (as it seems) beyond the Words; but in our case the Words are
beyond the Understanding. In both there is no need of Words, and where they are
used, they cannot be the means of Devotion; which is no more to be found
without the understanding then the Understanding can be, can attend, or be
moved by Words that it has no knowledge of.

So that let them either take away the Words altogether, and use no Tongue in
their Service, and turn all into mummery and pageantry: Or else let them use
such Words as will stir up religious Affections in the faithful, and answer
Catechis. Trid. p. 4. c. 8. Sect. 4.
the End for which they are used in public (as they confess) For though we
should be of the same mind with Bellarmin, That Instruction is not in the
Sense, but in the Words; yet how a Man can understand the sense contained in
the Words, without understanding De verbo, l. 2. c 16. Sect. Object. 4.
the Words containing the sense, is as hard to understand, as how we can be
Religious and Devout, without understanding, and for we know not what.

But to proceed to another Question.

III. Let us consider, Whither^ the worship so performed, as to leave those
Ends unattainable; will be accepted by God? Divine Worship respects God as its
Object, and so the End of it is the giving Honor to him by suitable Thoughts,
words and Actions (as has been before observed) but how that honor is to be
given, as the nature of the thing, and Divine Institution are the Rule; so when
that Honor is given to him, the Ends, for which the worship it self is
appointed and the Offices of it do serve, must determine. And if these Ends are
not respected, nor can be attained in the way of its ministration, we may be
confident, That as the Worship is not then worthy of God, so it is not accepted
by him Now,

As it has been already showed what those Ends are, so it has been proved, that
those Ends are not to be attained, where the Service is not in a Tongue known
to the people, and so consequently will not be accepted by God. And for this we
have the judgment of the Romish Church, when they discourse practically upon
this Argument, and without respect to the controversy before us. Of this I
shall give an instance in Prayer, (a point most of all insisted upon) of which
it is said in Part. 4. c. ^. Sect. 1.
general in the Romish Catechism, That it is of special concernment after what
manner we pray; for although Prayer be a saving good, yet unless it be rightly
performed, it does not profit. And Ibid. c. 2. Sect. 4.
elsewhere they insist upon several things that render our Prayers ineffectual,
as the ignorance of what we pray for; and the want of attention or assent to
what we pray, etc. And certainly if the Prayer without these Ends be not
acceptable to God, then such a ministration of it, as renders those Ends
unattainable, cannot be lawful to us, or be thought approved by him.

But how well and truly soever they speak in a case remote from Controversy,
yet when they come to controvert the Point in hand, they do in effect unsay all
that they have said; and then the Prayers used in the Church, though not at all
understood by the people, are magnified for their use and benefit to Man, and
for their acceptance with God.

Thus the Rhemists, We doubt not but it is acceptable to God, and available to
all necessities, Annot, 1, cor, 14. p. 462. Et Annot. in Mat. 21. 16. De ling
vernat. p. 9.
and more agreeable to the use of all Christian people to pray in Latin then in
the Vulgar, though every one in particular, understands not what he says.
And (says Cardinal Hosius,) When done, to give honor to God, it is acceptable
to him, and no understanding of Words can be compared to it.

To say that our Prayers are hindered of their virtue through ignorance or want
of attention, etc. And that they be acceptable to GOD, though we understand not
what we say, are things irreconcilable. But setting aside the contradiction in
it, they are not without some pretenses to prove that the efficacy of the
Divine Offices does not depend upon the peoples understanding them. Now I might
ease my self or these kind of Pleas, because they suppose that which has been
already disproved, viz. That the affections can be benefited without the
understanding. But yet because they are frequently produced to prove as well
the no necessity of Service in a Vulgar Tongue, and the lawfulness of having it
in an Unknown Tongue, as that a Service of that kind is acceptable to God, and
efficacious to the people, I shall before I conclude this Head (to which they
more peculiarly belong) take them into consideration.

Now their Arguments are taken partly from Scripture, and partly from some
cases supposed to be parallel to this.

Object. 1. They say, That the Children in the Temple, as well as the people
cried, Hosanna Ledesma, c. 13. n. 1.
to the Son of David, Matthew. 21. 16. Whereas they understood not what they
said: And yet this was our Savior pleased with, and defended them in.

But this is said with very little Reason: For,

Answ. 1. It is more probable that they did understand, then that they did not:
Hosannah being a form of solemn acclamation; and as easy to be understood by
them in the signification; so also in the application of it to Christ upon this
occasion; which, says S. John 12. 17. 18. was, because the people bad heard
that he raised Lazarus. And whereas our Savior applies that of Babes and
Sucklings to the case, that was not because those that cried Hosannah were
such, but that because God never wanted Instruments of his Glory, but could
make use of such as were mean and unfit in themselves for^.

2. Supposing they did not understand, where is the consequence, that because
young childrens Prayers proceeding from the instinct of God's Spirit be
acceptable to God, therefore the voices of other simple folk, now in the
church, though they themselves understand not what they say, be mavelous
grateful to God, as Annot. in Matthew 21. 16.
the Rhemists say. As if an extraordinary case should be a Rule for us in
ordinary; and that Prayers proceeding from Children, by the instinct of God's
Spirit, and who were little less miraculously empowered to do it, then the Ass
of Balaam (if they were Sucklings, and such as could scarcely speak, as Ledesma
would have it) should teach us to choose what we do not understand. Or as if
what was grateful to God from Children, who were in no capacity of doing better
then following of others, though they did not understand, should excuse, nay
recommend the Service of those that are in a capacity of understanding, and yet
understand no more of what they offer to Almighty God in particular, then if
they were Ba^^^ and Sucklings, and such as had no understanding.

The Apostle in 1 Cor. 14. 20. does upon this occasion exhort, Be not children
in understanding, so as to think God pleased with that which does not benefit
us; or so as to think, that he who is so merciful as to accept according to
what a man has, should also be so remiss as to accept him that brings not
what he has. That when God has given us a Tongue and Understanding, we should
be debarred of the use of both in his Worship and Service, and yet our Service
and our selves be as well accepted, as if both were employed therein. Certainly
what will avail where there is no capacity, will not avail when there is a
capacity; and therefore it is a mean way of arguing, and will receive the same
answer, That they that have no Bell^rm. l. 2, de effectu sacram, c. 32. Rhem.
annot. p. 461.
use of Reason, are truly and eff^catiously baptized, and so there is no need
of understanding; and it would have confuted it self, if they had added, (as
they should) therefore those that have understanding, may as lawfully act, and
shall be as certainly accepted, though they use not that understanding, as if
they did.

Object. 2. Among the Jews the Prayers of the Ledesma. c, 13. n. 7, Touchstone
of the Reformed Gospel, c, 52.
Priest, when he entered into the Holy of Holies, were accepted, though the
people were without, Lev, 16. 17. and Luk, 1. 9. 10. Therefore the Service of
the Church may be so said, as all the people understand it not, and also be
accepted.

Answ. 1. It is acknowledged on both sides that the High Priest's entering into
the Holy of Holies, was typical of Christ, and the Atonement made by him, and
consequently what the people could not bear a part in. But since the people are
concerned with the Priest in the Offices of our Religion, and are to set their
Amen to it, there is no parity betwixt the case then and the case now.

2. How is this a proof that they had their service in an Unknown Tongue? Or if
they were to have it in a known Tongue, how can they infer, that the High
Priest might have used an Unknown Tongue, when praying with the people, and
that this should have been as acceptable to God, and as beneficial to them, as
if it had been understood?

Obj. 3. But they say, it proves thus, That Ledesma. ibid. Bellarm, de verb. l.
2. c. 16. Sect. obj. 2.
Prayers though made for them, that do not hear or are absent, are effectual;
and then why not as well for them that do not understand them though present?

This is an argument they much insist upon. But,

1. If this were of any force, then we need no more to pray so our selves,
because others pray, for us, then we are not bound to understand what we pray,
because those that pray for us do understand.

2. The Dispute is not, whither persons in some cases may not be benefited by
the prayers of others, though they do not understand them, as when the Church
prays for the absent as well as the present, and Christ in Heaven interceeds
with success for his Church here, and those that are present pray for Children,
Lunaticks, and Delirous: But whither such Prayers are acceptable to God, which
a person himself is oblidged to join in, and yet so little understands, as he
knows not what he prays for, whither for himself or others; nor can be certain
whither indeed he prays at all. Monica prayed for her Son Austin with that
Fervor and Devotion, with such passion and continuance, that St. Ambrose told
her, It was impossible a Son of such Prayers and Tears should miscarry: But if
she had prayed in a Language she understood not, she would not have known what
she prayed for, and she would then have found no Tears for her Prayers; or if
she had had Prayers and Tears, they had both been lost with her Son. And
although the Priest be a public person, and offers up prayers Ledesma, c. 13.
^. 13. Bellarm. ibid.
to God, yet this does not at all exclude the faithful from a share in them,
And therefore as the Priest is the Mouth of the Congregation, and as such he
must use a Tongue the Congregation understands: So the Congregation is to
attend to him, and to give their Amen. and Assent to what he in their name
offers to God, And he is neither Priest nor Mouth to them, if he prevents them
in their part, and renders them incapable of bearing a part in it, by using a
Tongue they understand not. And therefore it is as necessary the Congregation
should understand as the Priest, and if he do otherwise, he can no more
justify himself, then if he did celebrate the Service in a Tongue he himself
knew nothing of, and which neither the one nor the other did understand. So
that upon the whole, we have reason to conclude Orat. deling. Offic. Eccles.
with Sanders; That an unknown Tongue is not profitable for the People though
he will not allow it for that Reason to be unlawful.

And that is the thing I shall now particularly inquire into, by considering.

IV. Whither from the Apostles Discourse upon this Argument, it can be
reasonably concluded, that Divine Service so administered, as not to be
understood of the people, is unlawful.

In the Apostles Discourse upon this Argument, 1 Cor. 14. there are two things
agreed in betwixt the contending parties.

I. That the Service of God is so to be ordered, as may be for the edification
of the Church: ^. 4, 5, 12. And that what is inconsistent with the general,
much more the universal Edification of it, is not to be allowed.

II. That an Unknown Tongue in such Assemblies and Offices as the Apostls
speaks of, is inconsistent with, and cannot be for the public Edification, v.
2, 6. 9, 11, 14, 16.

But though it be thus far agreed, yet they afterward divide upon it from the
Protestants.

For,

1. Some of the Church of Rome do say, That it is evident from this place of
Scripture, that a Vulgar and Known Tongue was not used in those days in
public Worship.

2. That if so be such was then used, yet the Apostle does not forbid the use
of an Unknown Tongue in it.

The first do wholly found what they have to say, upon Verse 16. How shall he
that occupies the room of the Unlearned (or Idiot) say Amen, as thy giving of
Thanks.

This shows (say they) that such giving of Thanks was not accustomed to be made
in the Ledesma, c. 27. n. 5. etc. Sanders, orat. de lingua, etc.
Vulgar Tongue; for had the Service been in the Vulgar, there needed no Man to
have supplied the place of the Idiot.

This at first sight may seem a pretty Argument to one that understands no more
then Latin and English; but the is Bellarmin, etc.
mischief of it is, that it is not true. Of this mind who says,

1 That the Greek Phrase he anapleron ton topon, according to the use of that
Tongue, does not De verbo l. 2. c. 16. Sect. alii ergo. Rhem. annot. p. 458.
Marg.
signify one that is in the stead of an Idiot or unlearned, but thereby are
meant all rude unlearned Men. So Chrysostom and Theophylact expound it, etc.

2, There was no such custom in Apostolical times, and long after, of one to
answer in the place of the Vulgar; but that the people were wont to answer, as
is evident from Justin Martyr, etc.

After this Argument has been so clearly relinquished, it might have been
omitted by us, had it V. Petra sanctae c. 17. n. 5. Touchstone of the reformed
Gospel, c. 52. p. 138.
not been reassumed with no little assurance and triumph by others since
Bellarmin's time.

III. Those among them that do quit this, yet hold that the Apostle does not
forbid a Tongue so unknown, as the Latin is now, in Divine Worship. And for
this they offer several Arguments, which will be all comprehended, and I
conceive cleared, by considering.

1. What is mean'd by the Unknown Tongue, which the Apostle condemns?

2. What by the Assemblies, in which such an Unknown Tongue is forbid?

3. What by the Service used in these Assemblies?

4. How far the Apostle's Prohibition is to be extended?

Quest. 1. As to the first.

They say, That the Tongues condemned were Ledesma, c. 26. Rhem. annot. p. 461.
miraculous and extraordinarily infused, but what they plead for is acquired
and learned.

A. But supposing the Tongues were miraculous yet what is this to the case in
Hand, when they we not condemned for being miraculous (for as such they were
Gifts from God and Signs to Men) but as they were abused, and used neither to
the Glory of God, nor the Edification of the Church. And by parity of reason,
every Unknown Tongue, as well what is acquired as infused, is condemned also.
The Miraculous Tongue was forbidden, when it did not profit, when it was a
speaking to the air, when he that spoke was a Barbarian to him that heard, and
when he that heard could not say Amen to him that spoke, Verse 2, 9, 11, 1^.
And if a Tongue acquired be as much unknown as a Tongue infused, the Reasons
being common to both, the one is as much prohibited in those circumstances as
the other.

Nay, according to their way of arguing, it will follow, That if Tongues
miraculously infused, which were a sign to them that believed not, might not be
used in the cases abovesaid, then much less may such as are acquired, by
Education and other humane ways.

But they say farther, That the Apostle speaks of a Tongue which no one
understands in the Bellarm. ibid. Sect, veraigitur. Sect. at objicies. Sect. in
post. riore. S. C. p. 176.
whole Church, but not of that which is understood by some, at least by him
that officiates.

But for this they offer no manner of proof, neither is there any. For (1.) the
Apostle speaks of such a Tongue as is not for the Edification of the Church;
but if some only understand it, those that do not understand, are no more
edified by the understanding of the rest, then if none understood it. (2.)
There are two sorts of persons concerned, one that can say Amen, and another
that cannot, whom the Apostle calls Unlearned. But the Unlearned are as well
(as he says) to be respected as the Learned; and the Unlearned being
ordinarily more then the Learned; it must consequently be such a Tongue which
all or the most did understand that he pleads for; and such a Tongue, which
none or the fewest did understand, that he pleads against.

Lastly, They say, The Apostle condemns a Barbarous Tongue, but not that which
is understood Annot. p. 461.
by Learned and Civil people in every great City, as Hebrew, Greek and Latin.
So the Rhemists.

And we are farther told, That all Tongues are Harding in Jewil devis. 3. p.
116. John Baptista de Rabeis Rationale, l. 2. c. 9. Sanders orat, etc.
Barbarous, except those three:

But all this is spoken very precariously. For the Apostle excepts no Tongue,
as a Tongue, from being barbarous. For that is barbarous with him that is not
understood, whither it be Hebrew or Arabic, Greek or Scythian, Latin or
Dalmatick: In this Sense Ovid took it, speaking of, himself in Exile, amongst
the Getae,

Barbarus hic ego sum, quia non intelligor ulli:

I am here a Barbarian, because I am not understood by any.

And in this sense it is here taken by ancient Expositors. in loc. Salemeron.
Lyra in loc.
Thus S. Jerome, Every speech which is not understood is barbarous. Thus S.
Chrysostom, and indeed several also amongst themselves.

So that upon the whole it is manifest, that the Apostle means by an Unknown
Tongue, that which is not understood of the People.

Quest. 2. What are the Assemblies in which the Bellarm. c. 16. init. Rhemists.
annot. at. p. 462.
Apostle condemns the use of an Unknown Tongue?

The Champions of this Cause in the Church of Rome, do allege, That much of
the Chapter refers to Spiritual Conferences and collocutory Exercises then used
in lesser Assemblies, which they endeavor to prove more especially from the
Directions given by the Apostle, Verse 27, etc.

If we should grant that part of the Apostle's Discourse refers to such
Conferences, yet what is this to that part of it that treats of Public
Worship? Or indeed what is it to the purpose at all, when there were mostly the
same Offices used in one as the other, and the same End prescribed to the use
of them in both? Those that do thus distinguish, have not ventured to tell us
where the Apostle does treat of the one, and where of the other: And it is
evident that he applies his Argument of Edification to the whole, and then
proceeds from one Office to another, from Prophesying to Praying, and Singing,
if not also to the Lords Supper. Now where the End is common to all, without
distinction, the means conducing to that End are in all alike to be observed.
And if in those lesser Assemblies (when they expounded, prayed or sung) they
were to use a tongue known to the Assembly, because without so doing, the Ends
of their so assembling would have been defeated, then certainly it was, if not
more, yet at least as necessary, that the same order be observed when the whole
Church came together into one place.

Quest. What was the Service used in those Assemblies, and what was forbidden
to be celebrated in an Unknown Tongue?

Some of the Church of Rome will understand it only of preaching; and those
that do grant it Bellarm. ibid. Sect. Veraigitur. Sect. ad hant igitur.
Rhemists annot. in 1. Cor. 14. 26. p. 460.
to respect Prayers, yet will have it understood of such Prayers as were
inspired. But what though the Prayers were inspired, when they were to be
uttered in a Tongue known to the Church, and were not to be used if they were
not for the Edification of the Church; as they were not if not understood? And
is not the Reason as full against Prayers not inspired, when they are not
understood; The Question is not about Prayers, inspired or not inspired; but
known and unknown; according to which all the Offices of the Church are to be
tried, as to their lawfulness and expedience.

But let the Prayers be as they will, yet say they, The Apostle treats of them
occasionally Sanders orat. p 64. 66.
only.

Supposing this so to be, yet that is not to the purpose, for the Question is
not whither the Apostle treats so expressly of Prayer as of prophesying; as
whither the prohibition of an Unknown Tongue, and the Argument taken from the
End of Divine Offices lie not as expressly against praying as prophesying in
that way? And whither the words, If I pray in an Unknown Tongue, my Spirit
prays, but my understanding remains unfruitful, etc. v. 14. 16. are not as
plain as he that speaks (or prophesyeth) in an Unknown Tongue, speaks not
unto Men, etc. If the prohibition be the same, and the reason of the
prohibition be the same in both; then it is not the being expressly or
occasionally handled, that can make so vast a difference, as that the former
shall be lawful, and the latter unlawful

Quest. 4. How far is the Apostle's prohibition to be extended?

This will be determined partly from what has been before said, and partly
from the current of the Apostle's Discourse, who as he lays down that general,
Let all things be done to Edifying; so upon that principle, he prohibits the
use of an Unknown Tongue, as inconsistent with it, Verse 14. If I pray in an
Unknown Tongue, my Spirit prays, but my understanding remains unfruitful.
Where he does not speak of a better and worse, and prefer that which is
understood before that which is not (as they would have it) but he speaks of a
good and bad; and so does absolutely condemn an Unknown Tongue for the
unprofitableness of it. For, says he, My Spirit prays, not Bellarm. Sect in
posteriore. Rhemists ^^not. p. 460. S. Chrysostom. H^mil. 35. Theophylact.
Salmeron in loc. Hieron. in loc.
the Affection, but the Spirit in the gift of an Unknown Tongue (as many of the
Ancients, and some of themselves expound it) But my understanding remains
unfruitful, to my self, that is, If I do not understand it; and to others, if
they do not understand me, as the Apostle does explain it, Verse 16.

So that from the whole we may with good Reason conclude; that the
administration of Divine Service in an Unknown tongue is as unlawful as express
Scripture can make it: And that after all their attempts to decline, pervert
and overthrow it, the fourteenth Chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, remains in full force against the Opinion and Practice of the
Church of Rome; and is a sufficient Reason on their part, to keep the Scripture
in an Unknown tongue, as long as their service is contrary to the Scripture
celebrated constantly in it.

SECT. III. I shall enquire, Whither the celebration of Divine Service in a
Tongue not understood of the people, has been the ancient Rite of every Church?
1. I shall consider whither it has been an ancient Rite? II. Whither from the
time of its having been a Rite, it has been the Rite and Custom of every
Church.

Both of these are affirmed by the Council of Trent.

Qu. I. Whither it has been an ancient Rite?

Ancient is a Term of an uncertain date, and seems to have been chosen by the
Council upon Mature deliberation; lest peradventure if it had been determined,
it might have been so late, as to be of no authority in it self; or so early,
as for want of truth, it might have given a foul shock to its own Authority.
But however, because nothing can be ancienter then what is first, let us
consider how Service was administered in Apostolical times, and so downwards, as
much before the Council as any thing can be reasonably said to be Ancient by
it. I have already accounted for the Apostle's sense in this matter, which
Cassander calls (after St. Chrysostom in loc.) an Apostolical Command for De
^^^ic. pii viri, p. 865.
Service in a Tongue understood of the people. And if we take a step lower, and
so proceed, we shall find an uncontrollable Evidence for it, both as to the
Judgment and Practice of the Church. In the first place (setting aside the
pretended Liturgies of St. James and St. Clement, which are however plainly for
it, as is acknowledged) Salmeron in 1. Cor. 14. Sect. His igitur. Apolog. sub
fin.
is Justine Martyr, that flourished about 150 years after Christ, who relates,
That after the Bishop had concluded his Prayer and giving of Thanks, all the
people did assent to it with an Amen. Which they could not have done, as the
Apostle and Fathers affirm, unless they understood what was prayed for. To this
purpose does Clemens Alexandrinus also write, who lived toward the close of the
second Century.

Origin, Who lived about the middle of the third Contra cells. l. ^. p. 402.
cantabr.
Century, says, The Greek Christians in their Prayers used the Grecian, and
the Romans used the Roman words, and each prays and praises God in his own
Tongue. And the Lord of all Tongues does hear those that pray to him in all
Tongues, etc. St. Cyprian at the same time, does say, That the Mind in Prayer
does think of nothing In orat. Dom. n. 22.
else but what is prayed for. And therefore the Priest before Prayer does
prepare the Minds of the Brethren, by saying, Lift up your Hearts, that when
the people does answer, We lift them up unto the Lord, they may be admonished,
that they ought to think of nothing but the Lord. For not the sound of the
Voice, but the Mind must pray to the Lord.

Dionysius Alexandrinus, that lived in the same Age, Apud Eusebius. Eccles. Hist.
l. ^. c. 8.
in a Letter to Xystus Bishop of Rome, does write of a person that having been
baptized by Heretics, upon the hearing the Questions and Answers at the
Baptism of the Orthodox, questioned his own Baptism But says he, we would not
rebaptize him, because he had for a good while held Communion with us in the
Eucharist, and had been present at our giving of Thanks, and answered Amen.

St. Basil., Who flourished about the year 370. Tom. 2. Reg. brev. reg. 27^.
putting the Question, How the Spirit prays, and the Mind is without Fruit?
Answers, It is mean'd of those that pray in a Tongue unknown to them that hear.
For when the Prayers are unknown to them that are present, the mind is without
Fruit to him that prays, etc.

And as to the Practice of the Church in the public Service, he declares, That
the People Tom 1. in Ps. 28
had the Psalms, Prophets and Evangelical Commands: And when the Tongue sings,
the Mind does search out the sense of the things that are spoken. And he
relates how the Christians used to spend the Night in Prayers, Confessions and
Psalms; one beginning, and the rest following. Tom. 2. Epist 63. Cler. Ne^caes.
Tom. 1. ^exameri. Ho^. 4. sub. ^n.
And that the noise of those that joined in the Prayers, was like that of the
Waves breaking against the Shore,

With him we have S. Ambr^se agreeing (that lived much about the same time) who
faith, It is evident that the Mind is ignorant, where the In 1 Cor. 14. ^. N^^
siora vere.
Tongue is not understood; as some Latins that are wont to sing in Greek,
being delighted with the sound of the Words, without understanding what they
say And again, the unskilful hearing what he does not understand, knows not the
conclusion of Ibid Quis supplet locum.
the Prayer, and does not answer Amen, that is, it is true, that the Blessing
may be confirmed. For by those is the confirmation of the Prayer fulfilled,
that do ans^^^ Amen. etc. And he does show what an honor is given to God, what
a reverence is derived upon Ibid. Sia. (...) prophet^^^.
our Religion, and how far it excells the Pagan, that he that hears
understands, and that nothing is in the dark.

And he says. This is a symphony, when there Tom. 3. Com. l. 7. in L^c. 1^. p.
169. Par. 1614. In 2 cor. c. ^. Homil 1^. Et (...).
is in the Church a concord of diverse Ages and Virtues: that the Psalm is
answered, and Amen said, etc.

Toward the latter end of the same Century lived S. Chrysostom, who says,
That the people are much concerned in the Prayers, that they are common to them
and the Priest; that in the Sacrament, as the Priest prays for the people, so
the people for the Priest. And that those Words, and with thy Spirit, signify
no thing else -- And what wonder is it, That in the Prayers the people do talk
with the Priest?

And elsewhere he says, That the Apostle shows that the people receive no
little damage, when In 1 Cor. 14. Hom. 35.
they cannot say Amen.

To conclude, Bellarmin says, that in the Liturgy which bears this Fathers
name, the parts sung L. 2. c. 16. Sect. idem etiam. v. Chrysostom. Tom. 4. Par.
1621.
by the Priest, Deacon and People, are most plainly distinguished.

To him let us add S. Jerome his cotemporary, who declares that at the Funeral
of Paula in Jerusaelem, the multitude did attend, and sung their Psalms in
Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and Syriack, according Tom. 1. Epitap Paulae ad
Euslochium. Epist Paulae ad Marcellam.
to the Nations they were of. And we are farther told, That at Bethlem there
resorted Gauls, Britains, Armenians, Indians, etc. And there were almost as
many Choirs of Singers as of Countries; of a different Tongue, but of one and
the same Religion.

And the same Fathers tells us, That at Rome the Tom. 10. prooem. 2. ad Galat.
people sounded sorth Amen, like to the noise of Thunder.

Next let us consult. Augustine, of the same time, who says, That no body is
edified by Tom. 3. in Genes. l. 12. c. 8. Lib. de Magi. stro. c. 1. and 7. De
catechis. rud. C. 9.
what he does not understand. And, That the reason why the Priest lifts up his
Voice in the Church when he prays, is not that God, but the people may hear
and understand, and join with him, And that whereas the Bishops and Ministers
of the Church were sometimes guilty of using barbarous and absur^ Words, they
that should correct it that the people may most plainly understand, and say
Amen.

And elsewhere (as has been quoted before) exhorts that they be not as Parrots
and Pies that say they In psalm. 18.
know not what.

Thus far our Authorities do proceed with little interruption. For Bellarm does
grant, That not c. 16. Sect. sed neque.
only in the times of the Apostles, all the people were wont to answer in
Divine Offices; but that the same was a long time after observed both in the
Eastern and Westren Church, as is evident from S. Chrysostom, S, Jerome, etc.

Now having derived the Tittle thus far above 400 years, we need not be much
solicitous for what was introduced afterward; but yet for a farther
confirmation, I shall add some Testimonies of a latter date. Such is that known
Edict of the Emperor Justinian (who dyed Anno 565,) in which Novel. 123. See
this vindicated in Bishop Jews reply to Hardings answ. p. 128.
it is thus enacted, We command all Bishops and Priests to celebrate the holy
Oblation, and the Prayers in sacred Baptism, not in a low, but such a Voice, as
may be heard by the people; that thereby their heart may be raised up with
greater Devotion, and Honor be given to God; for so the Holy Apostle teaches,
in the first to the Corinthians, For if thou only bless with the Spirit etc.

To this I shall add that of Isidore Hispalensis; that lived in the end of the
fifth Century, who says, De Eccles. off. l. 1. c. 10.
That it behooves that when it is sung in the Church, that all do sing; and
when prayers are offered, that all do pray; and when there is reading, that all
do read; and silence being made, that all hear.

This is also agreeable to the former Opinion of the Church of Rome it self;
and for proof of which, what can we desire more then the Declarations of Popes
and Councils? and this we have. For we read of a permission given by the Pope
to the Moravians, at the instance of Cyril (who had Aeneas Sylvius Hist. Bohem.
l. 1. c. 13. Aun^ 260.
converted them and other Nations of the Sclav^nians) to have Divine Service in
their own Tongue; and that he and the Conclave were induced to it (when not a
few did oppose it) by a voice from Heaven, that said, Let every Spirit praise
the LORD, and every Tongue confess to him, as Aeneas Sylvius afterward Pope,
relates.

And Pope John the VIII. (not long after, in Anno 880.) writes thus to S fento
opulcer, a Prince Coneil. Tom. 24. Epist. 217. Paris, 1644.
of the Sclavonians, We command that the Praises and Works of our Lord Christ,
be declared in the same (Sclavonian) Tongue. For we are admonished by sacred
Writ, to praise the Lord; not only in three, but in all Tongues, saying, Praise
the Lord all ye Nations, praise him all the people. And the Apostles filled
with the Holy Ghost, spoke in all Tongues. And S. Paul admonishes, Let every
Tongue confess; and in the first to the Corinthians, he does sufficiently and
plainly admonish us. that in speaking we should edify the Church of God.
Neither does it hinder the Faith or Doctrine, to have the Mass sung or the
Gospel and Lessons well translated, read, or other divine Offices sung in the
same Selavonian Tongue; because he who made three principal Tongues, viz.
Hebrew, Greek and Latin, made all to his praise, etc.

And consormable to this is the Decree of the Council of Lateran under Innocent
III. Anno 1215. that because in Con. 9.
many parts, within the same City and Diocese, there are many people of
different manners and Rites mixed together, but of one Faith, We therefore
command that the Bishops of such Cities or Diocesses provide fit Men who shall
celebrate Divine Offices according to the diversity of Tongues and Ri^es, and
administer the Sacraments.

This may be farther confirmed by the very Offices of the Church of Rome; but
this is sufficient Vid. Cassandri Liturg. c. 36.
to show that the Church of Rome has departed from Scripture, Antiquity, and
it self, when it does require that Divine Service be performed in a Tongue
unknown to the people: and that it was never the opinion of the Fathers, nor
any Church, nor even of the Church of Rome that it is most expedient to have it
so performed. So little was it then thought that religious things the less they
are understood; Epist. Cleri Gall. Collect. p. 63. Epist. P. Alex. 7. in
Collect. p. 69. Hosius, p. 64. Bellarm. Sect. Septim^, P. Sanct. c. 17. n 3. E.
W. Truth will out p. 45. 47. R^^erus. c. 22. Portraiture, c. 14 p. 224.
Bellarm. l. 1. de ^^ssa, c. 11. Sanders orat. p. 72 R^em. Annot, p. 461.
the more they would be admired; and that to preserve a reverence for them, and
the people from dangerous errors, it is requis^te to keep them from being
understood. So little was it pleaded, that there are any Tongues sacred in
themselves; and that as the three upon the Cross of Christ, are to be preferred
before others, and to exclude the rest, so the Latin as next to the head of
Christ, is the most venerable of the three. So little was it then thought that
there is a certain kind of Divinity in Latin, and something more of Majesty,
and fitter to stir up Devotion then in other Tongues. So little were they
afraid, that Latin would be lost, if the service were not kept in it; or
however, so little evident is it that they valued the preservation of that
Tongue above the Edification of the Church.

Lastly, So little did they think of the expedience of having the service in
one common Tongue, as Latin, That Christians wherever they travel, may find
the self same Service, and Priests may officiate in it as at home. As if for
the sake of the few that travel, the many that stay at home should be left
destitute, and for one Man's convenience, 10000. be exposed to eternal perd^io^.
These are Arguments coined on purpose to defend the Cause, and so are peculiar
to the Church that needs them.

II. Let us consider, whither from the time of its having been a Rits it has
been the Rite of every Church.

To this I shall only produce their own Confessions, Cassander. Liturg. c. 11.
13. 15 Ledesm, c. 33 n. 5 Bellarm. c. 16. sect. obj. ult. Salmer on in 1 cor.
16. sect. septime.
for it is acknowledged that the Armenians, Egyptian^, Habassines, Muscovites
and Sclav^nians have their Service in a Tongue known to the people. And their
giving them the hard Names of Heretics, Schismatics and Barbarous, will not
save the Council from being fallible, when it says, It is the rite of every
church.

But were there no such Churches in the World that herein practiced contrary to
the Church of Rome, yet it would no more justify her, then it can make that
good which is evil, that expedient which is mischievous to the Church of God,
or reconcile one part of the Council to the other, that when it has declared,
The Masi contai^^^ great instruction for the people. yet adds, That it is
expedient and an approved Rite, that it be not celebrated in the Vulgar Tongue.

But say they, this is granted, If there were no interpretation, but that is
provided for by the Council, for it is ordered, That lest Christ's sheep should
hunger, all that have the care of Souls shall frequently expound, etc. And that
we are now to consider.

SECT. IV Whither the Provisions made by the Council of Trent, for having some
part of the Mass expounded, be sufficient to countervail the mischief of having
the whole celebrated in a Tongue not understood of the People, and to excuse
the Church of Rome, in the injunction of it.
THis is the last refuge they betake themselves to S. C. Answ. to D. Piece, 7.
175. Sanders orat. p. 63.
confessing that without an Interpretation, S. Paul is against them, but with
this, they plead, he is for them.

But what shall we then think of the case in their Church at a time, when as
the people could not understand, so the Priests could not interpret, and wanted
both the gift, and had not acquired so much as the art of it? What shall we
think of their case, and their Church, that has neither provided nor does use
such an Interpretation as the Apostle speaks of, but what differs as much from
it in respect of the light it gives to the people, as both that and the Tongue
they use, do in the way by which they are obtained? If it were a translation,
what a ludicrous thing would it be for a Church in its constant Service to
take, suppose, the Lord's Prayer in pieces, and first pronounce it in Latin,
and then in English? But as they do not permit their Offices, Extract. ex
regist. Facult, Par. an. 1525. Collectio, p 8. Censurae, An. 1655 p. 18.
Procez. contr. V^isin. An. 1660. p. 53. etc. Epist. Cleri An 1660. p. 62. Orat.
etc. p. 63
not the Horae B. Virginis, Breviary, or Mass book to be translated into a
Vulgar Tongue: So the verbal translation of it, during the celebration of Mass,
was never thought of by the Council, but was thereby condemned, as the cause
and seedplot of many errors: as we are informed in a Lett^^, wrote upon the
occasion of Voisin's translation, by the whole Clergy of France, to Pope
Alexander the Seventh.

And whatsoever the Exposition did refer to (let it be what it will) yet it was
not to the devotional Part, as Sanders declares; who (after he had pleaded that
an Unknown Tongue with interpretation, was the perfect fulfilling of S. Paul's
advice) perceiving a difficulty behind, throws all off with this, If the
Interpretation of Prayers he laid aside for a seasion, it is however not to be
thought, that it is to he ommited for ever, etc. So that at most, no more was
intended then a short exposition of some doctrinal Point or ceremony (which
might as well be called an Exposition of the Breviary, or any other Book,
containing much the same things, as the Missal) And it is probable that so much
as this also was never intended, which if ever, is very rarely practiced
amongst them. Insomuch as Ledesma says, That the sense of the council was,
That the people should be instructed only by Sermons, Indeed they would rather
have this go for an Argument, then Cap. 15. Sect. decret. Con. Trid. n. 2.
dispute it. They do as the Irish by their bogs, run over it lightly, for fear
if they tread too hard, it will not supoort their cause but stifle it. And
therefore they wheel off again, and then tell us, That it S. C. Answ. p. 176.
being a known set Form, in one set Language, those that are ignorant of it at
first, need not continue so, but by due attention and diligence may arrive to a
sufficient knowledge. As if the poor people are inexcusable, if they do not
arrrive to a sufficient knowledge of the Tongue (which must be learned before
the things) without other helps then their own attention and diligence; when
the Priests and others are trained up to the knowledge and understanding of
Latin by Rules, Masters, and frequent exercise. Surely they had the Mass in
Latin, when the learned themselves did not understand it, as Valla says. They
had the Elegant: Praes.
Mass in Latin, when the greatest part of the people did not understand it, as
Faber relates. They had In 1 Cor. 14. Cassand. Liturg. c. 36. Sixth. Senens.
Bibli^th. 6. Annot. 263.
the Mass in Latin, when not only the people but the Priest and Deacons,
rarely understood what they prayed for, as Billet, etc. confess. And where 'was
then their attention and diligence, that to their lives end, either daily
rehearsed it, or often heard it, and yet never understood it? And is is not so
still, when notwithstanding all the noise of S. c. p. 176.
Exposition, Manuals and Primers, etc. for the use of the Vulgar, yet (setting
aside some little Forms and Ceremonies of it) they are so ignorant of the
Contents of the Missal or Mass Book, that as to the matter of it; they know it
not from the Breviary; nor would know it from the Alcoran^ if read in the same
Tongue, alike pronounced, and the same falls and postures were used in the
reading of it? So that what more plain then the means they have provided is not
sufficient for to instruct and edify the people, and that after all, they do
hold this instruction unnecessary, and that the people are safe without it? And
this is the case, for it is generally resolved by their Casuists, both for
Priest and People; that ^^ they do their duty and merit, when they say their
Prayers, though they do not understand; so Eckius, so Salmeron, etc. And if it
were otherwise, very few Saimeron. in 1 cor. 16. Disp. 3 Instrnct. Sacerd. c.
13. n. 5, and 6.
would do their duty, when so very few do at all understand what they say, as
Cardinal Tolet does determine. So in ^ulgent are they; and very reasonable is
it that they should be so, that when they have put out the peoples Eyes, they
should take good care to make the way broad and smooth for them.

But in good earnest, can we think this way as safe as it is broad, and that
there is no Ditch into which both Priest and People, if alike blind; may fall
and perish? And if there be; must not the case of that people be very
lamentable that are wholly left to the ability and sincerity of their Priest?
who if he wants the former, may, through ignorance, turn the most solemn part
of their Service, as it happens, into Nonesense or Blasphemy. And if he wants
the latter may use a Spell for Prayer, and the ancient charm D. Stilling steet
Answ. to. T. G. c. 3 sect. 3.
of Abracadabrae for Ave Maria (as a learned person has observed.) Nay instead
of baptizing in the sacred Name of the Father, etc. ^he may do by the person,
as a Jew under the profession of a Priest, is said to have done by a certain
Prince in the last Age, and baptize him in the horrid name of the Devil. There
is then nothing so absurd or wicked, which, according to the case, may not be
pra^^ised. And neither Prayers be Prayers, nor Sacraments Sacraments, nor
persons Christians, as long as the Priest does alone know, neither Priest nor
People understand.

But supposing that there be no defect in either of these, and that the whole
Service is faithfully and understandingly performed; yet if the Tongue in which
it is performed be not understood of the people, there can be no understanding
of the sense contained in it; and where the sense and matter is not understood,
there cannot be (as I have showed) these dispositions of Soul, that attention
of Mind, that Faith which gives the Amen to our Prayers, etc and which renders
the Service acceptable to God and beneficial to our selves; and consequently a
service so contrived, as shall defeat these ends, is one of the greatest
mischiefs that can befall a Church, and must render the Romish Church
inexcusable in the injunction of it, and Justify those that have reformed it.

SECT. V. We are come to enquire, Whether upon the whole, the Service of God
ought not to be celebrated in a Tongue vulgarly understood.
THe Church of Rome does anathematize, and Bellarm. c. 16, sub sin. T. G.
against D. Stilingfleet, Sect ^. n. 3. p. 28. Ledesma, c 33. ^. 1.
doom to Hell, those that hold a Vulgar Tongue necessary in Divine Service; and
does both absolutely forbid their own Missal to be so translated, and persecute
those that have so used it. And yet they cannot, dare not say it is unlawful in
it self. For it is better to have it in the Vulgar then not at all, says one.
It is matter of Discipline, says a second.

It has been granted in some cases, is acknowledged by others. And it is most
expedient to have it in the Vulgar, says a fourth. And if so, why this
diligent Cassander. de off. pii viri, p. 86^.
care to prevent and suppress it? Why this outcry against it? Why this
Severity? What need of such Decrees and Anathema's of Councils? What need such
Commands of the Popes for Princes to oppose it with all their force (as that of
Gregory VII. to Vladislaus of Bohemia) what reason is there for a general
Convention of the Clergy of a Kingdom to proceed against a translation of their
Missal? When if we consult the ends for which the public Service was
in^^itut^d, i^ we consult the reason of the thing; if we consult Scripture, or
^ath^rs, or the practice of the Church for about seven hundred Years together,
we shall find that it is not only expedient, but necessary to have it in a
Tongue understood of the people, and that the Church of Rome that is so forward
in its Anathema, is under a precedent, and greater o^^, even that of the
Apostle, Whosoever shall preach any other Gospel, let him be Anat^em^. So that,
which is most to be respected, the Anathema of Heaven, or that of the Council;
the command of God, or a Decree of a Pope; the Church of God in its best times
or the particular Church of Rome in latter Ages; whither the edification of the
Church of God, or the will and interest of a corrupted Church, is not difficult
to conceive. And therefore we may end as we began, with the Church Art. 24.
of England. It is a thing plainly repuguant to the Word of God, and the (...)
of the Primitive Church, to have public Prayers ^^ the Church, or to minister
the Sacraments in a Tongue not underst^^d of the people.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE DEVOTIONS OF THE Church of Rome.

Especially, as compared with those of the CHURCH of ENGLAND In which it is
shown, That whatever the Romanists pretend, there is not so true Devotion among
them, nor such rational Provision for it, nor Encouragement to it, as in the
Church established by Law among us.

EDINBURGH, Re Printed by John Reid, Anno DOM. 1686.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the DEVOTIONS Of the Church of Rome;
IT is certain one of the greatest Commendations that can be given of any
Church, or body of Christians, that a man can with Truth afirm of it that the
Doctrines which they profess, the Rules and Orders under which they live, that
the frame and constitution of the Church tends directly to make men more
pious and devout, more pe^^tent and mortified, more heavenly minded, and every
way of better Lives, then the way and profession of other Christians: For to
work men up to this holy frame and disposition was one of the main designs of
the Gospel of Christ, which intends to govern men's Actions, and reform their
Temper, as well as to inform their Understandings, and direct their belief. And
in this particular it differs much from all the Ethics of the learned Heathen:
For whereas they designed especially to exalt the passions. and to raise up the
Mind above it self, by commending the high and pompous Virtues, thereby to stir
men up to great designs, and to appear bold and braving in the affairs of this
Life; the Gospel is most frequent in commendation of the humble lowly and
mortifying Virtues, which would reduce the Mind to it self, and keep Men within
due bounds, and teach them how to behave themselves toward God, and to live in
a due regard to another Life.

Now there is scarcely any thing which the Church of Rome does more often urge
for her self, or with greater confidence pretend to excel the Church of England
in, then by endeavoring to persuade, that the Frame of their Church is more
fitted for the exciting of Devotion and a good Life then ours is, And so they
will boast of their severe Rules and Orders, the Austerities of their Fasts and
Penances, the strict and mortifyed Lives, the constancy and incessancy of
Devotions used among them; and would thence infer, that that m^st needs be
the best Religion, or way of serving God in which these practices are enjoined
and observed, That the Tree must needs be good by such excellent Fruit^; and
that if all other Argument fail, yet they say they have this to show for
themselves, that in their Communion there is at least somewhat more like that
great Self-denial and Mor^^fication so often made necessary under the Gospel,
then is to be found in the Reformed Churches, or particularly in the Church of
England. Now laying aside all Disputes concerning Points of Doctrine, in
controversy between them and us, in which it has been abundantly shown, that
they err in matters of Faith; and that in what they differ from us, they differ
also from the Scripture, and the true Church of Christ in all the best Ages;
I Will confine my self to examine their Pre^^^ce to Devotion, where I doubt not
but it will sufficiently appear, that they are as much deficient also in
Regularity of Practice; that there is not that true Foundation laid for such
Devotion as God accepts, nor that strict Provision made for it, nor that real
Practice of it which they would make us believe; but that even the best which
they pretend to, is such as does by no means befit a truly Christian spirit,

I Will discourse in this Method.

1. I Will instance in the several Expressions of Devotion, the Motives to it, or
Assistance of it, which the Church of Rome pretends to, and on which she is
used to magnify her self.

2. I will allege the just Exceptions which we have against such their
Pretenses.

3. And then show that they are so far from encouraging true Devotion, that
many things both in their Doctrine and Discipline directly tend to the
Destruction of it.

4. I Will show what excellent Provision is made in the Church of England, for
the due exercise of all the parts of Devotion, and what Stress is laid on it,
and on a good Life among us.

First, Though Devotion is properly and chiefly in the mind, a due sense of God
and Religion, yet it is not sufficient if it stop there: For there are certain
outward Acts which are either in themselves natural and proper Expressions, or
else are strictly required of us by God, as Duties of Religion, and Evidences
of the devout temper of our Minds; and these are called Acts of Devotion. And
all the Commendation that can be given of any Church, on Account of Devotion,
must be either, that there is a true Foundation laid for it in men's Minds, or
constant Provision made for the due Exercise of it, all necessary Encouragement
given to it, and a suitable, strict and regular Practice of it observable among
them. And there are several things which are not at all insisted on by us,
which they of the Church of Rome boast of, as serving to some or all of these
pu^poses, which I shall represent as fairly as I can, that we may see what
there is in that Church that does answer such great pretenses.

For it is observed that they of the Church of Rome oftentimes instead of
dispute, endeavor to work on our People, and too often prevail, by appealin^
to matters of Practice, visible to every ones Eye; an Argument to which men
need not use their Reason, but their Sense; and this will, (say they)
sufficiently convince any of the excellency of our way. For here are several
things used as Instances and Expressions of Devotion, very acceptable to God,
and suitable to a good Christian Temper, which are either not at all used in the
Church of England; or at least not in that Degree and Measure, and yet all
those that are used in the Church of England, say they, are used among us: For
we not only enjoin, and practice constant use of Prayers public and private,
together with Reading and Preaching of the Word, Sacraments, and whatever is
used in the Church of England; but we have besides several things which are as
well proper Expressions of Devotion, as Helps and Assistances which are not
used among the Protestants: The Principal things which they urge are such as
these:

1. They blame the Reformation in general, as well as the Church of England,
for the want of Monasteries and such other Religious Houses, which are so
numerous in the Popish Countries; where Holy Men and Women being shut up, and
having bid adieu to the World, live as in Heaven in constant Exercise of
praising of God Night and Day, and of praying to him for the Church and State,
and particular Christians, as well as themselves; and who are not only so
beneficial to the World, by the constancy of their Prayers, but also by their
Example putting others in mind of Religion, and of doing likewise; and by the
severity of their lives, as to Diet, Garb, and other Circumstances, live in a
constant Practice of that self-denial which is commanded in Scripture, and was
so practiced by Holy Men almost from the beginning of Christianity; and are as
it were constant Preachers of Holiness and Mortification; who though they do
indeed stay here in the World below, yet converse not in it, but are in some
Sense out of it, and live above it.

2. They sometimes also boast of the extraordinary Charity, and Liberality to
all good and Holy Uses pressed and practiced among them, which is but sparingly
used, say they, among the Protestants; Especially their excessive Expense and
Cost in building and endowing Monasteries, erecting Churches, Chapels and
Crosses, their so pompous adorning the places dedicated to the Worship of God,
besides their Charitable Assistance, and relief which they afford to the Bodies
of the Living, and the Souls of the Dead; and no Man can deny but Charity is a
certaint Evidence, as well as a great branch and duty of true Religion and
Devotion:

3. Sometimes they glory in the great number of Saints commemorated in their
Church, and dying in the Communion of it, and urge them as a forcible Example
to others, and a mighty incentive to Devotion; they think also it redounds much
to the Honor, and Commendation of their Church to have had such glorious
Members of it, and twit us as they think severely, when they ask us what Saints
we have of our Church, and wonder especially that we should observe so few
Festivals and Holidayes; whereas the very many days set apart in their Church
in memory of their several Saints, they think not only afford proper Occasions,
for all Acts of Religion; but are a sign of their being less addicted to this
World, when so great a part of their time is spent in the Service of God, and
that Piety and Devotion are a considerable part of their Business and
Employment.

4. They urge also the multitude of Pictures and Images of several Famous Men
and Women, who have in an eminent manner served and pleased God, and been
instrumental in converting the World, as very proper assistances of a Man's
Devotion; instructing some, they being the Books of the Unlearned, and sensibly
affecting and alluring all to the Imitation of the Persons whom they represent.

5. Sometimes they commend their Church for the Fastings, and other Acts of
severity and Mortification, used not only by the Monks and Regulars, but by all
sorts of Men, according to the Rules of their Church, on set days of the Week
or Seasons of the Year; as well as such Austerities as are enjoined by their
Confessors, by way of Penance; their going barefoot and bare headed in
Processions, their whipping and lashing themselves their drawing great Chains
and Weights after them, as great and proper Instances of Self-denial and
Devotion.

6. They place also a great Deal of Religion in Pilgrimages, which the more
Devout sort take, and spend their Estates, and sometimes their Lives in, to
Jerusalem, Rome, Loretto,* Mount-ferrdt, to St. Thomas, at Canterbury St.
Winefrid's Well, or some such other places where some extraordinary Person has
lived, or some strange Relic is left, or where they reckon God has on some
Occasion or other wonderfully manifested himself; and they reckon that the very
visiting or kissing these, are either an Argument of truly Devout Minds, or
that which will make them so. And their Manuals or Books which their Priests
give into the peoples hands, do not fail by all the art imaginable, to
endeavor to screw up Men's Devotion, even to rapture and ecstasy in
Commendation of these Practices and Orders, even as if they would have us
believe that there is no true Religion and Devotion without these, and that
where there are these things practiced, it is a certain sign that the mind is
affected as it ought, and Piety flourishes in the highest Degree.

And besides these Matters of Practice, their are also several Doctrines, and
Opinions peculiar to themselves, which they reckon do naturally tend to the
advancement of true Devotion. As,

7. Their Doctrine concerning the Intercession of Saints for us, and the
Advantage of Invocation or prayer to them, and that we of the Church of England
want one of the greatest Encouragements to Prayer and Devotion that can be, who
neither own nor make use of these Helps, and therefore that we cannot have such
hope of Success and Blessing as they have.

8. Their Doctrine concerning the Merit of Good Works and Supererogation, is of
the same Nature, in their esteem: For the more Worth you suppose in any Action,
the greater Encouragement is there to the performance of it, and therefore
surely it must be a most irresistible motive to Devotion, to persuade men that
the worth and value of it is such, as that you may by it purchase Heaven not
only to your selves, but for others also.

9. Their belief of Purgato^y, and of the validity of Prayers for the Dead,
does naturally tend to excite men to Devotion, say they; for here is a greater
Scope and Occasion for our Prayers, we may hope to be instrumental to more
good, more Persons to be relieved and helped by our Prayers, then are supposed
in the Devotions of the Church of England.

10. And especially their Doctrine and Practice of Confession, Penance and
Absolution, they look on as so necessary to Devotion, that it is a wonder with
them that there should be any show of it, where these are received and
practiced: For a particular Consession of all Sins to a Priest being so
strictly required, they say is the readiest way to bring men to a sense of, and
shame for their Sins; and Penance being also imposed presently on them, will
surely make Men to be more afraid of sining again when they see it must cost
them so dear, and that they may not despair or despond, by Reason of the
Multitude or Weight of their former Sins, but may be encouraged to strive more
earnestly against sin for the future, the Priest gives them Absolution of what
is passed, at the same time encouraging their hope, as well as exciting their
fear, and endeavoring by the same method both to allure, to force and to shame
Men into Amendment.

Lastly they insist much also on the Validity of their Ordinations, the Truth
and Succession, Unity and Authority, of their Church, and the Obedience that is
paid to the Rules and Orders of it, as mighty Helps and Assistances, and
Encouragements to Devotion; when they are so sure of the Sacraments being duly
administered, and all other Acts of Authority rightly performed when the Laws of
the Church for the punishment of Offenders are duly executed, and when the
Church has Power to oblige all to an Uniform and Regular Practice.

All these things, say they, do either encourage and exc^te men to Devotion, or
as^ist or direct them in their exercise of it, give more room or afford better
occasions for it, or else show more fully the Necessity of such and such parts
of it then what is received and practiced in the Church of England; and
therefore the Church of England that wants these wants also much of the
Occasion, Matter, Oppor^^^ities, and Arg^^^ts for Devotion: so that they laying
a side all disputes concerning Articles of Faith, they doubt not but it will be
readil^ granted, that at least they are a more devout People; whatever their
belief i^, their practies is more agreeable to that self denial, and
Mortification commanded in Scripture; that God is more constantly and
reverently served among them then he is among us; that they take more pains,
are at more Cost and trouble in the worship of God. which they think is an
Instance of a good religious mind, and will be most secure of God's Acceptance.

These are, I think indeed, the most that they do urge for themselves in this
point, and there is something of appearance of Truth in all this. Most of these
Instances are such as may perhaps be very taking at first fight with some
People, they having a show of Regularity, Strictness and Severity, or else of
being proper helps and Assistances of Devotion: For men are wont to admire any
thing that looks o^d or big, especially if others have but the confidence
highly to praise and extol it. But if we examine them, we shall find them to
fall infinitely short of such specious pretenses; some of them to be unlawful,
and those that are good in themselves, to be some way or other spoiled in the
use of them; always they ^rr in some matterial part or circumstance; and taken
altogether, they have nothing in them which evidence any true devout temper
either designed to be wrought by the Church, or actually working in the People:
Much less do they bespeak greater Devotion then is required and practiced in
our Church.

For it has been well observed by the judicious Sir Edwin Sandyes, that the
Church of Rome has so contrived its Rules and Orders, as rather to comply
with, and fit every Temper and Inclination good or bad, then to work any real
good effect on any. And therefore as it has several things which openly agree
with, and please the profane and debauched; so it must be granted, that it has
somewhat also to suit with and gra^ifle the melancholy Temper, where the
devoutly disposed may find somewhat an agreeable Retreat: And therefore one
would be apt to suspect that the most strict and severe of their Orders, were
kept up rather out of a politic end to please and quiet the People, then
really to advance true piety to God and Devotion. But however it is plain, that
taking the whole Frame of that Church together, it does not design to promot
serious and true Devotion; but only to make a Noise, and to appear so to do.
For when I see the same Church, though sometimes seeming to countenance the
utmost severity as necessary, yet at other times to give all Liberty, and let
the Rein^ loose to all kind of Debauchery, I have just reason to ^ear they are
not in earnest for Religion: For all such irregular Heats, are a sign of a bad
Principles, or a distempered Constitution. Just as if I should see the same
person sometimes desperately dissolute and debauched, and at othertimes
intollerably strict and severe, and this interchangeably and often; I shall
much question his strictness, whither it be sincere: If his sense of Piety were
real, it would be more lasting and uniform; and therefore without breach of
charity I think I may look on him in his severity, rather to act a part on a
Stage, and to serve a present Turn and Occasion, then to be really in his mind
what such strictness would represent him. And therefore whatever true Devotion
is in any of that Communion, ought to be ascribed to somewhat else, then to the
Constitution of that Church: For even those things which they are used to boast
most of, which I have mentioned already, we shall easily find to have little
that is truly commendable, much that is greatly faulty in them; and if their
best things are no better, what are the worst? If the subject of their Glory is
shameful, what will become of the rest?

2, And therefore I Will now show what we have justly to except against their
forementioned pretenses to Devotion.

1. As for Monkery in general, which they boast so much of calling it, Status
Perfectionis and religiosus, as if besides the State of Men in Holy Orders,
that were a State of Perfection, and nothing else worth the Name of Religious.
We confess, that scarcely as to any thing concerning the Externals of Religion,
does the Church of England distinguish it self from the Romish Church so much,
as that there is not any Provision made, or so much as a supposition of such
Monastries, or religious Houses, or public places of Retirement for devout
People, as they are called, being again ever settled among us. For though we are
not so rash as utterly to abhor and throw away every thing that at any time had
been abused to superstition, yet we are very well contented that Monastries
should never be rebuilt among us. For we do not look on the Life of Monks as
any great help to Devotion, or an instance of true Religion prevailing where
they are found; much less that they are necessary in the Christian Church.

For it is evident that the first and purest Ages of the Church did not know
any thing of them: Almost three Centuries passed without any mention of them in
Ecclesiastical History. Antony and Paul in the Dioclesian Persecution, being
taken notice of as the first of that Way. We read indeed of some that did lead
a more then ordinary severe Course, and denied themselves much of the (perhaps)
lawful Pleasures of this Life, in respect to Religion and the other Life; but
these were not Monks, or the modern Asceticks; though it has been the way of the
Church of Rome in more instances then this to impose some new thing on the
World upon the Reputation of some good and reverend Old Name: For the Lives of
the ancient Aste^icks, or mortified Men, differed much from the present Monks
of the Church of Rome. We find not that they engaged themselves in a solemn
vow, distinct from, or above that of their Baptism. For whatever their general
Course of Life was, they would take the Liberty to break their Rule sometimes
in order to extraordinary Charity, or when an occasion offered it self of doing
more good; as is recorded particularly concerning Spiridion a Bishop in Cyprus.
Nor do we find that they always continued in the same State of Life; but took
such a severe course on themselves at some particular times, and on some
special occasions, (as the Nazarites of old did) to humble, and bring their
Bodies under, and as St. Paul advises the married, but not to continue always
so, lest Satan should tempt them; and they reckoned it in an higher degree
praise worthy for every Act of Mortification to be voluntary, then that they
should once for all force themselves to it: And therefore still retained a
Power to themselves, and did vary from this Method sometimes, and on occasion
would indulge themselves a greater, though still a lawful Liberty. They took not
on them the Vow of Poverty, nor placed Perfection in Beggary, but reckoned
every Creature of God to be good; and even the outward good things of this Life
to be the Gift and Grace of God, if they be well employed, according to 1 Pet.
4. 10. And remembered that Saying of our Blessed Savior, Acts 20. 35. It is
more blessed to give then to receive. Nor did they vow what the Church of Rome
now calls Chastity but reckoned themselves as chaste in Wedlock; and as for
Obedience; the third part of the Monks Vow, they thought it sufficient to obey
the Commands of God, and knew not of any other Obedience due from them, but
only to their Governors in Church and State, whose lawful Commands they
reckoned themselves obliged to, in order to the more regular Administration of
Affairs, and the more peaceable Government of the World; much less had they any
distinct Rules to be set up in Competition with the Laws of God, and urged as
necessary to Salvation, making even the Commandments of God of none effect, as
many of the Monks Rules apparently do, as might be easily made to appear. Such
religious Men as these there were in the first Ages, who practiced a stricter
Devotion then others, that God's Name might be the more hallowed by them, the
more it was profaned by the rest of the World, and who were more then ordinary
instant and constant in Prayers for a Blessing on the Church and State, of
which they were Members; and by the Strictness and Severity of their Lives,
made some amends for the Negligence and Viciousness of the Age in which they
lived.

And many such as these, we doubt not, are now among us, who yet utterly
dislike the Popish Monkery, And if by the Monastic Life all this were done,
and nothing else designed, It were justly to be commended; For let Men deny
themselves as much as they will, and use their Christian Liberty to the
Restraint of themselves by a voluntary Self denial and Mortification, to keep
their bodies under, and thereby get a better Temper of Mind. But all this will
not suffice in the Church of Rome: For it is not enough for a man to live so
strict and holy a Life, unless he enter into a Vow particularly to this
purpose. Nay, though a man do take on him all these Vow^ of Chastity, Poverty
and Obedience, and though they be made to his Bishop or Confes^or, who one would
think were the properest persons in the Case, yet still it is not sufficient;
he cannot be said to be in this religions State, unless he vow Obedience to
another kind of Spiritual Jurisdiction. So that it is neither the living so
strictly, nor vowing to live strictly, as the most severe Monks; but it is
their being of a particular Order, and living under such and such Rule, that is
so meritorious; so that by Monkery indeed, Monkerie is encouraged, and some
politic and Secular Designs answered; but the Advancement of Piety and
Devotion is not principally designed or intended. But to discourse more
distinctly of it;

In a Monastic Life these three things are especially remarkable,

First, The secluded, and perhaps Eremetical way of living which they lead.

Secondly, The Constancy and Regularity of Devotions practiced there.

Thirdly, The severity of their Rules, and Austerity of their Lives.

But I must needs say, that there is little of true Devotion, that I can
discover in any of these.

First, Their being shut up from the World, or living in Deserts, is no very
proper Instance of their Devotion, or agreeable to the Design of Christianity.

For a man should converse in the World, else he cannot so well understand it,
what is amiss, or wanting in it, nor how even to apply and place the Emphasis
of his Prayers.

A man that lives in a Wilderness, or shut up always in a Monastery, it is
possible that he may keep himself free from the Difilements of the World; but
yet it must be looked on as much more noble and commendable to converse in the
World, and yet to avoid the Pollution of it.

And though by such a secluded Life he may escape one kind of Temptation, yet
still he will be at least as liable to the two others; that arise from the
Devil, or his own Flesh and Temper as ever. And if he avoid some Sins, yet
still he will be more subject to others, Sowerness. Moroseness, Melancholy,
Censoriousness, spiritual pride, and other sins of as high a Nature as those,
which by being shut up from the world he pretends to avoid. And yet such as
these are generally legible and observable in the very Looks, conversation and
carriage-of Monks and Hermits.

Indeed Retiredness sometimes is an excellent help to the Mind, by giving it
time to recollect it self, and to reflect on its former Miscarriages, and the
better, to prepare it self for its future encounters in the World. But a man
may exceed in the measures and degrees of this, as well as of other
conveniences and lawful enjoyments; and so it may become a snare and an evil to
him; For the mind will naturally be as much tired with Solitude as with
business. Besides, that the Devil is always busy when men are idle and
Diversion and Recreation is as necessary to most Tempers, as Health, and
Cheerfulness are; and fits a man even for the Duties of Religion. For the
keeping the mind in a constant Bent, though of Devotion, will in a short time
weaken its Spring and dull its Edge; and the Acts of Devotion in such a mind,
will, ^its to be feared, be rather a formal piece of Drudgery then a reasonable
service. And though we should grant, that by being confined to a Monastry, a
man might better escape the Defilements of any kind of sin; yet it must be
granted that he cannot be in so much capacity of doing good in the World as if
he conversed freely with it: S^c. l. 1. c. 12
And Sozomen quotes is as a most remarkable saying of some of the first Monks,
that he that abstains from evil, but does no good, ought to be esteemed a very
bad Man; and so the commands of Scripture enjoin us to take care to do good as
well as to abstain from evil, else we shall be reckoned among the unprofitable
servants. We are sure that public service ought to be preferred before
private, the Glory of God, and the good of men being more advanced by it; and
therefore, though that man that lives in a wilderness, and serves God there
when he is forced to it by persecution, may hope for a Blessing, though he be
alone, and neither worshippeth God in public, nor gives a good Example to the
World; yet he that runs into a Wilderness to be wondered at and admired, and
neglects the ordinary and most useful way of serving God, there is too much
reason to fear he has his Reward. At least how far soever it may please God to
pardon his blind Zeal, and want of Discretion, yet certainly this Example of
his ought not to be recommended to all, as a Rule for them to walk by. The
first Monks we grant, were very good and pious Men, and were compelled to
forsake their Houses, and live in solitude; but it is very unreasonable to make
their manner of Life a Pattern to be followed in the quiet and peaceable Ages
of the Church. For this would be to show our selves insenfible of the goodness
of God to us, in giving us the Liberty of serving him freely and openly, and
that we dare profess our Religion without fear of loosing our Lives. And for
the same reason we should still chase to celebrate the Sacrament in an ^pper
(...) because our blessed Savior, and his Holy Apostles did so; and should
have our religious Assemblies in Crypts and Vaults under the Ground, because
the first Christians, in times of difficulty and persecution, often durst use
no other.

And as the Solitude of a Monastic Life is no proper Assistance o^ Expression
of true Devotion, was not known in the first Ages of the Church and afterward
was not taken up of choice, but by Necessity: So also in the last place, I
observe, that the Gospel of Christ, and the ^ules of Living, which are given us
by himself, and his Holy Apostles, never enjoin or suppose any such thing. We
are always supposed to live in Company and Society; and accordingly the
precepts of our Savior and the Apostles are adapted to the common Cases of
Men, and the Concerns of such as converse freely in the World. And therefore I
must needs say, that it has been very wisely ordered, that there should be new
and distinct Rules made for those that delight in this solitary and Monastic
way of Life: For they are such a kind of men as the Gospel of Christ has no
proper Rules for.

Secondly, And I am afraid that there is as little true Devotion in their so
frequent and constant Prayers enjoined and practiced in their Monastries,
though this be confessedly what is most commendable in their way of Life, and
is the only way by which they themselves can pretend to do any Good in the
World. (If I except those, which are but very ^ew, that work with their hands.)

Praise and prayer is therefore acceptable with GOD, as it is in the voluntary
Expression of our Souls, a free will-Offering and Sacrifice which we offer to
GOD, in consideration of his infinite Excellencies and Perfections in himself,
his former undeserved Goodness to us, and our Liableness to him. Now the
constant prayer used in their Monastries, in more particulars then one, come
short of that true Devotion due from Men to their Maker: For first they are as
much as can be forced on a rational Being, and on that account must needs lose
much of their worth and acceptableness. The Monks are oblidged by the Rules of
their several Orders to say such and such prayers, and just at such and such
times, whatever Devotion or Intention of Mind they have; and they are severely
punished if they fail of them. Exactly at Midnight, at two or three a Clock in
the Morning, so very often, and at so very unseasonable times, that many have
confessed this strictness of their Devotions, to be of all the greatest burden
of their Lives And yet this they must do in Imitation of some holy Man of Old,
who is recorded to have prayed at these Hours; whereas these Men's Devotions is
not warm enough to keep them awake when they are at Prayer. And therefore these
Prayers not being the free Emanations of their own mind, methinks the praise of
them is not so much due to the Monks themselves, as to the head and founder of
their Order, who oblidged them to such Rules.

And their Devotion is little more praiseworthy then that of the Jews at
Avignon, and several other Places, who are once in a Week forced to go to
Church and hear a Sermon, (as these Monks are) at least to sit there whilst a
Sermon is preached. and return home as good Christians as they went thither.

But then they are not only thus strictly obliged to such Hours of Prayer, for
that were somewhat tolerable, they might possibly be intent on their Prayers,
notwithstanding. But they are at the same time taught, that they need only say
the Words with their Mouths; it is not absolutely necessary that their mind
should go along with them, and this together with the other must needs spoil
all true Devotion. The frequencie and unseasonableness of their Prayers, will
make it very difficult for them to attend as they ought, and their Doctrine
concerning the No-necessity of attention at Prayer, will certainly make them to
yield to these difficulties, and so there may be abundance of Words said, but
no Devotion performed.

Besides all this, they have a way of being eased of this trouble of the
Prayers, for according to their Casuists, it is allowable for a man to get or
hire another to say his Prayers for him. At least he may be dispensed with by
his Superior, and this Dispensation is good, whither there be a just Reason or
Occasion for it or no, according to an excellent Maxim of theirs, Non ad Valo
rem, sed ad Justitiam requiritur Causa.

And if after all this, Men still will be more then they need strict in their
Prayers, according to the Rules of their Orders, they almost constantly offend
in the End, and Design of their Devotions. For they do them not so much to
benefit the World, or work themselves up to a better temper of Mind; but to
perform a task imposed on them, and which they have vowed to perform, or
especially to merit by their works. For they do not so much as pretend that
this strictness in Devotion is absolutely necessary for their Salvation, (for
else why do they not enjoin it to all, seeing all have the same need of
Salvation?) and therefore the sole end of all this strictness and constancy in
Prayers, is only to get Heaven for others. Which Opinion, besides that it will
mightily discourage Men of an ordinary Charity, from being very intent on
what they do, when they are sensible they Labor only for another; It
countenanceth also a false and dangerous Doctrine concerning the Merit of good
Works, and encourages all vicious practices in other Men, who will hope to be
saved, though not by their own Prayers, yet by the Prayers of these holy Monks
said for them.

So that on many accounts, their is little of true Devoton to be found in that
constant course of Prayers, said so regularlie by the Monks and Hermits; Not to
mention several other particulars, concerning the Frame and Language of their
Prayers, the Object or Persons worshipped or prayed to, the Persons prayed for,
and the like, which I may have Occasion to mention afterward, which being put
together, do abundantly show the improprietie, and the worthlesness of such
Devotions.

Thirdly, And as to the Austerities of the Lives of their Monks and Nuns, the
Punishments which they inflict on themselves, as they profess for the sake of
Religion, by course and uneasy Garments, scanty Food and Fare, long and
tedious Watchings; frequent and cruel Whippings, and Lashings, and other such
Course and Harsh Treatments, which they use toward their own bodies. I confess
I pity them, but can discern little or no true Christian Devotion in them.

For all Severity to our bodies is not Devotion, or any part of that
Self-denial which the Gospel requires; nor is this of theirs, though they
pretend it to be for the sake of Religion; but their insisting so strictly on
it, and valuing themselves so much on it, is of very bad consequence to
Religion.

All Punishment which men inflict on themselves is not Religion, nor
commendable, nor is the patient bearing of it always a Sign of a true
Christian Temper. Christ has no where told us, that he that can fast longest,
or endure most Lashes is the best Man; but he that governs himself and his
Life best. We have strange Instances of this Insensibleness of Pain in many of
the worst Principles and most profligate Consciences: The Devil has his
Martyrs as well as God; and if the voluntarily inflicting Punishment on
themselves be a Sign of Devotion, the Priests of Baal, 1 Kings 18. must have
been a very devout Generation of Men. Therefore it is not any religious
commendation of a Man, that he can ^onstantly whip, or lash himself, or bear it
from another without flinching: Such a man might have made a good Gladiator,
but seems not so well qualified for a Christian.

Nor is all Punishment which Men inflict on themselves, and say they do it for
the sake of God and Religion, always a Sign of true Devotion: For in other
Cases, it is not Men's saying that they design well, which will make their
Actions acceptable with God; but it is their doing what he has commanded, and
for the ends which he designed and intended, with which he is well pleased. And
it too often happens, that men do Actions having a show of Sanctity, and of
great Self denial, which yet are received by God only, with a who has required
this at your hands?

Self-denial indeed is commanded in Scripture, and is necessary also to many
and excellent Purposes, to subdue a man's Passions and Affections, and to bring
him to a right understanding of himself; to put a man in mind of leaving the
pleasant things of this World, sensibly to affect him with the Condition of
those that are in Misery, and always want them, and to inure him to bear
patiently the adverse things, or whatever it shall please God to lay upon him.
It is necessary that a man should have a mind always ready and prepared to
lose all for Christ: And therefore he ought often to deny himself somewhat for
the Sake of Christ, that he may give full proof to himself, that his mind is
affected as it ought to be: And by voluntary Acts of this Nature he preserves a
Power over himself, and is much the more fitted for all the Accidents of Life,
and for the Exercise of Devotion.

But let a man have a care that he keep within due bounds: He may exceed and
transgress both in the Measure, and in the End and Design of such
Mortification, He exceeds in the Measure of it, when he inflicts such Severity
on himself as shall render him unfit for the Service of God, and useless in his
Place. God delights not in the punishment of his Creatures, but desi^es their
Good here as far as it is consistent with their greater Good hereafter. And
though he requires Self-denial of us, it is only in such a measure as is for
our Good, in order to the bettering of our Temper, and to cut off the Occasions
of Sin in us. And therefore it is a great fault in any man on this pretense to
render his Life so uneasy to himself, as that he shall not be able to serve God
contentedly, cheerfully, and without Distraction, As a Man may be to blame also
for his Charity, when without a just Occasion he throws, or gives away all; For
if this Course were allowed or followed, the worst People, and they that know
least how to use an Estate well, would be the richest and Owners of all, and
the only persons in Authority and Power,

And he transgresses also in the end and Design of such Severity, when he
pretends to merit by it, and hopes to buy Heaven (which is the Gift of God)
with a few Lashes, or a litte Money.

And I have too much reason to under value and disl^ke the Severity of the
Monks on both these Accounts. They often tie themselves up to such Degrees of
Strictness as are above the Measures of a man, and consequently not to the
purpose of Religion and Devotion. And they always design to purchase Heaven
for themselves or other, by the Merits of such Sufferings: At the same time
under-valuing the Sufferings of Christ, and over-valuing their own; and yet
making them of less worth in in God's esteem then else they would be' by their
own setting so high a price upon them.

And besides all this, their insisting so strictly on these pieces of
Austerity, and placing such Religion and Perfection in them, is of very ill
consequence to other purposes.

It makes men to acquiesce in the means as the end, to content themselves with
having performed their Fasts, their Number of Prayers and Lashes, without ever
aiming at any Reformation and Change of Temper and Practices; then which
nothing can be more absurd in it self, or more contrary to the the Design of
Christianity.

It makes men also to esteem this or that kind of Meat and Drink, Condition or
Course of Life, to be unlawful or sinful, which really is not; which does much
harm, even to Religion: For it disparageth God's Creation and brings an evil
Report upon the Land. It necessarily makes Men querulous and censorious; and is
the very thing which our Savior took such pains to correct, and did so often
rebuke the Pharisees of his Time for.

And this extraordinary pretense to Severity, brings the Persons of such Men
into Esteem, whatever their Principles, Opinions and Practices otherwise are,
and so injures Religion. For so ecclestastical History tells us, That those
Heretics that have most hurt the Church, were such kind of pretended mortified
Men, as Montanus, Pelagius. etc. So that what do these more then others? Do not
even the Publicans so?

And therefore however praiseworthy the Monastic Life might have been
formerly, and whatever good might have been done, by some of that Order, Yet
thisis'no Plea for the Monks at this time. For the Ancients were very
Instrumental in converting many to Christianity; but these only live on the
spoil of Christians already made so. And considering the present posture of
Affairs in the World, this Monkish way of living is very improper, and the
abuses that are made of it in the Church of Rome, are plainly intolerable.
Where Men are taught to place Religion in a certain Way and Trade of Life,
rather then in a truly Christian conversation. It strikes at the very
Foundation of our Religion, for Men to be made to believe, that the living or
dying in the Habit of this or that severe Order of Monks, will have an
Influence on the Soul, and give it a better Title to Heaven. And yet it is too
notorious that these things are confidently taught and believed among them.

In short, let Men deny themselves as much as they will, for the sake of God
and of Religion, to humble themselves for their Sins, and to keep their bodies
and Passions under. Let them use their Christian Liberry to the restraint of
themselves, by a voluntary self-denial, as far as they find it necessary o^
^xpedient; But for this to be brought into a trade, is the most prep^^terous
thing in the World. Especially, let them have a Care of censuring and judging
others, who tread not exactly in their Steps, or of over-valuing themselves, on
account of this severe and strict course of Life. For it is evident that for
the most part it is not Religion brings them thither, or any extraordinary love
of Devotion; but their Parents send them thither as a pretty cheap way of
providing for their younger Children, that so they may be able the more
honorably to dispose of the rest agreeablie to the Grandeur of the Family.
Therefore if they will commend the Institution of Monastries, as a good and
frugal way of breeding up of Youth, or of providing for a spare Child or two,
let them do what they will, But it is not to be suffered, that when they serve
especially, or only to such Polit^ck ends, yet that they should be boasted of
as the best, or only, Christian and Religious way of Life, as if the persons
in them were the only Religious, and all others were secular, and in some
Measure Profane.

Besides it is very unreasonable for Persons to be shut up in Monasteries, so
as they are, when they are young, and before they can have fully considered
what Temptations they may have, or how they shall be able to bear and withstand
them; and yet if they have but once, though of a sudden, through their own
Melancholy, or the Insinuation of others, taken the vow on themselves, there
is ordinarily no revoking or drawing back for ever,

It is very cruel also for Persons to be put there, without any Consideration
of their several Tempers, and Circumstances. For instead of benefiting the
public, which they pretend, it robs the World of many an one that would
have been useful to it in an Active Life and Station. And some by their Tempers
do not need such Mortification, as the melancholy and dejected. Others cannot
bear the Strictness and Confinement, as the weak and sickly, And now to force
this same course of Li^e on all, or such a number of Men indifferently, is like
the Cruelty of that Tyrant that would make all men of the same length: And the
best that can be said in the the case, is, that the Persons who thus confine
and shut up their Children and Relations, are like to the Persecutors, who in
the like manner shut up S. Cyprian, which certainly was Cruelty in them, though
by so doing, they gave him a greater Opportunity for private Devotion. So that
in truth I look on the Monastries, as they are now ordered, to be rather a kind
of Prisons, and places of Punishment, then convenient places of Retirement in
order to the freer and more undisturbed Exercise of Religion and Devotion. And
if I am not mistaken, the Church of Rome her self whatever she pretends, really
thinks so of them: For the worst punishment that she inflicts on a Priest for
one of the worst of Offenses, viz. for his violating the Seal of Confession,
is, that he shall be condemned to be shut up in a Monastry: and I dare say,
that he and I agree in thinking that to be a severe Punishment, rather then an
Help to Devotion.

Secondly, And if the Multitude of Monastries in the Church of Rome is no
certain Sign of Devotion flourishing among them, they have little reason to
boast of their Works of Charity: For it is most plain that the biggest part of
their Charity is turned this way, to the building and endowing Monastries, and
to the Encouragement of the Monastic way of living.

But besides this, though I am very loath to find fault with any pretense to
Charity, yet I have too much reason on many accounts to think very meanly of
all that which is practiced in the Church of Rome: For whatever has been given
to that Church under the Name of charity, and is now enjoyed by it, has for
the most part been ill gotten and is as ill employed.

And here I will not treat of the temporal Power of the Pope himself; and of
the several Principalities which he stands possessed o^ in Italy and France;
for they cannot be ranged under the Head of charity, according to my
acceptance of the Word; though it might be easily made to appear, that they
have generally been gotten by unjust and unlawful, or at best by harsh and
cruel Means, and such as one would not expect from the Successor of St. Peter.
But I concern my self with smaller and more private Benefactions and Gifts,
though these are so considerable, that generally a third part, often half the
Lands of a Country are the Propriety of the Church. Now all this is gotten
chiefly from men that are dying, who can keep their Riches no longer, and
therefore who do not so much give this from themselves as from their Heirs; And
is especially, as it were, to buy Heaven; and a man must have a most despicable
esteem of Heaven, who will not give all the good things of this Life, when he
can no longer use or enjoy them, for the Purchase of it: And what is given from
so bad a Principle, is commonly applied to as bad a purpose. It is a common
Observation, that in all the Popish Countries the Poor are the most miserable
in the World; and their Secular Priests too are generally in a sad condition,
notwithstanning the infinite Riches of that Church: And so the Regulars only
have any considerable advantage by them; and they also, as it were, club
together to set up one great Man as Cardinal, or Head of their Order, in mighty
Pomp and State; and heap Riches and preferments on him till he can hardly bear
them. So that one can scarcely suppose so great Riches as that Church is in
common endowed with, to be gotten into fewer Hands, or do less Good then it
does amongst them. Let them not therefore boast of their Charity, whilst amidst
so great Plenty, they suffer the poor to want so extremely; and yet to make a
Show, build a fine Hospital in two or three of their chief Towns: For perhaps
no where in the World do the rich exalt themselves, and tyrannize over the
Poor, no where is there a greater inequality of Conditions; no where is there
so much given to the Church and Charity. and no where is the Estate of the
Church engrossed into so few Hands, to maintain Grandeur, rather then to be a
Relief to Poverty. For the Cardinals not above Seventy in number are maintained
out of the Church-Revenues, and yet are by their Creation equal to Kings, and
superior to Princes. Now if this be Charity to have a Prodigious Revenue for
the Maintienance of the Church and Poor, and yet to employ this to the Luxury
of a few, and to let the rest perish I will acknowledge the Church of Rome to
be the most charitable Church in the World. And if it be said that a great deal
indeed has been given to good and truly charitable uses, but is now perhaps
misimployed: I answer, it is possible it may be so, yet still I have some
reason to question it; For their Doctrines of Merit, and of buying Souls out of
Purgatory, etc. are enough to spoil their works of Charity, and make them to be
rather esteemed a Bargain of Sale then a free Gift. And yet their Donations run
commonly in this Form, I give this to such a Monastry for the good of my Soul,
or of the Souls of other persons deceased, or for the Honor of such a Saint;
But seldom for the good of the Poor, the Maintenance and Support of true Piety
and Religion; or for the Glory and Honor of God: And yet in my Opinion such as
these are the ends for which a Gift ought to be esteemed charitable, or will be
accepted by God as such.

But now on the other side, though the Church of England own not either
Purgatory, or any other of their Pick-pocket Doctrines, yet charity urged by us
from truly Christian Principles, has had more force, and done more good then
all their Tricks and Devices put together: For so Dr. Willet has in part
shown; and it might be more fully demonstrated, that in these last 120, or 130
Years, since the settling of the Reformation among us, there has been more and
greater Churches, Schools and Hospitals built and endowed, better Provision
made for the Poor; more and better care taken, not only for the Maintenance,
but especially for the Instruction of the ignorant and meanner sort of People;
In short, all parts of Charity more fully exercised, then can be shown in any
the like number of Years since Christianity came into this Country. Indeed the
general Strain of our Peoples Charity runs to the doing of more good, and is
more properly expressed then theirs is. The Papists build Monastries, in which
Provision is made for a few people to live in Idleness and Luxury under
pretense of Devotion and Retirement: Ours relieve the Sick and Needy (though not
Regulars) and think it better Charity to preserve a poor Family from starving
(of which so many thousands die in Popish Countries) then to maintain an idle
Monk or Nun, or to make a Present to the Lady at Loretto, or offer Candles and
Tapers to the Image, or Saint of the Town in which we live. We, by so bestowing
our Charity, both honor God, and do good to Men. They do neither, but do
Homage to a Saint that neither knows them, nor receives any Good by the Honor
which they give them.

It is in deed confessed, that our Churches are not so adorned as they ought
sometimes: But that is no Fault of our Church, but of the Iniquity of the
Times, and of those Dissentions which they raise among us; but generally they
are decently grave, and as well fitted to assist a devout mind without
Distraction as can be. We love to have our churches neat and handsome, to show
we do not grudge whatever may be required to make them in some measure a sit
place for Divine Worship; but we see not any necessity of having them so
splendidly rich and fine; we think it would rather divert men's minds from the
Business of the place, then assist them in the Duties of it.

In short, in no part of Charity can they pretend to exceed us, considering our
circumstances, unless it be in that of Prayer for the Dead, when they hire so
many Masses to be said for them; but we think not this so much charity to the
person deceased, as to the Priest; for he doubtless receives most benefit from
it.

Thirdly, And whatever they pretend, the great number of Saints canonized and
commemorated among them, is neither a Sign of the good State and condition of
their church, nor is their keeping so many Holy days in remembrance of them
any instance of true Devotion.

As for many of the Saints which they commemorate we own as well as they, and
can pretend as good a right in them as they can, because we own, and will
submit to whatever can be urged from them, such are the Blessed Virgin, the
Apostles and Evangelists; and after them also the Bishops, Martyrs and
Confessors in the Primitive church: but we confess that we have not the same
esteem of many whom they commemorate as Saints, and utterly di^allow of their
canonizing or Sainting of them: For many of them (I believe) never had any
being, but in the Fancy of these Saint-makers, who yet are commemorated, and
prayed to as well as any others. Such as St. Longinus, under which name they
have made a Man of the Spear which pierced our Saviors Blessed Body. St.
Almachius, on Jan. 1. which only comes from the Corruption of Alman ack; Saint
Amphibalus, who was only St. Alban's Cloak; St. Vrsula, and her 11000 Virgins,
of whom no Footsteps can be found in true History. Many of them, I fear, it
had been better that they had never been, as being notoriously vicious and
scandalous in their Lives. And others, though more innocent, yet if we believe
what is written in their Lives, were so prodigiously ridiculous, that a wise
and religious man would be ashamed of such company. To hear men in an Ecstasy
of Devotion to talk Nonsense, or to preach to Birds and Beasts, to run naked,
to wander voluntarily in Deserts. etc. is more likely with sober men, to bring
their persons and Actions into contempt and scorn, then to affect them with any
quick Sense of Religion; at best it will excite men only to that extatical and
enthusiastical kind of Devotion, which was in vogue among the Heathens, whose
Priests were besides themselves, when they spoke in the Name of their Gods: and
their most celebrated Exercises of Religion were such kind of irrational
Actions; but there is nothing of this at all countenanced under Christianity:
For the Gospel would make us wise as well as devout; and it is not required
that we put off the Man, but the Old Man and its Vices when we become
Christians.

And though we are sensible of many among us that have been very examplary for
Virtue and Piety, and have no reason to doubt of their Salvation: but have as
full Assurance of it, at least, as they of their Saints; yet we are very shy of
canonizing or sainting of them, because we know not Men's Hearts, nor dare we to
presume to dispose so absolutely of Heaven as the Pope does. We thank God for
those that have lived and died well among us, and exhort our People to imitate
all the Good which showed it self in them; but we know not to what purpose
Canonization is. If it be only to recommend their Virtues to Example, the
Canonization of them will signify no more then the bare History of their good
Lives faithfully recorded would do; but if it be in order to praying to them,
we utterly condemn it. And it is too plain, that this is the end of their being
canonized: For from that time solemn Prayer and Invocation is allowed and
offered up to them. And this I believe has been an occasion of falling from
the Truth of Christian Doctrine as well as practice: For they taking such a man
to be a Saint, think themselves oblidged to follow and vindicate whatever he
either did or said, as holy and true, not considering that the best of mere Men
have been guilty of Mistakes and Imperfections; and then much more may we
suspect the Judgment and Understanding, the Virtue and Piety of many of those
that fill up the bigger part of the Romish Calendar,

And for the same reason we think there is not much Religion or Devotion
expressed in the keeping up the Memory of such Saints, by so many holidays
observed among them.

If they commend their holidays for the opportunities afforded in in them of
serving God in publik, we have such Conveniences in many-places every day.

If they comend them as days set apart to Rest and Idleness, we are not
altogether of their mind; for we think we have as many as our Poor can well
spare; and are sure that they have more holy days then their Poor can afford
to observe So that their Holy days are no advantage to any. The Rich need them
not; because if they have Abilities, they may be idle and luxurious every day:
But they are a great evil and Burden to the poor, when they are forced to lose
so many days from their Work, by which they should maintain themselves and
their Families. And though the Popes, by reason of this Cry of the poor, have
been prevailed with to cut off many of those days of Idleness, yet still in
most places the Number of them is intolerable.

Fourthly, As for Images, I should have thought it more proper to range them
among the Hindrances of Devotion, did I not see the Men of Rome to plead
earnestly for them, as Helps and Assistances, and to blame us for not using
them, and paying no respect to them.

I consess my self not a cute enough to discern how they can any ways advance
Devotion: For their paying such Honor and Respect to them as they do own and
acknowledge, must needs be a great Distraction, it diverting the Mind, and
making Men spend their religious Reverence on that which is exposed to their
View: but their paying such Worship to them as they do pay, but are ashamed to
own, is flatly destructive to all true Devotion.

They indeed plead the Ignorance of the People for the necessity of Images, and
call them the Books of the Unlearned: but they must first suppose their People
insufferably ignorant to need such Helps as these are. And to give the Priests
their due, if any Ignorance would suffice to justify such a Practice: they
take care to keep their People in Ignorance sufficient: And then if they are so
ignorant that they cannot worship God without an Image, the Church cannot be
secure, but these so silly People may worship the Image for God or Christ; or
at least as having some extraordinary Virtue in it, and so make an Idol of it,
especially when they see the Eyes and Hands of the Image to move, and see
Miracles wrought by the Touch of it, as is frequently pretended and believed to
be done: So that either there is no need of Images, or great danger in the use
of them.

I confess, I am not of Mr. Baxter's Mind, who thinks that they may be properly
or safely used to excite Devotion; at least I must confess my self of a
different temper from him. Methinks I represent God in greater Majesty to my
self, when I consider him in his Works of Creation and Providence, then to see
him pictured; as in the Clouds, though with Thunder in his hand. And my Savior
appears more lovely to my mind and thoughts when I consider him as coming into
the World and dying for us, then when I see him pictured and carved on a
Crucifix. For it is more useful to see him with the Eye of Faith then of Sense,
and it is not the Proportion of his Body represented to my eyes, but the
Dignity of his Nature, the love that he bore me, and the Passions of his Soul
for me, that I admire most, and which no Pencil can draw.

Besides, a Picture or Image tells me nothing but what I knew before; and it is
by what I knew before that I can make sense or any devout use of this Picture;
for else I might take it for another profane and idle Story, And I would fain
know whither the reading considerately the 26, and 27th. Chapters of S. Matthew
will not affect any pious Heart much more then the seeing and contemplating a
Picture. Certainly if this will affect the Sense and bodily Passions, the other
will more work on our Reason, and that will be to better purpose. Nay, the
seeing of any Picture often will naturally make it familiar, and not at all
affecting to us.

5. And if the severity of the Monks to their Bodies is not any great Sign of
Devotion, much less can the Austerities used by the common People turn to any
great Commendation of the Church. It is true, they are forced to keep Fasts,
but it would make a Man laugh to read how their Casuists have defined
concerning the modus, the Measure the End of Fasting. Escobar has resolved it,
That no Drink breaks a Fast, be it Wine or Chocolat; and because it is not
wholesome to drink without eating, you may eat two Ounces of Bread: For that is
but a quarter of a Meal; and if a man should chance to break his Vow of Fasting
thus, he is not bound to fast another day for it, unless on a new Obligation.
And if all this be too hard, you may be dispensed with for your whole Life; and
that whither there be any just cause for it or no. Nay, Servants, tho they eat
never so gluttonously of the Scraps, they break no Fast. Indeed there need be
no Rules set down concerning the Poor Peoples observing Fasting Days: They are
kept low enough without them: And as for the Rich, their Fasting is
Mock-fasting, to fast to Luxury, with Wine, and Fish, and Sweetmeats: Is not
this great Self denial? If any therefore are still truly mortified, when they
can thus help it, I must rather commend their own Piety, and devout Temper,
then the Rules and Orders of their Church, which give much Liberty, that a man
must have a very cross-grained Appetite, or be in the highest degree sensual,
not to be willing to comply with it. We find then no Fault with Fasting being
enjoined, and at set seasons: For we our selves commend and practice it; but
let it not be to play tricks, but for true and real Mortification, and for the
proper end of Mortification, to humble the Body to the Soul, and to bring the
Mind to a better Temper; and to these ends is Fasting commanded by our Church;
but not as if we looked on this or that kind of Meat to be unholy, or designed
to purchase Heaven by our Abstinence, as the Church of Rome does.

6. And as for their Pilgrimages, and Worship of Relics, they must needs have
less pretense to Religion: For their Fasts, and other Austerities somewhat
resemble true Christian Duties; but these have no show that way. If Pilgrimage
be enjoined for Penance, then there is no thanks due to the Person performing
it.

If it be voluntary, there is no true Devotion in it: For the Worth of it must
consist in some of these Reasons, viz. either, First, That GOD is more present,
or Secondly, more propitious in one public place of Worship then another, both
which are contrary either to the Nature of God, or his Declaration in
Scripture, when he says, In every place a pure Offering shall be offered to
him, Mal. 1. 11. And Where ever two or three are gathered together in Christ's
Name, he is in the midst of them: Mat. 18. 20. And the teaching otherwise is in
some measure to revive Judaism. which allowed God, as to some cases, to be
served acceptably only in one place, or Thirdly, that the Saint is more present
or propitious here then any where else: But we are speaking of Devotion to God,
not to the Saint; or Fourthly, That it is their punishing themselves that is so
acceptable; but that has been sufficiently discarded already: Or, Fifthly,
That going so far, and taking such pains is a sign of their Love: But a man may
show his Love to God, and to his Saints too by more proper Instances, and do
more good by it, which GOD, to be sure, will better accept, and the Saint, if
he be a Saint will like as well. And therefore the making such account of
Pilgrimages, seems rather to favor the Mahumetan, then the Christian Religion:
For the going on Pilgrimage to Mecca, is one of the five indispensable points
of the Mahumetan Superstition.

And as for the Veneration of Relics, all the World knows, what a cheat is
put on Men, in vending any old rotten Bone, or piece of Cloth, etc. for a
Relic of this or that Saint: So that according to a moderate Computation, I
suppose scarcely one in a hundred is true: And some have pleaded they need not
be true. Now what ever Devotion is performed to, or on occasion of these
Relics, can be commendable only in regard of the Mind and devout Temper of
the Person; which I think might as acceptably show it self in any other proper
time and place: And there is required a long Series of Consequences before the
sight of St. Joseph's Axe, or any such other of their Relics, can be
pretended to raise a man's Devotion. But it being the chief Trade at Rome to
sell feigned pieces of Antiquity, and other such worthless Trinkets at a high
rate, I the less wonder that they have such an Esteem for Relics; for it is
for their profit to keep up the value of them, they being the principal
commodities of the place.

7. And the belief which they have of the Saints hearing them, and their
practice of praying to them, is no proper Encouragement or instance of true
Devotion: For all Devotion is properly toward God; and therefore the making of
Addresses to any other cannot possibly have any direct Tendency to exalt our
Devotion to him, but is really a great hinderance, For it takes men's Minds off
from GOD, and sets them on his Creature: And the same time that is spent in
Prayer to them, surely is better spent in praying to God, who is more present
with us, hears us better, and loves us more. And Men's going to Saints when God
is present, naturally tends to provoke God's Jealousy: For he declares himself
jealous as to his Worship particularly, to set them up in competition with God,
and to create in Men an Opinion, that they are more easily entreated, and
readier to do us a Kindness then he is. And therefore though Men may fear God
more, yet they will rather love the Saint; and Love is the truest Motive to
such Devotion, as will be best accepted with God And yet in this plainly
consists all that Court which they make to the Virgin Mary, that she should
pacify the Anger of GOD the Father, or of the Son toward Men; they are
represented severe, and almost cruel, to render her more amiable to the people
in her interceeding for them: So they frequently in their printed and allowed
Books of Devotion, call her Fountain of Mercy, and Pity, and other Names of the
like Importance. Now all the assurance they have of her being tender and
compassionate, is only because she is a Woman: but they are assured of God's
Mercy, both from his Nature and his Word: They have no Assurance that she, or
any other Saint hears them; nor can they show how the Saint can be rationally
supposed to know every thing that we do or say; but they are well assured that
God hears them: For he is stilled the God that hears Prayer; which
Prerogative of his, by every Prayer to a Saint, they may at least suspect that
they entrench on. They are not assured that the Saint can help them; but they
may be fully satisfied of his Help, who is Almighty. They have no Encouragement
from Scripture for praying to Saints: For though the Angels rejoice at the
repentance of a sinner, it does not follow that therefore every concern of Men
is known, or Prayer heard by them; much less that we may pray to them for the
Gift of Repentance, or any other Grace, And prayer being so considerable a part
of Divine Worship, we need not doubt but the Angels and Saints would refuse it:
For so St. John was rebuked for offering to Worship the Angel, though supposed
immediately and visibly with him, Worship God, Rev. 19. 10.

So that if they prayed to Saints and Angels only to mediate and interceed for
them to GOD, it is more then they have any Warrant or Allowance for. Christ
being always represented as the Mediator between God and Man; and the setting
up his servants in his Office, is as far as is possible a deposing of him. Nor
is it in this case, as it is in Courts on Earth (which is their common Excuse)
where a Favorite is made use of to represent our cause and request to the
King: For this is done because our Kings do not know our Persons, nor
understand our Case, nor can they be present in all places, and hear all causes
themselves: so that it is often necessary that Princes should employ and trust
other then their own Eyes and Ears. Many things they think below them to
inquire particularly into; and sometimes they will do that at the request of a
Favorite, which they would not do for the sake of a Person that is not
particularly known to them. But there is no Room nor Occasion for this in the
Court of Heaven: For God is not only intimately known, but is immediately
present to all his Creatures; as he has declared himself no Respecter of
Persons, but to love all, and therefore there is no need of any Intercessor for
us, except the Lord Jesus; he affects not empty pomp and state; but his
Providence extends to every particular Concern of the meanest of all his
creatures; and though he may give some undeserved Favors, as longer Lives, and
farther Opportunities of Amendment, etc. for the sake of others Prayers, yet no
man is so far his Favorite, as to be able to persuade him to reverse his own
Laws, and to save a wicked Person that continues in his Wickedness. On all
which Accounts there is no Occasion of praying to the Saints so much as to
interceed for us, as the Church of Rome pretends. But to pray to them to bless
us, and give us this or that Temporal or spiritual Good, as they of the Church
of Rome practice, and to suppose them to have Power to help us in this or that
particular Difficulty and Distemper is plainly intolerable: For this is in a
great measure to revive Heathenism, by which Men Worshipped this or that GOD
for this or that particular Case. They must grant the Saint to have, though not
an Original, yet a most certain and derivative Power, according to which he
will not fail to assist them that worship him; and in all such Prayer,
methinks, they even terminate their Worship on the Saint: For if I pray to a
Saint to help me in this or that Difficulty, with a full assurance that this
Saint has sufficient power to help me, though I should grant that this Saint
received this Power from GOD, yet my prayers terminate on the Saint. Indeed the
Saint is oblidged to God for that power; but I seem to own my self only
oblidged to the Saint, for his applying this his general power to my particular
case: Just as I am oblidged to a man for giving me an Estate, though he is
beholden to the Government and Laws, that either he enjoyed the Estate himself,
or was empowered to give it to another.

Besides that they often pray to Saints for such things, which, if they be only
Creatures, they can have no power to give, or to be even so much as the
Instruments of conveying to us; and yet it is notorious, they pray sometim^^ to
the Saints for Grace, for Pardon of Sins, and strength against them. So in
Benaventure's Psalter, translated into Italian, and published Salmi di S.
Bonav. in Lode della Virgin, per Giovan Battista Pinello. in Genoa, Anno 1606.
for the use of the People, though the Translator and Publisher says, that he
had purged it from the Blasphemies which were in the former Editions; yet we
find such passages as these to the Virgin Mary, Psalm. 7. Come to her all ye
that are heavy laden, and she shall give Rest and Refreshment to your Souls.
Psalm. 40. Cleanse my heart. Psalm. 41. Thou art the beginning and the end of my
Salvation. Psalm. 44. By thy Holiness my sins are purged, and by thy Integrity,
Incorruptibility is given to me. Psalm. 104 Eternal Salvation is in thy Hund, O
Lady, and he that worthily honors thee s^all obtain it; And many more
Sayings of this nature, or wro^e, if possible. Now can any man say, that such
Prayers as these are fit to be offered up to a Creature, or that they are
Instances of the Devotion of a Christian, when they are so offered? I am sure
that we charge the Heathen with giving Divine Worship to Men, though we can
hardly find any Expressions or prayers to their Gods, which are so high, and
argue their terminating their Worship on them so fully as these, and other
such, which are commonly used by those of the Church of Rome to Saints, and
especially to the Virgin Mary.

8. And whatever they pretend, the constant Trade which they make of Confession
and Penance, and their Doctrine concerning them, is so far from encouraging
Devotion, that it is enough to destroy all true Devotion out of the World, if
the providence of God did not miraculously interpose.

For though they be very constant in their Confessions of all their Sins to a
Priest, yet the frequency of it in themselves and others; makes them not so
much as a shamed of themselves; and though they may be more afraid of angring
their Priests, yet they have no reason to abhor themselves, or their Sins in
the sight of GOD any more for it.

And when they have thus confessed, their Confessor may enjoin what Penance he
pleases, or else may leave it to the Penitents own choice as Escobar from
Suarez affirms; and men are not used to be very cruel to their own Bodies, or
lay a very severe penance on themselves when a lighter will serve; or else the
Confessor may say thus, I impose on thee for penance whatever good thing thou
have done, or shall do this Day, or this Week, or whatever Evil thou have, or
shall suffer. And Cardinal Tolet is of the same mind too. Now will not this
make a man mightily afraid of sining any more, when his ordinary course of
Conversation, and the unavoidable Casualtie^ of life shall be turned into a
sufficient Penance, Satisfaction, and Punishment for his Sin? And if the
Confessor enjoin no Penance at all, indeed he is to blame, says Escobar; but
still it is a Sacrament for all that, because a satisfactory penance is not an
essential part of the Sacrament; but an Integral.

But if after all this the Confessor will impose a Penance, the Penitent may
perform what he will of it: For says Tolet, if he do not perform his Penance,
his Absolution stands good, only when he comes to Confession next, he must
confess that he did not perform his penance and so his Nonperformance of
penance will pass away in the Crowd of his other Sins, and there is an end of
it. And if this please them not, there is an easier way still, if need be: For
you may get another man to do your penance for you. Is not this a fine easy
way to Heaven, when the fasting and starving of the Poor may be made to serve
for a satisfaction for the Sins and Debauchery of the Rich? Indeed Escobar and
Suarez, says, There ought to be a just Cause for one's performing penance for
another: But here the other distinction will help them, non ad valorem, sed ad
justitiam requiritur causa, the penance is valid, though there be no just
Cause. And whither there be a Cause or no, it is not doubted, says Escobar,
but one may perform the penance for another, if the Confessor will give leave:
And it is to be hoped there are some good natured Consessors to be found: But
good Cardinal Tolet Instru^t. Sacerd. Lib. 3. c. 11.
Tolet is more free and generous then Escobar himself in this point: For he
tells the Confessor, That he must impose a lighter Penance, if he sees the
Penitent will not perform a harder, without ever telling the penitent, that
this lighter will not serve his turn, or without ever putting him in mind of his
Danger, or of the necessity of a harder penance; and wholly commits it to the
prudence of one Priest to diminish the penance which another had imposed,
without so much as once telling him, that perhaps this penance will not
suffice. So that in plain terms, by consequence, he resolves it all into the
powerof the Priest; ^ and neither Confessor nor penitent are any ^a^ther
accountable that I perceive, if too slight a penance be enjoined, the Sin is
pardoned notwithstanding. And lastly, he goes on, and shows, that though the
penitent be enjoined to perform his penance in, on person, yet he may transfer
this to another, without his Confessor's leave; and yet he shall obtain the
satisfactory part of penance, though not the meritorions, that is, he shall be
excused from suffering evil; but shall not merit much at God's Hands by such
penance. And indeed I think he is very unreasonable if he expect more: And
besides all this, the design of all penance being only to satisfy the Debt of
Temporal punishment due to their Sins, there are several easy ways provided
by their Church for the discharge of it, besides the sever penance, as e. g.
several short Prayers, to the saying of which some scores of thousands of years
pardon are annexed, toties quoties; there are large Indulgences granted at
Jubilees, and at several other good Times; and may at any time be had for a
good sum of Money; And if a man take no care of himself all his Life, yet if he
can purchase Prayers to be said for him after his death, it will serve as well.
And though the penance be never so easy, and be performed as triflingly, yet
the Absolution, by which they suppose the Debt of eternal punishment is
discharged, must be as complete and full as possible: For so the aforenamed
Cardinal, with a great deal of concern, takes Care that the Absolution be not
pronounced conditionally, as, e. g. on condition that you amend your Life, or
perform your penance, etc. but it must be pronounced absolutely, without any
if or and, thus, I absolve thee, etc.

Now would not any one think, that the Church of Rome, by this Method of
Confessions and Penances so taught and practiced among them, rather designs to
find out the Temper and Inclinations of People, and to dive into the councils
of great Men, or to answer some other such politic End, then to advance piety
toward God, or Amendment of Life in the Penitent? I am sure they can have no
hearty respect for Devotion, when they are taught to look on their prayers to
God, as a severe Penance, and yet which they may be released from by winning a
Game at Cards, as is too commonly known.

9. And their Doctrine concerning the Merit of good Works and Supererogation,
as it is false, so we cannot look on it as any Encouragement to devotion; for
God will not be served with a lie.

I confess, if what is required of Men in their Confession and Penances be
enough to save their Souls, they may very easily do more then is required: For
they cannot do less, if they do any thing, though indeed one would would
wonder, that any that consider the Nature of the Gospel, or the Words of our
Savior, should ever pretend to supererogate.

But supposing their Doctrine to be true in these points, they cannot be
thought to advance Devotion, but rather hinder it: For seeing it is somewhat
natural for a Man to love his own Lase, every one will be apt to argue with
himself, that so many have merited already, that there is no need of what he
can do. Nay, it is Folly for him to attempt it. For what need he endeavor to
add to a Stock of Merit, which is already infinite, as some have thought?

And indeed it had need be infinite, else it is to be feared, it is almost, if
not quite spent, especially considering the vast Expense of these Merits in
frequent Jubilees, and other Indulgences, the Multitude of Sinners, and the
little extraordinary Virtue and Piety found among them at this day, to add to
their Store; So that methinks it may justly be questioned whither they are not
bankrupt before now, their Disbursem^nt so much exceeding their Receipts; and
the Credit of their Bank seems to depend wholly on their Old flock of Merit
which the Ancients laid up for them; and yet they grant that this was rather
casual, then out of Design or good Nature; For the Saints designed only to make
sure doing enough for themselves, and it seems that less served their turns
then they thought of, and the rest was laid by for the use of such rich Sinners
as the Church would sell it to. So that all the Stock of Merit, which the
Church of Rome has so great occasion for and of which there is made so
prodigious an Expense, is at the best but a Chance and spare-heap, which they
cannot tell how they came by (for every Bishop has the same Title to such
Treasure trove that the Bishop of Rome has,) nay they have reason to fear
there was never any such Treasure: (For I doubt not but the Saints in heaven
will thankfully own, that they have received more from GOD then they deserved,
or could challenge:) to be sure, they knew not how much there was ever laid up,
nor whither the Stock be spent; and yet they spend as freely now, as if they
had been only laying up till this time, and that the Treasure were now first
opened.

Many other such Absurdities and unanswerable Difficulties there are in their
Doctrine of Merits to the use of others. And is it not a dismal thing, that the
Priests of the Church of Rome should teach men to trust in, and as to
Salvation, depend assuredly on these, of which they themselves have no manner
of assurance nor Ground to hope. Is not this to play with Men's souls and
eternal Salvation? And especially can this be urged as an encouragement of
Devotion, when, if it were as true as it is false, it tends directly to make
Men vicious, and to neglect Devotion: For so a man will think if there be such
a Stock in the Church, why should not he have a Share of it as well as another?
And if one can merit for another, why should not he depend on others, as well
as they on his Merits? And seeing Merits may be bought as the Roman Casuists
have adjudged, he may think it very reasonable that others Merits should be
given him in exchange for his Money. So the Result of all is this, according to
this Doctrine, and the supposed Church-flock, only one thing is needful, and
that is Money; and this will fully make up all lack of Piety and Devotion.

10. And the belief of Purgatory and of the validity of Prayers for the dead,
is no proper Encouragement of true Devotion: For true Devotion is such as we
perform to God, agreeably to his Will, when we know what we do, and for what
ends; and have a promise or hope of Success; but when a man prays to God to
deliver a Soul out of Purgatory, he must suppose as true several things which
are either false, or at least very uncertain; so that he can never pray in
Faith, or without great perplexity and distraction of mind; for he knows not
whither there by any such place or state as Purgatory: For Scripture says
nothing of it, nor the Fathers of the three or four first Centuries. He knows
not whither the Soul that he prays for be in Purgatory (if there should be
such a place) for it may be in Heaven or in Hell, for ought he can tell. And if
the Soul be in Purgatory, he knows not whither it be Useful or Lawful to pray
for it; for God has given us neither Command, nor Encouragement, nor Liberty
so to do, Nay, there are several particulars which they themselves cannot agree
on concerning Purgatory, viz. What Sins are punished there? How the Soul
without its Body can be tormented there with a material Fire? Who are Gods
Instruments in punishing the Souls there? For the Devils are not; and how the
Pope by his Indulgences can apply the Satisfactions of Christ and of the
Saints so as to deliver any Soul out of Purgatory? And if there be such a place
the Pope himself by his Example does enough to dishearten all Men from
endeavoring to deliver the Souls of their Friends from thence: For it is not
doubted but he can deliver all out of Purgatory, he having the Command of the
Treasure of the Church. And it must needs be a wonderful Discouragement to a
Devout Mind, that among so many hundred Popes, their should not be one found so
Charitable as to release so many thousands of poor Soul that lie under
intolerable pains, and so must lie till the last day, or till the deb^ of their
temporal punishment be paid, If the Pope can do so much with so little Charge
or Trouble to himself, and yet will not do it, surely I have less Reason to do
any thing.

Nor does it follow, that because it is a part of acceptable Devotion, for one
Man to pray for another whilst living here on Earth; that therefore it is as
pleasing to God, for us to pray for Souls departed: For our Prayers for others
on Earth, are either for Temporal Blessings, or ^or the means of Grace. We
pretend not to desire God to reverse his own Laws, and save such a Man, let him
be as bad as he will; but to make him Holy first, and then to make him Happy:
And to pray any otherwise for another Man, naturally t^nds to represent it a^
feasible to reconcile a wicked Life with the hopes of Heaven; but when a Man is
dead he can Work no more, nor make any use of the means of Grace, and therefore
there is no room for this Prayer to God for him, he is not capable of
Repentance; and Glory, and Amendment; and of being made fit for Heaven.

Lastly, if they boast of the validity of the Orders of their Bishops and
Priests, as an Encouragement to Devotion, the validity of the Sacraments
depending so much on the Legality of the Minstry; We answer that we have a
Clergy as properly and truly of Christ's sending as any Church in the World;
against whose Ordination and Mission nothing can be objected: We deriving the
Succession of our bishops, not only from their own Austin, but from the British
bishops before his time, which is the only Regular way of Mission that we know
of except that of an extraordinary Commission from Heaven as St. Paul had. And
I would not that there were that to be objected against us, that is justly
objected against them, as to the Succession of their Popes even since the
Reformation began. For the Election of Sixtus V, Was most notoriously
Simoniacal, and yet one that comes by Simony into the Popedom, is by their own
Canon Law, by the Bull or Constitution of Julius II. approved in the Council of
Lateran, An. 1513. To be looked on as a Magician, Heathen, Publican, Septimi
Decretal, Lib. 1. Tit. 3.
and Arch Heretic, and his Election can never be made valid by any after act,
and yet several of the Popes since, were either made Cardinals by this Sixius.
V. Or received that Dignity from those that received it from him; which is the
very case of this present Pope Innocent Eleventh.

As for their Unity, it is plain that they have more divisions among
themselves, then they can charge us with. For they have not only such as openly
dissent and separate from them, but great and violent dissentions among their
own Members, and such as live in the Communion of their Church, one against
another, and each party pleads the Doctrine of the Church, and Decisions of its
Councils. And yet the Pope himself, notwithstanding his Infallibility and
Authority, either cannot or darr not determine which is in the Right, or which
Opininion is True.

So that what ever Power and Authority their Church has, it has no effect to
such ends and purposes, to which Church Power is designed to serve, the
encouragment of Holiness and Virtue, and the discountenancing of vice, the
Preservation of the Doctrine in Purity, and of the Members at peace one with
another. It is true they are more able to see the Laws of their Church Duly
executed; but it is to their disparagement to have so much Power, and yet to do
so little good with it. As for us, we had rather deserve more then we have,
then that it should be said that we have more power then we deserve. And
whatever Power our Church wants, and whatever loss Religion suffers by this
means, we justly Charge the Church of Rome with the guilt of it, who have made
all Princes jealous, and afraid of all Church Power; by their invading their
temporal Rights under pretense of a Spiritual Jurisdiction.

In short, though somewhat may be said for the worst thing, and a very bade
Cause may have a great deal pleaded in its Vindication, as we have seen in all
the foregoing Helps and Instances of Devotion; which the church of Rome boasts
of; yet if we consider them, they all in some respect or other come short of
what they pretend to; several of them being very improper, many plainly
Nonsensical and Ridiculous, they proceed from bad principles, are done in an
undue Manner and Measure, or to serve some bad end or design, or some such
other way offend; even the most severe practices, which most resemble true
Self-denial, are countenanced or enjoined rather to make a show, or to gratify
some tempers, then to advance Devotion; for excesses and over-actings are often
Infirmities, and the effects of Weakness; steddiness being the most certain
sign of Strength, as the shaking palsy is a Disease and sign of weakness, as
well as the Dead one.

3. I now come to consider such things in the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of Rome, as tend directly to promote Debauchery of Manners, and
Carelessness in Devotion.

I Will insist only on these few, among very many.

First, The unlimited Power which they ascribe to the Church, or to the Pope as
Head or Monarch of it: For the people are taught that he can make null Duties
that were made necessary by God, and make necessary what was not so before. The
consequence of which Doctrine is plainly this, that a Man may safely disobey
and neglect the serving of God, if he pay but his due respects to the Pope. And
yet their Casuists have defined that the Pope can dispense with Sins, or give
leave to do things forbidden by the law of God, as well as pardon them when
committed, as in the Dispensations with unlawful Marriages. And on the other
side he can excuse them from doing what they are by their Duty to God bound to
do, as in his Dispensations with Vows though made never so solemnly to God
himself. That is, he can Bind where God has left us loose, and he can loose
where God has bound us. Nay, a Superior can give a Dispensation even when he
doubts whither it be lawful or no; because in a doubtful case the milder side
is to be taken. And if the Reason cease for which the Dispensation was given,
yet the Dispensation does not cease: Nay, a Dispensation may be granted where
there is no Reason or Cause for it; and yet the Dispensation is valide
notwithstanding. And not the People only, but every Bishop and Priest has his
Share of this Power, only there are some reserved and more profitable Cases,
which his Holiness only can dispense in. And though I cannot tell what they
think, yet I am sure their Casuists are very shy of saying, that the^e is any
Case in which there may not be a Dispensation granted for the doing of it; or a
Pardon for it when it is done.

And all Indulgences are directly designed to hinder Devotion, for they are
given to free Men from Necessity of Mortification, frequent Alms and Prayers,
etc. Which else would have been enjoined as Penance; and yet we know that these
are the chiefest parts of Devotion.

And as their general Doctrine concerning the validity of Pardons and
Indulgences is very destructive of all true Piety and Religion: So,

Secondly, Their constant Practice of giving Absolution before Penance, is in a
more especial manner influential to that purpose. For the People are taught to
believe, that by the Priests saying, I absolve thee; etc. the sin is actually
pardoned by God: And though indeed their Guides of Confessors advise that
Absolution should not be given till Penance be imposed and accepted, yet when
the Confessor thinks that the Penitent will acept of the Penance, he may
absolve him first: That is, the Person may be absolved before he accept the
Penance, or even promise to perform it; but it is their constant Method to
absolve him before Penance be actually performed.

Now if their Absolution be of force, the Person is free from his sin, and sure
enough of Heaven, whither he perform any penance or no: Which Practice gives
all imaginable Encouragement and License to Sin; the fear of penance being the
only restraint from Sin which they pretend to; for if the sin be fully pardoned
before Penance be accepted or performed: I see not why a man should trouble
himself much for the performance of his Penance: he sees plainly that it is
only an Appendix that is used to be annexed to Absolution, but is neither
necessary in it self nor for Absolution; the Sin is pardoned already, and at
the worst there is only some temporal punishment to be satisfied for, which he
may get rid of several other ways.

Nay indeed the true and ancient Notion of penance is utterly destroyed, by its
being imposed and performed after Absolution. For penance according to their
primitive use of it, was a severe course of Life prescribed to a person that
had grieviously offended, as a proper Method for him, at the same time to
testify his own sorrow for his Sin, and abhorrence of it, and to create in him
an Aversation to the like for the time to come; and also to satisfy the Church
of all this, that so he might be admitted to absolution and the Communion: And
therefore their Penances were always public, and indeed is it by public
Penance only that all these so good ends can possibly be answered: but now in
the Church of Rome; the Offender is pardoned without any thing of this, he is
not put to any grief for his Sin before he be absolved. It is left wholly to
his own Honesty and Generosity whither he will perform any Penance for his Sin.
Nay indeed so loath are they to appear severe against sin, or cruel to the
sinner; that when in the Council of Trent some would have revived this
Discipline, by enacting public Penance, they were violently opposed and
overruled; though St. Gregory a Pope of Rome had held it to be of Divine Right:
and their Casuists since teach that a Confessor cannot, or ought not to enjoin
a public penance: So that by this means a Man is not so much as to be put to
the blush for his Sins; for no such Penance must be imposed by which the Sin
may be known, and he is sure that the Confessor to save a Kingdom darr not
reveal or discover it.

Thirdly, Their Doctrine concerning the Nature of several Sins, is such as must
needs rather encourage Men to continue in Sin, then deliver us from it; and
will spoil all true Devotion to God, and that due regard that we ought to have
to his Commandments.

They tell us there is a vast number of Sins in their own Nature Venial, which
are so very inconsiderable that an Escobar Tract. 2. Exam. 1. cap. 4.
infinite number of them altogether will not deprive a man of the Grace and
Favor of God, or make up one Mortal sin, and for the Pardon of which there is
no need or occasion for the Mercy of God: And yet they have no certain Rules to
discover whither a sin be Mortal or Venial, so that men are in wonderful danger
of being cheated in a matter of so great Moment as their Eternal Salvation.

They tell us also, that Habitual Sin, is only a Stain left by former voluntary
Sins, and a Deprivation of Escobar Tract. 2. Exam. 1. cap. 2.
habitual Goodness; but has nothing else that is evil in it. From which
Doctrine it necessarily follows that a man is guilty only of those Sins which
created this Habit, and that there is not an habitual Repentance, or Course of
Life required to get pardon for habitual Sins; but a few or perhaps one single
Act of Contrition will serve. So that the more a Man sins the better he may,
and it is a piece of true Prudence to get an Habit of all Sin betimes; for a
Man is accountable only for those sins which preceeded the Habit; all the Sins
which follow it will pass under the name of Inadvertencies, and as such can be
esteemed only as a kind of Venial sins.

And they not only allow the Church Power to command what does not belong to
her in many Cases; but give such Authority to her commands, as to make the
Disobedience to them the greatest of all Sins, and make way for the breaking of
the Laws of God, that they may keep those of the Church. So Marriage has been
adjudged a greater Sin in a Priest then Fornication, because the Priests are
obliged to Celibacy by the Laws of the Church, and their own Vow; as if they
were not by the Laws of God, and their Vow of Baptism more oblidged to obstain
from Fornication; and accordingly for Marriage, a Priest is excommunicated or
deposed; but for Fornication he is only oblidged to consess it secretly among
his other sins; and the Guilt and Irregularity of it is done away by
Absolution. Indeed they bring almost all sins under the Head of Discipline, not
only by pretending to give Pardon and Dispensations for most sins that can be
committed; but also when they compare sins, they are always most earnest
against such as transgress the Command of the Church. So. v. g. When Escobar
asks the Question, What if I communicate unworthily at Easter? He answers, That
by so doing, I fulfill the command of the Church, which is what I am immediately
bound to: And passes over the Duty of Selfexamination and Preparation so
strictly enjoined by St. Paul, as not worthy to be considered: And so in
inumerable other cases, by which means indeed they create a great Veneration
for the church, or for that which they call the church, but thereby make the
commands of God of none effect.

Fourthly, Their very Doctrine concerning their Prayers and Devotions, and
their Practice consequent on it, is such as is altogether inconsistent with the
Nature of true Devotion: For, according to the Church of Rome, the outward Act
will suffice in many cases, though nothing of the Mind go along with it;
particularly as to Prayers Escobar from Coninth and Durandus affirms, that
neither an actual, nor virtual Attention is required when a man prays; and
they give an excellent Reason for what they say, viz. Because the Church has
no Power in hidden cases, but only in the case of Auricular confession: As if
in Prayer only the power of the church, and Obedience to its commands were to
be regarded: And he confirms his Assertion with this other most cogent
comparison, That an outward Act of Devotion, or Prayer only with the Mouth, is
a true Act of Prayer, though without the Intention, as an outward Act of
Adoration of an Idol, though without the Intention, is a true Act of Idolatry.
So that for a man to mind what he does when he is at Prayers, or to be earnest
in his Desires of that which he prays for, though it may possibly be a
commendation, and accomplishment, yet it is not necessary either to the
pleasing of God, or satisfying of his Duty according to the Church of Rome.
Nay, it is a praise for a man to draw nigh with the mouth, and honor him with
the Lips, though the Heart be far from God, notwithstanding that our Savior,
after the Prophet Isaiah, blamed the Jews for so doing. Indeed such a kind of
superficial Christians will this Doctrine make, that a Pharisee would have been
an excellent Man, if he had lived in these days.

And pursuant to this doctrine of no-necessity of Attention at prayers, they
take care that the people shall not be able to attend to what is done; and
therefore provide that the public prayers and the Scripture it self shall be
only in a Language unknown to the people, and are so desperately fond of this
Device of keeping the people ignorant of what is prayed for, that their
Casuists have defined, that a Man may say his Office privately in other
Languages besides the Latin, as in Hebrew, or Greek, but not in the Vulgar
Language; at the same time keeping the people in Ignorance, and discouraging
them in their devotions, and exercising their Authority over them in the most
dangerous manner that can be.

6. Their ascribing spiritual Effects to several things which are purely of
their own Invention, is much to the discouragement of true devotion toward
God. And yet they have very many things of this Nature: As Holy Water, by the
being sprinkled with which, they believe the Devil shall have less power over
them: Agnus Dei's, Swords and Medals which they wear to preserve them from
dangers; which being consecrated according to the Rules of their Church, have
through the devotion of the persons, and the power of the Church, a wonderful
good effect, though indeed God never promised any such thing.

To this Head I may refer also, their Rosary, which is nothing else but an odd
combination of Pater nosters and Ave Mary's. Several short prayers to the
saying of which thousands of years of pardon of Sins are annexed: Their
carrying the Image of St. Genovefa in procession at Paris, and other Images in
other places to obtain Rain, etc. And innumerable other such like practices, on
which Men are taught to rely, and to expect great good by, though they have
neither any natural force or efficacy that way; nor any assurance from God that
such effects shall follow. Nay even the Sacraments themselves according to the
doctrine of the Church of Rome are only such a kind of charms; for they are
supposed to work effectually on the person, without any devotion or Virtuous
disposition being required of him in order to it.

Now whatever effect they promise above what the natural efficacy of the thing
is apt and able to produce, they must have express Authority from God, or else
they sadly delude and cheat those poor souls that depend upon them. And at the
best they are supposed only a shorter cut to Heaven, an easier way of pleasing
God and getting his Blessing, and are invented only to ease a Man of the
fatigue and trouble of the common and ordinary road of serving him by a
constancy and regularity of Devotions.

Seventhly, Their Manuals and books of Devotion which they give their People to
read, instead of the Scripture which they forbid to be used, though they may
design them as Helps, yet I must range them among the Hindrances of Devotion.

For the best of them are so full of Tautologies and vain Repetitions, that
they must needs come uuder the censure of our blessed Savior, Matthew. 6. though
they use his own holy Name. For so in the Jesus Psalter, at the end of the
Manuals of Prayers and Litanies printed at Paris in English, An. 1682. In a
Litany of fifteen Petitions, the Name Jesu is repeated over above 130 times.
And in the same book, in the Litany of the blessed Virgin, they pray to her by
40 several Names, being only so many distinct praises of her. And the like is
observable in all their books of Devotion which I ever saw. Now their saying
the same thing so often over, is not contrived to help and Assist Attention, or
prevent Distraction, or as a Repetition of what is more then ordinarily
important, or for any other good and prudent Reason, but out of pure vanity and
Ostentation, or as it were even to flatter our blessed Savior, or the Saint
which they pray to.

But most of the books and Legends which they put into the hands of their
People to excite their Devotion, and by which the People take an estimate of
the Christian Religion, are such wretched plain Forgeries and so pitifully
contrived Fables, as can never be believed by Men of sense, and if they could
be believed, are proper indeed to make Men Mad and Enthusiastical, but not to
advance true Devotion; and he that reads only such books is qualified indeed to
tell Stories and to believe Lies, but no serious truth will stick to him or be
valued by him. So that such books as these are so far from doing good, that
they do much harm to Religion, for they Imprint a wrong Notion of Religion on
Men's Minds; would make a Man believe that God is like a child pleased with
Trifles, that Religion and the Method of our Salvation is only a Charm and
Trick, which the Priests have gotten the receipt of; but that there is nothing
in Christianity fi^ to make a man wise and manly in his Worship of God, or in
the management of himself and practice of Devotion. Nay the stories which are
told in the Lives of their Saints, and believed by the common people, are
enough even to deprave the natural Sentiments of Mankind concerning God and
Religion, so that perhaps it were much better to leave Men to the natural
effluxes of their own minds, then to pretend to assist them with such Helps as
these. That a little Water or a consecrated Bell should scare the devil, or St
Francis's rope charm and bind him, would make a man have little fear of such an
Enemy, or a prodigious Veneration for such a Saint; but how it should render a
Man more piously affected toward GOD, more relying on his Providence, or more
Religiously Careful over himself, I see not: And these Stories though so
apparently false, yet being affirmed with such Confidence, strike at the very
Foundation of our Religion; For it is apt to make Men believe that Christianity
it self was at first propagated among a sad, dull, stupid, and credulous
Generation of Men; (when as really it first appeared in an Age as
sharp-sighted, as any Age before or since, which is much for its Vindication.)
It would tempt a Man to despise a Religion in which such Men are Saints, and
such Practices commended; and will set Christianity but on the same level with
modern Judaism and Mahumetanism; For the Jews have just as much to say for
their Cabbala, and the Turks for their incredible Fables; for they are reported
on the same Credit, are just so credible in themselves, and just as edifying of
the People that attend to them: The Miracles which they relate being often Just
so useful, as that pretended to be wrought in the Temple of Apollo; when a Man
coming out of the Temple, it was observed that his body did not cast any
shadow; by which thing however strange in it self, the Man was not much the
better, nor the World wiser,

But many of their Books of Devotion are worse then ridiculous; for there are
frequently such passages and prayers as I cannot tell how to vindicate from
Blasphemy and Idolatry. Saint Bonaventur's Psalter both in Latin, and Italian I
mentioned before, in which there are I believe a thousand such Prayers to her,
or Expressions concerning her, which I confess I could not with a safe
Conscience say of any Creature. And Albertus Magnus the Master of St. Thomas
Aquinas has not only 12 Books of the Praises of the Virgin Mary, but also a
distinct Book called Biblia Mariana, in which he applies several places of
Scripture to the Virgin Mary; as if she were prefigured in several passages of
the Old Testament as well as her Son: So Genesis 1. 1. that she was that Heaven
that God made. Genesis 1. 3. She was the Light which God there made, and so on
through almost the whole Scripture: And however Cautious they are in the Books
which they Print in English for the use of their Converts here: yet in them we
find often such sayings to or of the Virgin Mary as I cannot reconcile with
Christianity; for so in the Manual quoted before, in the Prayers for Women with
Child they sing thus to her.

Hail to the Queen who Reigns above.
Mother of Clemency and Love, etc.
Elsewhere they pray thus to her, page 1^6: O blessed Mother assis^ my Weakness
in all my Da^^ers and Necessities, in all Temptations to sin, and in the hour
of my Death, that through thy Protection I may be safe in the Lord. Where the
Lord indeed is mentioned, out of Complement, and for Fashions sake, but they
had first begged of the Lady as much as they wanted or could desire: and page
80. they call her Spouse of the Holy Ghost, Promise of the Prophets,
Expectation of the Patriarchs, Queen of the Angels, Teacher of the Apostles,
strength^^^ of Martyrs, Faithful comforter of the Living and Dead. Now if they
print such things in English, what do they print in Spanish? If they do such
things in a green Tree. what shall be done in a dry? And I fear that even their
nicest Casuists give too much Countenance to this so gross Practice: For they
have determined that Honors above civil, c^ltus Hyperduliae are due to the
Virgin Mary, that is in plain English, Divine Honors must be paid to her. For
it must be a very Metaphysical head that can in this sense apprehend a kind of
Honor above ci^il, and yet not divine; it must be somewhat like his, that
would pretend to find a mean between Creator and Creature, between Finite and
Infinite.

Lastly, this is most notorious, that they enjoin acts to be used, and propose
Objects of Worship which they themselves cannot deny but there is danger of
offending in them, and even of falling into that Idolatry; and yet take little
or no care of giving caution concerning them; and if the grosest abuse should
happen, there is scarcely any possibility of redress.

Indeed wherever they speak of Veneration due to Relics and Images, of
worshipping of Saints, and especially the Virgin M^^y, they always seem as if
they cared not how much Honor were to paid to them; only they must make as if
they put some Re^^^iction on it, for the sake of the Reformed who would exclaim
against them: And therefore their Command for the worshipping of them is
general and absolute; but the Limitations are so nice and forced, that one may
easily see that they very unwillinglie deny any Worship to be paid to them. For
so the wary council of Trent speaking of Images, says They are to be kept, and
due Honor and Veneration paid to them: And though by and by they seem as if
they would limit this Honor, yet presently they put in such words as make that
pretended Limitation to signify nothing: For they tell you. That whatever
Honor you pay to the Image, goes to the person represented, (v. g. to our
Savior) it seems the Honor is paid to him whither we intend so or no: And
hence you may easily gather what Honor is due to to the Image of our Savior,
and how little fear there is of paying too much Honor to it: For I suppose we
are all agreed there is no fear of paying too much Honor to our blessed
Savior; and whatever Honor is paid to his Im^^^ is paid to him, if we can
believe these Gentlemen. And agreeably hereunto, it is very rare to hear of any
person censured or blamed for paying too much Honor to Images, though surely
it is as possible for men to be Idolaters now as in the former Ages; and I
suppose that neither the common people, nor all the Priests are Men of such
extraordinary Understanding and Learning, as to be altogether free from the
like Temptation. Nay, the Caution which is given ^eems only to concern,
Imagines falsi dogmatis, and Rudibus periculosi Erroris Occasionem praebentes;
but there is not one word concerning the abuse which may be made of the Image
of Christ, or of a true Saint: There is no Provision made that Men be warned
not to perform too much Devotion in their Minds to a good Image.

And by what this Council says, the Priest understands well enough what it
intends; and therefore scarcely ever dar^ preach against the excess and abuse
of Images, Relics, etc. Though they cannot but ^ee it actually committed every
day.

And now if their should happen to be any Idolatrous Worship paid to an Image;
though the Bishop has power indeed to set the Image up; yet he has not power to
pull it down, or to correct any abuse concerning it; without the leave of the
Archbishop and other Bishops of the Province, and even of the Pope himself. So
unwilling do they seem that any Provision should be made for redressing abuses
in so great and common a Case as the excess in Worship of Images must needs be,
v. Conci^. Trid. Sess; 25.

Lastly, as we have seen how deficient and very faulty the Church of Rome is
in her pretenses to Devotion, we will now consider what Provision is made for
the due Exercise of Devotion among our selves, that we may thank God for our
being settled in the Communion of the Church of England, and may learn to be
conscientiously strict and ^^gular in our own, as well as to despise the Romish
Devotions. And in order hereunto. I reckon that these four things are
especially to be regarded.

First, That among us none but the true Object of Devotion is proposed to be
worshipped. God the Father Son and Holy Ghost, none of the most blessed Angels,
or Saints in Heaven being ever invocked, or adored by us. For we look on them
only as our Brethren, and Members of the same Church with us, triumphing indeed
whilst we are here below still in our Warfare. We thank God for them; and keep
Feasts in the Memory of them, at the same time praising God for his Goodness
and Grace bestowed on them, and shining forth in them, and also stirring up our
selves by such Commemorations to follow their good Example, and this we think
is as much as is due from us to our fellow Creatures, and believe that neither
God allows, nor do they expect more from us.

Secondly, Only proper expressions of Devotion, are commanded or allowed by our
Church. For the matter of them they are such as God himself has required to be
served by, are significant of that disposition of Mind which we know God
accepts, and have an aptnes^ to the producing of that temper in us which God
intends to work us up to by them: We use all the Instances of Devotion which
they of the Church of* Rome use, if they be either necessary or fit; though
indeed often to other and better purpose. We pray constantly, but only for the
living; for we look on the Dead as past the means of Grace, and consequently
past the benefit of our Prayers. We praise God for his Excellencies in himself,
and thank him for his Goodness to others as well as to our selves: We practice
Confession of Sins to God in public, and in private, and advise it to be made
also to the Ministers of Gods Word, when it is necessary for Ghostly Council
and Advice, for the satisfying of their Consciences, and the removal of
Scruple, and Doubtfulness: but we cannot say it is necessary to be made to Men
in order to the Pardon of God: We reckon it rather as a privilege or advantage
then a Duty. And if Men will not make use of this privilege, as often as there
is Occasion unless we tell a lie to advance the credit of it, we cannot help
that. We enjoin Fastings and disallow not of Penances, but advise People to
take an holy revenge on themselves when they have sinned; but not as the
Papists do to satisfy for their sins, or merit at Gods hand, but to show the
sincerity of their Repentance, and to strengthen their Resolutions of
amendment; for it is our amendment, and not our punishment which God is
pleased with. And we take care that all these things be performed in a due
measure, proportionably to the strength of the Person, and the Nature and
Design of the Duty; but are afraid of straining them too high, lest men should
be altogether deterred from them, or acquiesce only in the outward Action, or
render our selves and our Cause ridiculous by an imprudent management. We have
the Sacraments duly administered, as our Savior commanded them; we reckon our
Baptism with Water perfect without Oil or Spittle: We grutch not the cup to the
Laity, nor celebrate solitary Communions, nor admire whispering to God in the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, but as we have received from Christ,
so we teach and administer, without Addition or Diminution of any thing
essential or material. In short, in the holy Offices themselves, and the
behavior which our Church requires they be celebrated with, there is always a
great propriety observable, agreeable to the command of God in Scripture, and
the practice of the Apostles and first Ages of the Church, proper to the
several parts of divine Worship, expressive of our Sense, consonant to Reason,
and the use of the World, especial respect being always had to the exciting of
Piety and Devotion in the minds and carriage of our fully afforded and pressed
on Men. For we not only have all our Service in a Language which the meanest
People understand, but have it so contrived by frequent Responses, that every
Person bears a part in that Worship which he is so much concerned in, and does
not only hear the Priest speak to God Almighty, but prays for himself, and is
required to join his assent to every short Prayer by a distinct Amen. With us
the same Service and Rules of Life are enjoined to all, all Men having the same
Concern in another Life however different their Circumstances and Concerns are
in this Life. We have constant Prayers in every Parish weekly at least, in many
daily, with the blessed Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ frequently
administered, nay every Sunday, not only in Cathedrals, but in ^everal Colleges
and private Parish Churches. And we appeal to all Men whither there be any
where more practical Sermons, fitted to the Cases of Men, without Vanity and
Super^^ition, then among us; Whither good and free Learning be any where more
encouraged, or where better care is taken for the due instruction of the
People: The Scriptures being in every one^s hands, with us, and other excellent
Books made according to the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, instead of Legends
and Lives of Sai^^^, St. Bonaventure's Psalter, and other such Books which are
really Libels against Christianity, and yet are the principal books which the
Priests of the Church of Rome commend to their People: For as for the Bible, if
any one of them has happened to read in it, who is not licensed to that
purpose, he must own it as sin to his Priest at his next Confession.

And as there are such blessed Opportunities afforded so constantly, and such
Prudent provision made for all Cases Ordinary and Extraordinary, so I thank
God, we can say that our people are generally very diligent in the use of these
Means; (and would be more so, were it not for the Division, which they of the
Church of Rome especially raise among us.) For they may easily perceive that we
urge no more on them then their own good, and the commands of God require of
them ^ though our church knows her Power very well, yet she makes use of it
only to ensorce the Laws of God, to explain, illustrate and apply them to
particular Cases, but never to set up her own commands in Opposition to them,
as the Church of Rome does; and therefore though we teach our People to dread
an Excommunication, it being sammum fut^ri Judicii Praejudicium, as Tertullian
calls it, a foretast or forestalling of the last Judgment; and not for a World
to lie under it, though it were inflicted only for contempt; yet we warn them
in the first place to avoid the Cause and Occa^ion of Excommunication, and
therefore not to value what Censures of the Church of Rome we are under, they
being so very unjust and Groundless.

Fourthly, and lastly, as only the true Object of Devotion is here worshipped,
only proper Expressions allowed, all useful Helps afforded; so also the
greatest stres^ is la^d on the practice of it; agreeable to the true Nature,
End and design of it. The principal ends of Devotion are to pay a Homage to God
our great Creat^^ and Benefactor, to get his Blessing, and to work our selves
up to a better temper of ^^ind^ And to this end we are in our service
import^^ate without Vanity or Impertinency, long without Tediousness, or Idle
Repetitions; (Only we use the Lord's Prayer often, that no part of our service
may be without that perfect form, and also in Consideration of the great
Comprehensiveness of it, and of the Distraction of Men's Minds which seldom can
attend to the full sense of it all at one time.) And we teach our People that
every Man must work for himself, for he that prays only by a proxy, it is very
just that he should be rewarded only by a Proxy too; we put our People in mind
that an unfeigned Repentance is absolutely Necessary, and not a Verbal one
only: That it is out of our power, and of any Man's in the World to turn
Attrition into contrition. We pretend not to dispense with any for not obeying
the Command of God. We have no Taxa Camere by which the Papists are shown how
all sins are fined in their Church; for in that Book Men see at what Charge
they may kill a Father, or commit Incest with their Sisters: But we assure all,
that the Wages of sin is Death, Death Eternal, if indulged and not most
earnestly repented of. And we tell all that Devotion is necessary for all,
though the Church of Rome has ways of gratifying every Inclination, so as
they that will not lead a strict Life, need not, and yet may have hopes of
Salvation: We own their Policy in this Contrivance, but do not so much admire
their Religious regard to the Salvation of Men's Souls.

And to conclude, though we thus forcibly press all Christian Duties on all
Men; yet at the same time we warn them not to pretend to Merit Heaven at God's
Hand; but after they have done their best; to confess they are unprofitable
servants. We say of our Charity or whatever else we do in Obedience to God,
that of his own we give to him, and we are bound to thank him both for the will
and the Ability to give. The most that we pretend to', is only to make a small
Acknowledgment by way of Sacrifice for what we have received; we beg of God to
accept it as a Testimony of a grateful Mind, and we know that his Goodness is
so great, that he will abundantly reward an honest and sincere servant, though
he has done no more then was his Duty: And we hope that what we offer though
mingled with many Imperfections, he will be pleased to accept for the sake of
Christ as if it were perfect.

These are the Grounds that we go on in our Devotions' and whatever we do for
the Honor of God; and thus designing and thus acting and persisting, we need
not doubt but the good Providence of God which watches over his whole Church,
will in an especial manner watch over this which is so pure a Member of it:
that he will accept of the Devotions which are offered to him in it, and hear
the Prayers that are made unto him for it, and defend it against all its
Enemies on every side; which God of his Infinite Mercy grant for the sake of
Jesus Christ our Lord.

A DISCOURSE Concerning Invocation OF Saints.

How shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed? Romans 10. 14.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by John Reid, Anno DOM. 1686.

A DISCOURSE Concerning Invocation (...) Saints.
AMongst many other very corrupt and erroneous Doctrines of the Romanists, the
Church of England in her twenty second Article condemns that of Invocatio^ of
Sai^^s, as a ^ond thing, vainly invented and grounded upon no warrantry of
Scri^ture, but rather repugnant to the Word of God; and in her Learned Homily
against the peril of Idolatry passes yet a much severer Censure upon it, and
makes all those that believe and practice it, Guilty of the same Idolatry that
was amongst Ethnicks and Gentiles. How sharp soever this charge may be thought
to be, it is, you see, the plain sense and judgment of our Church, and what I
believe is the Truth, and no hard matter to make good.

To proceed therefore in the easiest and clearest method I can, I purpose to
sum up all that I think needful to be said upon it under these following heads.

1. What Is the professed Doctrine and practice of the Church of Rome as to
Invocation of Saints?

2. On what occasion it began and spread in the Church?

3. That there is not the least p: ^ of for it from Scripture.

4. That there is no proof for it from the Fathers of the first three hundred
years, and more.

5. That there is full and evident proof in Scripture against it.

6. That the Fathers of the first and purest Ages, till after three hundred,
are all express and positive in th^^^ writings against it.

7. That the Doctrine and Practice of Saint-Invocation is impious and
Idolatrous.

I. What Is the professed Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome as to
Invocation of Saints.
AN Account of this I shall give you first in general, as it is set down in the
decree of the Trent* Council, and then lay it before you more at large
distributed under several particulars.

In the twenty fifth Session of that packed Synod we have its decree in these
words; That all Bishops and Pastors that have the cure of souls do diligently
instruct their Flock that it is good and profitable, Humbly to pray unto the
Saints, and to have recourse to their prayers, help and aid; And then to
reinforce the Obligation of it, it denounces an Anathema against all those who
shall find fault with it, or refuse to practice it; so that now whosoever shall
be so hardy as to think and teach the contrary, to say, that either it ought
not to be done, or that it is a foolish thing to do it; that the practice is
little less then Idolatry, repugnant to the Glory of God as sole Governor of
the World, and highly injurious to the Honor of Christ as the only Mediator
betwixt God and Man, does in the judgment of that Church, think impiously; and
if the Popes Power as well as his Infallibility does not fail him, he most be
Cursed and Damned for it. But, for once, not to be frighted with his vain
Thunder, I shall proceed in due place by Gods assistance to prove all the
foregoing particulars against it, when I have given you yet a fuller
description of it. First, then,

1. The least and most excusable thing in this Doctrine and practice, is, to
pray to Saints to pray for them. Thus much is not only confessed by them, but
made the pretense to bring off this Doctrine without the charge of Idolatry and
Creature* Worship; We do no more in praying to Saints departed, say they, then
one living Christian does to another, when he says, pray Sir, pray for me, or
remember me in your prayers. But, was this indeed the true meaning of such
Devotions, it is so far from being any justification of them, that the Apologly
it self is sinful, and admitting the excuse, the practice no less to be
condemned: For,

When they Pray to Saints departed to pray for them, those Saints do either
hear their prayers and become acquainted with their desires, or they do not; If
they do hear all those prayers that are put up to them at the same time by
innumerable persons, and that in far distant places. what is this but to ascribe
to them that ubiquity and omnipresence, that is solely, peculiarly and
incommunicably in God? If they do not, then it is very absurd and ridiculous,
and a great abuse of that reason God has given men for other ends then to
triflle with, to Pray to them. For, to what purpose should they Pray to them
that cannot hear them? Why should they beseech those to be their Advocates to
God and recommend their particular cases to him, whose cases they cannot, by
any way that we know of, come to understand? As for their Learning and seeing
all things in the Glass of the Trinity, or learning them by particular
revelation from God; as God has declared no such thing to us, so is it not to
be known by the Light of Nature, but the contrary is very probable, if not
certain; as shall be made to appear in the sequel of this Discourse. It is not
denied but that blessed Spirits who are safely landed upon the Shore, do pray
for their Partners who are still behind beating it on the Waves; it is not
denied but that Saints in Heaven may Pray in particular to God for their
Friends and Relations, whose necessities and infirmities they were well
acquainted with before they left the Body; so 'twas agreed betwixt St Cyprian
and Cornelius, that who went first to Glory, should be mindful of the others
condition to God; for, why should their Memories or their Charity be thought to
be less in Heaven then they were on Earth; We know 'twas the practice of some
good Men in the Primitive times to recommend themselves to the Prayers of the
Saints, that is, to desire God to hear the Prayers that the Saints in Heaven
did make in their behalf; and to apply themselves to the Martyrs a little
before their suffering, when they themselves were entered into bliss, to
interceed with God for those who were yet on the way passing thither with fear
and trembling. But now is there no difference betwixt the Saints intercessions
for us and our Invocation of them? Betwixt their Praying for us in Heaven and
our Praying to them on Earth? Is there no difference betwixt one Living
Christian Praying to another to Pray for him, who hears his request and who is
acquainted with his condition, and our addressing to Saints departed to pray
for us, who know us not, and who are are ignorant of our state?

Again, when they pray to Saints departed, they do it with all the Rites and
Solemnities of a Religious Worship, in sacred offices, upon their Knees, with
uncovered Heads, with Hands and Eyes lifted up, in times and places dedicated
to Gods Worship; now, though it should be true, that they do no more then Pray
to Saints to pray for them, yet doing it in that manner, with such external
Acts of Devotion that are confessed to be the same wherewith we call on God, I do
not see, how they can be excused, even on this account, from attributing that
Honor to the Creature which is due only to the Creator. As God is owned to be
infinite in himself, and to have incommunicable perfections, so there ought to
be some peculiar and appropriate Acts and signs of Worship to signify that we
do inwardly so esteem and believe of God, and when these are once determined by
the Law of God or the universal reason and consent of Mankind, the applying
them to any else but him, is a plain violating his peculiarities and robbing
him of his Honor. And now in this respect also I cannot discern how the Romish
Invocation of Saints is of the same nature with our requesting our
Fellow Members to pray for us? For (not to mention again the presence of these,
and the absence of the other) is there no difference betwixt my desiring an
eminently good Christian to pray for me, and falling down on my Knees with
Hands and Eyes lifted up, and that in a Temple, to him, with that request?
Would not every good Man that has any regard for the Honor of God presently
show his detestation of such an action? Would he not say to me as St. Peter to
Cornelius falling down before him, Stand up, I my self also am a Man? Would he
not with St. Paul have rent his Garments and with much Holy indignation cried
out to me, as he to the Men of Lystra, designing the same Honors to him and
Barnabas wherewith they Worshipped their Gods, Why do ye these things, we also
are Men of like Passions with you? As the Saints in Heaven cannot be supposed
to lose any thing of their Love and Charity toward their Fellow Members by
going thither, so neither can they be thought to abate any thing of their Zeal
and fervor for the honor of God; and therefore certainly what they did and
would have refused here on Earth, they must with higher degrees of abhorrence
reject now they are in Heaven.

Moreover, if this be all they mean by all their several Offices of Devotions
to Saints departed that they should pray for them unto God, why in all this
time that these forms have been complained of, has not the sense of them been
better expressed? Whence, I pray, should we take the meaning of such prayers but
from the usual signification of the Words? But, if not; why has no Inquisition
past upon them? Why have not the grossest and rankest for Superstition and
encroaching on the prerogative of God, been expunged and blotted out? Why all
this while has there been no review, no comments upon them, no cautions and
instructions written and bound up with their Breviaries, Rosaries and Hours,
that the people might know how to understand them? If the form of words in
their Saint-Invocation be the same that is used to God, but their sense and
meaning otherwise; Why don't they tell this to the World and make their
explication as public and as general as the prayers?

Certainly, the Bishops and Governors of the Romish Church, and those that
have the care of Souls amongst them, are either guilty of gross and wilful
neglects to the people; or else, whatever they say to us, their will is, that
the People should understand those Prayers according to the customary and
received use of the words; and then I am sure they pray, not only to saints to
pray for them unto God, in order to the obtaining of him such aids and supplies
they want, but to Saints themselves for those very blessings. As will appear at
large in the next particular.

2. They pray to Saints departed for those very blessings that none but God can
give. To what purpose else do they advise us to fly, not only to their prayers,
but their help and assistance; which words, help and assistance, would have
been Open auxiliiumque Trid. Con. fess. 25. Propere veni, accelera.
altogether superflous, was not something else mean'd by them then only that of
their prayers.

To what purpose else do they Pray to visit them, to make haste and come to
them, did they not expect some other aid and assistance from them then bare
praying for them? for that certainly might have been better and more
convenientlie performed in Heaven, before the Face of God.

To what purpose else in some particular cases do they put up their Addresses
to one Saint rather then to another, according as in this World they were
famous, either for some eminent Grace shining in them, or for some strange cure
or extraordinary deliverance wrought by them, but only, that they believe and
trust, that those, who did such great things on Earth, are much more willing
and able to do them now they are in Heaven, where, while other Graces cease,
Charity and Beneficence are perfected and abide for ever?

Thus because St. Roch was signally Charitable in assisting those who were
infected with the plague, therefore do they call upon him in times of
infection; because St. Appollonia had all her Teeth struck out for her
undaunted Confession of the Faith of Jesus, therefore do they fly to her for
ease against the Rage of Teeth; because St, George was by profession a Soldier
and renowned for wonderful Achievements, therefore have they recourse to him
for assistance against Enemies. It Is true, was it Lawful to Address to any at
all, this might be a sufficient reason, why they Address to this rather then to
another Saint, because his or her former actions or sufferings do best suit and
befit their present case; but, being not sure that these and such like
Canonized Saints of the Romish Church are Saints in Heaven, being sure, if they
are, they cannot hear us, nor know our particular State, much less bestow health
and deliverance upon us, whilst we Love and Honor the Memory of Saints
indeed, we ought to call only upon God, who only is a present help in time of
need and the Savior of them that put their trust in him.

But to put this out of doubt, it will not be amiss to set down some of their
forms of Devotion to Saints departed; And here not to rake for them in some
obscure Authors that have privately stole into the World, I shall need go no
farther then the present Roman Breviary Corrected and Published by the Decree
and Order of the Council of Trent. The blessed Virgin is there Invocated in the
Feast of the Assumption, For strength against Enemies, and in the Hymn
frequently used in her Office, she is not only called the Gate of Heaven, but
entreated to loose the bonds of the Guilty to give light to the blind, to drive
away our evils, to obtain good things for us, and to show her self to be a
Mother, (that is, as the Mass Book of Paris 1634 interprets it.) O foelix
puerpera nostra pians scelera, jure matris impera Redemptori. Dall, de cultu
Latin. lib. 3. c. 4. p. 359. Not denied by Natalis Alexander though he answers
this Citation of Dalle, only says, Nec est ab eccles^^ probata and quibusdam
tant^m missalibus ^lim inser^^ est. His^. E^^l. sec: 5. dissert. 5. p. 343. 347.
in right of a Mother to command her Son. In another place she is sued to for
help to the Miserable, for strength to the Weak, for comfort to the Afflicted,
and that all that Celebrate her Festivals may feel her assistance: And but that
I said I would not hunt for matter, I could send you to Authors of theirs, and
not of the least note, where we may read such Blasphemy as this; Biel. in Can.
mis. sect. 80.
That God has given the Virgin Mary half of his Kingdom. Salmero^ in Tim. 1.
2. disc. 8.
That the Prayers made to, and by all Saints. are better then those made by
Christ. Carol. scrib. in Amph. hon. Com. p. 29. Ch^^^. exemp. Invocat. Sanct.
p. 146.
That the Mothers Milk is equally to be esteemed with the Sons Blood. This you
may take for a taste of that Hyperdulia, that super-refin'd service, which they
put up to the blessed Virgin, and yet that to the Apostles and other Saints of
less magnitude comes not much behind it; St. Peter is entreated by the power
given to him, To hear their prayers, to unty the bonds of their iniquity and to
open the Gates of Heaven; all the Apostles, to absolve them from their sins by
their command, to heal all their spiritual maladies and to increase their
virtues. St. Andrew is supplicated for patience to bear cheerfully the Cross of
Christ; St. Francis, for deliverance from the drudgery and bondage of sin; St.
Brigit, for Wisdom against the snares of the World; St. Nicholas, for courage
against the assaults of the Devil; St. Agnes for the chiefest of Graces, that
of Charity; and St. Catharine, for all Graces; We are taught to pray to be
delivered from Hell, and to be made partakers of Heaven by their merits; to fly
to them as our Patrons and Advocates, to put confidence in their intercessions
Breviar and ^^ss.
and to ascribe our mercies and deliverances, to their Power and Interest in
God. In the office of Visitation of the Sick, the Priest laying his right hand
upon Ritu^l. de Visit. Infirm.
the head of the Sick Person, prays, that Jesus the Son of Mary, and Savior
of the World, would for the Merits and Intercession of his Apostles Peter and
Paul, and all saints, be gracious and Merciful to him; and in another place in
the same office; that through the intercession of the blessed Virgin and all
saints, he might obtain Eternal-Life; these are enough, but I Merits and
intercessione S. S. Ritual. Romans de Sacram. poenit.
cannot omit one more, which is a flower indeed in the office about the
Sacrament of Penance there is found this remarkable Prayer; The Passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Merits of the blessed Virgin Mary, and of all saints,
and whatsoever good thou have done, and whatsoever Evil thou have suffered, be
to thee for the remission of sins, the increase of grace and the reward of
Eternal Life. And now let the Reader judge, if this be not to give the Creature
that Worship that is due only to the Creator, and to seek to obtain those
blessings from finite Beeings and through their procurement, which only
Almighty God and his blessed Son Christ Jesus can give unto Men.

3. It Is the Doctrine of the church of Rome, that Mental Prayers as well as
Vocal are to be put up to Voce vel mente Supplicare.
Saints departed; So the Trent-Council decreed, so their Bishops and Pastors
are enjoined to teach the People, and so they practice, this being a form of
Prayer to Saints in frequent use amongst them, With the desire of our Hearts we
pray unto you regard the ready service of our minds; So that according to them,
Saints departed do not only hear our Prayers, but know our Hearts also; and
indeed this is necessarily implied in every Prayer that is made to them, viz.
That they not only hear the Prayer, but know the disposition of the Heart from
whence it proceeds, otherwise the Hypocritical Supplicant must be supposed as
likely to obtain their favor as the Sincerest Votary.

4. They not only Pray to them with Mental and Vocal Prayer, but They confess
their sins to them. Very remarkable is that form of Confession in the Reformed
Roman Ordinar. missae. 217.
Missal, I confess to Almighty God, to the ever blessed Virgin; to Hessed
Michael Archangel, to blessed John Baptist; to the Holy Apostles Peter and
Paul, to all the saints, and to you Brethren, that I have sinned in thought,
word and deed.

They make Vows to them; nothing is more common then at entrance into Religious
Orders thus Francis. Albertin. de Angel. Custod. p. 224. Horst. in dedic. sect.
2. p. 83.
to express their Devotion, I Vow to God and the blessed Virgin; then to Vow
that their whole life shall be devoted to the blessed Virgin or some other
Saint, according to the famous Pattern, I humbly beg of thee Oh Mother of all
Clemency, that thou would vouchsafe to admit me into the number of those who
have devouted themselves to thee to be thy perpetual servants. Another of this
kind, not much inferior to it; we meet with in Horstius, viz, I firmly resolve
henceforth to serve thee and thy Son with all Faithfulness, and for ever to
cleave to thee.

They offer up Laud and Praise to them, and entreat them to hear and receive
their Thanksgiving; thus Brev. Rom, in fest. S. Jacob.
to St. James they pray that he would joyfully hear the acknowledgements that
as right and due they paid to him. It Is usual with their Learned Men to
conclude their Books with praise to God and the Blessed Virgin, particularly
Valentia and Bellarmine, the letter of which thus ends his Book conc^rning the
Worship of faints; praise be to God and to the blessed Virgin, also to Jesus
Christ. Morstius before had it, thee and thy Son; Bellarmine here, the Blessed
Virgin and then Jesus Christ; whereby we Bellarm, de cul-Sanct. Lion Edit. Laus
deo virginique Mariae, Jesu item Christ^
may see they give her not only an equal part with God in their Praises, but by
placing her before Christ, seem to give her somewhat of preeminence above him.

5. They appoint Angels and saints, Deputies and Lievtenants under God in the
Government of the World, and stick not to make them Cuardians, Patrons and
Patronesses over particular Kingdoms, Cities, Churches and single persons. The
Scripture indeed frequently speaks often he Knowledge, presence, Dignity,
occasional Ministry, and Embassies of holy Angels, but that delegation of power
the Romanists give them, whereby they make them share Empire and Dominion with
God in the Government of the world, can be as little proved of them, as of
saints departed; however I am chiefly to consider their Doctrine and practice
in reference to the latter; they teach the people to make choico of one or more
out of the number of the saints to be their Patron; to Love them, to imitate
them, through their hands Horst. parad. Animae sect. 2.
to offer daily their works to God, to commend themselves to their protection
at all times, especially in difficulties and temptations; they give to one
saint this precinct, and to another, that; to one, power over this malady; over
that, to others; more of this you have drawn to the life in the forementioned
excellent Homily of our Church against Idolatry, out of which I shall only ^ull
some passages and refer ^he Reader for farther satisfaction to the Homily it
self; it compares such saints in the Roman Church to whom they allot Homil of
Idolat.
the defense of certain countries, to the Dii Tutelares of the Gentile
Idolaters; such, to whom the safety of certain Cities are cammitted, to their
Dii presides; and such, to whom Temples and Churches are Builded, and Altars
Erected to their Dii Patroni; it t^lls us that the Romanists have no fewer
saints then the Heathens had Gods, to whom they give the Honor due to God;
every Artificer and profession has his special saint as a peculiar God; for
example, Scholars have St. Nicholas and St. Gregory, Painters St. Luke; neither
lack soldiers their Mars; not Lovers. their Venus amongst Christians. The sea
and waters amongst the Romanists as well as Cities and Countries have their
special Saints to preside over them, as amongst the Heathens they had Gods; all
diseases have their special Saints as Gods, the Curers of them; the Pox St.
Roch; the Falling-Evil, St. Cornelis; the Toothach, St. Apollonia; neither do
Beasts and Cattle lack their Gods with us, for St. Loy is the Horsleach, and
St. Anthony the swineheard, etc. where is Gods Providence and due Honor in the
mean time? Who says, the Heavens be mine, the Earth is mine, the whole World
and all that therein is; but we have left him neither Heaven nor Earth, nor
Water, nor Country, nor City, Peace nor War, to Rule and Govern; neither Man
nor Beasts, nor their diseases to Cure; and as if we doubted of his ability or
will to help, we join to him another, as if he were a Noun Adjective, using
these sayings; such as Learn, GOD and St. Nichol as be my speed; such as
s^eese. GOD help, and St. John; to the Horse, God and St. Loy save thee thus
are we become like Horses and Mules that have no understanding; Oh Heavens! Oh
Earth! What madness and wickedness against God are Men fallen into? What
dishonor do the Creatures to their Creator and Maker? This is not written to
reproach the Saints, but to condemn the Foolishness and Wickedness of Men, who
make of the true servants of GOD, false Gods, by attributing to them the Power
and Honor which is Gods, and due to him only.

II. On what occasion this Doctrine and Practice began and spread in the Church.
GReat was the Honor the Primitive Christians had for the Martyrs and
Confessors; they frequented their Tombs, erected Altars on the places of their
burial, highly esteemed their bones and relics; ^here they rehearsed their
good works done in their life time, and their Faith, Patience and Constancy
showed at Death; here they blessed God for that Grace that was given to them,
and for that good that accrued to themselves by their example, here they
proposed their virtues for imitation, and had their own Piety and Zeal enflamed
by the remembrance of them; and the Christian cause being then harassed on
every side by implacable Enemies, the Malice of the Jew, and the subtity of the
Greek, and the Power of the Roman combining with their united force to destroy
and root it up, it pleased God, not only by the demonstration of a Divine power
in the Apostles and their immediate Successors, whilst they were alive* but
also by many wonderful things done at their Tombs when the were dead, and by
sensibly answering Prayers that were there puup to him, to confi^m the Truth of
Christianity, to declare hi approbation of the sufferings of his servants, and
to encourage others to Seal the Doctrine of the Gospel with their Blood as they
bad done. To them in a particular manner may that of the Apostle be applied,
W^om GOD did foreknow Romans 8. 29, 30.
them he did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son; and whom he
did predestinate, them he called; and whom he called, them he Justified; and
whom he Justified them he Glorified. The Ap^stle having said in the verse
before, verse 28, We know that all things work together for good unto them that
love GOD, to them who are called according to his purpose; adds as a proof of
what he had said, whom he did foreknow, would be persons of Great and noble
minds, and so fit for the work, them he did predestinate to be conformed to the
Image of his Son, them he did decree to suffer for his sake, and by sufferings
to be made conformed to his Son, who was made perfect through sufferings; and
whom he did predestinate, them he also called, them in due time he actually
called forth to suffer for his name; and whom he called, them he justified:
them he approved of as Faithful Servants, as Loyal Soldiers, as Invincible
Champions of Truth and Righteousness; and whom he Justified he Glorified, them
he Crowned with Honor and Renown here, and with immortal Glory hereafter. This
was the Testimony God bore to the Apostles and first Bishops of the Church, to
the Authority they had received, to the Doctrine they taught, and for which
they died; this was the Honor the Primitive Christians deservedly showed to
their Victorious Martyrs, they did not Invocate them, but Loved their Memories,
Commemorated their Virtues, and Blessed God for their example; they performed
to them not any part of Religious Worship that was Cultus offici^sus
dilectionis, and so^ietatis, specialis observantia. S. Aust. contr. Faust. l.
20. 21. ou latreutik^s, alla schetikos kai ti metik^s Cyril. l. o. contr. Jul.
due to God only; but, (as they called it,) an officious Worship, a Worship of
Love and society, a special and particular observance, a respect convenient and
proper, and which they could not but think was due to them on the account of
the great service they had done to the the cause of Christ, and the more then
ordinary worth and excellency that shined in them,

But afterward in succeeding Ages, when through the good providence of God and
favor of Constantine the great, the church had rest and ease, and Prosperity
began to dawn upon it; the Devil finding he could not prevail over the
Christian Faith by fiery trials and temptations, betook himself to other, more
secret it may be, but equally dangerous stratagems, and by working on the
strong inclinations and affections of Men to ease and softness, he too
successfully attempted to deprave and corrupt it by loose and superstitious
Doctrines; most Men are for some kind of Religion whither the Devil will or no,
which, because he cannot hinder, he labors what he can, it may be such, that
whilst it pretends fair, may do them but little good; and Men are for^ard
enough to close with that which offers at carrying them to Heaven on the
easiest terms. The Church being now out of Persecution, and Riches and Honors
attending that profession, for which such multitudes had lost all, and endured
the flames, the people began to be more loose and vain in their conversations
then when they still expected martyrdom; now they began to place their Religion
in shows and pretenses more then in a sincere and substantial Piety; and
whereas before they were wont to frequent the Tombs of the Martyrs that at the
sight of the place their affections might be raised, their Devotions enlivened,
and their Faith and Charity receive farther degrees of warmth and heat from
their burning and shining examples, now they placed all their Religion in the
bare outward observance of that Solemnity, and took more care to Honor the
Saints by their lofty Praises and commendations of them, then to become Saints
themselves by imitating their Graces and Virtues; and that, what was wanting in
the one, they might make up in the other, they now began to fall into many
Superstitious Conceits and Opinions concerning them; to break out into too
lavish and indeed extravagant expressions of their worth and to fly too high in
their Panegyricks and Laudatory Orations, Now they began,

To attribute the miracles done at the Martyrs Tombs to the Martyrs own Power,
or at least, mediation with God; the common People observing, that many Cures
were wrought upon those that at those monuments applied themselves to God, were
led by degrees to look upon them as so many Testimonies of the Martyrs great
interest in the Court of Heaven, and instead of begging relief of God, to speak
directly to the Martyrs themselves:

To fancy that the Souls of Martyrs were always hovering about their Tombs and
Ashes, and so joined their Intercessions with the Prayers of Christians that
were put up to God in those places; so 'twas objected by Vigilantius to St.
Hierom:

To wish that the Martyrs would Pray for them; Oret pro nobis Flavianus.
so they cried out in the Council of Chalcedon, Let Flavianus Pray for us: and
in Theodoret's History of the Lives of the Fathers, we find in the close of
most of them, (though some think them not to be his words, but Additions and
Insertions afterward,) I wish and desire that by their Intercession I may
obt^in Divine help.

To commend themselves to the Martyrs intercessions, Commendare nos orationi.
St. Aust,
to beg to be heard for their sakes, to be helped by their prayers, to be
vouchsaf't the effects of the Prayers that were made by them in behalf of the
Church below.

To pray to them upon supposition if they heard or knew what was done here
below; Hear, oh thou soul Nazian. Orat. 2. in Jultan. ei de iis soi kai ton
hemeteron esti logos Orat. and. in. Gorgon.
of great Constantius, says St. Gregory Nazianzen, if thou have any
understanding of these things; the like he has in his Funeral Oration which he
made upon his sister Gorgonia; If thou have any care of things done by us, and
Holy souls, receive this Honor from God that they have any feeling of such
things as these, receive this Oration of ours;

By such steps and degrees as these, the frequenting the places where the
Martyrs were enshrined, and Honoring their Names and Memories, was turned into
Superstitious Devotion and that soon ended in solemn and downright Invocation.

To all this we may add, what a Learned Author of our own has ingeniously
guest, that the great compliance Dr. Tenison.
and yielding of the Roman Christians in this particular to those Northern
Nations, the Goths and Vandals, when they invaded and overun the Empire, did
not a little contribute to raise and propagate this Saint-Worship and
Invocation in the Church; of all the Heathen Nations none were more Zealously
Devoted to the Worship of Demons then those were, whereof he gives many
Testimonies; now it is not improbable that the Christians, to mollify their
fierce natures and to induce them the more readily to embrace Christianity,
might indulge them still that practice, excepting only the object of their
Worship, giving them real Saints and Holy Angels instead of their feigned and
impure Deities; and that which makes this the more probable is, that their
invasion and stay in Italy, and the rise and growth of Daemon-Worship there,
jump exactly as to time, and both bear date from the Fourth and Fifth Centures.

III. That there is not the least proof for it from Scripture.
1. ANd here we are first^^ take notice that Bellar. de sanct. beat. c. 19.
Salm. in 1 Timothy 2. disp. 7. Eckius Enchirid. de vener. sanct. c. 15. Cardin. du
Perron.
it is ^reely confe^^ by some of their own Learned Divines, that there is no
express Text either in the Old or New Testament for this Doctrine and practice;
and is it not hard to make that an Article of Faith that has no Foundation to
stand on in the word of God? Or to make that a Duty that has no Law ^or
sanction to bind us to the practice of it? Were not the Scriptures written to
make Men Wise unto salvation, and to instruct them thoroughly un^o all good
works? Were they not written that 2 Timothy 3. 15. 16.
we might believe, and believing might have Eternal Life? Do not the Apostles
say, they have made known to Man the whole will of God, and kept nothing hid
from them? Do John 20. 30.
they not abound in earnest Exhortations to Pray to Pray always, to pray
without ceasing, with all prayer? Have they not left frequent directions for
the right performance of it, in a Language that all that hear may understand,
with pure hands, in Faith, without wrath and doubting? And now can 1 Cor. 14.
we imagine after all this, that, had Invocation of Saints been so good and
profitable a Duty, or that it had been so great a Crime so much as to doubt of
the Blessed Virgin's Merits and Ability to help, that the^ would have been
Catech. Romans 584.
wholly silent as to this matter? Were not the Apostles guided by the Holy
Spirit of God? Must they not be supposed to have as hearty a concern and as
burning a Zeal for the Salvation of Souls and the Glory of God as the Trent
Fathers had? And now, had this practice been so highly instrumental to promote
both these, as that Synod would have us believe, is it to be imagined that,
every one of them would have quite forgot it, and neglected to have given it in
charge with as much strictness, as they have done to all Bishops and Pastors,
to instruct their Flocks in the Pie^y and Usefulness of it? Have not the
Apostles both by their precept and example enjoined Christians to beg the
Prayers of one another whilst they are in the body? Have they not prescribed
the Sick Man, as the most Sovereign receipt, to have recourse to the Prayers of
the Elders of the Ja^. 5. 14.
Church? What reason then can be given that we have not any one example or
precept to fly to the Prayers of Saints departed, to their help and assistance,
as the more prevailing and meritorious, but only this, that they are not in a
capacity to hear our requests, or, to know our conditions? Nay, had our Savior
and his Apostles intended this Saint-Invocation as a necessary Christian Duty;
it would have needed a more express command and penalty to have enforced its
obligation, then most other Duties of Christianity, since it was altogether a
thing new to the Jews and what had never been practiced by them; for though
sometimes in their prayers to God, they besought him to remember Abraham,
Isaac, and Luk 1. 55. 72. 73. Deuteronomy. 7. ^.
Jacob, that is, his own covenant and promise he had made with and to them, yet
they never used them as intercessors, or said, Holy Abraham, or Holy Isaac,
pray for us.

But to blunt the edge of this Argument that they themselves have put into our
hands against it, they tell us, was not for any intrinsic Evil in the thing,
but for some particular reasons relating to the times of the Old Testament, and
the first Ages of the New that It was not mentioned and enjoined in scripture;
but if the reasons produced by them do hold with equal force against it
promiscuously in all Ages, as well as against it then, certainly the main
reason why it is no where prescribed in scripture, is, that it might at no time
be put in practice. The reasons they give are chiefly two.

For the Old Testament* they say it is not there enjoined, because the
Patriarchs and Saints departed, during that dispensation, were not admitted
into the beatifick Vision, and so could not ordinarily understand the Prayers
of the Living; but, if for ought we know, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, are still
in the same Limbo, or place of rest they went to at first, or, if, our Savior
at his ascension into Heaven did give them a happy deliverance and took them up
with him into the immediate presence of God, it is not certain, that they
understand the desires of the Living any more then they did before, then there
is as much reason not to Invocate them now, as there was not to do it then.
Many of the Romanists will not have the Saints in Heaven come to know the
desires of their Living Votaries by the benefit of the beaufick Vision which
they enjoy, but by particular Revelation from God, and if so, then the Old
Testament worthies were as capable of it, and consequently there was as much
reason to pray unto them before our Saviors coming, when they were but in
Paradise, as afterward when by his Glorious Victory and Triumph over Death
they were exalted into Heaven, since God could have revealed the requests of
their supplicants alike to them in all places, in one as well as another;
besides, considering the great esteem and veneration the Jews ever had for
those great Men, the Founders of their Nation, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses,
Joshua and others, had there been no evil in the thing, no reason can be given
why it was not preached to the Jews by our Savior and his Apostles as the most
likely argument to win them to embrace the Christian Religion.

For the New Testament they say, it is not there enjoined, because it would have
been a great offense and scandal to the new converted Gentiles, and have given
them an occasion to think, that they had only changed their Gods but not their
Religion, that the Christian Doctrine was only a device of the Apostles to
thrust out their old Demons and Heroes and to put in themselves; that as those
had hitherto been Worshipped for the great services and benefactions they did in
this present World, so they for the future might have the some Honor done them
for the full discoveries they had made, and excellent directions they had
given, relating to a future and more happy State.

And is not this a good Argument and does it not hold still against Romish
Invocation? Is it not of as much force now to cast it out of the Church as it
was then not to bring it in? Does it not give infinite offense to a great part
of the Christian World, and is it not esteemed, and that justly by them, to be
the old Pagan-Worship revived, or something very near it? For, it is not enough
to excuse them from it that the object of their Inv^cation is not the same,
that they do not with them pay this Worship to the Heathen Deities, (who,
though in some respects they had been Patrons and Benefactors to their Country,
were yet in others very lewd and unworthy persons,) but to the Apostles of
Christ and Christians Martyrs (who in all respects were highly deserving of the
World) whilst they agree in the same act and kind of Worship and give that
Honor to the Creature which properly and peculiarly belongs to God, and herein
especially did the Pagan Worship and Superstition consist.

2. We shall now examine the chief of those Texts the Romanists produce in the
behalf of this Doctrine, and let you see how little they serve to that purpose.

The first is, Luke 15. 7. 10. There shall be joy in Heaven; and again, There
shall be joy before the Angels of God, over our Sinner that repents, From
whence they argue, that if Angels and blessed spirits rejoice at the Conversion
of a sinner, they must know and understand this change that is wrought in them
before they can rejoice at it, and if the knowledge of their repentance reaches
them, why not also of their Prayers? And then if they can hear their Prayers,
why may they not be Prayed unto? To this it is answered,

That this rejoicing in Heaven is not for the Conversion of a particular
sinner, but in general for the Redemption of Mankind by Jesus Christ, and this
appears more then probable from the parable of the lost sheep immediately going
before, whereof these words are the Conclusion; the Ninety nine sheep not lost
are the Angels presevering in their first state of Innocence; the sheep that
went aftray, Adam and in him all his Posterity that fell from God; the shepherd
that went to seek the lost sheep, God himself, who sent his Son into the World
to seek and to save that which is lost, on whose shoulders the great Work of
Man's Redemption was laid; and for this we are sure there was joy in Heaven,
when a Blessed Chore of Angels sung that Heavenly Anthem at Christ's Nativity,
Glory be to God on high, and on Earth Peace good will toward Men But

Supposing this rejoicing is to be understood for the repentance of individual
sinners, it may be observed. Emopion to^ Aggel^n
that this joy is not said to be the joy of Angels, but before the Angels;
intimating that this rejoying is not to be attributed to the Angels, but to God
in whose presence they stand, and this exposition is countenanced by
considering it is God that answers to the Shepherd in the parable; as he went to
seek his straied sheep, and rejoiced at the finding of it, so it is God that by
his Grace and Mercy in Christ recovered Man, and rejoyc^d at the accomplishment
of his own Work. Again,

If this Text does imply that Angels in Heaven know when a Sinner is converted
and rejoice at it, it does not follow that they know this by some excellent
privilege and perfection of their nature, whereby also they are enabled to
understand even those mental Prayers, that we are told ought to be put up to
them; but passing always betwixt Heaven and Earth (as wa^ represented unto
Jacob in his Divine Vision on God's Errands and Embassies) those that ascend
from Earth may tell the joyful News of converted sinners to them in Heaven; but
they that tell them this, cannot also acquaint them with the inward secret
desires and cogitations of Men's Hearts, bebeing in a capacity by observing in
Men the Signs and Fruits of true Repentance to know the one, but having no way
by their own natural power to understand the other.

The second place is, Mat. 22. 30. Where our Savior says, That the just at
the Res^rrection shall be as the Angels in Heaven; from whence they infer, that
if our Prayers and concerns are known to the Angels, and they on that account
may be Invocated; why should they not be known also to the Saints departed, who
are as they enjoying the same Blissful Vision of God? To this may be returned;

That we are no more sure of the Knowledge of Angels in this particular, then
we are of that of Saints, and therefore the one ought to be proved before the
other be granted. The Angels in Heaven see indeed the Face of Christ's Father
which is in Heaven, but the meaning of that is not, that by enjoying the sight
of Gods Face they therein see and hear all things transacted here on Earth, but
that they are God's Ministers always attending round about his Thron, and
waiting before him to receive his Commands, and to execute his pleasure.

But was this Knowledge the privilege of the Angelical nature, the equality
which just Men in the Text are said to have to the Augels, is not mean'd an
equality of Knowledge or perfection of nature, but a similitude of State and
Privileges; and his appears from the contex; In the Resurrection they neither
Mary, nor are given in Marriage, but are as the Angels of God; the just shall
not be equal to the Angels in every respect, for as they d^ffer in Nature and
Kind, so they shall have distinct natural Qu^lities and Operations, of Bliss
and Ha^piness; they as the Angels in that Spiritualized State, shall not need
Matrimony for the propagation of their Kind, nor Food for the preservation of
their incorruptible Bodies, they shall be free from all the necessities that
attend temporal humane lite, and all the affections that arise from the body
and sensitive part of Man; they as Angels shall be the Children of God, being
Children of the Re^urrection, partakers of the Bl^ss, and immoveably possessed of
all the privileges of the Sons of God. Yet

Was this equality to the Angels to be mean'd of an equality in Nature and
Knowledge, yet the Saints departed are not to enjoy it until the Resurrection,
and so, though the Angels on that account might be Invocated, yet the Saints
departed, who are not till the Resurrection ^o have this excellent privilege
conferred on them, are not till then to have this Homage and Worship paid to
them; At the Resurrection they shall be as the Angels of God, whither they are
before that admi^ted into the bea^fical Vision, we need not now dispute, since,
if they are, this Angelical privilege of seeing all things in the Face of God,
is reserved for the Saints, as a farther addition of bliss till that day.

Again, they produce Revel. 5. 8. Where it is said, That the Four Beasts and
twenty four Elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them Harps
and Gold^n Vials full of Odours, which are the Prayers of Saints By the prayers
of Saints,, they mean, of those Saints that ar^ living upon the Earth; and by
the Four Beasts and Twenty Four Elders, the Saints that are in Heaven, and from
thence draw their Argument, that Saints in Heaven do offer up the Prayers of
Holy Men living upon the Earth.

But now if they are mistaken in the ^ense of this Text, and by the Four Beasts
and Twenty four Elders are not mean'd the Member^ of the Church triumphant; but
the Bishops and Elders of the Church Mili^ant; Whose Office it is to represent
the Prayers and Praises of the Church to God; then this cannot afford them the
least show of a reason for their Invocation* Dr. Hamon^ and many other Learned
Expositors are of opinion, that either, this whole Text is nothing but a
representation of the Church below offering up prayers by their Pastors; who
are the Mouths of the Congregation; to God through the Lamb; (and it is said
ve^se 10. That they shall Re^gn upon the Earth;) or else, a representation of
the whole Church of Christ both in Heaven and Earth, joining together in their
Dox^logies and Praises to God for the Vict^ries of the Lamb, and the Redemption
of the World by his blood; and for this sense the next ve^s^ seems to give it,
where they are said to Sing a new Song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the
Book and -- for thou wast s^ain, and redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of
every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation.

Another place to be explained, which they sometimes mention as on their side,
is, Revel ^ 10. Where the Souls of the Martyrs under the Altar are said to cry,
How long, Oh Lord, Holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our Blood on
them that dwell on the Earth: Now say they, if the Souls of Martyrs pray for
Vengance upon their Persecutors and Murderers; much more may we suppose them to
pray for Mercy and Deliverances for their Fellow Members and Sufferers. To this
may be replied,

That these words cannot signify a formal Prayer of the Martyrs to God for
Revenge on their Persecutors; they who after their Lord's example Prayed God to
forgive their Murderers when they were on Earth, cannot be supposed, now they
are in a more perfect State, to Pray for Vengeance upon them; but the words are
only an Emblem and representation of the certainty of Dr. Ham.
God's judgments and Vengeance overtaking them; by the Souls of them that were
stain and cry under the Altar, is mean'd their blood, and the Sin of Murdering
them, and (as we are wont to say) Murder is a crying Sin, and as it is said,
that Abel's blood cried for Vengance, so the Sin of shedding their blood cried,
'that is, would certainly awake and provoke the justice of God to take
Vengeance on them for it: This is well explained Esdr. 2. 15.
by a passage in the book of Esdras, Behold the Innocent and Righteous blood
cries unto me, and the Souls of the just complain continually, and therefore,
says the Lord, I will surely Avenge them, etc. But

Let their inference be granted, that the Souls of Martyrs in the future State
do Pray for their Fellow Sufferes that are left behind, it does not follow that
their Fellow Sufferers Pray to them, or that they offer up their Prayers made
to them unto God.

Lastly, they cite Genesis 48. 16. When Jacob blessing the two Sons of Joseph,
thus prays, The Angel that redeemed me from all Evil bless the Lads; this will
require no long answer.

God being pleased often to make use of the Ministry of Angels in sending
succor and relief to good Men, Jacob Prayed, not unto the Angel, but to God,
that he would appoint the same bessed Angel that administered unto him in all
his streights, to be the instrument of his good providence to those two Sons of
Joseph, whom he had now made his own, and caused them to be called after his
name. Or else.

If the Patriarch must be thought here to have Prayed to the Angel, we must
suppose with Athanasius, and others of the Fathers, that Angel to be Christ the
Son of God.

And the same answer is to be given to Revel 8* 4. Where it is said, That the
smoke of the Incense which came with the Prayers of the Saints, ascended up
before God out of the Angels hand; that is, Christ's, the Angel of the
Covenant, and therefore this Angel that offered up the Prayers of the Saints is
called verse 3. Another Angel; intimating, that it was a special Angel, one
different both in Nature and Office, from the other seven mentioned verse 2.
and described there as Ministering Spirits; And I saw the seven Angels which
stood before God, etc. verse 2. and then ^. 3. And another Angel came -- etc.

IV. That there is no proof for it from the Fathers of the first three hundred
years, and more.
THe Trent Fathers and the Catechism put out by Concili. Trident. sess. 25.
Catech. Romans par. 3. c. 2.
their Authority having declared invocation of Saints to be a custom received
and continued in the Church ever since the Apostles time, the Romish Authors
have not been wanting to turn every Stone, to search every Author, to produce
and strain every sentence and expression that looks that way, to the height, in
order to the making it good; but how short their proofs fall of it, will be
made evident by these following particulars.

1. Those that have taken the most pains to seek for Testimonies, have not been
able to produce any tolerable one out of the Genuin Writings of the Fathers
within the first three hundred years after Christ; they cite indeed the
Hierarchy of Dionisius Areopagita, Orige^s comments on the second Chapter of
Job and the twenty first of Numbers, the works of St. Ephroem, and Athanasius's
of the most Holy Mother of God; but these have been sufficiently proved by many
of our Learned Men and acknowledged by some of no obscure fame amongst them, to
be spurious, Mons. Dal. Coc. Censur. Patr.. in D. Are^p. Rivet. in Crit, Sac.
Bellar. de Scrip. Eccl.
and falsely fathered on them; and then for their proofs out of Irenaeus,
Eusebius and St. Ambrose, it is easy to show that the first is grossly
misunderstood, the second corrupted, and third retracted by that Father.

Irenoeus indeed is an Ancient Father, and of sufficient Authority, but his
words are little to their Irenoeus Adver. Haer. l. 15. c. 10.
purpose; they are these Sicut Eva seducta est ut effugeret Deum, sic Maria
suasa est obedire Deo, ut Virginis Evoe Virgo Maria fieret Advocata; Wherein
the blessed Virgin Mary is termed the Advocate of Eve. Now to make this a pat
proof for their Invocation, they must put this sense upon it, that the blessed
Virgin being a Glorified Saint in Heaven, did at the request and desires of Eve
living upon Earth represent her case to God, and interceed with him on their
behalf; but how could Eve alive request this of the Virgin Mary, and Eve d^ed
above three thousand years before Mary was born! Or how could Irenoeus think
the blessed Virgin in a capacity to do this whose opinion it was, with the
Iren. l. 5. c. 31.
generality of the Fathers in that Age, that her Soul, as all others of
departed Saints, were yet in an invisible place and not admitted to the
Beati^ick Vision? Or how could Eve stand in need of her Advocatship, who, if it
were true, as the Romanists hold, that our Savior at his Resurrection Aquin.
Durand.
freed the Saints of the Old Testament from their Limbus and carried them up
with him into heaven, and the presence of God, was a Glorified Saint in Heaven
whilst she was living upon the Earth, and so was in a better State to be an
Advocate for the Virgin Mary, then the Virgin Mary for her? Thus you see, as
clear a proof as Bellarmin Bellar. de Sanct. beat. l. c. 19.
thinks this to be, nothing can be more ridiculously and impertinently quoted;
some other meaning then of the words must be found out, and the most obvious
and natural is this, that the Virgin Mary is here by a figure put for Christ
her Son according to the Flesh; and said to do that, as she was the happy
Mother of a Son who did it; and thus indeed she is Advocate for Eve, and all
Eves Posterity, instrumentally, not by her self personally, but by her Son, she
being that vessel made choice of by the Holy Ghost, to bear him in her Womb,
who by taking Flesh of her became the Savior of Eve and all Mankind. For the
Testimony of Eusebius; it, as Bellarmine Bellar. de Sanct. beat. l. 1. c. 19.
reports it, runs thus, We Honor those Heavenly Soldiers, ^s God's Friends,
we approach unto their Mo^^ments, and Pray unto them as unto Holy Men, by whose
intercession we profess to receive much help and assistance; but it is
apparent, as many Learned Men have shown, that Bellarmine took this allegation,
not out of Euse^ins's Original but a corrupt translation made by Trapezuntius
and afterward followed by Dadr^^u^ a Doctor of Paris, who set forth E^sebius;
there being no such words, as Praying to them as unto Holy Men, to be found in
him speaking his own Language his words are these, h^then kai ept tas thekas
aut on ethos, Evang praep. l 13 c. 7.
hemin parienai, kai tas euchas para tautais poiesthai, etc. It is our custom
to come to their Tombs and Monuments, and to make our Prayers, not autois to
them, those Martyrs, as the Transla^or and Bellarmine would have it, bu^ para
tautais, i e thekais, at or before their ^ombs and Monuments, and to Honor
those blessed ^ouls.

I might now pass over St. Ambrose, he living beyond the time I undertook to
answer for, Anno, 374. but whatsoever he said of this nature, was said, when he
was but a young Christian, and recalled and contradicted by him afterward;
Speculatores vitae actuumque nostrorum.
in his book of Widows, he exhorts them to pray to the Angels and Martyrs, whom
he calls beholders of our Lives and Actions; ^ut Baronius himself Confesses (as
Bishop Andrews proves ^^out o^ the life of St. Ambrose) that this Book was
written presently after his Conversion, when he was but a raw Divine and had
not th^^ughly Learned the Christian Doctrine; and this appears by some other
mistakes he was guilty of, besides this, that are of as dangerous a Nature;
when in the same Book he asserts, that the Martyrs, either had no Sin at all,
or what they had, they did themselves wash away with their own Blood. But that
St. Ambrose changed his opinion concerning this Proprio Sanguine.
point of Invocation, we are as sure as that once he held it, since we find him
afterward plainly asserting the Contrary, in such words as these, That to
procure God's favor we need no Amb. in Romans c. 1. tom. 5. Tu tamen, Domine,
solus es invocandus. De ^bitu The^d. tom. 3.
Advocate but a devout Mind; and again, speaking with relation to the two young
Sons of Theodosius, Thou only, Oh Lord, art to be Invocated, and Prayed unto,
namely, for a blessing and protection upon them.

2. They make the Rhetorical Flourishes and Apostrophes of the Fathers in their
Panegyricks of the Martyrs, to be folemn forms of Invocation of them The
Fathers about the la^ter end of the Fourth Century, observing Piety and
Devotion to decay and wax cold, as the Church encreafed in Riches and
Prosperity, thought themselves obliged, by all the Wit and Art and Rhetoric
they had, to retrieve, if it was possible, the pristine heat of Devotion that
was formerly in it; to that purpose they spoke h^gh and large in commendation
of their Martyrs, and sometimes in their O^ations directed their words to them,
as though they had been there present, not with an intent to teach the People
to Pray unto them, or to rely upon their merits, but to signify the mighty
favor they were in with God, and the more effectually to excite them to an
imitation of their virtues. Many such strains of Rhetoric occur in the
Writings of St. Hierom, St. Basil, St. Gregory Nyssen, St. Gr^gory Nazianzen
and others. Orat. in San^^. Theod.
So St. Gregory Nyssen speaks to ^heodore the Martyr in his Oration, Gather
together the Troops of thy Brethren Martyrs, and thou with them beseech God to
stay the In^^s^on of the Barbarians.

So St. Gregory Nazianzen in his Oration calls unto Orat. in Athan. St.
Cyprian, St. Basil, St. Athanasius, to each after this manner, Do thou
favorably look upon us from on high.

After the same manner does St. Hierom conclude his Funeral Oration on Paula,
Farewell, Oh Paul, and help the Old Age of thy Honourer with thy Prayers. Now
what is there in all this but what is usual in all Authors both Sacred and
Profane? The design of the Fa^^^^s was to raise the People to as h^gh an
opinion as they could, bo^^ of the Persons of the Martyrs and their virtues
that made them so illustrious; and might they not make useof their best Art and
Rhetoric to do it? What is more in this then those Apostrophes frequently
found in the Sacred Writings even to insensate Creatures? Hear ye, Oh
Mountains, the Lord's Contro^ersy! Praise the Lord ye Dragons and all Deep^!
And who will infer from hence that the in^ensate Creatures were hereby invock'd
and addressed unto.

3. A great part of the Testimonies they produce out of the Fathers, are to
prove the Intercession of Saints in Heaven for us, and not our Invocating of
them; and so they change the Question and are at a great deal of pains to prove
that which no body denies; such sayings as assert the Saints Praying for us,
are frequent among the ancient Fathers, and that not only for the Church
Militant in general, but in particular for those, whose persons and conditions
were well known to them on Earth, and these are cunningly shufled in by the
Romish Doctors as proofs for invocation of them, with a design to impose on the
unwary vulgar, who are supposed not to take notice of the difference (but it is
a wonder if they should not for it is wide enough) betwixt their Praying for us,
and our Praying to them. Neither is this the only instance wherein those
cunning Sophisters play this game, First alter the Nature of the Question, and
then where they have no Adversary, to Triumph in demonstrating the truth of it?

If the Question be whither the Bishop of Rome be the Supreme head of the
Church, and has an absolute Jurisdiction and Monarchy over all other Bishops
and Churches; they shall bring Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 2. c. 15. 16.
you a number of Testimonies out of both Greek and Latin Fathers, to prove St
Peter had a Primacy of Honor and Authority.

If the be Question be whither the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament be
Substantially turned into the body Bellar.. de Euchar. l. 2,
and blood of Christ; they shall write a whole Volum to prove the Truth and
Reality of Christ's presence in it, which we own as well as they, but after a
Spiritual manner, not corporally and by the way of Transubstantiation.

If the Question be about Purgatory, a place prepared for the Purification of
those Souls that depart hence not quite cleansed; they shall allege you
Fathers and those St. Ambr. Hill. Orig. Hierom. etc.
not a few of unquestionable name, to prove the utter Consumption of all things
by Fire at the end of the World.

So here, when the Question is whither we ought to Pray to Saints departed;
they bring innumerable Fathers to prove that the Saints departed do Pray for
us; hence we hear of that of St. Ignatius, My spirit salutes you, not only
Epist. ad Tral.
now, but also, when I enjoy God; and of St. Chrysostom in his Oration to those
that were to be Baptized, Remember me when that Kingdom receives you.

4. They produce the sayings and practices of some few in the Church for the
general and allowed Doctrine and Practice of the whole Church. If the story
should be true that Justina a Christian Virgin did in great distress jointly
supplicate the blessed Virgin with God and Christ, does it follow, that it was
the practice of all to do so? It cannot be denied but that many of the Fathers
let slip, in the heat of their Affection and Oration, many unwary speeches to
this purpose, and that many, otherwise good Men, were guilty of this excess of
Devotion to the Martyrs; the many miracles God was pleased to work at the
Memorials of the Martyrs for the Honor and Confirmation of the Faith,
reasonably begat a custom amongst Christians to resort to those places, and
there to offer their Prayers to God; and thinking, it may be, they could not
easily honor those too much whom God was pleased after so wonderful a manner
to declare his esteem of, from Praying to God at their Tombs, they began to
Pray to them themselves. But now

We are to distinguish betwixt the speeches of some particular Fathers and the
general Doctrine of the Church, betwixt what they express in Rhetorical strains
to move affection, and what they lay down in plain terms to inform the
judgment; betwixt what comes from them in the heat of their Discourses and
popular Orations, and what in cool and deliberate debates they set down for the
truth of Christ; it is generally confessed, that the Fathers of times hyperbolize,
particularly S. Chrysostom, and we must not take their flights of Fancy, for
the Doctrine of the Church.

We are to distinguish also betwixt what the Church did teach and allow, and
what she only tolerated and was forced to bear with; the Bishops and Governors
of the Church being many times engaged in weightier mattersin defending the
Christian cause again Heathens and Heretics, were not always at leisure to
reform abuses and irregular practices, but were forced too often to connive at
those Faults which they had not time and opportunity to redress; St. Austine
complains much of this piece S. Aust. de morib. Eccles. c. 31. tom. 1 Epis.
119. ad Janu. approbare non possum, liberius improbare non andeo.
of superstition in his days, that it had got such an head, that the good
Father wanted power to give a check to it; I can no way allow them, says he,
and yet I dare not freely reprove them, lest I either offend some good Men or
provocke some turbulen^ spirits.

5. They cite the practice of the Ancients Praying to God, that for the
Intercession of those Holy Men that had died in the Lord, he would grant them
their requests, as a good proof for direct Praying to them. The Ancients
generally believing that the Saints and Martyrs in the future state did
continually Pray to God in behalf of the Church Militant on Earth, and some,
that their Souls were present at their Shrines and Tombs, and did join their
Intercessions with those Prayers of the Christians that were there offered up
to God, were wont in their addresses to mention the Martyrs, and to beg the
effects of their Intercessions, that God would be moved by their supplications
as well as their own, to grant a supply of their wants and necessities; but
this is no more Praying to them, then Moses may be said to Pray to Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, when he besought God to remember them in behalf of the People
of Israel; then we may be said to Pray for help to that part of the Church of
Christ that is at a great distance from us, when we desire God to hear the
Prayers of his Church Catholic dispersed throughout the whole World in the
behalf of all Christian people, that in all places call upon him. Thus it is
said by the Historian that the Emperor Theod^sius, Ru^^in. Hist. l. 2. c. 33.
when Eugeni^ and his Compl^ces raised that dangerous Rebellion against him,
repaired With his Clergy and Laity to the Ora^ories and Chapples, and Sanctorum
intercessione,
there ly^^g Prostrate before the Tombs and Monuments of the Aposties and
Mar^yrs begged and and succor by intercession of the Saints. He did not pray
to any Saint^r Saints, he did not beg help of them, but supposing they Prayed
with him and for him, he prayed unto God, that he would send him help for the
sake of their In^e^cession in his behalf. This is also the meaning of those
expressions in St. Austin, that They ought to commend themselves to the Prayers
of the Martyrs, and frequent Aug. de Cur. promort c. 4.
their tombs with a Religious Solemnity, that they may become partakers of
their Me^its and be helped by their Prayers; that is, not by praying to them,
b^^ (holding, as was then commonly believed, that when Christians came to their
Tombs, the blessed Martyrs joined their Supplications with them) by Praying to
God to afford them the benefit of their Prayers, and that their Petitions might
succeed the better for the sake of their requests put up in conjunction with
their own. The same account may be given of St. Basils words in his O^a^^on on
the forty Martyrs, He that is in distress flies to them, and Ba^il. Hom. 20.
in, 40. Mart.
he that is in Prosperity runs to them; the one that he may have his condition
changed, the other that he may have his continued; but now to fly and to run
unto them, signifies no more then to fly and run to the Churches and ^omb where
they lie interred, for so it follows, here a Woman Praying for her Son is
heard, and here let us together with those Mar^yrs pour forth our Prayers;
Supposing it is likely, as was mentioned before, that the Mar^yrs Souls were
continually about their Tombs and Prayed for all that came thither to Pray for
themselves, the Father exhorts Christians to go thither, not to Pray to them,
but to join with them in Prayer unto God.

6. They tell us of many miracles wrought by God upon addresses made to Saints
and in this they triumph as an undeniable proof that God approves of such
addresses; God hears not Sinners, neither will he give his Glory to another,
and therefore were Prayers made to Saints a sin of that sacrilegious nature as
to rob God of his Honor, it is not to be thought that he would give suchcountenance
to them against himself, as to Crown them with success.

To this it may be answered; It Is certain that at first God was pleased upon
the Prayers of Christians put up to himself, to work many miracles for the
Confirmation of the Faith, but that any were wrought in answer to such Prayers
that at those places were in after Ages made to the Martyrs, is very uncertain
August. de Civit. Dei. l. 22. c. 8.
and much to be suspected: St. Austin names but two instances of this kind that
I have met withal, and at the same time he mentions them, blasts their credit
by telling us he had no undoubted Authority for the Truth of them; St.
Chrysostom not only declares that miracles in his time were ceased, but has
wrote a Discourse on purpose ^o give us the reasons why they are so, so that all
the miracles the Church of Rome pretends to on this account, are either
delusions of Satan, which God sometimes permits him to work for the Trial of
his people, or else Cheats and Impostures performed by cunning Men of their own
to wheedle and impose on the easy and credulous Vulgar.

V. That there is full and evident proof in Scripture against it.
IF that general rule of St. Austin's be allowed off, that God is so to be
Worshipped, that is, as to all the Aug. de consen. Evang. l. 1. c. 18
Essential parts of it, as he himself has commanded to be Worshipped, then all
those places of the Scripture that command us to direct our Prayers only to
God, and only in the Name and Mediation of Jesus Christ, do with equal force
forbid us to direct our Prayers to any other object, or to use any other Name
and Mediation. Now Texts to this purpose are inumerable.

Oh thou that hear Prayers, unto thee shall all Flesh Psalm 65. 2
come.

Call upon me in the time of trouble -- and I will deliver Psalm 50. 15
thee.

Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and Matt. 11. 28
I will give you rest.

Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will John 16. 23.
give it you.

In every thing by Prayer and supplication with Thanksgiving, Phil. 4. 6.
let your requests be made known unto God.

If any of you lack Wis^om, let him ask it of God, who Jam. 1. 5.
gives to all Men liberally, -- etc.

How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? Romans 10. 14.
Now if none but God is to be believed in, none but God is to be called upon.

These are very plain and convincing, and no others need to be produced, but
because the Romish Authors have been practicing upon some others, endeavoring
to obscure and weaken their evidence, which are yet no less clear and full; I
shall bring them forth, also, and not only wip off the dust that has been cast
upon them, but restore them to their own natural sense and Prespicuity.

They are chiefly these Four.

The First is, Luke 11. 2. When ye Pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven,
-- etc. For thine is the Kingdom, the Power; and the Glory for ever and ever.
Now the meaning of this precept must be one or both these two things, either
that we should use this form of words when we Pray, or that we should compose
all our Prayers after this pattern; take which we will; in either sense they
oblidge us to direct all our Prayers to our Heavenly Father; whose is the
Kingdom, Power, and Glory, whenever we repeat this form of Prayer, we address
to God as the Object, saying, Our Father; and if no Prayer is to be made but
after this pattern then still* it follows that no other ought to be the Object
of them, but he who is Our Heavenly Father. It Is generally concluded on all
sides, that in this absolute and perfect form of our Lord's Prayer is contained
a Summary of what ever ought to be the subject matter of a Christians Prayer,
now since every Petition in it is directed immediately to God our Heavenly
Father, it follows that when ever we Pray, we are not only to Pray for no other
things but these blessings, but also to beg them of no other Being but him.

But to put by the force of the Argument taken from this command of our Lord's,
When ye Pray, say; or, Spenc. Script. mistaken by Protest. p. 57.
after this manner Pray ye; the Romanists tells us, that it is true, we are to
imitate this Prayer of Christ's in composing our own, as to it is brevity and
compendiousness, as to the subject matter of it, as to the the Catholickness of
its Spirit, oblidging us to Pray for others at the same time when we Pray for
our selves, saying, Our Father; but not as to the Object to whom our Prayers
are to be addressed, for then by the same Argument we may exclude the Second and
Third Persons in the Blessed Trinity as well as Angels and Saints; to this it is
no hard matter to give an answer. And

1. It must be confessed, that the word Father in this Prayer is to be mean'd
chiefly, though not solely, of the first person in the Sacred Trinity; he being
the Root and Fountain of the Deity, and the prime Original of all our
happiness, may in special be called upon by us, so far as is consistent with
our acknowledgment of the equal Divinity of the other Two Persons; for though
the Son and the Holy Ghost partake alike with him of the Divine nature and
consequently have a right to the same Adoration, yet forasmuch as God the
Father is the First Person, and the Father who Communicates that Divine nature
to them both, forasmuch as John 2. 29. John 6. 27. John 5. 26.
God the Father has that Essence in himself, and what he is, is from none, but
the Son and the Holy Ghost have it by Communication from the Father, and what
they are, they are from him, this Title may bear particular and primary respect
to him. Accordingly Ephesians. 1. 3.
we find the Apostles in a particular manner directing their Prayers to God the
Father; Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us, Ver. 17.
-- I cease not to make mention of you in my Prayers, that the God of our Lord
Jesus Christ; the Father of Glory, -- for this cause I bow my Knees to the
Father of our Lord Jesus, that he would grant you -- But

2. The word Father in this Prayer is to be taken Essentially, and not
Personally, and so excludes not the other two Persons of the most Holy and
Undivided Trinity but only those that are of a different nature from them. Now
if the whole three Persons are one in Essence, then when ever we Pray to, and
do Honor to God the Father, we must at the same time Worship John. 10. 20.
the other two, though not so directly, who are one with him. Thus our Savior
speaks, I and the Father are one; yea, the whole Three Persons are so, 1 John 5.
7.
as St. John tells us expressly, There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. We read that
'twas the John 5. 23.
will of God, That all Men should Honor the Son as they do the Father, and
that we should Honor the Holy Ghost as well as either, because we are equally
Baptized Matt. 28. 19.
into his name; Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son and the Holy Ghost; now if the Son and the
Holy Ghost are one in Essence with the Father, and to be Honored with the same
Honor, then although in this Title the Father be only expressly named and
invock'd, the other two persons cannot but be employed and comprehended in it.

3. We may consider that this Doctrine of the Trinity, being in a great measure
a stranger to the Old Testament, and the Apostles, when our Savior gave them
this Prayer, not sufficiently instructed in it, our Savior might teach them to
call upon God in suchh an expression; which, though for the present they might
understand only of God the Father, yet afterward when they should come more
fully to understand and believe the Trinity, might fairly be extended to take
in the other two persons, Son and Holy Ghost.

4. Since it is by virtue of our Spiritual relation to God by Christ, through
the operation of the Holy Ghost, that in a more special and particular manner
he is Our Father; when ever we call upon God as a Father, and Our Father, it
implies that we address to him in the Name and Mediation of Christ, and by the
assistance of the Holy Ghost; the Apostle tells believers that they had
received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they cried Abba Father: St.
Chrysostom's notion on the Text is, that the Jews Romans 8. 15.
during the time of the Old Testament, being under a Servile Dispensation, did
seldom or never presume to call upon God by that familiar appellation of a
Father; but the Holy Ghost moving believers after a miraculous and
extraordinary way, in the first days of Christianity, to invocke God by that
name, as our Savior had directed his Disciples before, might well be called
the Spirit of Adoption, as thereby declaring them to be his Adopted Sons.

Another evident proof are those words of the Apostle 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one
God and and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus. The natural
importance of the words seems to be this, that, as there is but one God only,
and no more, to whom we ought to Pray, so there is but one Mediator only, and
no more by whom we have access with boldness to the Thron of Grace; one
Mediator Emphatically, in the same sense as there is one God, and you may as
well make to your selves more Gods as more Mediators.

But to weaken the strength of this evidence, the Romanists distinguish betwixt
a Mediator of Redemption and a Mediator of Intercession, and tell us that the
Text is only to be understood of the former, which indeed is but one, but not
of the latter, which may be more then one, even as many as there are Angels and
Saints in Heaven; but how little this distinction does serve their turn, may
appear by considering.

1. That there is a vast difference betwixt an Intercessor and a Mediator of
Intercession; that Saints in Heaven, out of that Charity that all the Members
of Christ have for one another, do in general interceed for the good of that
Body of which they are a part, was owned and granted before; but this makes
them not Mediators of Intercession, to which office it belongs to receive the
Prayers of others, and to present them to God; and in order hereunto, they must
hear the Prayers of others, and receive information concerning their particular
States and Conditions, which they are not capable of.

2. That this Text is especially to be understood of that part of Christ's
Mediatory Office that consists in interceeding for us; the Apostle seems to
oppose these words to the Heathen Form of Praying, which was to many Gods by
many Doemons, who were reputed Agents or Mediators between their chief Gods
and them; now all that the Heathens attributed to their Doemons was
Intercession only and the Apostle shows that Christ being made a Mediator,
every way effectual for that end, ^^^re could be no necessity of any Mediators
of Intercession besides him; so that the Apostle here. replies two things to
the Heathens multiplicity of Mediators; 1. That God had appointed but one, the
God-Man Christ Jesus; therefore he says, ver. 7. that he was ordained a
Teacher of the Gentiles in Faith and Verity, for establishing the Christian
Faith and Truth in this particular especially, of one God and one Mediator, in
contradiction to the plurality of Gods and Mediators amongst the Gentiles;
answerable to this are those words of the Apostle in another place, Though
there be many that are called Gods (as there be Gods many and Lords many) but
to us there is but one 1 Cor. 8. 5.
God the Father and one Lord Jesus Christ; here there is a manifest and direct
opposition betwixt the Heathen way of Praying and the Christian; the Heathens
had many Gods and many Lords Mediators, the Christians, but one God, and one
Lord Mediator; the Heathens had many Sovereign Gods betwixt whom and Men they
supposed there was no immediate intercourse; they had also many under Gods or
Doemons, by whose Agency and Mediatourship they addressed themselves to their
Sovereign Gods, this the Apostle confutes, and shows that Christians are taught
to believe and profess but one God, Maker of all things to whom they ought to
Pray, and but one Lord, Mediator and Advocate, by whom they offer their
Petitions to him. 2. That there needed no other besides this one, he being a
Mediator of Redemption too, and on that account had not only an Authority and
Commission from God to show for that office, but an infinite worth and
invaluable merits of his own to plead in behalf of Mankind and to procure the
gran^ing of their requests; he has purchased what he begs for, and atoned for
what he Pra^s for; having no Sin of his own to answer for, he was excellently
qualified to interceed for Pardon for our Sins; and having perfectly fulfilled
all righteousness and shed his most precious Blood for us, he highly merited of
God, both for us and for himself; for us, the several blessings he interceeds
for; for himself the God like Honor and Royalty to be the Donour and Dispenser
of them. Hence it is that the Apostle here makes his Mediation ^^ ^^pend on his
Propitiation, and after he had told there is but one Mediator, presently
subjoins, Who gave himself a Ransom for all; to the same purpose is that of St.
John Ver. 6. 1. Joh. 21. 2.
If any Man Sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, that is, the same with a
Mediator of Intercession, and that we might be fully assured of the greatness
of his John 2. 1, 2.
Authority and Power, he adds, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the
Propitiation for our Sins.

A third Scripture against Saint-Invocation are those words of our Savior,
Mat. 4. 10. Taken out of Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve. Now if Prayer be a necessary and chief part of God's
Worship, as all are agreed it is, we are bound by this Scripture to Pray only
to God. But to this they say, there are several degrees of Religious Worship,
and that it is only an inferior kind wherewith they Worship the Saints
departed, called by them Duleia, when it is applied to ordinary Saints, and
hyperduleia, when, to the blessed Virgin; and that they never Worship them as
they do God, with Latreia, the highest kind of Worship; if it be asked; How
does this appear, since the same Signs and outward Acts of Worship are
performed to the one as well as to the other? They answer, that they have
higher conceptions and intentions of Honor to God in the exercise of their
offic^^ to him, then when they perform the like to any Angel or Saint depar^ed.
To this several things may be said,

1. If these words, him only shall thou serve, are to be understood only of the
highest degree of Religious worship, as a part of the whole, and distinguished
from a lower kind, they had not been a sufficient answer to the Devils demand;
he might thus have answered, I acknowledge the Sovereign and Almighty Power of
God as well as you, That it is he alone can command Ver. 3,
Stones to become Bread; and this Power I have over the Kingdoms of the World,
I own to have received from him, for it was delivered to me. And therefore I do
not Luke 4. 6.
desire that thou should Worship me as thou do God with Latreia, with the
highest degree of worship; but only with Duleia, a lower kind; thy Heart, the
highest and most elevated thoughts and conceptions of thy mind, may be given to
God, it is only the outward Act that I challenge of thee, that thou would
only fall down and Worship me, or by falling down worship Me.

2. That the Scriptures often use these two words, Latreia, and Duleia,
promiscuously, to signify the same thing; and as sometimes Latreia, is set to
signify that Civil Honor and Service that is due to Men in Eminency and
Authority; so is Duleia, to express that Religious worship that is only due to
God. As to the first, God Deuteronomy. 28. 48. Latreuseis
thus threatens the Isralites, therefore thou shall serve thine Enemies; as to
the other, many places may be instanced in; thus when Samuel exhorted the House
of Isarel, to prepare their Hearts unto the Lord and to serve him only, and
when the Apostles urged Christians to be fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord,
and when our Savior said, ye cannot 1. Sam 7. 3. duleusate, Romans 10. 11.
duleuontes Matt. 6. 24. u dunasthe Theo dulein.
serve God and Mammon, Duleuein, is the word made use of.

3. That there is no, such distinction in Religious worship as an higher and
lower kind, because whatever is Religious worship is such, with respect to God
only as the Object, and therefore can be but one, and that in the highest
degree, as God is one, and infinitely exalted above all. Religion, say the
Schoolmen, is a Moral Virtue which exhibits due Worship to God, as the L. 4
Inst. c. 28. de ver. Rel. c. 55.
Principal of all things. Lactantius therefore derives it a Religando, because
it ties Man to God; and St. Austin, a Religendo because Men choose God again
whom they had forsaken; It Is not therefore whatsoever is excellent, but
whatsoever is Divine, and as it is Divine, that is the Object of Religion; now
Angels and Holy Men, although there be some kind of Honor due to those
excellencies, that are found in them, an Honor Commensurate to those
excellencies; yet falling infinitely short of Divinity, must be excluded from
having any share of that worship, which either by God himself, or the universal
consent of Mankind, is made Religious, that is, appropriate to God. Neither.

4. Will it help the matter to say, that though the outward Acts and
Expressions of worship to both are the same, there is a vast differrence in the
inward Devotions of their minds and Souls, and that which they Pray to Saints
and Angels, they must not be thought to do it, with that height of Affection,
and trust and resignation, wherewith they call upon God? For, when all is done,
words and outward Acts will be reckoned to signify according to that sense and
meaning Custom and Institution has stamped upon them, and let the inward
thoughts of the Votary be what they will, if he apply to Saints and Angels in
such expressions and offices or with such Rites and Ceremonies, as according to
the usual acceptance of them, naturally import that Hope and Confidence, that
Love and Duty, that is due to God alone, he will be deemed to ascribe unto
them, naturally import that Hope and Confidence, that Love and Duty, that is
due to God alone, he will be deemed to ascribe unto them, the Honor which he
owes to God. Outward Acts of worship are declarative of the inward respect and
veneration of the Soul to God, as words are of the inward thoughts and
apprehensions of the mind; and, as when I use such words, which acording to
common custom signify such a Proposition, I must be concluded to mean and
intend that Proposition; so when I use such outward Acts of Worship, which by
Custom or Institution signify the Honor due to God, to any other, I must be
thought to ascribe the Honor that is due to God, to that other. The
Cori^^^ians, although they knew that an Idol was nothing in the World, yet
because they observed the Feasts that were dedicated to the Honor of the Idol,
Eating and Drinking in the Idols Temple, are said by the Apostle to Drink the 1
Cor. 20. 21.
Cup of Devils, and to be partakers of the Devils Tables, and to have
Fellowship with Devils; that is, by doing those actions that in those places
were used to signify the Worship of the Heathen Gods, although they intended no
Religion, but Civility and Complement in the compliance, they are said to
Worship those Heathen Gods, who were not Gods, but Devils. The Israelites that
halted betwixt God and Baal, although they could not but have higher
apprehensions of God then Baal, Yet by bowing the Knee to Baal and Kissing his
Mouth, by using those outward 1 Kings 19. 18.
Acts of Worship, wherewith the Heathens Worshipped him, are said to be guilty
of Idolatry. In sum, was a mental reservation of keeping the Heart to God, and
intending the highest degrees of Honor and Worship to him, sufficient to clear
Men from Idolatry, whilst they perform outward Acts Instituted and customarily
observed for Religious worship Exodus 32. 8
to any besides God; the Israelites could not be guilty of it, when they
Sacrified to the Golden-Calf they had made; nor the Wiser sort of Heathens, who
whilst they knew the vulgar Gods to be no Gods, but Cheats and Devils, did out
of fear of punishment comply with the vulgar practice of burning Incense to
them; and the Primitive Fathers were very much mistaken, who judged not only
those Christians who at the Emperors Command sacrificed to Idols against their
Consciences, guilty of Idolatry, but even those, who, though no threats could
move them to do it in Libellatici.
person, did yet either purchase Certificates that they had done it, when they
did it not, or procure some others, their Heathen Friends and servants to do it
for them, implicitly to be guilty of it.

I shall name but one Scripture more, Col. 2. 18. Let no Man beguile you of
your reward in a voluntary Humility and Worshipping of Angels -- and not
holding the head. Where we see the Apostles expressly condemns the Worship of
Angels as forsaking of Christ and not ^olding the head; and if the Worship of
Angels, it follows with greater force of reason, the Worship of Saints
departed. What this Worship was, Theodoret upon the place informs us; where he
says, that the Jews, that is, Jewish Christians, Having received the Law by the
Ministration of Angels, and holding that the God of all was Invisible, and in
accessible taught that Men ought to obtain the favor of God by the Means and
Intercession of Angels; and the same Father tells us that they had Oratories or
Chapels of St. Michael.

This St. Paul calls, ^ot holding the head, because they set up more Mediators
besides Christ, who was the only one appointed by God, and they that join
others with him, do forsake him; accordingly the Council of Loadicea condemned
it as Idolatrous; the words of the Canon are these; That christians Council
La^d. can. 35.
ought not to forsake the Church of God, and Invocate Angels, because they that
do so, forsake our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, and give themselves to
Idolatry. St. Paul and the Canon both speak so direct and home against the
Romanists, that Baronius, it seems, was hard put to it, to answer them, when
he is forced to beg Theodoret's Pardon, and tells him, with his good leave, that
he understood neither the one nor the other, that it was the Religious Worship
of false and Heathenish Gods, not that of good Angels that was forbid and
condemned by both of them, and that those Oratories of St. Michael were set up
by Catholics and not by Heretics, it being then the practice of the Church to
Invocate Angels. And now though we might safely venture Theodoret's Judgment
and Credit against Baronius's, yet we have no need of his Authority to find out
the true meaning of the Text; whoever considers that the Apostle condemns the
Worship of Angels in general, and duly weighs the series of his Discourse, will
easily apprehend, that it is not levelled against the Heathens who had not yet
embraced Christianity, but adhered to the Worship of their false Gods; but a
sort of Judaizing Christians, who retaining still a mighty Veneration for
Angels, as the supposed givers of the Law, endeavored to introduce the Worship
of them into the Church of Christ: Let no Man beguile you of your reward -- in
Worshipping of Angels, not holding the head; the Apostles Argument to dis^wade
them from that Worship is, that by doing so, they forsook Christ, which could
not have been an Argument to the Heathens who had never yet believed on him.

VI. That the Fathers of the first and purest Ages till after three hundred,
are all express and positive in their Writings against it.
HOw fully the sacred Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament do condemn
the Invocation of Saints, you have seen already; now that the Fathers of the
purest Ages understood the Scriptures in the same sense as Protestants do as to
this particular, and are also very clear in their writings against it, will
appear from these following Considerations;

1. They generally denied the Doctrine on which this of Saint-Invocation is
founded; viz. that Saints departed do now reign in Heaven, and enjoy the
Beatifick Vision. It Is by this blessed privilege especially, of seeing God,
that the Romanists ground their belief, that the perfected Spirits of just Men
in Heaven come to see all things in him, to know the Petitions and to be
acquaintwith the requests of their humble Supplicants; but now the Primitive
Fathers have peremptorly affirmed, that the Saints departed are not yet
admitted to the sight of God, but are only kept in certain hidden receptacles
in the full enjoyment of Peace and rest till the general Resurrection; this
they have not only asserted in so many words, and endeavored to Iren. l. 5. c.
31.
prove, from our Saviors Soul being in Paradise, which they will not have to
be the highest Heaven; but thinking them in a condition not yet fully and
completely happy, instead of Invocating them Chrysos. Tom. 6. p. 998.
did Pray for their farther Bliss and Consummation. So that denying the
foundation, they cannot be supposed to grant the Doctrine built upon it. No
fewer then Eighteen, by the Romanists own Confession, are of this opinion; and
though they should be mistaken, as their great Cardinal thinks they were, and
endeavors to prove, yet it is enough to our purpose, that they did not hold the
one, and therefore could neither teach nor practice the other.

2. One chief Argument which the Primitive Fathers used to prove the Divinity
of the Son and the Holy Ghost against the Arrians and Macedonians, was the
Catholic practice of the Church in Praying to them, which would not have been
of any force, had they believed that any Creatures, though never so highly
exalted in Nature and Condition, might have had that Honor paid unto them.
They tell us frequently in their writings, that when the Gospel directs us to
invocate the Son and Holy Ghost in conjunction with the Father, it proves them
Orig. l. 8. in Epis. ad Romans c. 10 Athan. Orat. 4. contr. Arrianos.
to be true God, that Invocation supposing them every where to be present when
they are invock'd, and that Omnipresence being the sole property of God. For
the same reason when the Arrians who conceived Christ to be no more then an
excellent and Godlike Creature, did yet Pray unto him, the Catholics accused
them of Idolatry. Had the Catholics at the same time practiced the Invocation
of Saints, the charge might have been returned with greater force upon
themselves, and whatever could have been thought of by the Catholics to excuse
themselves from that guilt, might with more strength have been urged by the
Arians in their behalf. Had the Catholics replied, as the Romanists do now,
that though they did Pray to the blessed Spirits, yet they did not do it with
that Sovereign, direct and final Prayer, nor with those Sublimest Thoughts and
intentions of Honor, wherewith they did address to God, but only with
indirect, subaltern and relative Prayer, and with no higher intentions of
Honor to them, then what is proportioned to the excellencies of their finite
nature; the Arrians might have returned upon them with great advantage; even
after the same manner, Sirs, and with the same due limitations do we Invocate
the Man Christ Jesus, and whilst we do no more but so, we have more reason for
what we do then you can have, since Christ is confessedly superior to all
Creatures, and consequently deserves at least as great an Honor to be paid to
him as unto any the highest amongst them, though we do not think him God equal
with the Father, yet the Scripture assures us he is exalted far above all
Angels, Principalities and Powers and every name which is named in Heaven and
Earth; and though we may not Honor the Son in the same high degree with an as
of equality as we do the Father, yet the Scripture enjoins us to do it with the
same kind of Honor, with an as of similitude and likeness; and this is more
then can be said in defense of that Honor and Invocation you offer to Saints
and Angels.

3. Because the Fathers condemned the Heathens as guilty of Idolatry for
Invocating their Doemons or inferior Deities, which in a manner is the same
with the Romish Invocation of Angels and Saints. This has been invincibly
proved Dean of St. P. against G.
against the Romanists by a great Light of our Church; who has made the Parity
and Agreement betwixt them to be very obvious; as,

1. In the Object of their Invocation; the Heathens had one Supreme God and a
multitude of Inferi^u^ Deities; the Romanists have also, besides one God above
all, a multitude of Angels and Saints departed. It may be the Vulgar and
Ordinary People might mistake for their Gods, Jupiter of Crete, Mars, Venus,
Vulcan, Bacchus, Persons that had been famous for Lewdness and Adulteries; and
if they did, it is to feared not much better an account can be given of many of
the Canonized Saints in the Church of Rome; but the Wiser sort had far
different apprehensions of their Deities, they said and believed the same of
the Supreme God, as Christians do, That he made the whole Plot Enn. 5. l. 9. c.
5. Laert. in Vit. Thal. p 24. Senec. Ep. 83
World, and sees all things, that he wants neither Power nor Will, nor
Knowledge to make his Providence concerned in the least things, that neither
the Actions nor the very thoughts of Men's minds can be hid from him.

Accordingly we find St. Paul affirming of the Heathens that they knew God,
ascribing to the Heathens Jupiter, he being the Creator of all things, so he
told the Athenians, Him whom ye Ignorantly Worship, declare I Acts. 17
unto you, God that made the World, and the being the Father of all Mankind,
when he said in the words of one of heir Poets, for we are all his offspring.
And then for their Inferior Deities, there is so very little disparity betwixt
them and the Angels and Saints Invocated by the Church of Rome, that it seems
to be only in name. Accordingly St. Austin Confessed that the Platonists did
affirm the same things of their good Demons as Christians St. Aust. de civit
Dei. l. 9. c. 23.
did of the blessed Angels; did they distinguish their Inferior Deities into
such Spirits as were by Death delivered from the Body, and such as never had
any; into such as always lived in Heaven, and such, Apul. de Deo. Socr. p. 50.
cic. de leg. l. 2.
whose merits had advanced them thither; how exactly does this suit with the
difference given by Romanists betwixt Angels and Saints departed, and the
reason of their Worshipping of them, The spiritual and Heavenly Nature of the
one and the Merits of the other?

2. In the Office ascribed to them. The employment the Heathens put upon their
Demons was to Aug. de civ. Dei. l. 8, e. 18.
carry up the Prayers of Men to God: and what they had obtained, to bring back
to Men; imagining the Supreme God to be of too pure and sublime a Nature,
immediately to converse with Men, they looked upon these as Advocates and
Mediators betwixt God and Men, and as Intercessors and Procurers of their
desired blessings; and is not this the same thing the Church of Rome says,
touching the Office of Angels and blessed Spirits in the behalf of Men, such as
do solicit God for them, and by their more prevailing merits and interest in
God, obtain of him what they themselves Pray for?

3. In that which they make the Foundation of their Worship and Invocation to
them, viz. a middle sort of excellency betwixt God and Men; so said the
Heathens, that there were a sort of Beeings between God and Men that
participated of both Natures, and that by means of those intermediate Beeings
an intercourse was maintained betwixt Heaven and Earth; and as God was to be
Worshipped for himself, so the others, to be Loved and Honored for his sake, as
being Gods by way of participation, as likest to him, as his Vicars, and as
Reconcilers betwixt them: And is not this the declared reason why the Church of
Rome gives Religious Worship to Angels and departed Saints, Because of a middle
sort of worth and excellency that is in them, that is neither infinite as the
divine, nor so low as the humane, but Spiritual and Supernatural, whereby
approaching near to the Divinity, they have great interest in the Court of
Heaven, and ought, as Celsus said of their Demons, to be Prayed unto to be
favorable and propitious to us. So exact you see is the parallel betwixt them.
Now against this Daemon-Worship the Fathers replied, that whatever great and
supernatural excellencies were to be found in the Spirits above, ought indeed
to have an Acknowledgement and Honor paid to them both in Mind and Action,
proportioned and Commensurate to such excellencies; but yet they were not to be
esteemed inwardly as Gods, nor to be Worshipped with any outward Act of
Religious Worship, be it, erecting Altars, making Vows or putting up Prayers to
them, as if they were such, For all and every part of that was solely due to
God and not to be given to any the highest Created Excellency. As you may see
their minds more fully in the next particular.

4. The Fathers positively assert that none but God ought to be invocated.

And the first I shall mention is that advice Ign. Ep. ad Philadelph.
which Ignatius gave the Virgins of his time, not to direct their Prayers and
Supplications to any, but only to the Blessed Trinity, Oh ye Virgins have
Christ alone before your Eyes, and his Father in your Prayers, being enlightened
by the Spirit.

Irenaeus in his first Book taking notice of some Persons, who had entertained
strange fancies concerning the Power of Angels and accordingly gave Divine
Worship to them, tells us plainly that the Doctrine and Practice of the Iren,
l. 2. c. 57.
Church in his days was far otherwise, and that throughout the World, it did
nothing by Invocation of Angels nor by Incantations, but purely and manifestly
directs her Prayers to God who made all, and calls upon the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Feuardentius in his notes upon the place would have the words of
the Father to be understood only of Prayers made by Evil Spirits and angels;
but then why did not the Father express it so? Why does he exclud all Angels
without distinction from Divine Worship; when he says the whole Church every
where called only upon God and his Son Christ Jesus.

Eusebius in his History has set down a long Prayer of the of the Holy Martyr
Polycrap, which he uttered at the time of his Suffering, wherein there is not
any one Petition put up to Saints, but every one directed to God through the
Meditation of Christ, closing his Prayer with Eusebius. l. 4. c. 15.
this Doxology; Therefore in all things I Praise thee, I Bless thee, I Glorify
thee through the Eternal Priest Jesus Christ thy Beloved Son, to whom with
thee, Oh Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Glory now and for ever.

To which we may add, what also is Recorded by the same Author, that when the
Church of Smyrna desired the Body of their Martyred Bishop to give it an
Honorable Inte^ment, and was denied it by the Governor, upon the unworthy
suggestion of the Jews, that they would Worship it; they thus replied, We can
never be induced to Worship any other but Christ, him being the Son of God we
adore, others as Martyrs and his sincere Disciples we worthily Love and
Respect: and that which here deserves a particular observation, is, what the
Learned Primate of Armagh has pointed out to us, viz. that what in the
Original Greek Sebein Religiously to Worship, is in the Latin Edition that was
wont to be read in all the Churches of the West, rendered precem Orationis Ex
passion. M. S. 7. Kalend. Febr. in Bib. Eccl. Sarish. and Dom. Rob. Cotton.
impendere; to impart the Supplication of Prayer.

The nex^ Testimony I shall produce is that of Origin, who is very full to this
purpose; in his Writings against Celsus, he tells us, We must endeavor to
please God alone, and labor to have him propitious to us, procuring his good
will with Godliness and all kind of Virtue; and if Celsus will have us to
procure the good will of any others after him that is God ov^^ all, let him
consider that as when the Body is moved, the motions of the shadow thereof does
follow it; so in like manner, having God favorable to us, who is over all, it
follows that we shall have all his Friends, both Angels and Spirits loving to
us; and whereas Celsus had said of the Angels, that they belong to God, and in
that respect were to be Prayed unto that they may be favorable to us; he thus
sharply replies, Away with Celsus's Council, saying that we must Pray to
Angels, for we must Pray to him who is God over all, and we must Pray to the
Word of God, his only begotten Son and the first born of all Creatures, and we
must entreat him, that he as High Priest would present our Prayer unto his God
and our God. And when Celsus Objected that the Christians did not keep to their
own rule of Praying to and Worshipping none but God, since they gave the same
Honor to Christ, whom they knew to be a Man; he replies, that Christ was God
as well as Man, one with the Father, and proves it from Miracles and Prophesies
and Precepts that this Honor was given to him to be Worshipped as they
Worshipped the Father.

Had Celsus Objected that the Christians Worshipped Angels and Saints departed,
it had been laid right, and would have born hard upon them, and he had inferred
strongly, that they might as well Worship their Inferior Deities; but Celsus
Objects no such thing (but only their Worshipping of Christ which Origin was
well provided to answer;) and this is an evident proof that the Christians were
not guilty of it. Had there been but the least ground to suspect them for it,
it would have been so hugely serviceable to his cause, and with so much force
have rebounded back upon the Christians, that it is not to be imagined so
industrious and spightfull an Adversary as Celsus, would have omitted, with the
greatest Insult and Triumph, to have laid it at their Door.

To these we might add the Suffrages of many more; St. Cyprian.
who have written set Treatises of Prayer, teaching us to regulate all our
Prayers after that most perfect Pattern of our Lords, and ever to direct our
Petitions to our Heavenly Father only.

Gregory Nyssen says we are taught to Worship and aktiston physin Cont. Eunom.
Tom. 2. Orat. 4. O^at. 3. Contr. Arrian. De ver. Relig. c. 55. de civit. Dei.
l. 22. c. 10. Ep. 42.
Adore that Nature only that is uncreated.

Athanasius, That God only is to be Worshipped, that the creature is not to
Adore the creature.

St. Austin says expressly that the Saints are to be Honored for imitation,
not to be Adored for Religion; that at the Communion Table they were named, but
not Invocated. And again, you see the head of the most renowned Empire stooping
with his Diadem, and Praying at the Sepulcher of Peter the Fisherman, namely,
it is to God himself that he Prays, though at the Tomb of Peter.

Epiphanius reproving, as he calls it, the Women's Hoeres. 79. adver.
Collyridian.
Heresy, who were wont to offer up a Cake to the Blessed Virgin, has these
words, Let Mary be in Honor, but let the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost
be Worshipped; and to show us what a very ill opinion he had of that at least
Superstitious practice, he six times repeats in that tract, Marian medies
^roskyneito Let no Man Adore Mary.

To name no more; Tertullian in his Apology for the Apol. c. Sect. 30. 2. 3.
Christians thus expresses himself; after he had set down the many great
Blessings the Christians thought themselves ever oblidged to beg for their
Emperors, As long life, and Valiant Armies, and a Faithful Senate, and Loyal
Subjects, and a peaceable Reign; these things, says he, I may not Pray for
from any other but from him of whom I know I shall obtain them, because both it
is he who is alone able to give, and I am he to whom it appertains to obtain
that which is requested, being his Servant who observe him alone.

VII. That the Doctrine and Practice of Saint-Invocation is Impious and
Idolatrous.
THis, I think, will be fully made out from these three particulars.

1. This ascribes to Angels and Saints the Attributes and Perfections that are
solely proper and peculiar to God, viz. his Omniscience and Omnipresence; for,
not only, when Mental Prayers, as the Church of Rome directs, but (since the
blessed Spirits above cannot be supposed to espouse the cause of an insincere
Votary) when vocal Prayers also are offered up to them, it supposes them Privy
to the very thoughts, and acquainted with the Hearts of Men; again, when
innumerable Prayers and Supplications from Millions of places at the greatest
distance from one another, are at the same time immediately put up to them, it
supposes in like manner, that they are present in all places and at the same
time can give Audience to all their Petitioners. Now what more or greater can
be said of God? Is not this that infinite knowledge, that Omnipresent Power,
and never absent Nature that the Scriptures solely attribute to the Creator of
all things, and have denied to any of the highest Form of the Creatures? And
although, I will not undertake to describe to you the exact bounds aad Measures
of the Angelical Nature and Perfections, how perspective their Knowledge is?
How piercing their understanding? How swift their motion? Yet, sure I am, that
neither they nor any other the most elevated part of Gods Creation can by their
Natural Power know the Hearts of Men, and be in all places at one instant of
time. It is God alone whose understanding is infinite, who looks down from
Heaven and beholds all the ways of the Sons of Men, He, even he knows all
the Hearts of the Children 1 King. 8. 27.
of Men. It Is he that sees in secret. And God challenges it as a peculiar to
himself; The Heart is Matt. 6. 4. Jerem. 17. 9. 10.
deceitful above all things, and disperatly Wicked, who can know it? I the Lord
search the Heart, and try the Reins. By this Argument the Fathers Triumphed
over the Arrians and Macedonians in proving the Divinity of the Son and the
Holy Ghost, which yet would have been no Argument at all, had not this
Knowledge been an Incommunicable perfection in the Divine Nature.

But it is said, that it is God indeed that only Naturally, and of himself, knows
the Hearts o Men, but this hinders not, but that others, his Saints and Angels
may know them by Communication from him, viz. Either by Revelation from God or
by the Beatifick Vision, Seeing all things in God who sees all things.

In answer to this, not to mention how it contradicts the express words of
Scripture, which, without any distinction or limitation, does as plainly assert
as words can do it, That God only knows the Heart; not to mention the many
disputes the Romanists have among themselves which way is to be chosen as the
most probable, and after what manner is either way this knowledge is derived
and past from God to them; these things may be said,

1. That God has no where declared that he has Communicated this Privilege
and Prerogative of his Nature to Saints and Angels, or that he does any way
make visible or known to them the Hearts and the Requests of Men; and now, if
what is not of Faith is Sin, we having no Text of Scripture to Build our Faith
upon in this particular, must of necessity Sin in Praying to them on that
supposition, and commit that very sin too, which we doubt whither we so doing
commit or no; nay the silence of the Scripture in this particular, has in a
manner determined the point, and we may conclude that the most jealous God, has
reserved the Honor of Intimation to himself alone, since he has no where given
us the least hint or intimation of leave, to pray to them.

2. We are informed in Scripture that the Saints departed do not particularly
know or mind what is done 2 Chronicles. 34. 28.
here below, God tells Josiah. thou shall be gathered to thy Grave in Peace,
neither shall thine Eyes see the Evil I will bring upon this place. The Dead
know not any thing, that is, of the affairs of this World, says the Eccl. 9. 5.
Preacher. His Sons come to Honor and he kneweth it not, and they are brought
low and he perceives it not of them, says Job of Man in the other State. When
2 Kings 2. 9.
Elijah was about to be taken up into Heaven, he thus spoke to Elisha, Ask what
thou will before I am taken from thee. Strongly implying that when he was once
gone, 'twas in vain to ask any thing of him. Elijah was immediately taken up
into Heaven, made no stay by the way in Limbo, as the Romanists themselves
agree, being in Heaven, his Love to Elisha could not be forgot, nor his
Interest in God lessened, but rather both by being exalted thither, very much
increased and augmented; so that no reason can be given why he should limit and
fix his making his desires known to him to the time of his abode with him on
Earth, but only this, his persuasion that in the other State he should not be
capable to hear his requests, and so all his future addresses to him would be
ineffectual. To these we may add that known place in Isaiah, Abraham does not
know us and Israel is ignorant of us; from whence St. Austin concludes, that if
those great Men Isa. 63. 16.
and Founders of their Nation were ignorant of what was done in after Ages to
their Posterity, why should the Dead S. Aust. de cura pro morie c. 13.
be thought in a condition to know or help their surviving friends in what they
do.

3. They that will have God acquaint particular Saints and Angels with those
Petitions that are put up to them, impose a very Servile and Dishonorable
Office on God; and as sometimes they will have us, out of Discretion and
Humility go to God by Saints and Angels, as Men make their way to a Prince by
his Favorites; now they make the King and his Subjects to change places, and
God is sent to wait on them with the requests of their Votaries. What can be
more strangely ridiculous then this Position of theirs? That the Petitioner
must first make his suit to Angels and Saint^, then God must tell those Angels
and Saints both the person that Prays, and the boon he Prays for, then the
Angels or Saints must back again and present them to God. Or, when any one
addresses to an Angel or Saint, to supplicate the blessed Virgin in his behalf,
God must first tell this Angel or Saint, the contents of the Address, then he
must Post to the blessed Virgin, she upon the first notice of it, must have
recourse to her Son, and he upon the motion of his Mother, repair to his
Father, to present that request to him which he himself first revealed. But is
not this an insufferable affront to God, and an intolerable abuse of
themselves? To send the most high God on the Errands of his Creatures, and to
apply themselves to broken Cisterns, when they may directly go to the Fountain
it self of all blessings?

4. Neither can the Angels and Spirits above know the Hearts and Petitions of
their supplicants any more by virtue of the sight of God, then by Revelation
from him; this fond opinion depends upon this Romish gingle, That seeing God,
they must in him see all things that in Idea are contained in him: but does not
the Scripture assure us, That no one knows the things of God but the Spirit of
God that is in him? Do they not tell us, how 1 cor. 2. 11.
ignorant the Angels were of the great Mystery of Man's Redemption,
notwithstanding their nearness to God, Ephesians. 3. 10.
and beholding his Face, Till it was made known to them by the church. Does not
our Savior let us know that 1 Pet. 1. 12.
he himself as Man, though his Humanity was Hypostatically united to the
Divinity, did not pretend to know all the Councils and Purposes of God?
Speaking of the day of Judgment, he says, Of that day and hour knows no Man,
no Matt. 24. 36
not the Angels but the Father only. Why then should it be thought credible
that the blessed spirits above, by beholding Gods Face, do in that Glass of the
Divinity see all things and transactions that are done and hear all Prayers and
Petitions that are made by the sons of Men?

2. This Doctrine and Practice is highly derogatory from the Glory of God as
Governor of the World. God is the great Lord of Heaven and Earth, all that we
are and all that we have we derive from him; we are upheld by his Power and
maintained by his bounty and Goodness; In him we live, and move, and have our
being; he gives to all life and breath and all things; he numbers the hairs of
our head, paints the Lillies of the Field beyond the Glory of Solomon, feeds
the young Ravens that call upon him, takes care of Sparrows; much more of Man,
who is of a more worthy and excellent Nature, much more yet of Nations and
Kingdoms who consist of multitudes of Men linkt together by Laws and
Government; and* though sometimes when he pleases, he makes use of the Ministry
of Angels, and makes them the Instruments of his Providence toward the sons of
Men, yet he has no where told us, that he has divided to them, much less to
Saints departed, their several Provinces, or set them their particular tasks
that he has made them Presidents over such Countries or Cities, Patrons and
Guardians over such persons or professions, that he has given them a power over
such and such Maladies and Diseases; but, has reserved the power of dispensing
his kindnesses, where, to whom, and in what measure, in his own hands; and
therefore all our trust and confidence ought entirely to be placed in God, all
our Thanks and Praises are due to him, and he alone is to be acknowledged as
the Author and Donor of all our blessings; but now from that Presidentship and
protection, that power and patronage, that the Romanists intruding into these
things they have not seen, without sufficient ground Col. 2. 18.
ascribe to Angels and Saints, over particular Kingdoms, persons, and in
particular Cases and Circumstances, (though as substitutes under God) arises
naturally some degree of trust and confidence in them, some debt of Homage and
praise to them, and it is well if the person oblidged looks any higher in his
returns of Love and Thankfulness then to that particular Angel or Saint he
prayed to, and from whose deputed power and Authority he thinks he received his
deliverance; and what is this but to rob God of the Honor of being sole
Governor of the World, and to make some of his Creatures who are no less
beholding to him for their subsistence then the rest, to partake with him of
that Trust and Affection that Homage and subjection, that is wholly due to him
from all his Creatures? What is this, as our Church in her Homily expresses it,
But a turning from the Creator to the Creature? Cursed is Man that trusts in
Man, says the Prophet, and Jerem 17. 5. 7
for the same reason in any Finite and Created Being, because in what degree
he does so, in the same does his Heart depart from God, but blessed is the Man
that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is.

What low and mean conceptions of God have those Men, who think his Government
of the World must be modelled and conformed to a Princes Government over his
Kingdom; and because, he being but a Man, and so not able in person to hear all
complaints and redress all grievances, appoints substitutes under him, Judges
and Magistrates to do it, therefore God must do so too; whereas there is an
infinitely wider distance betwixt the Wisdom, and knowledge, and Goodness, and
Power of God, and those of the most acccomplish'd Governor, then there is
betwixt the height of Heaven and the lowest center of the Earth; My thoughts
Esa. 55. 8. 9.
are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord, for as
the Heavens are higher then the Earth, so are my ways higher then your ways,
and my thoughts then your thoughts. The Wisest Monarch on Earth falls
infinitely short of the perfections of God, his Knowledge is but short, his
Power small, and therefore cannot possibly without the information and
assistance of others extend the influences of his Government over all his
subjects; did he not make use of more Eyes and more Hands then his own, the
complaints of some would be altogether neglected, and the cause of others not
rightly judged, his mistakes would be innumerable, and his wings too short to
cherish and foster, to shelter and cover every corner of his Realm: But could
he act with that plenitude of Wisdom, and Knowledge, and Power that is in God,
all then might have access to his Person, either immediately, or by his Son,
that is of like Nature and Power with him, and no Man fear the being sent back
unheard, or the having his cause misjudged, the not having justice done him, or
Mercy in a compassionable case withheld from him; Gods Wisdom is never wearied
with seeing, nor his Power tired with acting in the World. supposing the
affairs of the World to be infinite which they are not, yet God is infinite
too, and now an infinite God can with as much ease manage, and govern an
infinite number of affairs, as one Wiseman can prudently manage one affair,
Infinite bearing the same proportion to Infinite as one does to one.

The same fancy likewise of making the Court of Heaven resemble Princes Courts
on Earth, has brought forth that excuse in the Romish Supplicants, that it is
out of an humble sense of their own unworthiness, and an awful regard to the
Infinite Majesty of God, that they address to him, as Earthly subjects to their
King, not immediately to himself, but by the Mediation of Angels and Saints,
those Courtiers and Favorites of Heaven. But what Wiseman on Earth who is
abundantly satisfied of the readiness and ability of his Prince to help him,
and has free leave given him on any ocasion to come, immediately, or by his
Son, to him, will choose to wave this freedom of access, and apply himself to
some inferior Officer and Favorite, (of whose Power and Interest he is not so
well assured,) either to relieve him himself, or to procure relief of the King
for him: This is our case, God is of infinite Wisdom, Goodness and Power, every
way able on all occasions to afford suitable aids and supplies to the wants of
his Creatures, has not only allowed, but commanded all to call upon him in the
day of trouble, to pour out their complaints to him, has over and over
promised to hear their Prayers and to answer them, has appointed his own Son,
God with himself, the Master of Requests, from time to time to receive all the
Petitions of his Subjects, and both the one and the other are infinitely more
able, and infinitely more willing to hear and succor them, then the Best and
Wisest and most Powerful of all Created beings; and shall we now be afraid to
take the liberty that God has given us? Shall we call that Impudence which God
has made our Duty? Whilst we pretend Hu^ility, shall we forseit our
Allegiance? And distruct his promises and suspect the Goodness of his Nature
for fear of being too Saucy and too Bold with his person? To this pretense of
voluntary Humility, the Fathers long since, particularly St. Ambrose and St.
Chrysostom, gave a satisfactory answer; St. Ambrose, or whoever was the Author
of those Commentaries that go under his name, observing that the Heathens used
the same Apology for going to their Gods by their inferior Deities, as the
Romanists do now for their addressing to God by In Romans 1. 21.
Saints and Angels, namely, As Men go the King by his Courtiers, out of
Humility and a deep sense of the infinite distance betwixt God and them, calls
it a miserable excuse, and adds, is any Man so mad and regardless of himself to
give the Honor due to the King to any of his Courtiers, which if a Man does,
he is condemned of Treason? And yet they think themselves not guilty, who give
the Honor due to Gods name to a creature, and forsaking God Adore their Fellow
Servants, as though any thing greater then that were reserved for God himself.
But therefore we go to a King by his Officers and Servants, because the King is
but a Man, who knows not of himself whom to employ in his public affairs
(without information from others.) But with God it is otherwise, for, nothing
is hid from him, he knows the deserts of every one, and therefore we need no
spokes-Man but a Devou^ mind, for whenever such an one shall speak to him, he
will Answer him. St. chrysostom also often to the same St. chry. sermon. 7. of.
Repentance. sermon. in. Psalm 4. p. 524 p. 802.
purpose denies the way of our coming to God to be like the manner of Kings
Courts; When thou have need, says he, to sue unto a King, thou are forced
first to apply to his favorites and go a great way about? but with God there
is no such thing he is entreated without an Intercessor, it suffices only that
thou cry in thine Heart and bring tears with thee, and entering in straightway
thou may draw him unto thee; and for example hereof he sets before us the
Woman of Canaan; she entreated not James, she beseeched not John, neither did
she go to Peter, but brake through the crowd, to Christ himself; saying, I have
no need of a Mediator, but taking Repentance with me to recommend me, I come
to the Fountain it self; for this cause did he descend, for this cause did he
take Flesh, that I might have the boldness to speak unto him, I have no need of
a Mediator, have thou Mercy upon me.

3. It Is highly injurious to the Honor of Christ, as the only Mediator God
has appoint betwixt God and Man. God, as the reward of the unspotted innocence
of his life and perfect obedience of his Death exalted him to the right hand of
Majesty and Glory, bestowed a mediatorious Kingdom on him, invested him with
all Power in Heaven and Ea^^h, and gave Acts 2.
him Authority to receive and answer the Prayers of his People. Jesus whom ye
flew and hanged on a Tree, Acts. 5. Phil. 2. 9.
him has God exalted to be a Prince and a Savior; Let all the House of Israel
know assuredly, that that same Jesus whom ye crucified, God has made Lord and
Christ. He humbled himself and became obedient unto the Death, even the Death
of the cross, wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a name which
is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every Knee should bow, and every
tongue confess that Jesus is the Lord, to the Glory of God the Father, so that
now to make more Mediators then Christ, is, not only to undervalue his
all-sufficient merits, to distrust his never-failling Interest and Power with
God, but also to invade that Honor and Royalty that God has conferred on him
alone, by giving to Angels and Saints the same Power, they give them the same
Honor too, and Christ is robbed of both, whilst others are made to divide
with him. But to which of the Angels or Saints departed, said God at any time;
Sit thou on my right hand to make intercession for Men? Of which of them has he
at any time affirmed, as he has done of Christ, He is able to save them to the
uttermost that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession
for Men? That if any Man Sin, he is an Advocate with the Father for him; Or
whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in his name, it shall be given you?
Certainly, they who will have Angels and Saints Mediators betwixt God and Men
ought to produce a Commission signed by God or his Son Jesus to constitute them
such, but this they are no more able to do, then they are to make a grant of
such Power and Honor themselves to them. It Is true the Blessed Spirits above
are said to stand about the Throne of God, and the Holy Angels to behold his
Face, and as the Honor of a Prince is increased by the number of his
Attendants, so is our Lords exaltation rendered the more Glorious by those ten
thousand times ten thousand that Minister unto him; but yet it is never said,
They sit at Gods right Hand, or live for ever to make Intercession for us; and
having no such delegation of Power from God for this office, the Honor and
Worship that belongs to it, cannot be given to them without manifest Wrong and
Sacrilege to Christ who has? The Holy Angels are Gods ministering Spirits, and
the Spirits of Just-Men departed, his Glorified Saints; but God has made Jesus
the Lord and Christ; and put all things in Heaven and Earth in Subjection under
his feet; of him only has he said, Let all the Angels Honor him, and all the
Saints fall down before him, and all Men Honor the Son even as they Honor the
John 5. 23
Father. Amen.

To Conclude.
WEre we certain that the Saints departed do now reign in Heaven and enjoy the
Beatifick Vision, and that it was lawful to Invocate such as are undoubtely
Saints, as the Blessed Virgin and the Holy Apostles; Yet, methinks, a wary Man
should be shy, and not over-forward to exhibit that honor to all whom the Pope
has Cannoniz'd; I cannot for my heart but think, that the Prelates and Bishops
in King Henry the Eighth's time had as much reason to Unsaint Thomas Becket for
being a Rebel against his Prince, as Pope Alexander the Third had to Canonize
him for being a Biggot for the Church. What can a sober Christian think of the
Saintship of some, who never had any being in the World, and of others who
never had any goodness; many of their Saints are mere Names, without Persons,
and many mere Persons, without Holiness; nay, I am very confident that the
greatest Incendiaries and Disturbers of the Peace of the World do as well
deserve it, as that famous Pope, Hildebrand or Gregory the seventh. Inumerable
might be instanced in, whose Saintship justly falls under great Suspicion: but,
it is enough that some Romanists themselves, and those of no little Authority in
their Church, have granted that the Popes canonizations are doubtful and
subject to error; If then at any Billar. de beat. sanct. l. 1. c. 7. 8.
time his Infallibility should chance to mistake, as I am pretty sure, he has
more then once done, the Members of that Church are in a sweet case, and are
not only in danger of Invocating Saints, but Devils also, which is Idolatry
with a witness, and by their own Confession.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE AGAINST TRANSUBSTANTIATION

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by John Reid, Anno DOM: 1686.

A DISCOURSE AGAINST TRANSUBSTANTIATION
COncerning the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, one of the two great positive
Institutions of the Christian Religion, there are two main Points of difference
between Us and the Church of Rome. One, about the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; in which they think, but are not certain, that they have
the Scripture and the words of our Savior on their side: The other about the
administration of this Sacrament to the People in both kinds; in which we are
sure that we have the Scripture and our Savior's Institution on our side; and
that so plainly, that our Adversaries themselves do not deny it.

Of the first of these I shall now treat, and endeavor to show against the
Church of Rome, That in this Sacrament there is no substantial change made of
the Elements of Bread and Wine into the natural Body and Blood of Christ; that
Body which was born of the Virgin Mary, and suffered upon the Cross; for so
they explain that hard word Transubstantiation.

Before I engage in this Argument, I cannot but observe what an unreasonable
task we are put upon, by the bold confidence of our Adversaries, to dispute a
matter of Sense; which is one of those things about which Aristotle has long
since pronounced there ought to be no dispute.

It might well seem strange if any man should write a Book, to prove that an
Egg is not an Elephant, and that a Musket-Bullet is not a Pike: It is every
whit as hard a case, to be put to maintain by a long Discourse, that what we
see and handle and taste to be Bread is Bread, and not the Body of a Man; and
what we see and taste to be Wine is Wine, and not Blood: And if this evidence
may not pass for sufficient without any farther proof, I do see why any man,
that has confidence enough to do so, may not deny any thing to be what all the
world sees it is; or affirm any thing to be what all the world sees it is not;
and this without all possibility of being farther confuted. So that the
business of Transubstantiation is not a controversy of scripture against
scripture, or of Reason against Reason, but of downright Impudence against the
plain meaning of scripture, and all the sense and Reason of Mankind.

It is a most self-evident Falsehood; and there is no Doctrine or Proposition in
the world that is of it self more evidently true, then Transubstantiation is
evidently false: And yet if it were possible to be true, it would be the most,
ill-natured and pernicious truth in the World, because it would suffer nothing
else to be true; it is like the Roman Catholic Church, which will; needs be
the whole Christian Church, and will allow no other society of Christians to be
any part of it: so Transubstantiation, if it be true at all, it is all truth;
for it cannot be true unless our senses and the senses of all mankind be
deceived about their proper objects; and if this be true and certain, then
nothing else can be so; for if we be not certain of what we see, we can be
certain of nothing.

And yet notwithstanding all this, there is a Company of men in the World so
abandoned and given up by God to the efficacy of delusion, as in good earnest
to believe this gross and palpable Error, and to impose the belief of it upon
the Christian World under no less penalties then of temporal death and Eternal
damnation. And therefore to undeceive, if possible, these deluded souls, it
will be necessary to examine the pretended grounds of so false a Doctrine, and
to lay open the monstrous absurdity of it.

And in the handling of this Argument, I shall proceed in this plain method.

I. I shall consider the pretended grounds and reasons of the Church of Rome
for this Doctrine.

II. I shall produce our Objections against it. And if I can show that there is
no tolerable ground for it, and that there are invincible Objections against
it, then every man is not only in reason excused from believing this Doctrine,
but has great cause to believe the contrary.

FIRST, I will consider the pretended grounds and reasons of the Church of Rome
for this Doctrine. Which must be one or more of these five. Either 1. The
Authority of scripture. Or 2ly. The perpetual belief of this Doctrine in the
Christian Church, as an belief of of this Doctrine in the Christian Church, as
an evidence that they always understood and interpreted our Savior's words,
This is my body, in this sense. Or 3ly. The authority of the, present Church to
make and declare new articles of Faith. Or 4ly The absolute necessity of such a
change as this in the Sacrament to the comfort and benefit of those who receive
this Sacrament. Or 5 ly. To magnify the power of the Priest in being able to
work so great a Miracle.

1. They pretend for this Doctrine the Authority of Scripture in those words of
our Savior, This is my Body. Now to show the insufficiency of this pretense, I
shall endeavor to make good these two things.

1. That there is no necessity of understanding those words of our Savior in
the sense of Transubstantiation.

2. That there is a great deal of reason to understand them otherwise.

First, That there is no necessity to understand those words of our Savior in
the sense of Transubstantiation. If there be any, it must be from one of these
two reasons. Either because there are no figurative expressions in Scripture,
which I think no man ever yet said; or else, because a Sacrament admits of no
figures; which would be very absurd for any man to say, since it is of the very
nature of a Sacrament to represent and exhibit some invisible grace and benefit
by an outward sign and figure: And especially since it cannot be denied, but
that in the institution of this very Sacrament our Savior uses figurative
exressions and several words which cannot be taken strictly and literally. When
he gave the Cup he said, This Cup is the new Testament in my Blood, which is
shed for you and for many for the remission of Sins. Where first, the Cup is
put for Wine contained in the Cup; or else if the words be literally taken, so
as to signify a substantial change, it is not of the Wine but of the Cup and
that, not into the blood of Christ but into the new Testament or new Covenant
in his blood. Besides, that his blood is said then to be shed and his body to
be broken, which was not till his Passion, which followed the Institution and
first celebration of this Sacrament.

But that there is no necessity to understand our Savior's words in the sense
of Transubstantiation, I will take the plain concession of a great number of
the most learned Writters of the Church of Rome in this Controversy. de Euch.
l. 3. c. 23.
Bellarmine, in 3. dis. 49. Qu. 75. Sect. 2.
Suarez and in 3. part. dis. 150. Qu. 75. art. 2. c. 15.
Vasquez do acknowledge Scotus the great Scholman to have said that this
Doctrine cannot be evidently proved from Scripture: And Bellarmine grants this
not to be improbable; and Suarez and Vasquez acknowledge in sent. l. 4. did.
11. qu. 1. n. 15
Durandus to have said as much. in 4. sent. Q. 5. and quod 4. q. 3.
Ocham, another famous schoolman, says expressly, that the Doctrine which holds
the substance of the Bread and Wine to remain after the consecration is neither
repugnant to Reason nor to Scripture. in 4, sent. Q, 6. art. 2.
Petrus ab Allia^^ Cardinal of Cambray say plainly, that the Doctrine of the
substance of Bread and Wine remaining after Consecration is more free from
absurdity, more rational, and no ways repugnant to the authority of scripture;
nay more, that for the other Doctrine, viz. of Transubstantiation, there is no
evidence in scripture in canon Miss. Lect. 40.
Gabriel Biel, another Schoolman and Divine of their Church, freely declares,
that as to any thing expressed in the Canon of the scripture, a man may believe
that the substance of Bread and Wine does remain after Consecration: and
therefore he resolves the belief of Transubstantiation in to some other
Revelation, besides scripture, which he supposes the Church had about it.
Cardinal in Aquin 3. part. Qu. 74 art. 1.
Cajetan confesses that the Gospel does no where express that the Bread is
changed into the Body of Christ; that we have this from the authority of the
Church: nay he goes farther, that there is nothing in the Gospel which
enforces any man to understand these words of Christ, this is my body, in a
proper and not a metaphorical sense; but the Church having understood them in a
proper sense they are to be so explained; Which words in the Roman Edition of
Cajetan are expunged by order of Pope Aegid. ^^nink. de sacr^^^ Q. 75. art. 1.
n. 13.
Pius V. Cardinal de sacram. l. 2. c. 3.
Contarenus, and Loc. Theolog. l. 3. c. 3.
Melchior Canus one of the best and most judicious Writers that Church ever
had, reckon this Doctrine among those which are not so expressly found in
scripture. I will add but one more, of great authority in the Church, and a
reputed Martyr, contra captiv. Babylon. c. 10 n. 2.
Fisher Bishop of Rochester who ingenuously confesses that in the words of the
Institution there is not one word from whence the true presence of the flesh
and blood of Christ in our Mass can be proved: So that we need not much contend
that this Doctrine has no certain foundation in Scripture, when this is so
fully and frankly acknowledged by our Adversaries themselves.

Secondly, If there be no necessity of understanding our Saviors words in the
sense of Transubstantiation, I am sure there is a great deal of reason to
understand them otherwise. Whither we consider the like expressions in
scripture; where our Savior says he is the door, and the true Viue (which the
Church of Rome would mightily have triumphed in, had it been said, this is my
true Body.) And so likewise where the Church is said to be Christ's body; and
the Rock which followed the Israelites to be Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4. They drank
of that Rock which followed them and that Rock was Christ^ All which and
innumerable more like expressions in scripture every man understands in a
figurative, and not in a strictly literal and absurd sense. And it is very well
known, that in the Hebrew Language things are commonly said to be that which
they do signify and represent; and there is not in that Language a more proper
and usual way of expressing a thing to signify so and so, then to say that it
is so and so. Thus Joseph expounding Pharaoh's dream to him Genesis 21. 26. Says,
the seven good kine are seven years, and the seven good ears of corn are seven
years, that is, they signified or represented seven years of plenty; And so
Pharaoh understood Him, and so would any man of sense understand the like
expressions; nor do I believe that any sensible man, who had never heard of
Transubstantiation being grounded upon these words of our Savior, this is my
Body, would upon r^ading of the institution of the Sacrament in the Gospel ever
have imagined any such thing to be mean'd by our Savior in those words; but
would have understood his meaning to have been, this Bread signifies my Body,
this Cup signifies my Blood; and this which you see me now do, do ye hereafter
for a Memorial of me: But surely it would never have entered into any man's
mind to have thought that our Savior did literally hold himself in his hand,
and give away himsel from himself with his own hands.

Or whither we compare these words of our Savior with the ancient Form of the
Passover used by the Jews from Ezra's time, as Dialog. cum
Justin ^^rtyr tells us, tuto to pascha ho Soter hemon kai he kata phyge hemon
this Passover is our Savior and our refuge^ not that they believed the Paschal
Lamb to be substantially changed Tryph. p. 297. Edit. Paris. 1639.
either into God their Savior who delivered them out of the Land of Egypt, or
into the Messiah the Savior whom they expected and who was signified by it:
But this Lamb which they did eat did represent to them and put them in mind of
that Salvation which God wrought for their Fathers in Egypt, when by the
slaying of a Lamb and sprinkling the blood of it upon their doors their
firstborn were passed over and spared; and did likewise foreshew the Salvation
of the Messiah the Lamb of God that was to take away the Sins of the World.

And nothing is more common in all Languages then to give the name of the thing
signified to the Sign, as the delivery of a Deed or writing under hand and Seal
is called a conveyance or making over of such an Estate, and it is really so;
not the delivery of mere wax and parchment, but the conveyance of a real
Estate; as truly and really to all effects and purposes of Law, as if the very
material houses and land themselves could be and were actually delivered into
my hands: In like manner the names of the things themselves made over to us in
the new Covenant of the Gospel between God and man, are given to the Sgns or
Seals of that Covenant. By Baptism Christians are s^id to be made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6. 4. And by the Sacrament of the Lords Supper we are said
to Communicate or to be made partakers of the Body of Christ which was broken,
and of his Blood which was shed for us, that is, of the real benefits of his
death and passion. And thus St. Paul speaks of this Sacrament, 1 Cor. 10. 16.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? the bread which We break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? But still it is bread, and he still calls it so, v. 17. For we being
many are one bread and one Body; for we are partakers of that one bread. The
Church of Rome might, if they pleased, as well argue from hence that all
Christians are substantially changed first into Bread, and then into the
natural Body of Christ by their participation of the Sacrament, because they
are said thereby to be one bread and one body.. And the same Apostle in the
next Chapter, after he had spoken of the consecration of the Elements still
calls them the bread and the Cup, in three verses together, As often as eat
this bread and drink this Cup, v. 26. Whosoever shall eat this bread and drink
this cup of the Lord unworthily, v. 27. But let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat of this bread and drink of that cup, v. 28. And our Savior himself
when he had said, this is my blood of the new Testament, immediately adds, Mat.
36. 29.
but I say unto you, I will not henceforth drink of this fruit of the Vine,
until I drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom, that is, not till after
his Resurrection, which was the first step of his exaltation into the Kingdom
given him by his Father, when the Scripture tells us he did eat and drink with
his Disciples. But that which I observe from our Savior's words is, that after
the consecration of the Cup, and the delivering of it to his Disciples to drink
of it, he tells them that he would thenceforth drink no more of the fruit of
the Vine, which he had now drank with them, till after his Resurrection. From
whence it is plain that it was the fruit of the Vine, real wine, which our
Savior drank of and communicated to his Disciples in the Sacrament.

Besides, if we consider that he celebrated this Sacrament before his Passion,
it is impossible these words, should be understood literally of the natural
body and blood of Christ; because it was his body and his blood shed which he
gave to his Disciples, which if we understand literally of his natural body
broken and his blood shed, these words, this is my body which is broken, and
this is my blood which is shed, could not be true, because this Body was then
whole and unbroken, and his blood not then shed, nor could it be a propitiatory
Sacrifice (as they affirm this Sacramen to be) unleses they will say that
propitiation was made before Christ suffered: And is likewise impossible that
the Disciples should understand these words literally, because they not only
plainly saw that what he gave them was Bread and Wine, but they saw likewise as
plainly that it was not his Body which was given, but his Body which gave that
which was given; not his body broken and his blood shed, because they saw him
alive at that very time and beheld his body whole and unpierc'd; and therefore
they could not understand these words literally: If they did, can we imagine
that the Disciples, who upon all other occasions were so full of questions and
objections, should make no difficulty of this matter? nor so much as ask our
Savior, how can these things be? That they should not tell him, we see this to
be Bread and that to be Wine, and we see thy body to be distinct from both; we
see thy body not broken, and thy blood not shed.

From all which it must needs be very evident, to any man that will impartially
consider things, how little reason there is to understand those words of our
Savior, this is my body, and this is my blood, in the sense of
Transubstantiation; nay on the contrary, that there is very great reason and an
evident necessity to understand them otherwise. I proceed to show.

2ly. That this Doctrine is not grounded upon the perpetual belief of the
Christian Church, which the Church of Rome vainly pretends as an evidence that
the Church did always understand and interpret our Savior's words in this
sense.

To manifest the groundlesness of this pretense, I shall, 1. show by plain
testimony of the Fathers in several Ages, that this Doctrine was not the belief
of the ancient Christian Church. 2. I shall show the time and occasion of its
coming in, and by what degrees it grew up and was established in the Roman
Church. 3. I shall answer their great pretended Demonstration that this always
was and must have been the constant belief of the Christian Church.

1. I shall show by plain Testimonies of the Fathers in several Ages, for above
five hundred years after Christ, that this Doctrine was not the belief of the
ancient Christian Church. I deny not but that the Fathers do, and that with
great reason, very much magnify the wonderful mystery and efficacy of this
Sacrament, and frequently speak of a great supernatural change made by the
divine benediction; which we also readily acknowledge. They say indeed, that
the Elements of bread and Wine do by the divine blessing become to us the body
and blood of Christ: But they likewise say that the names of the things
signified are given to the Signs; that the bread and Wine do still remain in
their proper nature and substance, and that they are turned into the substance
of our bodies; that the body of Christ in the Sacrament is not his natural,
body, but the sign and figure of it; not that body which was crucified, nor
that blood which was shed upon the Cross; and that it is impious to understand
the eating of the flesh of the Son of man, and drinking his ^loud literally:
all which are directly opposite to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation and
utterly inconsistent with it. I will select but some few Testimonies of many
which I might bring to this purpose.

I begin with Justin Martyr, who says expressly, that Apol. 2. p. 98. Edit.
Paris. 1636.
our blood and Flesh are nourished by the conversion of that food which we
receive in the Eucharist: But that cannot be the natural body and blood of
Christ, for no man will say that is converted into the nourishment of our
bodies.

The Second is Lib. 4. c. 34.
Irenoeus, who speaking of this Sacrament says, that the bread which is from
the earth receiving the divine invocation is now no longer common bread, but
the Eucharist (or Sacrament) consisting of two things, the one earthly, the
other heavenly. He says it is no longer common bread, but after invocation or
consecration it becomes the Sacrament, that is, bread sanctified, consisting of
two things an earthly and a heavenly; the earthly thing is bread, and the
heavenly is the divine blessing which by the invocation or consecration is
added to it. And lib. 5. c. 2.
elsewhere he has this passage, when therefore the cup that is mixed (that is,
of Wine and Water) and the bread that is broken receives the word of God, it
becomes the Eucharist of the blood and body of Christ, of which the substance
of our flesh is increased and consists: But if that which we receive in the
Sacrament do nourish our bodies, it must be bread and wine, and not the natural
body and blood of Christ. There is another remarkable Testimony of Irenoeus
which though it be not now extant in those works of his which remain, yet has
been preserved by Comment. in 1 Pet. c. 3.
Oecumenius, and it is this; when (says he) the Greeks had taken some
Servants, of the Christian Catechumeni (that is, such as had not been admitted
to the Sacrament) and afterward urged them by violence to tell them some of
the secrets of the Christians, these Servants having nothing to say that might
gratify those who offered violence to them, except only that they had heard
from their Masters that the divine Communion was the blood and body of Christ,
they thinking that it was really blood and flesh, declared as much to those
that questioned them. The Greeks taking this as if it were really done by the
Christ^^ns, discovered it to others of the Greeks; who hereupon put Sanctus and
Blandina to the torture to make them confess it. to whom Blandina boldly
answered, How would they endure to do this, who by way of exercise (or
abstinence) do not eat that flesh which may lawfully be eaten? By which it
appears that this which they would have charged upon Christians, as if they had
literally eatten the flesh and blood of Christ in the Sacrament, was a false
accusation which these Martyrs denied, saying they were so far from that, that
they for their part did not eat any flesh at all.

The next is ^ertullian, who proves against Marcion the Heretic that the Body
of our Savior was not a mere pha^^asm and appearance, but a real Body, because
the Sacrament is a figure and image of his Body; and if there be an image of
his body he must have a real body, otherwise the Sacrament would be an image of
an image. His words are these, Advers. Marcionem. l. 4. p. 571. Edit. Rigalt.
Paris. 1634,
the bread which our Savior took and distributed to his Disciples he made his
own body, saying this is my body, that is, the image or figure of my body. But
it could not have been the figure of his body, if there had not been a true and
real body. And arguing against the Scepticks who denied the certainty of sense
he uses this Argument: That if we question our senses we may doubt whither our
Blessed Savior were not deceived in what he heard, and saw, and touched. Lib.
de Anima, p. 319.
He might (says he) be deceived in the voice from heaven, in the smell of the
ointment with which he was anointed against his burial; and in the taste of the
wine which he consecrated in remembrance of his blood. So that it seems we are
to t^ust ou^ senses, even in the matter of the Sacrament; and if that be true,
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is certainly false.

Origin in his Edit. Huetii.
Comment on Matthew. 15, speaking of the Sacrament has this passage, That food
which is sanctified by the word of God and prayer, as to that of it which is
material, goes into the belly and is cast out into the d^aught, which none
surely will say of the Body of CHRIST. And afterward he adds by way of
explication, it is not the matter of the bread, but the word which is spoken
over it, which profite^h him that worthily eats the Lord, and this (he says)
he had spoken concerning the typical and Symbolical body. So that the matter of
bread remain him the Sacrament, and this Origin calls the typical and
symbolical body of CHRIST; and it is not the natural body of Christ which is
there eat^en, for the food eaten in the Sacrament, as to that of it which is
material, goes into the belly and is cast out into the draught. This testimony
is so very plain in the cause that Sextus Senensis suspects ^his place of
Origin was depraved by the He^eticks. Cardinal P^rron is contented to allow it
to be Origens, but rejects his testimony because he was accused of Heresy by
some of the Fathers, and says he talks like a Heretic in this place. So that
with much ado this testimony is yielded to us. The same Father in his cap. 10.
Homilies upon Levitic^s sp^^ks ^hus, There is also in the New Testament a
letter which kills him who does not spiritually understand these things which
are said; for if we take according to the Letter, that which is said, EXCEPT YE
EAT MY FLESH AND DRINK MY BLOOD, this Letter kills. And this is also a killing
Testimony, and not to be answered but in Cardinal Perron's way, by saying he
talks like a Heretic.

St. Cyprian has a whole Epistle Ep. 63.
to Cecilius, against those who gave the Communion in Water only without Wine
mingled with it; and his main argument against them is this, that the blood of
Christ with which we are redeemed and quickened cannot seem to be in the cup
when there is no Wine in the cup by which the Blood of Christ is represented:
And afterward he says, that contrary to the Evangelical and Apostolical
Doctrine water was in some places offered (or given) in the Lords cup, which
(says he) alone cannot express (or represent) the blood of Christ. And lastly
he tells us, that by water the people is understood, by Wine the blood of Christ
is shown (or represented) but when in the cup water is mingled with wine the
people is united to Christ. So that according to this Argument Wine in the
Sacramental cup is no otherwise changed into the blood of Christ then the Water
mixed with it is changed into the People, which are said to be united to Christ.

I omit many others, and pass to St. Austin in the fourth Age after Christ. And
I the rather insist upon his Testimony, because of his eminent esteem and
authority in the Latin Church; and he also calls the Elements of the Sacrament
the figure and sign of Christ's body and blood. In his book against Adimantus
the Manichee we have this expression, Aug, Tom. 6. p. 187. Edit. basil. 1569,
our Lord did not doubt to say, this is my body, when he gave the sign of his
body. And in his explication of the third Psalm, speaking of Judas whom our
Lord admitted to his last supper, in which (says he) enarrat. in. Psalm. Tom.
8. p. 16.
he commended and delivered to his Disciples the figure of his body; Language
which would now be censured for Heresy in the Church of Rome. Indeed he was
never accused of Heresy, as cardinal Perron says Origin was, but he talks as
like one as Origin himself, And in his comment on the 98 Psalm speaking of the
offense which the Disciples took at that saying of our Savior, except ye eat
the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, etc. He brings in our Savior
speaking thus to them, Id. tom. 7. p. 1105.
ye must understand spiritually what I have said unto you; ye are not to eat
his body which ye see, and to drink that blood which shall he shed by those
that shall crucify me. I have commended a certain Sacrament to you, which being
spiritually understood will give you life. What more opposite to the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation, then that the Disciples were not to eat that Body of
Christ which they saw, nor to drink that blood which was shed upon the Cross,
but that all this was to be understood spiritually, and according to the nature
of a Sacrament? For that body he tells us is not here but in heaven, in his
Comment upon these words, me ye have not always. Id. Tract. 50. in Johan.
He speaks (says he) of the presence of his body; ye shall have me according
to my providence, according to Majesty and invisible grace; but according to
the flesh which the word assumed, according to that which was born of the
Virgin Mary, ye shall not have me: therefore because he conversed with his
Disciples forty days, he is ascended up into Heaven and is not here.

In his 23. Epistle, Id. Tom. 2. p. 93.
if the Sacraments (says he) had not some resemblance of those things whereof
they are Sacraments, they would not be Sacraments at all; but from this
resemblance they take for the most part the name of the things which they
represent. Therefore as the Sacrament of the body of Christ is in some manner
or sense Christ's body, and the Sacrament of his blood is the blood of Christ;
so the Sacrament of faith (meaning Baptism) is faith. Upon which words of St.
Austin there is this remarkable Gloss in their own Cannon Law; De consecr.
did. 2. Hoc est.
the heavenly Sacrament which truly represents the flesh of Christ is called
the body of Christ; but improperly: whence it is said, that after a manner, but
not according to the truth of the thing but the mystery of the thing signified,
So that the meaning is, it is called the body of Christ, that is, it signifies
the body of Christ: And if this be St. Austin's meaning, I am sure no
Protestant can speak more plainly against Transubstantiation. And in the
ancient Canon of the Mass, before it was changed in compliance with this new
Doctrine, it is expressly called a sacrament, a sign an Image and a figure of
Christ's body. To which I will add that remarkable passage of St. Austin cited
by De consecrat. did. 2. sect. Vtrum.
Gratian, that as we receive the similitude of his death in baptism, so we may
also receive the likeness of his flesh and blood; that so neither may truth be
wanting in the Sacrament, nor Pagans have occasion to make us ridiculous for
drinking the blood of one that was slain.

I will mention but one Testimony more of this Father, but so clear a one as it
is impossible any man in his wits that had believed Transubstantiation could
have uttered. It is in his Treatise Lib. 3. Tom. 3. p. 53.
de Doctrina christiaua; where laying down several Rules for the right
understanding of Scripture, he gives this for one. If (says he) the speech be a
precept forbidding some heinous wickedness or crime, or commanding us to do
good, it is not fiugurate; but if it seem to command any heinous wickedness or
crime, or to forbid that which is profitable and beneficial to others, it is
figurative. For example, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink
his blood, ye have no life in you: This seems to command a heinous wickedness
and crime, therefore it is a figure; commanding us to communicate of the
passion of our Lord, and with delight and advantage to lay up in our memory
that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us. So that, according to St.
Austin's best skill in interpreting Scripture, the literal eating of the flesh
of Christ and drinking his blood would have been a great impiety; and therefore
the expression is to be understood figuratively; not as Cardinal Perron would
have it, only in opposition to the eating of his flesh and blood in the gross
appearance of flesh and blood, but to the real eating of his natural body and
blood under any appearance whatsoever: For St. Austin does not say, this is a
Figurative speech wherein we are commanded really to feed upon the natural body
and blood of Christ under the species of bread and wine, as the Cardinal would
understand him; for then the speech would be literal and not figurative: But he
says, this is a figurative speech wherein we are commanded Spiritually to feed
upon the remembrance of his Passion.

To these I will add but three or four Testimonies more in the two following
Ages.

The first shall be of Theodoret, who speaking of that Genesis 49. 11.
Prophecy of Jacob concerning our Savior, he washed his garments in Wine and
his clothes in the blood of grapes, has these words, Dialog. 1.
as we call the mystical fruit of the Vine (that is, the Wine in the
Sacrament) after consecration the blood of the Lord, so he (viz. Jacob) calls
the blood of the Vine (viz of Christ) the blood of the grape: but the blood of
Christ is not literally and properly but only figuratively the blood of the
grape, in the same sense as he is said to be the true Vine; and therefore the
Wine in the Sacrament after consecration is in like manner not literally and
properly but figuratively the blood of Christ. And he explains this afterward
saying, that our Savior cha^^ed the names, and gave to his Body the name of
the Symbol or sign, and to the symbol or sign the name of his Body; thus when
he had called himself the Vi^e, he called the symbol his blood; so that in the
same sense that he called himself the Vine, he called the Wine, which is the
symbol of his blood, his blood: For, says he, he would have those who partake
of the divine mysteries not to attend to the nature of the things which are
seen, but by the change of names to believe the change which is made by grace;
for he who called that which by nature is a body wheat and bread, and again
likewise called himself the Vine, he honored the symbols with the name of his
body and blood: not Changing nature but adding grace to nature. Whence you see
he says expressly, that when he called the Symbols or Elements of the
Sacrament, viz. Bread and Wine his body and blood; he made no change in the
nature of the things, only added grace to nature, that is, by the Divine grace
and blessing he raised them to a spiritual, and supernatural virtue and
efficacy.

The secound is of the same Theodoret in his second Dialogue between a
Catholic, under the name of Orthodoxus, and an Heretic under the name of
Eranistes; who maintaining that the Humanity of Christ was changed into the
substance of the Divinity (which was the Heresy of Eutyches) he illustrates
the matter by this similitude, As, says he, the symbols of the Lords body and
blood are one thing before the invocation of the Priest, but after the
Invocation are changed and become another thing; so the body of our Lord after
his ascension is changed into the divine substance. But what says the
Catholic Orthodoxus to this; why, he talks just like one of Cardinal Perron's
Heretics, Thou art, says he, caught in thy own net: because the mystical
symbols after consecration do not pass out of their own nature: For they
remain in their former substance, figure and appearance and may be seen and
handled even as before. He does not only deny the outward figure and appearance
of the symbols to be changed, but the nature and substance of them, even in the
proper and strictest sense of the word substance; and it was necessary so to
do, otherwise he had not given a pertinent answer to the similitude urged
against him.

The next is one of their own Popes, Gelasius, who brings the same Instance
against the Eutychans; biblioth. Patr. To^. 4.
surely, says he^ the Sacrament which we receive of the body and blood of our
Lord are a divine thing, so that by them we are made partakers of a divine
nature, and yet it cease not to be the substance or nature of bread and Wine;
and certainly the image and resemblance of Christ's body and blood are
celebrated in the action of the mysteries, that is, in the Sacrament. To make
this Instance of any force against the Eutychians, who held that the body of
Christ upon his ascension ceased and was changed into the substance of his
Divinity, it was necessary to deny that there was any substantial change in the
Sacrament of the bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ. So that here
is an infallible authority, one of their own Popes expressly against
Transubstantiation.

The last Testimony I shall produce is of Facundus an African Bishop, who lived
in the 6th. Century. Upon occasion of justifying an expression of one who had
said that Christ also received the adoption of Sons, reasons thus. Facund. p.
144 edit. Paris. 1676.
Christ vouchsafed to receive the Sacrament of adoption both when he was
circumcised and baptized: And the Sacrament of Adoption may be called adoption,
as the Sacrament of his body and blood, which is in the consecrated bread and
cap, is by us called his body and blood: not that the bread, says he, is
properly his body and the cup his blood, but because they contain in them the
mysteries of his body and blood; hence also our Lord himself called the blessed
bread and cup which he gave to his Disciples his body and blood. can any man
after this believe, that it was then, and had ever been, the universal and
received Doctrine of the Christian Church, that the bread and wine in the
Sacrament are substantially changed into the proper and natural body and blood
of Christ?

By these plain Testimonies which I have produced, and I might have brought a
great many more to the same purpose, it is I think evident beyond all denial
that Transubstantiation has not been the perpetual belief of the christian
church. And th^s likewise is acknowledged by many great and learned men of the
Roman church. In Sent. l. 4. Did. 11. Q. 3.
Scotus acknowledges, that this Doctrine was not always thought necessary to
be believed, but that the necessity of believing it was consequent to that
Declaration of the Church made in the council of Lateran under Pope Innocent
the III. And In sent. l. 4. did. 11. q. 1. n. 15.
Durandus freely discovers his inclination to have believed the contrary, if
the Church had not by that determination oblidged men to believe it, de Euchar.
l. 1. p. 146.
Tonstal Bishop of Durham also yields, that before the Lateran council men were
at liberty as to the manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament. And In, 1.
Epist ad corinth. c. 7. citan te etiam Salmerone, Tom. 9. Tract. 16. p. 108.
Erasmus, who lived and died in the communion of the Roman Church, and then
whom no man was better read in the ancient Fathers, does confess that it was
late before the Church defined Transubstantiation, unknown to the Ancients both
name and thing. And De Haeres. l. 8.
Alphonsus a castro says plainly, that concerning the transubstantiation of
the bread into the body of Christ, there is seldom any mention in the ancient
Writers. And who can imagine that these learned men would have granted the
ancient Church and Fathers to have been so much Strangers to this Doctrine, had
they thought it to have been the perpetual belief of the Church? I shall now in
the

Second place, give an account of the particular time and occasion of the
coming in of this Doctrine, and by what steps and degrees it grew up and was
advanced into an Article of Faith in the Romish Church. The Doctrine of the
Corporal presence of Christ was first started started upon occasion of the
Dispute about the Worship of Images, in opposition whereto the Synod of
Constantinople about the year DCCL did argue thus, That our Lord having left us
no other Image of himself but the Sacrament, in which the substance of bread is
the image of his body, we ought to make no other image of our Lord. In answer
to this Argument the second Council of Nice in the year DCCLXXXVII did declare,
that the Sacrament after Consecration is not the image and antitype of Christ's
body and blood; but is properly his body and blood. So that the corporal Body
of Christ in the sacrament was first brought in to support the stupid worship
of Images: And indeed it could never have come in upon a more proper occasion,
nor have been applied to a fitter purpose.

And here I cannot but take notice how well this agrees with De Eucharist. l.
1. c. 1.
Bellarmine's Observation, that none of the Ancients who wrote of Heresies,
has put this error (viz. of denying Transubstantiation) in his catalogue; nor
did any of the Ancients dispute against this error for the first 600 years.
Which is very true, because there could be no occasion then to dipute against
those who denied Transubstantiation; since, as I have shown, this Doctrine was
not in being, unless amongst the Eutychian Heretics, for the first 600 years
and more. But Ibid.
Bellarmine goes on and tells us, that the first who called in question the
truth of the body of the Lord in the Eucharist were the ICONOMACHI (the
opposers of Images) after the year DCC in the Council of Constantinople; for
these said there was one image of Christ instituted by himself, viz, the bread
and wine in the Eucharist, which represents the body and blood of Christ:
Wherefore from that time the Greek Writers often admonish us that the Eucharist
is not the figure or image of the body of the Lord, but his true body, as
appears from the VII. Synod; which agrees most exactly with the account which I
have given of the first rise of this Doctrine, which began with the corporal
presence of Christ in the Sacrament and afterward proceeded to
Transubstantiation.

And as this was the first occasion of introducing this Doctrine among the
Greek;, so in the Latin or Roman Church Paschasius Radbertus, first a Monk,
and afterward Abbot of Corbey, was the first broacher of it in the year
DCCCXVIII.

And for this, besides the Evidence of History, we have the acknowledgment of
two very Eminent Persons in the Church of Rome, Bellarmine and Sirmondus, who
do in effect confess that this Paschasius was the first who wrote to purpose
upon this Argument. Descriptor. Eccles.
Bellarmine in those words, this Author was the first who has seriously and
copiously written concerning the truth of Christ's body and blood in the
Eucharist: And In vita Paschasii.
Sirmo^dus in these, he so first explained the genuine sense of the Catholic
church, that he opened the way to the rest who afterward in great numbers
wrote upon the same Argument: But though Sirmondus is pleased to say that he
only first explained the sense of the Catholic Church in this Point, yet it
is very plain from the Records of that Age which are left to us, that this was
the first time that this Doctrine was broached in the Latin Church; and it met
with great opposition in that Age, as I shall have occasion hereafter to show.
For Rabanus Maurus Arch-biship of Me^tz about the year DCCCXLVII reciting the
very words of Paschusius wherein he had delivered this Doctrine, has this
remarkable passage concerning the novelty of it; Epist. ad Heribaldum. c. 33.
Some, says he, of late, not having a right opinion concerning the Sacrament
of the body and blood of our Lord, have said that this is the body and blood of
our Lord which was born of the Virgin Mary, and in which our Lord suffered upon
the cross and rose from the dead: which error, says he, we have opposed with
all our might. From whence it is plain, by the Testimony of one of the greatest
and most learned bishops of that Age, and of eminent reputation for Piety, that
what is now the very Doctrine of the Church of Rome concerning the Sacrament,
was then esteemed an Error broached by some particular Persons, but was far
from being the generally received Doctrine of that Age. Can any one think it
possible, that so eminent a Person in the Church both for piety and learning,
could have condemned this Doctrine as an Error and a Novelty, had it been the
general Doctrine of the Christian Church, not only in that but in all former
Ages; and no censure passed upon him for that which is now the great burning
Article in the Church of Rome, and esteemed by them one of the greatest and
most prenicious Heresies?

Afterward in the year MLIX, when Berengarius in France and Germany had raised
a fresh opposition against this Doctrine, he was compelled to recant it by pope
Nicholas and the Council at Rome, in these words, Gratian. de consecrat.
distinct. 2. Lanfranc. de corp. and sang. Domini. c. 5. Guitmund. de sacram. l.
i. Alger. de sacram. l. 1. c. 19.
that the bread and wine which are set upon the Altar; after the consecration
are not only the Sacrament, but the true body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ; and are sensibly, not only in the Sacrament but in truth, handled and
broken by the hands of the Priest, ground or bruised by the teeth of the
faithful. But it seems the Pope and his Council were not then skilful enough to
express themselves rightly in his matter; for the Gloss upon the Canon Law
says expressly, Gloss. Decret. de conse crat. did. 2. in cap. Ege Berengarius.
that unless we understand these words of BERENGARIVS (that is in truth of the
Pope and his Council) in a sound sense, we shall fall into a greater Heresy
then that of BERENGARIVS; for we do not make parts of the body of Christ. The
meaning of which Gloss ^ cannot imagine, unless it be this, that the Body of
Christ, though it be in truth broken, yet it is not broken into parts (for we
do not make parts of the body of Christ,) but into wholes: Now this new way of
breaking a Body not into parts but into wholes (which in good earnest is the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome) though to them that are able to believe
Transubstantiation it may for any thing I know appear to be sound sense, yet to
us that cannot believe so it appears to be solid nonsense.

About XX years after, in the year MLXXIX. Pope Gregory the VII. Began to be
sensible of this absurdity; and therefore in another council at Rome made
Berengarius to recant in another Waldnes. Tom. 2. c. 1^.
Form, viz. that the bread and wine which are placed upon the Altar are
substantially changed into the true and proper and quickening flesh and blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and after consecration are the true body of Christ,
which was born of the Virgin, and which being offered for the Salvation of the
World did hang upon the cross, and sits on the right hand of the Father.

So that from the first starting of this Doctrine in the second council of Nice
in the year DCCLXXXVII, till the council under Pope Gregory the VII th. in the
year MLXXIX, it was almost three hundred years that this Doctrine was
contested, and before this misshapen Monster of Transubstantiation could be
licked into that Form in which it is now settled and established in the Church
of Rome. Here then is a plain account of the first rise of this Doctrine, and
of the several steps whereby it was advanced by the Church of Rome into an
Article of Faith. I come now in the

Third place, to answer the great pretended Demonstration of the impossibility
that this Doctrine, if it had been new, should ever have come in, in any Age,
and been received in the Church; and conconsequently it must of necessity have
been the perpetual belief of the Church in all Ages: For if it had not always
been the Doctrine of the Church when ever it had attempted first to come in,
there would have been a great stir and bustle about it, and the whole Christian
World would have rose up in opposition to it. But we can show no such time when
first it came in, and when any such opposition was made to it, and therefore it
was always the Doctrine of the Church. This Demonstration Monsieur Arnauld, a
very learned Man in France, pretends to be unanswerable: whither it be so or
not, I shall briefly examine. And

First, We do assign a punctual and very likely time of the first rise of this
Doctrine, about the beginning of the ninth Age; though it did not take firm
root nor was fully settled and established till toward the end of the eleventh.
And this was the most likely time of all other, from the beginning of
Christianity, for so g^oss an Error to appear; it being by the confession and
consent of their own Historians, the most dark and dismal time that ever
happened to the Christian Church, both for Ignorance, and Superstition, and
Vice. It came in together with Idolatry, and was made use of to support it: A
fit prop and companion for it. And indeed what tares might not the Enemy have
sown in so dark and long a Night; when so considerable a part of the Christian
World was lulled a sleep in profound Ignorance and Superstition? And this
agrees very well with the account which our Savior himself gives in the
Parable of the Tares, of the springing up of Errors and Corruptions in the
Field of the Church. Matthew. 13 24.
While the men sleept the Enemy did his work in the Night, so that when they
were awake they wondered how and whence the tares came; but being sure they
were there, and that they were not sown at first, they concluded the Enemy had
done it.

Secondli^, I have shown likewise that there was considerable opposition made
to this Error at its first coming in. The general Ignorance and gross
Superstition of that Age rendered the generality of people more quiet and
secure, and disposed them to receive any thing that came under a pretense of
mystery in Religion and of greater reverence and devotion to the Sacrament, and
that seemed any way to countenance the worship of Images, for which at that
time they were zealously concerned. But notwithstanding the security and
passive temper of the People, the most eminent for piety and learning in that
Time made great resistance against it. I have already named Rabanus.
Archbishop of Mentz, who opposed it as an Error lately sprung up and which
had then gained but upon some few persons. To whom I may add. Heribaldus Bishop
of Auxerres in France, Io. Scotus Erigena, and Ratramnus commonly known by the
name of Beriram, who at the same time were employed by the Emperor Charles the
Bald to oppose this growing. Error, and wrote learnedly against it. And these
were the eminent men for learning in that time. And because Monsieur Arnauld
will not be satisfied unless there some stir and bustle about it, Bertram in
his Preface to his book tells us, that they who according to their several
opinions talked differently about the mystery of Christ's body and blood were
divided by no small Schism.

Thirdly, Though for a more clear satisfactory answer to this pretended
Demonstration I have been contented to unty this knot, yet I could without all
these pains have cut it. For suppose this Doctrine had silently come in and
without opposition, so that we could not assign the particular time and
occasion of its first Rise; yet if it be evident from Records of former Ages,
for above 500. years together, that this was not the ancient belief* of the
Church; and plain also, that this Doctrine was afterward received in the Roman
Church, though we could not tell how and when it came in, yet it would be the
wildest and most extravagant thing in the world to set up a pretended
Demonstration of Reason against plain Experience and matter of Fact. This is
just Zeno's Demonstration of the impossibility of motion against Diogenes
walking before his Eyes. For this is to undertake to prove that impossible to
have been, which most certainly was. Just thus the Servants in the Parable
might have demonstrated that the Tares were Wheat, because they were sure none
but good seed was sown at first, and no man could give any account of the
punctual time when any Tares were sown, or by whom; and if an Enemy had come to
do it, he must needs have met with great resistance and opposition; but no such
resistance was made, and therefore there could be no Tares in the field, but
that which they called Tares was certainly good wheat. At the same rate a man
might demonstrate that our King, his Majesty of great Britain, is not returned
into England, nor restored to his Crown; because there being so great and
powerful an Army possessed of his Lands, and therefore oblidged by interest to
keep him out, it was impossible He should ever come in without a great deal of
fighting and blood shed: but there was no such thing, therefore he is not
returned and restored to his Crown. And by the like kind of Demonstration one
might prove that the Turk did not invade Christendom last year, and besiege
Vienna; because if he had, the most Christian King, who had the greatest Army
in Christendom in a readiness, would certainly have employed it against him;
but Monsieur Arnauld certainly knows, no such thing was done: And therefore
according to his way of Demonstration, the matter of fact, so commonly reported
and believed, concerning the Turks Invasion of Christendom and besieging Vienna
last year was a perfect mistake. But a man may demonstrate till his head and
heart ache, before he shall ever be able to prove that which certainly is, or
was, never to have been. For of all sorts of impossibles nothing is more
evidently so, then to make that which has been not to have been. All the
reason in the world is too weak to cope with so tough and obstinate a
difficulty. And I have often wondered how a man of Monsieur Arnaulds great wit
and sharp Judgment could prevail with himself to engage in so bad and baffled
a cause; or could think to defend it with so wooden a Dagger as his
Demonstration of Reason against certain Experience and matter of Fact: A thing,
if it be possible, of equal absurdity with what he pretends to demonstrate
Transubstantiation it self. I proceed to the

Third pretended Ground of this Doctrine of Transubstantiation; and that is,
The Infallible Authority of the present Church to make and declare new Articles
of Faith. And this in truth is the ground into which the most of the Learned
Men in their Church did heretofore, and many do still resolve their belief of
this Doctrine: And, as I have already shown, do plainly say that they see no
sufficient reason, either from Scripture or Tradition, for the belief of it:
And that they should have believed the contrary had not the determination of
the Church oblidged them otherwise.

But if this Doctrine be obtruded upon the world merely by virtue of the
Authority of the Roman Church, and the Declation of the Council under Pope
Gregory the VII. or of the Lateran Council under Innocent the III. then it is
plain Innovation in the Christian Doctrine, and a new Article of Faith imposed
upon the Christian World. And if any Church has this power, the Christian
Faith may be enlarged and changed as often as men please; and that which is no
part of our Savior's Doctrine, nay, any thing though never so absurd and
unreasonable, may become an Article of Faith oblidging all Christians to the
belief of it, when ever the Church of Rome shall think fit to stamp her
Authority upon it: which would make Christianity a most uncertain and endless
thing.

The Fourth pretended ground of this Doctrine is, the necessity of such a
change as this in the Sacrament to the comfort and benefit of those who receive
it. But there is no color for this, if the thing be rightly considered:
Because the comfort and benefit of the Sacrament depends upon the blessing
annexed to the Institution. And as Water in Baptism, without any substantial
change made in that Element may by the Divine blessing accompanying the
Institution be effectual to the washing away of Sin, and Spiritual
Regeneration; So there can no reason in the world be given why the Elements of
Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper may not, by the same Divine blessing
accompanying this Institution, make the worthy receivers partakers of all the
Spiritual comfort and benefit designed to us thereby, without any substantial
change made in those Elements, since our Lord has told us, that verily the
flesh profits nothing. So that if we could do so odd and strange a thing as
to eat the very natural flesh and drink the blood of our Lord, I do not see of
what greater advantage it would be to us then what we may have by partaking of
the Symbols of his body and blood as he has appointed in remembrance of him.
For the spiritual efficacy of the Sacrament does not depend upon the nature of
the thing received, supposing we receive what our Lord appointed, and receive
it with a right preparation and disposition of mind, but upon the supernatural
blessing that goes along with it, and makes it effectual to those Spiritual
ends for which it was appointed.

The Fifth and last pretended ground of this Doctrine is, to magnify the power
of the Priest in being able to work so great a Miracle. And this with great
pride and pomp is often urged by them as a transcendent instance of the Divine
Wisdom, to find out so admirable a way to raise the power and reverence of the
Priest; that he should be able every day and as often as he pleases, by
repeating a few words to work so miraculous a change, and (as they love most
absurdly and blasphemously to speak) to make God himself.

But this is to pretend to a power above that of God himself, for he did not,
nor cannot make himself, nor do any thing that implies a contradiction, as
Transubstantiation evidently does in their pretending to make God. For to make
that which already is, and to make that now which always was, is not only vain
and trifling if it could be done, but impossible because it implies a
contradiction.

And what if after all, Transubstantiation; if it were possible and actually
wrought by the Priest, would yet be no Miracle? For there are two things
necessary to a Miracle, that there be a supernatural effect wrought, and that
this effect be evident to sense. So that though a supernatural effect be
wrought, yet if it be not evident ^o sense it is to all the ends and purposes
of a Miracle as if it were not; and can be no testimony or proof of any thing,
because it self stands in need of another Miracle to give testimony to it and
to prove that it was wrought. And neither in scripture, nor in profane
Authors, nor in common use of speech, is any thing called a Miracle but what
falls under the notice of our senses: A Miracle being nothing else but a
supernatural effect evident to sense, the great end and design whereof is to be
a sensible proof and conviction to us of something that we do not see.

And for want of this Condition, Transubstantiation, if it were true, would be
no miracle. It would indeed be very supernatural, but for all that it would not
be a Sign or Miracle: For a Sign or Miracle is always a thing sensible,
otherwise i^ could be no Sign. Now that such a change as is pretended in
Transubstantiation should really be wrought, and yet there should be no sign
and appearance of it, is a thing very wonderful, but not to sense; for our
senses perceive no change, the bread and wine in the sacrament to all our
senses remaining just as they were before: And that a thing should remain to
all appearance just as it was, has nothing at all of wonder in it: we wonder
indeed when we see a strange thing done, but no man wonders when he sees
nothing done. So that Transubstantiation, if they will needs have it a Miracle,
is such a Miracle as any man may work that has but the confidence to face men
down that he works it, and the fortune to be believed: And though the Church of
Rome may magnify their Priests upon account of this Miracle, which they say
they can work every day and every hour yet I cannot understand ^he reason of
it; for when this great work (as they call it) is done, there is nothing more
appears to be done then it there were no Miracle: Now such a Miracle as to all
appearance is no miracle, I see no reason why a Protestant Minister, as well as
a Pop^sh Priest, may not work as often as he pleases; or if he can bu^ have the
patience to let it alone, it will work it self For surely nothing in the world
is easier then to let a thing be as it is, and by speaking a few words over it
to make it just what was before. Every Man, every day, may work ten thousand
such M^racles.

And thus I have dispatched the First part of my Discourse, which was to
consider the pretended grounds and Reasons of the Church of Rome for this
Doctrine, and to show the weakness and insufficiency of them. I come in the

SECOND place, to produce our Objections against II.
it. Which will be of so much the greater force, because I have already shown
this Doctrine to be destitute of all Divine warrant and authority, and of any
other sort of Ground sufficient in reason to justify it. So that I do not now
object against a Doctrine which has a fair probability of Divine Revelation on
its side; for that would weigh down all objections which did not plainly
overthrow the probability and credit of its Divine Revelation: But I object
against a Doctrine by the mere will and Tyranny of men imposed upon the belief
of Christians, without any evidence of Scripture, and against all the evidence
of Reason and Sense.

The Objections I shall reduce to these two Heads. First, the infinite scandal
of this Doctrine to the Christian Religion. And Secondly, the monstrous and
insupportable absurdity of it.

First, The infinite scandal of this Doctrine to the Christian Religion. And
that upon these four accounts. 1. Of the stupidity of this Doctrine. 2. The
real barbarousness of this Sacrament and Rite of our Religion upon supposition
of the truth of this Doctrine. 3. Of the cruel and bloody consequences of it.
4. Of the danger of Idolatry; which they are certainly guilty of, if this
Doctrine be not true.

1. Upon account of the stupidity of this Doctrine. I remember that Tully, who
was a man of very good sense, instanceth in the conceit of eating God as the
extremity of madness, and so stupid an apprehension as he thought no man was
ever guilty of. De Not. Deorum. l. 3.
When we call says he, the fruits of the earth Ceres, and wine Bacchus, we use
but the common language; but do you think any man so mad as to believe that
which be eats to be God? It seems he could not believe that so extravagant a
folly had ever entered into the mind of man. It is a very severe saying of
Averroes the Arabian Philosopher (who lived after this Doctrine was entertained
among Christians) and ought to make the Church of Rome blush, if she can;
Dionys. Carthus. in 4. did. 10. art. 1.
I have traveled, says he, over the World, and have found diverse Sects; but
so sottish a Sect or Law I never found, as is the Sect. of the Christians;
because with their own teeth they devour their God whom they worship. It was
great stupidity in the People of Israel to say, Come let us make us Gods; but
it was civilly said of them, Let us make Gods that may go before us, in
comparison of the Church of Rome, who say, Let us make a God that we may eat
him. So that upon the whole matter I cannot but wonder that they should choose
thus to expose Faith to the contempt of all that are endued with Reason. And to
speak the plain truth, the Christian Religion was never so horribly exposed to
the scorn of Atheists and Infidels, as it has been by this most absurd and
senseless Doctrine. But thus it was foretold that 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.
the Man of Sin should come with power and Signs and Lying Miracles, and with
all deceiveableness of unrighteousness, with all the Legerdemain and juggling
tricks of falsehood and imposture; amongst which this of Transubstantiation,
which they call a Miracle, and we a Cheat, is one of the chief: And in all
probability those common juggling words of hocus pocus, are nothing else but a
corruption of hoc est corpus, by way of ridiculous imitation of the Church of
Rome in their trick of Transubstantiation. Into such contempt by this foolish
Doctrine and pretended Miracle of theirs have they brought the mos^ sacred and
venerable Mystery of our Religion.

2. It is very scandalous likewise upon account of the real Barbarousness of
this Sacrament and Rite of our Religion, upon supposition of the truth of this
Doctrine. Literally to eat the flesh of the Son of man and to drink his blood,
St. Austine, as I have showed before, declares to be a great Impiety. And the
impiety and barbarousness of the thing is not in truth extenuated, but only the
appearance of it, by its being done under the species of bread and Wine: For
the thing they acknowledge is really done, and they believe that they verily
eat and drink the natural flesh and blood of Christ. And what can any man do
more unworthily toward his Friend? How can he possibly use him more
barbarously, then to feast upon his living flesh and blood? It is one of the
greatest wonders in the World, that it should ever enter into the minds of men
to put upon our Saviors words, so easily capable of a more convenient sense
and so necessarily requiring it, a meaning so plainly contrary to Reason, and
sense, and even to Humanity it self. Had the ancient Christians owned any such
Doctrine, we should have heard of it from the Adversaries of our Religion in
every page of their writings; and they would have desired no greater advantage
against the Christians then to have been able to hit them in the teeth with
their feasting upon the natural flesh and blood of their Lord, and their God,
and their best Friend. What endless triumphs would they have made upon this
Subject? And with what confidence would they have set the cruelty used by
Christians in their Sacrament, against their God Saturn's eating his own
children, and all the cruel and bloody Rites of their Idolatry? But that no
such thing was then objected by the Heathens to the Christians, is to a wise
man instead of a thousand Demonstrations that no such Doctrine was then
believed.

3. It is scandalous also upon account of the cruel and bloody consequences of
this Doctrine; so contrary to the plain Laws of christianity, and to one great
end and design of this Sacrament, which is to untie christians in the most
perfect love and charity to one another: Whereas this Doctrine has been the
occasion of the most barbarous and bloody Tragedies that ever were acted in the
World, For this has been in the church Rome the great burning Article, and as
absurd and unreasonable as it is, more christians have been murdered for the
denial of it then perhaps for all the other Articles of their Religion. And I
think it may generally pass for a true observation that all sects are commonly
most hot and surious for those things for which there is least Reason; for what
men want of Reason for their opinions, they usually supply and make up in Rage.
And it was no more then needed to use this severity upon this occasion; for
nothing but the cruel fear of death could in probability have driven so great a
part of mankind into the acknowledgment of so unreasonable and senseless a
Doctrine.

O blessed Savior! Thou best Friend and greatest Lover of mankind, who can
imagine thou did ever intend that men should kill one another for not being
able to believe contrary to their senses; for being unwilling to think, that
thou should make one of the most horrid and barbarous things that can be
imagined a main Duty and principal Mystery of thy Religion; for not flattering
the pride and presumption of the Priest who says he can make God, and for not
complying with the folly and stupidity of the People who believe that they can
eat him?

4. Upon account of the danger of Idolatry; which they are certainly guilty of,
if this Doctrine be not true, and such a change as they pretend be not made in
the Sacrament; for if it be not, then they worship a Creature instead of the
Creator God blessed for ever. But such a change I have shown to be impossible;
or if it could be, yet they can never be certain that it is, and consequently
are always in danger of Idolatry: And that they can never be certain that such
a change is made, is evident; because, according to the express determination
of the Council of Trent, that depends upon the mind and intention of the
Priest, which cannot certainly be known but by Revelation, which is not
pretended in this case. And if they be mistaken about this change, through the
knavery of crosness or the Priest who will not make GOD but when he thinks fit,
they must not think to excuse themselves from Idolatry because they intended to
worship God and not a Creature; for so the Persians might be excused from
Idolatry in worshipping the Sun, because they intend to worship God and not a
Creature; and so indeed we may excuse all the Idolatry that ever was in the
world, which is nothing else but a mistake of the Deity, and upon that mistake
a worshipping of something as God which is not God.

II. Besides the infinite scandal of this Doctrine upon the accounts I have
mentioned, the monstrous absurdities of it make it in supportable to any
Religion. I am very well assured of the grounds of Religion in general, and of
the Christian Religion in particular; and yet I cannot see that the foundation
of any revealed Religion, are strong enough to bear the weight of so many and
so great absurdities as this Doctrine of Transubstantiation would load it
withal. And to make this evident, I shall not insist upon those gross
contradictions, of the same Body being in so many several places at once; of
our Savior's giving away himself with his own hands to every one of his
Disciples, and yet still keeping himself to himself, and a thousand more of the
like nature: But to show the absurdity of this Doctrine I shall only ask these
few Questions.

1. Whither any man have, or ever had greater evidence of the truth of any
Divine Revelation then every man has of the falsehood of Transubstantiation?
Infidelity were hardly possible to men, if all men had the same evidence for
the Christian Religion which they have against Transubstantiation, that is, the
clear and irresistible evidence of sense. He that can once be brought to
contradict or deny his senses, is at an end of certainty; for what can a man be
certain of, if he be not certain of what he sees? In some circumstances our
senses may deceive us, but no Faculty deceives us so little and so seldom: And
when our senses do deceive us, even that error is not to be corrected without
the help of our senses.

2. Supposing this Doctrine had been delivered in Scripture in the very same
words that it is decreed in the Council of Trent, by what clearer evidence or
stronger Argument could any man prove to me that such words were in the Bible,
then I can prove to him that bread and wine after consecration are bread and
wine still? He could but appeal to my eyes to prove such words to be in the
Bible, and with the same reason and justice might I appeal to several of his
senses to prove to him that the bread and wine after consecration are bread and
wine still.

3. Whither it be reasonable to imagine that God should make that a part of the
Christian Religion which shakes the main external evidence and confirmation of
the whole? I mean the Miracles which were wrought by our Savior and his
Apostles, the assurance whereof did at first depend upon the certainty of
sense. For if the senses of those who say they saw them were deceived then
there might be no Miracles wrought; and consequently it may justly be doubted
whither that kind of confirmation which God has given to the Christian
Religion would be strong enough to prove it, supposing Transubstantiation to be
a part of it: Because every man has as great evidence that Transubstantiation
is false, as he has that the Christian Religion is true. Suppose then
Transubstantiation to be part of the Christian Doctrine, it must have the same
confirmation with the whole, and that is Miracles: But of all Doctrines in the
world it is peculiarly incapable of being proved by a Miracle. For if a Miracle
were wrought for the proof of it, the very same assurance which any man has of
the truth of the Miracle he has of the falsehood of the Doctrine, that is, the
clear evidence of his senses. For that there is a Miracle wrought to prove that
what he sees in the Sacrament is not bread but the body of Christ, there is
only the evidence of sense; and there is the very same evidence to prove that
what he sees in the Sacrament is not the Body of Christ but bread. So that here
would arise a new Controversy, whither a man should rather believe his senses
giving testimony against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, or bearing witness
to a Miracle wrought to confirm that Doctrine; there being the very same
evidence against the truth of the Doctrine, which there is for the truth of the
Miracle: And then the Argument for Transubstantiation and (...) Objection
against it would just balance one another; and conseque^^ly Transubstantiation
is not to be proved by a Miracle, because the would be, to prove to a man by
some thing that he sees, that he d^ not see what he sees. And if there were no
other evidence that Tr^^substantiation is no part of the Christian Doctrine;
this would ^^ sufficient, that what proves the one does as much overth^^^ the
other; and that Miracles which are certainly the best and hig^^ external proof
of Christianity are the worst proof in the world of Tr^^substantiation, unless
a man can renounce his senses at the same t^^ that he relies upon them. For a
man cannot believe a Miracle without relying upon sense, nor Transubstantiation
without renouncing it. S^ that never were any two things so ill coupled
together as the Doctri^^ of Christianity and that of Transubstantiation,
because they draw s^veral ways, and are ready to strangle one another; because
the main evidence of the Christian Doctrine, which is Miracles, is res^^ved
into the certainty of sense, but this evidence is clear and poi^^ blank against
Transubstantiation.

4. And Lastly, I would ask what we are to think of the Argume^^ which our
Savior used to convince his Disciples after his Resurrect^on that his Body was
really risen, and that they were not deluded by ^ Ghost or Apparition? Is it a
necessary and conclusive Arg^ment or not? Luke 24. 3^. 39.
And he said unto them, why are y^^ troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your
hearts^ Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self; ^^^ a Spirit has
not flesh and bones, as ye see me h^^ But now if we suppose with the Church of
Rome the Doctrine o^ Transubstantiation to be true, and that he had instructed
his Dis^ciples in it just before his death, strange thoughts might justly have
risen in their hearts, and they might have said to him; Lord, it i^ but a few
days ago since thou did teach us not to believe our senses but directly
contrary to what we saw, viz. That the bread which thou gave us in the
Sacrament, though we saw it and handled i^ and tasted it to be bread, yet was
not bread, but thine own natural body; and now thou appealest to our senses to
prove that thi^ is thy body which we now see. If seeing and handling be an
unquestionable evidence that things are what they appear to ou^ senses, then we
were deceived before in the Sacrament; and if they be not, then we are not sure
now that this is thy body which we now see and handle, but it may be perhaps
bread under the appearance of flesh and bones, just as in the Sacrament, that
which we saw and handled and tasted to be bread was thy flesh and bones under
the form and appearance of bread. Now upon this supposition, it would have been
a hard matter to have quieted the though^^ ^f the Disciples: For if the
Argument which our Savior used did ^^rtainly prove to them that what they saw
and handled was his ^^dy, his very natural flesh and bones (...) because they
saw and ^andled them, (which it were impious to deny) is would as strong^^
prove that what they saw and received before in the Sacrament was ^ot the
natural body and blood of Christ, but real bread and wine: and consequently,
that according to our Saviors arguing after his ^esurrection they had no
reason to believe Transubstantiation before. ^or that very Argument by which
our Savior proves the reality of his ^ody after his Resurrection does as
strongly prove the reality of bread and wine after consecration. But our
Saviors Argument was most ^^fallibly good and true, and therefore the Doctrine
of Transubstan^^ation is undoubtedly false.

Upon the whole matter I shall only say this, that some other ^oints between us
and the Church of Rome are managed with some ^ind of wit^ and subtilty, but
this of Transubstantiation is car^ied out by mere dint of impudence and facing
down of Man^ind.

And of this the more discerning persons of that Church are of ^ate grown so
sensible that they would now be glad to be rid of this ^odious and ridiculous
Doctrine. But the Council of Trent has fast^ned it to their Religion, and made
it a necessary and essential Point of their Belief, and they cannot now part
with it if they would; it is like a Millstone hung about the neck of Popery
which will sink it at the last.

And though some of their greatest Wits, as Cardinal Perron; and of late
Monsieur Arnauld, have undertaken the defense of it in great Volumes; yet it is
an absurdity of that monstrous and massy weight, that no humane authority or
wit^ are able to support it: It will make the very Pillars of St. Peter's
crack, and requires more Volumes to make it good then would fill the Vatican.

And now I would apply my self to the poor deluded People of that Church, if
they were either permitted by their Priests, or durst venture without their
leave to look into their Religion and to examine the Doctrines of it. Consider,
and show your selves men. Do not suffer your selves any longer to be led
blindfold, and by an implicit Faith in your Priests, into the belief of
nonsense and contradiction. Think it enough and too much to let them rook you
of your money for pretended Pardons and counterfeit Relics, but let not the
Authority of any Priest or Church persuade you out of your senses. Credulity is
certainly a fault as well as Infidelity: And he who said, blessed are they that
have not seen and yet have believed; has no where said, blessed are they that
have seen and yet have not believed, much less, blessed are they that believe
directly contrary to what they see.

To conclude this Discourse. By what has been said upon this Argument it will
appear, with how little truth, and reason, and regard to the interest of our
common Christianity, it is so often said by our Adversaries, that there are as
good arguments for the belief of Transubstantiation as of the Doctrine of the
Trinity: When they themselves do acknowledge with us that the Doctrine of the
Trinity is grounded upon the Scriptures, and that according to the
interpretation of them by the consent of the ancient Fathers: But their
Doctrine of Transubstantiation I have plainly shown to have no such ground, and
that this is acknowledged by very many learned men of their own Church. And
this Doctrine of theirs being first plainly proved by us to be destitute of all
Divine Warrant and Authority, our Objections against it from the manifold
contradictions of it to Reason and sense are so many Demonstrations of the
falsehood of it. Against all which they have nothing to put in the opposite
Scale but the Infallibility of their Church, for which there is even less
color of proof from Scripture then for Transubstantiation it self. But so fond
are they of their own Innovations and Errors, that rather then the Dictates of
their Church, how groundless and absurd soever, should be called in question;
rather then not have their will of us in imposing upon us what they please,
they will owerthrow any Article of the Christian Faith, and shake the very
foundations of our common Religion: A clear evidence that this Church of Rome
is not the true Mother, since she can be so well contented that Christianity
should be destroyed rather then the Point in question should be decided against
her.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE Concerning the ADORATION OF THE HOST,

As it is Taught and Practiced in the CHURCH of ROME.

Wherein an Answer is given to T. G. o^ that Subject,

And to Monsieut Boileau's late book De Adoratione Eucharistiae. Paris 1685.

EDINEVRGH Reprinted by John Reid, Anno DOM, 1686.

A DISCOURSE OF THE ADORATION Of the HOST, etc.
IDolatry is so great a Blot in any Church, what ever other glorious Marks it
may pretend to, that it is not to be wondered, that the Church of Rome is very
angry to be charged with it, as it has always been by all the Reformed; who
have given in this among many others, as a just and necessary Reason of their
Reformation; and it must be confessed to be so, if it be fully and clearly made
good against it; and if it be not, it must be owned to be great
Uncharitableness on the other side, which is no good Note of a Church neither;
as grievous Slander and most uncharitable Calumny, which will fall especially
upon all the Clergy of the Church of England, who by their Consent and
Subscription to its Articles and to the Doctrine of its Homilies, and to the
Book of Common Prayer, do expressly join in it. For it is not the private
Opinion only of some particular and forward men in their Zeal and Heat against
Popery, thus to accuse it of Idolatry: but it is the deliberate, and sober, and
downright Charge of the Church of England, of which no honest man can be a
Member and Minister, who does not make and believe it. I might give several
Instances to show this; but shall only mention one, wherein I have undertaken
to defend our Church in its charge of Idolatry upon the Papists in their
Adoration of the Host, which is in its Declaration about Kneeling at the
Sacrament after the Office of the Communion, in which are these remarkable
words, It is hereby declared, that no Adoration is intended, or ought to be
done, either unto the sacramental Bread and Wine there bodily received, or unto
any corporal presence of Christ's natural Flesh and Blood; for the Sacramental
Bread and Wine remain still in their natural substances, and therefore may not
be adored, for that were Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians.
Here it most plainly declares its mind against that, which is the Ground and
Foundation of their Worshipping the Host. That the Elements do not remain in
their natural Substances after Consecration; if they do remain, as we and all
Protestants hold, even the Lutherians, then in Worshipping the consecrated
Elements, they worship mere Creatures, and are by their own Confession guilty
of Idolatry, as I shall show by and by; and if Christ's natural Flesh and Blood
^e not corporally present there, neither with the Substance, nor Signs of the
Elements, then the Adoring what there is most be the Adoring some things else
then Christ's body; and if Bread only be there, and they adore that which is
there, they must surely adore the Bread it self, in the opinion of our Church,
but I shall afterward state the Controversy more exactly between us. Our
Church has here taken notice of the true Issue of it, and declared that to be
false, and that it is both Unfit and Idolatrous too, to Worship, the Elements
upon any account after Consecration, and it continued of the same mind, and
expressed i^ is particularly, and directly in the Canons of 1640. where it says,
Canon 7. 1640. about placing the Communion Table under this head A Declaration
about some Rites and Ceremonis.
That for the cause of the Idolatry committed in the Mass, all Popish Altars
were demolished; so that none can more fully charge them with Idolatry in this
point, then our Church has done.

It recommends at the same time, but with great Temper and Moderation, the
religious Gesture of bowing toward the Altar, both before and out of the time
of Celebration of the Holy Eucharist, and in it, and in neither Ib. can. 7.
1^40.
Upon any opinion of a corporal presence of Christ on the Holy Table, or in the
mystical Elements; but only to give outward and bodily, as well as inward
worship to the Divine Majesty; and it commands all Persons to receive the
Sacrament Kneeling Rubric at Communion.
in a posture of Adoration, as the Primitive Church used to do, with the
greatest Expression of Reverence and Humility, tropo proskynesios kai
sebasmatos; St. Cyrill of Jerusalem speaks Cyril. Hierosolym. Catech. Mystag.
5.
and as I shall show, is the meaning of the greatest Authorities they produce
out of the Ancients for Adoration not to, but at the Sacrament; so far are we
from any unbecoming, or irreverent usage of that Mystery, as Bellarmine
Controv. de Eucharist.
when he is angry with those, who will not Worship it, tells them out of
Optatus, that the Donatists gave it to Dogs; and out of Victor Vticencis, that
the Arria^s trod it under their Feet; that we should abhor any such disrespect
shown to the sacred Symbols of our Saviors Body, as is used by them, in
throwing it into the Flames to quench a Fire, or into the Air, or Water to stop
a Tempest, or Inundation, or keep themselves from drowning, or any the like
mischief (to prevent which they will throw away even the God they Worship) or
the putting it to any the like undecent Superstitions. It Is out of the great
Honor and Respect that we bear to the Sacrament, that we are against the
carrying it up and down as a show, and the Exposing and Prostituting it to so
shameful an Abuse, and so gross an Idolatry. We give very great Respect and
Reverence to all things that relate to God, and are set apart to his Worship
and Service; to the Temple where God is said himself to dwell, and to be more
immediately present; to the Altar whereon the Mysteries of Christ's Body and
Blood are solemnly celebrated; to the Holy Vessels, that are always used in
those Administrations; to the Holy Bible, which is the Word of God, in the New
Testament of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, as the Sacrament is his Body,
and the New Testament in his Blood; to the Font, which is the Laver of
Regeneration, wherein we put on Christ, as well as we eat him in the Eucharis^;
and if we would strain things, and pick out of the Ancient and Devout
Christians what is said of all these, it would go as far, and look as like to
adoring them, as what with all their care they collect and produce for adoring
the Sacrament, as I shall afterward make appear, in answer to what the Jacob.
Boileau Paris. De Adoratione Eucharistiae. Paris. 1685.
latest Defender of the Adoration of the Eucharist, has culled, or rather raked
together out of the Fathers.

It seems from that Declaration of our Church, that some were either so silly,
or so spiteful, as to suppose that by our Kneeling at the Sacrament, we gave
Worship to the Elements; and that learned man is willing to have it believed,
that we do thereby, externe Eucharistiam colere c, outwardly b Boil. p. 145.
Worship the Sacrament, and he blames us for not doing it inwardly in our
minds, as well as outwardly with our Bodies; so willing are these men to join
with our wildest Dissenters in their unreasonable Charges against our Church,
and use any crutches that may help their own weak Cause, or be made use of to
strike at us; but it may as well be said, that the Dissenters Worship their
Cushions, or their Seats, when they kneel before them; the roof of the Church,
or the crowns of their Hats, when they fix their Eyes upon them; at the same
time they are at their Prayers upon their Knees; or that the Papists worship
the Priest himself, before whom they Kneel in their Confessions; or that on
Ashwednesday they adore the holy Ashes as they call them, and on Palmsunday the
holy Boughs, which they do not pretend to do, because they Kneel when they are
given them; as well as that we Worship the Eucharist, or the Mystical Elements,
when we receive them Kneeling, and disavow any such thing, and declare it to be
Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians.

But is it Idolatry to Worship Christ? Or or to Worship the Body of Christ,
though not for it self, yet for the sake of the Divine Nature, to which it is
always hypostatically united? No^ by no means; I know no Heretics, though they
denied Christ's Divinity, but yet were for worshipping him; the old Arrians, and
the late Socinians; but how justifiably, when they believe him but a mere man,
or only a more excellent Creature; they, and the Church of Rome are both
concerned to defend, and to clear it, if they can of Idolatry. As to the
Worship of the Flesh, though Nestorius could not do this according to his
Principles, as St. Cyril and the Council of Ephesus argue against him; nor
could the Ebionites, nor Doketai of old; yet I know none but some of their
Schoolmen dispute now of Adoring the Flesh or Humane Nature of Christ, which
however it be in our minds, is never in truth abstracted from his Divinity. But
we will not at all trouble our selves with those parts of the Science of
controversy; nor shall we stand upon any of those things. Well then, why may
not Christ and his Body be adored in the Sacrament, if they are proper Objects
of Adorations. No doubt but they may be adored in this Sacrament, in the
Sacrament of Baptism too, and in all the Offices of the Christian Religion,
wherein we pray to Christ and Kneel before him, and exercise the devout acts of
the Mind toward him, put our trust and hope in him, and expect Salvation from
him, and devout our selves in all Subjection to him, and bow both our Souls and
our Bodies, and give all, both internal and external Worship to him; this
Adoration we give to Christ, who is God blessed for ever, and who sits at the
right hand of God the Father. And the very same the Papists give to the
Sacrament, to the Host, and the consecrated Elements, the the most Sovereign,
and Absolute, and highest: Degree of Religious Worship that is due to God,
whose creatures those Elements are; or to Christ himself, who commanded us
receive them in remembrance of him. But it is only Christ, say they, whom we
Worship in the Sacrament, whom we adore as being present there with his Body in
the Host, and not the Host or the Sacrament it self; so a great many of them
would fain bring off the matter, or at least color and disguise it; Bellarmine
Lib. 4. de Eucharist c. 29. Quicquid sit de modo loquendi, slatus quaestionis
non est, nisian Christus in Eucharistia sit adorandus cultu latriae.
when he had entangled himself with the distinctions of worshipping the
Sacrament, whither formally or materially would extricate himself, by thus
stating the matter, and reducing it to this question, Whither Christ be to be
adored in the Eucharist? And St. Clara St. Clara Deus, Natura, Gratia, p. 308
(...) been, non dicit concilium Tridentinum, Sacramentum, sed Christuns in
Sacramento, latria adorandum.
would reconcile the dispute with this Observation, Nota been, Mark this, the
council of Trent does not say that the Sacrament is to be adored, but Christ in
the Sacrament. I wonder so great a man as Cassander Adoratio non ad exteri^s
signum quod exterius videtur, sed ad ipsam rem and veritatem quae interiu^
creditur referenda, Cassand. consult. de Adorat, Euchar.
should say, Unless, with a design to condemn the thing, That the Adoration is
not to be given to the outward sign which is seen; but is to be referred to the
thing it self, and to that which is truly and inwardly believed. But
Reconcilers, who will attempt the vain project of Accommodation, must do with
the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, as Apelles did with Antigonus his face,
they must draw but one part, half of it, that so they may Artificially conceal
it as deformed, and its blind side. That all these do so, I shall show by
stating the controversy carefully and truly, which is the chiefest thing in
this dispute; for they love to hide their own Doctrines as much as they can;
and they cunningly contrive most of them with a back door, to slip out at
privately and upon occasion. The Council of Trent has in this, as in other
things used art, and not spoke out in one place, as it does in another; that so
we mistake half its words for its full meaning, as Bellarmine and others were
willing to do, or at least to have others do so. In its sixth Canon on the
Eucharist it only says Council Trident. Can. 6. De Euchor. si quis dixerit in
sancto Eucharistiae Sacramento Christam Vnigenitum Dei filium non esse cultu
Latriae etiam externo adorandum, Anathema sit.
If any one shall say, that Christ the only begotten Son of God is not to be
adored with the external Worship of Latria, in the holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist, let him be accursed. Who will not say in those general words, that
Christ is to be adored with outward and inward Worship both, not only in the
Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, but of Baptism too, and in every Christian
Office, and in every Prayer, and solemn Invocation of him, either public or
private? But they mean a great deal more then all this, by Worshipping Christ
in the Sacrament, and in as plain words they say, Ib. 13. Sess. c. 5.
That the Sacrament it self is to be adored; that, whatever it be which is
something besides Christ, even according to them,, which is placed in the
Patin, and upon the Altar, which the Priest holds in his hands, and lifts up to
be seen, this very thing is to be adored; There is no doubt, says the Council
Ib. Nullus dubitandi locus relinquitur quin omnes Christi fideles pro more in
catholica Ecclesia semper recepto, l^triae cultum qui vero Deo debetur, huic
sanctissimo Sacramento in Veneratione adhibeant; neque enim minus est adorandum
quod fuerit a Christo D^mino ut sumatur, institutum.
but that all faithful Christians, according to the custom always received in
the Catholic Church, ought to give Supreme and Sovereign Worship, which is due
to God himself, to the most Holy Sacrament in their Worship of it; for it is
nevertheless to be adored, though it was instituted of Christ to be received.
That which is to be received, which is to be put into the Peoples Mouths by the
Priest (for since they have made a God of the Sacrament, they will not trust
the People to feed themselves with it nor take it into their hands: and they
may with as much reason in time not think fit that they should eat it) this
which was appointed of Christ to be taken and eaten as a Sacrament; this is now
to serve for another use, to be adored as a God; and it would be as true
Heresy in the church of Rome, not to say that the Sacrament of the Altar is to
be adored, as not to say, that Christ himself is to be adored. But what
according to them is this Sacrament? It is the remaining Species of Bread and
Wine, and the natural Body and Blood of Christ, invisibly, yet carnally present
under them; and these together make up one entire Object of their Adoration
which they call Sacramentum; for Christ's body without those Species, and
Accidents at least of Bread and Wine, would not according to them be a
Sacrament; they being the outward and visible part, are, according to their
Schoolmen, properly and strictly called the Lombard. sent. l. 4. did. 10.
Sacramentum, and the other the res Sacramenti; and to this external part of
the Sacrament, as well as to the internal, they give Latreia and Adoration; to
those remaining Species, which, be they what they will, are but creatures;
religious Worship is given together with Christ's Body and they withh that, are
the whole formal Object of their Adoration. Non solum Christum sed Totum
visibile Sacramentum, unico cultu, adorari, says Suarez, In Th. Quaest. 9.
disp.
quia est unum constans ex Christo and Speciebus; Not only Christ, but the
whole visible Sacrament (which must be something besides Christ's invisible
Body) is to be adored with one and the same Worship, because it is one thing
(or one Object) consisting of Christ and the Species. So another of their
learned men Henriquez. Moral, l. 8. c. 32.
Speciebus Eucharistiae datur Latria propter Christum quem continent; The
highest Worship is given to the Species of the Eucharist, because of Christ,
whom they contain. Now Christ, whom they contain, must be something else then
the Species that contain him. Let him be present never so truly and
substantially in the Sacrament, or under the species, he cannot be said to be
the same thing with that in which he is said to be present; and as subtle as
they are and as thin and subtle as these species are, they can never get off
from Idolatry upon their own Principles in their Worshipping of them; and they
can never be left out, but must be part of the whole which is to be adored,
totum illud quod simul adoratur, as Bellarmine calls it, must include these de
Euch. l: 4. c. 30.
as well as Christ's Body. Adorationem, says Bellarmine Bellarmine de Euch l.
4. c. 29.
ad Sybola etiam panis and vini pe^^nere, ut quod unum cum ipso Christo quem
continent, Adoration belongs even to the Symbols of Bread and Wine, as they are
apprehended to be one with with Christ whom they contain; and so make up one
entire Object of Worship with him, and may be Worshipped together with Christ,
as T. G. (b) owns in his Answer to his most learned Adversary; and are the very
term of Adoration, as Gregory de Valentia Cathol. no Idolaters, p. 268.
says, who farther adds, that they who think this worship d De Idol, l. 2. c.
5.
does not at all belong to the Species, in that heretically oppose the
perpetual custom and sense of the Church. Qui censeunt nullo m^do ad Species
ipsias eam Venerationem pertinere, in eo Haeretice pugnare contra perpetuum
usum and sensum Ecclesiae: de Veneratione Sacram. ad Artic. Tom. 5.


Indeed they say, That these species or Accidents, are not be Worshipped for
themselves, or upon their own account, but because Christ is present in them
and under them; and so they may be Worshipped as T. G. says Ib.
with Christ in like manner, as his Garments were Worshipped together with him
upon Earth; which is a similitude taken out of Bellarmine, the Magazine not
only of Arguments and Authorities, but of Similitudes too, it seems, which are
to Defend that Church; Quemadmodum says he de Euch. Venerat.
qui Christum in terris vestitum adorabant, non ipsum solum sed etia^ vestes
quodam modo adorabant. And are Christ's Garments then to be Worshipped with
Latria, as well as Christ himself, or as the Sacrament? I think they will not
say this of any of the Relics they have of Christ, or his clothes: Did they,
who worshipped Christ when he was upon the Earth, worship his clothes to? Did
the Wise men worship the blankets, the clouts, and the swadling-cloths, as well
as the blessed Babe lying in the Manger? Might it not as well be supposed that
the People worshipped the Ass, upon which Christ rode; not for himself, but for
the sake, and upon the account of Christ, who was upon him; as that they
worshipped his clothes, or his Sandals on which he trod, or the Garments which
he wore? Bellarmine^ quodammodo adorabant, shows his heart misgave him, and
that he was sensible the Similitude would not do, when he used it: but T. G. is
a man of more heart and courage, or front at least, and he found the cause was
in great need of it, and so he says boldly, without any trembling quodammodo,
that they worshipped his Garments.

The humane Nature it self of Christ, considered alone, and being a mere
Creature, is not an object of Worship, as St Augustine says, St. Aug. sermon. 58.
De verbis Dom. si natura Deus non est filius sed Creatura, nec colendus est
omnino nec ut Deus Adorandus. Ego Dominicam carnem, imo perfectam in Christo
humanltatem propterea adoro, quod a divinitate suscepta, atque Deitati unita
est, -- Denique si hominem separaveris a Deo, ut Photinus, vel Paulus
Samosatenus, illi ego nunquam credo nec servio.
but only as it is hypostatically united to the Divine Nature, i. e. so
intimately and vitally united to it, as to make one Person with it, with God
himself, one Theantbropos and so one Object of Worship; and if the Sacramental
Symbols or species, are to be adored with true latria, not per se, or upon
their own account, but by reason of the intimate Union and conjunction which
they have with Christ, as they say, not only with Christ's body, for that alone
is not to be worshipped, much less another thing that is united to it; but with
Christ's Persons, and then there must be as many Persons of Christ, as there are
consecrated Wafers; then these species being thus worshipped upon the same
account that Christ's humanity is, as Gregory de Valentia owns they must, (This
Worship, says he, belongs after a certain manner to the species, as when the
Divine Logos is worshipped in the humanity which he assumed, the Divine Worship
belongs also to the ^reated Humanity. Pertinet per accidens suo quodam modo ea
veneratio ad species quemadmodum suo modo, etiam hoc ipso quod adoratur Divinum
verbum in humanitate assumpta^ pertinet ejusmodi Divinus cultus, ad illam
humanitatem creatam secundario, neque in hoc est aliqua Idololatria) must be
also united to Christ, the same way that his Humanity is united Valentia,
Disput. 6. Quaest. 11. de ritu and oblat. Eucharist.
to his Divinity, so as to become with that, one entire object of Worship, as
the species are, according to them, with Christ in the Eucharist; that is, they
must become one suppositum, or one Person with Christ. This is so weighty a
difficulty, as makes the greatest Atlas's of the Roman church not only sweat;
but sink under it. Valentia a owns the wonderful Conjunction the a De Idol. l.
2. c. 5.
species have with Christ, but denies their being hypostatically united to him;
but then how are they to be worshipped? Since it is owned by him and the
schoolmen, that the very Humanity of Christ is to be worshipped only upon the
account of its hypostatical Union; and though God be very nearly and intimately
present in other Creatures, yet they are not to be worshipped, notwithstanding
that presence, because they do not make one suppositum or hypostasis with him,
or are not hypostatically united to him. Bellarmine being pinched on this side,
removes the burden to the other, that is as sore, and can as little bear it;
Christ, says he, is much otherwise in the Eucharist. then God bLonge aliter
est Christus in Eucharistia, and in aliis rebus Deus; Nam in Eucharistia unum
tantum suppositum est, idque Divinum, c^eteraque omnia divina ad illud
pertinent, and cum illo unum quid, faciunt, licet non eodem modo, Bellar. de
Euch. l. 4. c. 30
is in other things; for in the Eucharist, there is but one only suppositum,
and that divine; all other things present belong to, and make one thing with
that. If they do so, then sure they are hypostatically united with Christ, as
T. G's. Learned Adversary charges upon Bellarmine from this place; if they make
but one suppositum with him, and but one with him, let it be in what manner it
will, they must be hypostatically united to him Bellarmines Licet non eodem
modo, though not after the same manner, is both intelligible, and will not at all
help the matter; it is only a Consession from him, that at the same time that he
says they are hypostatically united to Christ, and make one suppositum with
him, and one object of Worship, that he does not know how this can be, and that
his thoughs are in a great straight about it, so that he doubts they are not
hypostically united at the same time that he yet says they are so; for this is
no way imposed upon him, as T. G. says, notwithstanding his non eodem modo. If
in the Incarnation of Christ, one should say, That the Soul and Body of Christ
are both united to his Divinity, but that both were not united after the same
manner; but the Soul in such a manner, as being a Spirit, and the Body in
another; yet so, that both made but one Suppositum with it, and that Divine;
and that all his humane Nature belonged to that, and made one with that, though
not after the same manner; would not this be still an owning the hypostatical
Union between Christ's Divinity, and his Soul and Body? and so must the other be
between Christ's Divinity, and his Body, and the Species; if they make one
Suppositum, and are, as they hold, to be worshipped as such.

Thus I have taken care to give you their Doctrine, and state the case with
some exactness; though I am sensible, with too much length; but that is the way
to shorten the controversy; and by this means I have cut off their common
retreats and stopped up those little lurking holes they generally run to, and in
which they are wont to Earth themselves. As, that they worship only Christ in
the Sacrament, or Christ under the accidents of Bread and Wine; and that it is
only Christ, or the Body of Christ with which his Divinity is always present,
is the formal object of their Adoration in the Sacrament, and that their
Worship is given to that, and not to the consecrated Elements, or to the
remaining Species of Bread and Wine; it appears from their own Doctrine and
Principles to be quite otherwise; and if we take them at their own words, they
are sufficient to bear wi^ness against them, and condemn them of Idolatry; but
this will be found to be much greater and grosser, when the whole foundation of
this Doctrine of theirs of the Worship of the Host, proves upon Examination to
be false, and one of the most thick and unreasonable Errors in the World, to
wit, the belief of Transubstantiation, or that the Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament, are converted into the natural and substantial Body and Blood of
Christ, so that there remains nothing of the substance of the Bread and Wine
after consecration, but only the Flesh and blood of Christ corporally present,
under the species and accidents of bread and wine. If this Doctrine be true, it
will in great measure discharge them from the guilt of Idolatry; for then their
only fault will be their joining the species which how thin and ghostly soever
they be, yet are Creatures, together with CHRIST, as one Object of Worship; and
unless they alter their Doctrine on this point, from what it is now, I see not
how they can justify their worshipping with Latreia, or the Worship due only
to God, not only the adorable substance of Christ's Body, but the very Vails and
Symbols under which they suppose that to lie; and yet when they teach, as they
do, the adoring of the Sacrament, they must adore the visible and outward part
of it, as well as the invisible Body of CHRIST; for without the remaining
Species, it would not, according to them, be a Sacrament; and they have not
gone so far yet, I think, as to deny that there are any remaining Species, and
that our senses do so far wholly deceive us, that when we see something, there
is really nothing of a visible Object. And the same Object which is visible, is
adorable too, according to them: If Christ's Body were substantially present in
the Sacrament, though it were lawful to adore it as there present; but by no
means, either the substance or Species of Bread with it; yet it is much to be
doubted, whither it were a duty, or necessary to do so. It would be present so
like a Prince in Incognito, that he would seem not to require that Honor which
we ought to give him under a more public appearance. God we know is present in
all his Creatures, but yet we are not to Worship him as present in any of them;
unless, where he makes a sensible Manifestation of himself, and appears by his
Shechinah, or his Glory, as to Moses in the burning Bush, and to others in like
manner: and it would be very strange to make the Bread in the Eucharist a
Shechinah of God, which appears without any Alteration just as it was before it
was made such; and especially, to make it such a continuing Shechinah as the
Papists do, that Christ is present in it, not only in the action and solemn
Celebration, but extra usum, as they speak, and permanenter, even after the
whole Solemnity and Use is over; that he should continue there as a praesens
Numen, as Boileau expressly calls it de Eucharistiae Adorat. p. 140.
and be showed and carried about and honored as such, and dwell in the species
as long as they continue, as truly as he dwelt in the Flesh, before that was
crucified; this is strange and monstrous even to those who think Christ is
present in the Sacrament, but not so as the Papists believe, nor so as to be
worshipped, I mean the Lutherans. But to bring the matter to a closer issue,
the Papists themselves are forced to confess, that if the Bread remain after
consecration, and be still Bread, and be not Transubstantiated into the Body of
Christ, that they are then Idolaters. So Fisher against Oecolampadius, l. 1. c.
2. In express words. So Coster in his Intali errore atque Idololotria, qualis
in or be terrarum nunquam vel visus vel auditus fuit. Tolerabilior est enim
error eorum qui pro Deo colunt Statuam auream aut argenteam, aut alterius
materiae imaginem, quomodo Gentiles Deos suos venerabantur, vel pannum rubrum
in hastam elevatum quod narratur de Lappis, vel viva animalia ut quondam
Aegyptii, quam eorum qui frustum panis. coster Ench. c. ^. S. 10. Long potiori
ratione excusandi essent infideles Idololatrae qui Statuas adoraverunt, Ib.
Euchiridion de Euch, c. 8. If the true Body of Christ be not present in the
Sacrament, then they are left in such an Error and Idolatry, as was never seen
or heard; for that of the Heathens would be more tolerable, who Worshipp a
golden or silver statue for God, or any other Image, or even a red cloth, as
the Laplanders are said to do, or living Animals, as the Egyptians, then of
those who worship a piece of bread. And Again, Those Infidel Idolaters would be
more excusable, who worshipped their statues. To whom I shall add Bellarmine
Sacramentarii omnes negant Sacramentum Adorandum and Idololatriam appellant
ejusmodi Adorationem; neque id mirum videri debet, cum ipsi non credant
Christum reipsa esse pra^sentem, and panem Eucharistiae reipsa nihil esse nisi
panem ex furno, Bellarm. de Euch. l. 4. c. 29.
who says, It does not seem strange, that they call the Adoration of the
sacrament Idolatry, who do not believe that Christ is there truly present, but
that the bread is still true bread.

If then the Bread do still remain Bread in the Host, and the Elements in the
Eucharist are not substantially changed into the natural and substantial Body
and Blood of Christ, then it is confessed Idolatry, and it is not strange
according to Bellarmine, that it should be so; and then sure it will be true
Artolatreia, or Bread worship too, if that be Bread which they worship, and be
not the natural Body of CHRIST, that which is there present, that they adore;
and if that be only Bread, then they adore Bread. And here I should enter that
controversy, which has given rise to most of their abominable Abuses and
Errors about the Eucharist; the making both a God of it, and also a true
Sacrifice of this God instead of a Sacrament, which CHRIST intended it, and
that is their Doctrine of Transubstantiation; but a great man has spared me
this trouble, by his late excellent Discourse against it, to which I shall
wholly refer this part of our present controversy, and shall take it for
granted, as any one must, who reads that, that (unless in Boileau's Phrase Homo
opiniosus cui tenacit as Error is sensum communem abstulit, Boil. p. 159.
he be such a Bigot, whose tenaciousness of his Error, has quite bereaved him
of common sense, which is an unlucky Character of his own Friends) that
Doctrine is false; and therefore, that the charge of Idolatry in this matter;
is by their own confession true. But there are some more cautious and wary men
amongst them, who out of very just and reasonable Fears and suspicions, that
Transubstantiation should not prove true, and that they may happen to be
mistaken in that, have thought of another way, to cover and excuse their
Idolatry; and that is, not from the Truth, but merely from the Belief of
Transubstantiation. As long, say they, as we believe Transubstantiation to be
true, and do really think that the Bread and Wine are converted into the
substance of Christ's body and blood, and so Worship the Sacrament upon that
account, though we should be mistaken in this our belief; yet as long as we think
that Christ is there present, and design only to Worship him, and not the
bread, which we believe to ^e done away; this were enough to free us from the
charge of Idolatry. To which, because it is the greatest, and the best Plea
they have, and they that make it have some misgivings, I doubt not, that
Transubstantiation will not hold; I shall therefore give a full Answer to it,
in the following Particulars.

1. All Idolatry does proceed from a mistaken belief, and a false supposal of
the mind, which being gross and unreasonable, will not at all excuse those who
are guilty of it; there were never any Idolaters, but might plead the excuse of
a mistake, and that not much more culpable and notorious, one would think, then
the mistake of those who think a bit of Bread, or a wafer, is turned by a few
words into a God. They all thought, however blindly and foolishly, that
whatever it was they worshipped, ought to be worshipped upon some account or
other; that it was a true and fit Object, and that Adoration rightly belonged
to it. Idolatry, though it be a great sin, and a great injury and affront to God,
yet arises not so much from the malice of the will, as the blindness and
darkness of the understanding; there were hardly ever any such Idolaters as
maliciously, and designedly intended to affront the true God, by worshipping
false Gods or Creatures; as if a subject should pass by his Prince out of ill
will, and of purpose to affront and defy him, and give the Reverence and
Homage that was due to him, to a Rebel or fellow Subject standing by him; but
they did this, because they mistook the person, and thought this to be the
Prince that was not, or that he was there where he was not, or that that which
was there, ought to be worshipped for his sake; still falsely supposing that they
ought to worship that wrong Object, which they took to be right; or in that
false manner which they took to be true; for if a mistake will excuse, it will
excuse in one as well as another.

2. Though they do not only think and believe that which they worship, to be a
true Divine Object; but it really be so in it self, and that which they have in
their Thoughts and intentions to worship, be right; yet they may still be
guilty of Idolatry; for so were the Jews in the Idolatry of the golden Calf,
whereby they intended not to throw off the worship of the true GOD, the God of
Israel, who brought them out of ^e land of Egypt; for they appointed the Feast
Exodus 32. 4. 5.
to him under that Title, and under the Name of Jeh^vah at the same time; and
so in the Idolatry of the Calves set up by Jeroboam; they were not designed to
draw off the people from 1 K. 12. 27. 28.
worshipping the same God, who was worshipped at Jerusalem, but only to do it
in another place, and after another manner; but still as T. G. Cath. no Idol.
p. 330.
says of the Roman Idolaters, so it may be said of these Jewish, That what
they had in their Minds and Intentions to Worship, was the true God; and what
ever was the material object of their Worship, he was the formal; for they did
no more think the Gold, then the Papists think the bread to be God. So the
Mani^hees in their Idolatry, which St. Austin often mentions Contra Faustum
Manicheum, l. 1. c. 3 Tom. 1. de Genesi contra Manich. l. 2. c. 25. Tom. 3.
Epist. 74. ad Deuterium, Solemn etiam and Lunam and adorant and colant.
of adoring the Sun and Moon, the Object which they had in their Minds, and
Thoughts, and Purposes to Worship, was CHRIST, as much as the Papists have in
the Eucharist. I would only ask, if a persons having a right Object in his
mind, in his thoughts and purposes to adore, which T. G. catholics no
Idolaters, p. 329. 330.
so often pretends, would excuse him from Idolatry; then suppose a person
should before consecration, worship the Sacramental Elements, to prevent which
they generally keep them from being seen; yet in the Thoughts, and Intentions,
and purposes of his mind, design to worship CHRIST then supposed, though falsely,
to be there, as they worship him afterward; whither this would be Idolatry in
him or no? If not, then they may worship the unconsecrated Elements, as well as
consecrated, even whilst they believe they are Bread; if it be, then having a
right Object in our Thoughts, and Purposes, and Intentions, will not excuse
from Idolatry.

3. Whatever was the material Object of Idolatrous worship, it was nor
worshipped for it self, no more then the Bread or its Accidents are by the
Papists in the Eucharist; but as they say of the Host, because they believed
that the true Object of worship was really present in it, or in an
extraordinary manner united to it Deos velect is sedibus propriis non recusare
nec fugere, habitacula inire terrena, quinimo jure dedicationis impulsos
simulahcrorum coalescere inunctioni, Arnob. contra gent. l. 6.
so did the Gentiles, who thought the Gods themselves, or at least a Divine
Power, was brought into their Images, by their consecrations, and that it
resided and dwelt there, and they worshipped their Images only upon this
account Deos per simulachra Veneramur Ib.
Now if they had t^ought this of the true God himself, that it was he, and no^
any false God that was thus present in their Images, this would have been
nevertheless Idolatry. Thus the Manichees, who worshipped the Sun, did not
worship it for it self, but because they believed CHRIST had placed his
Tabernacle in the Sun; so the more Philosophical Idolaters among the Heathens,
who worshipped the several Things of Nature, as parts, they thought, of the
Great See Voss. de Idolol. l. ^. c. 1.
and Omnipresent God; they did not worship them purely for themselves, but as
God was in them; and they were as St. Austin speaks; Aut parts ejus aut membra
ejus, aut aliquid substantiae ip^ius August. l. 24. contra Faustum.
Either parts of him, or Members of him, or something of his substance, as the
Papists believe the Sacrament to be his body. Thus they Deified the things of
Nature, though they thought there was but one Supreme GOD, whom they worshipped in
them, as ^usebius says of them; they believe (a,) that Hena gar onia theon,
pantoiais dymamesi ta panta plerun; kai dia panta diekein. kai iu ton dia ton
dedelomenon sebein. Eusebius Praepar. Evangel. l. 3. c. 13.
one GOD fills all things with his various power, and pervades all things, and
that he is to be worshipped in, and by all visible things; but yet they denied
that those visible things were to be worshipped for them selves, but for the
sake of God, and those invisible powers of God whichwere in them, as appears
from the same place Me ta horamena samata heliu kai selenes kai astron medege
ta aistheta mere tu kosmu phesusi the opoiein, alla tas en tutois aoratus
dunameis, autu de tu epi pasin
They do not, they say, make Gods of the visible bodies of the Sun, Moon and
Stars, or the other sensible parts of the World; but they worship those
invisible powers that are in them of that God, who is GOD over all. Nay the
Egyptians themselves did not as Celsus pleads even for those Idolaters, worship
their bruit Animals, but only as they were Symbols of God einai auta kai theu
symbola. Orig. contra cells. l. 3.


4. Yet notwithstanding this Plea of Idolaters, they may justly be charged with
worshipping those material Objects, which they say, as the Papists, when we
charge them with Bread-worship, that they do not worship. So the Egyptians
might be charged with brut-worship, the Heathens with the worship of the Sun
and Moon; and the Scripture Isa. 44. 17.
expressly Reproaches and Accuses the Idolaters with worshipping a Stock or
Stone, or a piece of Wood; though it was the constant Plea and pretense of the
Heathens, that they did no more worship those material Objects, then the
Papists do Bread. Non ego illum lapidem colo nec illud simulachrum quod est
sine sensu, Aug. in Psalm. 69.
I do not Worship the senseless Stone or Image, which has Eyes and sees not,
Ears and hears not, says the Heathen in St. Austin; and in Arnobius, We do not
worship the Brass, or the Gold, or Silver, or any of the matter of which our
Images are made Nos neque era, neque auri argentique materias, neque alias
quibus signa Conficiunt eas esse per se Religiosa decernimus numina, sed eos in
his colimus eosque veneramur quos dedicatio infert Sacra. Arnobius contra
Gentes.
and in St. Austin, again, Do ye think we or our Forefathers were such Fools as
to take those for Gods Vsque adeone Majores nostros insipientes fuisse
credendum est ut Does --
No, they would disown it as much as Boileau does, With his, who shall say we
adore the bread or Wine? Quis nos adorare panem and vinum? Boileau, p. 160.
or T. G's., pretending that we run upon that false ground, that Catholics
believe the bread to be God. And yet, I see not why there may not be good
reason to charge the one, as well as the other.

5. If those other Idolaters had been so foolish and absurd, as to believe and
think, that those things which they worshipped were their very Gods themselves,
substantially present, and that the visible substance of their Idols, had been
converted and turned into the substance of their Gods; this would have made
their Idolatry only more horribly sottish and ridiculous, but would not in the
least have made it more excusable. If the Jews had thought that by the powerful
words of Consecration, pronounced by Aaron their High Priest, the Calf had been
turned into the very substance of GOD, and that, though the Figure and Shape of
the Calf had remained, and the Accidents and Species of Gold, which appeared to
their sight; yet that the substance of it had been perfectly done away, and
that only God himself, had been there under those appearing Species of a golden
Calf; would this have mended the matter, or better excused their Idolatry,
because they had been so extremely sottish, That they conceived the Gold not to
be there at all, but in the place thereof, the only true and eternal God; and
so, although the Object (or rather subject) materially present in such a case
would have been the golden Calf; yet their Act of Adoration would not have been
terminated formally upon that, but only upou God, as T. G. says of the bread,
p. 339. Or if the Manichees had thought the Body of the Sun had been converted
into the glorious Body of JESUS CHRIST, would this have signified any thing to
bring them off; if their mistake had been, as T, G. says, p. 327. Theirs is
concerning the Bread, that they believed the Sun not to be there at all, and
therefore, what they would have in their minds would not, or could not be the
Sun, but the only true and eternal Son of God. Indeed they had as it appears
from St. Austin Eum (sc. Christum) na^im quandam esse dicitis, eum triangulum
esse perhibetis, id est, per quandam triangulam caeli Fenestram lucem istam
mundo terrisque radiare. August. contra Faustum Manichaeum, l. 30. c. 6. Nescio
quam navim per foramem Triangulum micantem, atque lucentem, quam confictam
cogitatis, adoretis Ibid.
some such absurd Imagination; they did think that it was not the material Sun,
which appeared to their senses; but a certain Navis, which was the substance of
CHRIST, that did radiate, through the triangular Fenestra in the Heavens to the
World, and to the Earth. These wretched Figments of theirs, whereby they made
the Father of the Light, that was inaccessible, and placed CHRIST in the Sun
and Moon, and the Holy Ghost in the Air Trinitati loca tria datis; patri,
unum^. e. lumen in accessibile, filio duo Solemn and Lunam spiritui sancto
rursus unum, Aris hunc omuem ambitum, Ibid c. 7.
and called these the Seals of their substance Seeds ejusdem substantiae
dicatis, Ibid. c. 8.
these made them indeed as he says, worship only the Figments of their own
crazy heads, and things that were not In iis non quod sunt, sed quod vobis
dementissime fingit is, adoratis, Ib. c. 9. Vos au^em colitis ea quae nec dii
nec aliquid sunt, quoniam prorsus nulla sunt, Ib. c. 9.
but yet this madness and extravagance did not excuse them from Idolatry, which
he still charges them withal They worshipped that in the Sun, which was not
there, as the Papists do in the Sacrament, to wit, CHRIST'S natural Body, let it
be Fantastic or not; and they endeavored to turn away the senses of men, as
he says Sensus simplicium connantur avertere, and nonnullorum avertunt. Id.
Enarrat in Psalm. 10.
from that visible Sun, and persuade them that it was Christ himself. So that
as T. G. says of their mistake concerning the Bread, They did not in their
minds, affirm the Sun to be, but not to be, p; 330. and so it could not
according to him be the Object of their worship, because whatever is so, the
understanding must affirm (either truly or falsely) to be, p. 329.

There was an Idolatry among the Persians, which Xenophon Cyrop. l. 8.
and Quintus Curtius l. 3.
give an account of, in their worship of Fire, and carrying it about with the
most stately Pomp and Solemnity upon silver Altars, and a great Train of
Priests and others; which does the most resemble the carrying about the Host in
Procession of any thing I have met with, as it is described by Curtius. Here
the sacred Fire as they called it, which no doubt was consecrated by some
Religious Ceremonies, and was no more counted ignis ex culina^, then the holy
Bread is panis ex furno; if they had supposed it by the magical Charms of the
Priests to have been turned into some other substance then common Fire, and had
thought it to have become the most noble Symbol of the great God, or the
illustrious Vail, under which lay the Divinity of the great Lord of the World,
and that all the substance of common Fire was quite changed, and done away in
this sacred and eternal Fire, as they accounted it Ignis qnem ipsi sacrum and
aeternum vocabant, argent is altaribus perferebatur, Curt. Ib.
this would not sure have made them to be no Idolaters. T. G. will make himself
a very great Patron of Idolaters, if with this Art and Sophistry of his he can
bring them off, as he would the Worshippers of the Host, by the mere adding of
more thick Grosness, and more Absurdities to their mistakes. He will have (b)
the Israelites to take the golden P. 322.
Calf for God, and the Egyptians the Sun to be God, and perhaps some of the
most stupid Heathens did take their very Images for Gods, and by his way, these
were the most excusable, because they were the most mistaken. These mistakes
would after this rate do great and extraordinary things for Idolaters, and
would be much better security for the Roman Church, then her pretended
Infallibity; and it is these must bring off her and her Members from the guilt,
though not from the Acts of Idolatry, as from other things, or else she and they
are in a very sad and desperate condition

But now I dare appeal to any man, who shall take in all those Considerations I
have mentioned together, whither the Papist's adoring the Host, upon the
supposal and belief of Transubstantiation, if that be not true, will excuse
them from Idolatry, and whither if a mistake in this Case, will excuse them, it
will not excuse the grossest Idolatry in the World? Notwithstanding all the
little Shifts and Evasions, that T, G. uses to wriggle himself out of this
straight and difficulty, into which his learned Adversary had driven him.

HAving considered the Adoration of the Host, as it is taught in the Church of
Rome, I shall now consider the Practice of it, which is more plain and
notorious to all the World; however they would palliate and disguise their
Doctrine. According to their Missal, which is wholly different in this, as well
as other things from the old Liturgy, and Eucharistick forms, as I shall show
by and by, the Priest Celebrans hostiam inter pollices teneus-genu flexus eam
adorat; tum usque in terram genuflexus hostiam ipsam veneratur -- sic de
calice, reponit calicem super corporale and genu flexus sanguinem reverenter
adorat, illum populo ^^tendens adorandum Sacramentum genu flexus veneratur. In
Canon. Miss. genu flexus reverentiam facit Sacramento.
in every Mass, as soon as he has consecrated the Bread and Wine, with bended
Knees, he adores the Sacrament Missale Romanum c. 9. Sacramentum genuflexus
adorat Capite inclinato versus Sacramentum dicit Inteligibili voce, Agnus Dei
qui tollis peccata^mundi miserere nobis, Da nobis pacem.
that which he has consecrated, that very thing which is before him, upon the
Paten, and in the Chalico and gives the same worship and Subjection, both of
Body and Mind to it, as he could to God or Christ himself; for with his head,
and his Soul, bowing toward it, and his Eyes and thoughts fixed upon it, and
directed to it, as to Christ himself: Lamb of God that take away the Sins of
the World, have Mercy upon us, Grant us Peace, and the like; then the Priest
rising up after he has thus adored it himself, he lifts it up as conveniently
as he can above his head, and with Eyes fixed upon it, he shows it to be
devoutly adored by the People Sacerdos postquam ipse hostiam genuflexus
adoravit, continuo se erigens quantum commode potest, elevat in altum and
intentis in eam oculis populo reverenter ^^^endit adorandam.
who having notice also, by ringing the Mass Bell, as soon as they see it, fall
down in the humblest Adorations to it, as if it were the very appearance of God
himself, and if CHRIST himself were visibly present before them, they could not
show more acts of Reverence and Devotion, and Worship to him, then they do to
the Host; they Pray to it, and use the very Forms of Petition and Invocation to
that, as to CHRIST himself; such as these, O saving Host, or blessed sacrament
which openest the door of Heaven, give me strength and power against dangers,
and against all my Enemies O salutaris Hostia, qu^ caeli pandis ostium, bell^
premunt hostilia, Da robur, fer auxilium. Hymnus in Festo corporis Christi in
Breviar. Romans
Adoro te devote lateus Deitas, quae sub his figuris vere latitas, tibi se cor
meum subjicit, Deum meum te confiteor.
Make me always more to believe, to hope in thee, to love thee; Grant that my
Soul may always live upon thee, and that thou may always taste sweet unto it.

Thus both the Priest, and the People are several times to Adore and worship
both the Host and the Cup in the Celebration of the Eucharist, and they will
not disown, nor cannot, their directing and terminating their Devotions and
Prayers upon the Fac me tibi magis credere; in te spem habere, te deligere,
praesta menti de te vivere and te illi semper dulce sapere, Rythmus, St. Thom.
ad Eucharist in Missal.
Sacrament, which is before them; Prayers, they call them to the Eucharist Laus
sacratissimo Sacramento.
and it is become a common form of Doxology amongst them, instead of saying,
Praise be given to God, to say, Praise be given to the most holy Sacrament Ad
Sacram Eucharistiam Rithmus Romans breviar.
as it is in one of their Authors, instead of ye shall pray to God, ye shall
pray to the Body of Christ, i, e. To the Sacrament. Orlandinus hist.
Sanders in his Book of the Supper of the Lord Corpore and sangi^^ Christi sub
speciebus panis and vini omnis honor, Laus and Gratiarum actio in secula
seculerum. Sanderus de caena Dom.
instead of Glory be to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, turns it thus, To the
Body and Blood of our Savior, under the species of Bread and Wine, be all
Honor and Praise, and Thanksgiving for evermore, as if it were another Person
of the blessed Godhead.

This Adoration is not only in the time of Communion, when it is properly the
Lords Supper and Sacrament; but at other times out of it, when ever it is set
upon the Altar with the Candles burning, and the Incense smoking before it, or
hung up in its rich Shrine and Tabernacle, with a Canopy of State over it. And
not only in the Church which is sanctified, they say, by this Sacrament, as by
the presence of God himself Bellarm. de sanct. c. 5.
but when it is carried through the Streets in a solemn and pompous Procession,
as it is before the Pope, when he goes abroad, just as the Persian fire was
before the Emperor Curt. l: 3. S. 3.
merely by way of state, or for a superstitious end, that he may be the better
Guarded and Defended by the company of his God Ad capit is illius sacri
custodiam praesidialem and patronalem. perron. de Euch. l. 3. c. 19.
In all these times it is to be worshipped and adored by all persons as it
passes by, as if it were the Glory of God which passed by. They are like
Moses, to make have* and bow their heads to the Earth and worship Exodus 34. ^.
but above all, upon that high day, which they have dedicated to this
Sacrament, as if it were some new Deity, the Festum Dei, as they call it, the
Feast of God, or the Festum Corporis Christi, the Feast of the Body of Christ;
for to call the Sacrament God, is a general Expression among them, as when they
have received the Sacrament, to say, I have received my Maker to day; and the
Person who in great Churches, is ^o carry the Sacrament to the numerous
Communicants, is called, Bajulus Dei, the Porter or Carrier of GOD; and they
always account, and so always reverence it, as Boileau falsely says
Eucharistiam pro praesente numine ^emper habuisse Veteres.
the Ancients did, as a present Numen and Deity. This Feast was appointed by
Pope Urban the 4th, about the middle of the twelfth Century; and again by
^lement the fifth in the beginning of the 13th, as is owned by themselves, upon
the occasion of a Vision to one Juliana, who saw a crack in the Moon, that
signified, it seems, a great ^efect in the Church for want of this Solemnity:
such was the rise of this great Festival Bzovii Annal in Contin. Baron. Anno
Dom. 1230.
and so late was its Institution in the Roman Church, in which alone, and in no
other Christian Church of the World, it is observed to this day. And that the
whole practice of the Adoration to the Host is Novel, and unknown to the
primitive Church, and to the Ancient Writers, I shall endeavor to make evident
against that bold and impudent Canon of the Council of Trent, which is the
first Council that commanded it in these words Siquis dixerit, non esse hoc
Sacramentum peculiari festivia celebritate venerandum, neque in processionibus
secundum laudabilem and Vniversalem Ecclesiae sanctae ritum and consuetudinem,
sole^niter circumgesland^^ vel ^on public ut adoretur, populo proponendum, and
ejus Adoratoresesse Idololatr as, anathema sit. Council. Trident. Can. 6. Sess.
13.
If any one shall say that the Sacrament is not to be worshipped by a peculiar
Festival, nor to be solemnly carried about in Processions according to the
laudable and universal manner and custom of the Holy Church, nor to be
publicly proposed to the people that it may be adored by them, and that the
Worshippers of it are Idolaters, let him be accursed. To confront this insolent
pretense of theirs, that it was an universal custom of the church, thus to
carry the Sacrament in processions, the ingenuous confession of their own
Cassander is sufficient, The Custom, says he Consuetudo quae panis
E^charistiae in publica pompa conspicuus circumferetur ac passim omnium oculis
ingeritur, praeter veterum morem ac mentem hand ita longo tempore inducta and
recepta videtur. Illi enim hoc mysterium in tanta religione ac veneratione
habuerunt, ut non modo ad ejus perceptionem, sed ne inspectionem quidem
admitterent, nisi fideles, quos Christi membra and tanta participatione
dignosesse existimarent, quare ante Consecrationem Catecbumeni, Energumeni,
poenite^tes, denique non Communicantes, Diaconi voce and Osliariorum Ministerio
secludeb antur Cassand. consult.
of carrying about the Sacramental Bread in public pomp, to be seen and
exposed to all eyes is contrary to the mind and custom of the Ancients, and
seems to be lately brought in and received; for they had this mystery in such
religious Veneration, that they would not admit any, not only to the partaking,
but not to the sight of it, but the Faithful, whom they accounted members of
Christ, and worthy to partake of such a Mystery. Wherefore all those who were
but Catechumeni, or were Energumeni or Penetents and not Communicants were
always put out and dismissed at the Celebration of it. Whither they be Idolaters
for adoring the Sacrament, I have considered already, and their practice joined
with their Doctrine, maks it more evident. I shall now prove that this
Adoration of theirs, was neither commanded nor used by Christ, or the Apostles,
nor by the Primitive Church, nor is truly mean'd and designed by those
Authorities of the Fathers, which they produce for it; and upon a general view
of the whole matter, That it is a very absurd and ridiculous thing that tends
most shamefully to reproach, and expose Christianity.

1. That it was not used or commanded by Christ or the Apostles, is plain from
the account that all the Evangelists give us of Christ's celebrating this
Sacrament with his Apostles, where is only mention of their taking and eating
the Bread, and drinking the Wine, after it was blessed by him, but not the
least tittle of their adoring it; so far from it that they were not in a
posture of Adoration, which they should have been in, if they had inwardly
adored it, which makes this not only a Negative Argument, as Boileau De Adorat.
Euch. l. 2. c. 1.
would have it, but a positive one. To take off this argument from the not
mention of any such command or practice of Adoration to the Sacrament in the
Gospel; he says, Neither is the Adoration of Christ, prescribed in express
words Nullo ex iis loco conceptis verbis praescriptam fuisse Adorationem, (sc,
Christi) p. 27.
nor that of the Holy Ghost, either commanded or performed N^llibi praeceptam
ejus Adorationem aut confestim peractam conceptis intelligamus, p. 98.
But I hope all those places of Scripture, that so fully tell us, that both
Christ and the Holy Ghost are God, do sufficiently command us to worship them,
by bidding us worship God; and if it had told us that the sacrament is as much
God as they, it had then commanded us to adore it. There are sufficient
instances of Christ's being adored, when he appeared upon Earth, and had the
other Divine persons assumed a bodily shape, those who had seen and known it,
would have particularly adored it, and so would the Apostles, no doubt, have
done the Sacrament, if they had thought that when it was before them an object
of worship. St. Paul, when he wrote to the Corinthians of 1 Cor. 11. c.
their very great Irreverence in receiving the Lords Supper, had very good
occasion to have put them in mind of adoring it, had that been their Duty; this
then would have been a proper means to have brought them to the highest
reverence of it; but he never intimates any thing of worshipping it, when he
delivers to them, the full account of its institution, and its design; nor
never reproves them among all their other unworthy abuses of it, for their not
adoring it; and it is a very strange fetch in Boileau Ib. p. 103. l. 2.
that he would draw St. Paul's command of examining our selves before we eat, to
mean our adoring when, or what we eat; and that not* discerning the Lords body,
and being guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ* is the not worshipping the
sacrament; which he never so much as touches upon among all their other fauls.
Are there not many other ways of abusing ^he sacrament, besides the not
worshipping it? this is like his first Argument out of Ignatius his Epistles l.
1. c. 2. synepheren de antois agapan Ep. ad smyr. at ipsemet nos docet nihil
nos diligere debere praeter solum Deum.
that because he says, the ^acrament ought to be loved, therefor he meant
that it ought to be ^dored. At which rate I should ^e afraid to love this
Gentleman. ^however taking he was, lest I should consequently adore him, ^or
because I am not to abuse him, therefore it would follow, that I must worship
him.

2. This Adoration was not in use in the Primitive Church, as I shall show,

1. From those Writers who give us an account of the manner of celebrating the
Eucharist among the Ancient Christians.

2. From the oldest Liturgies and Eucharistick forms.

3. From some very ancient Customs.

1. Those most ancient Writers, 1. Justin Martyr. 2. The Author 1. Justin
Marty. 2, Apologversus finem. Apostol. constitutit l. 8. c. 11, 12. 13, 14. 3.
Cyril Hierosol. Cateches. mystagog c. 5.
of the Apostolic Constitutions: And 3. St. Cyril of Jerusalem, who acquaint
us with the manner how they celebrated the Eucharist; which was generally then
one constant part of their public worship; they give no account of any
Adoration to the sacrament, or to the consecrated Elements, though they are
particular and exact in mentioning other less considerable things that were
then in use, the Kiss of Charity, in token of their mutual Love and
Reconciliation; this Justin Martyr mentions as the first thing just before the
Sacrament allelous philemati aspazometha, ep^ita prosphoretai artos. Justin
Martyr, Apol. 2.
In St. Cyril's time Catech, mystagog. 5. Aposstol. constit. l. 8. c. 11.
the first thing was the bringing of Water by the Deacon, and the Priests
washing their hands in it, to denote that purity with which they were to
compass Gods Altar; and then the Deacon spoke P^terion Krama^^^ Just. Martyr.
to the people, to give the holy Kiss; then Bread was brought to the Bishop or
Priest, and Oi kalumenoi par hem^^ diaconoi ^idoasin ekaste paron to metalabein
apo tu eucharistethentos artu kai oinu kai hydatos, kai tois ou parusin
apopherusin, Just Martyr, Ib.
Wine mixed with Water in those hot Countries, and after Prayers and
Thanksgiving by the Priest, to which the people too joined their Amen * The
Deacons gave every one present, of the blessed Bread, and Wine, a Water; and to
those that were not present, they carried it home; this, says Justin Martyr, we
account not Common Bread, or common Eucharistetheisan trophen, ex hes haima kai
sarkes kata metabolen trephontai hemon. Ib.
Drink, but the Body and Blood of Christ, the blessed food, by which our flesh
and blood is nourished, that is, turned into it, which could not be said of
Christ's natural Body; nor is there the least mention of any worship given to
that, or to any of the blessed Elements. The others are longer and much later,
and speak of the particular Prayers and Thanksgiving that were then used by the
church, of the sursum corda, lift up your heart; which St. cyril Hierosol.
mystagog. cat. 5.
cyril says followed after the Kiss of charity; of the sancta sanctis, things
holy belong to those that are holy; then they describe how they came to
communicate, how they held their hand Me tetamenois tois to^n cheiro^n karpois
mede dieremenois tois daktylois alla ten aristeran, Ib.
when they received the Elements; how careful they were that none of them
should fall upon the Ground; but among all these most minute and particular
Descriptions of their way and manner of receiving the sacrament, no account is
there of their adoring it, which surely there would have been, had there been
any such in the Primitive church, as now is in the Roman.

We own indeed, as Boileau objects to us L. 2. P. 106.
that from these it appears, that some things were then in use, which we
observe not now; neither do the Church of Rome all of them, for they are not
essential but indifferent matters, as mixing Water with Wine, the Priest's
washing, the Kiss of Charity, and sending the Sacrament to the absent; but the
Church may alter these upon good reasons according to its prudence and
discretion; but adoration to the Sacrament, if it be ever a Duty, is alwaye^
so, and never ought upon any account to be omitted; nor would have been so by
the Primitive Christians, had they had the same Opinion of it, that the Papists
have now.

2. From the oldest Liturgies, and the Eucharistick Forms; in them it appears
that there was no such Adoration to the Sacrament, till of late; for in none of
them is there any such mention, either by the Priest or the People, as in the
Roman Missal and Ritual, nor any such Forms of Prayer to it, as in their
Breviary. Cassander Cassandri Lyturgic.
has collected together most of the old Liturgies, and Endeavors, as far as he
can, to show their agreement, with that of the Roman Church; but neither in the
old Greek, nor in the old Latin ones, is there any instance to be produced of
the Priests or the Peoples adoring the Sacrament, as soon as he had consecrated
it; but this was perfectly added, and brought in a new into the Roman Lyturgy,
after the Doctrine of Transubstantiation was established in that Church, which
has altered not only in the first and best times of the Church, but for above a
thousand years after Christ; Boileau finding this, though a negative Argument,
press very hard upon them; and sure it cannot but satisfy any reasonable man,
that there is no Direction in the ancient Lyturgies for adoring the Sacrament;
and it is very hard to require us to produce a Rubric against it, when no body
thought of that which after-Superstition brought in; He would fain therefore
find something in an old Liturgy that should look like that of their own; and
no doubt but he might have easily met with abundant places for their
worshipping and adoring God and Christ at that solemn Office of the Christian
worship; the blessed Sacrament; and therefore out of the Liturgy called St.
Chrisostomes, which he owns to be two hundred years later then St. Chrysostom,
he produces a place Boil. l. 2. p. 74. ^x Chrysostom. Liturg-Eita proskynei ho
hiereus kai^ho: ^iaconos, en ho e^sti ^opo^, kai ho ^aos homoios pant^s met
eulabeias proskynusin.
wherein it is said That the Priest and the Deacon worship in the place they
are in, and likewise the p^^ple but do they worship the Sacrament? Is that, or
only God and Christ the object of their worship there? Is there any such thing
to determine this as they have taken care there should be in their Missal?
where it is expressly several times, they shall worship the Sacrament
Sacramentum Adorare, Romans missal. coopert^ calice Sacramentum ad^rare, and
genuflexus Sacramentum adorare.
but here in St. Chrysos. Liturgy it is God, who is to be worshipped, God be
merciful to me a Sinner Ho Theos hilastheti moi hamartolo^, Chrysos: Liturg.
but in the Roman, it is the Sacrament is prayed to Stans oculis ad sacramentum
intentis precart.
and they would reckon and account it as true Irreligion, not to worship and
pray to that, as not to Worship God and Christ. So the Lyturgy, that goes under
the name of St. James, the Worship is only before the Holy Table, Proskynusin
emprosthentes hagias t^apezet, Lyturg. S. Jacobt.
as it is in the Church of England; and I hope Boileau will not pretend that
this is to the Holy Table it self. If what ever we worship before, is the very
object of our Worship, then the Priest is so, as well as the Table; but it
neither he nor the Table, nor the Sacrament, but only Christ himself, to whom
this worship is, or ought to be given at the Celebration of the Eucharist; and
therefore this Adoration was as well before as after the Consecration of the
Sacramental Elements, and so could not be supposed to be given to them.

3. There were several very ancient Customs relating to the Sacrament, which
are no ways consistent with the Opinion the Papists have of it now, and with
the worship of it as a God. It was very old, and very usual for Christians to
reserve and keep by them, some of the Elements; the Bread especially, which
they had received at the Sacrament, as is evident from Tertullian De Orat. c.
14. Accepto corpore Domini and reservato.
and from St. Cyprian De Lapsis.
who reports a very strange thing that happened to a Woman, and also to a Man,
who had unduely gone to the sacrament, and brought some part of it home with
them. I shall not inquire whither this Custom had not something of
superstition in it; whither in those times of Danger and Pe^secution, it were
not of use; but had the Church then thought of it, ^as the Papists do now, they
would not have suffered private Christians to have done this; nay they would
not have suffered them hardly to have touched and handled, that which they had
believed to be a God, no more then the Church of Rome will now, which is so far
from allowing this private Reservation of the Elements, that out of profound
Veneration, as they pretend to them, they wholly deny one part of them, the Cup
to the Laity, and the other part, the Bread they will not, as the primitive
Church, put into their hands, but the Priest must inject it into their Mouths.

The sending the Eucharist not only to the sick and infirm, and to the
Penitents, who were this way to be admitted to the Communion of the Church, in
articulo mortis, as is plain from the known story of Serapion; Eusebius. Eccles.
Hist. l. 6. c. 34.
but the Bishops of several Churches sending it to one another, as a token and
pledge of their Communion with each other; and Iren. apud. Eusebius. l. 5. c 24.
it being sent also to private Christians, who lived remote in the Country and
private places, which custom was abolished by the Council of Laodicea; these
all show, that though the Christians always thought the sacrament a symbol of
Love, and Friendship, and communion with the Church, so that by partaking of
this one Bread they were all made as St. Paul says, One Bread, and one Body;
yet they could not think this to be a God, or the very natural Body of their
Savior, which they sent thus commonly up and down, without that Pomp and
solemnity, that is now used in the Church of Rome, and without which I own it
is not fit a Deity should be treated. But above all, what can they think of
those, who anciently used to burn the Elements that remained after the
Communion, as Hesychius In Levit. 8. 32.
testifies, was the custom of the Church of Jerusalem, according to the Law of
Moses in Leviticus, of burning what remained of the Flesh of the sacrifice,
that was not eaten; but how ever this was done out of some respect, that what
was thus sacred might not otherwise be profaned; yet they could not sure
account that to be a God, or to be the very natural and substantial Body of
Christ, which they thus burnt and threw into the Fire.

So great an honor and regard had the Primitive Church for the Sacrament, that
as they accounted it the highest Mystery and solemnest part of their Worship,
so they would not admit any of the Penitents, who had been guilty of any great
and notorious sin, n^^ the Catechumeni, nor the Possessed, and Energumeni, so
much as to the sight of it; the eposia and the Participation of this Mystery,
used always in those times to go together as Cassander Consult. de Circumgest,
Sacram.
owns, and Albaspinaeus L'ancienna Police de l'Eglise sur l'administration d^
l'Eucharistie liver prem. c. 15. 16. 17.
proves in his Book of the Eucharist. And therefore, as it is plainly contrary
to the Primitive practice, to carry the Sacrament up and down, and expose it to
the Eyes of all Persons; so the reason of doing it, that it may be worshipped by
all, and that those, who do not partake of it, may yet adore it; was, it is
plain, never thought of in the primitive Church; for then they would have seen
and worshipped it, though they had not thought fit that they should have partaken
of it. But he that will see how widely the Church of Rome differs from the
ancient Church in this, and other matters relating to the Eucharist, let ^im
read the learned Dallee his two Books of the Object of religious worship. I
shall now give an Answer to the Authorities which they produce out of the
Fathers, and which Monsieur Boileau has (he tells us) been a whole year a
gleaning out of them Annuae vellicationis litirariae ratiocinium reddo. Praef.
ad Lect. Boileau de Adorat. Euchar.
, if he has not rather picked from the sheaves of Bellarmine and Perrone. But
all their Evidences out of Antiquity, as they are produced by him, and bound up
together in one Bundle in his Book, I shall Examine and Answer too, I doubt
not, in a much less time. They are the only Argument he pre^^nds to for this
Adoration; and when Scripture and all other Reasons fail them, as they
generally do, then they fly to the Fathers; as those who are sensible their
forces are too weak to keep the open Field, fly to the Woods, or the Mountains,
where they know but very few can ^ollow them. I take it to be sufficient, that
in any necessary Article of Faith, or Essential part of Christian worship,
(which this of the Sacrament must be, if it be any part at all,) it is
sufficient that we have the Scripture for us, or that the Scripture is silent,
and speaks of no more then what we own and admit. In other external and
indifferent Matters relating merely to the circumstances of worship, the Church
may for outward Order and Decency, appoint what the Scripture does not. But as
to what we are to believe, and what we are to worship the most positive
Argument from any humane Authority is of no weight, where there is but a
Negative from Scripture. But we have such a due regard to Antiquity, and are s^
well assured of our cause, were it to be tried only by that, and not by
Scripture, which the Church of Rome generally de^^^s to; that we shall not fear
to allow ^^em to b^ing all the Fathers they can for there Witnesses in this
matter, and we shall not in the least decline their Testimony. Boileau Musters
up a great many, some of which are wholly impertinent and insignisicant to the
matter in hand, and none of them speak home to the business he brings them for.
He was to prove, that they Taught that the Sacrament was to be adored, as it is
in the Church of Rome; but they only Teach as we do, That it is to be had in
great reverence and respect, as all other things relating to the Divine
worship; that it is to be received with great Devotion, both of body and soul,
and in such a Posture, as is to exprese this, A Posture of Adoration; that
Christ is then to be worshipped by us in this Office especially, as well as he
is in all other Offices of our Religion; that his Body, and his Flesh, which is
united to his Divinity, and which he offered up to his Father as a sacrifice
for all Mankind, and by which we are Redeemed, and which we do spiritually
partake of in the Sacrament, that this is to be adored by us; but not as being
corporally present there, or that the Sacrament is to be worshipped with that,
or for the sake of that, or that which the Priest holds up in his Hands, or
lies upon the Altar, is to be the Object of our Adoration, but only Christ and
his blessed Body, which is in Heaven.

To these four Heads, I shall reduce the Authorities, which Boileau produces
for the Adoration of the Host, and which seem to speak* any thing to his
purpose; and no wonder that among so many Devout Persons that speak as great
things as can be of the Sacrament, and used, and persuaded the greatest
Devotion, as is certainly our Duty, in the receiving it, there should be
something that may seem to look that way to those, who are very willing it
should, or that may by a little stretching be drawn farther then their true and
genuine meaning, which was not to Worship the Sacrament it self, or the
consecrated Elements, but either.

1. To Worship Christ, who is to be adored by us in all places, and at all
times, but especially in the places set apart for his worship, and at those
times we are performing them in the Church, and upon the Altar, in Mysteriis as
St. Ambrose speaks, Despir. St. l. 3. c. 12.
in the Mystesteries, both of Baptism and the Lords Supper, and in all the
Offices of Christian Worship, as Nazianzen Orat. 11. de de Gorgon. To^
thysiasterio^ pr^spiptei me ta tes pisteo^s, kai ton ep' auto^ timon non
anakalumene.
said of his sister Gorgonia, that she called upon him, who is honored upon
the Altar. That Christ is to be honored upon the Altar, where we see the great
and honorable work of man's Redemption as 'twas performed by his Death,
represented to us, is not at all strange; if it had been another, and more full
word, that he was to be worshipped there, it is no more then what is very
allowable, though it had not been in a Rhetorical Oration; it is no more then to
say, That the God of Israel was worshipped upon the Jewish Altar, or upon this
Mountain. For it is plain, she did not mean to worship the Sacrament, as if that
were Christ or God, for she made an ointment of it, and mixed it with her tears,
and anointed her Body with it, as a Medicine to recover her Health, which she
did miraculously upon it. Now, sure it is a very strange thing that she should
use that as a Plaster, which she thought to be a God; but she still took for
Bread and Wine, that had extradinary Virtue in it, and it is so called there by
Nazianzen, the Antitypes Eipou ti ^o^n antitypon tu timu somatos kai haimatos
he cheir ^thefaurisan. Ib.
of Christ's Body and Blood, which shows they were not thought to be the
substance of it; and she had all these about her, and in her own keeping, as
many private Christians had in those times; and there was no Host then upon the
Altar, when she worshipped Christ upon it, for it was in the night Nuktos
aorian teresasa. Ib.
she went thus to the Church. So St. Chrysostom Vid. Boileau, c. 7. l. 1. ex.
Chrysostom.
in all the places* quoted out of him, only recommends the worshipping of
Christ our blessed Savior, and our coming to the Sacrament with all humility
and Reverence, like humble supplicants upon ou^ knees, and with Tears in our
Eyes, and all Expressions of sorrow for our sins, and Love, and Honor to our
Savior, whom we are to meet there, and whom we do, as it were, Horas
enthysiasterio; Chry. in 1. Ep. Cor. 10. c.
see upon upon the Altar, which is the great stress of all that is produced out
of him. That we do not truly see him upon the Altar, the Papists must own, though
they believe him there; but not so as to be visible to our senses; and he is no
more to be truly adored as corporally present, then he is visibly present. St.
Ambrose In sermon 56. Stephanus in terris positus Christum tangit in caelo.
says of St. Stephen, that ^e being on Earth, touched Christ in Heaven; just
as St. Chrysostom says, Thou see him on the Altar; and as he and any one
that will not resolve to strain an easy figurative Expression, must mean, not
by a bodily touch, or sight, but by Faith Non corporalia tactu, sed fide.
and by that we own, that we see Christ there, and that he is there present.

2. Adoring the Flesh and Body of Christ, which though considered without his
Divinity, it would be worshipping a Creature as St. Cyril of Alexandria says,
In actis council. Ephesians. Hos anthropon proskyneistai, te ktisei latreuein.
yet as it is always united to his Divinity, it is a true object of worship,
and ought to be so to us, who are to expect Salvation by it, even from the
Blood, and the Body, Proskynete esti sorz synto^ logo^ Theo^, kathos apotheosen
auten. Chrysostom. Hom. 108.
and Flesh of Christ; and therefore, as we inwardly trust in it, so we ought to
adore it, as no doubt the Angels do in Heaven, and as we are to do in all the
Offices of our Religion; though that be in Heaven, yet we are to worship it upon
Earth, and especially, when it is brought to our minds and thought, by that
which is appointed by Christ himself to be the Figure and Memorial of it, the
blessed Sacrament, there and in Baptism especially, when we put on Christ; and
have his Death, and Rising again represented to us, and have such great
benefits of his Death and Incarnation bestowed upon us; in these Mysteries we
are, as St. Ambrose Caro Christi, quam hodie in Mysteriis adoramus, Ambros, l.
3. de sp. fanct. c. 12. apud Boil. p. 32.
says, to Adore the Body and the Flesh of Christ, to which we immediately and
particularly owe them, and which we may truly call our Savior. St. Ambrose,
and St. Austin August. Enar. in Ps. 98.
his Scholar after him, supposing that there was a great difficulty in that
passage of the Psalms, worship his footstool, for so it is in the Latin Adorate
scabellum pedum ejus.
without the Preposition at his footstool, they labored to reconcile this with
that command of Worshipping and serving God alone; and to give an account how
the Earth, which was Gods footstool, could be worshipped; and the way they take,
was this, to make Christ's Flesh, which he took of the Earth, to be meant by
that Earth which was Gods footstool Invenio quomodo sine Impietate adoretur
terra, scabellum pedum ejus; suscepit enim de terra terram, quia caro de terra
est, and de carne Mariae carnem accepit, August Ib.
and this, say they, we ought to worship; his Apostles did so whilst he was
upon Earth, and we do so now, whilst he is in Heaven. We worship the Flesh of
CHRIST, which was crucified for us, and by the benefit of which we hope for
Pardon and Salvation, we worship that, though it be now in Heaven; we worship it
in the solemn Offices of our Religion Ipsam carnem nobis manducandam ad salutem
dedit (nem^ autem ill ^m carnem m^nducat, nisi prius adoraverit) Aug. Ib.
that Flesh which he gave to be eaten by us for our Salvation, that we worship,
for none eats that Flesh, but he first worships: Worships that, if they
please; though St. Austin do not expressly say that; but we will own, and we will
be always ready to Worship the Flesh of Christ, by which we are saved, and we
will do this especially at the Sacrament; and that more truly and properly,
then they themselves will own, that we eat and manducate it, as St. Austin
says, not with ou^ Teeth, as we do the Bread, but eat it, and worship it too,
as it is Heaven. St. Hierome Epist. ad Marcel. Ibant Christiani Hierosolymam ut
Christum in illis adorarent locis, in quibus primum Evangelium de patibulo
coruscaverat.
says of some devout Christians, That they went to Jerusalem, that they might
adore Christ in those places, where the Gospel first shone from the cross. They
went, that they might adore Christ in those places; not that they believed him
to be corporally present in those places; much less, that they worshipped the
places themselves; but they made a more lively impression of Christ upon them,
and made them remember him* with more Passion and Devotion; and so does the
blessed Sacrament upon us, and we therefore worship Christ, whom we believe to
be in Heaven in the Sacrament, as they worshipped him in those places, where
they were especially put in mind of him. Thus St. Hierome says, He worshipped
Christ in the Grave, and that Paula worshipped him in the stall Ad Paul. and
Eustoch.
and so we may be said to worship him on the cross, or on the Altar, or in the
Sacrament, and yet not to worship the Cross, or the Altar, or the Sacrament it
self.

3. Other places out of the Fathers brought by him for the Adoration of the
Host, mean only, that the Sacrament is to be had in great reverence and esteem
by us, as all things sacred and set a part to religious uses are; that a
singular Veneration is due to the Eucharist, as St. Austin says Eucharistiae
deberi singularem venerationem, Epist 118. c. 3.
, and as is to Baptism also, of which he uses the same word, We venerate
Baptism, Baptismum, ubicunque est, veneramur. Id Epist. 146.
as we ought to do all the Rites and Ordinances of our Religion; this is meant
by Origin in that first place of him produced by Boileau, de Euch. Ador p. 10.
ex Orlg. Homil. 12. Nostis qui Divinis mysteriis interesse consuestis, quomodo
cum suscipitis corpus Domini, cum omni cautela and veneratione servatis, ne ex
eo parum quid decidat, ne consecrati muneris aliquid dilabatur. Reos enim vos
creditis, and recte creditis, si quid inde per negligentiam decidat.
Ye that are wont to be present at the Divine Mysteries, know how, when ye
receive the Body of Christ, ye keep it with all caution and Veneration, that no
part of the consecrated gift be let fall; for ye think, and that rightly, that
ye should be guilty of a fault, if any of it should be let fall through your
negligence. And Christians have this care and Veneration of those consecrated
Symbols of the Body and Blood of their Savior, of these wonderful Pledges of
his Love, that they would not willingly spill them, or let them fall to the
ground, through their carelessness and neglect; they that have that due regard
to the Holy Bible which they ought, would not trample it under their feet, or
show any such disrespect to it; it was this, which Origin was recommending in
that place from that example of their care and respect to the Sacrament
Elements, that they should give it also to the Word of God, Quod si circa
corpus ejus tanta utimini cautela, and merito utimini: quomodo putatis minoris
esse praculi Verbum Dei neglexisse quam corpus ejus. Ib.
But if ye use such care, and that very deservedly about keeping his Body, how
do ye think it to be a less fault to neglect the word of God then to neglect
his Body. The comparison here made between the Word of God, and the Sacrament,
so plainly shows that he no way meant its Adoration; that I wonder this person
was not ashamed to pretend just before it, that he Alienum esse ab institutis
meis ullum in medium adducere patrem quin conceptis verbis proprium, Boil- p,
10.
would bring no Authority, but what was expressly for his Opinion, and use none
but Animo decreverim argumenta invictissima concludere.
invincible Arguments; but Roman Faith must be defended with Roman courage and
confidence, which is the only invincible thing they have.

The words of Theodoret are a great deal more plausible, and seem at the first
glance, to look more fairly, then any for their purpose. The Elements are
understood to be what they are made, and they are believed and reverenced, as
those things which they are believed ( Noeitai haper egeneto, kai pisteuetai,
kai proskyneitai, hos ekeina onta, haper pisteuontai. Theod: Dialog^ asygchyt:
apud Boil: p: 64.
Here our Faith makes the Sacrament to be what it signifies, to become to us
the res Sacramenti, as well as a sign and Representation of it, and that thing
is to be adored by us, in the use of the Sacrament, which is the true sense of
Theodorets words; and that he cannot mean in the Roman sense, the substance of
Christ's Body, is plain from what immediately goes before, and utterly destroys
what they would catch from half his words; for he says, That the Elements, or
the mystical Signs do not after sanctification recede from their own, but
remain in their former substance ( Oude gar meta tonhagiasmon ta mystica
symbola tes ^oikeias existataiphyseos; menei, gar ei^e^ proteros odfius, Ibid.
) Thus their best Witness, that seems to speak the most for them, yet speaks
that against them, which destroys their whole cause, as he must own, whoever
reads the Dialogue, and considers the design of it which was to answer the
pretense of those, who said that the Body of Christ was after his Ascension,
turned into a Divine substance, and lost the true nature of Body hosper toinyn
ta symb^la tu despotikon.
, as the Symbols of Christ's Body and Blood are changed, say those Heretics,
into what they were not before, Yes says he, Now ye are taken into your own
net; for they remain in their former nature and substance afterward, and so
does Christ's Body. If then the change of these sacred Elements be only as to
their use and virtue, but not as to their substance, according to Theodoret,
then he could not mean that they should be adored, but only reverenced by the
word proskyneitai, just as the Holy Bible *is said to be reverenced, and the
Priests themselves, by the very same word Prosknesai met' eulabei as to
euaggelion. Liturg. chrysostom. Hiepeis proskynetot, proskynetoi Adelpboi,
proskynete synodos. Acta council. Ephesians.


4. Some of the Fathers words imply, that when we come to the Sacrament, it
should be with the greatest lowliness, both of Body and Mind; and as the
Primitive Church used to do, and as the Church of England does, in a posture of
Worship and Adoration, in the form and manner of Worship, as St. Cyril of
Hieros. speaks, Kypton kai tropo prosky^ese^^ ka^ sebasmatos. Catech. Mist. 5.
or as St. Chrysottome, In the form of supplicants and Worshippers Schema
hiketon kai proskyneton echomen, Chrysostom. Homil. 7. in. Matthew. epi to timesai
kai proskynesai ton hyion tu Theu. Ibid. prosenegke sy tapein ophrosynen kai
tetapeinomenen kapdion. Homil. de Phil. Dianastesomen toinyn heautous kai
phrixomen kai pollo ton barbaron ^keinon pleiona epideixometha^en eulabeian.
of Christ, as the Magi were, when they came to bring their presents to him; do
thou then present him with humility, and a lowly and submissive heart, and be
not like Herod, who pretended he would come to worship him, but it was to
murder him; but rather imitate the Magi, and come with greater fear and
reverence to thy Savior then they did. This is the whole design and substance
of what is produced out of St. Chrysostom, Boil. c. 7. l. 1,
And this is the plain meaning of Origin, Hom. 5. in N. T. Tunc Dominus sub
tectum tuum in greditur; tu ergo humilians teipsu^^ imitare h^nc Centurionem
and dicito, Domine non sum dig^^s ut intres sub tec^^^ (...).
that when we come to receive Christ in the Sacrament, we should do it with all
Humility; for consider, says he, That then the Lords enters under thy roof; do
thou therefore humble thy self, and imitate the Centurion, and say, Lord I am
not worthy that thou should enter under my roof. When the Fathers would give
us the Picture of a devout Communicant, they draw him in the greatest Posture
of Humility and Reverence, looking upon and Phrixomen toinyu pro^iontes,
cachariste somen, prospesomen exomologunmeoi ta ptaismata bemon, dakrysomen ta
o^keia penthyntes kaka, ekteneis euch as apodom en to Theo, meta tes
prosekonses entaxias hos to Basilei prosiontes ton ouranon, Chrysostom in sermon.
31. in natal Dom Stomen emphoboi kai entromoi kat^ neuontes to omma, an^ de ten
psychen, stenazontes aphonos alalazomen te kapdia. Johan. Hieros. apud
Chrysostom. and apud Boil. p. 44. enthymetheti hoti ge ou kai spodos, haima kai
Christu metalamb antis, Chrysostom. Ib.
adoring his Savior, who died for him upon the Cross prostrating his Soul, and
his Body before him, and exercising the highest acts of Devotion to him, and
with Tears in his Eyes and sorrow in his heart, standing like a Penitent before
him; trembling and afraid, as sensible of his own guilt; with his Eyes cast
down, and with dejected Looks considering that he is but Dust and Ashes, who is
vouchsafed to this Honor, and inwardly Groaning, and sighing, and Panting in
his Soul, saying, Lord I am not worthy, that thou should enter under my
roof; and the like. And thus they may find all devout Communicants in our
Church behaving themselves, during the whole solemnity and celebration of that
blessed Sacrament, in which Mystery they always adore Christ, and that Flesh
of Christ which was crucified; for then as St. Ambrose, and St. Austin speak,
when their minds are all the while inflamed with the most devout Affections,
and they are performing all the inward and outward Acts of the highest Devotion
to God and their Savior, then they are upon their Knees, offering up most
ardent Prayers and Thanksgivings; but not to the sacred symbols which are
before them, or the Sacrament it self as the object to which, but as the
circumstance, at and in which all this Devotion and Worship is performed. And
there is a great deal of difference from all this in the Church of Rome, when
they direct all this to the Sacrament it self, and to the consecrated Elements,
when they terminate their Worship upon what is before them, and direct their
Intentions to that as an Object; and therefore, when ever they have this Object
appear to them, they immediately fall down and worship it, not only in the time
of the Communion, when it finds them at their Devotion, but at all other times;
when they are standing or walking in the streets, and are in no present Temper
or Posture of Devotion; yet all of a sudden, as soon as they see the Host
coming by, they must put themselves into one, and Adore that very Object, that
appears to them.

The Fathers always speak of Persons as coming to the Sacrament, and partaking
of it, and worshipping Christ, and the Body of Christ in the Celebration of
those Divine Mysteries; but it never entered into their minds or thoughts, to
persuade or encourage their hearers in their most devout Discourses, to Adore
the Host, as the Church of Rome does, either in, or especially out of the time
of that sacred Solemnity; and though it be very easy to make a Book out of the
Fathers, and to heap Authorities out of them to little purpose; yet, it is
impossible to prove by all the places produced out of them, by T. G. Chap. 1.
Of the Adoration of the blessed Sacrament.
or more largely by Boileau that they meant any more then what we are very
willing to join with them in, that Christ is to be worshipped in the Sacrament,
as in Baptism, and the other Offices of our Religion; and that his Body and
Flesh, which he offered for us, and by which we expect Salvation, is also to be
adored, as being always united to his Divine Nature; and that the Sacrament it
self, as representing the great Mystery of our Redemption is to be highly
reverenced by us, and that we should come to receive it with all Humility, and
in the most decent Posture of Worship and Adoration, as the Primitive
Christians did. But that the Sacrament it self is to be adored, as well as
Christ; that which the Priest holds in his hands, or lies upon the Altar before
us, that this is to be the Object of our Worship, and to have all manner of
Latria, both of Body and Soul directed to that, as to God himself; that the
consecrated Elements, or the sacred Symbols of Christ's Body and Blood are to be
worshipped by us when we receive them, or when without receiving them we see
them set upon the Altar, or carried about in Procession; this, which is the
Controversy between us, not one Father says, but above three hundred of them
together in a council say, council. sept. constant. Act. 6. Ten eikona hylen
exaireton, egoun ar^u ousian, prosetaxe prospheres^hai, me schematizusai
anthropu morphen hina me eidololatreia pareisachthe.
That to prevent Idolatry, Christ appointed an excellent Image and
Representation of himself in the Sacrament, without any manner of humane shape,
even the plain and simple substance of Bread. But they resolve that Idolatry
shall not be prevented, but they will be so sottish as to commit it with that,
which was designed to prevent it, and which one would think' should not in the
least tempt any man to it, with a bit of Bread.

The Absurdities of which, upon a general view of the whole, I shall now for a
conclusion represent and offer as the last Argument against it, and though that
alone might be sufficient, since God never imposes any thing that is really
foolish and ridiculous, to be believed or practiced by his Creatures; yet I
thought it the fittest to be produced after we are well assured, that neither
Scripture nor Antiquity have required any such thing. And however unwilling
Bellarmine Bell. de Sacram. Euchar. l. 3. c 10.
is to admit of Arguments of this nature, from the Absurdity of the thing, as
knowing how very liable the Church of Rome was to them; and though it is the most
unjust Reflection upon Christianity to say, that any thing that is a part of
that is so, which they are too ready to insinuate, and so bring a reproach upon
the common Christianity, rather then part with their own ridiculous Opinions;
yet after we have thoroughly informed our s^lves, that there is nothing of a
Divine Authority, as one can hardly think there should be for what is so absurd
in it self, then an Argument from the folly and unreasonableness of the thing,
must be allowed to be very proper; and till men have lost all their Reason, it
will always be very cogent; and here it is so very strong, and presses so hard
upon their Adoration of the Host, that it is no wonder that they love to set by,
and except against reason, when ever this matter is to be tried: but it is most
sad to consider, that they should have so little regard and concern for the
Credit and Reputation of the Christian Religion, as by this means so shamefully
and notoriously to expose it to the Reproach and Contempt of the wisest Men.
How must a Jew or a Turk, who are great enemies to all Idolatry, be prejudiced
against Christianity, when he sees those who profess it, fall down and worship
a Wafer, and make on Idol of a bit of Bread? When he lives in those places,
where he sees it carried about with Candles and Torches before it, in most
Solemn and Pompous Processions, and all persons as it goes by, falling upon
their Knees, and saying their Prayers, and using all acts of Devotion to it;
would he not wonder what strange and new God, that no History ever mentioned,
the Christians adored?

Mankind indeed, when very ignorant, used to worship a great many creatures
that were very useful to them, and when they were very hungry, if they lighted
upon Bread, it was no great wonder; but sure it can be no more fit to be
worshipped by those who better know God, then any of his other creatures, or any
of the most dum^ and senseless, and pitiful Images, for which the Christians so
often, and so justly laughed at the Idolatrous Heathens; especially, those of
them, who were so foolish, and such true belly-Gods, as to eat and feed upon
what they worshipped and De^fied. This the first and most learned Christians
charged, as the highest degree of folly in the Egyptians, to eat the same
Animals, whom they worshipped; Sebein, kai ethein ti proskynumenon. Orig. contra
celsum. l. 4. Thyels proba ton, to de auto kai proskyneis. Tatian. Orat. contra
Graec. Apim bovem adoratis and pascitis Minut. Octav. p. 94.
And a wise Heathen could not think any would be so mad as to think that to be
a God, with which he was fed. Ecquem tam amentem esse putas, us illud quo
vescatur, Deum esse credat? Tully de natura Deorum.
It was the ingenious Opinion of a very learned Father, that God made the
difference between the clean and unclean Beast, to prevent this Egyptian and
Brutish folly in the Israelites, who lived among them; because, says he, by
their abominating the unclean, they would not Deifie them; and by eating the
clean, they would be secured from ever worshipping them; for it must be the
extremest madness to worship what they eat. Dia touto ta men acatharta to^n
zoon legei, ta de cathara, bina ta menhos acatharta bdeluomenoi me theopoi osi,
ta de me proskyosin esthiomena. 'Abelterias gar eshates to esthi omenon
proskynein. Theodoret. in Quaest. in Genes.
How did the Ancient Apologists for Christianity with great wit and smartness,
ridicule the other Idols of the Heathens, as being the works at first of the
carver, or the Painter, and particularly for being such Gods as were baked at
first in the Furnace Incoctos fornacibus figulinis Arnob. contra Gent. l. 6.
of the Potter (and it had been much the same, had it been in the Oven of the
Baker) for being Gods of Brass, or of Silver? Deus aereus vel argenteus, Minut.
Octav. p. 74.
And yet they counted the Silver or the brass no more a God Nos neque aeris
neque auri argentique materias, Arnob. ut supra.
^hen others do the Bread, as I have shown above. How at other times did they
think fit to expose their impotent and senseless Deities, because they could
not preserve themselves from Thieves, ^ Deos vestros plerumque in praedam
furibus cedere Lectant. Institut. l. 2. c. 4.
nor yet from rotteness; but the Worms would still gnaw, and the Vermin deface
them, and the Bitds would defile them with their excrements even in their own
Temples? Quanto verius de Diis vestris animalia muta naturaliter judicant;
mures, hirundines, milvi, non sentire ^os sciunt, redunt, insultant, insident,
ac nisi abigatis, in ipso Dei vestri ore nidificant; Arancae vero facie^ ejus
intexunt, Minut. Octav. p. 75.
And could not this be said of a breaden Deity? is not that as subject to all
these mischances, and therefore as liable to all those Reproaches? Will not a
Mouse or Rat run away with it? Though if it do so, they have taken care, if they
can catch the sacrilegious Thief, to have the Sacrament drawn out of its
entrails, and religiously disposed of; Antonin. de de^ect. Miss. in Bishop
Jewels reply.
but however, if no such misfortune come to it, it will in a little time, if it
be kept, prove sour, and grow moldy; and when it does so, what should then
thrust out the Deity, and bring in again the substance of the Bread that was
quite gone before, is an unaccountable Miracle; and that which is taken of it
into our Bodies, is not l^ke one would think to have any better, or more
becoming treatment there, then by the other ways; so that upon all these
accounts, this which is worshipped by Christians, is in as ill condition as
that which was worshipped by Heathens; and those witty Adversaries, Celsus, and
Porphyry, and Julian would have thrown all that the Christians had said against
the Heathen Idols, back upon themselves, and have improved them with as great
Advantage, and retorted them with as much force, had the Christians in those
times worshipped the Host, or the Sacramental Elements, as the Papists do now;
and it is more then a presumption, no less than a Demonstration that the
Christians did not, because none of these things that were so obnoxious, and so
obvious, were ever in the least mentioned by the Heathens, or made matter of
Reflection upon them, when they picked up all other things, let them be true or
false, that they could make any use of to object against them. But the
Primitive Christians gave them no such occasion; which was the only Reason they
did not take it. As soon as the Church of Rome did so, by se^ing up the worship
of the Host, Averroes the Arabian Philosopher, in the Apud Dionys. carthus in
4. did. Nullam se sectam christiana deteriorem ^^t ineptiorem reperire.
13th Century, gave this character of Christians, that he had found no sect
more foolish, or worse then they, in all his Travels and Observations; upon
this very account, For they eat Quem colunt Deum, dentibus ipsi suis discerpunt
ac devorant.
the God whom they worship; and a later Historian and Traveller tells us, that
it is a common Reproach in the Mouths of the Turks and Mahumetans, Bullaeus
Gultius in Itin. Mange Deiu.
to call the Christians Devourers of their God; and a Jew, in a Book Printed at
Amsterdam in the year 1662, among others Questions put to Christians, asks this
shrewd one, If the Host be a God, why does it corrupt and grow covered with
Mold? and why is it gnawn by Mice or other Animals? Si Hostia Deus est cur situ
obducta corrumpitur? cur a gliribus and muribus corroditur? Lib. quaest. and
Resp.


The only way the Papists have to bring themselves off from these manifest
Absurdities, is only a running farther into greater; and their little Shifts
and Evasions, are so thin and Subtle Sophistry, or rather such gross and thick
falsehoods, that it could not be imagined that the Heathen Adversaries could
ever know them, and therefore be so civil as Boileau would make them Cap. 10.
l. 2. de aaor. Euch.
as not to lay those charges upon them, as others do; nor can any reasonable
and impartial man ever believe them; for they are plainly these two; That they
do not worship what all the World sees they worship; And that they do not eat
what they take into their Mouths and swallow down: Which is in plain words an
open Confession, that they are ashamed, to own what they plainly do; We do not
worship the Bread, say they, for that we believe is done away, and is turned
into the natural Body of Christ and so we cannot be charged with
Bread-worship. But do ye not worship that which ye see, and which ye have
before you, and which is carried about? And would not any man that sees what
that is, think ye worship Bread or Wafer? And could you ever persuade him, that
it was any thing else? And if notwithstanding what you think of it against all
Sense and Reason, it be still Bread; then I hope it is Bread that ye worship;
and till others think as wildely as ye do, ye must give them leave to think and
charge you thus. But if it were true, that ye did not worship the Bread, yet ye
must and do own, that ye worship the Species of the Bread; and how ye should do
that without being guilty of another very gross Absurdity, ye do not know your
selves; for ye must make them so united to Christ, as to make one suppositum,
and so one Object of Worship, as his Humanity and Godhead are; and then
according to this way of yours, Christ may as well be said to be Impanated and
United to Bread, or its Species, as some of you have taught Belarm. de Ruperto
Abbate Tuitiensi, l. 3. de Euch. c. 11
that the Bread in the Eucharist is assumed by the Logos, as the humane Nature
was. But not to mention these, which wheresoever ye turn ye, stare ye full in
the face, and should make ye blush, one would think, had ye not put off all
shame, as well as all sense in this matter; grant ye what ye would have, that
it is not Bread, but the substantial Body Flesh and Blood of a man, that is in
the Host; will this help much to mend the matter, or to lessen the Absurdity,
and not rather increase and swell it? For besides the incredible wonder, that a
bit of Bread should by a few words of every common Priest, be turned
immediately into the true and perfect Body of a man; nay, into ten thousand
Bodies at the same time, which is a greater Miracle then ever was done in the
World, and is as great almost, as creating the World it self out of nothing;
and if it were true, would make the Priest a God, certainly, and not a man, and
much rather to be worshipped then a bit of Bread, as Lactantins says of the
Heathen Idols, He that made them, ought rather to be worshipped then they.
Meliorem esse qui fecit, quam illa quae facta sunt and si haec adoranda sunt,
artificem a quo facta sunt, ipsum quoque multo potiori jure adorandum esse.
Lactant. Instit. l. 2. c. 2
Besides this, it seems it is the whole Body of a man, then, which is eaten and
swallowed down instead of Bread, for sure the same thing is not one thing when
it is worshipped, and another thing when it is eaten; and then how barbarous and
inhumane, as well as absurd and ridiculous, must this appear to any man, that
is not used to swallow the most substantial Nonsense, as well as the whole Body
of a man for a Morsel? and then all the former Absurdities which I mentioned,
do return again, of the Eating that which we worship, which the Apologists
thought so wild and extravagant in the Egyptian God-eaters. Well then, there is
no other way, but to say. we don't eat him as we eat other food; Boil. c. 10.
l. 2. Comestionem substantiae corporis Christi non esse nature alem.
so might the Egyptians have said too, if they had pleased; tho, how they can
otherwise eat him, it is hard to understand; but only in the heretical sense of
Spiritual and Sacramental Eating; unless they will at the same time say, They
do not eat him truly and naturally, and yet do eat him so; and they are so used
to Contradictions in this point, that I don't know whither they will make any
more bones of this, then of the rest, or of the substantial Body of a man
himself, when they have got so large a Faith, or rather so large a Swallow. But
how is it, that ye do not eat him after a natural and carnal manner, and yet it
is a carnal Body, that ye so much contend for, and that ye really and truly
eat, and it is a Carnal mouth and throat he is put into, and sometimes a very
soul and wicked one? And yet this must by this carnal way eat the very body of
Christ, as well as the most faithful; But we do not grind this Body with our
Teeth, nor chew him in our Mouths, as our other Food; nor digest him in our
Stomachs, nor cast him out into the draught; if ye do not as ye pretend, being
ashamed of the most shameful and abominable Consequences of it; and yet a very
great many among you, have owned all that Retract. Bereng. sub Nicol. 2 in
Council. Romans Verum corpus Domini nostri Jesu Christi sensualiter, non solum
Sacramento, sed in veritate, manibus Sacerdotum tractari and frangi and
fidelium dentibus atteri, Sic Gualt. and Abbaud apud. Boil. p. 177.
, as not knowing how it could be otherwise, and how if this eating be Spiritual
and Sacramental, Christ's presence may not be so too, which is the Heresy on
the other side; Iste in omnibus veritatem subtrahit, dum asserit omnia fieri
(sc. fractionem and attrit^onem corporis Christi in Eucharistia) non substantia
sed in specie visibili and forma panis and Sacramento tantum. Gualter adversus
Abailard. apud Boil. 179.
and ye seem to make strange Monsters of your selves that have spiritual Teeth,
and can spiritually, and not naturally eat a natural, and a carnal body; and if
ye do not thus eat it, as ye eat other meat, when ye take it into your Mouths,
and into your Stomachs, and do every thing to it that you do to your other
food, which is as like eating as it were very true and natural eating; and if
it be not Bread, which is thus eaten, when it is just as like other Bread as is
possible, then it is certainly, the most fantastic Food, and the most
fantastic way of eating it, that can be imagined; then there must be a new
way of eating, which is not eating, and a new way for a Body to be present, and
yet not present as a Body; and I will add there must certainly be then a new
understanding, which is no understanding, that can understand, or believe all
this.

But farther, ye have found it necessary for your purpose of Adoring the Host,
to keep the Body of Christ confined to it, and enclosed in it as a Prisoner,
till the Species corrupt, and so the prison is as it were opened, and the Body
let loose, and when that is gone, whither ye think it be the Species, or the
substance of Bread that corrupts. I would gladly know; and surely then, when
the Body is gone, there is no need of such a miracle to keep the Accidents
without a Subject; if it be Bread, what think ye of this sudden Transmutation
from Bread to Flesh, and from Flesh to Bread again, and this latter without any
words from the Priest; but since Christ's body must be so permanently in the
Host, not only in the act and use of the Sacrament, but at all other times; ye
are then forced to own, that as it is eaten in the Communion, as well by those
who have no faith, as by the most faithful Christians, so if any other Animals
should happen to eat the Host, taking it no doubt heretically for mere Bread,
that yet they truly take the Body of Christ, and eat it after some manner or
other, but whither it bea ster a natural manner in them or no, I don^t know how
you have resolved, but most of the Schoolmen have agreed that Scandalous
question An mus, vel Porcus vel canis comedens hostiam suscipit corpus Christi?
Bishop Jewels reply Artic. 24. see Burchard de correct. Miss. upon these
Questions, De vino in calice congelat^, de musca vel aranea vel veneno mixto
cum sanguine, de vomitu post receptionem Sacramenti, Quand^ cadit corpus
Christi, Quando cadit sanguis Christi. fol. 51. 52.
in the Affirmative, Whither if a Mouse, or a Hog, or a Dog eat the Host, they
do partake of Christ's Body? Or as Thomas Aquinas your most Angelick Doctor
says, consequently to this Opinion of yours, Aliter derogaret veritati
corporis Christi. p. 3. qu. 79.
It would otherwise derogate from the truth of this Sacrament and Christ's
presence in it. So that wherever the Species are, there is always Christ's
body, and whatever happens to them, happens to that also; If they fall to the
ground, Christ's body does so to; and so, if they lie in a hollow Tooth, or hang
but in the least crum or drop upon a Communicants beard; there according to
their principles, they and the body must be worshipped with Latria; and if they
be in a Mouse or Flies body, that has got to them, the adorable Object still
goes with the species, till they be corrupted; and whither the species be
corrupted, or no if they be poisoned as they have sometimes been, or whither
Christ be there with the Accidents of the Poison, I cannot tell; but when the
Species are in the pix, he is as fast there, as he ever was in his Sepulcher,
and to all appearance as dead and senseless, and if the Species be burnt or
Gnawn, or vomited out of the Stomach, before they are corrupted, all these
misfortunes belong as truly to Christ's body as to them, and so worse
indignities may be thus offered every day to Christ glorious body, then ever
were offered to it, in its state of Humility and Contempt upon Earth, when it
was spit upon, and Scourged, and Pierced, and Crucified by the Jews. But Good
God! that men should think to Honor and Adore Christ and his body, by thus
exposing them to the danger of the vilest Abuses! that humane reason should be
so decayed and besotted, as to believe and defend such palpable Absurdities!
That Christianity should be so shamefully and abominably exposed to all the
World, by such an extravagant Doctrine, and such an obnoxious practice and
unreasonable Idolatry as this is? God almighty open all our Eyes, that we may
not be given up to blindness of Mind, and darkness of understanding, and to the
belief of Lies, as most Idolaters generally were; but may it please him, who is
the God of Truth, to bring into the way of Truth, all such as have erred and
are deceived, in this or any other matter; in which charitable and constant
Prayer of our Church, which is much better then cursing and Anathematizing, its
Adversaries, I hope, as well as its Friends, will not refuse to join with it.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE AGAINST Purgatory,

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by John Reid, Anno DOM. 1686.

A DISCOURSE AGAINST PURGATORY
AMONG all the Errors of the Church of Rome, the Superstructures she has made
of hay and stubble upon the substantial Doctrine of Christianity; this Fable of
Purgatory is one of the most notorious, invented on purpose to increase the
treasury of the Church, by putting the grossest abuses upon the ignorant and
unwary People: over whom she has got such an absolute dominion, as that she
can make them believe what she pleases, and then can impose her additions to
the word of God, as infallible decrees. How easily are the multitude led into
bypath, when that light of Scripture is taken away from their eyes, which God
revealed on purpose, that by the search thereof they might find Eternal Life?
For the Scriptures are the most full and complete systeme of God's Laws, the
most sufficient and certain means of Man's Salvation: I cannot then but wonder
how it came to pass, that this middle state, called Purgatory, hanging thus
between, Heaven and Hell, was not known to the Penmen of God's word or if it
were known, that they should either be so envious of the Churches happiness, or
so forgetful of the work they took in hand, which was to write the whole
Gospel of Christ, as not so much as one of them should give us notice of this
place. But this new Doctrine, with many others, was introduced when the World
was in the dark; for in the ninth and tenth Centuries, such a General ignorance
and stupidity had seized the minds of Men, that scarce any one knew what the
Doctrine of Christ was: when the World was thus stupid and Superstitious, Men
were inclined to believe strange things: upon this fair opportunity, some
cunning Men drew the simple People into the belief of the most absurd
Doctrines, under the notion of being great and profound Mysteries; the
gallantry of Faith, they imagined, was mightily shown, in swallowing downright
Contradictions: when this breach was once made upon the minds of Men, then any
error might enter, though as senseless and ridiculous as Purgatory it self.

Which Opinion I will first show to have no foundation in the Canonical
Scripture.

Secondly, for what reason it was introduced.

Thirdly, what we are to believe in this matter.

Lastly, I shall conclude with some reflections upon the Authors of this, and
other new-invented Doctrines in the Church of Rome.

First I am to prove, that this opinion has no foundation in Scripture. The
Papists themselves are sensible enough of this; therefore they put all the
false glosses they can upon it, so that the People may discern nothing in the
Scripture it self, though it be as clear as the Sun: For by this craft they
have their living, as Demetrius and his Crafts. men had heretofore. But let
them fairly and honestly lay open the Books of God to every one's eye, without
any unreasonable interpretations, or spurious additions made to it; and I doubt
not, but the vanity of asserting Purgatory will soon appear.

Now in Scripture there are matters of a different nature.

I. Ancient Records; the History of former Times: and these things were far
better known, then they are now at this distance of time.

II. There are things that are wholly expired and out of date, and so of less
use to us, as the whole Mosaical Dispensation.

III. In Scripture there are matters of Prophecy fitted for those times, which
they then far better understood then we do now, and wherein they were far more
concerned then we are; for they are transactions partly of things performed,
which when fulfilled, were best understood.

IV. There are matters of deep Philosophy, as well as great Mysteries, which do
not belong to the business of Religion.

Lastly. There is the moral part of Religion, and our Savior's Doctrine; in
which two our Religion consists: and this is that Doctrine which has brought
life and immortality to light, but has not revealed any such thing as
Purgatory: which will appear, if we consider what Bellarmine has alleged in
the defense thereof, both out of the Old and New Testament. According to him,
the Texts for Purgatory in the Old Testament are first the Fasting of David for
Saul and Jonathan, 2. King. 1. 12. and again 2. Sam. 3. 35. For the death of
Ab^er. Which Fasting of David must be as he fancies, for the obtaining of
something for them at God's hands after their deaths, and when nothing can be
obtained for Men's Souls that are already in Heaven or Hell, it follows, that
some Men's Souls are in neither of those places, but must be in Purgatory.

We answer; that Mourning and Fasting were never practiced upon a design of
procuring thereby any benefit to the Deceased: but they were customs only, and
ceremonies made use of to ^estifie the honor and respect they had for their
Friends departed: and all Nations have had their particular ways of
discharging their last Duty to their Friends, when they have left this World,
without any thought of doing them any service in the World to come. The
Cardinal is not contented with this Argument, but he produces other places of
the Old Testament to support his opinion; in the behalf whereof he cites almost
every Text, wherein there is the word anger, or fire, or burning, or purging,
or cleansing: it were an infinite task to answer every thing he alleges, and
altogether needless, because there is not so much as any show or color of
proof in any one of them. Therefore we will pass to those Texts of the New
Testament, which he says are for him.

First; He alleges that of St. Matthew, 12. 32. Whosoever speaks a word
against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever speaks
against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world nor
that which is to come. This world to come, if you will believe him, must needs
be Purgatory. Now by the world to come, nothing else is meant in Scripture, but
that everlasting state which we shall enter upon after death in which all agree
there shall be no middle state between that of Heaven and the other of Hell;
therefore the world to come and Purgatory are inconsistent: for one Scripture
is the best Comment upon another; so that this way of Expression, uk en tuto to
aioni, ud^ en to mellonti, neither in this World, nor that which is to come, is
made easy and plain by St. Mark, c. 3. v. 29. hos d' an blasphemeseis to
Pneuma to hagion, ouk echei aphesin eis to aiona, alla enochos estin ai^non
criseos; now this manner of Expression in St. Matthew, oukaphethesatai anto,
out' en tuto to aioni, out' ento mellonti, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world, nor in that which is to come, signifies just so much,
and no more, as ouk echei aphesin eis to aiona has never forgiveness, but is
in danger of Eternal Damnation; as much as to say, this sin is of that
malignant and heinous nature, that it justly deserves endless punishment, and
will never be pardoned.

II. Another is that of the 1 Cor. 3. They themselves shall be saved, but so as
by fire, or but as through fire; which fire (he says) must be the fire of
Purgatory. We answer, that these words seem to allude to those of Zachar. 13.
9. where he says, I will bring the third part through fire, and refine them,
as silver is refined: which is a fair warning to men, that the Doctrines they
embrace, and their practices according to them, may be such as will bear the
severest trial, that they may not be like wood, hay and stubble, which will not
endure the fire: for the Particle (hos) is a Particle of similitude, as the
whole phrase hos did pyros is proverbial, used in Scripture as well as in other
Authors, to signify a narrow escape out of a great danger; just as St. Peter
expresses it, 1 Pet. 3. 20. di' ^ydatos, so here it is dia pyros he shall be
saved with great dificulty, so as through fire.

III. A Third place is that of 1 Cor. 15. concerning Baptism for the Dead; here
the Cardinal ventures very far, even to the drawing of fire out of water, the
flames of Purgatory out of these washings: Baptism for the Dead, and Prayer for
the Dead is the same thing in his sense; though it be discordant to the harmony
and scope of the whole Scripture. For the word Baptizesthai, in Scripture
^ignifies to Wash, or purify by Washing; it must be rendered in the same sense
here: For as all Nations had their peculiar Rites of Burial, so had the Jews;
who were used to wash the Carcasses of the Dead with warm water, Camomile, and
dried Roses being put into it. This Baptismos, or use of Baptisation was
threefold: The first, apo nekron, a washing from the pollution contracted by
the touch of the dead Ca^kass. The Second was Baptismos t^n Nekron washing of
the dead Corpse its self, as Tabitha was washed. The last was the Baptization
in the Text, Baptismes hyper ton Nekron in use only among some misguided
Christians: for the Apostle undertook to convince the Corinthians of the truth
of the Resurrection, from their own foolish and erroneous Customs; in effect
telling them, that their usage of Baptizing the living for the dead, was vain
and impertinent, if there were no Resurection: For if the Dead rise not at all,
to what end were these Funeral Solemnities! Why was there vicarium tale
Baptisma, as Tertullian calls it; the manner whereof is thus described by
Epiphan^us: When any Catechumenist dyed, some living person, being placed under
the bed, they came to the deceased party, and asked him whither he would be
Baptized; the Party under the bed answered, that he would; whereupon they
immediately Baptized him for the dead: a silly superstitious Action! Yet from
this Topic St. Paul proves a Resurrection to them, as he did once the
existence of the true God, from an inscription on an Altar in Athens, to one
that was unknown: but Bellarmine would persuade us, that by this washing they
intended to afford their Friends some relief in Purgatory, and he might with as
much reason have told us, that the Sea burns.

IV. The Fourth place is that of St. Matthew 5. 25. Agreewith thine adversary
quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him, le^t at any time the adversary
deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Officer, and thou
be cast into prison* verily I say unto thee, thou shall by no means come out
thence, till thou have paid the uttermost farthing. Now if the Cardinal may be
credited, Purgatory is this Prison, and the Prisoner shut up therein, is in a
condition to pay the uttermost farthing, by the help of Prayers, Masses, and
the Pope's Indulgence: Whereas all this is an Allegory, whereby we are taught
to reconcile our selves to God, the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, by leading
a Godly, Righteous and Sober life, whilst we are in the Way, or on this side
the Grave; for if we neglect our repentance and amendment of life in this our
day, before the night approaches, wherein no man can work; we run the hazard of
being cast into a prison, out of which there is no Redemption; for the Text
says, We shall by no means come out thence, till we have paid the uttermost
farthing; which will be never, because we shall never be able to discharge this
Debt. We are infinitely beholding to the goodness and mercy of God, who has
appointed his only begotten Son to be our Surety, and to deliver us out of this
Prison; how justly then may the Savior of the World be angry with Papists, for
pretending to cast simple people into I know not what Prison, and to torture
them with painted Fires, in spite of that Redemption which he has made for
the whole World?

V. The Fifth place is that of Mat. 5. 22. Whosoever is angry with his Brother
without a cause, shall be in danger of the Judgment, and whosoever shall say to
his Brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the Council: but whosoever shall say,
thou Fool, shall be in danger of Hell Fire. The last only of these sins,
Bellarmine observes, shall be punished with Hell Fire; consequently after this
life, the punishment of lesser sins will be in Purgatory. But this is no true
inference; because after this life, there will be no distinction of Courts of
Justice, as there was among the Jews in our Saviors time; then all Judicature
shall appertain to Christ's and his Apostles: therefore this Text cannot be
rightly understood without considering the words before and after it. Now our
Savior in this Chapter was about to interpret the Law of Moses, which the Jews
thought they had fulfilled, when they had not transgressed the Grammatical
sense thereof; this made them believe that the Sixth Commandment was not
broken, but by killing a Man; nor the Seventh, but actually committing Adultery
or Fornication: Whereas our Savior forbids the inward Anger of a Man against
his Brother without a cause, the punishment whereof at the Day of Judgment
shall be Hell Fire, How Purgatory then should be maintained from these words, I
cannot imagine, unless the Papists, can make it out, that as the Jews had
diverse Temporal Courts of Justice, so God Almighty will have three distinct
Courts of Justice hereafter, and will inflict different punishments for Sin.

VI. The Sixth place is Luk: 16. 9. Make ye friends of the unrighteous Mammon,
that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations;
Invocation of Saints, the Papists say may be proved from this Text, but I
cannot see upon what grounds. We are advised to make the Poor our Friends by
Charity, and by giving them some of our Riches, that we may have in this life
the benefit of their Prayers, and thereby make God himself our Debtour; for he
that gives to the Poor, lends to the Lord.

Lastly; the Champions for Popery allege for Purgatory, 1 Pet. ^. 19. 20. By
which also he went and preached to the Spirits in prison; by which they
understand the descent of Christ into purgatory, to loose some Souls there from
their Torments. But en ho by which, relates to Pneumati Spirit, that is set
down just before it; by which Spirit in Noah, who is called a Preacher of
Righteousness, Christ Jesus is said to preach to the Generation of Men
immediately before the Flood, whose Souls are now shut up in Hell for their
Disobedience. For this Preaching was not performed by an immediate act of the
Son of God, as if he personally had appeared on Earth, and actually Preached to
the Old World; but he did it by the ministry of a Prophet: For to do any thing
by another, that is not able to perform it without him, as much demonstrates
the existence of the principal cause, as if he did it of himself without any
interveening instrument. But if purgatory be intended in these words, we must
be mightily mistaken in our conceptions about a future state; then the days
that follow after Death do afford opportunities of obtaining a better Life;
then may Men rise from a life of torments to a life of joy: whereas the Angels
had one Instant, either to stand or fall eternally; what that instant was to
them, that this Life is to us; for after death immediately follows Judgment;
the Soul at its departure from the body, knows it is doom, and what it must
trust to for ever. The Schoolmen labor all they can to destroy the true Belief
of Christians in this matter, and have the face to propose it as a matter of
Faith, that Christ delivered the Souls of the Saints from the very suburbs of
Hell, which they call Limbus of the Fathers. It is pity but the wits of these
Men had been better employed, then in building such Castles in the Air, or in
filling Men's thoughts, with imaginary Ideas of strange places in the other
World, that have no foundation in Scripture; which is our surest guide against
all such Notional wanderings, opens our eyes to perceive the reality of things,
and clears the brain, not only from Darkness, but from fals^ and useless Light,
especially the Ignis fatuus of Purgatory; which serves only to mislead Men out
of the way, and so lose them i^ the bogs or woods of perpetual error, which
teaches us to believ^ quite otherwise then the Papists do; for such as these
are the instructions of the Holy Spirit, John. 5. 24. Verily, verily I say unto
you* he that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, hat^
everlasting life; he shall not come into condemnation, but is pass^^ from death
to life. Mat. 18. 8. Wherefore if thy hand or thy f^^^ offend thee, cut them
off, and cast them from thee; it is better for thee to enter into life, halt or
maimed rather then having two hands and two feet, to be cast into everlasting
fire. Mat. 19 29. And every one that has forsaken houses or Brethren, or
Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for my names
sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life. Mat.
25. 46. And these shall go into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into
life everlasting. In the sixteenth Chapter of St. Luk's Gospel, from the
nineteenth to the one and thirtieth Verse, we read how the Rich Man was cast
into Torments, and the Poor Man lodged in Abraham's Bosom: Between the places
of both these Men, there was Mega chasma, a Wide Gulf, never to be passed:
Insomuch, that Dives did despair of any relief out of his misery, when the gift
of a drop of Water to cool his tongue would not be granted him. If we can
assent to what the Papists say, they have paved a large Caus-way over this wide
Gulf, and have opened a very easy passage from a life of torments to that of
eternal happiness. For by virtue of some prayers, oblations and indulgences,
they have made the way broad to Heaven, and narrow to Hell; a Man that has
Money in his pocket cannot be damned, and a Camel may as soon pass through the
eye of a nedle, as a poor man be saved.

But granting that the written word of God has nothing of Purgatory in it, the
Romanists will tell you, that Tradition will defend them in the belief thereof:
which word, Tradition they are wont to allege to give a color to most of
their present innovations.

Wherefore in the second place I am to show how they are mistaken in this case
of Tradition also, and to declare for what reasons the Fiction of Purgatory was
first set on foot. The Traditions we receive as good and authentic, are the
Doctrines which we now read in the holy Scriptures; but I have proved Purgatory
to be none of these: Therefore those of the Romish Persuasion must mean some
other Tradition, that is not to be found written in the word of God. But here
we ought to observe, that the Scripture in this case, as well as in all others,
is the only rule of Faith; therefore Traditions, Councils and Fathers are only
to be used as helps to understand the Scripture better, but not to be
entertained as any rule of Faith; in which case we are bound to be of the
Apostle's mind. If I, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other doctrine then
that which we have delivered, let him be accursed. For this reason we cannot
receive those Doctrines for truth, which the Church of Rome presses upon our
Belief upon the account of Tradition: Especially when we consider with what
strategems of force and fraud this Church has labored to keep the People in
ignorance for the sake of her New Doctrines, that they may be swallowed the
more glibly; Which is an artifice to enslave Mankind, by disabling them either
to see or know what she is a doing: Whereas if we would keep up the honor and
privilege of Humane nature; if we would preserve our Bibles from being
sequestered into Hucksters hands; if we have any regard to God's pure and
undefiled Religion, we must resolve against the Novelties of Popery. For in the
true Religion, there is nothing which the reason of Mankind can challenge;
wherein the judgments of Men may not have so good an account as to receive full
and ample satisfaction. And to speak the truth I do not understand that there
is any Religion farther then that which is owned among Protestants: what more
is to be found among the Papists, is accommodated to serve some by-ends and
purposes. For this reasons, a great Abbot in the Roman Church was wont to say,
that he did greatly suspect his Religion must needs fail, being not built upon
so firm a Rock as was supposed; because there was so little Ground for many
Tenants of it in the word of God: I may add, that there is as little in the
principals of God's Creation, or in that which we call Natural Religion.

If this be so, I wonder with what face they can still stand up for Purgatory,
or imagine such a state, in which the Souls of Men are for a time shut up,
until they are set at liberty by the Prayers of the Living, or a Pope's
Indulgence: but to justify themselves in this unpardonable abuse of the
Christian Religion, they tell us, that some Christians in Old Time did make use
of Prayers and Commemorations for those who died in the true Faith of our
Savior Jesus Christ. Now the question is, whither the Supplicants, that used
this kind of Devotion, intended by these means to obtain a pardon for the
Criminals that were condemned to this Prison. The right understanding of this
custom will put an end to the Controversy; and who can better inform us of
their meaning then they themselves, or those that lived in the same Age with
them; amongst whom may be reckoned Dionysius the Areopagite. who treats
particularly of the Rites used in their Burials of the Dead: this Author tells
us that the Bishop was wont in the midst of the Congregation to make a Prayer
of Thanksgiving unto God for his restraining the power of the Devil over
Mankind; as also for his merciful admittance of sincere Penitents into his
Grace and Favor. And farther prays, that God would place them in the Land of
the Living, seat them in Abraham's Bosom, where, (now they rest from their
Labors here,) they may be received into a place of Light, Peace and Joy
everlasting: this was the end of their Prayers for those that Rest in the Lord.
Now, le^t by mistake we should infer from hence, as some have done, that the
Souls of good Men departed this life are not yet in Paradise, but remain for
some time in a condition of darkness, loss and pain; there to be prepared for
Heaven by certain Purgations, and thence to be discharged by the satisfactions
and prayers of the Living; the same excellent writer has mentioned only two
divisions of the Dead: of those that have lived well, and of those that have
lived ill; whereas the upholders of Purgatory have lodged them in three
distinct Apartments. But the Primitive Church know but two places of
entertainment for the Dead after this Life, Heaven, and Hell; the first for
good, the latter for evil Men; one for the Beliver, the other for the Infidel;
Heaven is for him whose sins are remitted, and Hell is for him whose si^s are
retained. Indeed some Ancient Doctors did seem to doubt, what that place was
which the Souls of Men did abide in, till they should be reunited to their
bodies in the Resurrection; supposing for a while they lay under the Altars.
But afterward the Church of Rome found it more profitable to build for them
this place of Purgatory, a place wherein she pretends the Souls of Men are
cleansed by Burning, and made fit for Heaven.

For as soon as the World was put into a great Fright about purgatory, then
came in the sale of Indulgences; which the subtle Priests put off for
securities against the vain fears and dangers to be met withal in this place:
This indeed is a Doctrine of good advantage to the Church of Rome, but most
disgraceful to the Christian Religion; for what can be more so, then to
defraud Christ himself of the Title and Merit which he ever had, of being The
only Redeemer of Mankind; as if he had not by his Sacrifice on the Cross fully
satisfied the Divine Justice, but that this great work was to be done by Pope's
Bulls, Indulgence and Masses? But for all this we will oblidge our selves to
believe the Roman Consessours, if they can from Scripture, Reason, or untainted
Tradition show us where God has told Men, tha he is pleased with these things,
and is resolved to accept of them instead of a good and Christian Life. For
this was always the Faith of the Primitive Church, that the state and
condition of a Man into which he passes after Death shall never be changed;
this I could prove out of Justin Martyr ad Orthodoxos, and out of St. Cyprian
ad Demetrianum; but my Design is not, to fill this brief Discourse with
Quotations, and indeed there is no necessity for it, because we have Scripture,
the common sense of Mankind, and the Faith of the best and purest Ages on our
side.

Wherefore in the third place, I will show what our Belief ought to be in this
matter. We all know very well, that we are to believe as the Scripture directs,
and herein we are taught that Heaven and Hell are fixed for the two Eternal
States of good and bad Men; who if after this Life they had any hopes of
gaining the first, or escaping the latter by the Prayers or the Gifts of their
surviving Friends, this expectation would in a great measure frustrate the
intent of Christ's coming into the World, which was to teach Men how in this
present Life they must work out their Salvation, how through patient
continuance in well doing they must here be brought to goodness and real
virtue; the practice whereof in all probability would be quite laid aside, if
they should depend upon such foolish hopes, as these are. If we do but consider
the reason of these promises and threatenings, which GOD makes use of in
Scripture to reclaim the Disobedient, we must be convinced, that there can be
no such place as Purgatory. For promises and threatenings are made use of in
Scripture to work upon our hopes and fears, two the most prevailing passions of
the mind; we have the promise of present assistance to encourage our endeavors
in a virtuous life, and to make this work the more easy, we have the assurance
of a future reward. Whereas Religion would be thought in its strictest duties
to be a burden too heavy for Men to bear, if so be they should once entertain
the hopes of getting Heaven by such cheap and easy methods, as the Church of
Rome prescribes: Persons that are her Proselytes will not be wrought upon by
that fear, which is the proper product of the threatenings of the Gospel, when
the most dreadful condition, that can be feared hereafter may be avoided, as
they think, by the charms of Masses; or some legacy to the Church. But these
are cunningly divised Fables, which the Scripture warns us of; which Gospel,
because of the terrors of it, is said to be the mighty power of God to
salvation: For great fear makes difficulties easy, it awakens all our powers,
and quickens all our motions, it turns our feet into wings, and enables Men to
do many things with ease, which without so strong a motive they would never be
persuaded to attempt. The lively apprehension of the danger of their Souls, and
the sad issues of a wicked life is enough to make the most profane Man stop his
course, it will incite him to summon all his powers to resist so great a
mischief as will undo him for ever. Besides the Commands of God are
exceedingly sweetened by Love, by all the imaginale obligations of Kindness;
when we have considered how undutifully we have demeaned our selves toward him
who is the great Benefactor of our life, who has recovered us from eternal
destruction; with how much long suffering he has expected to our amendment;
what means he has used to reconcile us to himself, by sending his only Son to
dye, that we might live, to be made a Spectacle of misery and contempt, that he
might bring us to happiness and glory: he only has delivered us from Wrath
and the Tormentour, when we lay open to the revenge of God's Justice. If we
have any sense of benefits, we cannot choose but love and obey him who has done
so much to oblidge us; for his whole Religion presents such arguments and
considerations to us as are apt to stir up all those passions in our hearts,
which are the great instruments to action; these are our hope, fear and love.
But the workings of these passions must needs be stifled by a lazy,
superstitious devotion, I mean that devotion of the Papists which is produced
by a belief of such dreams as Purgatory.

Let us therefore that are Protestants consider, that the main work we are to
do in the time of this life, is to prepare for our immortal state; for the
time of this life is the day of exercise, wherein we are to make trial of our
strength, and with all our powers to labor for Heaven, the way to which place
ly right before us, it is strait and narrow, so that we must use some care and
diligence, that we turn not to the right, nor to the left: the ways of Popery
are like the paths of sin, crooked and full of windings through Cells and
Cloisters, in long Processions and Pilgrimages, wherewith Men are rather
perplexed then their minds are improved, or their lives made better: by the
practice of these things they are brought off from the true meaning of the
Christian Religion, and learn at last to content themselves with pompous shows
instead of living righteously, godly and soberly in this present World: For how
can the ends of Religion be accomplished by this course, when in the place of
justice, honesty and goodness, simple and plain virtues, the People are brought
up to show so many tricks, and to act over so many mimical postures of Worship?

But thanks be to God, we have not so learned Christ: we came not into the
World to be idle Spectatours therein, to be slothful and unprofitable Monks,
to gratify our senses, feed our lu(...) or to live at ease, but to pay a
reasonable service to God, and to promote the public good; not to advance our
own advantages and designs, but the common interest and benefit of Mankind.
And as we are not to neglect our duty upon which the saving of our Souls
depends, in expectation, that after this life is ended we may get out of
Purgatory into Heaven; so we must not mistake our time of doing our duty, but
begin it as soon as we come to the use of our reason and understanding, that
as soon as our rational powers begin to move, Religion also may show it self at
the same time with all the brightness and majesty of truth and virtue.
Therefore Men do mightily abuse themselves when they are led aside by erroneous
opinions concerning their future state, and so lose the happy occasion of
advancing their true interest: this they do, who put off their living well to
the last, who defer their Repentance with groundless hopes of having the same
good success as the Penitent Thief had, or who neglect all those good means
that would make them sound and good Christians, out of a false persuasion, that
their sufferings hereafter will be but Temporary, and then they shall be as
happy as the best Men are. Some Philosophical Persons are mistaken in this
matter; for they will tell you, that they would rather choose not to be at all,
then be placed in such a condition of Life as that they shall be in danger of
everlasting punishment if they difobey the Laws of God. Surely this cannot be
the desire of a good or a wise Man, as if a Man had better choose to live in the
Woods in a wild state of confusion and anarchy, then be subject to the Laws of
a Just and Merciful Ruler, under whom he may lead an happy and quiet life,
merely because he shall be punished if he do amiss We are beholding to the
infinite bounty and goodness of God, for that he has given us all a Being; and
when we were made, it was abfolutly necessary that we should carefully observe
and keep the Laws of Almighty God: but such is the degeneracy of Mankind, that
they would never do this, unless there were severe penalties to be suffered
for the violation of them; which penalties are eternal upon impenitent Sinners
for this reason among others, because the goodness and mercy of God is
eminently shown toward Men both in threatening and inflicting these
punishments; for hereby they may behold his severity against fin, and so break
off the practices of it, that they may escape the punishments of the future
state, which are inflicted because Men have been unreclaimable either by the
mercies or severities of God toward them in this life. The suffering these
punishments God may accept of as a ^ull satisfaction to his Law, if they be
such as tend to break men off from sin, assert (...)'s Right, and vindicate his
honor to the World; for we must know that the end of punishment is not the
satisfaction of anger in God as a desire of revenge, but the design of it is to
vindicat the honor and rights of the injured person by such a way as himself
shall judge most satisfactory to the ends of his Government. But the misery of
any Creature cannot be an end to us, much less to the Divine nature, because an
End supposes something desirable for it self: so that God neither d^^h nor can
delight in the miseries of his Creatures in themselves, but as they are
subservient to the ends of his Government, and yet such is his kindness in that
respect too, that he uses all means agreeable thereto to make them avoid being
for ever miserable. For there is a vast d^fference between the end of
punishment in this Life, and in that which is to come; the punishments in the
life to come are aflicted because Sinners have been unreclaimable by either the
mercies or punishments of this Life, and they are intended to deter Men from
commiting those sins which will expose them to the wrath to come. Let us
therefore always laud and bless the Name of God, in wh^m we live, move, and
have our Being, for that he has raised us out of nothing, to be not only
Living, but Rational Creatures. Now we are bound to act according to the
d^gnity of our Natures; if we do not, we degenerate into the lower Rank of
Animals, and very deservedly pull God's vengeance upon us for disappointing the
end of our Creation, which was to serve our Creator in all Faithfulness and
Truth, it being a fault never to be forgiven for any Creature to say, that he
is not beholding to God for giving him a Being, unless he may be freed from
the dreadful apprehensions of that everlasting punishment which is due against
all such as wilfully offend so good and wise, so holy and just a God.

Wherefore let no vain expectations of escaping the wrath to come betray us
into so great a so^tishness as to put off our Repentance, or to defer making
provision for Eternity: to be thoroughly regenerate is a harder ta^k then to
mumble over so many Pater Noster's or Ave Mary Prayers; I fear those ignorant
People whose Religion hangs on a string of Beads, and whose Prayers are set
upon Tallies, understand very little what true Sanctification imports, what
reconciliation with the nature, will and mind of God signifies; unless we are
thus qualified for the enjoyment of God, no Flames of Purgatory will ever
prepare us for it.

Now therefore is the time of working out our Salvation; the next World will be
the time of giving an account of what we have done, either good or evil; as
this Life leaves us so eternal Life will find us; what advantages then we have
to day of knowing the will of God, and of learning his statutes, let us make
use of them; that we may be able to stand before his Judgment Seat, and
receive the rewards of good and faithful Servants: in order to the acquitting
of our selves well at this Bar, we have the direction of the holy Scripture,
which we may search as curiously as we please; we have all God's institutions
to guide us; we have the assistance of GOD'S Spirit to help and encourage our
endeavors, and the promises of the Go^pel to assure us, that ou^ labor shall
not be in vain. These are the benefits of the present time: but what warrant
have we from Scripture that those duties may be performed hereafter, which are
now neglected? No, we are told the quite contrary, because I called (says GOD)
and ye would not answer, I will then laugh at your destruction, and mock when
your fear comes; so St. Luke 15. The rich Glutton is tormented, who was
always for spending his present time in riot and luxury; he applauds himself
in his wisdom and foresight, when he had made such plentiful provisions for
many years ease and pleasure; but alas! how soon is his unprepared Soul
surprised with a sad arrest of Death! how blank did the Fool then look, when he
heard the fatal news, that that night should put an end to all his hopes! How
was he confounded with the terrors of the other World? poor Wretch! how did he
tremble, when he found himself beset with Devils and damned Spirits* On the
other side Lazarus is comforted, because he did his work in this World, through
much poverty and hardship he got at last to Heaven.

This is the case of all Men; an eternity of happiness or misery awaits them
hereafter: there is no other state of things so great and so unalterable: the
Divine Providence has made use of all the best and wisest methods to disabuse
the enchanted reason of Man, that he may not be miserable, but happy for ever:
and if Men could be brought seriously to reflect on the dismal and astonishing
events of a wicked life, they would never suffer themselves to be so much
imposed upon by Cheats and Impost^^^s, who recommend to them an implicit
Faith, and a belief in such a state, as Purgatory; whereby their eyes are shut
that they may not be affrighted by the sight of their misery. The fears of one
Party betray Men into Superstition, the vices of another into Atheism, the
covetousness of a third draws them into most pernicious mistakes about the
World to come. But if Men would be at the pains to enquire into the affairs of
Religion, and be not indifferent, whither their condition hereafter be happy or
miserable, they will easily discover its principles to be highly reasonable,
and the keeping of its Commandments to be their highest interest, they will
plainly see the paths of Truth and Blessedness, for it sets down the most easy
rules both for living well and for believing right, because errors in Belief
are the less destructive of Christianity and the ends thereof, then a general
viciousness of manners is. But if Men will be Fools and follow trifling
opinions, no wonder if they perish by their own folly; do they believe the
immortality of the Soul, a future state, or a judgment to come? If they believe
all this, to what a degree of madness do they act that will venture the fury of
an Almighty vengeance for the sake of obeying one sort of Men who have
contrived New and Antiscriptural Articles of Faith, who will run the hazard of
forfeiting an eternal Happiness, and of being cast into an eternal Flame,
because they fancy their Church is an infallible guide? whereas St. Paul
(writting to the Romans) speaks not one word of their privilege of
infallibility, but rather puts them in fear in the 11. chap. That they as well
as the Jews were in danger of falling away: St. Peter also in his Catholic
Epistles does not once acquaint the Christians, whom he writes to, what Guide
they were follow after his departure: there was no need for any such thing, for
he had all along told them that by following the Scripture they may be saved;
having then an infallible way, there was no use, at least no necessity of an
infallible Guide.

But as the Church of Rome without any color of reason sets up for an
infallible Guide in points of Controversy, so with like boldness she may lay
claim, as some of her disciples do, to demonstration in matters of Faith,
whereas if we will define Faith to be that assent by which we receive the word
of God as such, and upon account thereof give assent to all things which
therein are propounded to us to be believed, then there are to be assigned two
several acts of Faith, one of which is that judgment by which we acknowledge
that word to be truly divine, the other is that assent which we give to all
those things that are contained therein: Faith in the former respect is less
certain then science, but in respect of adherence is more certain. then the
other. Now there cannot be so great a certainty in Faith as in science, the
Mathematics for instance; because Faith is more liable to doubting then
science is: If any Man perceives the strength and force of a Geometrical
Demonstration, he cannot in the mean while doubt of the conclusion: but now a
true Believer does often strugle with doubting and unbelief, wherewith his
Faith is assaulted, and yet it cease not to be true Faith. We must confess
that the mind does less clearly perceive this to be the word of God, then it
does those things which are self-evident, and the conclusions logically deduced
from: There is no reason therefore that any one should fear to acknowledge that
assent to be also less certain: notwithstanding it follows not upon this
account that Faith is uncertain, for That, which arises not to the certainty of
the science, is not therefore uncertain; for although that certainty, which is
called Moral, be of an inferior degree to Demonstration, yet it is a true
certainty, leaves the mind satisfied and free from doubt. But how can a Man be
said to have a certainty greater then that of science, when he has not that
certainty of evidence from the Arguments upon which the matter is grounded? It
may be answered, that no Man can deny but there may be just cause why a Man may
adhere to the objects of his Faith more strongly then the Arguments brought for
the truth thereof do require: For when a Man is sufficiently persuaded by due
reasons and arguments, that what is propounded to him for Divine Revelation, is
indeed such; this Man, if he duly attends and seriously considers, that it is
God, who speaks, he will be wholly bent to yield obedience thereunto, he will
entertain the word of God with the highest veneration, he will closely adhere
to it, and he will be fully resolved to suffer and renounce all things rather
then withdraw his assent from those matters of Faith which are contained in it,
and confirmed by it. From thence there arises in his mind a greater, or at
least a more effectual adherence to the Articles of his Faith, then there is in
Science: for the mind so affected and disposed does more affectionately
embrace, and more firmly hold that word of God, then any thing else, by what
light soever it be propounded, or by whatever strength of demonstration it be
confirmed: Neither is there any knowledge which he does so carefuly retain, nor
is there any assent which he will suffer so hardly or with such difficulty to
be forced from him: which firmness of Faith and strong adherence of mind to the
objects of it, is not produced by the evidence thereof, but by the great weight
and moment of it; for the mind being enlightened by the holy Spirit,
understands that any other speculative scientifical Doctrine does little or
nothing conduce to a happy and blessed life; but that on This our everlasting
happiness does depend, and that we cannot reject This without certain Ruin.
Therefore we ought to take head, that cunning Men do not deceive us; that we do
not hearken to the teachers of New Doctrine^, which have no foundation in the
Scripture; their pretenses to infallibility and demonstration in matters of
Faith are false and unreasonable; for they assume these great and unwarrantable
privileges, only to deceive the Ignorant, and to obtrude fictitious articles of
Faith upon Mankind.

Wherefore all that now remains, is to make some short Reflections upon the
Authors of Purgatory, and other new-invented Doctrin^^ in the Church of Rome.

First, They may be charged for imposing upon our belief things contrary to
reason, self-inconsistent and incongruous: of this I will give but one
instance, which is their asserting, that the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament is
changed into the real and substantial Body and Blood of Christ. For this is the
hardest thing that ever was put upon men in any Religion; because they cannot
admit it, unless their reason be laid aside, as no competent Judge in the
matter; unless also they give the lie to the report of their senses. And if
they do this, how shall we think, that GOD made our Faculties true? which if he
did not do, we are absolutely discharged from all duty to him, because we have
no faculty that can resolve us, that this is of GOD: for if our reason must not
be trusted, we must cease to be Men: if our senses are not to be believed, the
chiefest proof of Christians falls to the ground; which was the sight of those,
who saw our Savior, after he was risen from the Dead. Now if I may not believe
the reason of my ^^nd in conjunction with three or four of my senses; how shall
I know(...) that any thing is this or that: therefore I say, that this Doctrine
is a gross invention of Men, contrary both to reason and sense.

Secondly, The Truths they do acknowledge, are made void by subtle
distinctions, or equivocations: as for example, their Doctrine of Probability
and of directing the intention; if a Man can find any Doctor among them, that
held such an opinion, it makes that Doctrine probable: and there is nothing so
contrary to the rules of Virtue and Conscience, but what some Romish
Casuistical Doctor has resolved to be good and practicable: just as Tully
says, there is nothing so absurd or ridiculous, which some Philosopher or
other has not maintained and asserted. So by directing their intention, they
may declare that which is false, and deny that which is true, because they
intend the credit of their Church and Religion; this mere intention shall
excuse them from the guilt of downright falsehood and lying. They are so well
practiced in equivocations, that you cannot confide in any words they speak;
they are so ambiguous, and of such doubtful meaning: in their evasions their
Speech shall bear a double sense whereas no Man ought to use wit and parts to
impose upon another, or to make a Man believe That, which he does not mean. For
the Christian Law is plain and obvious, void of all ambiguity or ensnaring
speeches, free from all Sophistications, and windings of Language, never flies
to words of a dubious or uncertain signification, but plainly declares the
truth to Men: therefore these practices are contrary to that simplicity and
plain heartedness, which ought to be in the conversation of every Christian.

Thirdly, They super-add to Religion things altogether unlikely to be true, and
dishonorable to GOD; which will appear in these following particulars.

I. The use of Images in the Worship of God, an Idolatry they are too guilty
of, otherwise they would never leave out the second Commandment, and divide the
Tenth into two to conceal i^ from the People. We find better Doctrine then
this, among the Philosopeers, who say, God is to be Worshipped by Purity of
Mind: for this is a rational service, and a worship most suitable to an
imma^erial Being; it being the use of that in us, which is the highest and
noblest of our Faculties.

II. The veneration of Relics; a very vain and fool^sh thing; for there can
be no certainty at this distance of time, what they are, and if they were
indeed, what they are taken for, what veneration is, or can be due to them? For
inanimate things are far in^eriour to those that have life, and for the living
to worship things that are dead, is unaccountable and irrational.

III. The Invocation or worship of Angels and Saints, our Fell^w creatures,
particularly of the Virgin Mary, to whom they make more Prayers then to our
Savi^u^ himself; al^h^ugh her Name be not mentioned in a^l the Ep^stles of the
Apostles; alt^ough Christ himself, as foreseeing the degeneracy of the Church
in this thing, did ever restrain all ex^ravagant imaginations of honor due to
her; yet the adoration of her is the most considerable part of their Religion.
But why should a Man so prost^ue himself, as to Worship those, I am sure, God
would not have me Worship? for he would not have us adore any Creature; as the
Apostle argues, Col. 2. 18. It is but a show of humility to worship Angels, who
are placed in the highest order of Creatures, and if they are not to be
Worshipped, sure none below them are: and God has declared, there is, but one
supreme self-existent Being, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man
Jesus Christ.

IV. They withhold the use of Scripture from the People, because, they say,
Knowledge of the very Oracles of God will make them contentious and disobedient
to Authority: if this be true, then the blame of all this must be laid upon our
blessed Savior, for revealing such a Doctrine to the World as this is, and
thereby we should condemn the Apostles for making known such a Doctrine to Men,
in a Tongue they understand; but I suppose, the Papists are not willing to lay
all the miscarriages of the World upon Christ and his Apostles. Although Men
may abuse the Knowledge of the Scripture, yet the abuse of a thing that is
useful, was never accounted a sufficient reason for the taking it away:
therefore Men are not to be hindered from the Knowof the Scriptures, for fear
they should become proud or rebellious; for this would be, as if one should put
out a Man's Eyes, that he might the better follow him, or that he might not
loose his way: for there is nothing in the whole Doctrine of out blessed
Savior, which is unfite for any Man to know, but what is plainly designed to
promote holiness and the practice of a good life: the Romanists do indeed
pretend, that the unity and peace of the Church cannot be maintained, unless
the People be kept in ignorance: then the mischief will be, that for the end of
keeping Peace and Unity in the Church, Church and Christian will be both lost;
which would be, as if a Prince should knock all his Subjects on the Head, to
keep them quiet. It Is true, this would be an effectual way to procure it, but
by these means he must lose his Kingdom, and make himself no Prince into the
bargain. It Is no doubt, but if Men were ignorant enough, they would be quiet;
but then the consequences of it would be, that they would cease to be Men.

Lastly, They frustrate the effects of real Religion by their Pretenses to
extraordinary Power and Privileges; that is, they pretend to make that
lawful, which is unlawful: Bellarmine says, that the Pope may declare vice
to be virtue, and virtue vice: by this practice they attempt to change the
reason of things, which all Mankind agree to be unalterable. By this pretended
Power they can turn attrition into contrition; that is, they can make such a
consternation of mind, as fell upon Judas, when he went and hanged himself, to
be contrition by the Priest's Absolution: they can m^ke bodily Penance to be
of equal validity with an inward change of mind, and true Repentance: they
pretend they can produce, by I know not what magical force, strange spiritual
effects by virtue of Holy Water and the Cross: they are also much puff't up
with a Power they assume of Absolving Men from solemn Oaths and Obligations:
They boast much of the efficacy of Indulgences for the pardon of sin, and for
the delivery of Souls out of Purgatory; by which Invention they detract from
the efficacy of God's Grace, as if it were not sufficient to prepare us for,
and at last to bring us to Heaven, unless we pass through this imaginary
Purgation after Death; by which also they themselves are deceived, whilst they
couple prayer for the Dead and Purgatory together, as if the one did
necessarily suppose or imply the other. But they do not: for though the sins
of the Faithful be privately and particularily forgiven at the day of Death,
yet the public promulgation of their pardon is to come at the day of Judgment.
Christians then may be allowed to pray for this consummation of Blessedness,
when the Body shall be reunited to the Soul: So we pray, as often as we say,
Thy Kingdom come, or come Lord Jesus, co^^ quickly: this is far enough from
being a Prayer to deliver them out of Purgatory; besides, the Roman Church is
not able to produce any one Prayer; public or private, nor one Indulgence, for
the delivery of any one Soul out of Purgatory, in all the Primitive times, or
out of their own ancient Missals, or Records.

All these things before mentioned are not to be justified; but thus the
Papists have endeavored to spoil the best Religion that ever was made known
unto Men. Whereas the Christian Religion as it is professed in the Reformed
Church, is quite another thing: for it does neither persecute, nor hold any
princip^es of faction or disturbance, but only those of peace and obedience to
the Laws of God and Man: if there be any agitatours of Miscief and Treason, it
is the fault of particular parties, and not to be charged upon the Reformed
Church: which Church holds the Worship of God, and all other offices of
Religion to be performed in the Vulgar Tongue, so that Knowledge may be thereby
had and promoted; which Knowledge of Religion if any Man does abuse for the
ends of Pride, Rebellion or Heresy, he does it at his own peril, and God will
judge him for it. But St. Paul is so far from allowing any Service to God in an
unknown Tongue, that he calls it a piece of madness, 1 Cor. 14. 23. If the
whole Church be come together into one place, and all speak with diverse
tongues, and there come in the unlearned, will not they say that you are mad,
that is, they may justly say so. Now a Man would wonder, that any society of
Men retaining the Name of Christians, should zealously press that to be
necessary for the Christian Church, which St. Paul has said to be a piece of
madness. The same Reformed Church owns the free use of the Scriptures both in
public and private, calls upon Men as our Sav^our did, to search them, for
these make the Man of God perfect, and do richly furnish him for every good
work, and by their help we are able to render a reason of the hope that is in
us. We do declare, that the Preachers of the Church ought not to take away the
Key of Knowledge from the People, as our Savior charges the Pharisees; or as
St. Augustine says, They do not command Faith in Men upon peril of Damnation,
to show their superiority: but they appear as Officers do direct and give
Counsel: not with Pride to rule, but in Compassion to lead others into the way
of Truth. and to recover them out of mislakes. In short, we tell the People,
that the Scripture is the only rule of their faith, that it is full and
perspicuous in all matters necessary for good life and practic^; so that if
they use diligence and mind them well, they may easily understand them, and be
sati^fied; we never demand any implicit Faith from them, neither do we expect
that they should resign up their Faculties, as others believe blindfold and
without reason, Therefore the Reformed Church, is honest in all its dealings,
does not deceive Men ^e any w^yes of fraud or fa^shood, such as the whole
Doctrine of Merit ^s, and the Relieving of Souls out of Purgatory by Mass^s.
But there is a pl^ce in the World, where, Coelum est venale Deusque, Heaven and
God himself is set to sale.

The premises considered, we may conclude, that the Church of England had good
reason to declare in her twenty second A^^cle, that The Romish Doctrine
concerning Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping and Adoration, as well of Images as
of Reliq^es, and also Inv^^ation ^^ Saints, is a fond thing, vainly invented,
and grounded upon no warra^^^ of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of
God.

For the whole Scripture is against Purgatory; whe^ein w^ rea^, 1 John 1. 7.
That the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin* that the Children of
God who die in C^^ist, do rest from their labors; that as they are absent from
the Lord, w^^^e the^ a^^ in the body; so when they are absent from the body,
^hey a^e present with the Lord, Joh. 5. 24. They come not into Judgemen^, but
pass from Death to Life.

The same Doctrine is taugh^ b^ ^^^ ancient Fathers of the Chu^ch^ Tertullian
Tertul. lib, de patien. chapter 3.
says, it is an Injury to Christ, to maintain, that such as be called from
hence by him, are in a Cyprian. de Mortali. sect. 2. edit. Goulart.
state, that should be pitied. Thus St. Cyprian affi^ms, the Servants of God to
have Peace and Rest, as soon as they are withdrawn from the storms of this
lower World. And Hilary observes in the Gospel Hilar. in Psalm. 2.
of the Rich Man, and Lazarus, S. Basil. Prooem. in Regulas, etc.
that every one is sent either to Abraham's bosom, or to torments, as soon as
this Life is ended. St. Ba^il declares this Nazianz. orati. 9. ad Julianum
World to be the time of Repentance, the other of Retribution; this of Hierom.
Epist. 25.
Working, that of receiving a Reward. So Nazianzen in his Funeral Orations
plainly denies, that after this Life there is any purging to be expected; and
therefore he tells us, that it is better to be purged now, then be sent into
torments, where the time of punishing is, and not of purging. St. Hierome also
comforts Paula for the Death of her Daughter after this manner; let the Dead be
lamented; but let us whom Christ comes forth to meet after our departure, be
the more grieved, because so long as we remain here, we are Pilgrims from God.

I could cite more Fathers to this purpose; but the Testimonies of these may
suffice to show, that all were not of Bellarmin's min^, as he pretends by his
precarious assertion; that antiquity constantly taught, there was a Purgatory.
Whereas the Grecians are so far from being of his Faith, that they do not
believe it at this day. The oldest and best Authors, that I know to be on his
side, are Plato in his Gorgias and Phoedo. Tully in the end of the Dream of
Scipio, and Virgil in his sixth Aeneide. Tertullian likewise, when he was an
Heretic, seemed to favor his opinion, and Origin was very much of that Be^ief
who acknowledges no other punishment after this life, but Purgatory-pains only.
Notwithstanding the Romish Clergy have the confidence to impose this
extravagant Doctrine upon the World now, it was never heard of in the Church
for the space of a Thousand years after the Birth of our Sayiour: when Thomas
Aquinas and other Friars had framed the cheat; the Doctors of the Greek Church
did publicly oppose it: afterward the Pope and his Agents prevailed so far in
the Council Council. Florentin. sess. 25.
at Florence; that for Peace s^ke they were contented to yield: That the middle
sort of Souls were in a Place of punishment, but whither that were Fire,
Darkness and Tempest, or something else, they would not contend. But as I have
said, the Greek Church, the Muscovites and Russians, the Cophtites and
Abassines, the Georgians and Armenians, could never be brought to submit to it.

But this opinion: with some others no less absurd and ridiculous, came into
the World, when Ignorance and Interest had fatally depraved the Primitive
purity of the Christian Faith and Worship. The broachers of these Fictions are
very crafty and industrious in contriving ways, how they may fasten them upon
credulous People; and although it is more, then an hundred years since our
Ancestors threw off the Pope's Tyranny; yet if he does not meet with a
proportionable zeal in their Posterity, to oppose his designs it will not be
hard to conjecture the success of a vigorous attacque; and a faint defense.

As therefore we are Memberr of a Christian Church, in which we may assuredly
find Salvation, if we continue in it, let us be firmly united among our selves
against all innovations in Religion. As we have no other rule of Faith and
practice, then the Holy Scripture, let us reject all notorious innovations,
that are obtruded upon us for fundamentals. As we are taught to be obedient to
the supreme Magistrate, not only for Wrath, but Conscience sake; so we are
bound to avoid the Communion of that Church, which claims a power of deposing
him, and of knocking those on the head, who keep close to the Faith once
delivered to the Saints.

What obligations then have we to the Church, we are of, and to the Religion we
profess, which has delivered us from the Laws of the Roman Religion, that are
written in Blood; that has recovered us from the Idolatrous practice of the
heathen World; that will not suffer us to Worship Images, or fall down to the
stock of a Tree; that does not rob us of the benefit of public Prayers, by
putting them into an unknown tongue; that does not enjoin an implicit Faith;
or blind obedience, but allows to every Christian a judgment^^ of Discretion,
who keeps within the bounds of due obedience and submission to his lawful
Superiors; that he may prove all things, hold fast That, which is good; a
Church, that has no pardons at a set price for guilty persons, no forged
miracles to amuse the credulous and ignorant, no pompous shows, Beads, Tickets,
Agnus Dei's, Rosaries, to please the Vulgar, or to gratify the superstitious.

If therefore we have any love of our Religion, or any concern for the
happiness of our Church and Nation; if we have any desire to hold the freedom
of our Consciences, or any care for the eternal safety of our Souls, it behooves
us to beware of the Emissaries of Rome, in whose success we must expect to
forfeit all these interests; every one of which ought to be dearer to us, then
our lives.

Let us not be imposed upon by the specious Name of Roman Catholic; it is a
mere contradiction, one of the Pope's Bulls; as if he should say, universal
particular, a Catholic Schismatic. Let us not be afraid to encounter this
pretended Catholic with the Councils and Fathers; though these are a
Labyrinth, an entangled Wood, which Papists love to fight in, not so much with
hope of victory, as to hide the shame of an open overthrow; which in this kind
of combat, many of our Divines have given them. But let them bound their
Disputations on the Scripture only, and an ordinary Protestant, well read in
the Bible, may turn and wind their ablest Doctors; for as among Papists, their
ignorance in the Scripture chiefly upholds Popery; so amongst Protestants, the
frequent and serious reading thereof will soonest baffle it. And we need not
doubt of an entire conquest, if we add to this the amendment of our lives with
all speed; left through impenitency, pride, luxury, bold and open Atheism,
uncharitable jarring and pelting at one another; through stubborn disobedience
to the Laws of GOD and Man, we run into that sottishly, which we seek so warily
to avoid, the worst of Superstitions, that enervates and destroys the whole
design of Christianity.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE CONCERNING AURICULAR CONFESSION As it is prescribed by the COUNCIL
OF TRENT, And practiced in the CHURCH of ROME With a Post script on occasion of
a Book lately printed in France, called

Historia Confessionis Auricularis.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by John Reid, Anno DOM. 1686.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING AURICULAR CONFESSION
THE Zealots of the Church of Rome, are wont to Glory of the singular
advantages, in the Communion of that Church, especially in respect of the
greater means and helps of Spiritual comfort, which they pretend are to be had
there, above and beyond what are to be found amongst other Societies of
Christians. Which one thing, if it could be as substantially made out, as it is
confidently asserted, could not fail to sway very much with all Wise men, and
would undoubtedly prevail with all devout persons, (who were made acquainted
with the secret) to go over to them. But if contrariwise it appear upon search,
that their pretensions of this kind are false and groundless, and that the
methods of Administering consolation, which are peculiar to that Church, are as
well unsafe and deceitful, as singular and unnecessary: Then the same Prudence
and sincerity, will oblige a man to suspect that Communion, instead of becoming
a proselyte to it, and to look upon the aforesaid boastings as the effect
either of designed imposture, or at the least of Ignorance and Delusion.

Amongst other things that Church highly values it self upon the, Sacrament of
Penance (as they call it) and as deeply blames and condemns the Church of
England, and other Reformed Churches, for their defect in, and neglect of so
important and comfortable an Office. And under that specious pretext, her
Emissaries (who are w^nt according to the phrase of the Apostle, to creep into
houses, and lead Captive silly Women, etc.) insinuate themselves into such of
the People as have more Zeal then knowledge, and now and then wheedle some of
them over into their Society. To that purpose, they will not only harangue them
with fine stories of the ease and benefit of it, as of an Ancient and usesull
Rite, but will also Preach to them the necessity of it, as of Divine
Institution, and that it is as important (in its kind) as Baptism or the Lords
Supper. For that Confession to a Priest, and his Absolution thereupon obtained,
is the only means appointed by God for the procuring of Pardon of all mortal
sins committed after Baptism.

As for Original sin, or whatsoever Council. Trid. sess. 14 c. 2
actual transgressions may have been committed before Baptism, all those they
acknowledge to be washed away in that sacred Laver. And for sins of Infirmity
or Venial sins, these may be done away by several easy methods, by Contrition
alone (say some,) nay, by Attrition alone (says others.) by Habitual Grace
says a Vid. Becan. Tract de Sacramentis in specie.
third, etc. But for mortal sins committed after a man is admitted into the
Church by Baptism, for these there is no other door of Mercy, but the Priests
Lips, nor has God appointed, or will admit of any other way of Reconciliation
then this, of Confession to a Priest, and his Absolution.

This Sacrament of Penance therefore is called by them, Secunda Tabula post
naufragium, the peculiar refuge of a lapsed Christian, the only Sanctuary of a
guilty Conscience, the sole means of restoring such a person to Peace of
Conscience, the Favor of God, and the hopes of Heaven. And withal, this
method is held to be so Sovereign and Effectual a remedy, that it cures toties,
quoties; and whatever a man's miscarriages have been, and how often soever
repeated, if he do but as often resort to it, he shall return as pure and clean
as when he first came from the Font.

This ready and easy way (say they) has God allowed men, of quiting all
scores with himself, in the use of which they may have perfect peace in their
Consciences, and may think of the day of Judgment without horror, having their
Case decided before hand by Gods deputy the Priest, and their Pardon ready to
produce, and plead at the Tribunal of Christ.

What a mighty defect is it therefore in the Protestant Churches, who wanting
this Sacrament, want the principal ministry of reconciliation? And who would
not join himself to the Society of that Church, where this great Case is so
abundantly provided for? For if all this be true, he must be extremely
foolhardy and deserve to perish, who will not be of that Communion from whence
the way to Heaven is so very easy and obvious, no wonder therefore I say, if
not only the loose and vicious are fond of this Communion where they may sin
and confess, and confess and sin again without any great danger, bnt it would
be strange if the more Virtuous and Prudent also, did not out of more caution
think it became them to comply with his expedient. For as much as there is no
man who understands himself, but must be conscious of having committed sins
since his Baptism, and then for fear some of them should prove to be of a
mortal nature, it will be his safest course to betake himself to this refuge,
and consequently he will easily be drawn to that Church, where the only remedy
of his disease is to be had.

But the best of it is, these things are sooner said then proved, and more
easily phansied by silly People, then believed by those of discretion. And
therefore there may be no culpable defect in the reformed Churches, that they
trust not to this remedy in so great a Case. And as for the Church of England
in particular, though she has no fondness for Mountebank Medicines, as
observing them to be seldom successful; yet she is not wanting in her care, and
compassion to the Souls of those under her guidance, but expresses as much
tenderness of their peace and comfort, as the Church of Rome can pretend to.
Indeed she has not set up a Confessors Chair in every Parish, nor much less
placed the Priest in the Seat of God Almighty, as thinking it safer, at least
in ordinary Cases, to remit men to the Text of the written word of God, and to
the public Ministry thereof, for resolution of Conscience, then to the secret
Oracle of a Priest in a corner, and advises them rather to observe what God
himself declares of the nature and guilt of sin, the aggravations or abatements
of it, and the terms and conditions of Pardon, then what a Priest pronounces.
But however this course does not please the Church of Rome, for reasons best
known to themselves, which if we may guess at, the main seems to be this, they
do not think it fit to let men be their own carvers, but lead them like
Children by the hand; my meaning is, they keep People as much in ignorance of
the Holy Scripture as they can, locking that up from them in an unknown Tongue;
now if they may not be trusted with those Sacred Records, so as to inform
themselves of the terms of the New Covenant, the conditions of the Pardon of
sin, and Salvation, it is then but reasonable that the Priest should Judge for
them, and that they await their doom from his Mouth. Yet I do not see why in a
Protestant Church, where the whole Religion is in the Mother Tongue, the Old,
and especially the New Testament constantly, and conscientiously expounded and
the People allowed to search the Scriptures and to see whither things be so or
no, I see not, I say, Why in such a case the Priest may not in great measure be
excused the trouble of attending secret Confessions, without danger to the
Souls of men.

But besides this, there is a constant use of Confession and Absolution too, in
the Church of England, in every days Service; which though they be both in
general terms, as they ought to be in public Worship, yet every Penitent can
both from his own conscience supply the generality of the confession by a
remorseful reflection upon his own particular sins, as well as if he did it at
the knees of a Priest; and also by an Act of Faith can apply the general
Sentence of Absolution to his own Soul, with as good and comfortable effects,
as if it had been specially pronounced by his Confessor.

But this public confession does not please the Romanists neither, and they
know a Reason for their dislike; namely, because this does not conciliate so
great a Veneration to the Priesthood, as when all men are brought to kneel to
them for Salvation: Neither does this way make them to pry into the secret
thoughts of Men, as Auricular confession does, wherein the Priest is not only
made a Judge of men's estate, but a Spy upon their behavior, and is capable of
becoming an Intelligencer to his Superiors of all the Designs, Interests, and
even constitutions of the People.

Moreover the church of England allows of private confessions also, as
particularly in the Visitation of the sick, (which office extends also to them
that are troubled in Mind or conscience, as well as to the afflicted in Body)
where the Minister is directed to examine particularly the state of the
Decumbents soul, to search and romage his conscience, to try his Faith, his
Repentance, his Charity, nay, to move him to make a special confession of his
sins, and afterward to absolve him upon just grounds.

Nay farther yet, if (besides the case of sickness) any Man shall either out of
perplexity of Mind, scrupulosity or remorse of conscience, or any other devout
consideration, think it needful to apply himself to a Priest of the church of
England for advice, ease, or relief, he has encouragement and direction so to
do in the first Exhortation to the Holy communion, and may be sure to find
those who will tenderly, and faithfully, as well as secretly administer to his
necessities. So that I see not what defect or omission can be objected to this
church in all this Affair, or what Temptation any Man can have upon this
account to go from us to the church of Rome.

But all this will not satisfy them of the Church of Rome, they are neither
contented with public confession, nor with private, no nor with secret
neither, if it be only occasional or voluntary: It is the universality and
necessity of it which they insist upon, for it is not with them a Matter of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, to prevent the Scandal of the Society, to conserve
the Reverence of the Church, or to restrain men from sinning, or much less an
Office of Expediency and Prudence to be resorted to upon exigencies, or such as
may accidentally become necessary upon emergency as suppose upon the ^trocity
of some fact committed, the scandalousness of some persons former life, which
may make him more doubtful of his Pardon, the weakness of his Judgment, the
Melancholy of his Temper, or the Anxiety of his Mind, or any such like
occasion, but it must be the standing indispensable duty of all men, as the
condition of the Pardon of their Sins; in one word it must be a Sacrament of
Divine institution, and of Universal Obligation.

For so the Council of Trent determines, Sess. 4. canon 1. Si quis dixerit in
Ecclesia catholica poenitentiam non esse vere and proprie Sacramentum pro
fidelibus, quoties post Baptismum in peccata labentur, ipsi Deo reconciliandis
a Domino nostro institutum, Anathema sit; i. e. Let him be accursed, who shall
affirm that Penance is not truly and properly a Sacrament instituted and
appointed in the Universal Church, by our Lord Christ himself, for the
reconciling those Christians to the Divine Majesty, who have fallen into Sin
after their Baptism.

And in the Doctrinal part of that Decree they teach and assert more
particularly; First, That our Savior instituted this Sacrament expressly, Joh.
20. 22.

2. That this Sacrament consists of two parts, viz. The Matter and the Form;
the matter Sess, 14. Cap. 2.
of the Sacrament (or quasi materia, as they cautiously speak) is the act or
acts of the Penitent, namely, contrition, confession, and Satisfaction; the
Form of it is the act of the Priest in these words, Absolvote.

3. That therefore it is the duty of every Man cap. 3.
who has fallen after Baptism, as aforesaid, to confess his sins at least once
a year to a Priest.

4. That this confession is to be secret; for public cap. 5.
confession they say is neither commanded nor expedient.

5. That this confession of Mortal sin be very Ibid.
exact and particular, together with all circumstances, especially such as
speciem facti mutant, alter the kind or degree of sin, and that it extend to
the most secret sins, even of thought, or against the 9th. and 10th.
Commandment. Ibid.


9. That the Penitent thus doing, the Absolution of the Priest here upon
pronounced is not Cap. 6.
conditional or declarative only, but absolute and judicial.

Now in opposition to this Doctrine and Decree of theirs, and the practice of
that Church pursuant thereof, as well as in defense of the Doctrine and
practice of the Church of England in that particular, I will here endeavor to
make good these Three things.

1. That our blessed Lord and Savior has neither in his Gospel instituted
such an Auricular Confession as aforesaid, nor much less, such a Sacrament of
Penance as the Church of Rome supposes in the recited Decree,

2. That Auricular Confession has not been of constant and universal use in
the Christian Church, as the Romanists pretend, much less looked upon as of
Sacramental and necessary Obligation.

3. That Auricular confession as it is now used in the Church of Rome, is not
only unneceslary and burdensome, but in many respects very mischievous to
Piety, and the great ends of Christian Religion.

If the first of these appear to be true, then (at the worst) the want of such
an Auricular confession in the reformed Churches, can be but an irregularity,
and no essential defect.

If the second of these assertions be made good, then it can be no defect at
all in those Churches that use not such a Rite, but a novely and imposition on
their parts who so strictly require it.

But if the third be true: it will be the corruption and great fault of the
Church of Rome to persevere in the injunction and practice of it, and the
excellency and commendation of those Churches which exclude it

I begine with the first, that it does not appear that our Savior has
instituted such an Auricular Confession, of such a Sacrament of Penance as the
Church of Rome pretends and practices.

I confess it is a Negative which I here undertake to make good, which is
accounted a difficult Province, but the Council of Trent has relieved us in
that particular by founding the Institution expressly upon that one passage of
the Gospel, Joh. 20. 2z. So that we shall not need to examine the whole Body of
Scripture to discover what footsteps of Divine Institution may be found here or
there, for the Council wholly insists and relies upon that Text of St. John,
and therefore if that fail them, the whole Hypothesis falls to the ground.

Now for the clearing of this, let us lay the words before us; and they are
these, He breathed on them, and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whosesoever
sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whosesoever sins ye retain,
they are retained.

Here I appeal to any Man that has Eyes in his Head, or Ears to hear, whither
in this Text there be any one word of Auricular Confession, or much less of
such a circumstantiated one as they require; And this is so manifest and
notorious, that their own ancient Canonists and several of their learned
Divines are ashamed of the pretense of Divine Institution founded upon this or
any other passage of Scripture, and therefore are content to defend the
practice of the Church of Rome in this particular, upon the account of the
Authority, and general usage of the Church; which we shall come to examine by
and by in its due place.

In the mean time I cannot choose but admire the mighty Faith of a Romanist,
who can believe in spite of his own Eyes. It seemed to us an unsuperable
difficulty heretofore, for a Man to persuade himself that in the Sacrament of
the Eucharist Bread was transubstantiated into Flesh, because it was against
the express Testimony of Sense, yea, although for that there was the
countenance of Five figurative (but mistaken) words to support the credulity;
but this of the Sacrament of Penance clearly out does it, for here a Man must
believe a thing to be, when as there is not so much as one word for the ground
of his Faith, or the proof of the thing in question. How many Sacraments may
not such men have if they please? What voluminous Creeds may not they swallow
and digest? What Mountains may not such a wonderful Faith remove?

But let us hear what they have to say for themselves, perhaps in the first
place they will plead the Authority of the Council of Trent, which has
peremptorily determined the sense of the passage of the Gospel to the purpose
aforesaid. Indeed that Council in the third Canon of their fourteenth Session,
does damn all those who deny that a Sacrament of Penance and Auricular
Confession is prescribed in that Text of St. John, or who apply it to any other
purpose. But in so doing, they both usurp a Prerogative which was never
pretended to, or practiced by any Council before them, and withal they betray a
consciousness that the Text it self yielded no sufficient evidence of the thing
which they designed to countenance by it; for what Councils (ever till now)
brought a Text, and then imposed an Interpretation upon it contrary to the
words? And then backed that Interpretation with an Anathema? If the Text were
plain or could be made so, why was not that done? And to be sure if that cannot
be done by other means, the curse will not do it; at least to any but very
obedient Roman consciences. Besides if this course be allowed, I see not but a
Council may bring in what Religion they please, having first made a Nose of Wax
of the Holy Scripture, and then writhed it into what shape they best phansy;
for in such a case, if the words of the Gospel do not favor me, I can govern
the sense and if the letter be silent or intractable, I can help that with an
Interpretation; and if I have authority or confidence enough to impose that
under the peril of Anathema, I am no longer an Interpreter or a Judge, but a
Lawgiver, and need not trouble my self with Scriptum est, but may (if I will
speak plain) say decretum est, and the business is done.

But if neither the Letter of Scripture, nor the Authority of a Council will do
in this case, then in the second place they think they have at least some
color of Reason to relieve them; and if they cannot find Auricular Confession
in the Text, yet they will by consequence infer it thence; for they say
although indeed it is true it is not here expressly mentioned, yet it is certain
that our Savior in the Text before us instituted a Sacrament of penance and
therefore Auricular Confession must necessarily be implied because absolution
cannot be without confession.

Here the Reader will observe that the point in Question between us is very
much altered, for we are now fallen from the consideration of the Divine
Institution of Auricular confession in particular to that of a Sacrament of
Penance in general, i. e. from direct proof to a subintelligitur. But we will
follow them hither also, and for the clearing of this matter we will briefly
consider these three things.

1. Whither that can properly be said to be of Divine Institution, and
necessary to salvation, which depends on an inference, and is proved only by an
innuendo?

2. Whither it can be reasonable to assert that our Savior there institutes a
Sacrament of Penance, where not only Auricular confession, but the whole matter
of such a Sacrament is left undefined?

3. Whither if our Savior (had done that which it is plain he has not, that
is,) had here instituted and appointed all those things, which by the church of
Rome are required as the material parts of Penance, yet this could have been a
Sacrament?

1. For the first of these, we have no more to do but to consider the force and
signification of this word Institution. Now that in the common use of men
(especially of those which speak distinctly and understandingly) implies a
setting up de novo or the appointing that to become a duty, which was not
knowable, or at least not known to be so before it became so appointed. For
this word Institution is that which we use to express a positive command by, in
opposition to that which is Moral in the strictest sense, and of natural
obligation. Now it is very evident that all things of this Nature ought to be
appointed very plainly and expressly, or else they can carry no obligation with
them; for seeing the whole Reason of their becoming matter of Law or Duty, lies
in the will of the Legislator, if that be not plainly discovered, they cannot
be said to be instituted, and so there can be no Obligation to observe them,
because where there is no Law there can be no Transgression; and a Law is no
Law in effect which is not sufficiently promulged. Is it not therefore a very
strange thing to tell us of an Institution by implication only, and yet at the
Sess. 14. c. 2.
same time to tell us that the matter so (pretended to be) instituted, is no
less then absosolutely necessary to the Salvation of Sinners?

2. The second of these will easily be resolved by considering what we observed
before from the Sess. 14. C. 3.
Council of Trent, viz. that this Sacrament of Penance consists of Matter and
Form; the Form is the Priests Absolution, but the Matter or Materials of this
Sacrament are Contrition, Confession to a Priest, and Satisfaction or
Performance of the Penance enjoined by him; now it is evident that not only
Auricular Confession (of which we have spoken hitherto, but also Contrition and
Satisfaction are wholly omitted and past over in silence by the Evangelist in
this passage of Scripture, from whence they fetch their Sacrament of Penance:
and is it not a wonderfully strange thing, that our Savionr should be supposed
to institut a Sacrament without any Materials of it at all? Surely therefore
this must be either a very Spiritual Sacrament, or none at all.

Let us guess at the probability of this in proportion to either of the other
undoubted Sacraments. Suppose our Savior instead of that accurat form in which
he instituted the Eucharist had only said I would have you my Disciples and all
that shall believe on my Name to keep a Memorial of me when I am gone: Or
suppose he said only as he does, John 6. 55. My Flesh is Meat indeed, and my
Blood is Drink indeed; would any one have concluded here, that our Savior in
so saying, had appointed Bread and Wine to be consecrated, to be received in
such a manner, and in a word that he had (without more ado) instituted such a
Sacrament as we usually celebrate? No certainly, and therefore we see our
Savior is the most express and particular therein that can be, for he takes
Bread, blesses it, breaks it, gives it to them, saying, Take eat, this is my
Body, etc. and after Supper he takes the Cup, blesses it, gives it to them,
saying, Drink ye all of this, for this is the New Testament in my Blood, etc.
and then adds, Do this in remembrance of Me. Now who is there that observes
this accuracy of our Savior in the Eucharist, can imagine that he should
intend to institute a Sacrament of Penance, and that as necessary to Salvation
(in the Opinion of the Romanists) as the other, only with this Form of words,
Whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted, etc. and without the least mention
of Confession, Contrition, or any other Material or necessary Part or
Circumstance of it.

2. But in the third and last place, let us suppose that our Savior had in the
Text before us instituted Penance, and had appointed particularly all those
things, which they call the Material parts of it, (as it is evident he has
not) yet even then, and upon that Supposition, Penance would not have proved to
be a Sacrament properly so called.

I confess according to a loose acceptance of the word Sacrament, something
may be said for it; for so there are many things have had the name of Sacrament
applied to them. Tertullian somewhere calls Elisha's Ax the Sacrament of Wood,
and in his Book against Marcion, he styles the whole Christian Religion a
Sacrament. St. Austin in several places calls Bread, Fish, the Rock, and the
Mystery of Number, Sacraments, for he has given us a general Rule in his Fifth
Epistle, viz. That all signs when they belong to divine things are called
Sacrament^: And in consideration hereof it is acknowledged by Cassander, that
the Number of Sacraments was indefinite in the Church of Rome it self, until
the times of Peter Lombard. But all this notwithstanding, and properly
speaking, this Rite of Penance taking it altogether (and even supposing
whatsoever the Romanists can suppose to belong to it) cannot be reputed a
Sacrament, according to the allowed definitions of a Sacrament delivered by
their own Divines. Some of them define a Sacrament thus, Hugo de S. Vict. lib.
de Sacram.
Sacramentum est corporale elementum foris sensibiliter propositum, ex
similitudine repraesentans and ex institutione significans, and ex
Sanctificatione continens invisibilem gratiam. And the Magist. Sent. lib. 4.
did. 1.
Master of the sentences himself describes it somewhat more briefly, but to
the same effect in these words: Sacramentum est invisibilis gratiae visibilis
forma, ejusdem gratiae imaginem gerens and causa existens; both which
definitions are acknowledged and applauded by the Jesuit Becanus Tract. 2. de
Sacramentis.
Becanus: And the plain truth is a Sacrament cannot be better expressed in so few
words, then it is by St. Aug. c. Faust. Lib. 19. c. 16.
Austin when he calls it verbum visibile a visible Word or Gospel: For it
pleased the Divine Wisdom and Goodness by this institution of Sacraments to
condescend to our weakness, and thereby to give us sensible Tokens or Pleges of
what he had promised in his Written word, to the intent that our dullness might
be relieved, and our Faith assisted; forasmuch as herein, our Eyes and other
senses, as well as our Ears are made Witnesses of his gracious intentions. Thus
by Baptismal wash^ng he gives us a sensible token and representation of our
regeneration, and the washing away of our sins by the Blood of Christ; and by
the participation of Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper we have a Token and
Symbol of our Union with Christ, our Friendship with God and communion with
each other*

But now it is manifest there is no such thing as this in their Sacrament of
Penance (as even Bellarmine himself confesses.) For they do not say or mean
that the Absolution of the Priest is a Token or Emblem of God's forgiveness,
but that the Priest actually pardons in God's stead, by Virtue of a Power
delegated to him. So that according to them, here must be a Sacrament, not only
without any material parts instituted, but also without any thing Figurative,
Symbolical, or Significative which seems to be as expressly contrary to their
own Doctrine in the aforesaid definitions as to the truth it self.

Nay, farther to evince the difference of this Rite of Penance from all other
proper Sacraments; it deserves observation, that whereas in those other
acknowledged Sacraments, the Priest in God's Name delivers to us the Pledges
and Symbols of Divine Grace, Here in this of Penance we must bring all the
material parts and Pledges our selves, and present them to God, or to the
Priest in his stead: My meaning is, that whereas (for instance) in Baptism the
Priest applies to us the Symbol of Water, and in the Eucharist delivers to us
the consecrated Elements in token of the Divine Grace, contrary-wise here in
Penance we must on our parts bring with us contrition, confession, and
satisfaction too, in which respect we may be rather said to give Pledges to
God, then he to us; which is widely different from the Nature of other
Sacraments, and seems no less to be contrary to the reason and Notion of a
Sacrament in general.

The sum of what we have hitherto discoursed, amounts to this; First, That here
is no Auricular confession instituted by our Savior, Joh. 20. 22. As was
pretended. Secondly, Not, any Sacrament of Penance in which it can be included
or implied; no nor indeed any Sacrament at all.

I confess I might have spared all the words I have used in proving the latter,
for so long as I have made appear that private confession is not instituted, it
was not so very material to consider whither penance could be a Sacrament or
no; but this I added to show the imperious dictates of that church, and their
extravagancy in imposing the most sacred Names upon their own inventions,
thereby to give them the greater veneration with the People.

And thus I would dismiss the first part of my undertaking, yet the Romanists
will not forego their pretensions for Auricular confession; for they will yet
urge, that wihther or no we will call it a Sacrament which our Savior
institutes in the Text before us, it is however certain here is a Power
conferred on the Apostles, and their Successors, of remitting and retaining
sins; for by these words, Whosesoever sins ye remit they are remitted, etc.
*Our Savior had made the Christus constituit Sacerdote^ sui ipsius Vicarios.
Sess. 14. Praesides and Judices Ibid. 4. Sacerdos solvit peccata potestate
quadam praetoria Bellar. lib. 1. de Sacram. c. 10. Christus ratam habet
sententiam a Sacerdote latam, Id. lib. 3. c. 2.
Priest a judge of Men's consciences and conditions; Wherefore that he may not
proceed blindly and indiscriminatly it is necessary that he know the merits of
the Cause, and not only understand the matter of fact, but all the
circumstances which may aggravate or extenuate it, all which cannot be attained
without the Confession of the party, therefore Auricular confession is as
necessarily implied in the Text, as Absoltion or Retention of sins expressed in
is it. So they.

But I crave leave to demand in the first place, Is it certain that upon such a
confession as they require, the Priest (as such) will be able to make a right
judgment of a Man's case that addresses himself to him, especially considering
the intricacy of some cases, and the ignorance of some Priests; upon this
account are those memorable words of St. Austin confess. lib. 10. c. 3. Quid
mihi ergo est cum hominibus ut audiant confessiones meas, qua^i ipsi sanaturi
sint omnes languores meos, and unde sciunt cum a meipso de meipso audiunt, an
verum dicam? Quandoquidem nemo scit hominum quid agitur in homine, nisi
spiritus hominis qui in ipso est. i. e. To what purpose should I Confess my
sins to Men who cannot heal my wounds? For how shall they (who know nothing of
my heart but by my own Confession) know whither I say true or no? For no one
knows what is in Man, but the Spirit of Man that is in him. O Yes, they will
say, Clave non errante, that is to say, if he judge right, he judges right, and
no more, and this is mighty comfort to a distressed conscien^^.

Secondly, Though we grant our Savior has given the Priest Authority to Remit
and Retain sins, yet how does it appear that this extends to Secret sins; sins
in thought only, or as the Council expresses it against the ninth and tenth
Commandments? Of open ^ins and public scandals the Church has cognizance, and
has a right which she may insist upon, or recede from, if she see cause,
because such sins are an injury to the Society as well as an offense against
God, and therefore here the Officers of the Church may dispense her Authority,
and Remit or Retain (as we shall see more by and by;) but in secret sins where
only GOD is injured, and to that which he is only privy, what has the Church
to do, unless they be volunlarily discovered to her? Otherwise they are
properly reserved Cases to the Tribunal of God

Thirdly, I would be bold to enquire farther, why may not sins especially such
as we last named, be Remitted upon Confession to God, without Confession to the
Priest also? And I the rather ask this for these two reasons, First I observe
that this very Council of Trent says, that until the times Sess. 14, c. 1.
of our Savior, and his Institution of this Sament, sins were remitted upon
contrition only, and application to the mercies of God, without Auricular
confession. They cannot therefore now say, remission implies this Confession,
for that cannot be said to be implied in the nature of a thing, when the thing
it self can be had without it.

They will answer that it is sufficient, that it is now made necessary by our
Savior. But I reply, Then that Institution which now makes it necessary, must
be better proved then yet it has been, or else Men will be very apt to hope
they may now under the Gospel obtain Pardon (at least) upon as easy terms as
it was to be had at before.

My Second reason of asking that third Question is this; I observe that their
own Schoolmen Aquinas sum. part. 3. Q. 68.
acknowledge sins to be remitted under the Gospel by the Priest without any
Confession to Men, particularly in the Administration of Baptism, by which it
plainly appears, that Confession is not implied in the nature of Remission, but
one may be had without the other, and then why may not a sinner after Baptism,
hope for Pardon upon his contrite and devout application to the Word and
Sacraments, without this new device and pick-lock of Conscience, Auricular
Confession.

But so much for that.

Sect. 3. I proceed now to the second thing propounded, namely, to inquire
historically whither or no Auricular, or such a secret, and Sacramental
Confession, as aforesaid, has been of constant and universal use in the
Christian Church, as the Romanists pretend, and as the Council of Trent
asserts, Sessi. 14 Chap. 5.

This inquiry is not into matter of Law or Divine Right, as the former was, but
of Fact only, yet nevertheless it is of great moment upon a double account:

1. Because this is the ground which the Old Roman Canonists wholly went upon,
(as I noted before;) they exploded all pretense of Divine Institution in the
case, as having more modesty (it seems) then to pretend so high upon no better
evidence, or at least they contented themselves to prescribe for it only upon
the Authority of constant and universal practice; now if we show the falseness
of this ground, as well as of the other, then will their Hypothesis of
Auricular Confession have no foot to stand upon.

2. Because the Credit of what has been already said under the former head,
does very much depend upon this, and that Discourse will be confirmed or
impaired respectively to what shall be evidently made out in this second point.
Forasmuch as if on the one side it be made apparent that such a Rite has been
of constant use in the Christian Church, it will afford a great presumption
that it took its rise at first from Divine Institution, notwithstanding all we
have offered to the contrary. So on the other side, if the Evidence here answer
not the Pretension; and no sufficient footsteps of constant and universal
practice appear: Then will all that which we have hitherto discoursed, be
greatly strengthened and confirmed; because it is by no means probable, that if
there had been a Divine Law in the case, that such a thing would have been
generally neglected by the Christian Church.

Now for the clearing of this, though I am here only upon the defensive, and so
bound to no more then to examine the proofs which the Romanists bring for their
pretensions, yet I will deal ingenuously, as seeking not to find Flaws, but to
discover the Truth, and therefore give these instances as so many reasons for
the Negative.

In the first place I crave leave to premise this: If Auricular Confession were
so great a Gospel mystery, so wonderfully efficacious a method of saving Souls,
as to be typified in the Law (as the Romanists teach) as well as instituted in
the Gospel and practiced by the whole Church, one might seem justly to wonder
how it comes to pass that there should be no mention, nor appearance of it in
the whole course of our Saviors own Ministry; he used to be an example, as
well ^^ a Lawgiver to the Church, he washed his Disciples Feet, before he
enjoined them to wash one another; he exemplified the other Sacraments before
he prescribed his Apostles to administer them, and one would have thought such
an Instance of his example had been more necessary in this business of Penance,
rather then any other, if it had been but to make way for the Understanding of
so obscure an Institution; since especially, one would have thought to find
some Traces of this in the Ministry of our Savior, because he daily conversed
with sinners he reproved them, instructed them, healed them, pardoned them, but
never brought any of them to such a Confession as we are treating of; viz. To a
particular enumeration of their sins, with the circumstances, nor upon so doing
formally absolved them. His very Disciples (some of which had been great
sinners) were admitted without it; the Woman of Samaria was told her by him all
that ever she did, but she was not brought on her knees to make her own
Confession; but most strange of all it is, that the Woman taken in Adultery,
when he had made her accusers slink away, was not privately brought to it; it
may be they will say, there was no need of Confession to him who knew all
before, but yet it might have been necessary to bring these Sinners to be
ashamed of themselves by that means to work Repentance, and fit them for
Pardon, at least if this Method had been of such mighty use and wonderful
necessity as is pretended.

2. But to let pass that; in the next place it is matter of wonder that nothing
of this practice appears in the Ministry of the Apostles; they went about
preaching the Gospel, calling Men to Repentance, erecting and governing
Churches, but never set themselves down in a Confessors chair for Penitents,
secretly to tell them in their Ear, the story of their vicious Lives; indeed we
read, Acts 19. 18. That some came in and showed their deeds; but first it was
voluntary, and in a fit of Holy Zeal, for we cannot find that they were
required to do it, as of a Sacramental Obligation; and besides, the Confession
was public before the Church, not c^ancular, and whispered in secret; it is
true also that St. James chap. 5. 16. advises the Christians to confess their
faults one to another, (which is made a mighty evidence in this Case;) but it
is as true, that this was spoken in an extraordinary case, as appears verse 14.
in bodily sickness and distress of Conscience, they are advised to lay open
their condition, in order to Relief and Succor, by the more ardent and
affectionate Prayers of those who should be privy to it, but it is not made a
standing and universal Rule for all Men to comply with it, whither they be sick
or well, in prosperity or adversity, perplexed or quiet in their Consciences,
much less of Sacramental and Necessary Obligation, as in the Roman Church.

3. Let us go on in the next Ages after the Apostles, for about two hundred
years we hear not one word of this kind of Confession, which we enquire for.
Indeed the Writings of that time which are extant, are not many, but if this
business had Been of such consequence as is pretended, it is strange that those
Holy Men Ignatius, Clemens, and Justin Martyr, should not have made mention of
it.

Indeed Bellarmine brings us one instance within this Period, and that is from
Irenaeus, who speaking of certain Women who had been abused by Marcion the
Heretic, says they afterward came and confessed, with shame and sorrow, to
the Church. But what is this to the purpose? We dispute not about Public
Confession, which is acknowledged to be truly Primitive, and we wish it had
been constantly maintained in after Ages, it is only the necessity of Clancular
Confession that we are unsatisfied in, and this passage speaks nothing at all
to that case.

4. In Tertullians time, which was also much about Two hundred Years after our
Savior, we find great things said of Confession, but it is of that which was
public, and in the face of the Church, not to a Priest in a Corner, and this
indeed was greatly encouraged and required by the Holy Men of those times, as
that which in the Case of open and scandalous sins, freed the Church both from
the guilt, and from the reproach of them, and in the case of secret sins, was a
means (by open shame) to bring Men to Repentance, and so to Pardon. And the
confession was principally directed to God, who was the person offended by the
sin, yet it was made before Men to raise a fervency in their Prayers, as is
noted before, and to obtain their effectual intercession with God on behalf of
the penitent. This that Ancient writer makes manifest to be his Sense in his
Book de Poenitentia in these words Plerumque vero jejuniis preces alere,
ingemiscere, lachrymari, and mugire dies noctesque ad Dominum Deum tuum,
Presbyteris advolvi, and aris (or rather charis) Dei adgeniculari, omnibus
fratribus legationes suae deprecationis injungere, haec omnia ex homologesis ut
poenitentiam commendet, etc. The penitent often joins Fasting to his Prayers,
Weeps, Wails and moans night and day before God, casts himself at the feet of
the Priests, kneels to all holy people, Tertull. Apol. c. 39.
and entreats all the Brethren to be his Intercessors with God Almighty for his
Pardon: This is penitential Confession, etc. And in his Apology more plainly;
Coimus in Caetum, etc. ibidem exhortationes, castigationes and censura divina
nam and judicatur magno cum pondere ut apud certos de Dei conspectu, summumque
futuri judicii praejudicium est si quis ita deliquerit ut a communione, etc.
religetur; we have (says he) in our Ecclesiastical Assemblies, a Spiritual
Judicature, and with great gravity censure offenders, etc. But I need say no
more of this, for we have the Testimony of Beatus Rhenanus, one of the Roman
Church Beatus Rhenan, in praef ad Tertull. de poeitent.
and of great insight into Ecclesiastical Affairs, who gives us this account of
Tertullian and his times, nihil illum de clancularia illa poenitentia loqui,
quae id temporis penitus ignorabatur; there was no such thing as secret or
Clancular Confession in use in Tertullian's time, which was a thing not so much
as known by the Christian Church in those days.

5. To go a little lower, such was the manner of proceedings in St. Cyprian's
time. as he himself describes it, the sinner by outward St. Syprian. Lib. 3.
Ephesians. 15.
gestures and tokens showed himself to be sorrowful and penitent for his sin,
and then made humble Confession thereof before the whole Congregation, and
desired all the Brethren to pray for him; which done, the Bishop and Clergy
laid their hands upon him, and so reconciled him: So it was also in Origen's
time, and once for all, to deliver the Custom of Origin in Ps. 37.
the Church in those times, touching this particular, I will add the words of
the Historian, Rei ad terram se pronos abjiciunt, etc. they that are Conscious
to themselves to Sozomen L. 7. Cap. 16.
have offended, fall down flat upon the ground with Weeping and Lamentations in
the Church, on the other side the Bishop runs to them with tears in his Eyes,
and falls down to the ground also in token of Sorrow and compassion, and the
whole congregation in the mean while sympathizing with both, is overwhelmed
with tears, etc.

6. If we go lower yet to the times of St. Chrysostom and St. Austin, we St.
Chrysostom. ad Hebr, Homil. 31. Id. in Sermon. de Confess. and poenit. etc.
find those Holy Men speaking very slightly of confessions to Men, so little
did they think of Auricular confession being a Sacrament. St. Austin's Judgment
in the case we have heard before, in the Tenth Book of his confessions, and
third chapter; and for the other, the Testimonies out of him are so many, and
so well known, that I cannot think it necessary to transcribe them; and for St.
Jerome who lived about the same time, I think it sufficient to repeat the
account of Erasmus, who was very conversant in his Writings, and indeed of all
the other Fathers, and who had no other fault I know, but that he did use
Mordaci rodere vero, to be too great a Tell-truth; which sure will not
invalidate his Testimony; his words are these, Apparet tempore Hier^^^^^ nondum
institutam fuisse secretam admissor^m Confessionem. (...) in hoc labuntur
Theologi quidam parum attenti, quod quae veteres soribunt de publica and
generali confessione, ea trabunt ad occultam and long diversi generis, i. e.
It is evident (says he) that in St. Jerome's time (which was about Four hundred
years after our Savior) there was no such thing as Secret Confession in use;
but the mistake is that some few latter and inconsiderate Divines have taken
the instances of general and public Confession then practiced for arguments of
that Auricular Confession which is now used, though quite of a different nature
from it.

Thus we have traced the current of Antiquity for Four or Five hundred years to
search for the Head of this Nilus, the source and rise of that kind of
Confession which is so highly magnified by the Church of Rome, but hitherto we
have found nothing of it, and this methinks should be sufficient to stagger an
impartial inquirer, (at least it is as much as can be expected in so short a
Treanse as this is intended to be) and may satisfy the unprejudicat that there
is little of Antiquity to favor this Rite, as there is of Divine Institution
to be pleaded for it. But yet I know on the other side, that the Romanists
pretend to bring abundance of Testimonies for it, and Bellarmine particularly
goes from Century to Century with his Citations to prescribe for the constant
and uninterupted use of it, but I do sincerely think that these Four following
short Observations will inablea Man to answer them all.

1. I observe that whereas this word Exomologesis is commonly used by diverse
of the Fathers, as the Phrase whereby they intend to express the whole nature
of Repentance in all the parts and branches of it, as is evident by the passage
I cited out of Tertullian de Poenit. even now, and is acknowledged by
Bellarmine himself; nevertheless, merely because that word signifies Confession
properly, and nothing else, these Romish Sophisters, where they find this word
Exomologesis, force it into an Argument for that Confession, which they contend
for; and so several Discourses of the Fathers concerning Repentance in general,
are made to be nothing but Exhortations to, or Encomiums of Confession in
particular, and that must be nothing else neither but Auricular Confession, tho
thing in Question. A cast of his skill in this way, Bellarmine gives us in
Irenaeus, the very first Author he cites for Auricular Confession in the last
quoted Book and Chapter of his Writings De Sacramentis.

2. Whereas the Novatians excluded all hopes of Repentance or Pardon for sins
committed after Baptism, but the true Church contrariwise admitted to hopes of
Pardon upon their Repentance; upon this occasion, when some of the Fathers
justly magnify the advantages, and comfortableness of the true Church above the
Schismatical, as that it set open a Door of hope to those who conessed their
sins, and applied themselves to the Ministry: Hence hese witty men will
persuade the World, that every true Church hade a Confessors Chair, and such a
formal way of pardoning as they now practice at Rome; as if there was no
remission of Sin where there was no Auricular Confession, and as if all that
excluded the latter, rejected the former too, and were no better then Novatian
Heretics; when as in Truth the Power of the Keys is exercised in all the
Minstries of the Church, and Bella^m. de Poenit. Lib. 3. c. 8.
she pardons and retains sins, otherwise then by the Oracle of a particular
confessor, as we have seen already. This piece of juggling the same Bellarmine
is also guilty of in his Citation of Lactantius.

3. Whereas the Ancient Writers are much in the Commendation of confession of
Sins, whither it be to GOD or to the church, but generally intending that which
is Public, it is common with those of the church of Rome, to lay hold of all
such sayings as were intended to persuade to, and encourage public
confessions, and to apply them to Auricular or clancular confessions, thus
particularly the aforesaid Author does by Tertullian in his citation of him.

4. And Lastly, Whereas it is also true that several Id. lib. 3. c. 6.
of those Holy Men of Old, do in some cases very much r^^^^mend confession of
secret sins, and persuade some sorts of Men, to ^he use of it, namely those
that are in great perplexity of conscience and that needed Ghostly Counsel and
Advice, or to the intent that they n^ight obtain the assistance of the Churches
Prayers, and make them the more ardent and effectual on their behalf, whereas I
say, they recommend this an expression of Zeal, or a prudent expedient, or at
most as necessary only in some cases pro hic and nunc. These great Patrons of
Auricular confession do with their usual artifice apply all these passages, to
prove it to be a standing and universally necessary duty, a Law to all
Christians, this is a very common sault amongst them, and particularly St.
Cyprian is thus mis^pplyed by the same forementioned Writer, lib. 3. cap. 7.

Hitherto inquiring into the most Ancient and Purest Times of the Church, by
the Writings of the Fathers of those times, we have not been able to discover
any sufficient ground for such an Auricular confession, as the Church of Rome
pretends to, much less for a constant and uninterrupted succession of it. But
now after all I m^st acknowledge there is a passage in Ecclasiastical S^cra^.
Hist. Lib. 5. cap. 19 S. ^^^nen. Lib. 7. C. 16.
History which seems to promise us satisfaction wherein and (...) by n^ me^
(...) sl^ghtly passed over (...) it is the famous story of Nect^rius Bishop of
Constantin^ple; and Predecessor to St. Chrysostom, which happened something
loss then Four hundred years after our Savior.

The Story as it is related by the joint Testimony of Socrates and Sozomen runs
thus: In the time of this Nectarius there was (it seems) a custom in that
church (as also in most others) that one of the Presbyters of greatest Piety,
Wisdom, and Gravity should be chosen Penitentiary, that is, be appointed to the
pecullar Office of receiving confessions, and to assist, and direct the
Penitents in the management of their Repentance: Now it happens that a certain
Woman of Quality; stricken with remorse of conscience comes to the Pene^entiary
(that then was) and according to custom, makes a particular confession of all
such sins, as she was conscious to her self to have committed since her Baptism,
for which he according to his Office appointed her the Penance of Fasting. and
continual Prayers to expiate her Guilt, and give proof of the Truth of her
Repentance. But she proceeding on very particularly in her confessions, at last
amongst other things comes to declare that a certain Deacon of that church had
lien with her; upon notice of which horrid Fact, the Deacon is forthwith
cashiered and cast out of the church: By which means the miscarriage takes Air,
and coming to the knowledge of the People; they presently fall into a mighty
commotion and rage about it; partly in detestation of so foul an Action of the
Deacon, but principally in contemplation of the Dishonor and Scandal thereby
reflected on the whole Church. The Bishop finding the Honor of the whole Body
of his Clergy extremely concerned in this accident, and being very anxious what
to do in this case, at last by the Council of one Eudaemon a Presbyter of that
Church, he resolves thenceforth to abolish the Office of Penitentiary, both to
extinguish the present flame, and to prevent the like occasion for the future;
and now by this means every Man is left to the conduct of his own Consc^ence,
and permitted to partake of the Holy Mysteries at his own peril. This is the
matter of fact faithfully rendered from the words of the Historian; but this if
we take it in the gross, and look no farther then so, will not do much toward
the deciding of the present controversy, we will therefore examine things a
little more narrowly by the help of such hints as those Writters afford us,
perhaps we may make good use of it at last; and to this purpose,

1. I observe in the first place, that though at the first blush here seem to
be an early and great example of that Auricular Con^^ssion which we oppose,
forasmuch as here is not only the Order of the Church of Constantinople, for
Confession to a Priest, but that to be made of all sins commit ^ after
Bap^ism, and this to be made to him in secret; notwithstanding upon a more
thorough view it will appear quite another thing from that pleaded for, and
practiced by the Church of Rome, and that especially in the respects following:
First, In the Auricular Confession in the Story, there is some remainder of the
ancient Discipline of the Church (whose Confessions used to be open and
public, as I have showed) in that here a public Officer is appointed by the
Church to receive them, such an one as whose Prudence, and Learning, and Piety
she could confide in for a business of so great nicety and difficulty, and it
is neither left to the Penitent to choose his confident for his Confessor, nor
at large for every Priest to represent the Authority of the Church in so
ticklish an Affair as that of Discipline, but to a public Officer appointed by
the Church for this purpose; so that Confession to him cannot be said to be
private, seeing it is done to the whole Church by him. To confirm which,
Secondly, This Penitentiary it seems was bound (as there was occasion) to
discover the matters (opened to him in secret) to the Church, as appears in the
Crime of the Deacon in the Story; there was no pretense of a Sale of Confession
in this Case, as in the Church of Rome, by Virtue of which a Man may confess
and go on to sin again secretly, without danger of being brought upon the
Stage, whatsoever the atrocity of his Crime be, and indeed without any
effectual course in Order to his Repentance and Reformation. Again, Thirdly,
This Confession in the Story does not pretend to be of absolute necessity as if
a Man's sins might not be pardoned without it, but only a prudent Provision of
the Church to help Men forward in their Repentance, to direct the Acts and
Expressions of it, and especially to relieve perplexed and weak Consciences,
and to assist them in their preparations for the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper; and this appears, amongst other things, by the account which the
Historian gives us of the consequence of abolishing it, viz. That now every Man
is left to his own conscience about his partaking of the holy Mysteries; but it
is not said or intimated that he was left under the guilt of his Sins, for want
of Confession. To which add in the last place, that this Office whatever it
was, was not reputed a Sacrament, but rather, as I noted before, an expedient
to prepare men for it, for doubtless neither that Bishop, nor that Church would
have ever consented to the abolition of a Sacrament, for the sake of such a
Scandal as happened in the mismanagement of it, or if they had done so, much
less can it be imagined that the greatest part of the Christian Church would
have concurred with them in it, as we shall by and by see they did.

2. I observe concerning the beginning of this Penitentiary Office, the time
and occasion of this usage; namely, that the Historians do not pretend it to
have been Apostolical, much less of strictly Divine Institution, but they lay
the Heat of its first rise about the time of the Decian Persecution, which was
about Two hundred years after our Savior, I confess Nicephorus would persuade
us of its greater Nicephor, Lib, 12. Cap. 28.
Antiquity, and that it was rather revived, then instituted at that time, for
he speaking of the bringing it into use at the Decian Persecution says,
Ecclesiasticco canoni heremenos, i. e. The Church pursuant of the Ancient
Ecclesiastical Canons constituted a Penitentiary, etc. And Petavius is so
addicted to the Roman Hypothesis, as very unreasonably to favor this Conceit;
but the Truth seems to be (as Valesius very ingenuously acknowledges) only
this, that here was a mistake of the import of the words of the Historian, who
says only that when the Church had chosen their Penitentiary canoni
prosethesan, they added him to the Canon, that is to the number of those in the
Matricula or Roll of such as were to be maintained in and by the Church, or as
we would say they made him Canon of the Church; not that he was Constituted in
such an Office, pursuant of that Ancienter Law or Canon, as Nicephorus
carelessly or wilfully mistakes Besides afterward when the Historian observes
that the Novatians universally withstood this Order from the beginning of it,
he calls it prostheken tauten q. d. This new Institution, or Addition, or
Supplement of the Ancient Rites of the Church; so that there is no reason we
should date this Institution higher then the Historian does. namely, after the
Decian Persecution.

But what should be the ground and reasons of erecting this new Office, and
Officer in the Church then, if it was not before? Of this I give two accounts.

First, The Church being now very numerous, and the Zeal and Devotion very
great; and what by the compassionate reception which the Church gave to
Penitents, and her ardent Prayers for them, what by the earnest harangues of
Holy Men to move People to repentance, abundance were inclined to confess their
sins, and this confession being till that time accustomed to be open, and
public in the face of the congregation, it must needs happen (all those
circumstances considered together) that a great many things would be brought
upon the Stage, the Publication of which would be attended with great
inconveniences; for some sins are of that Nature, that they scarce can take Air
without spreading a contagion, some confessions would make sport for light and
vain Persons, and besides abundance of other inconveniences (easy to be
imagined by any one) the publication of some sins might expose the Penitents to
the severity of the Pagan criminal Judge; upon these and such like
considerations, the church thought fit therefore (as I have intimated before)
to appoint one wise and very grave Person in her steed to receive the
confessions; who by this discretion might so determinat matters, that what
things were fit for silence, might have private Methods applied to them, but
what were fit to be brought upon the Stage, might be made Public examples of,
or receive a Public remedy,

Secondly, But the Historian leads us to a more special Reason of this
Institution at that time; namely, that the rage of the Decian Persecution
cruelly shock the Church, and abundance of her weaker members fell off in the
Storm, and which was worst of all the Church was distracted about the
restitution ^or final rejection of those that bad so miscarried; for though the
best and wisest of the Church were so merciful and considerate of humane
infirmity, as to be willing to receive those in again, upon Repentance, over
whom the Temptation of fear had too much prevailed, yet the Novatians a great
and Zealous part of Christianity, looked upon such as desperate, who had once
broken their baptismal Vow, and would rather separate from the Church
themselves, then suffer such to be restored to it. Here the Church was in a
great strait, either she must be very severe to some, or she shall seem very
unkind to others, she must either let the weak perish or she must offend them
that counted themselves strong. Now in this case she being both tenderly
compassionat toward those that had fallen, and withal willing to satisfy
those Novatian Dissenters, or at least to deliver her self from Scandal, takes
this course, she requires that those who had fallen, and desired to be restored
again to her Society should acknowledge their faults, and make all the Penitent
satisfaction that was possible for them to perform, that so neither they may be
too easily tempted to do so again by the gentleness of the remedy, nor the
Novatians rep^^^ch her Lenity, or take pet as if no difference was made between
the sound and the lapsed; for these causes, though the most public Penance was
thought little enough to be undergone by the lapsed; but yet on the other side,
considering wisely the inconveniences of public Penance in some cases (as I
specified before) she therefore took this middle course; namely she appointed a
public Confessor, who having first heard privately the several cases of the
Penitents, should bring into public, only such of them as (without incurring
any of the aforsaid dangers) might be made examplary. And this appears to be
the true reason of this Institution, and the bottom of this affair, by this
remarkable passage in the Historian; That whereas the generality of the
Orthodox closed presently with this wise temperament, the Novatians only, those
conceited Non-conformists, rejected prosiheken tauten this expedient as a new
invention; they were too humoursome to comply with such a temperament.

But here another Question arises, viz. How far this new exdient was embraced
by the Orthodox Churches, for if it was only received by that of
Constantinople, the Authority would not be so great; for it is possible to
imagine, that other Churches might allow every private Priest to confess, and
so admit of no public Penitentiary.

To which I answer, that by the History it seems plain enough, that this was
not the peculiar manner of the Church of Constantinople only, but the usal
Method in that time of most other Churches also; but I must needs say, I do not
find that the Church of Rome complied with them herein, though it was not much
to her Honor to be singular, where there was so much Prudence and Piety to
have inclined her to Uniformity. However this is gained, which is my point,
that the Church of Rome is no^ countenanced in her practice of private and
clancular confessions, by the general usage of the Church; as they pretend.

3. I observe concerning this Office of Penitentiary, that as it was erected
upon prudential considerations, so it was upon the same grounds abolished, by
the same Authority of the church which first instituted it, and that after
about Two hundred years continuance in the time of Nectarius, as we have seen;
and therein he was followed, says Sozomen by almost all the Bishops and
Churches in the World: this therefore was far from being thought either a
Divine or Apostolical constitution: Petavius would here persuade us, that it
was only public confession, and not private, which was upon this occasion so
generally laid aside, as we have seen, but this is done by him more out of
tenderness of Auricular Confession, then upon good reason; and Valesius goes
beyond him, and will needs persuade us that neither public nor private
Confession were put down in this juncture; but only that the lately erected
Officer of Penetentiary was cashiered; but I must crave leave to say, there is
no sufficient reason for either of these conjectures, but on the contrary plain
Evidence against them, for Socrates, who is the first and principal relater of
this whole story says he was personally acquainted with this Presbyter
Eudaemon, who gave the advice to Nectarius to make this change in the
Discipline of the Church, and that he had the aforesaid relation of it from his
own Mouth, and expostulated with him about it, giving his reasons to the
contrary, and suggested his suspicions that the state of Piety would be much
endamaged by this change, and in plain words tells him, that he had now ^erest
men of assistance in the conduct of their Consciences, and hindered the great
benefit men have, or might have one of another, by pri^^^ advice and
correption. Now this fear of his had been the absurd est thing in the World, if
upon this counsel and advice of his, only one certain Man in the Office of
public Confessioner had been laid aside, but both the use of public and
private Confessions had been kept up and retained.

But after all (for ought appears) the Church of Rome kept her old Mumpsimus,
she tenacious of her own customs especially of such as may advance her Interest
and Authority, complies not with this Innovation or Reformation (be it for
better or worse) but her Priests go on with their Confessions, and turn all
Religion almost into Clancular Transactions, in despite of the example of
other Churches. It may be she met with opposition sometimes, but she was forced
to disemble it till the Heriock Age of the Schoolmen, and then those lusty
Champions with their Fustian-stuff of vid^t ur quod sic, and probatur quod non,
make good all her pretensions. After them in the year 1215 comes the Fourth
Lateran Council, and that decrees Auricular Confession to be made by every body
once a year at the least; and last of all comes the Council of Trent, and
declares it to be of Divine Institution, necessary to Salvation, and the
constant and universal custom of the Christian Church: And so we have the
Pedigree of the Romish Auricular Confession.

Sect. 4. I come now to the third and last Stage of my undertaking, which is,
to show that Secret or Auricular Confession, as it is now prescribed and
practiced in and by the Church of Rome, is not only unnecessary, and burdensome
in it self but also very mischievous to Piety, and the great ends of Christian
Religion.

For the former part of this charge, if it be not evident enough already, it
will be easily made out from the Premises, for they cannot deny that they make
this kind of Confession necessary to Salvation, at least as necessary as
Baptism it self is, (supposing a Man has sinned after Baptism) now if it be
neither made so by Divine Institution, nor acknowledged to be so by the
constant Opinion of the Church, what an horrible imposition is here upon the
Consciences of Men, when in the highest and worst sense that can be they teach
for Doctrines the commandments of Men, and make Salvation harder then GOD has
made it, and suspend men's hopes upon other terms then he has done? if it was
prescribed by the present Church as a matter of Order and Discipline* only, or
of convenience and expediency, we should never boggle at it upon this account,
or dispute the point with them; or if it was only declared necessary pro hic
and nunc, upon extraordinary emergency, by the peculiar condition of the
Penitent, his weakness of Jugdment, the perplexity of his Conscience, his
horrible guilt or extreme Agonies, we would not differ with them upon that
neither; but when it is made necessary universally, and declared the
indispensable duty of all men whatsoever who have sinned after Baptism (when
GOD has required no such thing, but declares himself ^atisfied with true
contrition and hearty remorse for what is past, and sincere Reformation for the
time to come;) this I say is an intolerable Tyranny and usurpation upon the
consciences of Men. And that is not all neither, for besides its burdensomness
in the general, it particularly aggravates and increases a Man's other burdens,
for instead of relieving perplexed consciences, which is the true and principal
use of confessions to men, this Priestly confession as it is prescribed by the
Council, intangles and afflicts them more; for that enjoins that the Penitent
lay open all his sins, even the most secret, although but in thought or desire
only, such as against the Ninth or Tenth commandment, (according to their
Division of the Decalogue,) now this is many times difficult enough; but that is
not all, he must also recount all the circumstances of these sins, which may
increase or diminish the guilt, especially such as alter the species and kind
of sin: Now what sad work is here for a Melancholy Man? All the circumstances
are innumerable, and how can he tell which are they that change the species of
the Act, unless he be as great a School-man as his Confessor. Besides all his,
it may be he is not very skilful in the distinction between Venial and Mortal
sins; and if he omit one Mortal sin, he is undon^; therefore it is necessary
for him (by consequence) to confess all Venial sins too, and then where shall
the poor Man begin, or when, shall he make an end? Such a Carnificina such a
rack and torture, in a word, such an holy Inquisition is this business of
Auricular confession become. And that eminent Divine of Strasburgh (of whom
Beatus Rhenanus speaks) seems very well to have understood both himself, and
this matter who pronounces that Scotus and Thomas had with their tricks, and
sub^ilties, so perplexed this plain Business of confession, that now it was
become plainly impossible. And so much for that.

But for the second part of this impeachment, viz. That the Auricular
confession now used in the Church of Rome, is mischievous to Piety; This
remains yet to be demonstrated, and we will do it the rather in this place,
because it will be an abundant confirmation of all that has been discoursed
under the two former heads; and might indeed have saved the labor of them, but
that we were unwilling to leave any pretense of theirs undiscused; for if this
practice of their^ appear to be mischievous to Piety, it will never by any
sober Man be thought either to have been instituted by our Savior, or to have
been the sense and usage of the Catholic Church, whatever they pretend on its
behalf.

Now therefore this last and important part of my charge I make good by these
Three Articles following.

First, This Method of theirs is dangerous to Piety, as it is very apt to cheat
People into an Opinion that they are in a better condition then truly they are,
or may be in toward God, as that their sins are pardoned, and discharged by
him, when there is no such matter. The Churchmen of Rome complain of the
Doctrine of s^^e reformed Divings touching assurance of Salvation, that it
fills men with too great confidence, and renders them careless and
presumptuous; but whatsoever there is in that, it is not my business now to
dispute it, however methinks it will not very well become a Romanist to
aggravate it, till he have acquitted himself in the point before us; for by
this Assurance Office of theirs they comply too much with the self-flattery of
Men's own Hearts, they render Men secure, before they are safe, and furnish them
with a confidence like that of the Whore Solomon speaks of, who wipes her
Mouth, and says I have done no evil. For Men return from the Confessors Chair
(as they are made to believe) as Pure as from the Font, and as Innocent as from
their Mothers womb: as if God was concluded by the act of the Priest, and as if
he being satisfied with an humble posture, a dejected look, and a lamentable
murmur, God Almighty would be put off so too.

Ah nimium faciles qui tristia crimin^, etc.
Ah cheating Priests who made fond Men believe.
That God Almighty pardons all you shrieve.
Perhaps they will say this is the fault and folly of the Men, not of the
Institution of the Church: But why do they not teach them better then? Nay, why
do they countenance and encourage them in so dangerous mistakes? For whither
else tend those words in the Decree of the Council of Trent, ipsi Deo
reconciliandis? q. d. that by this way of confession, etc. men are reconciled
to the sess. 14. Can. 1
Divine Majesty himself; or those other forcited, where the Priest is said to
be the Vicar of Christ, and in Ibid. cap. 5.
his steed, a Judge or President; or especially what other meaning can those
words have where it is said, Ibid. cap. 2.
that this Rite is as necessary as Baptism, for as in that all sins are
remitted which were committed in former time, so in this sins committed after
Baptism are likewise remitted?

Now I say, what is the natural tendency of all this, but to make People
believe that their Salvation or Damnation is in the Power of the Priest, that
he is a little God Almighty, and his discharge would certainly pass current in
the Court of Heaven. But there is sophistry and juggle in all this, as I thus
make appear; for,

1. The Priest cannot pardon whom he will, let him be called Index and Praeses
never so; for if his Sentence be not according to Law ^ will be declared Null
at the Great Day; only it may be good and val^^ in the mean time in foro
Ecclesiae; and here lies the cheat.

2. Nor are all sins retained or unforgiven with God, that are not pardoned by
the Priest; it is true in public Scandals, till the sinn^r submit to the
Church, God will not forgive him; For what that binds on Earth is in this sense
bound in Heaven; but what has the Church to do to retain, o^ to bind the
sinner in the case of secret sins, where it can charge no guilt on him?

3. Nor is it properly the act of the Priest which pardons, but the Tenor of
the Law, and the disposition of Mind in the Penitent agreeable thereunto,
qualifying him for Pardon, to which the Pardon is to be ^^p^^ed: As it is not
the Herald which pardons, but the Prince who by his Proclamation bestows that
Grace upon those who are so and so qualified.

4. Nor, Lastly, Can the Priest be said to pardon so properly by these
Majestic words, Absolvo^te, as by his whole Ministry, in instructing People in
the Terms of the New Convenant, and making Application of that to them by the
Sacraments; this he has Commission to do, but those big words I cannot find
that he has any where Authori^y to pron^unce, and therefore (as I think I
observed before) the Ancient Church had no form of Absolution, but only
receiving Peni^ents to the Communion: And the Greek Church had so much modesty
as to Absolve in the third Person, not in the first, to show that their Pardon
was Ministerial and Declarative only.

All these things notwithstanding the People are let to go away with such an
Opinion as aforesaid (because it is for the Grandeur and Interest of the
Priesthood, that they should be cheated; but these misapprehensions would
vanish, if their teachers would be so just as to distinguish between God's
Absolution, and the Absolution of the Church; the first of which extends to the
most secret sins, the latter to open Scandals only; the one delivers from all
real guilt, the other from external Censure only; of the latter the Priest may
(by the leave of Church) have the full dispensation, so that he is really
pardoned with her that ha^h satisfied the Priest; but of the former he
dispenses but conditionally; To confirm all which I will here add only two
Testimonies of the judgment of the Ancient Church.

The first is of Firmilianus Bishop of Caesarea in his Epistle to St. Cyprian,
reckoned the Seventy Fifth of St. Cyprians, where speaking of holding
Ecclesiastical councils every Year, he gives these reasons for it; Vi si qua
graviora sunt communi consilio ^^rigantur, lapsis quoque fratribus, and post
lavacrum salutare a Diabol^ vulueratis, per poenitentiam medela quaeratur; non
quasi a nobis remissionem peccatorum consequantur, sed ut per nos ad
intelligentia^ delictorum suorum convertantur, and Domino before satisfacere
cogantur; partly (says he) that by joint advice, and common consent, we may
agree upon an uniform Order in such weighty Affairs as concern our respective
churches, partly that we may give relief, and apply a remedy to those who by
the temptation of the Devil have fallen into sin after Baptism; not that we can
give them Pardon of their sin, but that by our Ministry they may be brought to
a knowledge of their sin, and directed into a right course to obtain Pardon at
the hands of God. The other is of Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury whose
words are these: Confessio quae soli Theod. Cantuar. Apud Beat. Rhen. in prae^.
ad Tertul. de poe^it.
Deo fit purgat peccata: Ea vero quae Sacerdoti fit, docet qualiter purgentur.
Confession to God properly obtains the Pardon of Sin; but by Confession to Men,
we are only put into the right way to obtain pardon. Thus they:

But now in the church of Rome, the case is otherwise; there the Priest
sustains the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and is not so much his
Delegate as his plenipotentiary, and his pardon is as full and good as if the
Judge of the World had pronounced it pro Tribunali; so that if the most lewd
and habitual sinner have but the good fortune to go out of the World under the
Blessing of his Ghostly Father, that is to say, either death came so soon after
his last Absolution, or the priest came so opportunely after his last sin, that
he has not begun a new score, he is sure to go Heaven without more ado. This I
represent as the first mischief attending their Doctrine, and practice of
Auricular confession. But this is not all, for

Secondly, It corrupts and debauches the very Doctrine and Nature of Repentance
which the whole Gospel lays so much stress upon: Making Attrition (which is but
a slight sorrow for sin, or a dislike of it in contemplation of the Wrath of
God impendent over it) pass for contrition, which implies an hatred and
detestation of it for its own moral evil and deformity, with a firm resolution
of amendment. This they many of them are not ashamed to teach, and their
practice of Absolution supposes and requires it. The Jesuits in particular,
who have almost ingrost to themselves the whole Monopoly of confessions, avow
this as their principle. Father Ba^^y, Bsc^^^, and S^^r^z declare their
Judgment, that the Priest ought to absolve ^ Man upon his saying, that he
detests his sin, although at the same time the confessor does not believe that
he does so. And Caussi^ says, if this be not true, there can be no use of
confessions amongst the greatest part of Men. These things (it'^ true) are
disliked by some others of the Romanists, and the Curees of France are so
honest as to cry shame of it before all the World; for, say they, Attrition is
but the work of Nature, and if that alone will serve for pardon, then a Man may
be pardoned without Grace. But therefore, say the others, the Sacrament of
penance does it alone, and this is for the Honor of the Sacrament; greatly for
the Honor of it (say I) that it is of greater power then our Lord Jesus
Christ, and his Gospel, which cannot help a wicked Man to Heaven, whilst he
continues so, but this Sacrament it seems can. Nor can they excuse this matter
by saying these odio^^ assertions are but the private Opinions of some Divines.
For they are plainly favored by the determinations of the council of Tre^t. I
consess that council delivers it self warily and cunningly Conc. Trident. Sess.
14. Cap. 4.
in this point (as it uses to do in such cases) yet these are their words, Illa
vero contritio imperfecta quae attriti^ dicitur, qua^^vis sin^ Sacramento
poenitentiae per se ad justificationem perducere peccatorem nequeat, tamen eum
ad Dei Gratiam in Sacramento Poenitentiae impetrandam disponit, etc. Which is
as much as to say, though Attrition or a superficial Sorrow for sin, barely,
alone, and without confession to a Priest, will not justify a Man before God,
yet Attrition and confession together will do it, for then they are as good as
true Repentance. And in this sense Melchior Canus long since thought he
understood the council well enough.

Thirdly, This business of Auricular confession, as it is practiced in the
church of Rome, is so far from being a means to prevent and restrain sin, as it
highly pretends to be (and I am sure as it ought to be, if it be good for any
thing) that contrariwise it is either lost labor, and a mere ceremony, or it
greatly incourages and imboldens, and hardens Men it, both by the Secrecy, the
Multitudes, and the Frequency of these Confessions, by the cursory,
hypocritical and evasive ways of confessing, by the slight penances imposed,
and the cheapness, easiness, and even prostitution of Absolutions.

It were easy to be copious in instances of all these kinds, but it is an
uncomfortable subject, and I hasten to a conclusion; therefore I will only
touch upon them briefly.

1. For the privacy of these confessions. In the Ancient Church (as I have
noted before) the Scandalous sinner was brought upon the Stage before a great
Assembly of Grave and Holy Men, he lay prostrate on the ground, which he
watered with his Tears, he crept on his Knees, and implored the Pity and
Prayers of all present, in whose countenances (if for shame he could look up)
he saw a^horrence of his fact, indignation at God's dishonor, conjoined with
compassion to his Soul, and joy for his Repentance; his Confession was full of
remorse and confusion; the remedy was as sharp and disgustful to Flesh and
Blood as the Disease had been pleasant, and the pain of this expiation was able
to imbitter the sweet of sin to him ever after. Or if the Confession was not
made before the whole Church, but to the Penitentiary only, yet he was a Grave
and Holy Person, chosen by the Church, and representing it, a Person resident
in that Church, and so able to take notice of, and mind the future Conversation
of those that addressed themselves to him; a Person of that Sanctity and
Reverence that he could not choose but detest and abhor all base and vile
actions that should come to his knowledge: Now it must needs be a terrible cut
to a sinner to have all his lewdness laid open before such an one, and then to
be justly, and sha^ply rebuked by him, to have his sins aggravated, and to be
made to see his own ugly shape in a true glass held by him, besides to be
enjoined the performance of a strict Penance of Fasting and prayer, and after
all (if this do not do) ^o have the Church made acquainted with the whole
matter (as in the case of the Deacon aforesaid.) This course was likely to work
something of remo^se in the sinner for what was past, and to make him watchful
and careful for the time to come.

But what is the way of the Church of Rome like to this? Where a Man may
confess to any Priest, to him that knows him not, and so cannot observe his
future life and carriage; nay perhaps that knows not how to value the guilt of
sin, or to judge which be Venial, and which Mortal sins, or especially what
circumstances do alter the species of it, and it may be too, he may be such an
one that makes no conscience himself of the sins I confess to him. Now, when
all is transacted between me and such a Priest in a corner, and this under the
inviolable seal of confession, what great shame can this put me to? What
remorse is it likely to work in me? Whatshall discourage me from going to sin
again, if no worse thing happen to me?

2. And then for the multitude of confessions in the church of Rome, that also
takes off the shame, and weakens the efficacy of it, so that if it do no harm,
it is not likely to do any good; for who is concerned much in the doing that
which he sees all the World do as well as himself; if only notorious sinners
were brought to confession (as it was in the primitive church) then it might
probably and reasonably provoke a blush, and cause a remorse in him to whom
such a remedy was prescribed; but when he sees the whole parish, and the Priest
too brought to it, and Men as generally complying with it, as they approach to
the Lord's Table; What great wonders can this work? What shame can it inflict
upon any Man? What effect can be expected from it, but that it ordinarily makes
Men secure and careless, and grow as familiar with sin as with the remedy* or
at least think as well of themselves as of other Men, since it seems they have
as much need of confession and absolution as himself?

3. To which the frequency and often repetitions of these kind of Confessions
adds very much; it is very likely that modesty may work much upon a Man the
first or second time he goes to Confession, and it may something discompose his
Countenance when he lays open all his secret miscarriages, to a person
especially for whom he has a Reverence (for we see every thing, even sin it
self is modest in its beginnings,) and no doubt it is some restraint of sin
whilst a Man is sensible that he must undergo a great deal of pain and shame in
vomiting up again his sweet Morsels which he eats in secret: But by that time
he has been used to this a while, it grows easy and habitual to him, and
custom has made the very punishment pleasant as well as the sin; especially,
if we add,

4. The formal, cursory, hypoc^itical, and illusive ways of confession in
frequent use amongst them; as that a Man may choos^ his own Priest, and then to
be sure the greatest sinner will have a confessor right for his turn, that
shall not be too severe and scrupulous with him; that a Man may con^ess in
transitu, in a hurry or huddle, and then there can be no remark made upon his
person nor his sins; that a Man may make one part of his confession to one
Priest, and reserve the other part for another, so that neither of them shall
be able to make any thing of it; that he may have one confessor for his Mortal
sins, and another for his Venial; so that one shall save him, if the other damn
him; nay, for failing, the forgetful sinner may have another Man to confess for
him, or at least he may confess, that he has not confessed; these and
abundance more such illusive Methods are in daily use amongst them, and not
only taken up by the licentious and unconscionable people, but allowed by some
or other of their great Casuists; now let any Man judge whither this be a
likelier way to restra^n sin, or to encourage it; whither the easiness of the
remedy (if this be one^) must not of necessity make the Disease seem not very
formidable; in a word, whither this be not a riduculing their own Religion, and
which is worse, a teaching Men to be so fool hardy as to make a mock of sin.

5. This sad reckoning will be inflamed yet higher if we consider the slight
Penances usually imposed by these Spiritual Judges upon the greatest Crimes.
The Council determines that the Confessor must be exactly made acquainted with
all the circumstances of the sin, that so he may be able to adjust a Penance to
it; now when some great sin is confessed and that in a very ^oul circumstances,
if the Penance proportioned to it, by the Priest be to say two or three Pater
Nosters, or Ave Maria's extraordinary, to give a little Money in Alms to the
Poor or some Pious use, to kneel on his bare knees before such a Shrine, to
kiss such an Image, to go on Pilg^image a few Miles to such a Saint, or at most
to wear an Hair Shirt, or it may be to fast with Fish, and Wine, and
Sweetmeats, etc. does not this make that sin which is thus ^awled and
stigmatized, look very dreadfully, can any Man find in his heart to sin again,
when it has cost him so dear already?

Oh, but they will tell us these Penances are not intended to correspond with
the guilt of the sin, but only to satisfy the debt of Temporal punishment. But
we had thought that the end of Penance had been, to work in the Pe^^tent a
Dispositi^n for Pardon, by giving him both opportunities and direction to
express the sincerity of his Repentance; and this was the use of Penance in the
Primitive Church, together wi^h the ^ak^ng off the Scandal from the Society;
and for that other end h^w does the Church of Rome know so certainly that there
is a debt of Temporal punishment remaining due, after the sin is Pardon^d
before GOD; it is true, GOD may pardon so far only as he pleases, he may
resolve to punish Temporally those wh^m He has forgiven Eternally, as we see
he did in the case o^ David; but that this is not his constant Method appears
by this that our Savior releases the Temporal punishment to many in the
Gospel, whose diseases he cured, saying to them, Your sins are forgiven you,
when as yet it did not appear that all Scores were quitted with God so, but
that they might have pe^ished eternally, if they did not prevent it by Faith
and Repentance.

6. But lastly, to come to an end of this sad story, the easiness and
prostitution of their absolutions in the Church of Rome contributes, as much to
the encouraging of Vice and carelessness in Religion as any of the former; for
what else can be the natural effect and consequence of that ruled case among
the Casuists (as I showed before) that the Priest is bound to absolve him that
confesses, and says, he is sorry for his sin, though he does in his Heart
believe that he is not contrite, but that either the Priests Pardon is a very
cheat, or else that Pardon is due of course to the most impenitent Sinner, and
there is no more to do but Confess and be Saved? or what is the meaning of
their common practice to absolve men upon their Death beds, whither they be
contrite, or attrite, or neither, at least when they can give no Evidence of
^^her? If they intended this only for absolution from the Censures of the
Church it might be called Charity, and look something like the practice of the
Primitive Church, which released those upon their Deathbeds, whom it would not
discharge all their lives before though not then neither without signs of
Attrition and contrition too. but these pretend to quite another thing; namely
to release men in foro Conscientiae, and to give them a Passport to Heaven
without Repentance, which is a very strange thing, to say no worse of it. Or to
instance one thing more, what is the meaning of their practice of giving
Absolution before the Penance is performed (as is usual with them) unless this
be it, that whither the Man make any Conscience at all how he lives hereafter,
yet he is pardoned as much as the Priest can do it for him, and is not this a
likely way of Reformation?

I conclude therefore now upon the whole matter that Auricular Confession, as
it is used in the Church of Rome, is only ane Artifice of greatning the Priest,
and pleasing the People; a trick of gratifying the undevout and impious, as
well as the Devout and Religious; the latter it imposes upon by its outward
appearance of Humility and Piety; to the former it serves for a palliative Cure
of the Gripes of Conscience, which they are now and then troubled with; in
reality it tends to make sin easy and tolerable by the cheapness of its
Pardon, and in a word, it is nothing but the Old Discipline of the Church in
Dust and Ashes. And therefore though the Church of England in her Liturgy,
piously wishes for the Restoration of the Ancient Discipline of the Church, it
can be no defect in her that she troubles not her self with this Rubbish.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT.
AFter I had finished the foregoing Papers, and most part of them had also past
the Press, I happened to have notice that there was a Book just then come over
from France, written by a Divine of the Sorbone, which with great appearance of
Learning maintained the just contrary to what I had asserted (esepecially in
the Historical part of this Question) and pretended to prove from the most
Ancient Monuments of the Holy Scriptures, Fathers, Popes and Councils, that
Auricular Confession had been the constant Doctrine, and Universal and
Uninterrupted usage of the Christian Church for near 1300 years from the Times
of our Savior to the Laterane council.

So soon as I heard this, I heartily wished, that either the said Book had come
out a little sooner, or at least that my Papers had been yet in my hands; to
the intent that it might have been in my Power, to have corrected what might be
amise, or supplied what was defective in that short Discourse, or indeed if
occasion were, to have wholly suppressed it.

For as soon as I entered upon the said Book, and found from no less a Man then
the Author himself, that he had diligently read over all that had been written
on both sides of this controversy, and that this work of his was the product of
Eighteen years study, and that in the prime of his years, and most flourishing
time of his parts, that it was published upon the maturest deliberation on his
part, and with the greatest applause and approbation of the Faculty, I thought
I had reason to suspect, whither a small Tract, written in have by a Man of no
Name, and full enough of other Business, could be fit to be seen on the same
Day with so el^borate a work.

But by that time I had read a little further, I took Heart, and permitted the
Press to go on; and now, that I have gone over the whole, I do here profess
sincerely, that in all that learned Discourse I scarcely found any thing which
I had not foreseen, and as I think in some measure prevented. But certain I am,
nothing occurred that staggered my Judgment, or which did not rather confirm me
in what I had written; for though I met with abundance of Citations, and a
great deal of Wit, and Dexterity in the management of them, yet I found none of
them come home to the point; for whereas they sometimes recommend and press
Confession of Sin in general sometimes to the Church, sometimes to the Priest
or Bishop as well as to God Almighty: Again sometimes they speak great things
of the Dignity of the Priesthood, and the g^^at Honor that Order has in
being wonderfully useful to the relief of Guilty or Afflicted Consciences,
other while they treat of the Power of the Keys, and the Authority of the
Church, the danger of her Censures, the Comfort of her Absolution, and the
severity of her Discipline, etc. But all these things are acknowledged by us
without laborious proof, as well as by our Adversaries: That which we demand,
and expect therefore, is, where shall we find in any of the Ancient Fathers,
Auricular Confession said to be a Sacrament, or any part of one? Or where is
the Universal necessity of it asserted? Or that secret sins committed after
Baptism, are by no other means, or upon no other terms pardoned with God, then
upon their being confessed to men? In these things lies the hinge of our
dispute, and of these particulars one ought in Reason to expect the most direct
and plain proof imaginable, if the matter was of such Consequence, of such
Universal practice and notoriety as they pretend; but nothing of all this
appears in this Writter more then in those that have gone before him. In
contemplation of which I now adventure this little Tract into the World, with
somewhat more of Confidence then I should have done, had it not been for this
occasion,

But lest I should seem to be too partial in the Case, or to give too slight an
account of this Learned Man's performance, the Reader who pleases shall be
judge by a specimen or two which I will here briefly represent to him.

The former of them shall be the very first argument or Testimony he produces
for his Assertion, which I the rather make my choice to give instance in,
because no Man can be said ingenuously to seek for faults, to pick and choose
for matter of exception, that takes the first thing that comes to hand.

The business is this, Chap. 2. Page 11. of his Book he cites the Council of
Illiberis (with a great deal of circumstance) as the first Witness for his
Cause, and the Testimony is taken from the Seventy Sixth Canon, the words are
these, St. qu^s Diaconum, etc. i, e. If any Man shall suffer himself to be
ordained Deacon, and shall afterward be convicted to have formerly committed
some Mortal (or Capital Crime;) if the said Crime come to light by his own
voluntary Confession, he shall for the space of Three Years be debarred the
Holy Communion, but in case his sin be discovered and made known to the church
by some other hand, then he shall suffer Five years suspension, and after that
be admitted only to Lay Communion.

Now who would have ever thought this passage fit to be made choice of as the
first proof of Auricular confession, or who can imagine it should be any proof
ar^ all, much less a clear or d^^ect one?

Oh, but here is confession! It may happen so if the party please, but it is
not enjoined, but voluntary, and that not Auricular neither, but unto ^he
church, at least for ought appears,

And it is confession of a secret sin too! True it was so, till it was either
confessed or betrayed.

And here is Penance imposed for a secret sin: True when it was become public.

And here is a different degree of Penance imposed upon him that ingenuously
confesses, from him that stays till he is accused, and has his sin proved upon
him: And good Reason, for the one gave tokens of Repentance, and the oher none.
But then here is -- What? no Sacrament of Penance, no declared absolute
necessity of confession to Men in order to pardon with God, but only a
necessity that when the Fact is become notorious, whither by the confession of
the Party, or otherwise, that the church use her endeavors to bring the Sinner
to Repentance, and free her self from Scandal by making a difference betwixt
the Good and the Bad, the more hopeful, and the less.

If this be a clear and proper Argument for the necessity of of Auricular
confession, God help poor Protestant: that cannot discern it; but oh the Wit of
Man, and the Power of Learning and Logic! What may not such Men prove if they
have a mind to it?

The other passage I instance in, is in his Tenth chapter, Page 156. viz. The
critical and Famous Business of the Nectarian Reformation at Constantinople, of
which I have spoken somewhat largely in the ^oregoing Papers. Now for this:
This Learned Gentleman after he has acknowledged very frankly that public
Confession of sins was the Ancient use of the Church in the times of St.
Irena^s, Tert^^^^, Cypria^^, and Origin; that is, for the space of about
Threeundred years, and that instead of that Ancient usage (upon occasion of the
Decian Persecution) a public Penitentiary was appointed at Constantinople, and
most other Orthodox Churches, and in short after he had with more ingenuity
then some others of his party owned the undoubted Truth of the Relations of
Socrates and Sozomen touching this Affair, and made some Observation^ thereupon
not much to the advantage of his cause, he at length delivers that which would
be yery much to his purpose, if it could be credible; namely, that upon the
whole matter Nectarius in abolishing the Penitentiary, neither abolished
public nor private Confessions, but instead of oblidging Men to go to the
Penitentiary left every Man bound to resort to his respective Diocesan, and
confess his sins to him; and so Auricular Confession ^s after this change every
whit as necessar as it was before; very true (say I) it is as necessery now as
it was before, for it was only voluntary before, and so it may be after. But if
the intention of Nectarius, and the effect of that alteration was only the
change of the Person, and every man still obliged to confess to some body, how
comes it to be said in the story that every Man was left to his own Conscience,
does that word signify the Bishop? then we have found out a right Fanatic
Diocesan, for they will all readily confess to this Bishop, and believe his
Absolution as sufficient as any Romanist of them all does: And yet it seems to
be undeniably plain that Socrates after this Reformation thought of no other
Confessor but this, nor imagined Men now bound to make any other Confession,
but this (which if it was not Auricular was very secret) for otherwise how
comes it to pass that he expostulates the matter with Eudaemon who advised this
change, and bewailed the danger of this liberty which was hereby given men, if
they were as strictly bound still to confess to their Bishop as they were
before to the Penetentiary; therefore the Truth of the Business seems evidently
to be this, that men were now at liberty as they were no doubt before the
Institution of a Penetentiary. And now what has this Learned Gentleman gotten
by mustering up this Story; well however the Conclusion must be held, let the
Premises look to themselves.

I could find in my Heart (now my hand is in) to proceed farther and to
observe; what pitiful shifts he is put to, in his Thirteenth Chapter, to evade
the Testimonies brought by Monsieur Daille out of St. Chrysostom against his
Hypothesis. And the rather because (out of tediousness of writing) I in the
foregoing Papers omitted to specify the most remarkable discourses which that
excellent Author has upon this Subject. But the Authorities are so plain and
unanswerable, and the Evasions of this Gentleman so forced and palpable, that I
think it needless to go about to vindicate the one, or confute the other; for
in s^ight of Art this same Thirteenth Chapter (we speak of) will afford no less
then Thirteen Arguments against the necessity of Auricular Confession.

FINIS.

