Imprimatur, Hen: Scobell, Cleric: Parliament.

A COLLECTION Of such of the ORDERS Heretofore used in CHAVNCERY, With Such
Alterations and Additions thereunto, as the Right Honorable the Lords
Commissioners for the GREAT SEAL of ENGLAND, By and with the advice and
assistance of the Honorable the Master of the Rolls, Have thought fit at
present (in Order to a further Reformation now under their Lordships
Consideration) to Ordain and Publish, FOR Reforming of several Abuses in the
said Court, preventing Multiplicity of Suits, Motions, and unnecessary Charge
to the Suitors, and for their more expeditious and certain course for Relief.

London, Printed by Robert White for Francis Tyton, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the three Daggers near the Inner Temple, Fleetstreet. 1652.

Pleadings.
THat no Councellor do put his hand to any Bill, Answer, 1. Succinctness in
Bills and Pleadings.
or other Pleading, unless it be drawn, or at least perused by himself in the
paper-draught, before it be engrossed, (which they shall do well, for their own
discharge, to sign also after perusal.) And Council are to take care, that the
same be not stuffed with Repetitions of Deeds, Writings, or Records in Haec
Verba; but the effect and substance of so much of them only, as is pertinent
and material to be set down, and that in brief terms, without long and needless
traverses of points not traversable, tautologies, multiplication of words, or
other impertinencies, occasioning needless prolixity, to the end the ancient
brevity, and succinctness in Bills, and other Pleadings, may be restored and
observed. Much less may Council insert therein any matter merely criminous or
scandalous under the penalty of good costs to be laid on such Council, and paid
to the party grieved before such Council be heard in Court.

Pleas and Demurrers.
FOrasmuch as the Defendent being served with Process to answer, 2. What Pleas
or Demurrers may be put in without personal attendance, or charge of Commission.
may by advice of Council, upon sight of the Bill only, be enabled to demur
thereunto, if there be cause; or may by like advice be enabled to put in any
just plea, which he has in disability of the person of the Plaintiff, or to
the Jurisdiction of the Court: It is therefore Ordered, That such Demurrer, or
such Plea in disability, or to the Jurisdiction of the Court under the hand of
Council learned, shall be received and filed, although the Defendent do not
deliver the same in person, or by Commission; and therefore if the Defendent
shall pray a Commission, and thereby return a Demurrer only, or only such Plea
which shall be afterward overruled, the Defendent shall pay five Marks costs;
and although it be allowed, the Defendent shall have no costs in respect of the
Plaintiffs needless trouble, occasioned by such commission.

No Demurrer shall be said to be received, 3. No pleadings to be of effect till
filed.
or to be of effect in Court, until the same be filed to the Bill in the
custody of the six Clerk, being the Plaintiffs Attorney. No more shall any
Bill, Answer, or other Pleading, be said to be of Record, or to be of any
effect in Court, until the same be filed with such of the six Clerks, with whom
it ought properly to remain.

Every Demurrer shall express the several Causes of Demurrer, 4. Demurrers and
Pleas on the Matter, or to the jurisdiction.
and shall be determined in open Court. And such Pleas also as are grounded
upon the substance and body of the matter, or extend to the Jurisdiction of the
Court, shall be determined in open Court: And for that purpose the Defendent is
to enter the same with the Register, within eight days after the filing
thereof; or in default of such entry made, the same shall be disallowed of
course, as put in for delay, and the Plaintiff may then take out Process to
enforce the Defendent to make a better answer, and pay forty shillings costs,
and the same shall not afterward be admitted to be set down or debated, unless
(upon special reason showed to the Court before such Process to make better
answer be taken out) it shall be otherwise ordered by the Court. And if any
cause of Demurrer shall arise, and be insisted on at the debate of the Demurrer
(more then is particularly alleged) yet the Defendent shall pay the ordinary
costs of overruling a Demurrer, (which is hereby ordered to be five Marks) if
those causes which are particularly alleged be disallowed, although the Bill,
in respect of that particular, so newly alleged, shall be dismissed by the
Court.

5. Plea of Outlary.
A Plea of Outlary, if it be in any Suit for that duty, touching which, relief
is sought by the Bill, is insufficient according to the Rule of Law, and shall
be disallowed of course, as put in for delay, and the Plaintiff may
(notwithstanding such Plea) take out Process to enforce the Defendent to make a
better answer, and pay five Marks costs; Otherwise a Plea of Outlary is always
a good Plea, so long as the Outlary remains in force, and therefore the
Defendent shall not be put to set it down with the Register: And after the said
Outlary reversed, the Defendent upon a new Subpoena served on him, and payment
unto him of twenty shillings costs, shall answer the same Bill, as if such
Outlary had not been: But if the Plaintiff conceive such Plea of Outlary
through mispleading, or otherwise, to be insufficient, he may, upon notice
given to the Clerk, on the other side, set it down with the Register to be
debated with the rest of the Pleas and Demurrers in Course; but if the
Plaintiff shall not in such case enter it with the Register, within eight days
after the same shall be filed, the Defendent may take out Process against the
Plaintiff for his ordinary Costs of five Marks, as if the same had been heard.

6. Plea of a former suit depending.
The Dependancy of a former Suit for the same matter, is also a good Plea, and
therefore the Defendent shall not be put to set it down with the Register. But
if the Plaintiff be not satisfied therewith, the same shall be referred to one
of the Masters of the Court to certify the truth thereof: and if it shall be
determined against the Plaintiff, he shall pay to the Defendent five pounds
Costs. But such Reference shall be procured by the Plaintiff, and a Report
thereupon within one Month after the filing of such Plea, otherwise the Bill
to stand dismissed of course, with the ordinary Costs of seven Nobles.

If after a Suit Commenced at the Common Law, 7. Plea of a Suit depending in
another Court.
or any other inferior Court, a Bill shall be exhibited in this Court to be
relieved for the same matter, the dependancy of the former Suit shall be
admitted as a good Plea, and the Defendent not to be put to motions for an
Election, or Dismission: and that Plea shall be proceeded in, as in case of a
Plea of a former Suit depending in this Court for the same matter.

If the Demurrer be grounded only upon some Error, 8. Demurrer upon a slip or
mistake.
slip, or mistake in the Bill, the Plaintiff without Motion shall be permitted
of course to amend the same, paying to the Defendent, or his Attorney to his
use, twenty shillings costs. But if the Plaintiff shall not within eight days
after such Demurrer put in, amend, or alter it, and pay the costs, then the
Demurrer shall stand to be determined in Court, and if the same be ruled
against the Plaintiff, he shall pay the ordinary costs for overruling a
Demurrer.

If the Plaintiff, or his Attorney in Court, 9. Demurrer being admitted, the
Bill to be dismissed of Course.
shall, within eight days after a Demurrer filed, give notice to the Defendent,
or his Attorney in Court, under either of their hands, that the Plaintiff does
admit the Demurrer to be good, and shall pay the Defendents Attorney, or his
Clerk in Court, forty shillings costs; then the Defendent shall not need to
attend his Demurrer: but the Bill shall stand dismissed of course without Motion,
unless the Parties, or their Attorneys on both sides shall agree to an
amendment of the same, but such dismission is to be no Bar to a new Bill to be
exhibited by the Plaintiff.

Answers.
AN answer to a matter charged as the Defendents own Fact, 10. Answer to matter
of Fact.
must regularly be without saying to his Remembrance, or as he Believes, if it
be laid to be done within seven years before, unless the Court, upon exception
taken, shall find special cause to dispense with so positive an Answer. And the
Defendent deny the Fach he must traverse, or deny it (as the cause requires)
directly, and not by way of Negative pregnant. As, if he be charged with the
receipt of a sum of Money, he must deny, or traverse that he has not
received the sum, or any part thereof, or else set forth what part he has
received. And if a Fact be la^^ to be done with diverse circumstances, the
Defendent must not deny or traverse it literally, as it is laid in the Bil, but
must Answer the point o^ substance positively, and certainly.

When the Defendent has answered, 11. Hearing on Bil and Answer with caution.
the Plaintiff is to be well advised upon the answer; and if he shall find that
upon the answer alone without further proof, there be sufficient ground for a
final Order or Decree, the Plaintiff may procure his Attorney to present the
same in course to be set down, to be heard upon Bill and Answer, without
further lengthning of the cause; but in case the Court shall not find grounds
to make a Decree or final Order thereupon, the Bill shall be dismissed with
costs, or the Plaintiff admitted to reply if he desire it, first paying down 5.
li. costs to the Defendent or his Clerk, which if he shall not do in four days
after such hearing, then the dismission to stand, and the conclusion of the
Order upon hearing, is to be penned by the Register accordingly, that the said
Bill stand dismissed without any further order or direction, and then such
dismission shall be a good plea in Bar of any new Bill for the same matter.

If a hearing be prayed upon a Bill and Answer, 12. At hearing on Bil and
Answer, what evidence.
the answer must be admitted to be true in all points, and no other evidence to
be admitted, unless it be matter of record, to which the answer refers, and is
proveable by the record. The Plaintiff is therefore to be well advised therein,
that the Court be not put to an unnecessary trouble, and himself to a certain
charge, in bringing his cause to hearing, which will not bear a Decree.

When as the Defendent has put in an Answer, 13. Plaintiff to reply, if the
Answer good to a common intent.
if the Plaintiff has proofs for the matters denied, he is not to insist upon
the insufficiency of the answer, if the same be good to a common intent, but
proceed to replication and proof, to avoid charge and expense of time in
cavilling with answers.

If exceptions be put in to an Answer after the Term, 14. Time to answer
exceptions.
the Defendent shall not be compelled to stay in Town, to attend the Plaintiffs
exceptions, but shall have time to answer until the fourth day of the next
Term, 15. Time for exceptions to be delivered, and costs for insufficient
answers.
unless the Court shall find special cause to hasten it, and shall so order in
open Court.

When a Plaintiff excepteth to a Defendents Answer, he shall set down his
exceptions in writing, and the same Term the answer is filed, or within eight
days after that Term, deliver the same exceptions to the Council, whose hand
is to the Answer, or to the Defendents Attorney in Court, and if the Defendent
shall within the times before limited respectively satisfy the plaintiff of
the invalidity of those exceptions, or put in a perfect or better Answer, and
pay xx. s. costs, then the Plaintiff may reply thereunto. But if the Defendent
shall fail to do the same, or put in a second insufficient answer, then the
Plaintiff may get the said answer, or answers referred; and if the same shall
be ruled insufficient, the Defendent shall pay forty shillings cost; and in
case the Plaintiff shall procure a reference of the answer, and the same be
ruled good, the Plaintiff shall pay the Defendent forty shillings costs.

If the first Answer be certified insufficient, as aforesaid, 16. Further
insufficient Answers* and the costs for them.
the Defendent shall pay forty shillings costs, if the Answer were put in in
person; but if the same came in by Commission, the Defendent shall pay fifty
shillings costs, and no new Commission shall be awarded for taking any second
Answer, unless it be by Order made in Court, and Affidavit made of the parties
inability to travel, or other good matter to satisfy the Court touching that
delay, and first paying the costs of such insufficient Answer, or by the
Plaintiffs own assent for the expediting of his Cause. If the second answer be
reported insufficient unto any of the points formerly certified, (which are
only to be insisted upon without any new exceptions) the Defendent shall pay
three pounds costs; and upon the third answer four pounds costs; and upon a
fourth answer certified insufficient, he shall pay five pounds costs, and be
examined upon interrogatories to the points reported insufficient, and shall be
committed till he has perfectly answered those interrogatories, and paid the
costs, in respect of the great vexation and delay which in such case will
happen to the Plaintiff.

17. Proofs to be only of matters necessary.
If upon perusal of the answer, the Plaintiff shall find it will be necessary to
make proof of one, or few particulars, then the Plaintiff is to reply to those
particulars only, and not draw into pleadings and proofs any more, then the
points necessary to be proved: And in case upon the hearing it shall appear
that the Plaintiff might have had as full relief on Bill and Answer, the
Plaintiff shall not only go without costs, but shall pay the Defendent good
costs, to be assessed by the Court, albeit he be relieved upon the merit of his
cause in respect of the Defendents needless vexation.

If a Bill be regularly and justly dismissed of course, 18. Bill dismissed for
want of prosecution, not to be retained till the costs paid.
or by order for want of prosecution, no motion shall be admitted for the
retainer thereof without a Certificate from the Defendents Attorney in Court,
that the costs of the dismission are paid, to the end unnecessary charge to the
parties by several motions for one and the same matter, may henceforth be
avoided.

Examination of Witnesses.
19. Interrogatories to be pertinent.
IN case the parties proceed to examine Witnesses, the Interrogatories are to be
penned with care, that the same be pertinent, and only to the points necessary
to be examined unto: and the Witnesses are to be sorted and examined on those
interrogatories only that their testimony does extend unto, without the
needless interrogatories of matters unnecessary and immaterial, as well to
avoid the charge of both parties, Plaintiff and Defendent, in superfluous
examinations, as that apt Interrogatories (which are the life of the cause) may
be exhibited.

The Examiners (in whom the Court reposeth much confidence) are themselves in
person to be diligent in examination of Witnesses, 20. Examiners duty.
and not entrust the same to mean and inferior Clerks; and are to take care to
hold the Witness to the point interrogated, and not to run into extravagances
and matters not pertinent to the question, thereby wasting paper for their own
profit, 21. To have care of their Clerks, and be answerable for them.
of which the Court will expect a strict account.

The Examiners are to take care that they employ under them in their Office,
none but persons of known integrity and ability, who shall take an oath not to
deliver or make known directly, or indirectly to the adverse party, or any
other save the Deponent, who comes to be examined, any of the Interrogatories
delivered to be examined upon any examination by him taken or remaining in the
Examiners Office, or extract, copy, or breviate thereof, before publication be
thereof passed, and copies thereof taken. And if any such Deputy, Clerk, or
person so employed, shall be found faulty in the premises, he shall be expulsed
the Office, and the Examiner who so employed him, shall be also answerable to
the Court for such misdemeanour, and to the party grieved for his costs and
damages sustained thereby: and such solicitor, or other person, who shall be
discovered to have had a hand therein, shall be liable to such censure for the
offense, as the Court shall find just to inflict upon him.

No Witness shall be examined in Court, 22. Notice of a Witness to be examined.
by the Examiner, without the privity of the adverse party, or of his Attorney,
or his Attorneys Clerk, who deals for the adverse party, to whom the person to
be examined shall be showed, and a note of his name and place of dwelling
delivered in writing, by such as shall produce him; and the Examiner is to take
care, and be well satisfied that such notice be given, and then shall add to
the title of the Witnesses examination, the time of such notice given, and the
name of the person to whom it is given, and by whom, that at the hearing of the
cause, the Suitor be not delayed, upon pretense of want of notice.

For prevention of perjury and other mischiefs often appearing to the Court,
23. Witnesses to be examined to Inerrogatories seriatim.
the Examiner is to examine the deponent to the Interrogatories directed
seriatim, and not to permit him to read over, or hear read any other of
Interrogatories, until that in hand be fully finished, much less is he to
suffer the Deponent to have the Ieterrogatories, and pen his own Depositions,
or to depart after he has heard an Interrogatory read over, until he has
perfected his examination thereunto: and if any Witness shall refuse so to
conform himself, the Examiner is thereof to give notice to the Attorney, or
Clerk of the other side, and to proceed no further in his examination, without
the consent of the said Attorney or Clerk, or Order made in Court to warrant
his so doing.

In examining of Witnesses, 24. Examiner to avoid impertinences.
the Examiner shall not use any idle repetitions, or needless circumstances,
nor set down any answer to the questions, to which the Examinant cannot depose,
other then thus, To such an Interrogatory this Examinant cannot despose. And in
case such impertinences be observed by the Court, the Examiner is to recompense
the charge thereof to the party grieved, as the Court shall award*

25. Examination to the credit of a Witness, and how.
The Examiner shall not examine any Witness, to invalid the credit of any other
Witness, but by special Order of the Court, which is sparingly to be granted;
and upon exceptions first put into writing, and filed with the Examiner without
Fee, and notice thereof given to the adverse party or his Attorney, together
with a true copy of the said exceptions, at the charge of the party so
examining.

26. Fee for examining a Witness to be deducted.
From henceforth the Fee taken by the Examiner, upon the producing of a Witness
to be examined by him, shall be deducted to the party Plaintiff (...)
Defendent, who paid the same when the Copies of such Witnesses Depositions are
taken out by him, and such Exhibits whereupon any Witness is examined, shall be
always endorsed and certified by the Examiner, at the same time that the
Witness is thereupon examined, and his examination perfected and subscribed.

When Witnesses are examined in Court upon a Schedule of Interrogatories, 27.
No new Interrogatories for the same Witness, nor examination after Publication.
there shall be no new Interrogatories put in to examine the same Witnesses,
nor shall any Witnesses be examined in Court after the day of Publication,
though they were sworn before; so as a Copy of the Rule or Order whereby
Publication passed, be delivered to the Examiner, that he may take notice
thereof.

28. Commission ex part, when.
If the Defendent being served with a Subpoena to rejoyn and join in Commission,
shall not upon request by the Plantiffs Clerk, made to the Defendents Clerk,
deliver Commissioners names, by the end of that Term, wherein the Subpoena ad
rejungend. is returnable; The Plaintiff may without motion or Petition take the
Commission ex part.

29. Carriage of Commissions to examine.
The Plaintiff ought regularly to have the carriage of the Commission for
examination of Witnesses, as often as any is sued forth: but if through the
default of him or his Commissioners, the same be not executed he shall pay unto
the Defendent such reasonable costs, as the Defendent shall by oath make appear
he was put unto by such failer, and shall renew the Commission at his own
charge, but the other side shall have the carriage of such new Commission. And
the like shall be done to the Plaintiff, where the Defendent for just reason
has obtained the carriage of the Commission; and if through any error of the
Clerk in making out the said Commission, or misnaming the Commissioners, or
parties, or the like, the execution of a Commission shall be put off, the party
put to charge in attendance of such Commission, shall receive his costs to be
ascertained by his oath as aforesaid, from him that obtained such Commission,
and the Clerk that made out the same, or his Superior the Attorney in Court,
(who is answerable for him) shall make restitution thereof to the Client and
Suitor.

30. New Commission, and how.
If both sides join in execution of a Commission, and the one side produces and
examineth all his Witnesses, and the other side does not, but prays a new
Commission, the same shall not be granted (unless it be by consent of the
parties, or their Attorneys in Court,) but upon oath of good cause, why he
could not then examine all his Witnesses. And in case the same be granted, the
party praying the same shall bear the reasonable charge of the other side, both
of renewing and executing the Commission, to be ascertained by Oath, and the
other side shall be at liberty, to cross examine the Witnesses produced by him
that renews the Commission. But if he shall not only cross examine the
Witnesses of the adverse party, but examine new Witnesses, he shall bear his
part of the charge.

If at the instance of a Defendent, 31. New Commission through Defendents
default.
a Commission to examine Witnesses be renewed, either for a default by him or
his Commissioners, or because he did not examine all his Witnesses by the first
Commission, he shall at his peril examine all his Witnesses by such renewed
Commission, or in Court by the return of such Commission without more or
further delay, and no more Commissions to issue, except for examination beyond
the seas, by Order in Court, or by consent of the Attorney.

32. One rule on a joint Commission.
Upon the return of a Commission, if the same be executed by both parties, one
rule only shall be given for Publication; and if the said Commission be not
renewed, or another obtained by the Plaintiff, or Defendent within that time,
then Publication shall pass, and no Commission shall be afterward granted or
renewed, without special Order in Court.

33. No Fees for the copies of the parties own Interrogatories, save for
writing.
Upon the taking out of copies of Depositions examined in Court, or by
Commission either by the Plaintiff or Defendent, no Fee shall be taken by the
Six Clerks or the Examiner for the copies, either of the Plaintiffs or
Defendents rerespective Interrogatories, save only the Clerks usual Fee for the
writing thereof.

Depositions of Witnesses in several causes, 34. Depositions in cross Causes.
which are merely cross causes, ( viz.) between the same parties, and touching
the same matter, may be used at the hearing of both causes (coming to hearing
together) without any motion or order in that behalf.

Where either party Plaintiff or Defendent obtains an order to use
Depositions of Witnesses taken in another cause, 35. Depositions in another
Cause.
the adverse party may likewise use the same without motion, unless he be upon
special reason showed to the Court, by that party first desiring the same,
inhibited by the same order so to do.

No motion shall be made in Court or by Petition, 36. Depositions to be
suppressed, and how.
for suppressing of Depositions as irregularly taken, until the six Clerks not
toward the cause have been first attended with the complaint of the party
grieved, and shall certify the true state of the Fact to the Court with their
opinion: if the Attorneys or Clerks on either side shall not for the ease of
their Clients agree before them, for which purpose a rule for attendance of the
six Clerks in such case shall be entered of course with the Register, at the
desire of the party complaining, which shall warrant their proceedings and
certificate to the Court.

Process.
EVery Subpoena to answer shall be served personally, 37. Service of a Subpoena
ad respondend.
or left at the Defendents dwelling house, or place of residence with one of
that family, and no Clerk of this Court shall issue any attachment for not
appearing, but on Affidavit first made, positive and certain, of the day and
place of such service of the Subpoena, and the time of the return thereof,
whereby it shall appear that such service was made (if in London, or within
twenty miles, four days at the least, excluding the day of such service; and if
above twenty miles, then to have been) eight days before such Attachment
entered; and that such Attachment shall not be discharged, but on payment of
twenty shillings costs if the service be personal, and ten shillings if
othewise, and so the succeeding Process to be double.

38. Subpoena for better Answer and costs in one.
Every Subpoena to make a better answer, shall also contain a clause for payment
of the costs ordinary in that behalf, and the Suitor not be put to take out
several Writs, nor prosecute several contempts, as in that case has been used;
and if upon the service of such Subpoena, the costs be not paid, the answer of
such Defendent shall not be received or filed, unless the said costs be also
delivered and paid to the Plaintiffs Clerk, together with the said answer, but
Process of contempt shall issue in that case, as for want of an answer, at the
return of the said Subpoena.

A Subpoena ducens tecum (when the Defendent confesses in his Answer, 39.
Subpoena duc. tec. to be sued out of course.
the having of any writings material to be examined upon, or confessed to belong
to the Plaintiff) may be taken out by the Plaintiff of course without motion,
for the Defendent to bring them into Court, or show cause, etc. But if the
Defendent either confess not the having them in his hands, or makes his title
by them, or to them by his Answer, he shall be excused from any contempt,
although he neither bring them into Court, nor show cause; and if the Plaintiff
shall notwithstanding prosecute a contempt in that behalf (and the case upon
the Defendent his answer appear to be such) he shall be thereof discharged, and
have his costs.

40. Service of a Subpoena ad audiend. Iudicium.
The Subpoena ad audiendum Iudicium shall be served either on the person of the
Defendent, or left at his dwelling house, where his Family then resides: or in
case oath be made that he cannot be found to be served personally, and that he
has no certain dwelling, or is beyond the Seas, the Court will Order the
leaving of a Subpoena with his Attorney in this Court to be a sufficient
service.

41. Process of contempt into the proper County.
All Process of contempt shall be made out into the County, where the party
prosecuted is resident, unless he shall be then in or about London; in which
case it may be made into the County where the party then is. And if any person
shall be taken upon Process otherwise or irregularly issued, the party so taken
first appearing unto, and satisfying the Process which did regularly issue
against him, shall be discharged of his contempt, and have his full costs to be
taxed of Course by the six Clerks, not toward the Cause for such undue or
irregular prosecution, from the time that the error first grew without motion
or other order.

Every suitor who prosecuteth a contempt shall do his best endeavor to procure
each several Process to be duly served and executed upon the party prosecuted,
42. Endeavor to be used in serving it.
and his wilful default therein appearing to the Court, such person offending
shall pay unto the party grieved good costs, and lose the benefit of the Process
returned without such endeavor.

That all Attachments in Process shall be discharged upon the Defendents
payment, 43. To be discharged on payment of the costs, or upon tender and
refusal.
or tender to the Plaintiffs Clerk and refusal of the ordinary costs of the
Court, and filing his Plea, Answer or Demurrer (as the case regularly requires)
without any motion in Court in that behalf. And if after such conformity and
payment of the costs, (or tender and refusal thereof) any further prosecution
shall be had of the said contempt, the party prosecuted shall be discharged
with his costs.

Commissions to answer.
AFter a contempt duly prosecuted to an Attachment, 44. After At. cum Procl.
no Commission, nor Plea, or Demurrer.
with Proclamation returned, no Commission shall be made to Answer, nor Plea or
Demurrer admitted, but upon motion in Court, and Affidavit made of the parties
inability to travel, or other good matter to satisfy the Court, touching that
delay.

The Defendent who is served with a Subpoena ad respondend* 45. Commission to
Answer gives liberty to plead and demurr also.
and obtains a Commission to answer in the Country, shall without more words
have the same liberty thereby to Answer, Plead, and Demur, as he had by the
original Process, if he could have appeared in person.

46. In what case a second Commission to answer.
After a Commission once obtained to answer, no second Commission shall be
granted without special Order of Court; or the Plaintiffs own assent under his
hand. And if the time for the Defendents answering be enlarged upon Affidavit,
that he or they cannot answer without sight of Writings in the Country, or in
respect of the length of the Bill, or the like, which shall not be without
special Order in Court, no Commission shall be afterward granted without like
special Order of Court, upon good reason showed to induce, the same, or the
like assent of the Plaintiff.

In case where the Defendent sits all Process of contempt, 47. Sequestration
upon non invent* or rescue
and cannot be found by the Sergeant at Arms, or makes a rescue, a
Sequestration shall be granted of the land in question. And if the Defendent
render not himself within a year, then an Injunction for the possession, and
the profits so sequestered to be delivered over to the Plaintiff.

Injunctions.
48. Commission to answer to coniain an Injunction.
FOr that it is agreeable to equity and the constant practice of this Court,
that a Defendent obtaining a Commission to take his Answer in the Country,
should not by that delay or favor of the Court, get an advantage against the
Plaintiff, by proceeding at Law in the mean time, it is Ordered, that from
henceforth every Commission to take an Answer in the Country shall contain in
it a clause of Injunction to stay the Defendents suit at Law (if any be)
touching the matter complained of in the Bill, until he has answered the
Bill, and the Court given other Order, so as issue were not joined at Law,
before the return of the Subpoena served upon the Defendent, and in that case
to stay judgment for the like time, so that the taking of such Commission
under seal, shall be a sufficient notice and service of the said Injunction,
without motion or other trouble to the Plaintiff, whereupon for breach to
ground an Attachment, upon Affidavit of a proceeding at Law after the
Commission prayed.

No Injunction to stay Suits at Law shall be granted upon priority of Suit
only, 49. Grounds for Injunctions to stay suits.
nor upon the bare surmise of the Bill; but upon the Defendents delay or wilful
contempt in not Answering, or upon matter confessed in the Answer, or matter of
Record, or writing plainly appearing, or the duty demanded appearing to be very
ancient.

Where a Bill comes in after a Verdict a Law for a debt, 50. Injunction on Bills
after Verdict.
an Injunction is not to be granted, without depositing the principal money,
except there shall, upon hearing both sides, appear to the Court in the
Defendents answer, or by deed under hand and seal, or other good matter for
relief in equity. And an Injunction granted in such case, or otherwise upon the
merit of the cause or equity appearing to the Court, is regularly to stand,
until the hearing of the cause, unless the Plaintiff delay the cause, in which
case he may best be quickened, by dissolving the Injunction.

For avoiding multiplicity of references heretofore used, 51. Injunctions on
the matter without reference.
and charge to the suitor, It is Ordered, that where a motion is made for an
Injunction to stay a suit at Law upon allegation of matter of equity confessed in
the answer, the Council moving the same, shall have that suggestion fair
written in his hand, and read or truly open the same to the Court; and if the
Court hold that matter of sufficient weight, will thereupon grant an Injunction
as is desired, without reference, report, or further motion, and then the
Register is in Court to receive the said suggestion so fairly written, and
insert the same verbatim in the Order for granting the Injunction. But if the
said suggestion be untrue in the substance thereof, upon construction of the
whole Answer, and the Defendent be prosecuted by the Plaintiff for breach of
the Injunction granted thereupon, he shall be clear from any contempt in that
behalf, and have his costs, and such Council shall justly incurr the
displeasure of the Court.

52. Injunction on misinformation.
Where an Injunction to stay suits is obtained upon a misinformation made to the
Court, (as of matter confessed in the Defendents Answer, which in truth is not
so confessed, or if confessed in one place, is avoided in another part of the
Answer, or upon other such like plain abuse to the Court, in that case the
party prosecuted with contempt for breach of such Injunction shall upon his
examination (the matter appearing as aforesaid) be discharged of any contempt,
although he has proceeded at Law after such Injunction granted, and also have
his costs taxed for his wrongful vexation, by the same Master to whom the
contempt shall be referred, without other motion in Court, which also shall be
done in like cases, where a contempt stands referred to a Master of the Court,
he shall tax costs, and certify the same in his report to the Court, together
with his opinion touching the contempt, as well for the prosecutor, in case the
contempt be confessed or proved, as for the party examined, if he be cleared
thereof. 53. Injunctions to be dissolved without motion, and in what cases.


For avoiding the many motions heretofore frequently made touching dissolving
and continuing Injunctions, it is Ordered, That when an Injunction is granted
till Answer and further Order, if no Order be made within fourteen days, (after
the Answer duly filed in Court) for continuance of the Injunction, the same
shall stand dissovled without further motion upon Certificate only of the
Register.

Injunctions to quiet possession (usually granted for preservation of the
public peace, 54. Injunctions to quiet possession.
and prevention of force) shall not be granted before hearing, but upon oath
that the Plaintiff was in actual possession at the time of the Bill exhibited,
(and not of Rents or other things which lie not in manual occupation) and for
such possession as the Plaintiff himself had at the time of the Bill exhibited,
and three years before, but not to be extended further to the possession of
such from whom he claims, or of him and his Tenants, much less him and his
Assigns, or the like. Which Injunction shall not be extended to give the
Plaintiff any other possession then he had at the time when the motion was
made. And such Injunction in case the Plaintiff delay to bring his cause to
hearing is also to be dissolved.

No Injunction to quiet such possession shall extend to hinder the Defendents
proceedings at Law to evict the Plaintiff, 55. Not to hinder suits, lease,
entry, or distress.
or from making any lease, or peaceable entry, or single distress for that end.
56. Not extend to take away a possession.


No possession shall be taken from any person by color of any such Injunction
before the cause be heard. And if any be, the Court will restore possession,
and award costs.

57. Injunctions for Timber, Ploughing etc.
Injunctions against felling of timber, ploughing up of Meadow or ancient
pastures not ploughed in twenty years before, or for maintenance of Enclosures
that have continued for the better part of twenty years shall be granted as
usually they have been, but no Defendent who by Answer claims an estate of
Inheritance, or other estate dispunishable of wast, shall be thereby
restrained, unless it be particularly so Ordered and mentioned in the said
Injunction. And upon motion made for such Injunction, the case is to be truly
opened as it stands in Court, and the Defendents Claim by his Answer, if he
have answered.

When the day is appointed for setting down causes for the following Term, 58.
Causes to be set down according to Priority of Publication.
the six Clerks shall present the Causes according to their priority in
Publication, to be set down in their Order, so as the old Causes may be first
heard and dispatched. And for that purpose with the names of each Cause they
shall present the time when Publication passed, with a short note of the nature
of every such cause presented. And accordingly the Court will give order for
setting them down, so that puyne Causes shall not thrust out those that were
ready for hearing before them. Provided that no Cause be presented the same
Term in which Publication shall pass.

59. Default at hearing.
Where no Council appears for the Defendent at the hearing, and Process appears
to have been duly served, the Answer of such Defendent shall be read, and if the
Court upon such hearing shall find cause to Decree for the Plaintiff, yet a day
shall regularly be given to the Defendent to show cause against the same; but
before he be admitted thereunto, he shall pay down to the Plaintiff or his
Attorney in Court such costs as the Court upon that hearing shall assess, and
the Order is to be penned by the Register accordingly, ( viz.) it is decreed so
and so, etc. unless the Defendent shall by such a day pay to the Plaintiff or
his Attorney in Court costs, and show good cause to the contrary, and such
Defendent upon his showing cause shall first produce a Certificate from the
Plaintiffs Attorney in Court, that he has paid the costs or Affidavit of
tender and refusal thereof.

The reasons of the judgment of the Court are in such case where the Defendent
makes default to be by the Register shortly inserted in the Order, 60. Reasons
to be expressed in the Order.
that the Defendent may know how to apply his cause without a new hearing, but
if the Court shall not receive satisfaction thereupon to alter or confirm the
decretal Order, but that a new hearing shall be requisite, the Defendent (if
the Court shall confirm their first Order upon the second hearing) shall also
pay the Plaintiff his full costs expended in the suit.

61. Costs to be given on hearing.
If the Court upon the hearing of a Cause shall give no relief to the Plaintiff,
the Defendent shall have costs awarded him in respect of his causless vexation.
And where a Decree is made against a Defendent, the Court will likewise give
costs to the Plaintiff as there shall be cause.

Where costs are awarded by the Court, 62. Contemner to pay the costs double.
and the party shall refuse to pay them, and be afterward prosecuted and found
in contempt for not paying of them, he shall not be discharged of such his
contempt, until he shall pay the said costs double, over and besides the costs
taxed, for the prosecution of the said contempt.

Where Causes are removed by special Certiorari upon a Bill containing matter
of equity; 63. Certiorari Bill.
the Plaintiff is before he have the Certiorari granted, to put in bond to be
taken by the Register, to prove his suggestions within fourteen days after the
receipt of his Writ, which if he shall fail to do, upon certificate from the
Examiners, that no Witnesses are examined, or upon a report that the
suggestions are not proved, the Court will dismiss the Bill with costs, and
award a Procendo.

Decrees.
64. Who is bound, and who not.
NO Decree binds any man that comes in bona fide by conveyance before the
Bill exhibited, and is made no Party either by Bill or Order. But where he
claims in trust for such person against whom the Decree is made or comes
inpendente lite without allowance or privity of the Court, it is otherwise.

65. To be drawn briefly.
No Decree shall recite the Bill, Answer, pleadings or Depositions, or any of
them verbatim, but only the short state of the matter, and the decretal Order,
and the opinion and judgment of the Court.

No Decree being once under the Great Seal shall be reversed or altered at the
suit of the person against whom the Decree is made, 66. Not to be altered but
by Bill of review.
or any man claiming in privity, by, from, or under him, but by Bill of review
only.

But in case of mistaking in a Decree which is demonstrative, 67. Save in
mistakes demonstrative.
viz. an error in auditing or numbering, mistaking the date, or the like, by
the leave of the Court the same may be certified without a Bill.

That all Decrees and dismissions pronounced upon hearing the cause in this
Court be drawn up, 68. When to be enrolled.
signed and enrolled before the first day after the next Michaelmas or Easter
Term after the same shall be so pronounced respectively, and not at any time
after, without special leave of the Court.

69. An entry to be made of the Lands, etc.
That a short entry and Docquet be made in a Register Book kept by the Register
of this Court, or such Clerk as he shall appoint for that purpose, of all
Decrees that are drawn up and enrolled, whereby any Lands or Lease is decreed
or charged with any sum of money, annuity, etc. and of the Lands in particular,
and the Parish, or Town and County where the same lie; to the end that any
person that has occasion may resort to that Register Book, to see whether any
Decree be made touching such Lands, Houses, etc. and in case no such entry be
made within six Months after such Decree shall be signed by the Lords
Commissioners for the great Seal, and enrolled, the same shall not prejudce any
Purchaser, who shall bona fide purchase any Estate in such lands, houses, etc.
after the time limited for such entry to be made.

That the six Clerks, 70. Clerks to take care it be done.
and all other Clerks of this Court do therefore take care for their Client,
that such entry be made of all Decrees by them drawn up and enrolled by the
time before limited, that the Client do not suffer through their neglect: And
that the Register shall take only the Fee of twelve pence for such entry, twelve
pence for a Certificate, and four pence for a search, where no Certificate is
made. 71. Prosecution of a Decree for lands.


In case of a Decree for Lands upon Oath made, that the same has been
personally served, and is not obeyed, and an Attachment is issued under Seal
for such contempt, the Court does usually grant an Injunction for the
possession; and upon oath made of the serving thereof upon the party, and that
the same is not obeyed, a Commission is to be awarded to some of the Justices
of the Peace of that County, to put and keep the Plaintiff and his Assigns in
possession; and in case of resistance, a Writ of assistance is to be awarded to
the Sheriff for that purpose.

72. Contemners when to be discharged.
Where the party is committed, or brought in by a Sergeant at Arms for breach of
a Decree, he is not to be enlarged until he has performed the Decree in all
things that are to be presently done, and given security by Recognizance with
Sureties, as the Court shall order to perform the other parts of the Decree (if
any be to be performed) at future days and times appointed by the decree.

Where the party is committed for breach of a Decree, 73. When restrained.
or Order of Court, he ought to be restrained within the Fleet, and not
permitted to go abroad without special license of the Court.

Where a Decree is made for Rent to be paid out of the land, 74. Decree for
money out of land.
or a sum of money to be levied out of the profits of lands, there a
Sequestration of the same lands being in the Defendents hands, or of any Rent
reserved to the Defendent out of the same Lands may be granted.

75. Dismission on hearings.
Where causes are dismissed upon full hearing, and the dismission signed and
enrolled, such causes are not again to be retained, nor any new Bill admitted,
except it be a Bill of Review, or upon matter of like nature, as in case where
a Decree is sought to be avoided, and upon like security and allowance of the
Court.

Bills of Review.
TO the end, that after a Decree made the party may be at peace, 76. Grounds of
Bills of Review.
and multiplicity of Suits be avoided, no Bill of Review shall be admitted,
except it contain either error in Law appearing in the body of the Decree,
without either averment, or further examination of matters in fact, or upon new
matter discovered in time after the Decree made, and whereof the party could
not have had advantage before; and upon such Bill of Review, no Witnesses shall
be examined to any matters which were, or might have been examined unto upon
the former Bill; but upon Oath made of such new matter discovered, as
aforesaid, a Bill of Review may be exhibited by leave of the Court, and not
otherwise.

77. Not admitted* till obedience, except in particular cases.
No Bill of Review shall be admitted, nor any other Bill to change matters
decreed, except the Decree be first obeyed and performed: But if any Act be
decreed to be done, which extinguisheth the parties right at Common Law, as
making of assurance, or release, acknowledging satisfaction, cancelling Bonds
or Evidences, and the like; or where the error is apparent in the body of the
Decree, as aforesaid, the Court upon motion may dispense with the actual
performance of that part of the Decree, till the Bill of Review be determined.

No Bill of Review shall be allowed, 78. And upon Security.
except the party that prefers it (giving notice to the Defendent therein) do
first enter into a Recognizance with Sureties, before some Master of the Court
in ordinary, of a fit penalty in relation to the matter decreed, for the
satisfaction of the costs and damages, if the Bill of Review be dismissed.

Contempts.
79. Appearance on Contempts.
WHere a Contempt is prosecuted against any man, he shall not be put to move the
Court, as formerly has been used, either for Interrogatories to be exhibited,
or for reference of his Examinations, and discharge being examined. But where
any person shall be brought in by Process* or shall appear gratis to be examined
upon a contempt, he shall give notice of such his appearance to the Attorney or
Clerk of the other side: And if within eight days after such appearance and
notice given, Interrogatories shall not be exhibited whereon to examine him, or
if being examined, no reference shall be procured of his examination, nor
Commission taken out of the other side, nor Witnesses examined in Court to
prove the contempt within one Month after such examination, then the party so
examined shall be discharged of his contempt without further motion, and may
attend any one of the Masters of the Court for the taxing of his costs, which
the Master is to tax without further Order, and that taxation being entered in
the Register, the party may proceed for the same of course, as in like cases of
costs taxed.

If after appearance and Interrogatories exhibited as aforesaid, 80. Departure
without being examined.
the party appearing shall depart before he be examined (without leave of the
Court) he is upon motion and Certificate from the Register, and of such his
departing and not being examined, and of the Interrogatories exhibited from the
Examiner, to stand committed without further day given unto him, and is not to
be discharged from such his contempt, until he has been examined, and been
cleared of his contempt. And if he shall upon his Examinations, or by proofs be
found in contempt, he shall clear such his contempt, and pay the prosecutor his
costs, before he be discharged of his imprisonment. And although he be cleared
of his said contempt, yet he shall have no costs, in respect of his
disobedience in not being examined without the prosecutors trouble and charges
in moving the Court, as aforesaid.

In case of prosecution of a contempt for breach of an Order of the Court, 81.
Interrogatories not to exceed the Affidavit.
or otherwise grounded upon an Affidavit, the Interrogatories shall not be
extended to any other matter then what is comprehended in the said Affidavit or
Order, And if any other shall be exhibited, the party examined may for that
reason demurr unto them, or refuse to answer them.

Where the party prosecuted upon a contempt, 82. Commission to prove it of
course.
has denied it, or the same does not clearly appear by his Examinations, the
prosecutor may take out a Commission of course to prove the contempt, and in
such case the party prosecuted may name one Commissioner to be present at the
execution of the Commission, and may henceforth (notwithstanding the former
usage to the contrary) cross examine the Witnesses produced against him, to
prove the contempt, but is not to examine any Witnesses on his part, unless he
shall satisfy the Court touching some matter of Fact necessary to be proved
for clearing the truth. In which case the Court, if there be cause, will give
leave to him to examine Witnesses to such particular points set down, and the
other side may cross examine such Witnesses. But the Interrogatories on both
sides are to be included in the Commission.

83. In what cases a Com shall be to examine contemners.
Where a contempt is prosecuted against one, who by reason of age, sickness, or
other cause, is not able to travel; or in case the same be against many
persons who are servants, or workmen, and live far off: the Court will upon
motion and Affidavit thereof, grant a Commission to examine them in the
Country. Which Commission shall be sued out and executed at the charge of the
person or persons desiring it, directed to such indifferent Commissioners as
the prosecutor of the contempt shall name (as in other cases) and one
Commissioner only at the nomination of the party prosecuted as aforesaid.
Which Commission shall be executed at such convenient time and place, as the
six Clerks not toward the cause upon hearing the Clerks upon both sides, shall
set down.

Upon every examination or proof of a contempt referred to any of the Masters
of the Court, 84. Master to tax costs of course.
to certify whether the contempt be confessed, or proved, or not: the Master,
in his Certificate thereof made to the Court, shall likewise assess and
certify the costs to either party, as there shall be cause, without other
Order or Motion made for that purpose.

Commitment.
THe Court being tender of the liberty of men's persons, 85. On misdemeanour on
service.
and to avoid their imprisonment upon malicious Affidavits, which are often
made by one mean and ignorant person, and which has heretofore by the course
of the Court drawn on a Commitment, does Order, That from henceforth, where
oath shall be made of misdemeanor, in beating or abusing the party upon serving
of the Process or Orders of the Court, the party offending shall stand committed
upon motion, and no examination is in that case to be admitted.

And when Affidavit shall be made by two persons, 86. For scandalous and
contemptuous words against the Court.
of scandalous or contemptuous words against the Court, or the Process thereof,
the party offending shall likewise stand committed upon motion, without any
further examination: And a single Affidavit in such case shall be sufficient to
ground an Attachment, whereupon such person shall be brought in to be examined.
And if the misdemeanour shall be confessed, or proved against him, he shall
stand committed until he satisfy the Court touching his said misdemeanour, and
pay the prosecutor his costs: and if he shall not be thereof found guilty, save
by the oath of the party who made such Affidavit, he shall be discharged, but
without any costs, in respect of the oath made against him, as aforesaid.

That no Order whatsoever, except decretal or final Orders upon hearing, 87.
Orders to be entered in eight days.
be received to be entered after the space of eight days, to be reckoned from
the day of the Order pronounced exclusive: And if the party on whose behalf the
motion is made do not prosecute the drawing up of the Order within four days,
the Register is to do the same according to his notes at the instance of the
adverse party.

Masters.
THE Masters are not upon the importunity of Council (how eminent soever) or
their Clyents, 88. Reports not to be special without Order.
to return special Certificates to the Court, unless they are required by the
Court so to do, or that their own judgment in respect of difficulty leads
them unto it. Such kind of Certificates for the most part occasioning a
needless trouble, rather then ease to the Court, and certain expense to the
Suitor.

Their Certificates and Reports are to be drawn as succinctly 89. Nor Prolix.
as may be (preserving the matter clearly for the judgment of the Court) and
without recital of the several points of the Orders of Reference (which do
sufficiently appear by the Orders themselves) or the several debates of Council
before them; unless that in cases where they are doubtful, they shortly
represent to the Court, the reasons which induce them so to be.

The Masters of the Court are to take notice, 90. To be upon the whole answer.
That when the Court requires to be satisfied from them touching any matter
alleged to be confessed, or set forth in the Defendents Answer; it is intended
that without further Order they should take consideration of the whole Answer
or Answers of the Defendent, and certify not only whether the matter be so
confessed or set forth, but also any other matter, avoiding that confession, or
ballancing the same, that the Court may receive a clear and true information.

The Masters in taking Affidavits and administering of Oaths in cases duly
presented unto them, 91. Oaths reverendly to be administered and taken.
are to be circumspect and wary that the same be reverendly and knowingly given
and taken, and are therefore to administer the same themselves to the party,
and where they discern him rash, or ignorant, to give him some conscionable
admonition of his Duty, and be sure he understand the matter contained in his
Affidavit, and read the same over, or hear it read in his presence, and
subscribe his name or mark thereunto before the same be certified by the
Master, who is not to receive or certify any Affidavit, unless the same be
fairly and legibly written without blotting, or interlineation of any word of
substance.

92. Reports positive.
In all matters referred to the Masters of the Court, their Certificate (not
being to ground a Decree) if it be positive, is to stand, and Process may be
taken out to enforce performance thereof without further motion, unless the
adverse party upon notice given (to his Attorney or Clerk in Court) that such
report is filed against him, shall within eight days after such notice (if it
be given in Term, or whiles the General Seals for motions are held, or within
four days in the next Term, if it be given after) obtain some Order in Court to
control or suspend the same. And in case of an insufficient Answer certified
by the Masters, the Plaintiff may immediately take out Process against the
Defendent for his Costs, and to make a better Answer, as has been formerly
used.

Where after Certificate or Report made by the Masters of the Court, 93.
Appeals from them
either party shall appeal from the same, to the judgment of the Court, he
shall first file his exceptions thereunto briefly, with the Register, and
deposite with him Forty shillings to be paid to the other party for his Costs,
if he prevail not in such Appeal. And then the Register shall enter such Causes
of Appeal in a paper in order as they are brought unto him to be determined by
the Court in course upon days of motions, and notice thereof to be given by the
party appealing, to the Clerk of the other side. And also the Registers Paper
to be set up in the Office two days before. And if the Court shall not alter
the Masters Report, then the forty shillings deposited to be paid to the party
defending the same, with such increase as the Court shall find cause to impose,
otherwise to be restored to the party appealing, and both without charge.

Petitions.
94. No injunction to be granted on Petition.
NO Injunction for stay of Suit at Law shall be granted, revived, dissolved, or
staid upon Petition. Nor any Injunction of any other nature shall pass by Order
upon Petition, without notice, and a Copy of the Petition first given to the
other side, and the Petition filed with the Register, and the Order entered.

No Sequestration, Dismission, 95. Nor Sequestration, Dismission, Retainer, nor
final Order.
Retainers upon dismissions or final Orders, are to be granted upon Petition.

No former Order made in Court is to be altered, 96. Nor Order altered, or
explained, nor commitment dischargeed.
or explained upon a Petition; no Commitment of any person taken upon Process of
contempt to be discharged by Order made upon Petition, unless in the Vacation,
and upon hearing the adverse party, his Attorney, or Clerk in Court.

97. No Commissions to examine witnesses to be awarded, or discharged, nor
examinations suppressed by Petition.
No Commissions for examinations of witnesses, shall be awarded or discharged,
nor examinations suppressed upon Petition, except it be upon point of the
Course of the Court first referred to the six Clerks not toward the Cause and
certificate thereupon.

Paupers.
AFter an admittance In forma Pauperis, no Fee, Profit, or Reward shall be
taken of such Party admitted, 98. Not to pay Fees.
by any Councellor or Attorney for the dispatch of the Paupers business, during
the time it shall depend in Court, and he continued In forma pauperis; nor any
contract, nor agreement be made for any Recompense, or Reward afterward. And
if any Person offending herein shall be discovered to the Court, he shall
undergo the displeasure of the Court, and such further punishment as the Court
shall think fit to inflict upon him, and the party admitted, who shall give any
such Fee or Reward, or make any such contract, or agreement, shall be from
thenceforth Dispaupered, and not be afterward admitted again in that Suit to
prosecute in forma pauperis.

If it shall be made appear to the Court, 99. Not to contract for the benefit
of the Suit.
That any Person prosecuting in forma pauperis, has sold or contracted for the
benefit of the suit, or any part thereof whiles the same depends, such cause
shall be from thenceforth totally dismissed the Court, and never again Retained.

100. Council and Attorney assigned to do their duty.
Such Council, or Attorney as shall be assigned by the Court to assist the
Person admitted in forma pauperis, either to prosecute or defend, may not
refuse so to do, unless they satisfy the Lords Commissioners, or Master of the
Roles who granted the admittance, with some good reason of their forbearance.

That Councellor who shall move any thing to the Court, 101. Motions for them
to be first made.
on the behalf of a Person admitted in forma pauperis, ought to have the order
of admittance with him, and first to move the same, before any other motion.
And if the Register shall find that such person was not admitted in forma
pauperis, he shall not draw up any Order upon the second motion made by any
such Council, but he shall lose the fruit of such second motion in respect of
his abuse to the Court.

No Process of Contempt shall be made forth and sent to the Great Seal at the
suit of any Person prosecuting as Plaintiff in forma pauperis, 102. Process of
Contempt for them to be first signed by the six Clerk.
until it be signed by the six Clerk who deals for him, and the six Clerks are
to take care, that the such Process be not taken out needlessly, or for vexation,
but upon just and good cause, as they will answer it to the Court, if the
contrary shall appear.

And lastly; it is Ordered, 103.
That all Masters of the Court of Chancery, Counselors, and all Officers,
Ministers, Clerks, and Solicitors in the said Court, do observe these Orders,
which are to continue until upon further Consideration and experience, any
Alterations shall be thought sit to be made therein.

An Alphabetical Table.
A
Fol. Reg. ANswer to matter of Fact. 15 10 Time to answer exceptions. 19 14
Time to deliver Exceptions to an Answer. ib. 15 Further insufficient Answers,
and Costs for them. 21 16 Appeals from Masters Reports. 85 93 B
SVccinctness in Bills. 5 1 Certiorari Bill. 61 63 Bills of review. 69 76 Not
to be admitted till obedience, except in particular cases. 70 77 And upon
security. 71 78 C
CAuses to be set down according to priority of Publication. 57 58 Commission
to Answer, gives liberty to Plead and Demur also. 45 45 Commission to Answer to
contain an Injunction. 48 48 Not to be granted after Attach cum procl. 45 44 In
what case a second Commission to Answer. 46 46 Carriage of a Commission to
Examine. 32 29 Commission ex part when. ib. 28 New Commissions, and how. 34 30
New Commission through the Defendants default. 35 31 Commitment for
Misdemeanors on Service. 78 85 For Scandalous, and Contemptuous words against
the Court. 79 86 Contempts.
Process of Contempt into the proper County. 42 41 Endeavor to be used in
serving it. 43 42 To be discharged on payment of the Costs, or on Tender and
refusal. 44 43 Appearance on Contempts. 72 79 Departure without being Examined.
73 80 In what case a Commission shall be to Examine Contemners. 76 83
Commission to prove a Contempt of course. 75 81 Contemners, when to be
discharged. 66 72 When restrained. 67 73 Costs for insufficient Answer. 19 15
For further insufficient Answer. 21 16 Masters to tax Costs on Contempts of
Course. 78 84 Costs to be given on hearing. 60 61 Contemner to pay the Costs
double. ib. 62 D
DEcrees, who is bound by them, and who not. 62 64 To be drawn briefly. ib. 65
Not to be altered but by Bill of Review, 63 66 Save in mistakes demonstrative.
ib. 67 When to be enrolled. ib. 68 An entry to be made of the lands, etc. 64 69
Clerks to take care it be done. 65 70 Prosecution of Decrees for Lands. ib. 71
For money out of Lands. 67 74 Default at hearing. 58 59 Demurrer to put in
without personal attendance or charge of Commission. 7 2 Demurrers to express
the causes. 9 4 Demurrer upon a slip or mistake. 14 9 No demurrer after Attach.
cum procl. 45 44 Demurrer being admitted, the Bill to be dismissed of Course.
14 6 Depositions in Cross causes. 37 34 Depositions in another cause. ib. 35
Depositions to be suppressed, and how. ib. 36 Dismission for non-prosecution,
not to be retained till costs paid. 23 18 Dismissions on hearing. 68 75 E
TIme to answer Exceptions. 19 1 Time for Exceptions to be delivered. ib. 1
Examiners Duty. 25 20 To have care of their Clerks, and be answerable for them.
ib. 21 Examiner to avoid impertinences. 29 24 No Examination after publication.
31 27 H
HEaring on Bill and Answer. 17 11 What evidence admitted. 18 12 Default at
hearings. 58 59 Reasons to be expressed in the Order. 59 60 Costs to be given
on hearing, 60 61 I
INterrogatories to be pertinent. 24 19 No new Interrogatories for the same
witnesses. 31 27 No Fees for the Copies of the parties own Interrogatories,
save for writing. 36 33 Interrogatories not to exceed the Affidavit. 75 81
Injunction contained in a Commission to Answer. 48 48 Grounds for Injunctions
to stay suits. 49 49 Injunction on Bills after verdict. 50 50 Injunctions on
the matter without Reference. 51 51 Injunctions on misinformation. 52 52
Injunctions to be dissolved without motion, and in what cases. 53 53
Injunctions to quiet Possession. 54 54 Not to hinder Suits, Lease, Entry, or
Distress. 55 55 Not to extend to take away Possession. ib. 56 Injunct. for
Timber, Ploughing, etc. 56 57 O
OAths reverently to be administered and taken. 83 91 Orders to be entered in
eight days. 80 87 P
PAupers not to pay Fees, 88 98 Nor to contract for the benefit of his Suit. 89
99 Council and Attorney assigned to do their duty. 90 100 Motions for them to
be first made. ib. 101 Process of Contempt for them to be first signed by the
six Clerk* 91 102 No Pleadings to be of effect till filed. 8 3 Pleadings to be
succinct. 5 1 Pleas to be put in without personal attendance or Commission. 7 2
Pleas on the matter, or to the Jurisdiction. 9 4 Plea of Outlawry. 10 5 Plea of
a former Suit depending. 12 6 Plea of a Suit depending in another Court. 13 7
Petitions. No Injunction to be granted by Petition. 86 64 Nor Sequestration,
Dismission, Retainers upon Dismissions, or final Orders. 87 95 Nor Order
altered or explained, nor Commitment discharged. ib. 96 No Commissions for
Examination of Witnesses to be awarded or discharged, nor Examinations
suppressed by Petition. 88 97 Proofs to be only of matters necessary. 22 17 One
rule for Publication on a joint Commission. 36 32 R
PLaintiff to Reply, if Answer good to common intent. 19 13 Reports of Masters
not to be special, without Order. 81 88 Nor prolix. ib. 89 To be upon the whole
Answer. 82 90 Reports that are positive. 84 92 S
SErvice of a Subpoena to answer. 39 37 Subpoena for better answer and Costs in
one. 40 38 Subpoena ducens tecum to be sued out of course. 41 39 Service of a
Subpoena ad audiend. Judicium. 42 40 Sequestration on non est invent. 47 47 W
NO Witness to be examined without notice, etc. 27 22 Witnesses to be examined
to Interr. seriatim. 28 23 Examination to the credit of a Witness, and how. 30
25 Fee for examining a Witness to be deducted. ib. 26

FINIS.
B. Whitelocke C.S.
Rich. Keble C.S.
VV. Lenthall Master of the Roles.


