A Collection of the several ADDRESSES in the late King JAMES's Time:
Concerning the Conception and Birth of the Prince of WALES.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The bumble Address of the Comptroler, and other Members of the Society of the
Inner Temple.

PArdon us, Great Sir, if the fear of being thought ungrateful, for the
greatest Bounty, puts us upon the hazard of being thought too bold, in
approaching your Sacred Person, to offer our most humble and Hearty Tribute of
Thanks, for your most Gracious Declaration of Indulgence; and continued to us
and all our Subjects, your Royal Assent and Protection, in a free Choice and
Exercise of our Religion; a Blessing that could flow from none but the Best and
Wisest of Princes, whose Royal Thoughts are wholly taken up, how to make our
Religion as free as our Property; a Blessing which just Heaven (which ever
over-pays all good Actions) has evidently Demonstrated to be Grateful and
Acceptable, by showring down the Blessing of Fruitfulness on your Royal
Consort. May the ROYAL ISSUE live to be the Joy of your most Sacred Majesty,
the Delight of all Mankind, a safeguard to your Friends, and Terror to your
Enemies; and may Heaven continue its Favors on your Majesty's, and your Sacred
Posterity. This, Great Sir, is the Prayer of us,

Your most Dutiful and Obedient Subjects.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Address of the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, Sheciffs,
Common-Council-men, Grand Jury, and Borough Jury, of your Majesty's City and
County of the City os Gloucester, from the General; Quarter Sessions there held
this 2th day of January, in the Year of our Lord 1687.

Dread Sovereign,
THE Reason and Equity of a General Indulgence, for matters of mere Religion,
is so manifestain it self, and so clearly Illustrated by your Majesty's
gracious Declaration for it, tim to all that we can say on that Subject, can
but resemble an Eclipse of the sun, by the Interposition of a meaner Light.
Nothing then can be more our Duty, both as Christians and Subjects, than first
to render unto Almighty God, in whose Hands are the Hearos of Kings, our hearty
Thanks, for putting it into the King's Heart to do so good Things for his
People.

Next, in all Humility, to express not only our Acquiescence, but height of
Satisfaction, in your Majesty's so Pious, so Prudent, so Charitable, and Kind a
Determination toward all your Subjects; to assure your Majesty of our united
and utmost Endeavors, to Elect for Parliament, when called, such Members as we
may reasonably hope, shall joyfully and readily meet and join with your Majesty
therein; and likewise in the Repeal of the two Test-Acts, so subject to
dangerous Interpretations.

Yet, at last, we humbly crave leave, to Congratulate with your Majesty, the
Blessing of your Royal Consorts CONCERTION, which we consider as the Reward of
Heaven upon this your unparalled Goodness, and, with the most fervent Zeal,
offer up our Prayers to Almighty God, that she may, to the unspeakable
Happiness of all your Kingdoms, produce. you a SON, as much the Image of your
Heroic Mind, as the Product of your Royal Body.

Subscribed also by the said Grand Jury, and Burough Jury consenting, etc.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Address of your Majesty's most Layal and Dutiful Subjects, of your
Ancient Corporation of Portsmouth.

PResume humbly to hope, that our hearty Acknowledgments, though late, for your
gracious Indulgence, may be honored with a favorable Aspecr, since they give
precedence to none, in Gratitude and Loyalty. The many and happy Blessings that
visibly attend this your Royal Declaration, instruct us, that the Councils of
Princes are no less the immediate Concern of the Wisdom of the Almighty, than
the Protection of their Persons is of his Power. This one Act, most Gracious
Sovereign, has dispersed all the Fears and Apprehensions of Fire and Faggot,
under your Majesty's Reign, which the wicked Enemies of your Sacred Majesty's
Person and Religion, had maliciously distilled into the Minds of too many of
your credulous Subjects; this has confirmed to us our Liberties and Properties;
this has established Peace and Charity in the Minds of the Dissenting Brethren
in Opinion, and shaded all your Loving Subjects from the troublesome Heats of
Persecution, under the Wings of your Royal Protection. In sine, Great Sir, it
is an Act so transcendently Good, that, it seems to us, Heaven could not reward
it with a less Blessing, than what it has been pleased to bestow at this
present upon your Royal Consort; nor will we be wanting to contribute all that
lies in us, to the perpetuating of this Happiness to Posterity: For when it
shall seem fit to your Princely Wisdom to Summon a Parliament, we do hereby
engage our selves, to Elect such Members as shall Vote for the Repealing such
Laws as obviate your Gracious Intentions in your Declaration. Whoever now
presumes to oppose and spurn at this your Royal Goodness, becomes not only
ungrateful to their Country, but to Heaven also. And now, most Glorious
Monarch, that the Eternal Providence may ever Guide and Prosper all your
Councils and Undertakings; that the growing Hopes of the ROYAL WOMB may blossom
and flourish to a mature Perfection, and your Majesty enjoy a long and happy
Reign over us, is the hearty Prayers of all.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Address of the Grand Jury for your County of Buckingham, at the
Assizes held at Ailsbury for the said County, the 5th day of March, in the
fourth Year of your Majesty's Reign, Anno Dom. 1687.

Most Dread and Gracious Sovereign,
WE your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects of the County of Buckingham,
being deeply Sensible of the great Happiness we enjoy under your Majesty's
Reign and Government, tender our most hearty Thanks to Almighty God, in whose
Hands are the Hearts of Kings, that he has been graciously pleased to put into
your Roval Heart, the means which have effectually procured it; not doubting
your late gracious Declaration, for Indulgence and free Liberty of Conscience,
to be the Copy of his Sacred and Divine Will, who has commanded us all to live
in Peace and Charity with one another. The Blessing which Heaven has bestowed
upon your Royal Consort, is to us a convincing Argument, that you have your
Directions for the well management of your three Kingdoms, from that great
Court; and we think we are obliged in Gratitude and Duty, to use our utmost
Endeavors toward the removing those Impediments which may obstruct your Royal
Intentions, tending so much to our Good and Welfare; which we cannot perform
better, than (when you shall please to call a Parliament) by choosing such Men
as are entirely disposed to take off the Tests, and the Penal Laws. This we in
all Sincerity promise to do to the utmost of our Power, and shall with most
fervent Zeal offer our Prayers to Almighty God, that he would most graciously
Please, not only to grant your Majesty a long and prosperous Reign, but that
the Issue of your Royal Consort may prove a SON, which may inherit soon his
Royal Fathers Virtues, though late his Throne.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Address of the Grand Inquest for the County of Stafford, at the
Assizes holden at the Town of Stafford, the 3d day of April, in the Fourth year
of your Majesty's Reign, Anno Dom. 1688.

May it please your Majesty,
WE hope the lateness of this Address will not be attributed to want of Loyalty
in us, since it comes with the first opportunity the Body of the County could
be prevailed on, having hitherto been detained from paying its Duty, by an
overruling Party among us; we therefore, though late, yet with united
Affections, come to offer the Tribute of our humble Acknowledgments to your
Sacred Majesty, for your Gracious Declaration, Indulgent Distribution of your
Dispensing Power, and, with Hearts full of Joy, Congratulate the FRUITFULNESS
of your Royal Consort; which, as it is the hopes and expectations of all Loyal
Souls, so may it frustrate the great Ends of the Factious, by the happy
Production of a PRINCE of WALES. And whenever your Majesty shall in your
Princely Wisdom think fit to call a Parliament, it shall be our study and care
to promore the Election of such Members as will, by their concurrence in
Abolishing the PenalLaws and Tests, persect the great Work of Peace, so
Graciously and Auspiciously undertaken by your Majesty. And that your Reign may
be long and happy over us, are the Desires and Prayers of,

Your most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Address of the Mayor, Aldermen, Bailiffs, and Citizens, of the City
of Carlisle.

Dread Sovereign!
BEing now at liberty, by the late Regulation made here, to Address our selves
unto your Majesty, we beg leave to return our late but unfeigned Thanks, for
your Majesty's most Gracious Declaration of Indulgence, which we will endeavor
to maintain and support against all opposers: We likewise Thank your Majesty
for your Royal Army, which really is both the Honor and Safety of the Nation,
let the Teckelites think and say what they will. And when your Majesty in your
great Wisdom shall think fit to call a Parliament, we will choose such Members
as shall certainly concur with your Majesty, in repealing and taking off the
Penal Laws and Tests; and not hazard the Election of any Person, who has any
ways declared in favor of those Conibal Laws. Surely they do not consider what
a Sovereign Prince by his Royal Power may do, that oppose your Majesty in so
Gracious and Glorious a Work! A Work which Heaven Smiles upon, and will reward
with no less Blessing, we hope, than a PRINCE of WALES, that there may never
want of your Royal Issue to sway the Scepter, so long as the Sun and Moon
endure; that your Majesty's Reign may be long and prosperous, and Blessed with
Victories over all your Enemies, are the daily Prayers of,

Great Sir, Your Majesty's most Obedient and Dutiful Subjects.

May it please your Majesty,
WE your most Faithful and truly Loyal Subjects, the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen,
Common Council, and Burgesses, of the Ancient Corporation of Cambridge, do
humbly cast at the Feet of your Sacred Majesty, our unfeigned Thanks for your
most Gracious Declaration of Indulgence; which your Majesty has been pleased
with much Condescension to repeat, giving it a double strength by your Royal
Word; so that none that are truly Loyal can doubt of the performance of your
Majesty's most gracious Promise, or refuse to make their thankful Addresses for
it. When therefore your Royal Wisdom shall think fit to call a Parliament, we
your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, entirely engage our selves, and the utmost
of our Endeavors, for the Election of such Members as will heartily concur
with that Divine Principle of your Majesty; That Men's Consciences ought not to
be forced in matters of Religion, nor they distinguished, in the Service of
their Country, by other Tests then that of Loyalty. Wherefore the many
Blessings we enjoy under your most Sacred Majesty, engage us in daily Prayer to
Almighty God, that as your Royal Virtues exceed all Example, so your Reign,
above comparison, may be the longest; nor may it end till a PRINCE of WALES,
born of your Royal Consort our most Gracious Queen, has learned, by a long
experience, the most Heroic Greatness of your Royal Mind.

In Testimony whereof, we have unanimously caused our Common Seal to be affixed
bereunto,
this 28th day of May, in the Fourth Year of your Majesty's Reign, Annoque Dom.
1688.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Address of the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and Common Council-Men,
of your Majesty's Town and Parish of Maidstone, in the County of Kent.

Dread Sovereign,
AMongst the many Favors under your Majesty's Pious, Prudent, and Serene
Government over us, nothing more confirms our Hopes of lasting Happiness,
than the suspending the Execution of those Laws under which many of your Loyal
Subjects have most grievously suffered; having also for our future
Encouragement, your Majesty's gracious Declaration reiterated, that your
Princely Resolutions are, that during your Majesty's Reign over us (which God
grant may be long) no one of your Majesty's Subjects shall be punished, or
disturbed, for matters of mere Religion, nor their Properties invaded; and that
your Majesty will call a Parliament, where you have promised your Royal Assent
to confirm it by Law unalterable.

For these undeserved Favors, Great Sir, (after our humble and hearty
Acknowledgments, with thankfulness to the Governor of Heaven and Earth, who
has brought you to your Throne, and persuaded you so to Rule as to allow
Liberty of Conscience) We unfeignedly in all submission, as becomes good
Subjects by Inclination as well as Duty, Present our most humble Thanks,
resolving to use our best Endeavors to make an acceptable return of a
continued Loyalty, Thankfulness and Compliance to your most Gracious Majesty in
all your most Pious and Christian declared Purposes, Particularly in Electing
of Members of Parliament for this Corporation, whenever your Majesty shall
think fit to call a Parliament. And always shall be Petitioners to the Great
King of Kings, that he will bless your Majesty with a long and happy Reign over
us, and with a succeeding Issue to sit on the Throne of their Ancestors whilst
the World endures.

In Testimony whereof we have affixed our Common Seal,
the 25th Day of May, in the 4th Year of your Majesty's Reign.
To the KING'S Most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Address of your Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects the Grand Jury
of your City and County of Exeter, held at the Guild Hall of the said City, 23d
of April, in the 4th Year of His Majesty's Reign, being the Anniversary Day
solemnized for your Majesty's Coronation.

Most Dread Sovereign,
SInce it has pleased the King of Kings to bring your Majesty to the Crown,
and seat you on the Throne of your Illustrious Ancestors, on this Day, we
thought it our Duty, not only to thank the great God of Heaven for this
Universal Blessing, which we did perform with Hearts unfeigned, full of Joy,
and thoroughly sensible of that great Happiness which it has Pleased the
overruling Providence to bless us with, under your Majesty's most Gracious and
Merciful Government. But as we are bound to thank God for this great Blessing,
so we judge our selves likewise engaged, by all the Obligations imaginable, to
return our thanks to your Sacred Majesty, God's true Vicegerent, whose Actions
have surpassed any thing that History could yet afford us, and whose Gracious
and Unparalled Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, has come up to that
agreeableness of Divinity it self, who has said of Kings, I have made ye Gods;
that you, Great Sir, have exceeded all Princes in that high and transcendent
Character; we crave leave, most Gracious Sovereign, to render unto your Majesty
our most unfeigned Thanks for those fresh Obligations and Privileges lately
granted to this your Ancient and Loyal City in our new Charter, humbly assuring
your Majesty, that when ever you shall please to call a Parliament, we shall
give our Assistance in choosing such Members as we doubt not will readily
concur to perpetuate your great and good Work, which your Majesty to your
Eternal Honor and Glory have so happily begun; may the great God of Heaven
make your Majesty's Reign long and prosperous over us, and grant your Majesty,
and your Royal Consort, a numerous and lasting Issue, that as this Generation
has great cause to bless God for you, so future Generations may rise up and
call you and your Royal Progeny for ever Blessed: So pray heartily your
Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects.

P. P. of. W. was Born the 10th of June, 1688.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Address of the Bailif, Recorder, Justices of the Peace, and Capital
Burgesses, with other the Burgesses, Freemen and Inhabitants of the Borrough of
Leominster in the County of Hereford.

Dread Sir,
BY the plainness of our Words your Majesty may read the Integrity of our
Hearts, to a Prince whose only Aim and Desires are to revive the English Glory,
both at home and abroad; a Prince as Zealous of the true Interest and Welfare
of all his Subjects as ever Reigned; a Prince who imploys all his Cares,
Actions and Treasures for the attainment of those Ends, and the perpetuating
these Blessings to us and our Posterity, by Establishing unto every one of us
our Natural Birthright, Liberty and Property, both in Spirituals and Temporals,
which, most Sacred Majesty (out of the abundance of your Royal Bounty) has
been pleased so often to reiterate unto us, upon all occasions, especially in
your Majestyes late repeated Declaration of Indulgence, that should we admit of
the least Doubt or Scruple of the Sincerity of your Majesty's Intentions, we
must deprive our selves as Rationally, and become more Stupid than Brutes, or
which is worse, more malicious than the Common Enemy of Mankind, nay, should we
not most willingly concur with your Majesty's most Pious Intentions herein, and
contribute to the utmost of our Powers in promoting them, we should not deserve
the Earth we tread on, the Air we breath in, nor any other common Benefit we
naturally enjoy, wherefore, most Gracious Sovereign, in the deepest sense of
our most profound Duty, we lay our Selves, our Lives and Fortunes at your
Majesty's Feet, acknowledging all these Transcendent Favors we enjoy under
your Majesty's Government, promising hereby that we will readily Sacrifice all
that is dear to us in the promoting your Majesty's most Just, Gracious,
Merciful and Godly Declaration, by Abolishing the Test and other Penal Laws,
which have so long Tyrannized over, and Enslaved the Persons and Consciences of
your Majesty's Loyal Subjects, in Electing of such Members, for this your
Majesty's Loyal Borough, (when your Majesty in your Princely Wisdom shall
think fit to call a Parliament) as will heartily concur with us therein, as
well as in our Prayers, which we all unanimously offer to the great God of
Heaven, for the prolongation of your Majesty's happy Reign over us until you
see a PRINCE of WALES (whose Orient Beams we daily expect) in his full Glory,
ready to Support the Crowns and Sway the Scepters of your Majesty's Kingdoms,
the Government whereof we humbly pray may continue in your Royal Progeny, until
the Consummation of all Ages.

In Confirmation whereof we have hereunto put our Common Seal, and Subscribed
our Names,
this 16th Day of May, in the 4th Year of your Majesty's Reign, Anno Dom. 1688.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Address of your Majesty's Corporation of your City of Exeter.

WE your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects of your City of Exeter, in
our Common Council assembled, do think our selves highly obliged to render
Praise and Thanksgiving to the God of Heaven and Earth, the great Governor of
the World, for the Birth of a Royal Prince, a Blessing inestimable, and one of
the greatest to your most Sacred Majesty, and these Nations. Great Sir, we are
sure that all Men may now be satisfied, that Providence has not only favored,
but rewarded your Royal Conduct, by which Liberty and Peace have been promoted,
and maintained under the Shadow of your Scepter; whose Reign as it has been
without a Parallel the most Gracious, so may it be long and prosperous. May
your Majesty live to a good old Age, to see the Royal Prince inherit all your
Royal Virtues; and after your Majesty's long and prosperous Reign, may he be
(as your Majesty now is) a Blessing to these Nations. So pray your Majesty's
most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, who are and always shall be ready to serve
your Majesty with Lives and Fortunes, to the last drop of our Blood.

In Testimony whereof we have, this 20th Day of June, in the 4th Year of your
Majesty's Reign, affixed our Common Seal.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Address of the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, Common Council and
Burgesses of your Majesty's Ancient and Loyal Corporation of Berwick upon Tweed.

Most Dread Sovereign,
WE your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, though most remote in
Place, yet as early and zealous in Proximity of Affection as any other, being
struck with a profound sense of the due Acknowledgment we, as well as any other
of your Majesty's Subjects, owe to the great God of Heaven, and your most
Sacred Majesty as his Vicegerent over us, for your late and never too often to
be Commemorated most Gracious Declaration of free and general Indulgence, and
the many Benefits and Blessings we daily receive thereby, do in most humble
manner prostrate our selves at your Majesty's Feet, with all possible
Expressions of Gratitude. A Declaration which has brought a long with it, as it
were, a new Charter to this our Ancient Body, by which it has incorporated the
very Heart and Affections of every Member of it, and united them all as the
Heart of one Man, which is the best and surest way of Regulation. A Declaration
by which the most dark sullen Clouds of Jealousies and Fears in all unbyast
Men, as to the free enjoyment of their Religion and Property are dispelled from
our Horizon, and in which Your unparalled Grace and Bounty, like that
Universal Charity of the Sun shines equally upon all, the Unjust as well as the
Just; and by which, as in the Miraculous Preservation of Government in the Ark,
even Creatures of most contrary Principles live together in the quiet enjoyment
of themselves, under the Divine Influence of your Protection.

Wherefore, Most Dread Sovereign, to give you the earnest of a greater Harvest,
we hereby most heartily and sincerely declare, that we will on all Occasions
defend your Majesty's most Sacred Person and Government, with the utmost of our
Lives and Fortunes against all Opposers whatsoever: And that whenever it
shall Please your Majesty, in your Princely Wisdom, to call a Parliament, we do
hereby Testify, and unanimously Agree, to choose for Burgesses such as have
your Majesty's gracious Recommendations, and shall concur with your Majesty's
known pleasur, in Annulling and Abolishing the Penal Laws and Test; that so
your said gracious Declaration may likewise be the true Sense of all your
Subjects, in an Act of Parliament.

And lastly, Great Sir, let us, amongst the first of your Subjects, upon the
long wished for blessed Occasion, of the thrice happy Delivery of your great
and Royal Consort, Congratulate your most Sacred Majesty's; not only wishing
long Life, Health and Prosperity to the Prince, a Blessing to these Nations,
but shall also ever offer up our Prayers, that Almighty God will graciously
bestow a Male Posterity, from the same Royal Line, to sway the Scepter of these
Kingdoms to the end of the World.

In Testimony whereof, we have hereunto affixed the Seal of the said Borough,
this 16th day of June, in the Fourth Year of your Majesty's Reign, Anno Dom.
1688.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Address of your Majesty's Loyal Subjects, the Mayor, Recorder,
Aldermen, and all the Members of your Majesty's Ancient Corporation of Clisston
Dartmouth Hardness, in your County of Devon.

Dread Sovereign,
WE Presume (full of transports of Joy) to throw our selves at your Royal Feet,
heartily to Congratulate the happy Birth of the Prince, the greatest Blessing
that good Subjects could desire, or Heaven could grant: And (as the best
Obligation of Loyal Hearts) we sincerely offer up our Prayers and wishes, that
he may enjoy a long and happy Life; That your Sacred Majesty, as well for his
Sake, as for the invalue ble Good and Benefit of these Kingdoms, may live to
the utmost Period of humane Life, to instruct him, by your gracious Example, in
Piety, Prudence, Courage, and all the Royal Qualifications of a King, of which
your Sacred Majesty is the most Perfect Pattern. And when you shall change this
Crown for an Immortal One, may he then, with these your Dominions, inherit also
your Royal and Princely Virtues.

And, we presume also at this time, to repeat our fixed and Loyal Resolutions
of serving your Sacred Majesty on all occasions, with our Lives and Fortunes.
And we sincerely offer you our hearty Thanks, for your late Declaration of
Liberty of Conscience: And whenever your Majesty shall Summon a Parliament, we
will choose such Members as shall entirely, and without conditions, answer your
Royal Expectation, in Repealing the Penal Laws and Test, not thinking it
consistent with the Duty of Subjects, to make Conditions with their King. With
so Gracious a King! But as your Majesty's Mercy and Indulgence is free and
unlimitted, so shall our Obedience be. May your Sacred Majesty live long and
happily; may all your Enemies either heartily Repent and implore your Mercy, or
suffer by your Justice; and may your Throne be Established in Peace.

So heartily pray your Majesty's Loyal Subjects of this your Ancient Burough.

In Testimony whereof, we have affixed our Common Seal;
the 23d day of June, in the Fourth Year of your Majesty's Reign, Anno Dom.
1688.
The following was the first on the occasion of the Birth of the P. P. Wales.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble and hearty Address of the Mayour, Aldermen, and Burgesses, of your
Corporation of portsmouth.

Dread SIR,
HAving received by an Express from his Grace the Duke of Berwick, the joyful
News of her Majesty's being safely brought to Bed of a Prince, we thought it
our Duties, in the first place, to pay our humble and hearty Thanks to the
Almighty Hand that has bestowed this Blessing upon us, and has Crowned the
Wishes of all your good Subjects, with that Act of Grace which they have so
long and so earnestly prayed for.

In the next place, we must not, we cannot omit, to Congratulate your Majesty,
and your Royal Consort the Queen, in this great Jubilee of the Nation, in
renewing and confirming to your Sacred Majesty, by all the outward Marks of an
inward and real Joy, our true Allegiance to your Majestly and your Royal
Successors.

Permit us then, Great Sir, to make this our early Offering of Fealty, to the
Royal Infant in his Cradle; and to present him here with the first Fruits of
our Loyalty, our unseigned Wishes for his long Life and Happiness, that he may
inherit with the Crown the great Virtues of his Royal Parents; and when old
Age, the Public Cares, and Troubles of a Crown, has made you weary of this
(word) Printed in the Gazette, instead of [World;] and when that Hand which
gave you to us, shall take you from hence, to place you in a better, this young
Prince may succeed you in you Throne, and sway your Scepter with the same
Piety, Justice, and happy Temper, your Majesty has hitherto done (and we not
doubt but will always do) And since by Divine Providence we have been once more
Taught our Duties, and Heaven seems to be inclined, by this Blessing bestowed
upon us, to forgive the Nation its past Faults, we shall henceforth take more
care never to provoke that God, that gave us our King and this Prince, but
shall EVER say and pray, Long live King JAMES the Second, our Gracious Queen
MARY, and the PRINCE.

In Testimony of these our hearty Congratulations, and sincere Wishes, we have
caused the Seal of your Majesty's Corporation abovesaid, hereunto to be affixed.
Dated this 12th day of June, Anno Dom. 1688. and in the Fourth Year of your
Majesty's Reign.
July the 8th. the following presented to the King. To the KING's most
Excellent Majesty.
WE the Grand Inquest for the Body of the County of Middless, having a deep
Sense of your Majesty's Grace and Favor, in giving us and all your Subjects
Security and peace, by your Majesty's most Gracious Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, lately repeated and confirmed to us; do, in all Humility, return
our due and unfeigned Thanks to your Majesty for the same; and for your Royal
and pious Endeavors and Resolution, to perpetuate the present Tranquillity to
succeeding Generations, for their exceeding Benefit, and your Majesty's
everlasting Glory.

And we resolve, as much as in us lies, to contribute to so good and necessary
Work, and join our most humble and hearty Endeavors, that all Penal Laws, in
matters of Religion (save for the contempt and neglect thereof) and the unequal
Tests, may be Abrogated; That we and our Fellow Subjects having no partition
Wall between us, may unite in Love, Peace and Happiness, under your Majesty's
Gracious and Powerful Protection. We do most solemnly and heartily Congratulate
your Majesty's great Happiness and Satisfaction, in the Birth of our high
hopeful PRINCE, and account it no less Happiness to these Nations.

And it shall be (as our Duty) our constant, zealous Care, to pray to Almighty
God for the continuance of Life, Health, and Happiness, to his ROYAL HIGHNESS,
and for a Blessing on both your Majesty's in a numerous Issue, and with long
Life, and constant Happiness and Success, in all your Majesty's great and pious
Undertakings; and subscribe our selves

Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects and Servants.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Address of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, of your
Majesty's Loyal City of Durham, July 2d 1688.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
WE your Majesty's most Dutiful and Obedient Subjects of this Corporation,
having, in the first place, most humbly offered up our public Praises and
Thansgivings to Almighty God, for the happy Birth of the young Prince; the
greater Blessing that could Possibly descend upon these your Kingdoms; do now
hold our selves obliged also to present our most humble Congratulations to your
Sacred Majesty and your Royal Consort the Queen, upon this joyful occasion; and
shall always pray, that your Majesty's may be blessed with more Children, and
more Sons, that there never may be wanting one of your Royal Stock and Race, to
wear the Imperial Crown, and to sway the Scepter of these your Dominions.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Address of the Lord Lieutenant, Deputy Lieutenants, and Justices of
the Peace, of the County of Kent, at the General Quarter Sessions holden at
Cantorbury. the 10th day of July, 1688. for the Eastern Division of the said
County.

Dead SIR,
WE your Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, having rendered to Almighty God
our most sincere and humble Thanksgivings, for the ineffable Blessings bestowed
upon your Royal Majesty, your Kingdoms and Dominions, in the happy Birth of a
Prince. We do now (Sacred Sir) esteem it our Duty and highest Obligation,
prostrate at your Majesty's Feet, gratefully to acknowledge, that your
Majesty's admirable Goodness, Piety, and Justice, have obtained from our most
gracious God this so inexpressible a Blessing: The consideration whereof, as it
ought, so are we confidently assured, it will open the Eyes of all Men (who are
not wholly possessed with the Spirit of Contradiction) to behold, with grateful
Hearts, your Majesty's most Fatherly and Pious Care for the welfare of your
People: So that (when your Majesty shall think fit to call a Parliament) we
shall all, to the utmost of our Endeavors, make choice of such Persons to
serve therein, as may unite your Subjects in Charity and Christian
Correspondence, by their unanimous Consent to the Repeal of those disuniting
Penal Laws and Tests, whereby Divisions and Animosities have so long harbored
amongst us.

Great Sir, That Almighty God will grant your Sacred Majesty, your Royal
Consort the Queen, and his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, long Life,
Happiness, and Posterity, is the most zealous Prayer of,

Most Gracious SIR, Your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Address of the Clothiers of the Counties of Devon and Sommerset.
May it please Your Majesty,

WE cannot but in a due sense of your Majesty's great Goodness to us, render
our most humble and hearty Thanks, for your gracious Hearing our miserable
Complaints of the Exportation of Wool, and of your Majesty's speedy, as well as
effectual Redress thereof, in the issuing out your Commission for that purpose;
by which your Majesty has preserved and put a new Life to Trade, which, next
to the great and glorious Design of Liberty of Conscience, is undoubtedly the
best support of the Wealth and grandeur of a Nation; and therefore we can now
return with Joy to our respective Habitations.

And as it has pleased God, to our great Joy, to Bless your Majesty with a
Royal Prince, to sway the Scepter of these Kingdoms after your Majesty, so we
heartily pray God, there may never want of your Princely Posterity to sit on
the Throne of your Majesty, and that he may, in due time, inherit your Princely
Virtues, as well as the just Dominion over all your Kingdoms.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Address of the Grand Inquest at the General Quarter Sessions of the
Peace, held for the County Palatine of Durham, this 11th day of July, 1688.

Most Gracious Sovereign.
WE your Majesty's Loyal and Obedient Subjects, upon the first opportunity of
representing the Body of this Country, hold our selves obliged, next to our
public Thanksgivings to Almighty God, to Congratulate your Majesty and your
Royal Consort the Queen, in the most joyful News of the Birth of a young
Prince, now Prince of Wales, May his Royal Highness long Live, and your
Majesty's be blessed with a numerous Issue, and your Throne Established in all
succeeding Ages; which is the hearty and unanimous Desire of Your Majesty's
most Dutiful Subjects, etc.

We the Lord Lieutenant, High Sheriff, and Justices of the Peace of this
County, now present at the said Quarter Sessions of the Peace, do concur with
the Grand Inquest in this Address.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble and hearty Congratulation of the High Sheriff, Justices of the
Peace, and Grand Jury of the County of Worcester, holden at the
General-Sessions of the Peace, the 10th day of July. Anno Dom. 1688.

PErmit, Dread Sir! amongst the loud Peals of Joy, that ring in every corner of
this Kingdom, to join our Huzza with the rest of your Majesty's Subjects, for a
Blessing, bestowed on us, so long, so earnestly desired. Happy we that live to
see a Prince of Wales from your Loins, and happy our Posterity, that live to be
Governed by a Prince of such a Father. May your Majesty live long, to see those
great Endowments Heaven has enriched him with, and he live to outdo whatever
History speaks Great of his Ancestor's Actions; and, if possible, even those of
James the Second; whilst we contribute, by a steadfast Loyalty, to farther all
your just Designs, and not frowardly oppose you in any thing, since Heaven
seems to grant what you ask! And that your desire may never receive denial,
shall be the constant Prayer and Wishes of, etc.

The humble and unanimous Congratulation of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace
for the County of Sommerset, at their General Quarter Sessions held at
Bridgwater, the 10th day of July, in the Fourth Year of his Majesty's Reign.
Anno Dom. 1687. Subscribed likewise by several other Gentlemen then and there
present.
Most Gracious Soverign.
Although we have, with all sincerity, made our respective Acknowledgment to
Almighty God, for the great Blessing he has vouchsafed this Nation, by making
your Majesty the Parent of a most Hopeful and Illustrious Prince, and have
given us great and ample Demonstrations of our Joy for the same, in our several
stations, as we were capable; yet nevertheless, we do not think our selves
acquitted of our Duty, without an humble Congratulation, with your Majesty and
your Royal Consort, upon this happy Occasion; and assuring your Majesty, that
whenever the overruling power (by which Kings Reign) shall resume that Crown
you now so justly wear, we will bear all Faith and true Allegiance to this
Illustrious Prince; but that the commencement thereof may be late, are, and
shall always be, the Prayers of

Your Majesty's most Faithful and most Obedient Subjects.

To the KING's Most Excellent Majesty.
May it please your Majesty.
THE Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons, of your Majesty's Ancient and Loyal City of
York, were transported with Joy, at the Birth of the young Prince: And after
they had made what Demonstrations they could at Home of their Rejoicing,
thought it their Duty to send, and have sent, some of the principal Members of
their Body, to Congratulate your Majesty for so great and extraordinary a
Blessing, both to your Majesty and your Subjects, The great God who, has at
sundry times miraculously preserved your Majesty both at Sea and Land, has at
this time enlarged his Blessings to your Majesty and your People, by giving us
a Royal Prince, who, we pray, may live long to Inherit the Virtues and Crown of
his Ancestors, and that there may never want one of your Royal Family to sway
the Scepter of these Kingdoms; for the support and maintenance whereof, we are,
and shall always be ready, to Sacrifice our Lives and Fortunes. And that the
God of Heaven would be graciously pleased to shower down his Blessings upon
your Majesty, your Royal Consort, the young Prince, and the whole Royal Family,
is the hearty Prayer of us

Your Majesty's most Dutiful, Obedient, and Loyal Subjects.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty.
The hearty Congratulation of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, of your
Majesty's City of Bath.

Dread Sovereign,
NO sooner did the happy News of a Prince being born, reach our Ears, but we
thought it our Duty to Congratulate your Majesty for so great a Blessing; and
knowing it is unjust to be silent on this occasion, we do therefore offer up
our Thanks to the great Jehovah, for the sending of an Heir to your Majesty and
your Kingdoms from your Royal Loins; which is that alone that can confirm our
present Happiness under your Government, and give us a comfortable prospect of
the continuance of it; and we, as far as in us lies, shall, in our Proper
station, contribute to the Assisting your Majesty in your pious Intentions, in
settling these your Kingdoms in Peace and Tranquillity, whenever your most
Sacred Majesty shall in your Princely Wisdom think fit to require it of us. And
we heartily implore the Almighty, to send your Majesty and us more such Royal
Pledges, by your gracious Consort, and bless Your Majesty with long Life, to
see our young Prince, by your Majesty's tender Care, fitted to Govern all his
people. These are the Prayers of us your Majesty's most Dutiful and Obedient
Subjects.

In Testimony whereof we have hereunto affixed our Common Seal,
this 25th Day of June, in the 4th Year of His Majesty's Reign.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The. Humble Address of the Mayor, Aldermen, Bailiffs and Capital Citizens of
the City of Carlisle,

Great SIR!
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, cannot but express our exceeding Joy
(that if we may-say it) transports us above Mortals, and places us on Earth in
a most Heavenly Condition, living under Your Majesty's most Sacred Protection,
a Prince Born for high Exploits, and the Peace of these Three flourishing,
though lately distracted Kingdoms, as the whole Series of nine Years Revolution
can testify. Your Majesty in a most high measure has been the care of
Almighty God, whose Projects never fail, but ever in the end brings all humane
policy that is contrary to Confusion; Witness your Miraculous Preservations at
Sea amidst a number of unparalleled Dangers: Witness the easy Conquest You
gained, or rather the just Punishment You inflicted upon Rebels, who durst
oppose your Sacred Authority: But to close all, witness this Heavenly Blessing
to complete the Miracle. A Prince Born to the Worlds Astonishment, that gives
us hopes of a numerous Issue, an Heir (we question it not) that will Inherit as
well as Crown his Father's Heroic Virtnes, (Qualities above the greatness of
Constantine) and in Conclusion if need be, finish what Your Majesty, to make us
happy, has so fortunately begun, for whose Safety we faithfully promise to
spend our Lives and Fortunes, and will dally bless God, that has given You a
Fruitful Consort,

In Testimony whereof, we have hereunto affixed our Common-Seal
the 2d Day of July, in the 4th Year of your Majesty's Reign, Anno Domini,
1688.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble and unanimous Address of your Majesty's Justices of the Peace, at
the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace holden at Leads, for the West Riding
of the County of York, this 12th day of July, in the Fourth Year of your
Majesty's Reign.

MAY it please your Sacred to suffer us your most Loyal Subjects, moved by the
most ardent Affection, profoundest Duty, and truest Interest, to Congratulate
You, our and the three Kingdoms Happiness, in the Birth of a Prince; humbly
praying the God of Heaven, for Life, Health, and Prosperity to your Majesty,
his Royal Highness, and your Royal Consort, with the addition of whatever may
contribute to your and their Happiness here: And after a long Reign over us,
may your Majesty inherit an Erernal Crown in a better Kingdom: And may there
never want one of your Royal Line to sway the Scepter of these Kingdoms, till
Time shall be no more, is the most fervent, sincere, and unfeigned Prayer of

Your Majesty's Obedient Loyal Subjects

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Address of the Grand Jury for the County of Hertford, at the
Assizes held at Hertford the 23 day of July, in the fourth Year of your
Majesty's Reign,

SIR,
HAD not a Party averse to comply with your Majesty's gracious Inclinations,
been too prevalent in this County, an Address would have been sooner made to
your most Sacred Majesty, for your most gracious Declaration of Indulgence; and
tho we are too to late, yet we hope we shall not be unwelcome, in making a due
and just return of our most humble and hearty Thanks, and grateful
Acknowledgments, for your Majesty's gracious Intentions to your Subjects in
general, in Abrogating of the Penal Laws and Test.

We will not (like others) go about thanking your Majesty for your particular
Favors, of promising to maintain the Established Religion of the Church of
England only, but do freely, willingly, and unanimously, give our best Thanks,
general and without any restriction whatsoever.

We are neither for designing Evil, nor for carrying it on when it is begun;
therefore do promise our utmost Endeavors (when your Majesty shall, in your
great Wisdom, think fit to call a Parliament) to choose, and promote the
choosing, of such Representatives as will, in all respects, comply with your
Majesty's Desires. We all heartily Thank your Majesty, for your late
Proclamation against Swearing.

And lastly, we do (with all the Joy our Hearts can wish, or Tongues express)
Congratulate the Birth of the Prince of WALES, a Blessing sent from Heaven for
the perpetual Estabishment of Liberty of Conscience. May all the Happiness of
Heaven and Earth attend your Majesty, your Royal Consort, and the young Prince;
and may we cease living, when we cease being

Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Address of Your Loyal and Dutiful Subjects the Mayor, Recorder,
Aldermen and Common Council, of your Majesty's Corporation and Borough of
King's Lynn, in the County of of Norfolk.

Great SIR!
WE Your Majesty's Dutiful Subjects crave leave of Your Majesty, and Your Royal
Consort, that we may join with Your Majesty's, in offering our most humble and
hearty Thanks to God Almighty, for sending Your Majesty a Son, and us a Prince;
and further we beg of Your Majesty's to accept our Cordial Thanks, for Your
Majestles late Favors to the Body of this Corporation; as also for Your
Princely Condescension and Affection, by both Your Gracious Declarations, not
only extending to the Church of England; but to all other Your Peaceable and
Loyal Subjects, assuring us by Your Royal Word, that You will stand by us,
whereby we are not only obliged, but resolved, when Your Majesty shall think
fit to call a Parliament, we will endeavor to Elect such Members as shall make
Your Majesty happy, and Your Subjects easy. And shall ever pray for Your
Majesty's long Life and peaceable Reign over us.

In witness whereof we have Fixed our Town Seal,
the 2d Day of July, in the 4th Year of Your Majesty's most Gracious Reign,
Annoque Domini, 1688.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Address of several Members of the Corporation, and other Freemen
and Inhabitants of your Ancient City of Bath.

May it please your Majesty,
NO sooner did the happy News of the Prince's Birth reach our Ears, but we of
this Place thought it our Duty, in a more especial manner, to be early in the
return of our Praises to the Almighty, for so great a Blessing upon us and your
Three Kingdoms, and in Congratulating your Majesty and your Royal Consort, of
being the joyful Parents of so good a Son; a Gift which the whole Nation ought
to esteem as the Reward of Heaven, upon that continued Series of Goodness and
Indulgence, which your Majesty has ever since the beginning of your most
Auspicious Reign extended to your Subjects; particularly that of your
Compassionate Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, whereby as you are pleased
to suspend the execution of all Penal Laws in matters of Religion, and the
requiring of any Oaths or Tests from any; so do we, upon our Allegiance to You
our Sovereign, promise and engage, that whenever your Majesty shall think fit
to call a Parliament, such of us as shall have a power of Electing, will choose
none to serve therein, but who will give us full assurance, that they will
endeavor the total Abrogation of them.

And that your Majesty may have the ready concurrence of both your Houses in
these gracious Intentions, and enjoy the Comfort and Satisfaction of seeing the
Fruits and Consequences thereof, by a long and prosperous Reign in Peace and
Plenty, (having survived the Murmurings and Discontents of a malevolent Party)
the Prince your Son arrived to Maturity of Years and Understanding, and a
numerous Offspring from your Royal Loins, which may perpetuate your Name and
Memory, and even baffle Mortality it self, shall be the constant Prayer of,

Dread Sovereign, your Majesty's ever Dutiful and Loyal Subjects.

To the KING and QUEEN's most Excellent Majesty's.
The Humble Congratulation of the Lord Lieutenant and Deputy Lieutenant, the
High Sheriff, and the Grand Jury, with the rest of the Justices of the Peace of
this County of Essex, holden as the Assizes in Brentwood, this 27th Day of
July, 1688.

Great Sir,
WE your Majesty's most Loyal and Obedient Subjects, having returned our most
humble and hearty thanks to Almighty God for the Inestimable Blessing conferred
on your most Sacred Majesty, your Kingdoms and Dominions, in the happy Birth of
a Prince,

Now (Dread Sir) assure our selves that it is our highest Duty and Obligation
to lay our selves at your Majesty's Feet, thankfully acknowledging, that your
Majesty's Goodness, Piety and Justice, having obtained this so unspeakable a
Blessing from our most gracious God, will open the Hearts and Eyes of all Men,
to behold with Loyal and Thankful Respects your Majesty's Pious and indulgent
Care of the Welfare and Happiness of all your People. And we are resolved, that
when your Majesty shall, in your great Wisdom, call a Parliament, we will
unanimously Elect such Men as shall answer your Majesty's Expectation in
uniting your Subjects in Charity and Christian Correspondency.

Great Sir, That the Almighty will grant your Sacred Majesty, your Consort the
Queen, and his Royal Highness the Prince, a long Life Prosperity and Happiness,
and the most fervent Prayers,

Dread Sir, of your Majesty's most Dutiful, Loyal and Obedient Subjects.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Address of the High Sheriff, Justices of the Peace, and the Grand
Jury of the County of Oxon, at the General Assizes held at Oxford, the 28th Day
of July, 1688.

Dread SIR!
AS we are sensible the best Addresses that Subjects can make, are thereturns
of Duty and Obedience to their Princes Commands, we should not have presumed
upon this Application, but that full Hearts, like full Banks, will overflow:
The Blessing God Almighty has been pleased to bestow on your Majesty and this
Realm, by sending a PRINCE of WALES, is a Happiness too large to be contained
within the narrow compass of our Breasts; wherefore we could not but join in
our Particulars to the Universal Joy of the whole Kingdom. Rreceive therefore,
Great Sir, the Congratulations flowing from Hearts full of Loyalty which your
Majesty shall allways, find when ever Your Commands shall call us to a
performance; and hope there will be none, who hereafter will dare to srown on
Your Royal Designs, since Heaven Smilis on all Your Actions, whither we will
send sresh our dally Prayers for Your Majesty's and the Prince's long Life and
Happiness; and hope by constant Soliciting the Divine Goodness, to obtain a
Second Blessing to this Nation, that the Queen may have a Duke of York; for
which, let the Three Kingdoms join till Heaven hears our prayers, and all
concur with us in saying, Amen.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Address of your Majesty's Justices of the Peace in this the North
Riding of the County of York, at the General Quarter Sessions hold at North
Allerton, by Adjournment, the 17th Day of July, 1688.

Most Dread Sovereign,
THough we are out done in Point of Time by some of our fellow Subjects, yet we
may affirm none approach Your Throne with more joyful and grateful Hearts than
We, for the great Blessing God Almighty has bestowed on your Sacred Majesty,
and the Kingdom, by the happy Birth of his Royal Highness the Prince. of Wales.

We beg (Sacred Sir) leave to Congratulate with you for this blessing reveived
and that We may pray and wish for his long Life and Health and for the enerease
of your oyal Family, that After-Ages may know, and enjoy an equasity of that
Peace and Plenty under the Government of your direct Line, in which we, into
your wise and just Government (to the envy of our Neighboars) now flourish.

Having owned the vast Advantages we possoss, by your not yet equalled Justice,
permit Us, (Great Sir) being the best Return we are able to make, to all are
you of our willing Submission, and ready concurrence, to all your designed
Points of Government, and particularly to that of taking away the Penal Laws
and Tests, the best Expedient (we are satisfied) to make this Nation great and
happy.

To the KING.
May it please your Sacred Majesty,
IF the Yearly Duty we pay your Majesty in a general Meeting of Your Royal
Purroughs had not called Us together at this time, yet we had (after thanking
Almighty God in our respective Buroughs for the Birth of the Young Prince)
designed to have met of purpose, for Acknow'edging the great. Obligation we owe
Your Majesty in leagthning out, even beyond Your own Life, the Happiness and
Quier which we justly expect, during the Prince's life: Nor do we doubt but
that the Enemies of our Peace will, upon his Birth, find it necessary for them
to lay aside all hopes which they entertained of being able to trouble our
tranquillity; and that with him God will be stow upon Your Majesty that devout
Gratitude which prevails with his infinite Goodness: to bless You with the
entire Submission of Your Subjects, and Your Subjects with the happiness of
Your long and vigorous Life.

Great Sir, Interest as well as Duty, does tie your Royal Buroughs to a more
immediate Dependence upon that Royal Authority, which gave them both their
Being and Privileges; and experience has now obliged us to believe, that you
make our Interest your own. And therefore we do now again renew to your
Majesty, the sincere offer of our Lives and Fortunes, being much enlivened by
the new hopes which spring freshly from this occasion. And to Testify our
extraordinary Joy upon it, we have sent your Majesty's Provost of Edinburgh
(the chief of our Representatives, and one very much esteemed amongst us for
Loyalty) to testify beyond what Letter can do, that there are none of your
Majesty's Subjects more joyful. upon this occasion, than, May it please your
sacred Majesty, Your Majesty's most Humble, most Dutiful, and most Loyal
Subjects and Servents, the Commissioners of the Royal Borough of your
Majesty's Ancient Kingdom of Scotland.

Signed by Warrant of the General Convention of Buroughs, by our Praeses and
Clerk our particular Subscriptions being Recorded in our Registers.
Subscribed thus: Magnus Prince, Praeses, Ga. Rocheid, CI.
Edinburgh July 7. 1688.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty,
The Humble Address of the Clergy of the County-Palatinate of Chester, who
published the late gracious Declaration in their Churches, for Liberty of
Conscience.

WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, well weighing what we, as
such, ought to render to so Sacred and Gracious a King, reckoned we owed this,
and higher Instances of our Obedience, in pursuance of which, and of Your
Majesty's Order in Council, we heartily read the Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, not repining that all other our Fellow Subjects should enjoy with
us a Portion of your Royal Favor. We are well aware that many have well
deserved; and as to the other Number, toward whom you go the Courteous and
Noblest Way-of Conquering, we hope your Mercy may be successful; or at least
your Power will preserve you safe. But if is Matter of the Declaration were not
according to our Wishes, yet the establishing of it is according to our Duty,
since it is issued out from the express Pierogative of your Supremacy over us;
and we are required by what is Statute Law, the Rubric of our Liturgy, to
publish what is enjoined by the King, or our Bishop, (whose Care herein was
remarkable) as much as what is prescribed in the Rules of this Book. So that we
cannot, but with Trouble of Mind, hear of the Proceedings of the Seven Bishops;
who though they tenderly promised the Dissenters something, yet refused to do
their part about the Declaration, lest they should be Parties to it; which
Reason we, with due Modesty, (and relying upon a Higher Authority) esteem
insufficient, seeiag the Parliament of 62. did not think the Reading the Common
Prayer was approving of it, without Assent and Consent publicly declared.

We therefore, in all Submission, become earnest, though too mean, Intercessors
to your most Gracious Majesty, in behalf of the Church of England, That the
Faults of those, and others, may not be laid to our Charge, in whose Communion
there are many, and we hope there will be more, who concur in promoting the
Purposes of your mild Government. We farther beg leave to make our
Congratulations for the Happy Birth of the Young Prince, in his Hereditary
Successive Kingdom. We in this Palatinate, are the first Lot of Inheritance to
the Firstborn of our Kings; and as we have a greater part in him, so we have a
more plentiful Joy, that he is born to us; praying a long Life to him, and the
inheriting of his Royal Father's Crowns and Virtues: We hereby bind our selves
to conclude steadfastly,

Your Majesty's most Devoted, Obedient, and Firm Subjects and Servants.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty,
The Humble Address of the Gentlemen of the Grand Jury, for the County of Kent,
at the Assizes held at Rochester, Aug. the 6th. 1688.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
IF abundant Duty in some, or too little in others, have hitherto retarded an
Unanimous Address, and that just Tribute of Veneration, which all your Subjects
owe, and most have cheerfully paid your Majesty for a thousand Princely
Favors; but above all, for your Universal Indulgence, and more than Fatherly
Tenderness, even toward the most froward and undeserving. The Birth of a Royal
Infant now opens all our Eyes, our Hearts and Mouths, to see and admire, and
publish as well the propitious Conduct of Heaven over your Sacred Majesty, as
your Majesty's over us; both which instead of resenting past Ingratitudes, go
on still showring new Blessings on our Heads.

Permit us then, Great Sir! to throw our selves at your Majesty's Feet, and
prostrate, with all Humility, tender you, and your Royal Consort, unfeigned,
though late, Congratulations, for the inestimable Jewel you have bestowed upon us.

Long may our Illustrious Prince live, Heaven's Darling, as well as ours; and,
by inheriting the Heroic Virtues of his August Parents, secure to future Ages
the Happiness your most Serene Government has restored to ours.

And indeed, what can hereafter trouble England's Peace, when, to its
Impregnable, Native Strength, you shall have added the more Invincible, and, in
manner, Supernatural Union of all English Hearts?

That your approaching Parliament, Sir, may readily concur with your Majesty's
Gracious Designs, in order thereto, shall be the Great Endeavor, as well as
the Fervent Prayer of.

Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty,
The Humble and Congratulatory Address of the High Sheriff, Deputy Lieutenants,
Justices of the Peace, and the Grand Jury of the County of Hereford, at the
Assizes held at Hereford, on the 8th. day of August, in the 4th. Year of Your
Majesty's most Happy Reign.

Most Dread Sovereign,
WE Your Majesty's Liege People must acknowledge, that it is our Duty to
manifest our Resentment to your Sacred Majesty, after our Thansksgiving to
Almighty God (by whom Princes reign) for such a transcendent Mercy and Favor
from Heaven, as the Birth of his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, is, to
Your Majesty and these Kingdoms; especially, when we consider that it falls
upon us after so many evident and gracious Signals of Divine Providence, not
only in the Manifold and Miraculous Preservation of your Majesty's Royal
Person, but in the Establishment of your Majesty upon the Throne of your
Glorious Ancestors: Insomuch that we may justly raise some Confidence in our
selves (except obdurate Malice prevails) the Eyes of most thoughtful Men will
be opened to see the concurrence of the same Providence, attending your Majesty
in those your Royal, Great, and Good Intentions, for the Honor, Welfare,
Peace, and Happiness of this Nation, signified in your Majesty's late gracious
Declaration: Humbly assuring your Majesty, we shall use our utmost Endeavors
to elect such Representatives, as may comply with your Majesty in so Glorious a
Work, and always remain

Your most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects.

To the KING'S most Excellent Majesty,
The Humble Address of the Grand Jury, at the General Quarter Sessions of the
Peace holden for the Borough of Devizes in the County of Wilts, in the
Guild Hall of the said Borough, the 20th. day of July 1688, in the 4th. Year of
Your Majesty's Reign.

Great Sir,
WE still enjoying the good Effects of your Majesty's Declaration of Liberty of
Conscience, do continue our Thanks to God for inclining your Royal Heart to do
that, by which the Fears of many are vanished, and more than was expected is
enjoyed.

And since it has Pleased Almighty God to bless your Majesty with a Son, and
us with a Prince, which we hope is an ineffable Blessing to this Nation, we can
do no less, and by this we do humbly congratulate your Majesty and your Royal
Consort on this Occasion. Now that Heaven may so preserve this Prince, that
when your Majesty (whose Life God long preserve) shall fall asleep with your
Royal Ancestors, he may sway the Scepter of these Realms and Dominions, with
such Wisdom, Justice, and Piety, that his Name may be eternized, shall be the
Prayer of

Your Majesty's most Loyal, and Obedient Subjects.
We the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of the aforesaid Borough, having seen
the aforesaid Address, do concur therewith: And in Testimony thereof, have set
our Common Seal of the Corporation in the Guild Hall, aforesaid,
this 28th. day of July, Anno Domini, 1688.
To the KING'S most Excellent Majesty,
The Humble Address of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of Your
Majesty's Ancient and Loyal City of Hereford.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
WE beseech your Majesty to suffer us (amongst the rest of your Loyal Subjects)
thus humbly and publicly to express our grateful Sense of that happy Addition,
which it has pleased God to make to the Royal Family, by giving your Majesty
and your Kingdoms the desirable Blessing of a Prince to inherit your Royal
Virtues and Dominions: And most humbly pray that your Royal Issue may grow more
and more numerous to succeed to your Imperial Crown in all future Generations.

We likewise crave your Majesty's leave (once more) thankfully to acknowledge
those invaluable Blessings we enjoy under your Majesty's most Gracious
Government.

And do most humbly assure your Sacred Majesty, that as this Place has
heretofore been plundered and ransacked again and again, for their unalterable
Fidelity to the Crown, so we will ever owe Dutiful and Loyal Obedience to your
Majesty, Your Heirs, and Lawful Successors.

In Testimony whereof, we have hereunto put our Common Seal at the Guild Hall
of your said City

To the KING'S most Excellent Majesty,
The Humble Address of the Council and Assembly of Your Majesty's Island of
Jamaica, convened under his Grace the Duke of Albemarle.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
WE your Majesty's most Dutiful Subjects of this new World, warmed by the
Benign Influence of your Royal Beams, (from which no distance of Place can
seclude us) do in all humble and grateful Manner acknowledge the continuance of
that unparelled Blessing, the Protection of the Church of England, given to us
by your Royal Word at your happy Accession to the Crown, and also for the
Toleration and general Indulgence of Religion your Majesty has been pleased to
grant the rest of our Fellow Subjects.

Royal Sir, We cannot conclude here without further acknowledging unto your
Majesty the transcendent Honor done unto this Infant Colony in appointing so
Illustrious a Prince to govern us; from whose Care and Conduct, with the
continuance of your Majesty's unparalled Favors toward us, we may justly
hope for many Advantages promising on our Parts, (as we hereby do) a never to
be shaken Loyalty to your Majesty, due Obedience to his Grace, and our heartly
Endeavors, for the good and preservation of this your Majesty's Islands,
Praying unto Almighty God for a long continuance of your happy Reign over us,
and that there may never be wanting of your Royal Issue to sit upon the Throne
from Generation to Generation. Amen.

To the KING'S most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Address of the major Part of the Grand Jury of Cumberland, at the
general Assizes held at Carlisle The 21st. of August 1688.

May it please Your Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, humbly beg leave that we
may heartily Congratulate your Majesty, and your Royal Consort, and offer our
most humble and due Thanks to God Almighty, for sending your Majesty a Son, and
us a Prince, to be your Majesty's Successor to your Crown and Virtues, a
Blessing not more joyfully received, than earnestly desired, to quiet and
compose all restless and disorderly Spirits, That your Majesty, and the whole
Nation, may reap the Benefit of your most Gracious Declaration: And we will use
our utmost Endeavors to elect such Members for your Majesty's next Parliament,
as shall make your Majesty most happy, and your Subjects easy. We do also
cordially rejoice in the joyful Deliverance of the Prince from his late
dangerous Indisposition; not doubting but God will bless him with a long and
heathful Life, to the great Comfort of your most Sacred Majesty, and all your
Loyal Subjects. May your Majesty enjoy the greatest and utmost Blessings this
World can afford, with whatever is most dear to your Sacred Majesty, and also a
long and peaceable Reign over us: So prays your Majesty's most Dutiful and
Loyal Subjects, as we shall ever be ready to manifest when Occasion calls with
our Lives and Fortunes, in Defense of your Person, and your Heirs, in your
Majesty's Prerogatives, against all Opposers whatsoever.

To the KING'S most Excellent Majesty,
The Humble Address of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of the Borough
of Sudbury, in the County of Suffolk.

Great Sir.
ALmighty God having blessed your Majesty and your Royal Consort our gracious
Queen, with a Son, and your People with a Prince. We with all Alacrity
agreeable to the Happiness, and with Duty, and Humility which becomes Loyal,
and Obedience Subjects, do congratulate your Majesty. Such Blessings are from
Heaven, the Rewards of Virtue, of which your Majesty has given this Nation
many and Signal Testimonies, particularly, and for which we have brought our
Hearty and Unfeigned Thanks, in that your Majesty has been graciously pleased
to declare, that you will Protect and maintain the Church of England, as now by
Law Established, and all other your Majesty's Subjects, in the free Exercise of
their Religion, and in the Peaceable Enjoyment of their Civil Rights and
Properties. And as your Majesty intends to entail these Blessings upon your
People, by a Law; so we do assure your Majesty that when in your Princely
Wisdom, you shall think convenient to call a Partlament, we will heartily
endeavor to choose such Members as shall concur with your Majesty therein. And
it shall ever be our Prayers that your Majesty's Reign may be long and
prosperous: That our Prince may inherit your Inimitable Virtues with the
Crowns, and both enjoy a Crown of Glory.

To the KING and QUEENS Most Excelient Majesty's,
The Humble Congratulation of the Lord Lieutenant, the Deputy Lieutenant, the
High Sheriff, and the Grand Inquest, with the rest of the Justices of the
Peace, and Gentlemen of your Majesty's County Palatinate of Lancaster, holden
at the general Assizes this 29th day of August 1688.

Dread Sovereign,
Nothing but the want of a more early Opportunity of representing the Body of
this County, could have withheld your Majesty's most Loyal and Joyful
Subjects, from a more speedy Congratulation of your Majesty, and your Royal
Consort, upon the Birth of the Prince of Wales; Succession in the Right Line
has been the Care, and now immediately from your Majesty is the Joy, not only
of us, but of all your Dominions, the transports of Eorreign Courts, upon this
Illustrious Birth is an early presage, that his Fame shall be more extended,
and his Virties more shining, than their Illuminations. May his Heroic
Endowments fill all Europe with Terror and Regard, yout Majesty's with Comfort
and Satisfaction, and your Dominion with Peace, Security, and Happiness, till
time shall be no more, which shall be the faithful Endeavor, and lasting
Prayer of

your Majesty's most dutiful Subjects and Faithful Servants.

To the KING's Most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Address of your Majesty's Corporation of Garstang in the County
Palatine of Lancaster.

Great Sir,
IT has been the Singular Happiness of this Corporation, that how often so ever
we have hither to approached your Royal Feet, with the tender of our Duty and
Loyalty, we were always dismissed with the Comfort of your Majesty's gracious
Acceptance: These former Encouragemeets, together with the Happy News of the
Birth of the Illustious Prince of Wales, has doubled both our Duty and
Diligence, to return again with Joy and Satisfaction to your Sacred Feet,
humbly to congratulate both your Majesty and your Royal Consort of this Happy
Occasion.

May Heaven bleso both your Majesty and these Kingdoms, in fixing the Throne,
and advancing the Crown, by a name pous Isse: the growing Virtues, and
exemplary Conduct of his Royal Highness, in future Times add Comfort to your
Majesty years, relieve the Cares and Toil of the Scepter, engage the
Affections, and fix the Loyalty. of your Subjects:

So pray your Majesty's ever Loyal Subjects and Dutiful humble Servants.

To the KING's Most Excellent Majesty,
The Humble Address of the Lord Lieutenant, High Sheriff, Deputy Lieutenant,
Justices of the Peace, and Grand Jury of the County of Northumberland,
assembled at the Assizes held at the Castle of Newcastle for that County the
13th day of August 1688.

Great Sir.
HAving already with most sincere Devotion pald our Acknowledgments to God
Almighty, the Father of Mercies; we come now most humbly Prostrate at your
Majesty's Feet, to offer our hearty Congratulations, to your Majesty and Royal
Comfort, for the inestimable blessing of a Prince of Wales, a Prince given by
divine Providence, to the Prayers of your Kingdoms, to perpetuate your Majesty
Glory, and our Felicity: May he so thrive, (and we doubt it not) under the
Great Examples of your Majesty's Piety and Prudence, that you your self may
live to see him consummate in all the true Arts of Government. We further
promise with the best of our endeavors to send such Members to the next
Parliament, as will Cooperate with your Majesty's gracious Intentions,
(according to your Royal Declaration) in repealing the Penal Laws and Test, as
Obstacles to your Majesty's Glory and equal Justice, as well as to our Ease and
Happiness, well knowing that your Majesty will heal us as a most Indulgent and
Impartial Father does his many Sons, giving every one a share in his Esteem and
Affection, according to their particular Merits and Qualifications.

FINIS.

