English Liberties: Or, The Freeborn SUBJECT's Inheritance, CONTAINING

I. MAGNA CHARTA, The Petition of Right, The Habeas Corpus Act; and diverse
other most Useful Statutes: With Large COMMENTS upon each of them.

II. The Proceedings in Appeals of Murder; The Work and Power of Parliaments;
The Qualifications necessary for such as should be chosen to that great Trust.
Plain Directions for all Persons concerned in Ecclesiastical Courts; and how to
prevent or take off the Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo. As also the Oath and
Duty of Grand and Petty Juries.

III. All the Laws against Conventicles and Protestant Dissenters with Notes,
and Directions both to Constables and others concerned, thereupon; And an
Abstract of all the Laws against Papists.

LONDON: Printed by G. Larkin, for Benjamin Harris, at the Stationers Arms and
Anchor in the Piazza under the Royal Exchange.

A TABLE OF Some of the most Material Contents.
THe Nature and Happiness of our English Government, from page 1. to p. 5.
Magna Charta faithfully Recited p. 6 to p. 19. A Comment upon Magna Charta p.
19. to p. 30. It Is but a Declaration of what the people had right to before. p.
19. The occasion and means of obtaining Magna Charta, p. 20. Ill Council
persuade King Hen 3. to Revoke Magna Charta, and the sad end of that wicked
Counselor, p. 21. Liberties what, p. 24. Monopolies are against Magna Charta,
p. 25. The King cannot send any man out of England against his will, p. 25.
Peers what, p. 26. Commitment, The necessary circumstances where Legal, p. 27.
Justice its three properties, p. 28. Judges are to obey no Commands from the
King, though under the Great or Privy Seal (much less signified by any little
whispering Courtier) against Law, p. 28. Protection when unlawful, p. 29.
The Statute of Confirmation of the Charter, p. 31 A Solemn Curfe of the Clergy
against the Breakers of the Charter, p. 33. Another Curse to the same purpose,
p. 34 The Statute de Tallageo non Concedendo That the King shall lay no
Burdens on his people, but by their Consent in Parliament, p. 36. A Comment
thereupon, p. 38. to p. 40. There are Omissions and Errors in the Common
Printed Statute-Books, p. 40.
The Stat. cf 25. Edw. 3. declaring what Offenses shall be Treason, p. 40. A
Comment thereupon, p. 43. to p. 50. To Compass the Death of the King what, p.
44. A Colateral Heir to the Crown is not within this Statute, p. 45. Probably
Attaint, an Error in the Statute-Book for provably Attaint, p. 45. Offenses
made Treason since this Statute, p. 50.
The Stat. 13. Car. 2. cap. 1. for safety of His Majesty's Person, etc. p. 51
Notes thereupon, p. 57. to 63. There must be two not only Lawful, but Credible
Witnesses on this Statute, p. 58. and 59. Within what time the Party must be
questioned and Indicted, p. 60. The Sentence or Judgment in High Treason, and
the signification of each Branch thereof, p. 61. The King cannot allow a Lord,
Convict of Felony, the favor of being Beheaded, p. 62. Challenge what, and to
how many, p. 62.
The Statute, 2. Edw. 3. cap. 2. In what Cases only the King shall grant
Pardons, p. 63. The Comment thereon, p. 64. The nature, form and proceedings in
Case of Appeals of Murder, etc. Particularly opened to the meanest Capacity,
from p. 67, to p. 74. Two Statutes, That a Parliament shall be holden once
every year, p. 75. The Comment. p. 75. The Act of the 16th. Car. 2. that
holding of Parliaments, shall not be discontinued above three years at the
most, p. 76.
A not able Discourse of the Antiquity, use and power of PARLIAMENTS, and the
Qualifications of such Gentlemen as are fit to be Chosen the peoples
Representatives, p. 77. to p. 110. Parliament, the signification of the word,
p. 78. City what, and how it differs from a Borough, p. 79. Three Estates
what, the Bishops none of them, p. 80. The Parliament has Right to order the
Succession to the Crown, and he forfeits all his Goods and Chattels that denies
it, p. 82. and 84. The particular Business of Parliaments, p. 83. To punish ill
Favorites and Corrupt Ministers of State, p. 85. Examples of great Offenders
punished, Committed, degraded, and sentenced by Parliament, and particularly
some Parsons for Pragmatical Preaching, p. 85. to 92 Reflections on
State-Divines, p. 93. The Mischiefs of felling Voices for Parliament Men, for
Liquor, p. 95. Directions touching Choice of Members in 10 Negative
Descriptions, who are not fit to be Elected, p. 98. to 106. The Characters of
such as deserve this great trust, in five particulars, p. 110.
The Stat. of 8. Hen. 6. cap. 7. That only Freeholders should Choose Knights of
the Shire, p. 107. 110. The Petition of Right, 3. Car. 1. And the Kings Assent
thereunto [left out in the Statute-Book] p. 112. The Habeas Corpus Act, 31 Car.
2. cap. 2. p. 117. The Comment thereupon, p. 128. An Act for the Benefit of
Prisoners for Debt, that they shall not be lodged with Felons, etc. p. 131 An
Act for regulating the Privy Council, and taking away the Star Chamber, 17.
Car. 1. cap. 10. p. 135. Some Notes thereupon, p. 144. The Clause of the Act of
31. Car. 2. cap. 1. No man shall be bound to Quarter Soldiers, p. 145. The Act
touching the Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, 5. Eliz. cap. 23. p. 146. A
Comment, with a discourse of Excommunication, directions how to manage your
defense in all Cases in the Bishops Courts, and how to prevent or take off the
Writ de Excomunicato Capiendo, p. 154 to p. 170. Churchwardens not bound to
take any Oath in the Bishops Courts to present, p. 170. A Discourse touching
the Laws made or endeavored to be Executed against Protestant Dissenters, p.
171. The Acts 1. Eliz. cap. 2. the 23. Eliz. cap. 1. The 29 Eliz. cap. 6. 1
Jac. cap. 4. and 3 Jac. cap. 4. were all made against Papists only, and ought
not to be Extended against Protestant Dissenters, p. 171. to p. 177. Two new
Holy days made in the Church of England, since His Majesty's Restoration, p.
173. The opinion of the House of Commons, That Acts made against Popish
Recusants ought not to be extended against Protestant Dissenters, p. 178.
The Act of 35 Eliz. cap. 1. Considered. It Is plain from thence, that the Acts
made against Popish Recusants, ought not to affect Sectaries. p. 180. The said
Act of 35 Eliz. proved to be long since expired, p. 181. As also that of the
16th. Car. cap 4. Entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress seditious
Conventicles, p. 182. The Oxford or Five Mile Act, 17 Car. 2. p. 183. Notes
thereupon, p. 187.
The Act of the 22th. Car. 2. cap. 1. To prevent and suppress seditious
Conventicles, p. 188. Notes upon that Act, p. 197. An Abstract of the several
Laws in Force against Popery and Papists, p. 200. to p. 204. A Discourse of
Juries, and the Advantages English men enjoy thereby. p. 205. What persons
ought to be Jury men and how Qualified, p. 209. Jurors in Ancient Law Books
called Judges, p. 211. Of the Duty of Grand Juries, p. 212. Their Oath, p. 213.
That Juries are Judges of Law, in some respects, as well as Fact, p. 220. to p.
223. That Juries are not fineable, or any way to be punished under pretense of
going contrary to Evidence, or against the Judges Directions, p. 223. The
Conclusion. Bushels Case reported by the Learned Sir John Vaughan, Licensed by
the present Lord Chancellor, the Lord Chief Justice North, and all the Judges
then in England.
THE PROEM.
THE Constitution of our English Government (the best in the World) is no
Arbitrary Tyranny, like the Turkish Grand Seignior's, or the French Kings,
whose Wills (or rather Lusts) dispose of the Lives and Fortunes of their
unhappy Subjects; Nor an Oligarchy, where the great ones (like Fish in the
Ocean) prey upon, and live by devouring the lesser at their pleasure: Nor yet a
Democracy or popular State, much less an Anarchy, where all confusedly are hail
fellows well met. But a most excellently mixed or qualified Monarchy, where the
King is vested with large Prerogatives sufficient to support Majesty; and
restrained only from Power of doing himself and his People harm, (which would
be contrary to the very end of all Government, and is properly rather weakness
than power) the Nobility adorned with Privileges to be a Screen to Majesty,
and a refreshing Shade to their Inferiors, and the Commonalty too, so Guarded
in their Persons and Properties by the fence of Law, as renders them Freemen,
not Slaves.

In France and other Nations the mere Will of the Prince is Law, his Word takes
off any man's Head, imposes Taxes, or seizes any man's Estate, when, how, and as
often as he lists; and if one be Accused, or but so much as suspected of any
Crime, he may either presently Execute him, or Banish, or Imprison him at
pleasure; or if he will be so Gracious as to proceed by Form of their Laws, if
any two Villains will but swear against the poor Party, his Life is gone. Nay,
if there be no Witnesses, yet he may be put to the Rack, the Tortures whereof
make many an Innocent Person confess himself Guilty, and then with seeming
Justice he is Executed; or if he prove so stout as in Torments to deny the
Fact, yet he comes off with Disjoynted Bones, and such Weakness as renders his
Life a Burden to him ever after.

But in England, the Law is both the Measure and the Bond of every Subjects
Duty and Allegiance, each man having a fixed Fundamental Right born with him,
as to Freedom of his Person, and Property in his Estate, which he cannot be
deprived of, but either by his consent, or some Crime, for which the Law has
Imposed such a Penalty or Forfeiture. For all our Kings take a solemn Oath, See
Book of Oaths, p. 1. and 3.
At their Coronation, to Observe and cause the Laws to be kept, which was done
by our present most Gracious Sovereign: Bakers Cron. sol. 741.
Likewise all our Judges take an Oath, wherein amongst other points, they
swear, Book of Oaths p. 216.
To do equal Law, and Right to all the Kings Subjects, Rich and Poor, and not
to delay any Person of Common Right for the Letters of the King, or of any
other Person, or for any other Cause; But if any such Letters come to them,
they shall proceed to do the Law, the same Letters notwithstanding: Therefore
says Fortesoue (who was first Chief Justice, and afterward Lord Chancellor to
King Henry the 6th.) in his Book de Laudibus Legum Angliae, cap. 9. Non potest
Rex Angliae, etc. The King of England cannot alter nor change the Laws of his
Realm at his pleasure; For why, he Governs his People by Power not only
Royal, but also Politic; If his Power over them were only Regal, then he might
change the Laws of his Realm, and charge his Subjects with Tallage and other
Burdens without their consent, and such is the Dominion that the Civil Laws
purport, when they cry, Quod principi plecuit Legis habet Vigorom, The Princes
pleasure has the force of a Law. But from this much differs the power of a
King, whose Government over his People is Politic; For he can neither change
Laws without the consent of his Subjects, nor yet charge them with Impositions
against their Wills; Wherefore his People do frankly and freely enjoy and
occupy their own Goods, being Ruled by such Laws as they themselves desire.
Thus Fortescue; with whom Accords Bracton a Reverend Judge and Law-Author in
the Reign of King Henry the third, saying -- Rex in Regno suo superiores habet
Deum and Legem; The King in his Realm has two Superiors, God and the Law; for
he is under the Directive, though not Coercive Power of the Law; and on the
same Score Judge Vaughan speaking of our Fundamental Laws which are Coeval with
the Government, sticks not to say, The Laws of England were never the Dictates
of any Conquerors Sword, or the Placita or good Will and pleasure of any King
of this Nation, or to speak Impartially and Freely, the Results of any
Parliament that ever sat in this Land. And the late cited Fortescue, in his 13
chap. has a very apt similitude to Illustrate and Demonstrate this, The Law,
(says he) takes its name, a Ligando, to bind, for thereby the Politic Body is
knit and preserved together, as the Natural Body by the Bones and Sinews, and
Members, which retain every one their proper Functions; And as the Head of a
Body Natural cannot change his Sinews, nor cannot deny or withold from his
inferior Members, their peculiar Powers and several nourishments of Blood and
Spirits, no more can a King, which is the Head of a Body Politic, change the
Laws of that Body, nor withdraw from his People their proper Substance, against
their Wills and Consents in that behalf.

It Is true, the Law it self affirms, The King can do no wrong, which proceeds
not only from a presumption, that so Excellent a Person will do none: But also
because he Acts nothing but by Ministers, which (from the lowest to the
highest) are answerable for their doings, so that it a King in Passion should
command A. to kill B. without process of Law, A. may yet be prosecuted by
Indictment, or upon an Appeal, (where no Royal Pardon is allowable) and must
for the same be Executed, such Command notwithstanding.

This Original happy frame of Government is truly and properly called an
English man's Liberty, a Privilege not to exempt from the Law, but to be freed
in Person and Estate, from Arbitrary Violence and Oppression; A greater
Inheritance (says Judge Cook) is derived to every one of us from our Laws that
from our Parents; For without the former, what would the latter signify? And
this Birthright of Englishmen, shines most conspicuously in two things: 1.
Parliaments. 2. Juries.

By the first the Subject has a share by his chosen Representatives in the
Legislative (or Law-making) Power, for no new Laws bind the People of England,
but such as are by common consent agreed on in that great Council.

By the second, He has a share in the Executive part of the Law, no Causes
being Tried, nor any man Adjudged to lose Life, Member or Estate, but upon the
Verdict of his Peers (or Equals) his Neighbors, and of his own Condition:
these two Grand Pillars of English Liberty, are the Fundamental Vital
Privileges, whereby we have been, and are preserved more free and happy than
any other People in the World, and (we trust) shall ever continue so; For
whoever shall design to Impair, Pervert, or Undermine either of these, do
strike at the very Conisttution of our Government, and ought to be Prosecuted
and Punished with the utmost Zeal and Rigor. To cut down the Banks, and let in
the Sea, or to Poison all the Springs and Rivers in the Kingdom, could not be a
greater Mischief; for this would only affect the present Age, but the other
will Ruin and Enslave all our Posterity.

But besides these General Paramount Privileges which the English are Estated
in by the Original Constitution of their Government, there are others more
particularly declared and expressed in diverse Acts of Parliament, of which
several of the most remarkable and useful are here presented at large to the
Reader, with some Notes thereupon, for his better understanding of the same.

MAGNA CHARTA, or the Great Charter made in the ninth Year of King Henry the
Third, and confirmed by King Edward the First, in the eight and twentieth Year
of his Reign.
EDward, By the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of
Guyan:
To all Archbishops, Bishops, etc.
We have seen the great Charter of the Lord Henry, sometimes King of England,
our Father, of the Liberties of England, in these Words.

HEnry, By the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy
and Guyan, and Earl of Anjou; To all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors,
Earls, Barons, Sheriffs, Provosts, Officers, and to all Baysliffs, and other
our Faithful Subjects, which shall see this present Charter, Greeting. Know
you, that We unto the Honor of Almighty God, and for the Salvation of the
Souls of our Progenitors and Successors, Kings of England, to the Advancement
of Holy Church, and Amendment of our Realm, of our mere and free Will, have
Given and Granted to all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons,
and to all Freemen of this our Realm, these Liberties following, to be kept in
our Kingdom of England for ever.

CHAP. I.
A Confirmation of Liberties.
FIrst, We have granted to God, and by this our present Charter have confirmed
for Us and our Heirs for ever; That the Church of England shall be free, and
shall have all her whole Rights and Liberties Inviolable. (2) We have granted
also, and given to all the Freemen of our Realm, for Us and our Heirs for
ever, these Liberties underwritten, to have and to hold to them and their
Heirs for ever.

CHAP. II.
The Relief of the Kings Tenant of full Age.
IF any of our Earls or Barons, or any other which Hold of Us in Chief by
Knights Service, dye, and at the time of his Death, his Heir be of full Age,
and owes to us Relief, he shall have his Inheritance by the old Relief, that
is to say, the Heir or Heirs of an Earl, for a whole Earldom, by one hundred
pound: the Heir or Heirs of a Baron for an whole Barony, by one hundred marks:
the Heir or Heirs of a Knight, for one whole Knights Fee, one hundred shillings
at the most. And he that has less shall give less, according to the old Custom
of the Fees.

CHAP. III.
The Wardship of an Heir within Age; The Heir a Knight.
BUt if the Heir of any such be within Age, his Lord shall not have the Ward of
him, nor of his Land, before that he has taken of him Homage. (2.) And after
that such an Heir has been in Ward (when he is come to full Age) that is to
say, to the Age of one and twenty Years, he shall have his Inheritance without
Relief, and without time; so that if such an Heir being within Age be made
Knight, yet nevertheless his Land shall remain in the keeping of his Lord unto
the Term aforesaid.

CHAP. IV.
No wast shall be made by a Guardian in Wards Lands.
THE Keeper of the Land of such an Heir being within Age, shall not take of the
Lands of the Heir but reasonable Issues, reasonable Customs, and Reasonable
Services, and that without destruction, and waste of his Men and his Goods.
(2.) And if we commit the Custody of any such Land to the Sheriff, or to any
other, which is answerable unto us for the Issues of the same Land, and he make
destruction or waste of those things that he has in Custody, we will take of
him amends and recompense therefore. (3.) And the Land shall be committed to
two lawful and discreet men of that Fee, which shall answer unto Us for the
Issues of the same Land, or unto him whom we will Assign. (4.) And if we give
or sell to any man the Custody of any such Land, and he therein do make
destruction or waste, he shall lose the same Custody. And it shall be Assigned
to two lawful and discreet men of that Fee, which also in like manner shall be
answerable to Us, as before is said.

CHAP. V.
Guardians shall maintain the Inheritance of their Wards: And of Bishoprics.
THe Keeper, so long as he has the Custody of the Land of such an Heir shall
keep up the Houses, Parks, Warrens, Ponds, Mills, and other things pertaining
to the same Land, with the Issues of the said Land: And he shall deliver to the
Heir, when he comes to his full Age, all his Land, stored with Ploughs and all
other things, at the least as he received it. All these things shall be
observed in the Custody of Arch-Bishopricks, Bishoprics, Abbeys, Priories,
Churches and Dignities vacant, which appertain to Us: Except this, that such
Custody shall not be sold.

CHAP. VI.
Heirs shall be Married without Disparagement.
HEirs shall be Married without Disparagement.

CHAP. VII.
A Widow shall have her Marriage, Inheritance, and Quarentine. The Kings Widow.
A Widow after the Death of her Husband, Incontinent and without any
difficulty, shall have her Marriage, and her Inheritance. (2.) And shall give
nothing for her Dower, her Marriage, or her Inheritance, which her Husband and
She held the day of the Death of her Husband. (3.) And She shall tarry in the
chief House of her Husband, by forty days after the Death of her Husband,
within which days her Dower shall be Assigned her, (if it were not Assigned her
before) or that the House be a Castle. (4.) And if she depart from the Castle,
then a competent House shall be forthwith provided for her, in the which She
may honestly dwell, until her Dower be to her Assigned, as it is aforesaid; And
She shall have in the mean-time her reasonable Estovers of the Common. (5.) And
for her Dower shall be Assigned unto her the third part of all the Lands of her
Husband, which were his during Coverture, except She were endowed of less at
the Church door. (6.) No Widow shall be distrained to Marry her self:
Nevertheless She shall find surety, that She shall not Marry without our
License and Assent (if She hold of Us) nor without the Assent of the Lord, if
She hold of another.

CHAP. VIII.
How Sureties shall be charged to the King.
WE or our Bailiffs, shall not seize any Land or Rent for any Debt, as long as
the present Goods and Chattels of the Debtor do suffice to pay the Debt, and
the Debtor himself be ready to satisfy therefore. (2.) Neither shall the
Pledges of the Debtor be distrained, as long as the principal Debtor is
sufficient for the payment of the Debt. (3.) And if the principal Debtor fail
in the payment of the Debt, having nothing wherewith to Pay, or will not pay
where he is able, the pledges shall answer for the Debt. (4.) And if they will,
they shall have the Lands and Rents of the Debtor until they be satisfied of
that which they before paid for him, except that the Debtor can show himself
to be acquitted against the said Sureties.

CHAP. IX.
The Liberties of London, and other Cities and Towns Confirmed.
THe City of London shall have all the old Liberties and Customs which it has
been used to have. Moreover, we Will and Grant, that all other Cities and
Borroughs, Towns, and the Barons of the five Ports, and all other Ports, shall
have all their Liberties and free Customs.

CHAP. X.
None shall distrain for more Service than is due.
NO man shall be distrained to do more Service for a Knights Fee, nor for any
Freeholder, than therefore is due.

CHAP. XI.
Common Pleas, shall not follow the Kings Court.
Common Pleas shall not follow our Court, but shall be holden in some place
certain.

CHAP. XII.
Where, and before whom Assizes shall be taken. Adjournment for Difficulty.
ASsizes of Novel Diss^isin and of Mortdancester, shall not be taken but in the
Shires, and after this manner: If we be out of this Realm, our Chief Justicers
shall send our Justicers through every County once in the Year; Which, with the
Knights of the Shire, shall take the said Assizes in those Counties. (2.) And
those things that at the coming of our foresaid Justicers, being sent to take
those Assizes in the Counties, cannot be determined, shall be ended by them in
some other place in their Circuit. (3.) And those things which for difficulty
of some Articles cannot be determined by them, shall be referred to our
Justicers of the Bench, and there shall be ended.

CHAP. XIII.
Assizes of Darrein Presentment.
ASsizes of Darrein Presentment, shall be always taken before our Justicers of
the Bench, and there shall be determined.

CHAP. XIV.
How men of all sorts shall be amerced, and by whom.
A Freeman shall not be amerced for a small fault, but after the manner of the
fault. And for a great fault after the greatness thereof, saving to him his
contenement. (2.) And a Merchant likewise, saving to him his Merchandise. (3.)
And any others Villain than ours shall be likewise amerced, saving his Wainage,
if he fall into our mercy. (4.) And none of the said amerciaments shall be
Assessed, but by the Oath of honest and lawful men of the Vicinage. (5.) Earls
and Barons, shall not be amerced, but by their Peers, and after the manner of
their offense. (6.) No man of the Church shall be (...) after the quantity of
his Spiritual Benefice, but after his Lay-tenement, and after the quantity of
his offense.

CHAP. XV.
Making of Bridges and Banks.
NO Town nor Freeman shall be distrained to make Bridges nor Banks, but such as
of old time, and of right have been accustomed to make them in the time of King
Henry our Grandfather.

CHAP. XVI.
Defending of Banks.
NO Banks shall be defended from henceforth, but such as were in defense in the
time of King Henry our Grandfather, by the same places, and the same bounds as
they were wont to be in his time.

CHAP. XVII.
Holding Pleas of the Crown.
NO Sheriff, Constable, Escheator, Coroner, nor any other our Bailiffs, shall
hold Pleas of our Crown.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Kings Debtor dying, the King shall be first paid.
IF any that holds of Us Lay-fee do dye, and our Sheriff or Bailiff do show
our Letters Patents of our Summons for Debt, which the Dead man did owe to us:
It shall be lawful to our Sheriff or Bailiff, to Attach and Inroll all the
Goods and Chattels of the Dead, being found in the said Fee, to the value of
the same Debt, by the sight and testimony of lawful men; So that nothing
thereof be taken away, until we be clearly paid off the Debt. (2.) And the
residue shall remain to the Executors, to perform the Testament of the Dead.
(3.) And if nothing be owing to Us, all the Chattels shall go to the use of
the Dead (saying to his Wise and Children the Reasonable parts.)

CHAP. XIX.
Purveyance for a Castle.
NO Constable, nor his Bailiff shall take Corn or other Chattels of any man, if
the man be not of the Town where the Castle is, but he shall forthwith pay for
the same, unless that the Will of the Seller was to respite the payment. (2.)
And if he be of the same Town, the price shall be paid unto him within forty
days.

CHAP. XX.
Doing of Castle Ward.
NO Constable shall distrain any Knight for to give money for keeping of his
Castle, if he himself will do it in his proper person, or cause it to be done
by another sufficient man, if he may not do it himself for a reasonable cause.
(2.) And if we do lead or send him in an Arms, he shall be free from
Castle-ward for the time that he shall be with Us in Fee in our Host, for the
which he has done Service in our Wars.

CHAP. XXI.
Taking of Horses, Carts, and Woods.
NO Sheriff nor Bailiff of ours, nor any other, shall take the Horses or Carts
of any man to make Carriage, except he pay the old price limited, that is to
say, for Carriage with two Horse, 10 d. a day, for three Horse 14 d. a day.
(2.) No demesne Cart of any spiritual Person or Knight, or any Lord, shall be
taken by our Bailiffs. (3.) Nor we, nor our Bailiffs, nor any other shall take
any man's Wood for our Castles, or other our Necessaries to be done, but by the
License of him whose the Wood is.

CHAP. XXII.
How long Felons Lands shall be holden by the King.
WE will not hold the Lands of them that be be Convict of Felony but one Year
and one day, and then those Lands shall be delivered to the Lords of the Fee.

CHAP. XXIII.
In what place Wears shall be put down.
ALL Wears from henceforth shall be utterly put down by Thames and Medway, and
through all England, but only by the Sea-Co^ts.

CHAP. XXIV.
In what Case a Praecipe in Capite, is not grantable.
THe Writ that is called Praecipe in Capite, shall be from henceforth granted
to no Person of any Freehold, whereby any Freeman may lose his Court.

CHAP. XXV.
There shall be but one Measure throughout the Realm.
ONe Measure of Wine shall be through our Realm, and one Measure of Ale, and
Measure of Corn, that is to say, the Quarter of London. (2.) And one breadth of
died Cloth, Russets, and Haberjects, that is to say, two yards within the
Lists. (3.) And it shall be of Weights as it is of Measures.

CHAP. XXVI.
Inquisition of Life and Member.
NOthing from henceforth shall be given for a Writ of Inquisition, nor taken of
him that prays Inquisition of Life or of Member, but it shall be granted
freely, and not denied.

CHAP. XXVII.
Tenure of the King, in Socage, and of another by Knights Service. Petit
Serjeantry.
IF any do hold of Us by Fee-farm, or by Socage, or Burgage, and he holds
Lands of another by Knights Service, we will not have the Custody of his Heir,
nor of his Land, which is holden of the Fee of another, by reason of that
Fee-farm, Socage or Burgage. (2.) Neither will we have the Custody of such
Fee-farm, or Socage or Burgage, except Knights Service be due unto Us out of
the same Fee-farm. (4.) We will not have the Custody of the Heir, or of any
Land, by occasion of any Petit Serjeantry that any man holds of Us by
Service, to pay a Knife, an Arrow, or the like.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Wager of Law shall not be without Witness.
NO Bailiff from henceforth, shall put any man to his open Law, nor to an Oath,
upon his own bare saying, without faithful Witnesses brought in for the same.

CHAP. XXIX.
None shall be Condemned without Trial. Justice shall not be sold or deferred.
NO Freeman shall be taken, or Imprisoned, or be disseised of his Freehold, or
Liberties, or free Customs, or be Outlawed or Exiled, or any otherwise
destroyed, nor we will not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful
Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land. (2.) We will sell to no man,
we will not deny or defer to any man either Justice or Right.

CHAP. XXX.
Merchants, Strangers, coming into this Realm, shall be well used.
ALL Merchants (if they were not openly prohibited before) shall have their
safe and sure Conduct to depart out of England, to come into England, to tarry
in and go through England, as well by Land as by Sea, to buy and sell without
any manner of Evil Tools, by the old and rightful Customs, except in time of
War. (2) And if they be of a Land making War against Us, and be found in our
Realm at the beginning of the Wars, they shall be Attached without harm of Body
and Goods, until it be known unto us, or our Chief Justice, how our Merchants
be entreated there in the Land making War against Us. (3.) And if our Merchants
be well entreated there, theirs shall be likewise with Us.

CHAP. XXXI.
Tenure of a Barony, coming into the Kings Hand by Eschete.
IF any man hold of any Eschete, as of the Honor of Wallingford, Nottingham,
Boloin, or of any other Eschetes which be in our hand, and are Baronies, and
dye, his Heir shall give none other Relief, nor do none other Service to Us
than he should to the Baron, if it were in the Barons hand. (2.) And we in the
same wise should hold it as the Baron held it, neither shall we have by
occasion of any Baron or Eschete, any Eschete or Keeping of any of our men,
unless he that held the Barrony or Escehte, otherwise held of us in Chief.

CHAP. XXXII.
Lands shall not be aliened to the prejudice of the Lords Service.
NO Freeman, from henceforth shall give or sell any more of his Land, but so
that of the Residue of the Lands, the Lord of the Fee may have the Services due
to him, which belongs to the Fee.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Patrons of Abbeys, shall have the Custody of them in the time of Vacation.
ALL Patrons of Abbeys, which have the Kings Charter of England, of Advowson,
or have old tenure or possession in the same, shall have the Custody of them
when they fall void, as it has been accustomed, and as it is before declared.

CHAP. XXXIV.
In what only Case a Woman shall have an Appeal of Death.
NO man shall be taken or Imprisoned upon the Appeal of a Woman, for the Death
of any other than of her Husband.

CHAP. XXXV.
At what time shall be kept a Country Court, Sheriffs turn, and a Leet.
NO Country from henceforth shall be holden, but from month to month; and
where greater time has been used, there shall be greater. (2.) Nor any Sheriff
or his Bailiff shall keep his Turn in the Hundred, but twice in the Year: and
no where but in due place and accustomed, that is to say, once after Easter,
and again after the Feast of Saint Michael. (3.) And the view of Frank-pledge
shall be likewise at the Feast of Saint Michael without occasion. So that every
man have his Liberties which he had, or used to have in the time of King Henry
our Grandfather, or which he has purchased since. (4.) The view of
Frank-pledge shall be so done, that our peace may be kept. (5.) And that the
Tything be wholly kept as it has been acustomed. (6.) And that the Sheriff
seek no occasions, and that he be content with so much as the Sheriff was wont
to have for his view-making in the time of King Henry our Grandfather.

CHAP. XXXVI.
No Land shall be given in Mortmain.
IT shall not be lawful from henceforth to any one to give his Lands to any
Religious House, and to take the same Land again to hold of the same House. Nor
shall it be lawful to any House of Religion to take the Lands of any, and to
Lease the same to him of whom he received it: If any from henceforth give his
Lands to any Religious House, and thereupon be Convict, the Gift shall be
utterly void, and the Land shall Accrue to the Lord of the Fee.

CHAP. XXXVII.
A Subsidy in respect of this Charter, and the Charter of the Forest, granted
to the King.
ESeuage from henceforth shall be taken, like as it was wont to be in the time
of King Henry our Grandfather, reserving to all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Templers, Hospitallers, Earls, Barons, and all persons as well
Spiritual as Temporal, all their free Liberties and free Customs which they
have had in time passed; (2.) And all these Customs and Liberties aforesaid,
which we have granted to be holden within this our Realm, as much as
appertains to us and our Heirs, we shall observe. (3.) And all men of this
our Realm, as well Spiritual as Temporal (as much as in them is) shall observe
the same against all persons in likewise. (4.) And for this our Gift and Grant
of these Liberties, and of other contained in our Charter of liberties of our
Forest, the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights,
Freeholders, and other our Subjects, have given unto us the fifteenth part of
all their movables. (5.) And we have granted unto them on the other part, that
neither we nor our Heirs shall procure or do any thing, whereby the Liberties
in this Charter contained, shall be Infringed or Broken. (6.) And if any thing
be procured, by any Person, contrary to the premises, it shall be had of no
force nor effect. These being Witnesses, Lord B. Archbishop of Canterbury, E.
Bishop of London, etc.

We, Ratifying and approving these Gifts and Grants aforesaid, confirm and make
strong all the same for Us and our Heirs perpetually; And by the Tenor of
these presents, do renew the same, Willing and granting for Us and our Heirs,
that this Charter, and all and singular his Articles for ever, shall be
steadfastly, Firmly, and Inviolably observed. And if any Article in the same
Charter contained, yet hitherto peradventure has not been kept, We will, and
by Authority Royal Command from henceforth firmly they be observed. In Witness
whereof we have caused these our Letters Patents to be made. T. Edward our Son
at Westminster, the twenty eighth day of March, in the twenty eighth year of
our Reign.

Notes on Magna Charta.
THis Excellent Law holds the first place in our Statute Books, for though
there were no doubt many Acts of Parliament long before this, yet they are not
now Extant: it is called Magna Charta, or the Great Charter, not in Respect of
its Bulk, but in Regard of the great Importance and weight of the matters
therein contained; it is also styled Charta Libertatum Regni, the Charter of
the Liberties of the Kingdom, and upon great reason (says Cook in his Proem)
is it so called from the effect, Quia liberos facit, because it makes and
preserves the people free.

Though it run in the style of the King as a Charter, yet (as my Lord Cook well
observes on the 38 Chapter) it appears to have passed in Parliament, for there
was then a Fifteenth granted to the King, by the Bishops, Earls, Barons,
Free-tenants and people, which could not be but in Parliament, nor was it
unusual in those times to have Acts of Parliament, in a Form of a Charter: as
you may read in the Princes case, Co. Rep. L. 8.

Likewise though it be said here, that the King has given and granted these
Liberties, yet they must not be understood as mere Emanations of Royal Favor,
or new Bounties granted, which the people could not justly challenge, or had
not a Right unto before; For the Lord Cook at diverse places asserts, and all
Lawyers know, that this Charter is for the most part only Declaratory of the
principal grounds of the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of England, no new
freedom is hereby granted, but a Restitution of such as lawfully they had
before, and to free them of what had been usurped and encroached upon them by
any power whatsoever; and therefore you may see this Charter often mentions Sua
Jura, their Rights, and Liberat^s suas, their Liberties, which shows they had
them before, and that the same now were Confirmed.

As to the occasion of this Charter, it must be noted, that our Ancestors the
Saxons had with a most equal poize and temperament, very wisely contrived their
Government, and made excellent provisions for their Liberties, and to preserve
the People from oppression, and when William the Norman made himself Master of
the Land, though he be commonly called the Conqueror, yet in truth he was not
so, and I have known several Judges that would Reprehend any Gentleman at the
Bar that casually gave him that Title; For though he killed Harold the Usurper,
and Routed his Army, yet he pretended a right to the Kingdom, and was admitted
by Compact, and did take an Oath to observe the Laws and Customs.

But the truth is, he did not perform that Oath so as he ought to have done;
and his Successors William Rufus, King Stephen, Henry the First, and Richard
likewise, made frequent Encroachments upon the Liberties of their People, but
especially King John made use of so many Illegal Devices to drain them of
Money, that wearied with intolerable oppressions they resolved to oblige the
King to grant them their Liberties, and to promise the same should be observed,
which King John did in Running-mead between Stains and Windsor, by two
Charters, one called Charta Libertatum, The Charter of Liberties (the Form of
which you may read in Math. Paris, Fol. 246. and is in effect the same with
this here recited) the other the Charter of the Forest, Copies of which he
sent into every County, and commanded the Sheriffs, etc. to see them fulfilled.

But by ill Council he quickly after began to violate them as much as ever,
whereupon Disturbances and great miseries arose both to himself and the Realm.

The Son and Successor of this King John was Henry the Third, who in the 19th
Year of his Reign, Renewed and Confirmed the said Charters, but within two
Years after Cancelled them by the pernicious advice of his Favorites, and
particularly Hubert de Burgh whom he had made Lord Chief Justice; one that in
former times had been a great Lover of his Country, and a well deserving
Patriot, as well as learned in the Laws, but now to make this a step to his
Ambition (which ever Rides without Reins) persuaded and humored the King that
he might avoid the Charters of his Father King John by Duresse, and his own
Great Charter, and Charta de Foresta also, for that he was within Age when he
granted the same; whereupon the King in the eleventh Year of his Reign, being
then of full Age, got one of the great Charters, and of the Forest, into his
Hands, and by the Council principally of this Hubert his Chief Justice, at a
Council holden at Oxford, unjustly Cancelled both the said Charters,
(notwithstanding the said Hubert de Burgh was the primier Witness of all the
Temporal Lords to both the said Charters) whereupon he became in high Favor
with the King, insomuch that he was soon after (viz. the 10th of December in
the 13th Year of that King) Created (to the highest Dignity that in those times
a Subject had) to be an Earl, viz. of Kent. But soon after (for Flatterers and
Humorists have no sure Foundation) he fell into the Kings heavy Indignation,
and after many fearful and miserable Troubles, he was justly, and according to
Law Sentenced by his Peers in an open Parliament, and justly Degraded of that
Dignity which he unjustly had obtained by his Council for Cancelling of Magna
Charta, and Charta de Foresta.

In the 9th. Chap. of this great Charter, all the Ancient Liberties and Customs
of London, are Confirmed and preserved, which is likewise done by diverse other
Statutes, as 14 Edw. 3. Cap. 2. etc.

The 29 Chapt. NO FREEMAN SHALL BE TAKEN, etc. Deserves to be written in
Letters of Gold, and I have often wondered the words thereof are not Inscribed
in Capitals on all our Courts of Judicature, Town-Halls, and most public
Edifices; they are the Elixir of our English Freedoms, the Storehouse of all
our Liberties. And because my Lord Cook in the second part of his Institutes,
has many excellent Observations, I shall here Recite his very words. This
Chapter contains nine several Branches:

1. That no man be taken or Imprisoned, but per Legem terrae, that is, by the
Common Law, Statute Law, or Custom of England: For these words, per Legem
terrae, being toward the end of this Chapter, do Refer to all the precedent
matters in this Chapter; and this has the first place, because the Liberty of
a man's person is more precious to him than all the rest that follow, and
therefore it is great reason that he should by Law be Relieved therein, if he
be wronged, as hereafter shall be showed.

2. No man shall be Disseised, that is, put out of Seisin, or dispossessed of
his Freehold, that is, Lands or Livelihood, or of his Liberties or free
Customs, that is, of such Franchises and Freedoms, and free Customs as belong
to him, by his Free Birthright, unless it be by the lawful Judgment, that is,
Verdict of his equals, (that is, of men of his own Condition) or by the Law of
the Land, that is, (to speak it once for all) by the due Course and process of
Law.

3. No man shall be Outlawed, made an Exlex, put out of the Law, that is,
deprived of the Benefit of the Law, unless he be Outlawed according to the Law
of the Land.

4. No man shall be Exiled or Banished out of his Country, that is, Nemo
perdet patriam, no man shall lose his Country, unless he be Exiled according
to the Law of the Land.

5. No man shall in any sort be destroyed (Destruere id est quod prius structum
and factum fuit, penitus Evertere and Diruere,) unless it be by the Verdict of
his Equals, or according to the Law of the Land.

6. No man shall be Condemned at the Kings Suit, either before the King in his
Bench, where the Pleas are Coram Rege (and so are the words, Nec super eum
ibimus to be understood;) nor before any other Commissioner or Judge
whatsoever, and so are the words, Nec super eum mittimus, to be understood, but
by the Judgment of his Peers, that is, Equals, or according to the Law of the
Land.

7. We shall sell to no man Justice or Right.

8. We shall deny to no man Justice or Right.

9. We shall defer to no man Justice or Right.

Each of these we shall briefly explain.

1. No man shall be taken, (that is) Restrained of Liberty by Petition or
Suggestion to the King or his Council, unless it be by Indictment or
Presentment of good and lawful men, where such deeds be done. This Branch and
diverse other parts of this Act have been notably explained and Construed by
diverse Acts of Parliament, several of which you will find Recited hereafter in
this Book.

2. No man shall be Disseised, etc. Hereby is intended that Lands, Tenements,
Goods and Chattels, shall not be seized into the Kings Hands contrary to this
great Charter, and the Law of the Land, nor any man shall be disseised of his
Lands or Tenements, or dispossessed of his Goods or Chattels contrary to the
Law of the Land.

A Custom was alleged in the Town of C. that if the Tenant cease by two
years, that the Lord should enter into the Freehold of the Tenant, and hold the
same until he were satisfied of the Arrearages: it was adjudged a Custom
against the Law of the Land, to enter into a Man's Freehold in that case,
without Action or Answer.

King Henry 6. Granted to the Corporation of Diers within London, power to
search, etc. And if they found any Cloth died with Log-Wood, that the Cloth
should be Forfeit: And it was adjuged, that this Charter concerning the
Forfeiture was against the Law of the Land, and this Statute; For no Forfeiture
can grow by Letters Patents.

No Man ought to be put from his Livelihood without Answer.

3. No Man Outlawed] That is, barred to have the benefit of the Law. And note,
to this word Outlawed, these words, Unless by the Law of the Land, do Referr.
[Of his Liberties] This word has three Significations:

1. As it has been said, it signifies the Laws of the Realm, in which respect
this Charter is called Charta Libertatum, as aforesaid.

2. It signifies the Freedom the Subjects of England have: for example, the
Company of Merchant-Taylors of England, having power by their Charter to make
Ordinances, made an Ordinance that every Brother of the same Society should put
the one half of his Clothes to be dressed by some Cloath-Workers Free of the
same Company, upon pain to Forfeit 10 s. etc. And it was adjuged that this
Ordinance was against Law, because it was against the Liberty of the Subject,
for every Subject has freedom to put his Clothes to be dressed by whom he
will, and sic de similibus. And so it is, if such or the like grant had been
made by his Letters Patents.

3. Liberties signify the Franchises and Privileges which the Subjects have
of the gift of the King, as the Goods and Chattels of Felons, Outlaws and the
like; or which the Subject claims by Prescription, as wreck, waife, straie, and
the like.

So likewise and for the same reason, if a Grant be made to any Man to have the
Sole making of Cards, or the Sole dealing with any other Trade, that Grant is
against the Liberty and Freedom of the Subject, that before did or lawfully
might have used that Trade, and consequently against this great Charter.

Generally all Monopolies are against this great Charter, because they are
against the Liberty and Freedom of the Subject, and against the Law of the Land.

4. No Man Exiled, that is Banished, or forced to depart or stay out of England
without his Consent. By the Law of the Land, no Man can be Exiled or Banished
out of his Native Country, but either by Authority of Parliament, or in Case of
Abjuration for Felony by the Common Law; and so when our Books, or any Record,
speak of Exile, or Banishment, other than in case of Abjuration, it is to be
intended to be done by Authority of Parliament, as Belknap and other Judges,
etc. Banished into Ireland, in the Reign of Rich. the Second.

This is a Beneficial Law, and is Construed benignly; And therefore the King
cannot send any Subject of England against his will to serve him out of this
Realm, for that should be an Exile, and he should perdere Patriam: No, he
cannot be sent against his will into Ireland, to serve the King or his Deputy
there, because it is out of the Realm of England: For if the King might send
him out of this Realm to any place, then under pretense of Service, as
Ambassador or the like, he might send him into the furthest part of the World,
which being an Exile, is prohibited by this Act.

5. No Man destroyed -- That is, forejudged of Life or Limb, or put to Torture
or Death, every oppression against Law by color of any usurped Authority is a
kind of destruction. And the words Aliquo modo (any otherwise) are added to
this Verb destroyed, and to no other Verb in this Chapter, and therefore all
things by any manner of means tending to destruction are prohibited; as if a
Man be accused or Indicted of Treason or Felony, his Lands or Goods cannot be
granted to any, no not so much as by promise, nor any of his Lands or Goods
seized into the Kings hands before he is Attainted; For when a Subject
obtains a promise of the forfeiture, many times undue means and more violent
prosecution is used for private Lucre, tending to destruction, than the quiet
and just proceeding of the Law would permit, and the party ought to live of his
own until Attainder.

6. By Lawful Judgment of his Peers,] That is by his Equals, Men of his own
Rank and Condition. The general division of Persons by the Law of England, is,
either one that is Noble, and in respect of his Nobility of the Lords House of
Parliament, or one of the Commons, and in respect thereof, of the House of
Commons in Parliament. And as there be diverse degrees of Nobility, as Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, and yet all of them are comprehended
under this word Peers, and are Peers of the Realm; so of the Commons, there be
Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Citizens, and Yeomen, and yet all of them of the
Commons of the Realm. And as every of the Nobles is one a Peer to another,
though he be of a several degree, so it is of the Commons; and as it has been
said of Men, so does it hold of Noble Women, either by Birth or Marriage.

And forasmuch, as this Judgment by Peers is called Lawful, it shows the
Antiquity of this manner of Trial: It was, the ancient, accustomed, Legal
Course long before this Charter.

Or by the Law of the Land.] That is, by due process of Law, for so the words
are expressly expounded by the Stat. of 37 Edw. 3. chap. 8. And these words are
specially to be referred to those foregoing, to whom they relate. As none shall
be condemned without a lawful Trial by his Peers, so none shall be taken,
Imprisoned, or put out of his Freehold, without due process of the Law, that
is by the Indictment or Presentment of good and lawful Men of the place, in due
manner, or by Writ Original of the Common Law.

Now, seeing that no Man can be Taken, Arrested, Attached, or Imprisoned, but
by due process of Law, and according to the Law of the Land, these conclusions
hereupon do follow.

1. That the Person or Persons which commit any, must have lawful Authority.

2. It is necessary that the Warrant or Mittimus be lawful, and that must be in
Writing under his Hand and Seal.

3. The Cause must be contained in the Warrant, as for Treason, Felony, etc.
Suspicion of Treason, or Felony, or the like particular Crime; For if it do not
thus specify the Cause, if the Prisoner bring his Habeas Corpus, he must be
discharged, because no Crime appears on the Return; Nor is it in such Case any
offense at all, if the Prisoner make his escape; whereas if the Mittimus
contain the Cause, the escape would respectively be Treason or Felony, though
in Truth he were not Guilty of the first offense. And this mentioning the
Cause, is agreeable to Scripture, Acts 5.

4. The Warrant or Mittimus containing a lawful Cause, ought to have a lawful
conclusion, etc. And him safely to keep until he be delivered by Law, etc. and
not until the party committing shall further Order.

If any Man by color of any Authority, where he has not any in that
particular Case, shall presume to Arrest or Imprison any Man, or cause him to
be Arrested or Imprisoned, this is against this Act, and it is most hateful,
when it is done by Countenance of Justice. King Edw. the 6th. did Incorporate
the Town of Saint Albans, and granted to them to make Ordinances, etc. They
made a by-Law upon pain of Imprisonment, and it was adjudged to be against this
Statute of Magna Charta; so it had been, if such an Ordinance had been
contained in the Patent it self.

We will sell to no Man, deny to no Man, etc. This is spoken in the Person of
the King, who in Judgment of Law in all his Courts of Justice is present; And
therefore every Subject of this Realm, for injury done to him, in Bonis,
Terris, vel Persona, in Person, Lands, or Goods, by any other Subject,
Ecclesiastical or Temporal, whatever he be without exception, may take his
Remedy by the course of the Law, and have Justice and Right for the Injury done
him, Freely without sale, Fully without any denial, and Speedily without delay;
For Justice must have three Qualities, it must be Libera, Free, for nothing is
more odious than Justice set to sale; Plena, Full, for Justice ought not to
limp, or be granted Piecemeal, and Celeris, speedy: Quia Dilatio est quaedam
negatio, Delay is a kind of denial; And when all these meet, it is both Justice
and Right.

We will not deny nor delay any Man, etc.) These words have been excellently
expounded by latter Acts of Parliament, that by no means common right or common
law should be disturbed or delayed; no, though it be commanded under the Great
Seal, or Privy Seal, Order, Writ, Letters, Message, or Commandment whatsoever,
either from the King or any other; and that the Justices shall proceed, as if
no such Writs, Letters, Order, Message, or other Commandment were come to them:
all our Judges swear to this; for it is part of their Oaths, so that if any
shall be found wresting the Law to serve a Court Turn, they are perjured as
well as unjust. The Common-laws of the Realm should by no means be delayed, for
the Law is the surest Sanctuary that a Man can take, and the strongest Fortress
to protect the weakest of all; Lex est tutissima Cassis, the Law is a most safe
Headpiece, and sub Clipeo legis nemo decipitur, no man is deceived whilst the
Law is his Buckler: but the King may stay his own suit, as a Capias pro fine,
for the King may Respit his Fine, and the like.

All Protections that are not Legal, which appear not in the Register, nor
warranted by our Books, are expressly against this Branch, nulli diff^remus, we
will not delay any Man: As a Protection under the Great Seal granted to any
Man, directed to the Sheriffs, etc. and commanding them that they shall not
Arrest him during a certain time at any other Man's suit, which has words in
it, Per Prerogativ^m nostram quam nolumus esse Arguendam; By our Prerogative,
which we will not have disputed; Yet such Protections have been argued by the
Judges, according to their Oath and Duty, and adjuged to be void. As Mich. 11
H. 7. Rot. 124. a Protection granted to Holmes a Vintrier of London, his
Factors, Servants and Deputies, etc. Resolved to be against Law. Pasch. 7. H.
8. Rot. 66. such a Protection disallowed, and the Sheriff amerced for not
executing the Writ, Mich. 13. and 14 Eiiz. in Hitchcocks Case, and many other
of latter time: And there is a notable Record of Ancient time in 22 E. 1. John
de Mershals Case; Non pertinct ad vicecomitem de protectione Regis Judicare,
imo ad Curiam.

Justice or Right] We shall not sell, deny or delay Justice and Right, neither
the End, which is Justice* nor the Mean whereby we may attain to the End, and
that is the Law: Right, is taken here for Law, in the same sense that Justice
often is so called. 1. Because it is the Right Line, whereby Justice
distributive is Guided and Directed; and therefore all the Commissioners of
Oier and Terminer, of Jail-deliver, of the Peace, etc. have this Clause,
Facturi quod ad Justititiam pertinet, secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Angliae;
that is, to do Justice and Right, according to the Rule of the Law and Custom
of England: and that which is called Common Right in 2 E. 3. is called
Common Law in 14 E. 3. etc. and in this sense it is taken, where it is said,
Ita quod stat Rectus in Curia, id est Legi in Curia.

2. The Law is called Rectum, because it discovers that which is Tort,
Crooked or Wrong; for as Right signifies Law, so Tort, Crooked or Wrong,
signifies Injuries, and Injuria est contra Jus, Injury is against Right. Recta
Linea est index sui and obliqui, a right line is both declaratory of it self
and the oblique. Hereby the Crooked Cord of that which is called Discretion
appears to be unlawful, unless you take it as it ought to be, discretio est
discernere per Legem, quid sit Justum, discretion is to discern by the Law what
is Just.

3. It is called Right, because it is the best Birthright the Subject has,
for thereby his Goods, Lands, Wife and Children, his Body, Life, Honor and
Estimation are protected from Injury and Wrong: Major Haereditas venit
unicunque nostrum a Jure and Legibus, quam a Parentibus; A greater Inheritance
descends to us from the Laws, than from our Progenitors.

Thus far the very words of that Oracle of our Law, the Sage and Learned Coke;
which so fully and excellently explain this incomparable Law, that it will be
superfluous to add any thing further thereunto.

A Confirmation of the Charters of the Liberties of England, and of the
Forest, made in the 35th Year of Edw. the First.
EDward by the Grace of God King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of
Guyan, to all those these present Letters shall hear or see, Greeting. Know ye,
that we to the Honor of God, and of Holy Church, and to the profit of our
Realm, have granted for us and our Heirs, that the Charter of Liberties, and
the Charter of the Forest; which were made by Common Assent of all the Realm,
in the time of King Henry our Father, shall be kept in every point without
Breach. And we will, that the same Charter shall be sent under our Seal, as
well to our Justices of the Forest, as to others, and to all Sheriffs of
Shires, and to all our other Officers, and to all our Cities throughout the
Realm, together with our Writs, in the which it shall be contained that they
cause the aforesaid Charters to be published, and to declare to the People that
we have Confirmed them in all points. And that our Justicers, Sheriffs, Majors,
and other Ministers which under us have the Laws of our Land to guide, shall
allow the same Charters pleaded before them in Jugdment in all their points,
that is to wit, the Great Charter as the Common Law, and the Charter of the
Forest, for the Wealth of our Realm.

Chap. 2. And we will, that if any Judgment be given from henceforth contrary
to the points of the Charters aforesaid by the Justicers, or by any other our
Ministers that hold plea before them, against the points of the Charters, it
shall be undone and holden for naught.

Cap. 3. And we will that the same Charters shall be sent under our Seal, to
Cathedral Churches throughout our Realm, there to Remain, and shall be read
before the People two times by the Year.

Cap. 4. And that all Archbishops and Bishops shall pronounce the Sentence of
Excommunication against all those that by Word, Deed, or Council, do contrary
to the foresaid Charters, or that in any point break or undo them. And that the
said Curses, be twice a Year ddenounced and published by the Prelates
aforesaid. And if the same Prelates or any of them, be Remiss in the
Denunciation of the said Sentences, the Archbishop of Canterbury and York for
the time being, shall compel and distrain them to the Execution of their Duties
in Form aforesaid.

Cap. 5. And for so much as diverse People of our Realm are in fear, that the
Aids and Tasks which they have given to us beforetime toward our Wars, and
other Business of their own Grant, or good Will (however they were made) might
turn to a bondage to them and their Heirs, because they might be at another
time found in the Rolls, and likewise for the prizes taken throughout the Realm
by our Ministers: We have granted for us and our Heirs, that we shall not draw
no such Aids, Tasks nor Prises into a Custom, for any that has been done
heretofore, be it by Roll, or any other Precedent that may be founden.

Cap. 6. Moerover, we have granted for us and our Heirs, as well to
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other folk of Holy Church, as also to
Earls, Barons, and to all the Commonalty of the Land, that for no business from
henceforth, we shall take such manner of Aids, Tasks or Prises, but by the
common assent of the Realm, and for the common profit thereof; saving the
Ancient Aids and Prises due and accustomed.

Cap. 7. And for so much, as the more part of the Commonalty of the Realm find
themselves sore grieved with the Maletot of Woolls, that is to wit, a Toll of
Forty Shillings for every sack of Wool, and have made Petition to us for to
Release the same: We at their Request have clearly Released it, and have
granted for us and our Heirs, that we shall not take such things without their
common consent and good will, saving to Us and Our Heirs the Custom of Woolls,
Skins and Leather, granted before by the Commonalty aforesaid. In Witness of
which things we have caused our Letters to be Patent.

Witness Edward our Son, at London the 10th of October, and the Twenty five
Year of our Reign.
Sententia lata super Chartas.
The Sentence of the Clergy against the Breakers of the Articles above written.
IN the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Amen. Whereas our
Sovereign Lord the King, to the Honor of God, and of Holy Church, and for the
common profit of the Realm, has granted for him and his Heirs for ever, these
Articles above written; Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England
admonished all his Province once, twice, and thrice; Because that shortness
will not suffer so much Delay, as to give knowledge to all the People of
England of these presents in Writing. We therefore enjoin all Persons, of what
Estate soever they be, that they and every of them, as much as in them is,
shall uphold and maintain these Articles granted by our Sov. L. the K. in all
points. And all those that in any point do Resist or break, or in any manner
hereafter procure, Counsel, or any ways assent to resist or break those
Ordinances, or go about it, by word or deed, openly or privily, by any manner
of Pretense or Color: We the foresaid Archbishop by our Authority in this
Writing expressed, do Excommunicate and accurse, and from the Body of our Lord
Jesu Christ, and from all the Company of Heaven, and from all the Sacraments of
Holy Church do Sequester and exclude.

NOTES.
It may be observed, that this Curse is left out of our late Printed
Statute-Book, though inserted at large in that Printed in three Volumns, in
Queen Elizabeth's days, Anno. 1557. There is likewise another like dreadful,
but more full and express Curse, Solemnly pronounced before in the time of King
Henry 3d. which being also omitted in our Modern Statute-Book, I shall add here
for the Readers satisfaction.

The Sentence or Curse given by the Bishops against the Breakers of the Great
Charter.
IN the Year of our Lord, One thousand two hundred and fifty three, the Third
day of May, in the great Hall of the King at Westminster, in the Presence and
by the assent of the Lord Henry, by the Grace of God, King of England, and the
Lord Richard Earl of Cornwall his Brother, Roger Bigot Earl of Norfolk and
Suffolk, Marshal of England, Humphry Earl of Hereford, Henry Earl of Oxford,
John Earl Warren, and other Estates of the Realm of England: William Boniface
by the Mercy of God Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England; F. of
London, H. of Ely, S. of Worcester, E. of Lincoln, W. of Norwich, G. of
Hereford, W. of Salisbury, W. of Durham, R. of Exeter, M. of Carlisle, W. of
Bath, E. of Rochester, T. of Saint David's: Bishops apparelled in Pontificials
with Tapers burning, against the Breakers of the Churches Liberties, and of the
Liberties or other Customs of the Realm of England, and namely of those which
are contained in the Charter of the Common Liberties of England, and Charter of
the Forest, have denounced the Sentence of Excommunication in this Form. By
the Authority of Almighty God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and of
the Glorious Mother of God, and perpetual Virgin Mary, of the Blessed Apostles
Peter and Paul, and of all Apostles, and of all Martyrs, of Blessed Edward King
of England, and of all the Saints of Heaven: We Excommunicate, Accurse, and
from the Benefits of our Holy Mother the Church we Sequester All those that
hereafter willingly and maliciously deprive or spoil the Church of her Right:
And all those that by any Craft or Wiliness do Violate, Break, Diminish, or
Change the Churches Liberties, and free Customs contained in the Charters of
the Common Liberties, and of the Forr est, granted by our Lord the King, to
Archbishops, Bishops and other Prelates of England, and likewise to the Earls,
Barons, Knights, and other Freeholders of the Realm: And all that secretly or
openly, by Deed, Word or Council, do make Statutes, or observe them being made,
and that bring in Customs, or keep them when they be brought in, against the
said Liberties, or any of them, the Writers, the Lawmakers, Counselors, and
the Executioners of them, and all those that shall presume to judge against
them. All and every which Persons before mentioned, that wittingly shall commit
any of the Premises, let them well know, that they incurr the foresaid Sentence
ipso facto, [i. e. upon the Deed done.] And those that Commit ought ignorantly,
and be admonished, except they reform themselves within 15 days after the time
of the admonition, and make full satisfaction for that they have done, at the
will of the Ordinary, shall be from that time forth wrapped in the said
Sentence; and with the same Sentence we burden all those that presume to
disturb the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, and of the Realm. To the
perpetual Memory of which thing, we the foresaid Prelates have put our Seals to
these presents.

So Zealous were our Ancestors to preserve their Liberties from encroachments,
that they employed all the strength of humane Policy and Religious Obligations
to secure them entire and inviolate. And since this Act is still in as much
force as the Act against Conventicles, I cannot fadome the Reason why our
Prelates should not as well hold themselves obliged twice a Year to accurse the
Infringers thereof, as to Prosecute Protestant Dissenters: However we may note,
that by this Statute, Chap. 2. it is expressly provided, that if any Judgments
be given from that time forwards against any of the points of Magna Charta,
they shall be annulled and holden for naught; therefore Quaere whether the
conviction of Protestant Dissenters by a Justice, and spoiling them of their
goods without any Trial and Conviction by a Jury, (which is expressly against
the 29 Chapter of Magna Charta) ought not to be taken notice of, and redressed,
and the original Promoters thereof to be Cursed by my Lords the Bishops as
aforesaid?]

A Statute made Anno 34 Edw. 1. commonly called de Tallageo non Concedendo.
CHAP. I.
The King or his Heirs shall have no Tallage or Aid without consent of
Parliament.
NO Tallage or Aid shall be taken or Levied by Us or our Heirs in our Realm,
without the good Will and Assent of Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons,
Knights, Burgesses, and other Freemen of the Land.

CHAP. II.
Nothing shall be purveyed to the Kings Use without the Owners consent.
NO Officer of ours, or of our Heirs, shall take Corn, Leather, Cattle, or any
other Goods of any manner of Person, without the good Will and Assent of the
Party to whom the Goods belonged.

CHAP. III.
Nothing shall be taken of Sacks of Wool by Color of Maletot.
NOthing from henceforth shall be taken of Sacks of Wool by color or occasion
of Maletot.

CHAP. IV.
All Laws, Liberties, and Customs, confirmed.
WE Will and Grant for Us and our Heirs, That all Clerks and Laymen of our
Land, shall have their Laws, Liberties, and free Customs as largely and wholly,
as they have used to have the same at any time when they had them best. (2.)
And if any Statutes have been made by Us and our Ancestors, or any Customs
brought in contrary to them, or any manner of Article contained in this present
Charter: We Will and grant that such manner of Statutes and Customs shall be
void and frustrate for evermore.

CHAP. V.
Pardon granted to certain Offenders.
MOreover we have pardoned Humphrey Bohun, Earl of Hereford, and Essex,
Constable of England, Roger Earl of Norfolk and Suffolk, Marshal of England,
and other Earls, Barons, Knights, Esquires, and namely, John de Ferrariis, with
all other being of their Fellowship, Consederacy, and Bond, and also of other
that hold 20 l. Land in our Realm, whether they hold of us in Chief or of
others, that were appointed at a day certain to pass over with us into
Flanders, the Rancour and Evil will born against us, and all other Offenses if
any they have committed against us, unto the making of this present Charter.

CHAP. VI.
The Curse of the Church shall be Pronounced against the Breakers of this
Charter.
ANd for the more assurance of this thing, we will and grant that all
Archbishops and Bishops for ever, shall read this present Charter in Cathedral
Churches twice in the Year, and upon the Reading thereof in every of their
Parish-Churches shall openly Denounce accursed all those that willingly do
procure to be done any thing contrary to the tenor, force and effect of this
present Charter in any point and article. In witness of which thing we have set
our Seal to this present Charter, together with the Seals of the Archbishops,
Bishops, which voluntarily have sworn, that as much as in them is, they shall
observe the tenor of this present Charter in all Causes and Articles, and
shall extend their faithful Aid to the keeping thereof, etc.

The Comment.
THe word Tallage is derived from the French word Tailler, to share or cut out
a part, and is Metaphorically used for any Charge, when the King or any other
does cut out or take away any part or share out of a Man's Estate, and being a
general word, it includes all Subsidies, Taxes, Tenths, Aids, Impositions or
other Charges whatsoever.

The word Maletot signifies an Evil (that is, an unjust) Toll, Custom,
Imposition or Sum of Money.

The occasion of making this Statute was this: King Edward being injured by the
French King, resolves to make War against him, and in order thereunto requires
of Humphrey le Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, and Constable of England, and
of Roger Bigot Earl of Norfolk and Suffolk, and Marshal of England, and of all
the Earls, Barons, Knights, Esquires and Freeholders of 20 l. Land, whether
they held of him in Capite, to contribute toward such his expedition, that is,
to go in Person or find sufficient Men in their places in his Army; which the
Constable and Marshal, and many of the Knights and Esquires, and especially
this John Ferrers taking part with them and all the Freemen, stoutly denied,
unless it were so ordained and determined by common consent in Parliament
according to Law. And it seems the contest grew so hot, that Baker's Chronicle,
Folio 99. relates a strange Dialogue that passed between them, viz. That when
the Earl Marshal told the King, That if his Majesty pleased to go in Person, he
would then go with him, and march before him in the Vanguard, as by right of
Inheritance he ought to do; but otherwise he would not stir; the King told him
plainly, he should go with any other, though he went not in Person. I am not so
bound (says the Earl) neither will I take that Journey without you: The King
swore, By God, Sir Earl, you shall either go or Hang: And I swear by the same
Oath (said the Earl) I will neither go nor Hang. And so the King was forced to
dispatch his expedition without them. And yet (says my Lord Coke) although the
King had conceived a deep displeasure against the Constable, Marshal, and
others of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of the Realm, for denying that
which he so much desired, yet, for that they stood in defense of their Laws,
Liberties, and free Customs, the said King Edward the First, who (as Sir
William Herle Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, who lived in his time and
served him, said in the time of King Edward the 3d.) was the wisest King that
ever was; did after his return from beyond the Seas, not only consent to this
Statute, whereby all such Tallages and Impositions are forbidden for the
future, but also passes a Pardon to the said Nobles, etc. of all Rancour,
Ill Will and Transgressions, If any they have committed; which last words were
added, lest by acceptance of a Pardon of Transgression, they should implicitly
confess that they had Transgressed; so careful were the Lords and Commons in
former times to preserve the Ancient Laws, Liberties, and free Customs of their
Country.

But note, these words, Si quas fecerint, If any they have committed, are left
out in all the Printed Books of Statutes; but they are in this Statute recited
by Coke, in his second Book of Institutes, Fo. 535. and specially noted, which
he would never have done, if it had not been so in the Rolls. And since it is
probable them may be many more like Omissions, Mistakes or Falsifications,
crept into the Prints, and for that the R^^^^d not the printed Satute-Book
(varying from the Records) is the Law, It were to be wished that all the Rolls
of Acts of Parliament were carefully by some Persons of Learning and Integrity,
viewed and Compared with the Prints, and notice taken of all such Var^^tions,
and of Errors committed in the Translations, and of any Statutes of a public
Import, if in force, that were never printed, and the same to be made public.

Anno 25 Edw. 3.
CAP. II.
A Declaration what Offenses shall be adjudged Treason.
WHereas diverse opinions have been before this time in what Case Treason shall
be said, and in what not. (2.) The King at the Request of the Lords and of the
Commons, has made a declaration in the manner as hereafter follows, that is
to say, When a Man does Compass or Imagine the Death of our Lord the King, or
of our Lady his Queen, or of their eldest Son and Heir. (3.) Or if a man do
violate the Kings Companion, or the Kings Eldest Daughter unmarried, or the
Wife of the Kings Eldest Son and Heir. (4.) Or if a Man do Levy War against our
Lord the King in his Realm, or be Adherent to the Kings Enemies in his Realm,
giving them Aid and Comfort in the Realm, or elsewhere, and thereof be provably
Attainted of open Deed by the People of their Condition. (5.) And if a Man
Counterfeit the Kings Great or Privy Seal, or his Money. (6.) And if a Man
bring false Money into this Realm, Counterfeit to the Money of England, as the
Money called Lushburgh, or other like to the said Money of England, knowing the
Money to be false, to Merchandise, or make payment, in deceit of our said Lord
the King, and of his People. (7.) And if a Man Slay the Chancellor, Treasurer,
or the Kings Justice of the one Bench or the other, Justices in Air, or
Justices of Assize, and all other Justices Assigned to Hear and Determine,
being in their Places doing their Offices. (8.) And it is to be understood,
that in the Cases above rehearsed that ought to be judged Treason, which
extends to our Lord the King, and of his Royal Majesty. (9.) And of such
Treason the Forfeiture of the Escheats pertains to our Lord, as well of the
Lands and Tenement holden of other, as of himself. (10.) And moreover, there is
another manner of Treason, that is to say, when a Servant slays his Master,
or a Wife her Husband, or when a Man, Secular or Religious, slays his
Prelate, to whom he owes Faith and Obedience. (11.) And of such Treason the
Escheats cught to pertain to every Lord of his own Fee. (12.) And because that
many other like Cases of Treason may happen in time to come, which a man cannot
think nor declare at this present time; it is Accorded, That if any other Case,
supposed Treason, which is not above specified, does happen before any
Justices, the Justices shall tarry without any going to Judgment of the
Treason, till the Cause be showed and declared before the King and his
Parliament, whether it ought to be judged Treason or other Felony. (13.) And if
percase any Man of this Realm, Ride Armed covertly or secret with Men of Arms
against any other, to Slay him, or Rob him, or Take him, or Retain him till he
has made Fine or Ransom for to have his deliverance, it is not the mind of
the King nor his Council, that in such Case it shall be judged Treason, but
shall be judged Felony or Trespass, according to the Laws of the Land of old
time used, and according as the Case requires. (14.) And if in such Case or
other like, before this time any Justices have judged Treason, and for this
cause the Lands and Tenements have come into the Kings hands as forfeit, the
chief Lords of the Fee shall have the Escheats of the Tenements holden of them,
whether that the same Tenements be in the Kings hands, or in others, by Gift,
or in other manner. (15.) Saving always to our Lord the King the Year and the
Waste, and the sorfeitures of Chattels, which pertain to him in the Cases above
named. (16.) And that the Writs of Scire Facias be granted in such Case against
the Land-Tenants, without other Original, and without allowing any Protection
in the said Suit. (17.) And that of the Lands which be in the Kings hands,
Writs be granted to the Sheriffs of the Counties where the Lands be, to deliver
them out of the Kings hands without delay.

The Comment.
TReason is derived from Trabir, which signifies Treacherously to betray; when
it concerns the Government and the Public, it is called High Treason, but
against particular Persons, as a Wife killing her Husband, a Servant his
Master, etc. it is Petty Treason,

High Treason in the Civil Law is called Crimen Laesae Majestatis, a Crime
wronging Majesty, but in our Common-Law-Latine, Alta proditio, and in an
Indictment for this offense the word Proditorie must be in.

Before the making this Act, so many things were charged as High Treason, That
no Man knew how to behave himself: Now by this Statute, the particulars of that
Grand Crime are reckoned up, and all others excluded, till declared by
Parliament. And the settling of this Affair was esteemed of such Importance to
the Publick-Weal, That the Parliament wherein this Act passed, was called long
after Benedictum Parliamentum, the Blessed Parliament.

The substance of this Statute is branched out by my Lord Cook 3d. part of
Instit. Fol. 3. into six Heads. viz.

The first concerning Death, by compassing or imagining the death of the King,
Queen, or Prince, and declaring the same by some Overt Deed. By killing and
murdering of the Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices of either Bench, Justices in
Air, Justices of Assize, Justices of Oier and Terminer, In their Places doing
their Offices.

The second is to Violate, that is, to Carnally know the Queen, the Kings
Eldest Daughter unmarried, the Princes Wife.

The third is, Levying War against the King.

The fourth is, Adhering to the Kings Enemies, within the Realm or without, and
declaring the same by some overt Act.

The fifth is, Counterfeiting of the Great, the Privy Seal, or the Kings Coin.

The sixth and last, by bringing into this Realm Counterfeit Money to the
likeness of the Kings Coin.

Now as to the particular Exposition of the several parts of this Statute:

1. When a man does compass, etc. in the Original it is Quant Home, which
extends to both Sexes, but one that is Non compos mentis, or an Infant within
the Age of discretion, is not included; but all Allens within the Realm of
England, being thereby under the Kings Protection, and owing a Local
Allegiance, if they commit Treason may be punished by this Act, but otherwise it
is of an Enemy.

2. To compass and Imagine, Is to contrive, design or intend the death of the
King; but this must be declared by some Overt Act. But declaring by an open Act
a design to Depose or Imprison the King, is an Over Act to manifest the
compassing his death. For they that will depose their King, will not stick to
Murder him, rather than fail of their end, and (as King Charles the First
excellently observed, and lamentably experienced) There are commonly but few
steps between the Prisons and the Graves of Princes.

3. By the word King, is intended, 1. A King before his Coronation, as soon as
ever the Crown descends upon him, for the Coronation is but a Ceremony. 2. A
King de Facto, and not de Jure, is a King within this Act, and a Treason
against him is punishable, tho the Right Heir get the Crown. 3. A Titular King,
as the Husband of the Queen, is not a King within this Act, but the Queen is,
for the word King here includes both Sexes.

4. What is to be understood by the Kings Eldest Son and Heir within this Act?
I answer, 1. A second Son after the death of the first Born, is within the Act,
for he is then Eldest. Secondly, The Eldest Son of a Queen Regnant is as well
within the Statute, as of a King. Thirdly, The Collateral Heir Apparent or
Presumptive is not within this Statute. Roger Mortimer Earl of March was in
Anno Dom. 1487. (11 Rich. 2.) Proclaimed Heir Apparent. Anno 39. Hen. 6.
Richard Duke of York was likewise Proclaimed Heir Apparent, and so was John de
la Poolen, Earl of Lincoln, by Rich. 3. And Henry Marquess of Exeter, by King
Henry the 8. But none of these or the like are within the Purview of this
Statute, says my Lord Coke, 3 Instit. fol. 9.

5. Note, Whereas in the Printed Statute-Books, it is there said, probably
Attainted, the same is a great error: For the words of the Record are, Et de
ceo PROVABLEMENT soit Attaint: And shall be thereof PROVABLY Attaint: And I
cannot but admire, that such a Gross mistake should be suffered, since my Lord
Coke has so expressly observed the difference, in these words following, 3
Instit. fol. 12. In this Branch (says he) four things are to be observed: 1.
This word [Provablement] Provably, that is, upon direct and manifest proof, not
upon Conjectural presumptions or Inferences, or strains of Wit, but upon good
and sufficient proof. And herein the Adverb [Provablement] provably, has a
great force, and signifies a direct and plain proof, which word the King, the
Lords, and Commons in Parliament did use, for that the offense was heinous, and
was so heavily and severely punished, as none other the like, and therefore the
offender must Provably be Attainted, which words are as forcible, as upon
direct and manifest proof. Note, the word is, not [Probably] for then Commune
Argumentum might have served; but the word is, [Provably] be Attainted.
Secondly, This word [Attaint] necessarily implies that he be proceeded with,
and Attainted according to the due Course and proceedings of Law, and not by
Absolute power, or by other means, as in former times had been used. And
therefore if a Man does adhere to the Enemies of the King, or be slain in open
War against the King, or otherwise die before the Attainder of Treason, he
forfeiteth nothing, because (as this Act says) he is not Attainted: wherein
this Act has altered that, which before this Act, in Case of Treason was taken
for Law; And the Statute of 34 E. 3. Cap. 12. saves nothing to the King, but
that which was in Esse, and pertaining to the King at the making of that Act.
And this appears by a Judgment in Parliament in Ann. 29. H. 6. Cap. 1. That
Jack Cade being slain in open Rebellion could no way be punished, or forfeit
any thing, and therefore was Attainted by that Act of High Treason. Thirdly, Of
open Deed, per Apertum Factum, these words strengthen the former Exposition of
[Provablement,] an Overt Act must be alleged in every Indictment upon this
Act, and proved. Compassing by bare words is not an Overt Act, as appears by
many Temporary Statutes against it. But there must be some open Act, which must
be manifestly proved. As if diverse do Conspire the Death of the King, and the
manner how, and thereupon provide Weapons, Powder, Poison, Harness, send
Letters, or the like, for the Execution of the Conspiracy. If a Man be
Arraigned upon an Indictment of High Treason, and stand Mute [that is, refuse
to Plead] he is not to be Pressed to death, but shall have the same Judgment,
and incurr such forfeiture, as if he had been Convicted by Verdict, or had
confessed it. For this stands well with this word [Provablement] for fatetur
facinus qui judicium fugit. But otherwise it is in case of Petit Treason,
Murder, or other Felony. If a Subject Conspire with a Foreign Prince to Invade
the Realm by open Hostility, and prepare for the same by some Overt Act, this
is a sufficient Overt Act for the death of the King. Fourthly, The Composition
and Connection of the words are to be observed, viz. [Thereof be Attainted by
open Deed] This (as was resolved by the Justices in Easter Term 35 of Eliz.)
relates to the several and distinct Treasons before expressed (and specially
to the Compassing and Imagination of the death of the King, etc. for that is a
secret in the Heart) and therefore one of them cannot be an Overt Act for
another, as for example: A Conspiracy is had to Levy War, this (as has been
said and so resolved) is no Treason by this Act until it be levied, therefore
it is no Overt Act, or manifest proof of the Compassing the Death of the King
within this Act; for the Words are [de ceo, etc. thereof] that is, of the
Compassing of the death. Diverse latter Acts of Parliament have Ordained, That
compassing by bare Words or Sayings, should be Treason, but are all either
Repealed or Expired (except only that of the 12 Car. 2. herein after recited,
which is only to be in force during the Life of his present Majesty, whom God
preserve:) And it was wont to be said, bare Words may make an Heretic, but not
a Traitor, without an Overt Act. And the Wisdom of the Makers of this Law would
not make Words only to be Treason, seeing such variance commonly amongst the
Witnesses is about the same, as few of them agree together. But if words be set
down in Writing by the Delinquent himself, That is a sufficient Overt Act
within this Statute.

In the Preamble of the Statute of 1 Mar. (concerning the Repeal of certain
Treasons declared after this Statute of the 25. of Edw. 3. and before that
time, and bringing back all things to the measures of this Statute) It is
agreed by the whole Parliament, That Laws justly made for the preservation of
the Commonwealth, without extreme punishment, are more often obeyed and kept
than Laws and Statutes made with great and extreme punishments. And in special
such Laws and Statutes so made, whereby not only the ignorant and rude
unlearned People, but also learned and expert People minding honesty, are
oftentimes trapped and snared, yea many times for Words only, without other
Fact or Deed done or perpetrated. Therefore this Act of 25 Edw. 3. does provide
that there must be an Overt Act. But words without any Overt Act, are to be
punished in another degree, as an high Misprision.

By People of their condition] That is per Pares, by their Equals.

7. As to Treason by Levying War against the King, we must note, that tho
Conspiring or Compassing to Levy War, without a War de Facto, be no Treason,
yet if many Conspire a War, and only some few Actually Levy it, all are guilty
of the Treason. Raising a Force to burn or throw down a particular Enclosure is
only a Riot, but if it had been to have gone from Town to Town to throw down
all Enclosures, or to change Religion, or the like, it were Levying of War,
because the intended mischief is Public. Holding a Fort or Castle against the
Kings Forces, is Levying of War.

8. As touching the Interpretative Treasons by Killing the Chancellor,
Treasurer, Justice of one or the other Bench, Justice in Air, or of Assize, or
Oier and Terminer. Note, 1. This extends but only to the Persons here named,
not to the Lord Steward, Constable, or Marshal, or Lords of Parliament.
Secondly, It extends to those only during their Office. Thirdly, It extends
only to Killing, not Wounding without Death.

But by the Stat. 3 H. 7. C. 14. Compassing to Kill the King or any of his
Council, is made Felony.

9. Counterfeiting the Great or Privy Seal is Treason; but it must be an Actual
Counterfeiting thereof, Compassing to do it is no Treason: Affixing the Great
Seal by the Chancellor without Warrant, is no Treason: Fixing a new Great Seal
to another Patent, is a great Misprision, but no Treason, being not a
Counterfeiting within this Act: But Aiders and Consenters are within this Act.
The Counterfeiting of the Privy Signet or Sign Manual, is no Treason within
this Act, but made by the Statute, 1. Mar. c. 6.

10. Treason concerning Coin, is either Counterfeiting the Kings Coin, and this
was Treason at Common Law, and Judgment only as of Pettit Treason, but
Clipping, etc being made Treason by subsequent Statutes, the Judgment is to be
Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered. Money here extends only to the Proper Money of
this Realm, But now by the 1. M. c. 6. Forging or Counterfeiting Money made
current by Proclamation, is High Treason, and by 14. Eliz. c. 3. Forging of
Foreign Coin, not current here, is Misprision of Treason in the Forgers, their
Aiders and Abettors -- And not that the bare Forging of the Kings Coin, without
Uttering, is Treason.

The second Offense concerning Money, here declared to be Treason, is, If any
person bring into this Realm Counterfeit Money: Where note. 1. It must be
Counterfeit: 2. Counterfeited to the similitude of English Money: 3. It must be
brought from a Foreign Realm, and therefore not from Ireland: 4. It must be
brought knowingly: 5. Brought, and not barely uttered here. But by the Statute
De Moneta, if false or clipped money be found in a persons hands, and he be
suspicious, he may be Arrested till he can clear himself: 6. He must
merchandise therewith, that is make payment thereof.

11. As this Statute leaves all other doubtful matters to be declared Treason
in Parliament, but not to be punished as such till so declared. So in
succeeding Kings Reigns abundance of other matters were declared Treason, which
being found very grievous and dangerous, by the Statute of 1 Mar. Cap. 1. it is
Enacted, That thenceforth no Act, Deed, or Offense being by Act of Parliament,
or Statute, made Treason, Petty Treason, or Misprision of Treason, by Words,
Writing, Ciphering, Deeds, or otherwise however, shall be taken, had, Deemed or
Adjudged to be High Treason, Petty Treason, or Misprision of Treason, but only
such as be declared and expressed to be Treason, Petty Treason, or Misprision
of Treason, by this Statute of the 25. Edw. 3.

12. The Offenses made High Treason by Statutes since this first of Mary, are
as follow.

Refusing the Oath of Supremacy upon second Tender, is Treason by 5. Eliz. Cap.
1. but no Corruption of Blood, so likewise is Extolling the Power of the Bishop
of Rome, a Praemunire, and the bringing in of Bulls, or putting them in
Execution, or Reconciling to the Church of Rome, is Treason by the same
Statute. Bringing in Agnus Dei's is a Praemunire. 23. Eliz. C. 1. Also absolving
Subjects from their Obedience, or Reconciling them to the Obedience of Rome is
Treason, 27. Eliz. Cap. 2. So is it likewise for a Priest coming into England,
not submiting in two days. The like for English men in Foreign Seminaries.

But Besides these Old Treasons since the happy Ret^uration of His Majesty, The
zealous regards his Subjects in Parliament had, for the safety of his Sacred
Person and Government, thought sit to prefer and make the Statute following.

Anno Regni Car. 2. Regis, decimo tertio.
CAP. I.
An Act for Safety and Preservation of His Majesty's Person and Government,
against Treasonable and Soditious Practices and Attempts.
THe Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, deeply Weighing and Considering
the Miseries and Calamities, of well high twenty years, before your Majesty's
Happy Return, and with^l Reflecting on the Causes and Occasions of so great and
diplorable Confusions, do in all humility and thankfulness acknowledge your
Majesty's incomparable Grace and Goodness to your People, in your Free and
General Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion, by which roar Majesty has been
pleased to deliver your Subjects, not only from the Punishment, but also from
the Reproach, of their former Mi^carringes, which unexempted Piety and Clemency
of your Majesty has Enflamed the Hearts of us your Subjects with an ardent
desire to express all possible Zeal and Duty in the Care and Preservation of
your Majesty's Person (in whose Honor and Happiness consists the good and
welfare of your people) and in preventing (as much as may be) all Treasonable
and Sedititious Practices and Attempts for the time to come. (2) And because
the Growth and Increase of the late Troubles and Disorders, did in a very great
measure proceed from a multitude of Seditious Sermons, Pamphlets and Speeches,
daily Preached, Printed and Published with a Transcendent boldness, defaming
the Person and Government of your Majesty and your Royal Father, wherein men
were too much Encouraged, and (above all) from a wilful mistake of the Supreme
and Lawful Authority, whilst men were forward to cry up and maintain those
Orders and Ordinances Oaths and Covenants, to be Acts Legal and Warrantable,
which in themselves had not the least Color of Law or Justice to support them,
from which kind of Distempers, as the present Age is not wholly freed, so
Posterity may be apt to Relapse into them, if a timely Remedy be not provided.
(3) We therefore the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, having duly
considered the Premises, and Remembering that in the thirteenth year of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth of ever blessed Memory, a right good and profitable
Law was made, for Preservation of Her Majesty's Person, do most humbly beseech
your most Excellent Majesty, that it may be Enacted. (4) And be it Enacted by
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Lords and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the
same, That if any Person or Persons whatsoever, after the four and twentieth
day of June, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred sixty and one,
during the Natural Life of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord the King, (whom God
Almighty Preserve and Bless, with a Long and Prosperous Reign) shall within the
Realm or without, Compass, Imagine, Invent, Devise, or intend Death or
Destruction, or any Bodily Harm, tending to the Death or Destruction, Maim, or
Wounding, Imprisonment or Restraint of the Person of the same our Sovereign
Lord the King. (5) Or to deprive or depose him from the Style, Honor, or
Kingly Name of the Imperial Crown of this Realm, or of any other His Majesty's
Dominions or Countries. (6) To Levy War against His Majesty within this Realm
or without. (7) Or to move or stir any Forraigner, and Strangers with force to
Invade this Realm, or any other His Majesty's Dominions or Countries, being
under His Majesty's Obeisance. (8.) And such Compassings, Imaginations,
Inventions, Devices or Intentions, or any of them, shall express, utter or
declare by any Printing, Writing, Preaching, or malicious and advised Speaking,
being Lawfully Convicted thereof, upon the Oaths of two Lawful and Credible
Witnesses, upon Trial, or otherwise Convicted or Attainted by due Course of
Law, then every such person and persons so as aforesaid offending shall be
deemed, declared and Adjudged to be Traitors, and shall suffer pains of Death,
and also lose and Forfeit as in Cases of High Treason.

2. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons at any time after the four and twentieth day of June, in the year of
our Lord, one thousand six hundred sixty and one, during his Majesty's Life,
shall Maliciously and Advisedly publish or affirm the King to be an Heretic or
Papist, or that he endeavourr to introduce Popery. (2.) Or shall Maliciously
and Advisedly by Printing, Writing, Preaching, or other Speaking, Express,
Publish, Utter or Declare any words, sentences, or other thing or things to
Incite or stir up the people to Hatred or dislike of the Person of His Majesty,
or the Established Government, (3) Then every such person and persons, being
thereof Legally Convicted, shall be disabled to have or enjoy, and is hereby
disabled, and made incapable of having, holding, enjoying, or exercising any
Place, Office, or Promotion Ecclesiastical, Civil or Military, or any other
Employment in Church and Stateother than that of his Peerage, and shall
likewise, be liable to such further and other Punishments, as by the Common
Laws, or Statutes of this Realm, may be inflicted in such Cases. (4) And to the
end that no man hereafter may he misled into any Seditious or Unquiet
Demeanor, out of an opinion that the Parliament B-gun and held at Westminster,
upon the third day of November, in the year of our Lord, one, thousand six
hundred and forty, is yet in being, which is undoubtedly Dissolved and
Determined, and so is hereby declared and adjudged to be fully dissolved and
determined. (5) Or out of an opinion that there lies any Obligation upon him
from any Oath, Covenant or Engagement whatsoever, to endeavor a Change of
Government, either in Church or State. (6) Or out of an Opinion, that both
Houses of Parliament, or either of them, have a Legislative Power without the
King. (7) All which Assertions have been seditiously maintained in some
Pamphlets lately Printed, and are daily promoted by the Active Enemies of our
Peace and Happiness.

3. Be it therefore further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
person or persons at any time after the four and twentieth day of June, in the
year of our Lord. one thousand six hundred sixty and one, shall Maliciously and
Advisedly, by Writing, Printing, Preaching or other Speaking, Express, Publish,
Utter, Declare, or Affirm, That the Parliament Begun at Westminster upon the
third day of November, in the year of our Lord, one thousand six hundred and
forty, is not yet Dissolved, or is not Determined, or that it ought to be in
being, or has yet any Continuance or Existence. (2) Or that there lies any
Obligation on him, or any other person from any Oath, Covenant or Engagement
whatsoever, to endeavor a Change of Government, either in Church or State. (3)
Or that both Houses of Parliament, or either House of Parliament, have or has
a Legislative Power without the King, or any other words to the same Effect.
(4) That then every such person and persons so as aforesaid offending shall
incurr the danger and penalty of a Praemunire mentioned in a Statute made in the
sixteenth year of the Reign of King Richard the Second. (5) And it is hereby
also declared, That the Oath usually called the Solemn League and Covenant, was
in it self an Unlawful Oath, and Imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm,
against the Fundamenaal Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom. (6) And that all
Orders and Ordinances, or pretended Orders and Ordinances of both or either
Houses of Parliament, for imposing of Oaths, Covenants or Engagements, Levying
of Taxes, or Raising of Forees and Arms, to which the Royal Assent, either in
Person or by Commission, was not expressly had or given, were in the first
Creation and Making, and still are, and so shall be taken to be Null and Void
to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever. (7) Provided never theless, That all
and every person and persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, who have been, or
shall at any time hereafter be questioned for any thing Acted or Done by Color
if any the Orders or Ordinances herein before mentioned and declared to be Null
and Void, and are Indempnified by an Act, Entitled, An Act of Free and General
Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion, made in the twelfth year of His Majesty's
Reign that now is, or shall be Indemnified by any Act of Parliament, shall and
may make such use of the said Orders and Ordinances for their Indemnity
according to the true intent and meaning of the said Act, and no other, as he
or they might have done, if this Act had not been made; any thing in this Act
contained notwithstanding.

4. Provided always, That no person be Prosecuted for any of the Offenses in
this Act mentioned (other than such as are made and declared to be High
Treason) unless it be by order of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors,
under his or their Sign Manual, or by order of the Council Table of his Majest,
his Heirs of Successors, directed unto the Attorney General for the time being,
or some other of the Council learned to His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors,
for the time being. (2) Nor shall any Person or persons by virtue of this
present Act incur any the Penalties herein before mentioned, unless he or they
be Prosecuted within six months next after the offense Committed, and Indicted
thereupon within three months after such Prosecution; any thing herein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

5. Provided always, and be it Enacted, That no person or persons shall be
Indicted, Arraigned, Condemned, Convicted or Attainted for any of the Treasons
or Offenses aforesaid, unless the same Offender or Offenders be thereof Accused
by the Testimony and Disposition of two Lawful and Credible Witnesses upon
Oath. (2) Which Witnesses at the time of the said Offender or Offenders
Arraignment, shall be brought in person before him or them Face to Face, and
shall openly avow and maintain upon Oath, what they have to say against him or
them, concerning the Treason or Offenses contained in the said Indictment,
unless the party or parties Arraigned shall willingly without violence Confess
the ame.

6. Provided likewise and be it Enacted, That this Act, or any thing therein
contained, shall not extend to deprive either of the Houses of Parliament, or
any of their Members, of their just Antint Freedom, and Privilege of Debating
any matters or business which shall be propounded or debated in either of the
said Houses, or at any Conferences or Committees of both or either of the said
Houses of Parliament, or touching the Repeal or Alteration of any Old, or
preparing any New Laws, or the Regressing of any Public Grievance; but that
the said Members of either of the said Houses, and the Assistants of the House
of Peers and every of them, shall have the same freedom of Speech, and all
other Privledges whatsoever, as they had before the making of this Act; any
thing in this Act to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

7. Provided always, and be it ordained and enacted, That no Peer of this Realm
shall be Tried for any Offenses against this Act, but by his Peers; (2.) And
further, that every Peer who shall be Convicted of any Offense against this
Act, after such Conviction, be disabled during his Life, to sit in Parliament,
unless His Majesty shall graciously be pleased to pardon him? (3) And if His
Majesty shall grant his Pardon to any Peer of this Realm, or Commoner Convicted
of any Offense against this Act, after such Pardon Granted, the Peer or
Commoner so pardoned shall be Restored to all Intents and purposes as if he had
never been Convicted, any thing in this Law to the contrary in any wise
uotwithstanding.

Notes
THough the wisdom of our Legislators is not generally for bringing words
within the compass of Treason, yet upon emergent occasions it has been done,
but then with a Temporary Limitation, as by the Statute 13. Eliz. here referred
unto, during the Life of that Queen; In imitation whereof this present Act is
made to remain in force during only the Life of our present Sovereign King
Charles the Second, And the reasons for making this Temporary Law are assigned
in the preamble.

This Statute makes three sorts of Offenses. Some High Treason; some that
disable and in capacitate from holding any place or Office; and some that are
punishable by Praemunire.

As to the first, it is hereby declared to be High Treason during the Life of
his present Majesty,

1. Within or without the Realm to compass or in tend the Death, Destruction,
Maim, Wounding Imprisonment or Restraint of the King. 2. Or to deprive or
depose him, or Levy War against him, within the Realm or without, to stir up
Foreigners to invade the Realm.
If such Compassings or Intentions be expressed, uttered or declared by any
Printing, Writing, Preaching, or malicious and advised speaking.

Being legally Convicted thereof upon the Oaths of two lawful and CREDIBLE
Witnesses: [By which words, the Statute seems to injoin and require some more
than Ordinary Scrutiny into the Credit of the Witnesses, for otherwise Legal
had been enough (and so is every man not Convict of Perjury) but Witnesses in
this Case must not be only Legal but Credible, not infamous, scandalous, or
suspected]

As to the second, Maliciously and advisedly to publish or affirm during his
present Majesty's Life, that the King is an -- Heretic -- or -- a Papist -- or
that he endeavors to introduce Popery.

Or maliciously and advisedly by Writing Printing, Preaching, or speaking to
utter, express or declare any Words, Sentences or thing, to stir up the people
to hatred or dislike of the Person of His Majesty or the established Government.

Whoever is legally Convicted of any of these Crimes shall be disabled to hold
any place, Office, or promotion, Ecclesiastical, Civil or Military. And besides
be liable to such punishments as by the Common Laws or Statutes may be
inflicted.

As to the third, to declare publish, or affirm, first, that the Old long
Parliament of 40 is not dissolved, or ought to be in being. Secondly, That
there lies any obligation on ones-self, or any other person from any Oath,
Covenant, or Engagement, to endeavor a change of Government either in Church
or State. Thirdly, that either or both Houses of Parliament have a Legislative
power without the King, or any other words to the same effect.

The person so offending shall incur the penalty of a Praemunire, which by the
Statute of 16 Rich. 2 Cap. 5. here referred unto, is this, viz. To be put out
of the Kings Protection, their Lands and Tenements, goods and Chattels,
Forfeited to the King, and their bodies to be seized, etc. But in this Act of
the 13 Caroli, there are these Proviso's.

1. As for the two last Sorts of Offenses that are not Treason, none shall be
prosecuted but by order of the King, under his Sign Manual or of the privy
Council.

2. As for the crimes made Treasons, none shall be Indicted or Convicted unless
they be ACCVSED by two Lawful and Credible Witnesses, touching the Addition of
the word Credible to Lawful, (which is here again repeated) we have spoken
before; But must here further observe,

1. That by these express words, this Statute provides that no man shall be
Indicted [that is, have a Bill found against him] upon this Statute for
Treason, unless he be Accused, [that is, unless the matter be sworn against him
before the Grand Jury] by two not only Lawful, but CREDIBLE Witnesses, for the
words are not only, he shall not be Convicted [which is the work of the Petty
Jury, or Jury of Life and Death, as it is commonly called,] But he shall not be
Indicted [which is the business of the Grand Jury] And therefore Grand-Juries
besides their general and ordinary Right and power by Law, have when any person
is Indicted upon this Statute, a special right and direction from the Act it
self to Examine and be well satisfied in the Credibility of the Witnesses;
which if duly considered, would perhaps much mitigate the Clamours lately
raised against some Juries for their Returning some Bills before them
Ignoramus, though the matters therein were roundly sworn unto by Legal, but
probably in their esteem and Judgment, as they were upon their Oaths, not
sufficiently Credible Witnesses; especially when their Stories were no less
Incredible than their persons.

Secondly, Note that as a person cannot be Convicted or Indicted, so neither
can he be so much as Committed for any Offense made Treason by this Act, by or
upon the Oaths of any single Witness, though there should be never so much
presumption that more may come in against him before he be brought to Trial,
for the words are -- Unless he be thereof accused by the Testimony and
deposition of Two Lawful and Credible Witnesses, which Witnesses at his
Arraignment shall be brought before him face to face, etc. So that it is
evidently intended the original accusation before the Justice or Magistrate
that shall Commit the person must be by two such Witnesses, and that the same
two Witnesses (and not others, leaving them that first charged him out, though
yet others no doubt may be added to them) must give Evidence to the Grand Jury,
and at ^is Trial.

3. There is in this Act a third proviso, that no person shall incur any the
Penalties in this Act mentioned unless, 1. He be Prosecuted, [that is charged
before a Magistrate, or Committed] within six Months after the Offense
Committed. Secondly, and unless he be Indicted thereupon within three Months
after such Prosecution. So that if in either of these Respects the time be
elapsed, the Grand Jury ought not to find the Bill.

4. Provided, this Act shall not infringe the Privileges or Freedom of Debates
in either of the Houses of Parliament, or any Committee of them.

5. That a Peer shall be tried for any Offense against this Act by his Peers,
but if Convicted, shall be disabled to sit in Parliament during Life. And thus
much for what is Treason at this day.

By the Statute of 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. cap 10. All Trials for Treason shall
be only according to the Course of the Common Law. And though the greater part
of that Statute, being Temporary, be expired, yet this Clause is still in Force.

The Judgment in all Cases of High Treason, except for Counterfeiting Coin (for
a man) is, That he shall be drawn on an Hurdle or Sledge to the place of
Execution and there be Hanged by the Neck, to be cut down being yet alive, his
Privy Members cut off, his Bowels ripped up, taken out, and burnt before his
face, his Headsevered from his Body, his Body divided into four Quarters, which
are to be disposed of as the King shall order -- But for Counterfeiting Coin,
only Drawn and Hanged. And in both Cases for a Woman (for Modesty sake) it is
only that she shall be Burnt.

The reasons or signification of this horrid Judgment on a man for Treason, are
thus by some rendered and Interpreted.

1. He is drawn on a Sledg or Hurdle on the ground in the Dirt, to show that
his Pride is brought down, for Treason commonly springs from Ambition.

2. On this Hurdle he is drawn backward, to show that his Actings have been
contrary to Order, unnatural and Preposterous.

3. He is Hanged between Heaven and Earth, as unworthy of either.

4. He is cut down yet alive, and his Privities cut off, to show that he was
unfit to Propagate any Posterity.

5. His Head is severed from his Body, because his mischevious Brain contrived
the Treason.

6. His Body is divided, to show that all his Machinations and Devices are torn
to pieces, and brought to naught; and into four parts, that they may be
scattered toward the four Quarters of the World.

Heading being part of the judgment in Treason, the King commonly to persons of
Quality Pardons all the rest, of the Sentence, and so they are only Beheaded.
But if a person be Attainted of Murder or any other Felony, if he be Beheaded,
it is no Execution of the Judgment, because there the Judgment always is, that
he be Hanged till he be dead, which cannot be altered. So that had Count
Conning smark lately been Convicted and Condemned for the Murder of Esquire
Thynn, all his Guinies or his Friends could not have preserved him from the
Gallows, unless they could have got an entire Pardon.

Any person being Indicted for Treason may Challenge [that is except against or
refuse] Five and Thirty Jurors, peremptorily [that is, for his pleasure, or for
reasons best known to himself, and without assigning any Cause to the Court.
But if he Challenge more, that is above three full Juries, he Forseits his
Goods, and Judgment of Peinfort and dure, [that is of being pressed to Death]
shall pass upon him as one that refuses the Trial of the Law.

In Cases of Murder and Felony a man cannot Challenge peremptorily above the
number of Twenty; But with Cause he may except against more. And this is by the
Stat. of 22. H. 8. cap. 14.

And certainly since the Law of England, which is a Law of Mercy, does in
Favor of Life, not only order a man to be Tried by a Jury of his Country and
Equals, but also allows him to refuse, and have Liberty of excepting against so
many of those as shall be Impanelled for that purpose; It cannot be supposed
that the same Law ever intended that the Prisoner should be denied a Copy of
the Panel of his Jury, that so by the Information of his Friends or otherwise,
he may know their Qualities, Circumstances and Inchnations; for how else shall
he know whom to Challenge peremptorily, and whom to Challenge with Cause; to
allow a man such Liberty of Challenge, and give him no opportunity of such
Inquiry, is but to mock the Prisoner, to whom possibly the whole Jury by face
and name may be utter Strangers; and sure the wisdom of our Laws never thought
every Prisoner so skilled in Metoposcopy, that merely by looking on a parcel of
men he could tell which of them were indifferent, and which biassed against him.

Another Statute of King Edward the third. Anno 2. Edw. 3. cap. 2.
In what Cases only Pardon of Felony shall be granted, etc.
ITem, Whereas Offenders have been greatly encouraged, because the Charters of
Pardon have been so easily granted in times past of Man-slaughters, Roberies,
Felonies, and other Trespasses against the Peace, (2) It is ordained and
Enacted that such Charters shall not be granted, but only where the King may do
it by his Oath, that is to say, where a man slays another in his own Defense,
or by Misfortune. (3) And also they have been encouraged because that the
Justices of the Jail-delivery, and of Oyer and Terminer, have been procured by
great men, against the Form of the Statute made in the 27th year of the Reign
of King Edward, Grandfather to our Lord the King that now is, wherein is
Contained that Justices Assigned to take Assizes, if they be Laymen, shall
make deliverance, and if the one be a Clerk, and the other a Layman, that the
Lay-Judge with another of the Country associate to him, shall deliver the
Goals. (4) Wherefore it is Enacted, that Justices shall not be made against the
Form of the said Statute; (5) And that the Assizes, Attaints, and
Certifications be taken before the Justices, commonly Assigned, which should be
good men and Lawful, having knowledge of the Law, and none other, after the Form
if another Statute made in the time of the said King Edward the first. (6) And
that the Oyers and Terminers shall not be granted, but before the Justices of
the one Bench or the other, or the Justices Errants, and that great hurt, or
horrible Trespasses, and of the Kings special Grace, after the Form of the
S^atute thereof ordained in time of the said Grandfather, and none otherwise.

The Comment.
Touching this Statute and several others to the same purpose, as 14. Edw. 3.
cap. 14. and 10. Edw. 3. cap. 2. and 13. R. 2. cap. 1. and 16. R. cap. 6. etc.
We shall only give you the words of Cook in the third part of his Instit. fo.
236. What things the King may pardon, and in what manner, and what he cannot
pardon, falls now to be treated of.

IN case of death of man, Robberies and Felonies against the Peace, diverse Acts
of Parliament have Restrained the power of granting Charters of pardons; first,
that no such Charters shall be granted, but in case where the King may do it by
his Oath; Secondly, That no man shall obtain Charters out of Parliament, Stat.
4. Edw, 3. cap 13. And accordingly in a Parliament Roll it is said, [for the
Peace of the Land it would much help, if good Justices were appointed in every
County, if such as be let to mainprize do put in good Sureties, as Esquires or
Gentlemen: And that no pardon were granted but by Parliament] Thirdly, For that
the King has granted Pardons of Felonies upon false Suggestions, it is
provided, that every Charter of Felony which shall be granted at the Suggestion
of any, the name of him that makes the Suggestion shall be comprised in the
Charter, and if the Suggestion be found untrue, the Charter shall be
disallowed. And the like provision is made by the Statute of 5. H. 4. Cap 2.
for the Pardon of an Approver.

Fourthly, It is provided that no Charter of Pardon for Murder, Treason, or
Rape, shall be allowed, etc. If they be not specified in the same Charter.
Statute 13. R, 2. Before this Statute of 13. R, 2. by the Pardon of all
Felonies, Treason was Pardoned, and so was Murder, etc. At this day by the
Pardon of all Felonies, the death of man is, not Pardoned. These be excellent
Laws for direction, and for the Peace of the Realm. But it has been conceived,
(which we will not question) that the King may dispense with these Laws by a
Non Obstante, [notwithstanding,] be it General or Special (albeit we find not
any such Clauses of non Obstante, notwithstanding, to dispense with any of
these Statutes, (but of late times) These Statutes are excellent Instructions
for a Religious and Prudent King to follow, for in these Cases, Vt summae
potestatis Regiae est posse quantum velit, sic Magnitudinis est velle quantum
possit, [As it is the highest Kingly power to be able to Act what he Wills, so
it is his Greatness and Nobleness to Will only what he lawfully can.] Hereof
you may Read more in Justice Standford, Lib. 2. Cap. 35. in diverse places of
that Chapter, of his grave Advice in that behalf. Most certain it is, that the
Word of God has set down this undisputable General Rule, Quia non profetur Cito
Contra malos sententia, filii hominum sine timore ullo perpetrant, [because
Sentence against evil men is not speedily Executed, therefore the hearts of the
Children of men are set in them to do evil] And thereupon the Rule of Law is
grounded. Spes Impunitatis Continuum Affectum tribuit delinquendi, [the hope of
Impunity encourages Offenders] Et veniae facilitas Incentivum est Delinquendi,
and the facility of obtaining Pardon is an Incentive to Commit Offences] This
is to be Added, that the Intention of the said Act of 13. R. 2. Was not that
the King should grant a Pardon of Murder by express Name in the Charter, but
because the whole Parliament conceived, that he would never Pardon Murder by
special Name for the Causes aforesaid, therefore that provision made, which was
(as in other Cases I have observed) grounded upon the Law of God, Quicunque
effuderit humanum sanguinem, fundetur sanguis illius; ad imaginem quippe Dei
creatus est homo nec aliter Expiati potest, nisi per ejus sanguinem, qui
alterius sanguinem effuderit, [whosoever shall shed man's blood, by man also
shall his blood be shed, because man was Created after the Image of God,
neither can it be expiated otherwise then by his blood, who spilt the blood of
another.] And the words of every Pardon is after the Recital of the offense,
nos pietate moti, etc. we being moved with Piety, etc. But it can be no Piety
to violate an express Law of God, by letting Murder escape unpunisht. Thus Coke,
whereby we see what opinion he had of such Pardons.

A brief digression concerning the Nature of APPEALS.
THis Discourse of Pardons puts us in mind of another kind of Legal Prosecution
called an Appeal: of which it may be very convenient to give the Reader some
brief account. You must know then for several Offenses, for which a man
deserves death, and particularly for Murder, there are two ways to bring him
to Answer for the same, one by Indictment, which is at the Kings Suit, and the
other by Appeal, which is at the Suit of a Party which is wronged or injured by
the Murder: as a Woman whose Husband, or a Child, or Brother, whose Father or
Brother is Killed.

Now upon an Indictment, if the Offender be found Guilty, because its to be at
the Suit of the King, it has been said by some, may be and too often a Pardon,
has been obtained (tho even That too be against Law, as appears by the
Premises) But in an Appeal all agree, the King can grant no Pardon, Nay if a
person be tried by Indictment, and Acquitted, or Convicted and get a Pardon,
yet an Appeal may be brought, and if he be thereupon Convicted, notwithstanding
such his former Acquital, or Pardon, he must be Hanged.

The word Appeal is derived from the French Verb Appeller, to Call, because he
or she that brings it, Calls the Defendant to Judgment; but the meaning thereof
is all one with An Accusation, And is peculiarly in Legal signification applied
to Appeals of Three sorts; First an Appeal brought by an Heir Male for some
wrong done to his Ancestor whose Heir he is. Secondly, Of wrong done to an
Husband, and is by the Wife only, if it be for the death of her Husband, to be
Prosecuted. The third is of wrongs done to the Appellants themselvess as for
Robbery, Rape, or Maim Coke 1. Instit. Sect. 500.

Note that this Appeal must be brought within a year and a day after the Murder
is committed. For afterward it cannot be brought at all. And anciently it was
customary not to bring an Indictment for the King, till after the year and the
day, waiting in the mean time for the Prosecution of the Party, but this was
found very inconvenient, for the Party was frequently compounded with, and at
the years end the business was forgot, and so Offenders escaped Justice.

And therefore the same was altered by the Statute 3. Hen. 7. Cap. 1. Whereby
it is Enacted, That the Coroner shall do his Office, and the Offenders may be
Arraigned at any time within the year, at the Kings Suit, but if Acquitted, yet
the party within the year and day should have liberty to bring an Appeal
against such person, either Acquitted or Attainted, if the benefit of the
Clergy be not before thereof had. And in order thereunto that when any person
happened to be Acquitted for the death of a man, within the year, the Justices
before whom he is Acquitted, shall not suffer him to go at large, but either to
remit him again to the Prison, or else to let him to Bail after their
discretion, till that the day and the year be passed, that so he may be forth
coming to Answer an Appeal, if it shall happen to be brought.

Thus that Statute; as to the latter Clause whereof, you see the Judges have
power in Case of Acquittal to keep the Party in Prison still, till the day and
year be over. Or else to admit him to Bail; and tho this be left to their
Discretion, yet it must not be such a Discretion, as confounds all Discretion:
but they must weigh the Circumstances, and go according to Law and Judgment;
and certainly the law intended such Bail, if any be accepted, should be bound
Body for Body, for otherwise it seems no security. And therefore many wise men
wondered the other day when Count Conning smark was Acquitted on the Indictment
for the Barbarous Murder of Esquire Thynn, that he was suffered to go so soon
abroad, for being a Stranger, he was never like to come again into Enggland,
and being so rich, what values he to discharge the Forfeitures of his Sureties
Recognizances, which likewise may be easily Compounded. At most, the Forfeieure
is to the King, and what is it that to the next Heir or Kinsman? He is by this
means Outed of his Legal Remedy to Revenge the Blood of his near and dear
Relation -- Sed haec Obiter.

The form of an Appeal of Murder.
I C. Hic Instanter Appellat W. E. etc. (In English thus) I here instantly
Appeals W. F. of the death of his Brother H. C. For that whereas the aforesaid
H. was in the Peace of God, and the King, at Tonbridge in the County of Rent,
the twenty eighth day of March, in the thirty fourth year of the Reign of our
Lord Charles the Second, etc. at seven a Clock in the Evening of the same Day,
cama the said W. F. as a Felon, of our Lord the King in a premeditated Assault,
with Force and Arms, etc. And upon him the said H. C. then and there
felonionsly an Assault did make, and with a certain Sword, of the price of
twelve pence, Which he then and there in his Right Hand did hold, the aforesaid
H. upon his Head did strike, and one mortal wound of two Inches long in
forepart of his Head, even unto the Brain to the said H. did then and there
Feloniously give; of which said wound the said H for three days then next
following did Languish, and then, viz. the [such a] day of [such a month,] he
there died, [or if the case be so, Instantly died] And so the said W. H. as a
Felon of our Lord the King, the aforesaid H. Feloniously did Kill and Murder,
against the Peace of our said Lord the King his Crown and Dignity: And that
this he did wickedly, and as a Felon against the Peace of God, and our Lord the
King the aforesaid osters that the same be detained as the Court of our Lord
the King shall think meet. Diversity of Courts and Jurisdictions, Written in
the time of King Hen. 8.

1. Note, That a women cannot now bring an Appeal for the death of any other
Ancestors, being baried there from by Magna Charta, Cap. 34. whereas (as you
have heard) it is provided that none shall be taken or Imprisoned upon the
Appeal of any woman for the death of any Person, but only of her Husband. But
she may at this day bring an Appeal of Robbery, etc. For wherein she is not by
that Statute restrained. Coke 2d. Instit. fol. 68.

2. The women that brings an Appeal for the death of her Husband, must be his
Wife not only de Facto but de Jure, not only called and reputed, or cohabiting
with him, but actually and legally Married to him; and of such a Wife the
Antient-Law-Books, speaks, de morte viri Inter Brachia sua Interfecti, the
Husband is killed within her Arms. that is whilst he was legally in her
possession; but that the Appellant and the person killed, were not ever
lawfully coupled in Matrimony, is a good Plea in an Appeal.

3. This Right of Appeal for the death of her Husband is annexed to her
Widdow-hood, as her Quarentine is, and therefore if the Wife of the Dead Marry
again, her Appeal is gone, even although the second Husband should die within the
year and day after the Murder of the first: For she must all the while before
the Appeal be brought, continue Faemini viri sui, his Widow, upon whose death
the Appeal is brought: furthermore if she bring the Appeal during her
Widdow-hood, and take a Husband whilst it is depending, the Appeal shall Abate
(that is be out of doors) for ever, Nay, if on her Appeal she has Judgment
against the Defendant, if afterward she take an Husband before the Defendant
be Hanged, she can never have Execution of death against him.

4. By the Statute of Glocest. made in the sixth year of King Edw. 1. Cap. 9.
It is Enacted that if an Appeal set forth the Deed, the year, the day, the
hour, the Reign of the King, and the Town where the Deed was done, and with
what Weapon the Party was slain, the Appeal shall stand in effect, and shall
not be abated for default of fresh Suit, if the party shall Sue within the year
and the day after the Deed done

5. As for the year and day here mentioned, it is to be acconnted for the whole
year according to the Calendar, and not for twelve Months, at twenty eight days
to the Month. So likewise the day intended is a Natural day. And this year and
day must be accounted after the Felony and Murder Committed. Now if a man be
Mortally Wounded, on the first day of May, and thereof Languishes to the first
day of June, and then dies; the Question here arises whether the year and the
day allowed for bringing the Appeal is to be reckoned from the giving the
Wound, or the time of Death. Some have held the former: For that the Death
ensuing, has Relation to it, and that is the Cause of the Death, and the
Offender did nothing the day of the Death. But the truth is, the year and day
shall be accounted only from the first of June, the day of the Death; for
before that time no Felony was Committed: and thus it has often been resolved
and Adjudged, and the reason abovesaid grounded upon Relation (which is a
Fiction in Law) holds not in this Case. Coke 2. Ingit. fol. 320.

6. If an Appeal of Murder be brought, and depending the Suit, and after the
Year and Day is elapsed, one become accessory to the Murder, the Plaintiff
shall have an Appeal against him after the Year and Day past after the Death,
but it must be brought within the Year and Day after this new Felony as
accessory.

7. If a Man be Indicted for Murder and Convicted only of Manslaughter, and
have the Benefit of his Clergy it seems the Wife and Heir cannot afterward
bring their Appeal. Touching which the Lord Cook 3 Instit. Fo. 131. cites a
Case in these words: Thomas Burghe, Brother and Heir of Henry Burghe brought an
Appeal of Murder against Thomas Holcroft, of the Death of the said Henry: The
Defendant pleaded, that before the Coroner, he was Indicted of Manslaughter,
and before Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, he was upon that Indictment
Arraigned, and confessed the Indictment, and prayed his Clergy, and thereupon
was Entered Curia advisare vult, the Court will consider; whereupon he demanded
Judgment, whether the Plaintiff ought to maintain that Appeal he had brought.
To which the Plaintiff demurred in Law. And in this Case three points were
adjudged by Sir Christopher Wray, Sir Thomas Gaudy and the whole Court.

First, That the matter of the Bar had been a good Bar of the Appeal by the
Common Law, as well as if the Clergy had been Allowed: For that the Defendant,
upon his Confession of the Indictment had prayed his Clergy, which the Court
ought to have granted, and the deferring of the Court to be advised, ought not
to prejudice the Party Desendant, albeit the Appeal was Commenced before the
Allowance of it.

The second point adjudged was, that this Case was out of the Statute of 3 Hen.
7. For that the words of that Act are,

If it fortune that the same Felons and Murderers, and Accessaries so
Arraigned, or any of them, to be Acquitted, or the Principal of the said
Felony, or any of them to be Attainted, the Wife or next Heir of him so slain,
etc. may have their Appeal of the same Death and Murder against the Person so
Acquitted, or against the said Principals so Attainted, if they be alive, and
that THE BENEFIT OF HIS CLERGY THEREOF before be not had.

And in this the Defendant Holcroft, was neither Acquitted nor Attainted, but
Convicted by Confession, and the Benefit of the Clergy only prayed, as is
aforesaid, so as the Statute being penal concerning the Life of Man, and made
in Restraint of the Common Law, was not to be taken by Equity, but is Casus
Omissus, a Case Omitted, and left to the Common Law.

As to the Third, is was objected, that every Plea ought to have an apt
Conclusion, and that the Conclusion in this Case ought to have been, Et petit
judicium si praediit Thomas Holcroft Iterum de eadem morte, de qua semel
Convictus fuit, Respondere compelli debeat. And he does ask judgment if the
above mentione Thomas Holcroft shall be obliged to answer again for the same
death, he was once Convicted of] But it was adjudged that either of both
Conclusions was sufficient in Law: And therefore that exception was disallowed
by the Rule of the Court.

Note, the ancient Law was, that when a Man had judgment to be hanged in an
Appeal of Death, that the Wife, and all the Blood of the Party slain should
draw the Defendant to Execution, and Gascoigne said, Issint fuit in diebus
nostris, so it was done in our Days.

And thus much occasionally about Appeals, which we the rather inserted because
the practice thereof (through I know not whose negligence) has been almost lost
or forgot; till some few Years ago a Woman in Southwark revived it against one
that killed her Husband and got a pardon for it, but she Prosecuted him on
Appeal, had judgment against him, and he was Executed, since which time the
same Course has been frequently talked of, and brought, but for the most part
(to the shame I think of those Women or Children who make such Compositions for
their Husbands or Fathers Blood) they have been by some secret Bargains or
Compensations hushed up, and seldom effectually followed.

Two other Statutes of King Edw. 3.
Anno 4. Edw. 3. cap. 14.
A Parliament shall be holden once every year.
ITem, It is accorded that a Parliament shall be holden every year once, and
more often, if need be.

Anno 36. Edw. 3. cap. 10.
A Parliament shall be holden once in the year.
ITem, for maintenance of the said Articles and Statutes, and Redress of dibers
MISCHIEFS and GRIEVANCES, which daily happen, a Parliament shall be holden
every year, as another time was ordained by Statute.

The Comment.
BEfore the Conquest (as the Victory of Duke William of Normandy over Harold
the Usurper, is commonly, though very improperly called) Parliaments were to be
held twice every year, as appears by the Laws of King Edgar, cap. 5. and the
Testimony of the Mirror of Justices, cap. 1. sect. 3. For the Estates of the
Realm. King Alfred caused the Committees (some English Translations of that
ancient Book read, Earls, but the word seems rather to signify Commissioners,
Trustees, or Representatives) to meet, and ordained for a PERPETUAL USAGE, that
twice in the year, or ostner, if need were, in time of Peace they should
Assemble at London, to speak their Minds for the guiding of the People of God,
how they should keep themselves from Offenses, live in quiet and have right
done them by certain Vsages and sound Judgments. King Edward the first (says
Cook, 4. Instit. fol. 97.) kept a Parliament once every two years for the most
part: And now in this King Edward the Thirds time (one of the wisest and most
glorious of all our Kings) It was thought fit to Enact by these two several
Statutes, That a Parliament should be held once at least every year, which two
Statutes are to this day in full Force: For they are not Repealed, but rather
Confirmed by the Statute made in the 16th of our present Sovereign, King
Charles the Second, Cap. 1. Entitled, An Act for the Assembling and holding of
Parliaments once in three years at the least: The words of which are as follow.

Because by the ancient Laws and Statutes of this Realm, made in the Reign of
King Edward the third, Parliaments are to be held very often, your Majesty's
Humble and Loyal Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in
this present Parliament Assembled, most Humbly do beseech your most Excellent
Majesty, that it may be declared and Enacted, (2) And be it declared and
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that hereafter the sitting and holding of
Parliaments shall not be intermitted or discontinued above Three Years at the
most; but that within three years from and after the Determination of this
present Parliament, so from time to time within three years after the
Determination of and other Parliament or Parliaments, or if there be occasion,
more or oftener, Your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors, do Issue out your
Writs for calling, Assembling and holding of another Parliament, to the end
there may be a frequent calling, Assembling and holding of Parliaments once in
three years at the least.

Agreeable to these good and wholesome Laws are those gracious Expressions and
Promises in His Majesty's Proclamation touching the Causes and Reasons of
Dissolving the two last Parliaments, Dated April 8. 1681. Irregularities in
Parliament shall NEVER make us out of love with Parliaments, which we look upon
as the best Method for healing the distempers of the Kingdom, and the only
means to preserve the Monarchy in that due Credit and Respect which it ought to
have both at home and abroad. And for this Cause we are resolved by the
blessing of God to have frequent Parliaments; And both in and out of Parliament
to use OUR UTMOST ENDEAVORS TO EXTIRPATE POPERY, and to Redress all the
Grievances of our good Subjects, and in all things to Govern according to the
Laws of the Kingdom.

A DIGRESSION touching the Antiquity, Use, and Power of PARLIAMENTS, and the
Qualification of such Gentlemen as are fit to be chosen the Peoples
Representatives.
THe Recital of these several Laws for frequent calling of Parliaments,
declaring the same to be of such Importance or Necessity to the safety and
wel-being of the Nation, Invites us to give the vulgar Reader some further
Information touching those most Honorable Assemblies, which though a
digression will I hope be no Transgression, for I am willing at any time to go
a little out of my way, provided I may thereby meet with the Readers profit and
Advantage.

Of the Names and Antiquity of Parliaments.
THe word PARLIAMENT is French, derived from the three words Parler la meant, to
speak ones mind, because every Member of that Court should sincerely and
discreetly speak his mind for the general good of the Commonwealth, and this
name (says Cook. 1 Instit. fo. 110.) was used before William the Conqueror,
even in the time of Edward the Confessor. But most commonly in the Saxons time,
it was called Michegemote or Witenage Mote, that is, the Great Mote [Meeting or
Assembly, whence our Ward-Mootes in London receive their name to this day] or
the Wise-Moote, that is, the Assembly of the wise men and Sages of the Land.

But this word Parliament is used in a double sense.

1. Strictly, as it includes the Legislative Power of England, as when we say
-- An Act of Parliament; and in this Acceptance, it necessarily includes the
King, the Lords, and the Commons, each of which have a Negative Voice in making
Laws, and without their joint Consent no new Laws can pass, that be obligatory
to the Subject.

2. Vulgarly, the word is used for the Two Houses, the Lords and Commons, as
when we say, the King will call a Parliament, his Majesty has Dissolved his
Parliament, etc.

The Lords of Parliament are divided into two sorts, viz. Spiritual, that is to
say the Bishops (who sit there in respect of their Baronies) parcel of their
Bishoprics which they hold in their Politic Capacity, and Temporal.

The Commons are likewise divided into three Classes or parts, viz, Knights or
Representatives of the Shires or Counties; where note, that though the Writ
require two Knights to be chosen, and that they are called Knights, yet there
is no necessity that they should actually have the degree of Knighthood,
provided they be but Gentlemen; for the Statute 23 Hen. 6. cap: 15: has these
words, That the Knights of the Shires for the Parliament hereafter to be
Chosen, shall be not able Knights of the same Counties for which they shall be
chosen, OR OTHERWISE such Notable Esquires or Gentlemen born of the same
Counties, as shall be able to be Knights, and no man to be such Knight which
stands in the degree of a Yeoman and under.

Secondly, Citizens chosen to Represent Cities.

Thirdly, Burgesses, that is to say, those that are chosen out of Boroughs.

Note, that the difference between a City and a Borough is this, a City is a
Borough Incorporate, which is or has within time of Memory been an Episcopal
See, or had a Bishop; and this (although the Bishopric be Dissolved, as West
minster having heretofore a Bishop, though none now) still remains a City. Cook
1. Instit. Sect 164. Boroughs are Towns Incorporated, but such as never had any
Bishops.

Of the Three Estates in Parliament.
THere has been a great debate about the Three Estates, some zealously
pleading, That the Bishops are one of the three Estates of the Realm, and the
Lords Temporal a Second, and the Commons-house the Third, and the King over all
as a Transcendent by himself. Others as stiffly deny this, and assign the King
(as he his the Head of the Common Wealth) to be the first Estate, the Lords, as
well Spiritual as Temporal jointly, to be the Second; and the Commons-House the
Third. Non opis est nostrae tant as Componere Lites.


We shall not presume to undertake a decision of this arduous Controversy, but
in our poor opinion the matter seems to appear more difficult than really it
is, by means that the contending Parties do not first plainly set down what it
is they severally mean by the word Estate. Which may be taken, 1. For a rank,
degree, or Condition of Persons considered by themselves, different in some
notable Respects from others wherewith they may be compared. And in this
respect my Lords the Bishops may very properly be said to be an Estate, or one
of the Estates of the Realm, for then there will be several Estates, above the
number of three, for so in the House of Commons there may be said to be three
Estates, viz. Knights, Citizens and Burgesses. And heretofore in the days of
Popery, when there were 26 Abbots and Priors, that held per Baroniam too, as
well as the Bishops, called to the Parliament, and sat in the Lords House, [see
Fullers Church History, Lib. 6. 292.] Whether they being Religious and
Monastical Persons, whereas the Bishops were Seculars (no small difference in
their account) might not as well claim to be a distinct Estate by themselves,
as now the Bishops do, may be a question.

But secondly, When we spoke of three Estates in the Constitution of our
English Government, it is most natural to mean and intend such a poize in the
Balance, or such an Order or State, as has a Negative Voice in the
Legislative Power: For as the King and Commons excluding the Lords, so neither
the King and Lords excluding the Commons; much less the Lords and Commons
excluding the King, can make any Law; but this glorious Triplicity must be in
mutual Conjunction, and then from their united Influences spring our happy
Laws. But in this sense the Lords Spiritual by themselves have no pretense to
be a distinct Estate: That is, they have by themselves no Negative Voice,
(which I conceive the proper Characteristick or essential Mark of each of the
three Estates;) For suppose a Bill pass the Commons, and being brought into the
Lords House, all the 26 Bishops should be against it, and some of the Temporal
Lords, yet if the other Temporal Lords be more in number than the Bishops, and
those that side with them, the Bill shall pass as the Act of the whole house;
and if his Majesty please to give it his Royal Assent, is undoubted Law. Which
demonstrates the Bishops have of themselves no Negative Voice, and consequently
are none of the three Estates of the Realm. But if any will have them called an
Estate and mean something else be it, if he please to explain his Notion, it is
like I shall not contend with him about a fiddle faddle word.

Touching the Power of the Parliament
THe Jurisdiction of this Court (says Cook, 1 Instit. Sect. 164.) is so
Transcendent that it makes, Inlargeth, Diminishes, Abrogateth, Repealeth, and
reviveth Laws, Statutes, Acts and Ordinances concerning matters Ecclesiastical,
Civil, Martial, Marine, Capital, Criminal and common. And 4 Instit. Fol. 36.
The Power and Jurisdiction of the Parliament for making of Laws, in proceeding
by Bill, is so transcendent and absolute as it cannot be confined either for
Causes or Persons within any bounds. Of this Court it is truly said -- Si
Antiquitatem spectes est vetustissima, si Dignitatem, est Honoratissima, si
Jurisdictionem, est capacissima; if you regard its Original, it is most
Ancient; if its Dignity, it is most Honorable; if its Jurisdiction, it is most
Capacious.

Sir Thomas Smith a great Statesman, and in high esteem and place under Queen
Elizabeth, in his Treatise, de Republica Anglorum, L. 2. Ca. 2. gives this
Character of this supreme Court -- In Commitiis Parliamentariis, posita est
omnis Augustae, absolutaeque potestatis vis, veteres leges jubent esse irritas,
novas inducunt; Presentibus juxta ac futuris modum constituunt; Jura and
possessiones hominum privatorum commutant, Spurios natalibus restituunt, cultum
divinum sanctionibus corroborant; Pondera and mensuras variant; JUS IN REGNO
SVCCEDENDI PRESCRIBVNT, etc. The most high and absolute power of the Realm of
England, consists in the Parliament; for the Parliament abrogateth old Laws,
makes new, gives order for things past, and for things hereafter to be
followed, changes the rights and possessions of private men; Legitimateth
Bastards, Corroborates Religion with Civil Sanctions, Alters weights and
Measures; PRESCRIBES THE RIGHT OF SVCCESSION TO THE CROWN, defines doubtful
Rights where there is no Law already made, Appoints Subsidies, Taxes and
Impositions, gives most Free pardons, restores in Blood and Name, etc.

As for the power of Parliaments over both Statute and Common Law, take it in
the Accurate and Significant words of a Parliament, viz. the Statute, of 25
Hen. 8. Ca. 21, as follows, -- Whereas this Realm Recognizing no superior
under God, but the King, has been and is free from Subjection to any man's Laws
but only to such as have been devised, made, and ordained within this Realm,
for the wealth thereof, or to such other as the people of this Realm have taken
at their free Liberty by their own consent to be used amongst them, and have
bound themselves by long use and Custom to the observance of the same; not to
the observance of the Laws of any Foreign Prince, Potentate or Prelate, but as
-- to the accustomed and Ancient Laws of this Realm, originally established as
Laws of the same by the said Sufferance, Consents and Custom, and none
otherwise. It stands therefore with natural Equity and good Reason, that all
and every such Laws Humane made within this Realm or induced into this Realm,
by the said Sufferance Consents and Custom, the King and the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal and Commons Representing the whole State of the Realm, in the most
High Court of Parliament, have full Power and Authority to dispouse with those
and all other Humane Laws of the Realm, and with every one of them, as the
quality of the Persons and matter shall require. And also the said Laws and
every of them to abrogate, annull, amplify or diminish, as to the King, Nobles,
and Commons of the Realm, present in Parliament, shall seem most meet and
convenient for the Wealth of the Realm.

Thus far that notable Statute, which in truth is only Declarative and in
Affirmance of the Ancient Common Law of England.

The particular Business of Parliaments.
BY what has been said, you may perceive the work of an English Parliament is
not (as some would have it,) only to be Keys to unlock the peoples Purses. That
is but one part, and perhaps one of the least parts too, of their Office. They
are to propose new Laws that are wanting for general good, and to press the
Abrogation of Laws in being, when the Execution of them is found prejudicial or
dangerous to the public. They are to provide for Religion, and the Safety and
Honor of the Nation, they have a power (as you have heard from Sir Thomas
Smith,) to order the Right to the Crown (understand all this with the Kings
consent) and they have very frequently undertaken and actually Limited the
same, contrary to and different from the Common Line of Succession. Nay by the
Statute of the 13 Eliz. Cap, 13. It is expressly Enacted, That if any Person
shall in any wise hold and affirm or maintain, that the Queen with and by the
Parliament of England is not able to make Laws and Statutes of sufficient force
and validity to Limit and bind the Crown of this Realm, and the Descent,
Limitation Inheritance and Government thereof, or that this present Statute, or
any part thereof, or any other Statute to be made by the Authority of the
Parliament of England, with the Royal Assent for Limiting the Crown, is not,
are not, or shall not, or ought not to be for ever of good and sufficient Force
and validity to bind, limit, restrain and Govern all Persons, their Rights and
Titles, that in any wise may or might claim any Interest or Possibility in or
to the Crown of England, in Possession Remainder, Inheritance, Succession or
otherwise howsoever, and all other Persons whatsoever, every Person so holding
affirming or maintaining during the Life of the Queen shall be adjudged an high
Traitor, and suffer and forfeit as in Casts of High Treason is accustomed, and
every Person so holding affirming or maintaining after the d^c^ase of our said
Sovereign Lady shall forfeit all (...) Good and Chattels.

Which Clause and last mentioned Penalty is to this Day in force, and ought to
be considered by any who shall now pretend that an Act of Parliament cannot
dispose of the Succession.

As for the Right of making War and Peace the same is gramted to be part of the
High Prerogatives of our Kings, yet the wisest of our Monarchs have very rarely
entered into any War without the (...) Parliaments; for 1. Who could give them
better Counsel in such a difficult Affair? 2. The People would more readily
expose their Persons in such a War, the Justice and Expediency whereof was
approved by their Representatives. 3. The King from thence might more certainly
promise himself supplies of Money to carry on the same.

But nothing is more properly the work of a Parliament than to redress
Grievances. To take notice of Monopolies and oppressions, to Curb the
Exorbitances of pernicious Favorites, and ill Ministers of State. To punish
such mighty Delinquents as look upon themselves too big for the ordinary reach
of Justice, to inspect the Conduct of such as are entrusted with Administration
of the Laws, or disposal of the public Treasure of the Nation: All Crimes of
these and the like kinds are public Nusances, common mischiefs, and wound the
whole Body politic in a vital part, and can scarce at all be sound out or
Redressed (by reason of the power and Influence of the Offenders) but in this
great and awful Senate, before whom the haughtiest Criminals tremble; and it
has been observed that they scarce ever Prosecuted any (though never so great,
or highly in favor at Court) but sooner or later they hit him, and it proved
his Ruin. Take a few examples. King Edw. the second dotes upon Pierce Gaveston
(a French Gentleman, he wastes the Kings Treasures, has undeserved Honors
conserred on him, affronts the ancient Nobility. The Parliament in the beinning
of the Kings Reign Complains of him, he is banished into Ireland: The King
afterward calls him home, and marries him to the Earl of Glocesters Sister,
the Lords complain again so effectually, that the King not only consents to his
second Banishment, but that if ever he returned or were found in the Kingdom,
he should be h^ld and proceeded against as an Enemy to the State. Yet back he
comes, and is received once more by the King as an Angel, who carries him with
him into the North, and hearing the Lords were in Arms to bring the said
Gaveston to Justice, plants him for safety in Scarborough Castle, which being
taken, his Head was Chopped off.

In King Richard the Seconds time, most of the Judges of England to gratify
certain corrupt and pernicious Favorites about the King, being sent for to
Nottingham, were by Persuasions and Menaces prevailed with to give false and
Illegal Resolutions to certain questions proposed to them, declaring certain
matters to be Treason which in truth were not so: For which in the next
Parliament they were called to Account, and Attainted; and Sir Robert Tresilian
Lord Chief Justice of England, was drawn from the Tower through London to
Tyburn, and there Hanged: As likewise was Blake one of the Kings Council, and
Vske the Undersheriff of Middlesex, who was to pack a Jury to serve the
present Turn, against certain Innocent Lords and others, whom they intended to
have had taken off; and five more of the Judges were Banished, and their Lands
and Goods forfeited. And the Archibishop of York, the Duke of Ireland and the
Earl of Suffolk, three of the Kings Evil Counselors, were forced to fly, and
died miserable Fugitives in Foreign Parts.

In the beginning of King H. the 8ths Reign, Sir Richard Empson Knight, Edmond
Dudley one of the Barons of the Exchequer, having by color of an Act of
Parliament to try People for several Offenses without Juries, committed great
oppressions, were proceeded against in Parliament and lost their Heads.

In the 19 Year of the Reign of King James at a Parliament holden at
Westminister there were shown (says Bakers Chron. Fo. 418.) two great Examples
of Justice; which for future Terror, are not unfit to be here related; one
upon Sir Giles Mompesson, a Gentleman otherwise of Good parts; but for
practicing sundry abuses in erecting and seting up new Inns and Alehouses and
exasting great Sums of Money of people, by pretense of Letters Patents
granted to him for that purpose, was sentenced to be degraded from his
Knighthood, and disabled to Bear any Office in the Commonwealth, though he
avoided the Execution by Flying the Land; But upon Sir Francis Mitchel, a
Justice of Peace of Middlesex, and one of the Chief Agents, the sentence of
Degradation was Executed, and he made to ride with his face to the Horse tail
through the City of London. The other Example was of Sir Francis Bacon,
Viscount St. Albans, Lord Chancellor of England, who for Bribery was put from
his place, and Committed to the Tower.

In King Charles the firsts time, most of the Judges that had given their
opinions contrary to Law in the Case of Ship Money, were called to Account, and
forced to Fly for the same: And in the 19th year of our present Sovereign, the
Earl of Clarendon, Lord Chancellor of England, being questioned in Parliament
and retiring thereupon beyond the Seas, was by a special Act Banished and
Disabled. In a word it was well and wisely said of that excellent Statesman,
Sir William Cecil Lord Burleigh, and High Treasurer of England, That he knew
not what an Act of Parliament might not do; which Apothegm was approved by
King James, and alleged (as I remember) in one of his published Speeches.

And as the Jurisdiction of this Court is so transcendent, so the Rules and
Methods of Proceedings there, are different from those of other Courts. For
(says Cook 4. Instit. fo. 15.) As every Court of Justice has Laws and Customs
for its Direction, some by the Common Law, some by the Civil and Canon Law,
some by Peculiar Laws and customs, etc. So the High Court of Parliament suis
propriis Legibus and Consuetudinibus Subsistit, Subsists by it is own Peculiar
Laws and Customs. It is, Lex and Consuetudo Parliamenti, the Law and Custom of
Parliament, that all weighty matters in any Parliament moved concerning the
Peers, or Commons in Parliament assembled, ought to be determined, adjudged and
discussed by the Course of the Parliament, and not by the Civil Law, not yet by
the Common Laws of this Realm used in more Inseriour Courts. Which was so
declared to be Secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Parliaments, according to the
Law and Custom of Parliament, concerning the Peers of the Realm, by the King,
and all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the like pari ratione (for the
same reason) is for the Commons, for any thing moved or done in the House of
Commons: and the rather, for that by another Law and Custom of Parliament, the
King cannot take notice of any thing said or done in the House of Commons, but
by the Report of the House of Commons; and every Member of the Parliament has
a Judicial place. and can be no Witn^^^. And this is the Reason that Judges
ought not to give any opinion of a Matter of Parliament, because it is not to
be decided by the Common Laws, but Secundum Legem and Consuetudinem
Parliamenti, according to the law and Custom of Parliament: And so the Judges
in diverse Parliaments have confessed. And some hold, that every offense
Committed in any Court panishible by that Court, must be punished (proceeding
Criminally) in the same Court, or in some higher, and not any Inferior Court,
and the Court of Parliament has no higher. -- Thus Cook.

Great complaints have been made about a late House of Commons sending for some
Persons into Custody by their Sergeant at Arms; but certainly they did no more
therein, then what their Predecessiors have often done; every Court must be
supposed Armed with a power to desend, it self from Affronts and Insolences;
In all Ages when the House has appointed particular Committees, has it not
been usual to order that they shall be empowered to send for Papers, Persons,
and Records? But to bring Men to a sober Consideration of their Duty and
Danger, I shall give a few Instances, besides those before mentioned, of what
the House of Commons has done in former Ages.

1. Anno 20. Jacobi, Doctor Harris Minister of Bletchingly in Surry, for
misbehaving himself by Preaching and otherwise, about Election of Members of
Parliament, upon complaint, was called to the Bar of the House of Commons, and
there as a Delinquent on his Knees, had Judgment to confess his fault there,
and in the Country, in the Pulpit of his Parish Church, on Sunday before
Sermon.

2. Anno 21 Jacobi, Ingrey under Sheriff of Cambridge-shire, for refusing the
Poll upon the promise of Sir Thomas Steward to defend him therein, kneeling at
the Bar, received his Judgment to stand Committed to the Sergeant at Arms, and
to make Submission at the Bar, and Acknowledge his offense there, and to make a
father Submission openly at the Quarter Sessions, and there also to acknowledge
his fault.

3. Anno 20 Jacobi, the Mayor of Arundel, for misbehaving himself in an
Election, by putting the Town to a great deal of Charge, not giving a due and
General warning, but Packing a number of Electors, was sent for by Warrant, and
after ordered to pay all the Charge, and the House appointed certain persons to
adjust the Charges.

4. And 3 Car. 1. Sir William Wray and others, Deputy Lieutenants of Cornwall,
for assuming to themselves a power to make whom they pleased Knights, and
defaming those Gentlemen that then stood to be Chosen, sending up and down the
Country Letters for the Trained Bands to appear at the Day of Election, and
Menacing the Country under the Title of His Majesty's pleasure; had Judgment
given upon them, to be committed to the Tower. 2. To make Recognition of their
Offense at the Bar of the House upon their Knees, which was done. 3. To make a
Recognition and submission at the Assizes in Cornwall, in a Form drawn by a
Committee.

5. But most remarkable are the Proceedings in the same Parliament Anno 1628.
against Doctor Manwaring, who being there charged with Preaching and Publishing
Offensive Sermons, and the same referred to a Committee; they brought in their
Report, which was delivered to the House with this Speech, as I find it in
Doctor Fullers Church History, L. 11. Fo. 129.

Mr. Speaker,
I am to deliver from the Sub-Committee, a Charge against Mr. Manwaring, a
Preacher and Doctor of Divinity, but a Man so Criminous, that he has turned
his Titles into Accusations; for the better they are, the worse is he, that
has dishonored them. Here is a great Charge that lies upon him, it is great
in it self, and great because it has many great Charges in it: Serpens qui
Serpentem Devorat, fit Draco; his Charge having digested many Charges into it,
is become a Monster of Charges. The main and great one is this; a Plot and
Policy, to alter and subvert the Frame and Fabric of this State and
Commonwealth. This is the great one, and it has others in it, that gains it
more Greatness: For to this end, he labors to infuse into the Conscience of
his Majesty the persuasion of a Power not bounding it self with Laws, which
King James of famous memory, calls in his Speech in Parliament, 1619. Tyranny,
yea, Tyranny accompanied with Perjury.

2. He endeavors to persuade the Consciences of the Subjects, That they are
Bound to Obey Illegal Commands,; yea, he Damns them for not Obeying them.

3. He Robs the Subjects of the Property of their Goods.

4. He Brands them that will not lose this Property with most Scandalous and
Odious Titles, to make them Hateful both to Prince and People, so to set a
Division between the Head and Members, and between the Members themselves.

5. To the same end (not much unlike to Faux and his Fellows) he seeks to Blow
up Parliaments and Parliamentary-Power. These five being duly viewed, will
appear to be so many Charges, and withal they make up the main and great
Charge, a mischievous Plot to alter and subvert the Frame and Government of
this State and Commonwealth. And now that you may be sure that Mr. Manwaring,
though he leave us no propriety in our Goods, yet he has an absolute propriety
in his Charge; Audite ipsam Belluam, hear Mr. Manwaring by his own words making
up his own Charge.


Here he produced the Books, particularly Insisting on p. 19, 29, and 30. in
the first Sermon, p. 35, 46, and 48. in the second Sermon; all which passages
he heightened with much Eloquence and Acrimony; thus concluding his Speech, I
have showed you an Evil tree that brings forth Evil fruit; and now it rests
with you to determine, whether the following Sentence shall follow, Cut it
down, and cast it into the Fire.

Four days after the Parliament proceeded to his Censure, consisting of eight
particulars, it being ordered by the House of Lords against him, as follows.

1. To be Imprisoned during the pleasure of the House.

2. To be Fined a thousand Pounds.

3. To make his Submission at the Bar in this House, and in the House of
Commons, at the Bar there, in Verbis Conceptis, a set form of words framed by a
Committee of this house.

4. To be Suspended from his Ministerial Function three Years, and in the mean
time a sufficient Preaching-man to be provided out of the profits of his
Living, and this to be left to be performed by the Ecclesiastical Court.

5. To be Disabled for ever hereafter from Preaching at Court.

6. To be for ever Disabled of having any Ecclesiastical Dignity in the Church
of England.

7. To be Incapable of any Secular Office or Preferment.

8. That his Books are worthy to be Burned, and his Majesty to be moved, that
it may be so in London, and both the Universities.

And accordingly he made his humble Submission at both the Bars in Parliament,
on the Three and twentieth of June following, and on his Knees, before both
Houses, submitted himself, with outward Expressions of Sorrow, as follows.

I do here in all sorrow of Heart, and true Repentance, acknowledge those many
Errors and Indiscretions which I have committed in Preaching and Publishing the
two Sermons of mine, which I called Religion and Allegiance, and my great fault
in falling upon this Theme again, and handling the same rashly, scandalously
and undavisedly in my own Parish Church in St. Giles in the Fields, the Fourth
of May last past. I humbly acknowledge these three Sermons to have been full of
Dangerous passages and Inferences, and scandalous Aspersions, in most part of
them. And I do Humbly acknowledge the Just proceedings of this Honorable House
against me, and the Just Sentence and Judgment passed upon me for my great
Offense. And I do from the bottom of my Heart crave Pardon of God, the King,
and this Honorable House, and the Commonweal in general, and those worthy
Persons Adjuged to be reflected upon by me in particular, for these great
Ossences and Errors.

The truth is, it is this High Court of Parliament, that only can hinder the
Subject from being given up as a Prey to the Arbitrary Pleasure not only of the
Prince if he should attempt it, but (which is Ten times worse) to the
unreasonable passions and lusts of Favorites, chief Ministers, and Women; when
otherwise instead of a Monarch (who as sometimes it may happen shall Govern but
in name) we might be ruled like the Ancient French by an insolent Major of the
Palace, who will be sure to mind the private interest of himself and Family
more than that of the Prince or the Public good: Or like the Turkish Empire
under a Weak Grand Seignior, by the Prevailing Concubine of the Seraglio, who
is perhaps her self managed by no higher dictates than that of her chief Eunuch
or She-Slave. It is strange therefore to observe the Impotent Ambition of some
Men (and such as, with Shame let us speak it, boast themselves Englishmen too)
who (provided they may trample upon and domineer over their Inferiors) care not
how much their Superiors do the like over them. Their Souls (like most insolent
Men's) being mean enough to submit thereunto; or who can enough deplore and
abhor the ignorance and stupidity of some lazy insignificant Gentlemen, who
care not how things go, provided they may enjoy their Hawks, Hounds, and
Bowling-Green Meetings; whilst not only for Divinity, but Politics too, they
are Governed by their more Impertinent Chaplain, or the Parson of their Parish.
Now nothing is more obvious than the designs of some idle, Covetous, Sycophant
Clergymen, who like Ivy, though it cannot grow without the support of the Oak
and yet will destroy it at last, do in private Parlours over the Glass, whilst
Healths go round, as well as in their Pulpits over their Cushions, set up
Absolute Monarchy to be Jure Divino, declaiming against the unreasonable
stubornness of any Parliament that will not give away the Peoples Money, and
submit themselves to be Fleeced, as often as the prime Minister or Favorite
think fit, they cry up the Prince like an Angel so long as he will be their
Executioner to Whip, Imprison, or hang all that will not truckle to their own
Pride and Avarice; or refuse to give up their Souls once again to be managed by
an Implicit Faith, whereby in the mean while these Huffish Sir John's might not
be troubled with those uneasy Tasks of Studying, Preaching, etc. but may have
nothing else to do, but live at ease, keep their Coach and Horses, with a silly
Curate to do all the Drudgery; Whilst they themselves are making Addresses
above, by Flattering and Informing at some great Noblemans or Bishops Table,
and railing against the Whiggs and Fanatics, and speaking a good word for
Popery by the By; Or else if their parts reach so high, by some Sycophant
Pamphlet or Sermon against the Government Established by Law; They teach that
men have no property either in their Lives or Goods, but only during the
Princes pleasure, etc. If there be not such a parcel of Things as these that
call themselves Divines, then no Body is concerned in this Character; but if
there be, they are the worst of men, and ought not only to be exposed, but
severely punished.

Therefore since at present we live under so happy a Government, where being
securely Landed our selves, we behold the Shipwreck of our Neighbors, and
since (notwithstanding the goodness of our Sovereign King Charles the Second,
whom God preserve) who has declared that he desires nothing less than the
Alteration or subversion of that Government (which as well by his Coronation
Oath, as by his own Lenity and good nature, he thinks himself obliged to
observe) yet there are some, who for their own private ends, endeavor their
utmost to remove our ancient Landmarks, Introducing Popery and Slavery amongst
us; It is therefore the indispensable Interest and Duty of all true Englishmen
to maintain these Privileges conveyed from their Ancestors through so many
Generations inviolable, upon which all our (Earthly) and in a great measure our
Spiritual) Happiness, safety, and well-being depends. Nor can any Man in his
senses but acknowledge that the only right way to attain that end, is to look
well to the Means, and that is by taking due care what Persons they Choose for
their Representatives, with whom they must trust their Estates, Lives, and
Liberties.

Now this Government of a Prince by and with Parliaments, whenever the
Condition and Necessities of the State require them, however according to it is
primitive Institution it was the best of all others, yet as well in that as in
Christianity it self, there have been found out ways of Corruption, and that
is, when either they sit too long, or too seldom, or are too frequently
dissolved; too frequent Dissolutions being no less Dangerous to the Subject,
than too long Sessions. Nevertheless it may be in the Electors power to avoid
the Inconveniences of both, and that is by making a good Choice.

Whereas if the Country People will sell all that they have for a little roast
Beef, aGlass of Sack, and a pot of Ale, Choosing him that will give them most
Drink to Day, though they know him to be a Person who will sell both their
Religion, Liberties and Fortunes to Morrow, then frequent Dissolutions will of
necessity ruin us, and utterly debauch this Excellent Constitution; for the
honest Country Gentleman designing no other private advantage but the true
service of his King and Country, has no reason, nor is he able, once in half a
Year to spend 4 or 500 Pound, only to purchase a place full of Labor, Charge,
trouble and Danger, without any profit to himself, only to serve those who put
him to such an unkind Expense. And when honest Loyal Gentlemen are thus
discouraged, if this Sottish humor amongst the Electors continue, the Papist,
and their Faction, or necessitous Persons of prostituted Consciences, will
carry their Votes; for they can afford to buy them at large rates, being
resolved to repay themselves, though with the ruin of the Nation.

This is no vain surmize or idle speculation, but the very truth of the Case;
and the meanest Country Man that has Eyes in his Head, and will use them, can
not but see it: for did you ever know a Coachman or Groom buy his place, unless
he designed to rob his Masters Bin? Therefore whoever you put to charge in your
Elections, blame him not, if he makes Money again of what he bought, and lays
out his Vote in the House, not for your Good and that of the public, but that
way as will best please the Ministers of State, that so he himself may get a
good place, or preferment, or Title of Honor by the Bargain. I say though he
himself be a base Wretch for so doing, yet You cannot blame him, since you did
not lend him your Trust, but sold it him, and what a Man has purchased with
his own Money, he may lawfully sell again.

Therefore that Man who does wilfully give his Voice for a Knave or Fool, does
his endeavor to ruin both his Country, and himself and his Posterity, and to
be as bad or worse than the Person he chooses; and if the greater part of the
House happen to be Wiser or Honester, it is no thanks to him; he did as much as
he could to debauch it; and therefore for his part, if none else were concerned
with him, it were no matter if he were forthwith made a Slave, and his Children
Perpetual Vassals.

The before mentioned old Lord Treasurer Barleigh (who is thought to have been
the greatest Statesman that ever this Nation bred) did frequently deliver as a
Maxim, or rather as a Prophecy, That England can hardly be ruined, unless it
be by her own Parliaments; undoubtedly foreseeing that other oppressions, as
being wrought by violence, might perhaps by violence be in time shaken off
again; whereas when in a Parliamentary way we are undone by a Law, that can
never be reverst but by a downright Rebellion, because the parties advantaged
by that Law will never agree to the repealing of it; and a Rebellion is both so
dangerous, and of so biack a Character, as men either rich or conscientious,
will not engage therein; and therefore no public mischief is so irrecoverable
as that which is grown into a Law, and nothing, you know, can become so, but
what is Imposed upon you by Parliament. Such is the happy frame of your
Government, so prudently and so strong have your Ancestors secured Property and
Liberty, (rescued by inches out of the hands of encroaching violence) that you
cannot be enslaved but with chains of your own making, for as you are never
undone till you are undone by Law, so you can never be undone by a Law, till
you choose the undoing Legislators; and may not your enemies add Scorn to their
Cruelty, and pretend Justice for both, when they can plead they had never
trampled on your heads, had not you laid them on the Ground?

From what has been said, it evidently appears of what vast importance it is at
all times, when ever his Majesty shall be pleased to issue out his Writs for a
Parliament, to choose (as much as in us lies) a good house of Commons, as we
tender our Religion, Liberties, Estates and Posterity; upon our well or ill
choosing, depends our well or ill being; it is here as in marriage or war, there
is no room for second Errors, one Act may ruin a Nation beyond retrieve.

Besides, they whom you choose will represent the qualities as well as the
persons, and if you send up a false glass, it will represent you with an ugly
face; you have hitherto had the repute of an ancient and grave people, but if
you choose raw Saplings, green heads, unexperienced children, the world will
Judge of you, as they once did of the Grecians, that you were either always
children, or are grown twice so; you have long been a famous Religious
Protestant Nation, but if you choose debauched swearing Atheists, men of no
Religion, or such as are mere formalists, or enclinable to Popery, what can the
world think but that the Nation has lost its sense of Religion, and is content
to be led back into the Egyptian darkness of Romish Fopperies: you have
formerly had the Character of a sober temperate Nation, but if you choose
Drunkards for your Trustees, or give your voices for those that gorge you most
with liquor, what can be supposed but that you are already Drunk with folly,
and Just Reeling into Slavery.

Some Directions concerning the Choice of Members to serve in Parliament, and
the Qualifications that render a Gentleman fit or unfit, worthy or undeserving
of your Voices for so great a Trust.
1. AVoid all such as hold any Office of Considerable value during pleasure,
they being subject to be Overawed. For although a man wish well to his Country,
and in the Betraying thereof, knows that at the long run he mischiefs and
enslaves his Posterity, if not himself, yet the narrowness of mers minds is
such, as makes them more tenderly apprehend a small present damage, than a far
greater hereafter. Such men must of necessity be under a great Temptation and
Distraction, when their Consciences and Interest look different ways. For to
say truth, such an Office is but a softer word for a Pension; Therefore since
these men know before hand the Inconveniences that attend the Trust of a Member
of Parliament faithfully discharged, it is very suspicious and reflecting upon
their honesty, if any such stand for it; And I think we are bound in Charity,
nor can we do them a greater Courtesy, than to Answer their Petition in the
Lords Prayer -- Not to lead them into Temptation.

2. Suspect all those (especially if they are men of Ill Repute) who in their
Profession, or near Relations, have dependency upon the Court. For though to be
the Kings Servant is no Bar from being a Parliament Man, or from serving his
Country honestly in that Station, and no doubt several of them have at diverse
times well discharged the same, yet frequently such persons (unworthily)
guessing at their Prince by themselves, are apt to Vote right or wrong, as they
imagine will most please the Prerogative Party, and it is an hard matter for a
Courtier to please that great (perhaps corrupt) Minister who supports him, and
those whom he Represents, at the same time: And if he endeavors to oblige
both, he becomes such an uncertain Weathercock, as most commonly he pleases
neither. And therefore the most prudent and honestest of the Courtiors are
always observed to decline being Parliament men, for this very reason.

3. Meddle not with such as have been or are like to prove Pensioners, or
receive Salaries for secret Services. I know they would now Brazen it out, That
there were no such men, no such practices. But the contrary is notorious; did
not the House of Commons last Westminster-Parliament take the thing into
Examination? nay did not Sir S. F. by his memory (without the books, which for
some reasons were refused to be brought in) name about 30 of them, and the
respective Sums yearly paid to each? and would not many more have been
discovered, and the whole knot of them severely and exemplarily punished, if
that Parliament had a little longer Continued? Now there is none more
implacably your Enemy, then that person whose Interest is to destroy you; that
must neither eat nor drink, except you starve; that must go in Rags, except you
go naked; are taught to Fleece you, that they may keep themselves warm. To
prevent this, avoid not only all former Pensioners, but such other as may be in
danger to become so; Therefore meddle not with men of necessitous Fortunes, or
much in Debt. The Representative of a Nation ought to consist of the most wise,
Wealthy, sober, and courageous of the people, not men of mean Spirits and
little figure, and sordid passions, that would sell the Interest of the People
that chose them to advance their own, or be at the beck of some great man, in
hope of a lift to a good Employ. Those that have fair Estates, have in a manner
given Hostages to their Country, and must be Errant Fools before they can play
the Knave with you. But what cares the needy Passenger if the Ship perish, if
he can but save himself in the long Boat, or get some Booty by the Wreck? What
Protection do you expect from them, who cannot show their Faces with confidence
without a Protection, either in or out of Parliament? Who are no less
apprehensive of a Bailiff, than of the growing greatness of the French; and
dread not Popery half so much as an Out-Lawry? Will you secure them within the
Walls of the house of Commons, who were better secured within the Walls of a
Common Goal? Who can never pay their debts Contracted by their Prodigality, but
out of your Purses; and must run you in, to get themselves out of their
Mortgages? These men's fear of being dissolved makes them submit to any thing,
rather than be left to the unmerciful Rage of their hungrey Creditors, who have
so long fasted for their money. For all such persons (though some of them may
be looked upon as honest fair-Conditioned Gentlemen and good Housekeepers,) are
in danger of being Tempted to repair the decays of their own private Fortunes,
by the Ruin of the Public. Moreover the Choosing of such broken Fortunes,
decays Trade, and ruins whole Families; insomuch that I have known it drive
many men (contrary to their own Inclinations) to wish never to see Parliaments
more in England. In a word, if Beggars ever come to be your Representatives,
how can they Judge what is expedient for the Nation to spare, whose only Care
is to get a piece of money to spend?

4. As you are not unadvisedly to Choose such as retain to the Court at home,
so much less are you to Elect any such as have their dependence upon Foreign
Princes or States, these are under strong obligations to see you ruined; for
your own Reason will tell you, that no Foreign Power will prodigally throw
away his Pistoles, where he expects not an Harvest answerable to his Seed. It Is
possible this Caution may not be unnecessary, for it is more than suspected that
there are some such degenerated Englishmen, who having forsaken he Interest of
their Native Country, have sold themselves to an Outlandish Interest, that
they may the better gratify their own Ambition, and those Potent Lusts which
their own meaner Fortunes could not otherwise seed and satiate.

5. Be not over-fond to receive Bribes and Gratifications from persons that
would fain make a prey of you, and by their purses, lavish treats, and
entertainments would allure you to prostitute your voices for their Elections;
you may be assured they would never bid so high for your Suffrages, but that
they know where to make their Markets. Choose the worthy unwilling person,
before the complemental unworthy man, whose extraordinary forwardness
prognosticates he seeks not your good, but his own, separate from the public.
Let us not play the fools or knaves to neglect or betray the Common Interest of
our Country by a base Election, let neither Fear, Flattery, nor Gain Biass us.
Consider with your selves what losers you will be, if to laugh and be merry one
day, the person you choose should give you and your children occasion to mourn
for ever after. -- Say not he is but a single person, one man cannot do such
hurt, -- Silly men! what if all other places should be as bad as your selves?
then all the house would be of a piece, and besides don't you know that
sometimes a single man has carried a Vote, which perhaps was no less
mischeivous than Irretrievable? think how Justly the gallant ancient Heathens
may upbraid this baseness of us Christians, when, as they sacrificed many of
their children, nay and oftentimes their own Lives for the good of their
Country, so on the contrary do we sacrifice or at least Happ-Hazard both our
Religion, Lives, Children and Country for the Swinish pleasure of a day or
two's debauchery.

6. Make not your public choice the Recompense of private Favors, it is not
pleasing a Neighbor, because rich and powerful, but saving of England that
you are to regard. Neither pay nor return private obligations at the cost of
the Nation. Sir John is a pretty Gentleman, and treats people Civilly, and my
Landlord is a good man, and has been kind, and Esquire such an one, is our next
Justice of peace, but yet I will not give my voice contrary to my conscience,
or have an hand in a choice that may ruin my Country, to gratify any or all of
them. Let not such engagements put you upon dangerous Elections as you Love the
Liberties and the Freedom of your Posterity. But tell them in this affair they
must hold you excused, for that the weight of the matter will well bear it,
this is your Inheritance; all may depend upon it; it is a more Modest request if
they would desire you to give them that Freehold and Estate, that qualifies you
for an Elector, than to press you to be for a man that in your conscience you
think unfit, or not so fit as his Competitor, for so weighty a Trust. Men don't
use to Lend their Wives, or give their Children to satisfy personal
Kindnesses, nor ought you to make a Swop of your Birthright (and that of your
Posterities too) for a mess of pottage, a Feast, or a lusty Drinking bout;
there can be no proportion here, and therefore none must take it ill, that you
use your freedom about that which in its constitution is the great Bulwark of
all your ancient Liberties.

7. Have a care of Ambitious men and non-Residents, such as Live most about the
Town, and not with their Estates in the Country. These seek Honors and
Preferments above; and little or never embetter the Country with their expenses
or Hospitality, for they are too much for themselves, to Act vigorously for the
advantage of their Country; or if in the house they do for a while Swagger a
little, and Speak it briskly, it is only that the Court may take notice of them,
and take them off by some preferment; and then these false Patriots shall be
the only sticklers for unbounded Prerogative.

8. Be resolved (against all Temptations) to choose no Minors: What, will you
be content with sucking Statesinen? and Beard-less Politicians? and Rehoboams
Counselors? then, expect, for well you deserve to be lasht with Scorpions: Can
you Judge them fit to dispose of your Liberties, Lives Estates and Religion,
who cannot legally dispose of their own Estates or themselves? What security
can they give you, that they will not give away yours and you, whose Bond in
the eye of the Law will not betaken for 40 s? but sure your own experience of
what such young Green Persons have been and done in former Parliaments, has I
hope learned you sufficient wisdom, not to choose the like again.

9. Elect no prodigal or Voluptious persons, for besides that such are not
regular enough to be Lawmakers, they are commonly Idle, and though possibly
they may wish well to your Interest, yet they will rather lose it than their
Pleasures, they will scarce leave one of their Nightly Revellings to give you
their attendance and Service next day, and therefore they are not to be relied
upon. And upon this occasion I shall borrow the words of an Author to whom I do
not much desire to be beholden; Some Senators are drawn from their duties by
Pleasure; perhaps a party at Tennis, Bowls, Cards, a pack of Dogs, a
Cock-Fight, or a Horse-match, a Comedy, a Good Fellow, or a Mistress. And while
they are thus employed, the Vigilant faction steals a Vote that is worth a
Kingdom. -- Some again are so transported with the Vanity of Dress and
Language, that rather then serve the public with one hair amiss, or in one
broken Period, they will let the public perish, Mallent Rempublicam turbari, quam
capillos. These, while their Country lies at Stake, are ordering of their
heads, and Polishing the Phrase, shaping the parts of a Set-Speech, till it is
too late to use it. Nothing methinks does less beseem a Grave Assembly, then
this Facultatula Loquendi; this same Rhetorical Twittle-twattle; it spins out
so much time in tedious Circumstance, that it makes a man even sick of a good
Cause, and for the very form, prejudge the Reason of it. -- Sloth and Neglect,
are yet more dangerous in a Senator, in regard of Surprises from the Faction,
these think a wet day, or a cold morning, a sufficient discharge of their
Attendance; and while they are taking the other Napp, or the other Bottle, the
Monarch perhaps has lost his Crown, or the Subject his Liberty.

9. Avoid all those that play the Protestants in Design, and are indeed
disguised Papists, ready to pull off their mask on the first opportunity,
whenever time serves. You may know them by their swaggering for a Popish
Successor to maintain the Protestant Religion, Their Laughing at the Popish
Plot, and disgracing the Evidence of it, and at the same time affirming
(without any grounds) the reality of a Presbyterian Plot; their associating
with known Papists, and winking at them, but eager heats to put the Laws in.
Execution with the utmost rigor upon Protestant Dissenters; These are men
whose affection for the Protestant Interest, notwithstanding all their fair
Speeches may justly be questioned, since their practice gives their words the
Lie; nor will their large pretensions and seeming zeal for the Church of
England, at all prevail with wise men; for we know the Papists themselves, when
it is for their Interest, will pretend the same thing, and speak fair of our
Church, and rail only upon the Fanatics; when yet in their hearts, they hate
our Church as much as they do any of the Sects; Observe all their Pamphlets,
the noise is against the Presbyterians and Dissenters, but it is with a design
to destroy them first, and the Church of England afterward; for when so great
a body of Protestants are represented as Disloyal and Dangerous, and Crushed and
undone, the Church of England-men will be left alone, and then they hope to
deal with them well enough; and that this is their aim, may be perceived if you
observe how zealous the Papists are to stir up Prosecution against the
Dissenters, and none more Joyful when it goes on, etc. Now what is all this for?
are they think you indeed and in earnest so very kind to the Church of England?
for what acqualntance? No, no, it is all Dissimulation and Roguery, a Design
which they drive on first to divide and then to ruin us. Therefore beware how
you choose any such Tool as they make use of therein. The contrary, are men that
bless God for the most happy discovery of the Hellish Popish Plot, and all
their wicked shams ever since, and would have the bottom thereof fairly searched
into, and the Traitors, though never so great or potent, brought to Condign
punishment, and in their Conversation zealously direct themselves in an
Opposition to the Papal Interest, which indeed is a combination against good
Sense, Reason, and Conscience, and to Introduce a blind Obedience without (if
not against) Conviction: And that Principle which Introduces Implicit Faith
and blind Obedience in Religion, will also Introduce Implicit Faith and blind
Obedience in Government, so that it shall be no more the Law in the one than in
the other, but the will and power of the Superior that shall be the Rule and
Bond of our Subjection; this is that fatal mischief Popery brings with it to
Civil Society, and for which all such Societies ought to beware of it and its
friends and Abetters, which sure none can be, but such who are designed for
Slaves by Nature as well as Fortune, debaucht lewd unthinking Animals,
properly enough called Tories; Silly, Servile, yet conceited and Cruel,
Creatures altogether of an Irish understanding.

10. As for you Citizens Burgesses and Freemen of Cities and Corporations in
particular, I shall only say, That whoever is not fit to be chosen Knight of
the Shire, is likewise unfit to be chosen a Burgess; Neither let the more
specious pretenses of any man that shall promise to build you a Town Hall, or
Relieve you poor with money, or out of his Adjacent Woods, or any such
Good-morrows, deceive you; for if so, wherein are you wiser than your Horses,
whom you catch every day, and Clap a Bridle into their mouths, only by showing
them a few Oats, which they are never like to Eat? Even the very Mice are too
wise to be taken by an Old Bait, but will first have the trap ^ew baited before
they will meddle: And yet I have known a Corporation which has been taken TWICE
by the same bait. But suppose these men do really perform what they promise,
what Compensation is that, if the same men should lay a good Swinging Tax upon
your Estates without any real cause? or should give up the very power you have
of Taxing yourselves, or sending your Representatives in Parliament, (for one
bad Parliament may ruiue us) what good would the money for your Poor do in such
a case, more than that when you are thereby reduced to beggary, you might
perhaps yourselves (the Gentry of the Country having no reason to relieve you)
be forced to comein for a small share of this their Hypocrital Charity? An
excellent Reward for Knavish Folly: Neither say -- Oh! this is but one man, and
can have but one Vote, he will do our Town a great deal of good, and can do us
but little hurt if he would, etc. For, 1. (as I told you before) one or two
Voices have sometimes carried a Vote of great Importance; 2. You know not what
mischief your bad example may do in other Corporations, and if all should do
so, what a miserable case would you be in? Since the Voices of the Boroughs
make two thirds of the House. Lastly, no man can tell the Influence that one
running Talkative Ill-man may get over the rest of the House, especially over
those that weigh words more than Sense, or Reason, and the Interest of their
Country.

Hitherto we have talked Negatives, and described such as are not fit to be
Chosen; Now we came positively to set before you, who are fit for such a Trust,
especially in such a dangerous Juncture as we are fallen into. In order to which
we must consider for what ends they serve, and they are principally Two. The
first is, the preservation of our Religion from Popery, the other is to
preserve inviolable our Liberty and Property according to the known Laws of the
Land, without any giving way unto or Introduction of that Absolute and
Arbitrary Rule practiced in Foreign Countries, which we are neither to imitate
or regard -- Therefore,

1. Take Care to Choose such as are well known to be men of good Consciences,
fearing God, thoroughly Principled in the Protestant Religion, and of high
Resolution to maintain it with their Lives and Fortunes. And amongst these,
rather cast your Favor upon themof large Principles (I mean in matter of mere
opinion) such as will not sacrifice their Neighbors Property and Civil Rights
to the frowardness of their own Party in Religion. Narrow Souls, that will own
none but those that bear their own Image and superscription, will sooner raise
Persecution at home, than secure us from Popery and Invasion from abroad. The
great Interest of England at this day, is, to Tolerate the Tolerable, to bear
with the weak, to encourage the Conscientious, and to restrain none but such as
would restrain all besides themselves.

2. As we ought as near as we can possibly judge, to Elect good Protestants
toward God, and just toward men, yet since in this Corrupt Age wherein we
Live, men are not so spiritual as they ought to be, it is not amiss to seek for
those whose spiritual Interest is seconded by a Temporal one; For though men
talk high, and keep a great Noise with Conscience and love to their Country,
yet when you understand Mankind aright (not as it should be, but as it is, and
I fear ever will be) then you will find that private Interest is the string in
the Bears Nose, it is that Governs the Beast. And therefore the surest
Champions for our Religion (Caeteris Paribus) against the Papacy are our Abbey
Landed-men, for notwithstanding the Registered Dispensation to King Henry the
Eighth from the Pope for the seizing of those Monasteries and Lands, yet of
late they pretend that the Pope had not Power to Alien them from the Church, so
that the present Possessors can never trust or rely upon that, or any new
promises or Actual Grants thereof, especially from him whose everlasting and
declared Maxim it is -- Never to keep Faith with Heretics. Undoubtedly to
make easy his ascent into the Saddle he will proffer many Assurances and
Grants, but if these Abby-Landed men be not the most silly of all others, they
will never believe him. For when he is once firmly settled, then will he with
his Canon Law Distinctions, like Fire under Quicksilver, Evaporate away all his
Promises, and violently Resume the Lands, glorying of his own Bounty, if he
require not the mean profits ever since they have been sacriligiously withheld
from Holy Church.

3. Endeavor to Choose men of Wisdom and Courage, who will not be Hectored out
of their Duties by the Frowns and Scowles of men: Never had you more need to
pitch upon the old English Spirit, that durst be faithful and just against all
Temptations. What a degenerate Race have we known, that could never yet Resist
Smile or Frown, but tamely sunk below their own Convictions, and knew the Evil,
they did, yet durst not but Commit it?

4. Make it your business to Choose such as are resolved to stand by and
maintain the power and privileges of Parliament (for they are the
Heart Strings of the Commonwealth) together with the power and just Rights of
the King, according to the Laws of the Kingdom, so as the one may not Entrench
upon the other. And such as with a becoming true English Courage will Prosecute
all Traitors, whether already Impeached, or to be Impeached; And to secure us
from Popery hereafter, and to get removed all Corrupt and Arbitrary Ministers
of State, and wicked Judges, and stiflers of the discovery of the Popish Plot,
and Suborners, and vile Pamphleteers, that endeavor so industriously to Clear
the Papists, and expose the Protestant Religion, and poison the People.

Lastly, Take particular notice of those who are men of Industry and
Improvement; for such as are Ingenious and laborious to propagate the growth
and advantage of their Country, will be very tender of yiedling to any thing
that may weaken or Impoverish it.

If you Conduct yourselves thus prudently, honestly and gallantly, in your
Choice, without putting the Gentlemen whom you choose to serve you, to charges,
the consequence will be, that as you will be sure to have a good Parliament
when ever His Majesty shall please to call one, and such as will be zealous for
the safety of the Protestant Religion, and prosperity of the Nation, if they
shall continue to sit and Act; so, on the other side. If they should be
Dissolved, and never so many new Parliaments be called, yet you run no hazard,
for the same Candidates will still be ready to serve you. And so we shall
conclude our discourse of Parliaments, when I shall first have observed that
anciently all Freemen of England (though not Freeholders) had a right to choose
their Representatives till the same was altered and limited by the following
Statute, for the reasons therein mentioned.

The Statute Anno 8. Hen. 6. Cap. 7. What sort of men shall be Chusers, and who
shall be Chosen Knights of the Parliament.
ITem, whereas the Elections of Knights of Shires to come to the Parliaments of
our Lord the King, in many Counties of the Realm of England, have now of late
been made by very great, Outrageous and Excessive numbers of People, dwelling
within the same Counties of the Realm of England, of the which most part was of
people of small Substance, and of no value, whereof every one of them pretended
a voice Equivalent, as to such Elections to be made, with the most worthy
Knights and Esquires, dwelling within the same Counties, whereby Man Slaughter,
Riots, Batteries, and Divisions among the Gentlemen, and other People of the
same Counties shall very likely rise and be, unless convenient and due Remedy
be, provided in this behalf: (2) our Lord the King considering the premises,
has provided, ordained and stablished by Authority of this present Parliament,
that the Knights of the Shires to be chosen within the said Realm of England to
come to the Parliament of our Lord the King hereafter to be holden, shall be
chosen in every County of the Realm of England, by People dwelling and resident
in the same Counties, whereof every one of them shall have Landor Tenement, to
the value of forty Shillings by the year, at the least, above all Charges, (3)
and that they which shall be so chosen shall be dwelling and resident within
the same Counties: (4) and such as have the greatest number of them that may
expend forty shillings by the year and above, as before is said, shall be
returned by the Sheriffs of every County, Knights for Parliament, by Indentures
sealed betwixt the said Sheriffs and the said Chusers so to be made: (5) and
every Sheriff of the Realm of England, shall have power by the said authority
to examine upon the Evangelists every such Chuser, how much he may expend by
the year: (6) and if any Sheriff returned Knights to come to the Parliament,
contrary to the said Ordinance, the Justices of Assizes in their Sessions of
Assizes shall have power by the authority aforesaid thereof to enquire, (7) and
if by inquest the same be found before the Justices and the Sheriff thereof be
duly attainted, that then the said Sheriff shall incur the pain of an hundred
pounds, to be paid to our Lord the King, and also that he have Imprisonment by
a year, without being let to mainprise or bail (8) and that the Knights for the
Parliament returned contrary to the said Ordinance, shall lose their wages.

Provided always, that he which cannot expend forty Shillings by year, as before
is said, shall in no wise be Chuser of the Knights for the Parliament; (2) and
that in every Writ that shall hereafter go forth to the Sheriffs to choose
knights for the Parliament, mention be made of the said Ordinances.

Note
Though this Statute make the penalty on a Sheriff but 100 l. for a false
Return, yet the House may further punish him by Imprisonment etc. at their
pleasure by the Law and Custom of Parliaments.

We shall now proceed to certain excellent Laws of a latter Date, made for the
explanation and conservation of our Liberties; and in the first place present
you with that excellent Petition of Right, granted by King Charles the first.

Anno Regni Caroli Regis Tertio. The PETITION exhibited to His Majesty by the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
concerning diverse Rights and Liberties of the Subjects.
To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
HUmbly show unto our Sovereign Lord the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
and Commons in Parliament assembled, That whereas it is declared and enacted by
a Statute made in the time of the Reign of King Edward the first, commonly
called Statutum de Tallagio non Concedendo, that no Tallage or Aid shall be
laid or Levied by the King or his Heirs in this Realm, without the good Will
and Assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses,
and other the Freemen of the Commonalty of this Realm; (2) and by authority of
Parliament holden in the five and twentieth year of the Reign of King Edward
the third, it is declared and Enacted, that from thenceforth no person should
be Compelled to make any Loans to the King against his Will, because such Loans
were against Reason, and the Franchise of the Land; (3) And by other Laws of
the Realm it is provided, that none should be Charged by any Charges or
Imposition called a Benevolence, nor by such like Charge, (4) By which the
Statute before mentioned, and oath the good Laws and Statutes of this Realm,
your Subjects have Inherited this Freedom, that they should not be Compelled to
Contribute to any Tax, Tallage, Aid, or other like Charge, not set by Common
Consent in Parliament.

2. Yet nevertheless, of late diverse Commissions directed to sundry
Commissioners in several Counties, with Instructions, have Issued, by means
whereof your people have been in diverse places Assembled and required to lend
certain Sums of Money unto your Mejesty, and many of them, upon their refusal
so to do, have had an Oath administered unto them not warrantable by the Laws or
Statutes of this Realm, and have been Constrained to become bound to make
Appearance and Attendance before your Privy Council, and in other places, and
others of them have been therefore Imprisoned Confined and sundry other ways
molested and disquieted (2) and diverse other Charges have been laid and levied
upon your people in several Counties by Lord Lieutenants and Deputy
Lieutenants, Commissioners for Musters, Justices of Peace, and others, by
Command or direction from your Majesty to your Privy Council, against the Law
and free Customs of this Realm.

3. And where also by the Statute called the great Charter of the Liberties of
England, it is declared and Enacted, that no Freeman may be taken or
imprisoned, or be disseised of his Freehold or Liberties, or of his free
Customs, or be outlawed or Exiled, or in any manner destroyed, but by the
lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land.

4. And in the eight and twentieth year of the Reign of King Edward the third,
it was declared and Enacted by Authority of Parliament, that no man of what
Estate or Condition that he be, should be put out of his Land or Tenements, nor
taken nor Imprisoned, nor disherited, nor put to death, without being brought
to answer, by due process of Law.

5. Nevertheless, against the tenor of the said Statutes and other the good
Laws and Statutes of your Realm to that end provided, diverse of your Subjects
of late have been Imprisoned without any cause showed; (2) and when for their
deliverance they were brought before Justices by your Majesty's Writs of Habeas
Corpus, there to undergo and receive as the Court should order, and their
keepers commanded to certify the causes of their detainour, no cause was
certifyed, but that they were detained by your Majesty's special command,
signified by the Lords of your privy Council, and yet were returned back to
several prisons without being charged with any thing, to which they might make
answer according to the Law.

6. Whereas of late great Companies of Soldiers and Mariners have been
dispersed into diverse Counties of the Realm, and the Inhabitants against their
wills, have been compelled to receive them into their Houses, and there to
suffer them to sojourn, against the Laws and Customs of this Realm, and to the
great grievance and vexation of the People.

7. And whereas also by authority of Parliament, and in the five and twentieth
year of the reign of King Edward the third, it is declared and enacted, that no
man shall be forejudged of life and limb, against the form of the great Charter
and Law of the Land; (2) and by the said great Charter and other the Laws and
Statutes of this Your Realm, no man ought to be Judged to death, but by the
Laws established in this your Realm, either by the Customs of the Realm, or by
Acts of Parliament; (3) And whereas no offender of what kind soever, is
exempted from the proceedings to be used, and punishments to be Inflicted by
the Laws and Statutes of this your Realm; nevertheless, of late diverse
Commissions under Your Majesty's great Seal have Issued forth, by which certain
persons have been Assigned and appointed Commisioners, with power and authority
to proceed within the Land, according to the Justice of Martial Law, against
such Soldiers and Mariners, or other dissolute persons joining with them, as
should commit any Murder, Robbery, Felony, Mutiny, or other Outrage or
Misdemeanour whatsoever, and by such summary Course and Order as is agreeable to
Martial Law, and as is used in Armies in time of war, to proceed to the Trial
and Condemnation of such Offeuders, and them to cause to be executed and put to
death according to the Law Martial.

8. By Pretext whereof some of your Majesty's Subjects have been by some of the
said Commissioners put to death, when and where, if by the Laws and Statutes of
the Land they had deserved death, by the same Laws and Statutes also they
might, and by no other ought to have been Judged and Executed.

9. And also sundry grievous offenders, by color thereof, claiming an
exemption, have Escaped the punishments due to them by the Laws and Statute of
this your Realm by reason that diverse of your Officers and Ministers of Justice
have unjustly refused or forborne to proceed against such Offenders according
to the same Laws and Statutes, upon pretense that the said Offenders were
punishable only by Martial Law, and by Authority of such Commission as
aforesaid; (2) which Commissions, and all other of like nature, are wholly and
directly Contrary to the said Laws and Statutes of this your Realm.

10. They do therefore humbly pray your most Excellent Majesty, that no man
hereafter be compelled to make or yield any Gift, Loan, Benevolence, Tax, or
such like Charge, without Common consent by act of Parliament; (2) and that
none be called to make answer, or take such oath, or to give attendance, or be
confined, or otherwise molested or disquieted concerning the same, or for
refusal thereof; (3) and that no Freeman in any such manner as is before
mentioned be Imprisoned or detained; (4) And that your Majesty would be pleased
to remove the said Soldiers and Mariners, and that your people may not be so
burdened in time to come; (5) and that the foresaid Commissions for proceeding
by Martial Law, may be revoked and annulled; and that hereafter no Commissions
of like nature may Issue forth to any person or persons whatsoever to be
executed as aforesaid, lest by color of them, any of your Majesty's Subjects
be destroyed, or put to death contrary to the Laws and Franchise of the Land.

11. All which they most humbly pray of your most Excellent Majesty, as their
Rights and Liberties, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and
that your Majesty would also vouchsafe to declare, that the awards, doings and
proceedings to the prejudice of your people in any of the premises, shall not
be drawn hereafter into Consequence or Example; (2) and that your Majesty would
be also graciously pleased for the further comfort and safety of your people,
to declare your Royal Will and Pleasure, that in the things aforesaid, all your
Officers and Ministers shall serve you according to the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm, as they tender the honor of Your Majesty and the prosperity of
this Kingdom.

Which Petition being Read, the second of June, 1682. the Kings Answer was thus
delivered unto it.

The King wills, that Right be done, according to the Laws and Customs of the
Realm, and that the Statutes be put in due Execution, that His Subjects may
have no Cause to complain of any wrong, or oppressions, contrary to their just
Rights and Liberties: To the Preservation whereof, he holds himself in
Conscience as well obliged, as of his Prerogative.

But this Answer not giving satisfaction, the King was again Petitioned unto,
that he would give a full and satisfactory answer to their Petition in full
Parlinment -- Whereupon the King in Person, upon the seventh of June, made this
Second Answer,

My Lords and Gentlemen!

The Answer I have already given you, was made with so good Deliberation, and
approved by the Judgment of so many Wise Men, that I could not have Imagined,
but that it should have given you full satisfaction; but to avoid all ambiguous
Interpretations, and to show you that there is no doubleness in my meaning, I
am willing to please you in words, as well as in substance; read your Petition,
and you shall have an Answer that I am sure will please you.

And then causing the Petition to be read distinctly by the Clerk of the Crown,
the Clerk of the Parliament read the Kings Answer thereto in these words, Soit
Droit Fait, Come est desire, which is, Let Right be done as is desired.

This Answer, and the manner of Confirming this Law, I have the rather recited,
because the Kings Answer and Circumstances relating thereunto, are wholly left
out in our last Printed Book of Statutes.

The Petition it self is so plain that there needs no Comment thereon, only the
Reader may observe that the things therein mentioned were the ancient Rights of
the people, and therefore they expressly demand them of the King as their Rights
and Liberties.

In the next place we shall add, the late excellent Habeas Corpus Act, because
relating to the same Subject, viz. The freeing of the Subject from causeless
tedious and Arbitrary Imprisonments.

Anno Tricesimo primo Caroli Secundi Regis.
CHAP. II. An Act for the better securing the Liberty of the Subjest, and for
prevention of Imprisonments beyond Seas. Commonly called the Habeas Corpus Act.
I. Whereas great delays have been used by Sheriffs, Goalers, and other
Officers to whose Custody any of the Kings Subjects have been committed for
Criminal, or supposed Criminal matters, in making Returns of Writs of Habeas
Corpus to them directed, by standing out an Alias, and Pluries, Habeas Corpus,
and sometimes more, and by other shifts, to avoid their yielding obedience to
such Writs, contrary to their duty, and the known Laws of the Land, whereby
many of the Kings Subjects have been, and hereafter may be long detained in
Prison, in such Cases where by Law they are Bailable, to their great Charges
and Vexation.

II. For the prevention whereof, and the more speedy relief of all persons
Imprisoned for any such Criminal, or supposed Criminal matters. (2) Be it
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent
of the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, and by the Authority thereof, That whenever any person or persons
shall bring any Habeas Corpus directed unto any Sheriff or Sheriffs, Jailer,
Minister or other person whatsoever, for any person in his or their Custody,
and the said Writ shall be served upon the said Officer, or left at the Goal or
Prison with any of the under Officers, under Keepers, or Deputy of the said
Officers or Keepers, that the said Officer or Officers his or their under
Officers or Keepers or Deputies, shall within three days after the service
thereof, as aforesaid (unless the Commitment aforesaid were for Treason or
Felony, plainly and specially expressed in the Warrant of Commitment) upon
payment or tender of the Charges of bringing the said Prisoner to be
Ascertained be the Judge or Court that awarded the same, and Endorsed upon the
said Writ, not exceeding twelve pence per Mile, and upon security given by his
own Bond to pay the Charges of carrying back the Prisoner, if he shall be
Remanded by the Court or Judge, to which he shall be brought, according to the
true intent of this present Act, and that he will not make any Escape by the
way, make Return of such Writ. (3) And bring or cause to be brought the Body,
of the party so Committed or Restrained, unto, or before, the Lord Chancellor,
or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England for the time being, or the Judges
or Barons of the said Court from whence the said Writ shall Issue, or unto and
before such other person or persons before whom the said Writ is made
returnable, according to the Command thereof: (4) And shall then likewise
certify the true Causes of his Detainer, or Imprisonment, unless the
Commitment of the said party be in any place beyond the distance of twenty
Miles from the place or places, where such Court or Person is or shall be
Residing: and if beyond the distance of twenty Miles, and not above one hundred
Miles, than within the space of twenty days after such the delivery aforesaid,
and not longer.

III. And to the Intent that no Sheriff, Jailer, or other Officer may pretend
ignorance of the import of any such Writ. (2) Be it Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That all such Writs shall be marked in this manner, Perstatutum
Tricesimo primo Caroli Secundi Regis, and shall be signed by the person that
Awards the same. (3) And if any person or persons shall be, or stand Committed
or Detained as aforesaid, for any Crime, unless, for Fel^ny or Treason, plainly
expressed in the Warrant of Commitment, in the Vacation time, and out of Term,
it shall and may be lawful to and for the person or persons so Committed or
Detained (other than persons Convict, or in Execution) by Legal Process, or any
one on his or their behalf to Appeal, or complain to the Lord Chancellor, or
Lord Keeper, or any one of His Majesty's Justices either of the one Bench, or
of the other, or the Barons of the Exchequer of the degree of the Coif. (3) And
the said Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, Instices, or Barons, or any of them,
upon view of the Copy or Copies of the Warrant or Warrants of Commitment and
Detainer, or otherwise upon Oath made, that such Copy or Copies were denied to
be given by such person or persons, or any on his, her, or their behalf,
attested and subscribed by two Witnesses, who were present at the delivery of
the same, to award and grant an Habeas Corpus under the Seal of such Court
whereof he shall then be one of the Judges. (5) To be directed to the Officer
or Officers in whose Custody the party so Committed or Detained, shall be
returnable immediately before the said Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, or such
Justice, Baron, or any other Justice or Baron of the Degree of the Coif of any
of the said Courts. (6) And upon service thereof as aforesaid, the Officer or
Officers, his or their under Officer or under Officers, under Keeper or under
Keepers, or Deputy to whose Custody the party is so Committed or Detained,
shall within the times respectively before limited, bring such Prisoner or
Prisoners before the said Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, or such Justices,
Barons, or one of them, before whom the said Writ is made Return able, and in
case of his absence, before any other of them, with the Return of such Writ,
and the true Causes of the Commitment, and Detainer. (7) And thereupon within
two days after the party shall be brought before them, the said Lord Chancellor
or Lord Keeper, or such Justice or Baron before whom the Prisoner shall be
brought as aforesaid, shall discharge the said Prisoner from his Imprisonment,
taking his or their Recognizance, with one or more surety or sureties in any
sum, according to their discretion, having regard to the Quality of the
Prisoner, and Nature of the Offense, for his or their appearance in the Court
of Kings Bench the Term following, or at the next Assizes, Sessions, or General
Jail-delivery of and for such County, City, or Place, where the Commitment was,
or where the Offense was Committed, or in such other Court where the said
Offense is properly Recognizable, as the Case shall require, and then shall
Certify the said Writ, with the Return thereof, and the said Recognizance or
Recognizances, into the said Court, where such appearance is to be made. (6)
Unless it shall appear, unto the said Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, or
Justice or Justices, Baron or Barons, that the party so Committed is Detained
upon a Legal Process, Order, or Warrant out of some Court that has
Jurisdiction of Criminal matters, or by some Warrant Signed and Sealed with the
Hand and Seal of any of the said Justices or Barons, or some Justice or
Justices of the Peace, for such matters or offenses for the which by the Law
the Prisoner is not Bailable.

IV. Provided always, and be it Enacted, That if any person shall have wilfully
neglected by the space of two whole Terms after his Imprisonment, to pray a
Habeas Corpus for his Enlargement, such person so wilfully neglecting, shall
not have any Habeas Corpus to be granted in Vacation time in pursuance of this
Act.

V. Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Officer or
Officers, his or their Under-Officer, Underofficers, Under-Keeper, or
Under-Keepers, or Deputy, shall neglect or Refuse to make the Returns
aforesaid, or to Bring the Body or Bodies of the Prisoner or Prisoners
according to the Command of the said Writ, within the Respective times
aforesaid, or upon demand made by the Prisoner, or Person in his Behalf; shall
Resuse to deliver or within the space of six hours after demand, shall not
deliver to the Person so demanding, a true Copy of the Warrant or Warrants of
Commitment and detainer of such Prisoner, which he or they are hereby Required
to deliver accordingly, all and every the Head Gaolers, and Keepers of such
Prisons, and such other Person, in whose Custody the Prisoner shall be
detained, shall for the first Offense forfeit to the Prisoner or Party Grieved.
the sum of one hundred pounds; (2.) And for the second Offense, the sum of two
hundred pounds, and shall and is hereby made Incapable to Hold or Execute his
said Office; (3.) the said penalties to be Recovered by the Prisoner or Party
grieved, his Executors or Administrators, against such Offenders, his Executors
or Administrators, by any Action of Debt, Suit, Bill, plaint or Information, in
any of the King's Courts at Westmin. wherein no Essoign, Protection, privilege
Injunction, Wager of Law, or stay of Prosecution by Non vult ulterius prosequi,
or otherwise, shall be Admitted or Allowed, or any more than one Imparlance
(4.) And any Recovery or Judgment at the Suit of any Party Grieved, shall be a
sufficient Conviction for the first Offense; and any after Recovery or Judgment
at the suit of a Party Grieved for any Offense after the first Judgment, shall
be a sufficient Conviction to Bring the Officers or Person within the said
penalty for the second Offense.

6. And for the prevention of unjust Vexation by Reiterated Commitments for the
same; (2.) Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or Persons
which shall be delivered or set at Large upon any Habeas Corpus, shall at any
time hereafter be again Imprisoned or Committed for the same Offense, by any
Person or Persons whatsoever, other than by the Legal order, and process of
such Court wherein he, or they shall be Bound by Recognizance to appear, or
other Court having Jurisdiction of the Cause; (3.) And if any other Person or
Persons shall knowingly contrary to this Act Recommit, or Imprison, or
knowingly procure or Cause to be Recommitted or Imprisoned for the same
Offense, or pretended Offense, any Person or Persons delivered or set at Large
as aforesaid, or be knowingly aiding or Assisting therein, then he or they
shall forfeit to the Prisoner or Party Greived, the sum of five hundred pounds,
any colorable pretense or variation in the Warrant or Warrants of Commitment
notwithstandin, to be Recovered as aforesaid.

7. Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That if any Person or Persons
shall be Committed for High Treason or Felony, Plainly and specially Expressed
in the Warrant of Commitment, upon his prayer or petition in open Court the
first week of the Term, or first day of the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, or
General Gaol delivery, to be Brought to his Trial, shall not be indicted
sometime in the next Term, Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, or General Gaol
delivery after such Commitment, It shall and may be Lawful to and for the
Judges of the Court of Kings Bench, and Justices of Oyer and Terminer, or
General Gaol delivery, and they are hereby Required upon motion to them made in
open Court the last day of the Term, Sessions, or Gaol delivery, either by the
Prisoner, or any one in his Behalf, to set at Liberty the Prisoner upon Bail,
unless it appear to the Judges and Justices upon Oath made, that the Witnesses
for the King could not be produced the same Term, Sessions or General Gaol
delivery; (2.) And If any person or persons Committed as aforesaid, upon his
prayer or petition in open Court, the first week of the Term, or first day of
the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, and General Gaol delivery, to be Brought to
his Trial, shall not be Indicted and Tried the second Term, Sessions of Oyer
and Terminer, or General Gaol delivery after his Commitment, or upon his Trial
shall be Acquitted, he shall be discharged from his Imprisonment.

8. Provided always, That nothing in this Act shall Extend to discharge out of
prison any person charged in debt, or other Action, or with process in any
Civil Cause, but that after he shall be discharged of his Imprisonment for such
his Criminal Offense, he shall be kept in Custody according to Law, for such
other suit.

9. Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
person or persons sub^ects of this Realm, shall be Committed to any prison, or
in Custody of any Officer or Officers whatsoever, for any Criminal, or Supposed
Criminal matter, That the said person shall not be Removed from the said prison
and custody, into the custody of any other Officer or Officers, (2.) unless it
be by Habeas Corpus, or some other Legal writ; or where the prisoner is
delivered to the Constable or other Inferior Officer to carry such prisoner to
some common Gaol; (3.) or where any person is sent by ^rder of any Judge of
Assize, or Justice of the peace ^o any Common workhouse, or house of
Correction; (4.) or where the prisoner is Removed from one prion or place to
another within the same County, in order to his or her Trial or discharge in
due Course of Law; (5.) or in case of sudden fire or Infection, ^r other
Necessity; (6.) And if any person or persons shall after such Commitment
aforesaid, make out and ^ign, or Countersign any Warrant or Warrants for ^uch
Removal aforesaid, contrary to this Act, as well ^e that makes or signs or
Countersigns such Warrant or Warrants as the Officer or Officers, that obey or
Execute the same, shall suffer, and Incur the pains, and Forfeitures in this
Act beforementioned, both for the first and second Offense Respectively, to be
Recovered in manner aforesaid by the party Grieved.

10. Provided also, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
it shall and may be Lawful to and for any prisoner and prisoners as aforesaid,
to move, and obtain his or their Habeas Corpus, as well out of the High Court
of Chancery, or Court of Exchequer, as out of the Courts of Kings Bench, or
common pleas, or either of them; (2.) And if the said Lord Chancellor, or Lord
Keeper, or any Judge or Judges, Baron or Barons for the time being, of the
degree of the Coif of any of the Courts aforesaid in the Vacation time, upon
view of the Copy or Copies of the Warant or Warants of Commitment or Detainer,
or upon Oath made, that such Copy or Copies were denied as aforesaid, shall
deny any writ of Habeas Corpus by this Act Required to be Granted, being moved
for as aforesaid, they shall severally Forfeit to the prisoner or party
Grieved, the sum of five hundred pounds, to be Recovered in manner aforesaid.

11. And Be it Enacted, and declared by the Authority aforesaid, That an Habeas
Corpus according to the true Intent and meaning of this Act, may be directed,
and Run into any County Palatine, the Cinqu^ ports or other privileged places
within the Kingdom of Engl. Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed,
and the Isles of Jersey, or Guernsey; any Law or Usage to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

12. And for preventing Illegal Imprisonments in prisons beyond seas (2.) Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no subject of this Realm that
now is, or hereafter shall be an Inhabitant or Resiant of this Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales* or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, shall or may be sent
prisoner into Scotland, Ireland, Jersey, Guernsey, Tangier, or into any parts,
Garrisons, Islands, or places beyond the seas, which are, or at any time
hereafter, shall be within or without the Dominions of His Majesty, His heirs
or successors, (3.) And that every such Imprisonment is hereby Enacted and
adjudged to be Illegal; (4.) and that, If any of the said subjects now is, or
hereafter shall be so Imprisoned, every such person and persons so Imprisoned,
shall and may for every such Imprisonment, maintain by virtue of this Act, an
Action or Actions of false Imprisonment, in any of his Majesty's Courts of
Record, against the person or persons by whom he or she shall be so Committed,
detained, Imprisoned, sent prisoner, or Transported Contrary to the true
meaning of this Act, and against all or any person or persons that shall frame,
Contrive, Write, Seal, or Countersign any Warrant or Writing for such
Commitment, detainer, Imprisonment, or Transportation, or shall be Advising,
Aiding, or Assisting in the same, or any of them; (5.) And the plaintiff in
every such Action shall have Judgment to Recover his Treble Costs, besides
damages; which damages so to be Given, shall not be less than five hundred
pounds; (6.) in which Action, no delay, stay or stop of proceeding, by Rule,
order, or Command, nor no Injunction, protection, or privilege whatsoever, nor
any more than one Imparlance shall be allowed, Excepting such Rule of the Court
wherein the Action shall depend, made in open Court, as shall be thought in
Justice necessary, for special cause to be Expressed in the said Rule; (7.) And
the person or persons who shall Knowingly Frame, Contrive, write, seal or
Countersign any Warrant for such Commitment, detainer, or Transportation, or
shall so Commit, detain, Imprison, or Transport any person or persons Contrary
to this Act, or be any ways Advising, aiding or Assisting therein being
Lawfully Convicted thereof, shall be disabled from thenceforth to Bear any
Office of Trust or Profit within the said Realm of England, Dominion of Wales,
or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or any of the Islands, Territories or Dominions
thereunto Belonging. (8.) And shall Incur and sustain the pains, Penalties and
Forfeitures Limited, ordained, and provided in and by the statute of Provision
and Praemunire, made in the sixteenth year of King Richard the Second. (9.) And
be incapaple of any pardon from the King, His Heirs or Successors, of the said
Forfeitures, Losses, or disabilities, or any of them.

13. Provided always, That nothing in this Act extend to give Benefit to any
person who shall by Contract in Writing agree with any Merchant, or Owner, of
any plantation, or other person whatsoever, to be transported to any parts
beyond the Seas, and receive Earnest upon such Agreement, although that
afterward such person shall Renounce such Contract.

14. Provided always, and be it Enacted, That If any person or persons
Lawfully Convicted of any Felony, shall in open Court pray to be Transported
beyond the seas, and the Court shall think fit to leave him or them in prison,
for that purpose such person or persons may be Transported into any parts
beyond the seas; This Act or any thing therein Contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

15. Provided also, and be it Enacted, That nothing herein Contained, shall be
deemed, Construed, or taken to Extend to the Imprisonment of any person before
to first day of June, one thousand six hundred seventy and nine, or to any
thing Advised, procured, or otherwise done, Relating to such Imprisonment; Any
thing herein Contained to the Contrary notwithstanding.

16. Provided also, That If any person or persons at any time Resiant in this
Realm, shall have committed any Capital Offense in Scotl. or Ireland, or any of
the Islands, or Foreign Plantations of the King His Heirs or Successors, where
he or she, ought to be Tried for such Offense, such person or persons may be
sent to such place there to Receive such Trial, in such manner as the same
might have been used before the making of this Act; any thing herein contained
to the contrary notwithstanding.

17. Provided always, and be it Enacted, That no person or persons shall be
sued, Impleaded, Molested or Troubled for any Offense against this Act, unless
the party offending be Sued or Impleaded for the same within two years at the
most after such time wherein the Offense shall be Committed in Case the party
Grieved shall not be then in Prison, and if he shall be in Prison, then within
the space of two years after the decease of the Person Imprisoned, or his, or
her delivery out of Prison, which shall first happen.

18. And to the intent no person may Avoid his Trial at the Assizes, or General
Gaol delivery, by procuring his Removal before the Assizes at such time as he
cannot be brought back to receive his Trial there; (2.) Be it Enacted, That
after the Assizes proclaimed for thatCounty where the Prisoner is detained, no
person shall be Removed from the common Gaol upon any Habeas Corpus granted in
pursuance of this Act, but upon any such Habeas Corpus, shall be brought before
the Judge os Assize in open Court, who is thereupon to do what to Justice shall
appertain.

19. Provided nevertheless, That after the Assizes are Ended, any person or
persons detained may have his or her Habeas Corpus according to the direction
and Intention of this Act.

20. And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
Information, Suit, or Action shall be Brought or Exhibited against any person
or persons for anyOffence committed, or to be committed against the form of
this Law, it shall be Lawful for such defendants to plead the General Issue,
that they are not Guilty, or that they own nothing, and to give such special
matter in Evidence to the Jury that shall Try the same, which matter being
pleaded, had been good and sufficent in Law to have discharged the said
Defendant or Defendants against the said Information, Suit or Action, and the
said matter shall be then as available to him or them, to all Intents and
purposes, as if he or they had sufficiently pleaded, set forth or Alleged the
same matter in Bar or Discharge of such information, Suit or Action.

21. And because many times persons charged with petty Treason or Felony, or as
Accessaries thereunto are Committed upon suspicion only, whereupon they are
Bailable, or not, according as the Circumstances making out that suspicion are
more or less weighty, which are best known to the Justices of Peace that
committed the persons, and have the Examinations before them, or to other
Justices of the Peace in the County: (2.) Be it therefore Enacted, That where
any person shall appear to be Committed by any Judge, or Justice of the Peace,
and charged as Accessory before the Fact, to any petty Treason or Felony, or
upon suspicion thereof, or with suspicion of petty Treason or Felony, which
pettyTreason or Felony shall be plainly and specially expressed in the Warrant
of Commitment, that such person shall not be Removed or Bailed by virtue of
this Act, or in any other manner than they might have been before the making of
this Act.

The Comment.
THere are three things, which the Law of England (which is a Law of Mercy)
principally Regards and takes care of, viz. Life, Liberty and Estate. Next to
a man's Life, the nearest thing that concerns him, is freedom of his person,
For indeed what is Imprisonment, but a kind of Civil Death? Therefore says
Fortescue Cap. 42. Angliae Jura in omni Casu Libercati dant favorem. The Laws
of England do in All Cases favor Liberty.

Touching Commitments, and what is Required to make a Legal Mittimus, see
before Page 27.

The Writ of Habeas Corpus is a Remedy given by the common Law for such as were
unjustly detained in custody, to procure their Liberty: But before this
statute, was Rendered far less useful than it ought to be partly by the Judges,
pretending a power to Grant, or deny the said Writ at their pleasure, in many
cases, and Especially by the Ill practices of Sheriffs and Gaolers, by putting
the prisoner to the charge and trouble of an Alias and pluries (that is a
second and third Writ, before they would obey the first, for there was no
penalty till the Third) and then at last the Judges would oft-times Allege,
That they could not take Bail, because the party was a prisoner of State, etc.
Therefore to Remedy all those mischiefs, This most wholesome Law was provided.
Which we shall briefly Endeavor to Divide into its several Branches, and
Explain it to the meanest Capacities, since no Man is sure but one time or
other, he may have occasion to make use of it.

This Act concerns either first, persons committed for some other Criminal,
or supposedCriminal matter, (besides Treason or Felony,) and these are to have
an Habeas Corpus Immediately; 2ly. such who in their Mittimus are charged with
Treason or Felony, and these shall have the benefit of the said Writ after the
time herein Limited. 1st. If any Jailer or Under-Keeper shall not deliver a
trueCopy of the Mittimus within 6 hours after the prisoner demands it, the
Head-Gaoler or Keeper forfeits to the prisoner for the first Offense 100l. for
the second Offense 200l. and loses his place. Nor is there any Fee to be paid
for the same, the Turn-key must deliver it at his peril. And note if the
prisoner should be locked up, or none suffered to come at him, any friend of his
may demand the same on his behalf.

2. Whatever the Criminal matter be, If Treason or Felony be not Expressly
charged, any person on the prisoners behalf, carrying such true Copy of the
Commitment to the Lord Chancellor, or any one of the Judges, or Barons of the
Exchequer, or upon Oath made that a Copy was demanded and denied, he shall
Grant an Habeas Corpus, or forfeit 500l. to the prisoner; But note, the Request
must be made to such Judge in Writing, and Attested by two witnesses.

3. If the Sheriff or Jailer do not carry up the prisoner and Return the true
causes of his detainour, within three days, If under twenty miles distance, or
within ten days if above twenty, and under an hundred miles, or within twenty
days if above an hundred miles, he forfeits 500l. to the prisoner.

Note the prisoner must pay the Charges of his carrying up, and the Judge when
he Grants the Writ, may order how much, but it must not be above 12 d. a mile.

If upon the Return of such Habeas Corpus, it appear the prisoner is not
charged with Treason or Felony, specially and plainly Expressed, or for such
matters, as by Law are not Bailable, the Judge shall discharge the prisoner
upon Bail.

4. If a person once so Bailed out, shall again be Imprisoned for the same
Offense, those that do it forfeit 500 l.

5. If there be High Treason or Felony plainly and specially Expressed [That
is, not only Generally, for Treason or Felony, but Treason in conspiring to
kill the King, or in Counterfeiting the King's Coin, or Felony, for stealing
the goods of such an one to such a value, etc.] Then the Prisoner cannot have
his Habeas Corpus; till first he has on the first week of the Term, or first
day of Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, or General Jail-deliver petitioned in
open Court to be brought to his Trial; and then if he be not brought to Trial
the next Term, or Sessions following, on the last day thereof, he shall be
Bailed; and if not Indicted the second Term or Sessions, shall be discharged.

6. This Act extends to all places within England? and Wales; the Tower cannot
be supposed to be exempted, nor Windsor Castle, nor any such Royal Forts; for
the words are general: And besides, there is a special Act of Parliament, that
unites the King's Castles to the Counties wherein they stand; there having been
it seems some pretensions and ill practices to hold them district, that therein
they might detain men prisoners against Law, and not admit any Writ to enlarge
them. For Remedy whereof it was thus Enacted;

Anno 13. Rich. Secundi.
Item. It is Ordained and Assented, That the King's Castles and Gaols which
were wont to be Joined to the Bodies of the Counties, and be now Severed, shall
be Rejoyned to the same Counties.

Lastly, No person shall be sent Prisoner out of England or Wales, into
Scotland, Ireland, Jersey, Guernsey, Tangier, or any other place beyond the
Seas.

The Proviso's and other Clauses of this Act may be easily apprehended by the
meanest capacities.

AND, As the Law provides thus for our Liberty, so it takes care, that those
that are in Custody, shall not be abused or oppressed; to which purpose I shall
here insert so much as is material and necessary to be known by all persons,
who are so unhappy as to be prisoners, out of the Statute of the 22d. and 23d.
Car. 2. Cap. 20. The words wereof are as follows:

WHEREAS. Persons that are under Arrests, or committed to the custody of
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Gaolers, Keepers of Prisons, or Gaols, are much abused and
wronged by Extorting of great Fees, Rewards, and other Exactions, and put to
great Expenses under pretenses of favor, or otherwise, whereby they are
greatly Oppressed, and many times Ruined in their Estates. (2.) For Remedy
thereof, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Undersheriff,
Bailiff, Sergeant at Mace, or other Officer or minister whatsoever, shall at
any time or times hereafter have in his or their Custody, any person or persons
by virtue or color of any Writ, Process, or other Warrant whatsoever, it shall
not be lawful for such Officer or Officers, to convey or carry, or cause to be
conveyed or carried the said person or persons to any Tavern, Alehouse, or
other public Victualling or Drinking-house, without the free and voluntary
consent of the said person or persons, so as to charge such Prisoner with any
sum of Money for any Wine, Beer, Ale, Victuals, Tobacco, or any other things
whatsoever, but what the said person or persons shall call for, of his, her, or
their own accord, (3,) And shall not demand, take or receive, or cause to be
demanded, taken or received, directly or indirectly, any other, or greater Sum
or Sums than what by Law ought to be taken or demanded for such Arrest, taking,
or waiting (until such person or persons shall have procured an Appearance,
found Bail, agreed with his or their Adversaries, or be sent to the proper Gaol
belonging to the County, City, Town or Place where such Arrest or taking shall
be,) (4.) Nor take and Exact any other Reward or Gratuity for so keeping the
said person or persons out of the Gaol or Prison, than what he, she or they
shall or will of his, her, or their own accord, voluntarily and freely give.
(5,) Nor take, nor receive any other, or greater Sum or Sums for each nights
Lodging, or other Expenses, than what is reasonable and fitting in such cases,
or shall be so adjudged by the next Justice of the Peace, or at the next
Quarter Sessions. (6.) And shall not cause or procure the said person or
persons, to pay for any other Wine, Beer, Ale, Victuals, Tobacco, or other
things, than what the said person or persons shall voluntarily, freely, and
particularly call for.

And that every Undersheriff, Jailer, Keeper of Prison or Gaol, and every
person or persons whatsoever, to whose Custody any person or persons shall be
delivered or committed, by virtue of any Writ of Process, or any pretense
whatsoever, shall permit and suffer the said person or persons, at his and
their will and pleasure, to send for, and have any Beer, Ale, Victuals, and
other necessary Food, where, and from whence they please; and also to have and
use such Bedding, Linen, and other things, as the said person or persons shall
think fit, without any purloyning, detaining or paying for the same, or any
part thereof; nor shall demand, take or receive of the said person or persons,
any other, or greater Fee or Fees whatsoever, for his, her, or their
Commitment, Release or Discharge; or for his, her, or their Chamber-Rent, than
what is allowable by Law, until the same shall be settled by three Justices of
the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, of each particular County, City and
Town Corporate, in their several Precincts; and for the City of London, and
Counties of Middlesex and Surrey, the two Lord Chief Justices of the
Kings's-Bench and Common Pleas, and the Lord Chief Baron, or any two of them,
and the Justices of the Peace of the same, in their several Jurisdictions.

And likewise that the said Lord Chief Justice, Lord Chief Baron, and Justices
of the Peace in their several Jurisdictions, and all Commissioners for
Charitable Uses, do their best Endeavors, and Diligence to Examine, and find
out the several Legacies, Gifts and Bequests bestowed and given for the Benefit
and Advantage of the Poor Prisoners for Debt, in the several Gaols and Prisons
in this Kingdom, and to send for any Deeds, Wills, Writings, and Books of
Accounts whatsoever; and any person or persons concerned therein, and to
Examine them upon Oath, to make true discovery thereof (which they have full
Power and Authority hereby to do) and the same so found out and ascertained, to
order and settle in some manner and way, that the Prisoners hereafter may not
be defrauded, but Receive the full benefit thereof, according to the true
intent of the Donors.

And that these Accounts of the several Legacies, Gifts and Bequests, given and
bestowed upon the several Prisoners for Debt, within this Kingdom, and the
several Rates of Fees, and the future Government of Prisons, be signed and
confirmed by the Lord Chief Justices, and Lord Chief Baron, or any two of them
for the time being, and the Justices of the Peace in London, Middlesex and
Surrey; and by the Judges for the several Circuits, and Justices of the Peace
for the time being, in their several Precincts, and fairly written and hung up
in a Table in every Gaol and Prison, before the first day of November, 1671.
and likewise be Registered by each, and every Clerk of the Peace within his or
their particular Jurisdiction: And after such Establishment, no other or
greater Fee or Fees than shall be so Established, shall be Demanded or
Received.

And whereas it is become the common practice of Gaolers, and Keepers of
Newgate, the Gate House at Westminster, and sundry other Gaols and Prisons, to
Lodge together in one Room, or Chamber and Bed, Prisoners for Debt, and Felons,
whereby many times honest Gentlemen, Tradesmen and others, Prisoners for Debt,
are disturbed and hindered in the nightime from their natural Rest, by reason
of their Fetters and Irons, and otherwise much offended and troubled by their
lewd and profane Language and Discourses, with most horrid Cursing and
Swearing (much accustomed to such persons;) (2.) Be it Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, that it shall not be lawful hereafter for any Sheriff, Jailer, or
Keeper of any Gaol or Prison, to put, keep or Lodge Prisoners for Debt, and
Felons together in one Room or Chamber; but that they shall be put, kept, and
Lodged separate and apart one from another, in distinct Rooms, (3.) Upon pain
that he, she, or they which shall offend against this Act, or the true Intent
and meaning thereof, or any part thereof, shall forfeit and lose his or her
Office, Place or Employment, and shall forfeit treble damages to the party
grieved, to be Recovered by virtue of this Act, any Law, Statute, Usage or
Custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And to the End that Englishmen may more entirely enjoy their due Freedoms,
the prudence of our Legislators have thought fit from time to time to Remove
Encroachments thereupon, though under pretense of Jurisdictions and Courts of
Justice; and to prohibit any Exorbitant Arbitrary Power for the future, but
that all things may be left to the calm and equal proceedings of Law; and that
most excellent Method of Trial by Juries, one of the principal Bulwarks of
England's Liberties. For an Instance hereof, take the Act following.

An Act for Regulating of the Privy Council, and for taking away the Court
commonly called the Star Chamber.
Whereas by the Great Charter many times confirmed in Parliament, it is
Enacted, That no Freeman shall be taken or Imprisoned, or Disseized of his
Freehold or Liberties, or Free Customs, or be Outlawed or Exiled, or otherwise
destroyed; and that the King will not pass upon him, or condemn him, but by
lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land: (2.) And by another
Statute made in the fifth year of the Reign of King Edward, it is Enacted, That
no man shall be Attached by any Accusation, nor fore-judged of Life or Limb,
nor his Lands, Tenements, Goods nor Chattels seized into the King's Hands
against the Form of the Great Charter, and the Law of the Land: (3.) And by
another Statute made in the five and twentieth year of the Reign of the same
King Edward the third, it is Accorded, Assented, and Established, That none
shall be taken by Petition, or Suggestion made to the King, or to his Council,
unless it be by Indictment or Presentment of good and lawful people of the same
Neighborhood, where such Deeds be done, in due manner, or by Process made by
Writ Original at the Common Law; and that none be put out of his Franchise or
Freehold, unless he be duly brought in to Answer, and fore-judged of the same
by the course of the Law: And if any thing be done against the same, it shall
be Redressad, and holden for none: (4.) And by another Statute made in the
eight and twentieth year of the Reign of the same King Edward the Third, it is
amongst other things Enacted, That no Man of what Estate or Condition soever he
be, shall be put out of his Lands or Tenements, nor taken, nor Imprisoned, nor
Dis-inherited, without being brought in to Answer by due Process of Law: (5.)
And by another Statute made in the two and fortieth year of the Reign of the
said King Edward the Third, it is Enacted, That no Man be put to Answer without
Presentment before Justices, or matter of Record, or by due Process and Writ
Original, according to the Old Law of the Land; and if any thing be done to the
contrary, it shall be void in Law, and holden for Error: (6.) And by another
Statute in the six and thirtieth year of the Reign of the same King Edward the
Third, it is amongst other things Enacted, That all Pleas which shall be
pleaded in any Courts before any of the King's Justices, or in his other
places; or before any of his other Ministers, or in the Courts and places of
any other Lords within the Realm, shall be Entered and Enrolled in Latin: (7.)
And whereas by the Statute made in the third year of King Henry the Seventh,
Power is given to the Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer of England, for the time
being, and the Keeper of the Kings Privy Seal, or two of them, calling unto
them a Bishop, and a Temporal Lord of the King's Most Honorable Council, and
the Two Chief Justices of the King's Bench and Common Pleas for the time being,
or other two Justices in their Absence, to proceed as in that Act is expressed,
for the punishment of some particular Offenses therein mentioned: (8.) And by
the Statute made in the one and twentyeth year of King Henry the Eighth, the
President of the Council is Associated to join with the Lord Chancellor, and
other Judges in the said Statute of the Third of Henry the Seventh mentioned:
(9.) But the said Judges have not kept themselves to the points limited by the
said Statute, but have undertaken to punish where no Law does warrant, and to
make Decrees for things having no such Authority, and to Inflict heavier
punishments than by any Law is warranted.

2. And forasmuch as all matters Examinable or Determinable before the said
Judges, or in the Court commonly called the Star Chamber, many have their
proper Remedy and Address, and their due punishment and correction by the
Common Law of the Land, and in the ordinary course of Justice elsewhere: (2.)
And forasmuch as the Reasons and Motives inducing the Erection and Continuance
of that Court do now cease; (3.) And the Proceedings, Censures and Decrees of
that Court, have by Experience been found to be an Intolerable Burden to the
Subject, and the means to Introduce an Arbitrary Power and Government: (4.) And
forasmuch as the Council Table has of late times assumed unto it self a Power
to Intermeddle in Civil, and matters only of private Interest between Party and
Party, and have adventured to determine of the Estates and Liberties of the
Subjects, contrary to the Law of the Land, and the Rights and Privileges of
the Subject, by which great and manifold mischiefs and inconveniences have
arisen and happened, and much Incertainty by means of such proceedings has
been conceived concerning men's Rights and Estates; for settling whereof, and
preventing the like in time to come;

3. Be it Ordained and Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament,
That the said Court commonly called the Star Chamber, and all Jurisdiction,
Power and Authority belonging unto, or Exercised in the same Court, or by any
the Judges, Officers or Ministers thereof, be from the first day of August, in
the Year of our Lord God, one thousand six hundred forty and one clearly and
absolutely dissolved, taken away and determined; (2.) And that from the said
first day of August, neither the Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Seal
of England, the Lord Treasurer of England, the Keeper of the Kings privy Seal,
or President of the Council, nor any Bishop, Temporal Lord, privy Counselor,
or Judge, or Justice whatsoever, shall have any power or Authority to hear,
examine or determine any matter or thing whatsoever in the said Court commonly
called the Star Chamber, or to make, pronounce, or deliver any Judgment,
Sentence, Order or Decree; or to do any Judicial or Ministerial Act in the said
Court: (3.) And that all and every Act and Acts of Parliament, and all and
every Article, clause, and Sentence in them, and every of them, by which any
Jurisdiction, Power or Authority is given, Limited or appointed, unto the said
Court commonly called the Star Chamber, or unto all, or any the Judges,
Officers or Ministers thereof, or for any Proceedings to be had or made in the
said Court, or for any matter or thing to be drawn into question, Examined or
determined there, shall for so much as concerns the said Court of
Star Chamber, and the power and Authority thereby Given unto it, be from the
said first day of August Repealed and Absolutely Revoked and made void.

4. And be it likewise Enacted, That the like Jurisdiction now used and
Exercised in the Court before the President and Council in the Marches of
Wales; (2.) and also in the Court before the President and Council Established
in the Northern parts; (3.) and also in the Court commonly called, the Court of
the Duchy of Lancaster, held before the Chancellor and Council of that Court;
(4.) And also in the Court of Exchequer of the County Palatine of Chester, held
before the Chamberlain and Council of that Court; (5.) The like Jurisdiction
being Exercised there, shall from the said first day of August, one thousand
six hundred, forty and one, be also Repealed and Absolutely Revoked, and made
void, any Law, prescription, Custom or Usage, or the said statute made in the
third year of King Henry the Seventh, or the statute made the one and twentieth
of Henry the Eighth, or any Act or Acts of Parliament heretofore had or made,
to the Contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding: (6.) And that from
henceforth no Court, Council, or place of Judicature shall be Erected,
Ordained, constituted or appointed within this Realm, of England, or Dominion
of Wales, which shall have, use or Exercise, the same, or the like
Jurisdiction, as is or has been used, practiced, or Exercised in the said
Court of Star Chamber.

5. Be it likewise declared and Enacted by Authority of this present
Parliament, That neither His Majesty, nor his Privy Council, have or ought to
have any Jurisdiction, Power or Authority by English Bill, Petition, Articles,
Libel, or any other Arbitrary way whatsoever, to Examine or draw into question,
determine or dispose of the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, goods, or Chattels
of any of the Subjects of this Kingdom; but that the same ought to be tried and
determined in the ordinary Courts of Justice, and by the ordinary course of the
Law.

6. And be it further provided and Enacted, That If any Lord Chancellor, or
Keeper of the Great Seal of England, Lord Treasurer, Keeper of the Kings Privy
Seal, President of the Council, Bishop, Temporal Lord, Privy Councillor, Judge
or Justice whatsoever, shall offend, or do any thing contrary to the purport,
true intent and meaning of this Law, Then he or they shall for such offense
forfeit the sum of five hundred pounds of lawful Money of England, unto any
party grieved, his Executors or Administrators, who shall really prosecute for
the same, and first obtain Judgment thereupon, to be Recovered in any Court of
Record at Westminster, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, wherein
no Essoign, Protection, Wager of Law, Aid-prayer, Privilege, Injunction or
Order of Restraint, shall be in any wise prayed, granted or allowed; nor any
more than one Imparlance: (2.) And if any person against whom any such Judgment
or Recovery shall be had as aforesaid, shall after such Judgment or Recovery,
offend again in the same, then he or they for such offense shall forfeit the
Sum of one thousand pounds of lawful Money of England, unto any party grieved,
his Executors or Administrators, who shall really prosecute for the same, and
first obtain Judgment thereupon, to be Recovered in any Court of Record at
Westminster, by Action of Dept, Bill, Plaint, or Information, in which no
Essoign, Protection, Wager of Law, Aid-prayer, Privilege, Injunction or Order
of Restraint, shall be in any wise prayed, granted or allowed; nor any more
than one Imparlance: (3.) And if any person against whom any such second
Judgment or Recovery shall be had as aforesaid, shall after such Judgment or
Recovery, offend again in the same kind, and shall be thereof duly convicted by
Indictment, Information, or any other lawful way or means, that such person so
convicted, shall be from thenceforth disabled, and become by virtue of this Act
Incapable, ipso facto, to Bear his and their said Office and Offices
Respectively; (4.) And shall be likewise disabled to make any Gift, Grant,
Conveyance, or other Disposition of any of his Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
Goods or Chattels; or to take any Benefit of any Gift, Conveyance or Legacy to
his own use.

7. And every Person so offending shall likewise forfeit and lose to the party
grieved, by any thing done contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Law,
his treble Damages, which he shall sustain and be put unto, by means or
occasion of any such Act or thing done, the same to be Recovered in any of His
Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or
Information, wherein no Essoign, Protection, Wager of Law, Aid-prayer,
Privilege, Injunction, or Order of Restraint, shall be in any wise prayed,
granted or allowed, nor any more than one Imparlance.

8. And be it also provided and Enacted, That if any person shall hereafter be
Committed, Restrained of his Liberty, or suffer Imprisonment, by the Order or
Decree of any such Court of Star Chamber, or other Court aforesaid, now, or at
any time hereafter, having, or pretending to have the same or like
Jurisdiction, Power, or Authority to Commit or Imprison as aforesaid: (2.) Or
by the Command or Warrant of the King's Majesty, His Heirs and Successors in
their own Person, or by the Command or Warrant of the Council Board; or o(...)
any of the Lords or others of His Majesty's Privy Council: (3.) That in every
such Case, every person so Committed, Restrained of his Liberty, or suffering
Imprisonment, upon demand or motion made by his Council, or other Employed by
him for that purpose, unto the Judges of the Court of King's Bench, or
Common Pleas in open Court, shall without delay, upon any pretense whatsoever,
for the Ordinary Fees usually paid for the same, have forthwith granted unto
him a Writ of Habeas Corpus, to be directed generally unto all and every
Sheriffs, Jailer, Minister, Officer, or other person in whose Custody the
person Committed or Restrained shall be: (4.) And the Sheriffs, Jailer,
Minister, Officer, or other person, in whose Custody the party so Committed or
Restrained shall be, shall at the Return of the said Writ, and according to the
command thereof, upon due and convenient notice thereof given unto him, at the
Charge of the party who requires or procures such Writ, and upon Security by
his own Bond given, to pay the Charge of carrying back the Prisoner, if he
shall be Remanded by the Court to which he shall be brought; as in like cases
has been used, such Charges of bringing up, and carrying back the Prisoner, to
be always Ordered by the Court, if any difference shall arise thereabout,
bring or cause to be brought the Body of the said Party so Committed or
Restrained unto, and before the Judges or Justices of the said Court, from
whence the same Writ shall Issue, in open Court: (5.) And shall then likewise
certify the true Cause of such his Detainour or Imprisonment, and thereupon
the Court within three Court-daies after such Return, made and delivered in
open Court, shall proceed to Examine and Determine, whether the Cause of such
Commitment appearing upon the said Return, be Just and Legal, or not, and shall
thereupon do what to Justice shall appertain, either by Delivering, Bailing, or
Remanding the Prisoner: (6.) And if any thing shall be otherwise wilfully done,
or omitted to be done by any Judge, Justice, Officer, or other Person
aforementioned, contrary to the direction and true meaning hereof, then such
person so offending shall forfeit to the party grieved, his treble Damages, to
be Recovered by such means, and in such manner as is formerly in this Act
limited and appointed for the like penalty to be Sued for and Recovered.

9. Provided always, and be it Enacted, That this Act, and the several Clauses
therein contained, shall be taken and Expounded to Extend only to the Court of
Star Chamber: (2.) And to the said Courts holden before the President and
Council in the Marches of Wales: (3.) And before the President and Council in
the Northern parts: (4.) And also to the Court commonly called the Court of the
Duchy of Lancaster, holden before the Chancellor and Council of that Court:
(5.) And also in the Court of Exchequer, of the County Palatine of Chester,
held before the Chamberlain, and Council of that Court: (6.) And to all Courts
of like Jurisdiction to be hereafter Erected, Ordained, Constituted, or
Appointed as aforesaid; and to the Warrants and Directions of the
Council Board, and to the Commitments, Restraints and Imprisonments of any
person or persons made, commanded or awarded by the King's Majesty, His Heirs
or Successors in their own Person, or by the Lords and others of the
Privy Council, and every one of them.

And lastly, Provided and be it Enacted, That no person or persons shall be
Sued, Impleaded, Molested or Troubled for any Offense against this present Act,
unless the party supposed to have so Offended shall be sued or Impleaded for
the same within two years at the most after such time, wherein the said Offense
shall be committed.

The Comment.
THE Court of Star Chamber (so called, because held in a Chamber at
Westminster, the Roof of which is garnisht with Golden Stars) was not
originally Erected, but confirmed and established by the Stat. of the 3 H. 7.
Ca. 1. For there had before been some such Jurisdiction, as Cook observes 4.
Instit. fo. 62. yet there is reason to believe, That it grew up rather by
Connivance and Usurpation, than any due course of Law. The Crimes it pretended
to punish were the Exorbitant Offenses of Great Men, (whom Inferior Judges and
Jurors (though they should not) would in respect of their Greatness be afraid
to offend) Bribery, Extortion, Maintenance, Champerty, Imbracery, Forgery,
Perjury, Libelling, Challenges, Duels, etc. Their proceedings were by English
Bill, and Process under the Great Seal; and the punishments by them Inflicted
were Fines, Imprisonment, Pillory, Cutting off Ears, etc. But whatever
pretenses there were for the setting up this Court at first, it is certain it
was made use of as a property of Arbitrary Power to Crush any whom the Ruling
Ministers and Favorites had a mind to destroy; and indeed there were Three
things in the very nature of this Court, which were destructive to the Original
Constitution of our English Government and Liberties. 1. They proceeded without
Juries. 2. They pretended to a Power to Examine men upon their Oaths touching
Crimes by them supposed to be committed, which is contrary to all Law and
Reason; For, Nemo tenetur seipsum Accusare: No man is bound to accuse himself.
3. The Judges of this Court proceeded by no known Law or Rules, but were left
at Liberty to Act Arbitrarily, and according to their own pleasures; whereas
the Law of Engl. hates to leave to any such an unlimited Power, but as it marks
out the several species of Crimes, such or such an Act shall be Treason; this
Felony, that petty Larceny, etc. So it awards certain and positive punishments,
proportionate to each of them. Therefore this Court being found a Grievance to
the Subject, was by this Act dissolved and taken away.

And to the intent nothing of the like kind should by any other name be
practiced for the future, it is Declared and Enacted, That the King and His
Privy Council shall not question or dispose of the Lands or Goods of any
Subjects: And if they do, each Privy Counselor or present forfeits 500l. to
the party grieved.

A Clause in the Act of 31. Car. 2. C. 1.
Whereas by the Laws and Customs of this Realm, the Inhabitants thereof cannot
be compelled against their wills to receive Soldiers into their Houses, and to
sojourn them there, Be it Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
no Officer, Military or Civil, nor any other person whatever, shall from
henceforth presume to Place, Quarter or Billet any Soldier or Soldiers upon
any Subject or Inhabitant of this Realm, of any degree, quality or profession
whatever, without his consent; And that it shall, and may be lawful for every
such Subject and Inhabitant, to refuse to Sojourn or Quarter any Soldier or
Soldiers, notwithstanding any Command, Order, Warrant or Billeting whatever.

HAVING thus recited several of the most material Statutes provided by the care
and wisdom of our Ancestors and prudent Legislators for the Guarding and
Securing our English Liberties, I shall now for the Reader's Information,
proceed to add certain other Laws of another nature; And first give the Reader
all the Statutes at this day in force against Protestant Dissenters upon the
account of Religion; And secondly, an Abstract of all the Laws against Papists.

And in order to the first of these, we begin with a Statute touching the Writ
De Excommunicato Capiendo, upon which many people have been prosecuted. Which
Act is as follows:

Anno Quinto Reginae Elizabethae, Ca. 23.
An Act for the due Execution of the Writ De Excommunicato capiendo.
FOrasmuch as diverse persons offending in many great Crimes and Offenses
appertaining merely to the Jurisdiction and Determination of the Ecclesiastical
Courts and Judges of this Realm, are many times unpunished for lack and want of
the good and due Execution of the Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, directed to
the Sheriff of any County, for the taking and apprehending of any such
Offenders: (2.) The great abuse whereof, as it should seem, has grown, for
that the said Writ is not Returnable in any Court, that might have the Judgment
of the well Executing and serving of the said Writ, according to the Contents
thereof; (3.) But hitherto have been left only to the discretion of the
Sheriffs and their Deputies, by whose Negligences and Defaults, for the most
part, the said Writ is not Executed upon the Offenders as it ought to be. (4.)
By reason whereof, such Offenders be greatly encouraged to continue their
sinful and criminous Life, much to the displeasure of Almighty God, and to the
great contempt of the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm.

2. Wherefore, for the redress thereof, be it enacted by the Queens Most
Excellent Majesty, with the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same;
That from and after the first day of May next coming, every Writ of
Excommunicato Capiendo, that shall be granted and Awarded, out of the high
Court of Chancery against any person or persons within the Realm of England,
shall be made in the time of the Term (2.) And Returnable before the Queen's
Highness, Her Heirs, and Successors in the Court commonly called the King's
Bench, in the Term next after the Test of the same Writ; (3.) and the same
writ shall be made to contain at the least twenty days between the Test and
the Return thereof; (4.) And after the same writ shall be so made and sealed,
that then the said Writ shall be forthwith brought into the said Court of
King's Bench, and there in the presence of the Justices, shall be opened and
delivered of Record to the Sheriffs or other officer, to whom the serving and
Execution thereof shall appertain, or to his or their Deputy or Deputies? (5.)
And if afterward it shall or may appear to the Justices of the same Court for
the time being, that the same writ so delivered of Record, be not duty returned
before them at the day of the return thereof; or that any other Default or
Negligence has been used or bad, in the not well serving and Executing of the
said Writ, that then the Justices of the said Court shall and may by Authority
of this Act, Assess such Amerciament upon the said Sheriff or other Officer in
whom such Default shall appear, as to the discretion of the said Justices shall
be thought meet and convenient; which Amerciament so Assessed, shall be
Estreated into the Court of Exchequer, as other Amerciaments have been used.

3. And he it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sheriff or
other Officer to whom such writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, or other Process by
virtue of this Act, shall be directed, shall not in any wise be compelled to
bring the Body of such person or persons, as shall be named in the said writ or
Process, into the said Court of the King's Beneh at the day of the Return
thereof; (2.) But shall only Return the same Writ and Process thither, with
Declaration briefly how and in what manner he has served and Executed the
same, to the intent that thereupon the said Justices may then further therein
proceed, according to the Tenor and Effect of this present Act.

4. And if the said Sheriff or other Officer to whom the Execution of the said
writ shall so appertain, do or shall Return, that the party or parties named in
the said Writ, cannot be found within his Bailiwick, that then the said
Justices of the King's Bench for the time being, upon every such Return, shall
Award one Writ of Capias against the said Persons or Persons named in the said
Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo; (2.) Returnable in the same Court in the
Term-time, two months at least next after the Test thereof; (3.) With a
Proclamation to be contained within the said Writ of Capias, that the Sheriff
or other Officers, to whom the said Writ shall be directed, in the full
County Court, or else at the General-Assizes and Jail-delivery to be holden
before within the said County, or at a Quarter Sessions to be holden before the
Justices of the Peace within the said County, shall make open Proclamation ten
days at the least before the Return, that the party or parties named in the
said Writ, shall within six days next after such Proclamation, yield his or
their Body or Bodies to the Prison of the said Sheriff or other such Officer,
there to remain as a Prisoner according to the Tenor and Effect of the first
Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, upon pain or forfeiture of ten pounds: (4.) And
thereupon after such Proclamation had, and the said six days past and expired,
then the said Sheriff or other Officer, to whom such Writ of Capias shall be
directed, shall make Return of the same Writ of Capias into the said Court of
the King's Bench, of all that he has done in the Execution thereof, and
whether the party named in the said Writ, have yielded his Body to Prison or
not.

5. And if upon the Return of the said Sheriff, it shall appear, that the party
or parties named in the same Writ of Capias, or any of them, have not yielded
their Bodies to the Goal and Prison of the said Sheriff, or other Officer,
according to the Effect of the same Proclamation; that then every such person
that so shall make default, shall for every such default forfeit to the Queens
Highness, Her Heirs and Successors ten pounds, (2.) Which shall likewise be
Estreated by the said Justices into the said Court of Exchequer, in such manner
and form as fines and Amerciaments there taxed and assessed, are used to be.

6. And thereupon the said Justices of the King's Bench shall also award forth
another Writ of Capias against the said person or persons that so shall be
Returned to have made default, with such like Proclamation, as was contained in
the first Capias, and a pain of twenty pounds, to be mentioned in the said
second Writ and Proclamation: (2) And the Sheriff, or other Officer, to whom
the said second Writ, of Capias, shall be so directed, shall serve and Execute
the said Writ, in such like manner and form, as before is Expressed for the
serving and Executing of the said first Writ of Capias. (3.) And if the Sheriff
or other Officer shall return upon the said second Capias, that he has made
the Proclamation according to the tenout and Effect of the same Writ, and that
the party has not yielded his Body to Prison, according to the Tenor of the
said Proclamation; that then the said party that so shell make default, shall
for such his contempt and default, forseit to the Queens Highness, Her Heirs
and Successors, the Sum of twenty pounds; (4.) which said Sum of twenty pounds,
the said Justices of the King's Bench for the time being, shall likewise cause
to be Estreated into the said Court of Exchequer, in manner and form aforesaid.

7. And then the said Justices shall likewise Award forth another Writ of
Capias against the said party, with such Proclamation and pain of forfeiture,
as was contained in the said second writ of Capias: (2.) and the Sheriff or
other Officer to whom the said Third writ of Capias shall be so directed, shall
serve and Execute the said writ of Capias, in such like manor and form as
before in this Act is expressed and declared, for the serving and Executing of
the said first and second writs of Capias: (3.) And if the Sheriff or other
Officer to whom the Execution of the said third writ shall appertain, do make
Return of the said third writ of Capias, that the Party upon such Proclamation
has not yielded his Body to Prison, according to the Tenor thereof, that then
every such party for every such contempt and default, shall likewise forfeit to
the Queen's Majesty, Her Heirs and Successors, other twenty pounds: (4.) which
Sum of twenty pound shall likewise be Estreated into the said Court of the
Exchequer, in manner and form aforesaid: (5.) And thereupon the said Justices
of the King's Bench shall likewise Award forth one writ of Capias against the
said party, with like Proclamation, and like pain of forfeiture of twenty
pound: (6.) And that also the said Justices shall have Authority by this Act,
infinitely to Award such Process of Capias, with such like Proclamation and
pain of forf^iture of twenty pound as is before Limited, against the said
party, that so shall make default in yielding of his B^^y to the Prison of the
Sheriff, until such time as by return of some of the said writs before the said
Justices, it shall and may appear, that the said party has yielded himself to
the Custody of the said Sheriff, or other Officer, according to the Tenor of
the said Proclamation; (7.) And that the party upon every default and contempt
by him made against the Proclamation of any of the said writs so infinitely to
be Awarded against him, shall incur like pain and forfeiture of twenty pound,
which shall likewise be Estreated in manner and form aforesaid.

8. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when any person
or persons shall yield his or their Body or Bodies to the hands of the Sheriff,
or other Officer, upon any of the said Writs of Capias, that then the same
party or parties that shall so yield themselves, shall remain in the Prison and
Custody of the said Sheriff, or other Officer, without Bail, Basion or
Mainprise, in such like manner and form, to all intents and purposes, as he or
they should or ought to have done, if he or they had been apprehended and taken
upon the said Writ of Excommunicato capiendo.

9. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Sheriff
or other Officer, by whom the said Writ of Capias, or any of them shall be
Returned, as is aforesaid, do make an untrue Return upon any the said Writs,
that the party named in the said Writ, has not yielded his Body upon the said
Proclamations, or any of them, where indeed the party did yield himself
according to the effect of the same, that then every such Sheriff or other
Officer, for every such false and untrue Return, shall forfeit to the party
grieved, and damnified by the said Return; the Sam of 40 l. (2.) For the which
Sum of 40 l. the said party grieved shall have his Recovery and due Remedy by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, in any of the Queens Courts of
Record, in which Action, Bill, Plaint, or Information, no Essoign, Protection
or Wager of Law shall be admitted or allowed for the party Defendant.

10. Saving and Reserving to all Arch Bishops and Bishops, and all others,
having Authority to certisie any person Excommunicated, and like Authority to
accept, and receive the submission and satisfaction of the said person so
Excommunicated; in manner and form heretofore used; (2.) And him to Absolve and
Release, and the same to signify, as heretofore it has been accustomed, to
the Queen's Majesty, Her Heirs and Successors, into the High Court of Chancery,
(3.) And thereupon to have such Writs for the deliverance of the said person
so absolved and released from the Sheriff's Custody or Prison, as heretofore
they, or any of them had, or of right ought, or might have had; any thing in
this present Statute specified or contained to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

11. Provided always, That in Wales the Counties Palatines of Lancaster,
Chester, Durham, and Ely, and in the Cinque Ports, being Jurisdictions and
places Exempt, where the Queen's Majesty's Writ does not run, and process of
Capias, from thence not Returnable into the said Court of the King's Bench,
after any Significavit, being of Record in the said Court of Chancery; The
Tenor of such Significavit by Mittimus shall be sent to such of the Head
Officers of the said Country of Wales, Counties Palatines, and places Exempt,
within whose Offices, Charge or Jurisdiction, the Offenders shall be Resiant;
that is to say, to the Chancellor or Chamberlain for the said County Palatine
of Lancaster and Chester, and for the Cinque Ports, to the Lord Warden of the
same, and for Wales and Ely, and the County Palatine of Durham, to the Chief
Justice or Justices there: (2.) And thereupon every of the said Justices and
Officers, to whom such Tenor of Significavit with Mittimus shall be directed
and delivered, shall by virtue of this Estatute, have Power and Authority, to
make like Process to the Inferior Officer, and Officers, to whom the Execution
of Process there does appertain, Returnable before the Justices there, at their
next Sessions or Courts; two Months at the least after the Test of every such
Process: (3.) So always, as in every degree they shall proceed in their
Sessions and Courts against the Offenders, as the Justices of the said Court of
King's Bench are Limited by the Tenor of this Act, in Term-times to do and
Execute.

12. Provided also, and be it Enacted, That any person at the time of any
Process of Capias aforementioned, Awarded, being in Prison, or out of this
Realm in the parts beyond the Sea, or within Age, or of non sanae memoriae, or
woman Covert, shall not incur any of the pains or forfeitures aforementioned,
which shall grow by any Return or Default happening, during such time of
Nonage, Imprisonment, being beyond the Sea, or non sanae memoriae: (2.) And
that by virtue of this Estatute, the party grieved may plead every such cause
or matter in bar of, and upon the distress, or other Process that shall be made
for Levying of any of the said pains, or forfeitures.

13. And if that the Offender against whom any such Writ of Excommunicato
Capiendo shall be Awarded, shall not in the same Writ of Excommunicato
Capiendo, have a sufficient and lawful addition according to the form of the
Statute of Primo of Henry the Fifth, in cases of certain Suits, whereupon
Process of Exigent are to be Awarded: (2.) Or if in the Significavit it be not
contained, that the Excommunication does proceed upon some cause or contempt of
some Original matter of Heresy, or refusing to have his or their child
Baptized, or to recieve the Holy Communion as it is now commonly used to be
Received in the Church of England, or to come to Divine Service, now commonly
used in the said Church of England, or Error in matters of Religion, or
Doctrine now received and allowed in the said Church of England, Incontinency,
Usury, Simony, Perjury in the Ecclesiastical Court, or Idolatry. (3.) That then
all and every pains and forfeitures limited against such persons Excommunicate
by this statute by reason of such Writ of Excommunicato capiendo, wanting
sufficient Addition, or of such Significavit, wanting all the Causes before
mentioned, shall be utterly void in Law; (4.) and by way of Plea to be allowed
to the party grieved.

14. And if the Addition shall be with a Nuper of the place, Then in every such
case, at the Awarding of the first Capias with Proclamation according to the
form mentioned, one Writ of Proclamation (without any pain expressed) shall be
Awarded into the County, where the Offender shall be most commonly Resiant at
the time of the Awarding of the said first Capias with pain, in the same Writ
of Proclamation, to be returnable the day of the return of the said first
Capias, with pain and Proclamation thereupon at some one such time and Court,
as is Prescribed for the Proclamation upon the said first Capias with pain:
(2.) And if such Proclamation be not made in the County where the Offender
shall be most commonly Resiant, in such cases of Addition of Nuper, That then
such Offenders shall sustain no pain or forfeitures by virtue of this Statute,
for not yielding his or her body, according to the Tenor aforementioned, any
thing before specified, and to the Contrary hereof in any wise Notwithstanding.

The Comment, With a Discourse of the Nature of Excommunication, and how to
prevent or take off the Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo.
THough Excommunications pretend a Title Jure Divino, as an Institution of
Christ, and therefore his Sacred Name is therein made use of, and several other
Spiritual Phrases purporting that the same, and all proceedings thereunto, are
by his Authority; yet they being so commonly thundered out, by persons who have
immediately no Authority from our Lord, or his Word, to manage them; and for
such trivial Crimes as no Law of God has ordered them against, and in such a
Light and precipitant manner, as no part of Holy Scripture warranteth: The
wiser sort of men do therefore look upon them rather as Excommunings, or a sort
of Civil punishment, like that in use among the Romans, Interdico tibi aqua and
igni, than one of the solemn Institutions of God. And therefore waving any
discourse of what Spiritual Influence or Effect may be dreaded from the same in
our days, which we hope are wise enough not to be Bug-Bear'd with that Maxim
of the Canonists Excommunicatio sive Justa, sive Injusta est timenda; A
Church-Curse, be it Just, or Unjust, is to be feared. All that we shall speak
to is matter of Law, for so it is that there are Legal Bars and punishments
formed by our Temporal Laws, as long as the Legislative Power shall not be at
leisure to consider of them, and (if they find it requisite) Repeal them. For,

1. A person Excommunicated is forthwith disabled to Sue in any of His
Majesty's Courts; not that thereby he loses his Right for ever, but the
Excommunication may be pleaded in Abatement of his present Action, till the
same is taken off by an Absolution. Yet note, That whosoever is Instrumental in
procuring, soliciting, decreeing or pronouncing the Excommunication, shall
never be allowed to plead it; nor shall it be pleaded, unless the
Excommunication be, signified by the Bishop himself; for the Court will receive
no Certificate from any to whom they cannot write to Absolve the person, if
they find cause.

2. Likewise, though a person Excommunicated may be appointed an Executor, and
is capable of having a Legacy given him, yet so-long as he stands
Excommunicated, he is not to be allowed to prove the Will, nor Sue for his
Legacy in the Spiritual Court. But note, whereas some say a man Excommunicated
cannot Marry; it is Nonsense, for Marriage is de Jure Naturali, and alike
absurd it is for any to pretend, that such a person cannot give his Suffrage in
any Election; as for Example of Parliament Men, for the same is an idle dream;
the Law allows him a Voice, so long as he has a Freehold of Forty Shillings
per Annum, though he were under forty Curses.

3. If a person (justly or unjustly) Excommunicated, continue so by the space
of forty days then by the Common Law, the Bishop certifying the same into
Chancery, (which is called a Significavit) there shall issue forth a Writ from
thence to the Sheriff of the County where the party lives, to Imprison him
without Bail or Mainprize, till he has made satisfaction to Holy Church.

This is called a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, and such Imprisonment of a
person Excommunicated by a Civil Sanction, is not practiced in any Nation in
the world but ours, and if it had here too been Buried with its Brother de
Haeretico Comburendo, I believe it would have had few Tears at its Funeral. But
at Common Law the same Writ being not Returnable in any Court, the Sheriffs
took their own time, and used their discretion in Executing it; to enforce
which, this Statute was made, whereby it is Enacted.

1. That the said Writ shall be Returnable in the King's Bench, yet the Sheriff
need not bring thither the Body.

2. If the Sheriff Return Non est Inventus. a Capias shall be Awarded with
Proclamation, to come in with six days; if the party do not, he forfeirs 10 l.
and thenceforwards Capias after Capias, and 20 l. forfeited on each.

3. But note, there are two Cases in which though a man stands out never so
many Proclamations, he shall forfeit nothing. And they two are these.

1. Where the Party against whom the Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo is
Awarded, has not therein a sufficient and lawful Addition; That is (says
Cowel) a Title over and above his Christian and Surname, showing his State,
Degree, Trade, Occupation, or Mystery (as Lord, Knight, Gentleman, Yeoman,
Clothier, and the like) and the Hamlet, Town, Parish, and County where he is,
or lately was conversant and dwelling. And if it be with a Nuper [late of such
a place] then you see there must be made out one Capias without any penalty.

2. Where it is not expressed in the Bishops Certificate, that the Cause for
which the party was originally Cited into the Spiritual Court, was for one of
these 10 Causes following, viz. 1. Heresy; 2. Refusing to have Children
Baptized; 3. Refusing to Receive the Communion; 4. Refusing to come to Divine
Service; 5. Error in Religion or Doctrine; 6. Incontinency; 7. usury; 8.
Simony; 9. Perjury in the Ecclesiastical Court; or 10. Idolatry.

To know whether there be such cause expressed, you may have a Copy of the
Significavit at the Cursitors Office in Chancery Lane.

Then in either of these cases, all pains and forfeitures limited by this
Statute by reason of such Writ of Excom. Cap. wanting such an Addition or
Significavit, wanting all the causes aforesaid, shall be utterly void in Law,
and by way of plea to be allowed to the party grieved.

Touching the Authority of the Courts called Spiritual or Ecclesiastic,
whether they have truly any at all by our present Laws, I shall not here
debate; they that have a mind to hear what is to be said on that Theme, may
read Mr. Hickeringil's Book of Naked Truth, or Mr. Henry Care's Book written in
the year 1664. entitled, A true Guide for all persons concerned in
Ecclesiastical Courts; neither of which I ever yet saw sufficiently Answered;
yet still since most certain it is, that such Courts do proceed and Act, we
shall suppose them to have some Power, and only inform our Reader of the course
of their practice, as it is used at this day, and his best course to defend
himself.

You must note, that persons are usually Excommunicated upon Contempt or
Contumacy, which may be,

1. If the party being duly Cited, Denies, or Omitteth to appear: For if he be
not personally summoned, he needs not appear the first time; but then their way
is to Cite him by a Writ called Viis and Modis, set up at the Doors of his
House, or at the Church Doors, Citing him at a certain day to appear to answer,
etc. But (being personally Cited) if he does not appear the first time, or
whether he be or no, if he does not appear the second time, he is
Excommunicated for Contempt. If he be Cited generally: the Law is, That he
shall appear the third day after the Service of the Citation. The Law also is,
that if he he will give the Apparator 6d. he must bring him the full and true
Copy of the Citation. If a day of appearance be mentioned, and the same be not
at least the third day from the Citation; or if he has before witnesses given
the Apparator 6d. to bring him a full and true Copy of the Citation, and he
does not, I conceive, he needs not appear, but listen what they do; and if they
decree him Excommunicated, he may Appeal within 15 days, and bring from the
Superior Court, an Inhibition to stop their proceedings against him. And
further, the Rule in that Law is, Totus dies debetur Delinquenti. It is enough
for a person to appear any hour of the day (provided it be a Court-hour)
wherein he is Cited to appear; so as though he be called before he comes, vet
if he appears that day, he shall be discharged, or he may Appeal.

2. When he appears, he shall demand his Charge, which is either by a
Presentment from Churchwardens, or by a Libel, or Articles, which are
exhibited by a Promoter. Be it which it will, he shall demand a Copy; if it be
denied or delayed, he may bring, if he will, a Prohibition from the King's
Court at Westminster, forbidding them to proceed in that Cause, till they have
given a full and true Copy of his Charge, according to the Statute of 2 Hen. 5.
Ca. 3.

If he appears in person, he ought to have his Charge the first Court-day; if
he appears by a Proctor, they will usually (to get the Proctor more Fees)
give to the second Court-day, to bring in the Libel or Articles.

4. If they deliver him not his Charge the second Court-day, he may Appeal, if
upon his demand the Judge will not dismiss him; or he may, if he will, bring
his Prohibition, for want of Articles, and stop their further proceedings.

5. If the proceedings be upon a Promotion, and the Promoter has Employed a
Proctor in the Case, the party accused must know, that no Proctor can be
admitted without a Proxy, that is, Letters Procuratory under the Promoter's
Hand and Seal, authorizing him to act for him in the Case; and when he has
that, there must be an Act entered in Court to admit such a person Proctor in
the Case. The party charged may go or send to the Register, and demand a sight
of both those; the Reason in Law is this, because any Proctor is liable to the
Parties Action, if he molesteth any person in the name of another, without
Authority from him. And secondly, If there be no Act of Court admitting him as
a Proctor, though the party accused be Conqueror in the case, yet he cannot
Recover Costs, because there is no Legal Adversary, against whom they can be
Recovered.

6. According to the Statute Law, Every Informer, if overthrown, shall pay
charges. According to the Civil and Canon Law, none ought to be admitted as a
Voluntary Promoter, till he has given security to pay the Charges. If
overthrown, The Party Accused therefore shall before he answers the Articles,
demand this; if it be denied by the Judge, he may Appeal to the Superior
Court. It is also worth the persons Enquiry who is Accused, to be well advised
whether the Promoter in the Ecclesiastical Courts, be not obliged to all those
things, that an Informer in the Secular Courts is tied to, by the Statutes 31
Eliz. 5. 18. Eliz. 5. 21. Jac. 4. The Reason is, because those Statutes say,
Informers Upon any Penal Statutes, and commonly Promoters in the Ecclesiastical
Courts, say such and such things are done contrary to the Statutes of this
Realm, as well as contrary to the Canons: now what things the Statutes, which
also name Promoters, Require of such Informers and Promoters, the Statutes do
declare.

7. When the Party Accused has a Copy of his Libel, let him demand time to
answer; If the Judge denies him time (at least till the next Court-day) let him
Appeal; Having due time granted, in the mean time let him duly consider the
matter and form of his Libel. As to which let him amongst other things observe
these that follow.

1. Whether the matters he be Charged with, belong to the Cognizance of the
Ecclesiastical Court? If Lawyers tell him no, let that be his Answer, and let
him hasten to bring his Prohibition, which Lies in all such Causes.

2. Whether they have put into the Libel the Promotors Petition for Right and
Justice to be done him: it is often times left out. It is a Rule in their Law,
Libellus est ipso Jure nullus, ubi nihil Petitur. If he finds that this is
wanting, let his Answer only be That the Libel is in Law utterly void, and
Insufficient, and desire to be dismissed: If the Judge refuses to dismiss him,
let him Appeal.

3. Let him also Observe, whether he be in the Articles laid to be one of the
Diocese, or a Parishoner of such a Parish, for it be not laid, it can never be
proved, and so the Promotor must fail in his Suit; for what is not laid, cannot
be proved: Quicquid deponitur Extra Articulum, deponitur Extra Legem, is a Rule
in their Law. If he be said to be a Parishioner of such a place, within such a
diocese, let him not in his Answer Confess it but say, He cannot determine the
Bounds of Diocesses and parishes, but for that he Refers himself to the Law.

4. Let him also observe, if the things he be Charged to have done, or omitted,
be within the compass of a year, and whether there has been since no Act of
Grace or Oblivion, which has pardoned them; and whether they be not such
things as he has been punished for, or such things as the Statute Law has
Limited the prosecution of to a less time than a year: For if any of these
things be, they may be given in answer to avoid eithor the whole, or any part
of the Charge. If the Judge will not accept the Answer, the party may Sue out a
Prohibition and stop them.

5. Let him also observe, whether he be charged certainly or particularly, as
to time and place, or only generally and incertainly; if he be charged only
generally, as for the most part he is, in Church-VVardens Presentiments, not
mentioning time and place; or incertainly with Or's, that he did not come to
his Parish Church, such and such months and days, or was absent in some one,
or more, or most of them: Let his Answer be, that this Charge is void in Law,
for the generality or incertainty of it. If the Judge will not Receive his
Answer, let him Appeal; for the Law of England allows no such Charges, from
which can be no Discharge, or where the Crime is not fixed to a certain time.
But it may be, in this Case, a Prohibition will be his best Remedy.

6. Let him observe, whether he be charged only upon Statute Law, or upon
Canons; if upon Canons, let him in his Answer modestly refer himself to Persons
Learned in the Statute-Laws, whether any such Canons were ever Enacted,
Ratifyed, Allowed, or Confirmed by Parliament, or by the Established Laws of
the Land, as they stood in the year 1639. and if not, whether they be not made
void by the Statute 13. Car. 2.

10. When he has given his Answer, which must be subscribed by his own hand,
it is usual for the Adverse Proctor to demand a time to prove his Articles, for
which the Judge at his pleasure grants two, three, four, or six Court-daies
(usually but two) let him also at the same time move, that he may have liberty
within that time also, to produce any Witnesses for his Defense; if it be
denied, let him Appeal.

11. Let him observe, what time the Judge sets his Adversary to produce his
Witnesses in Court, and whom he names for Witnesses for him. Let him also
desire a time to be set in Court for him to produce his Witnesses, and be
careful to bring them at the time, for they must all be sworn in the Court,
then Examined privately by the Register. Unless the Adversary desires a
Commission to Examine Witnesses, (which is not often done, because it is much
more Chargeable) is that Case, there are no Witnesses in the Court produced and
Sworn, but before those Commissioners.

12. if the party Defendant will, he may deliver in to the Register
Interrogatories, upon which the Register shall Cross-Examine his Adversaries
VVitnesses. But he must be very wary as to this, for he shall not afterward
Except against any of his Adversaries Witnesses, whom he has Cross-Examined,
and made VVitnesses for himself.

13. Let him Advise his own Witnesses to be very careful that the Register
sets down what they say, in their own words, that under the pretense of
putting them into a decent phrase, their whole sense be not altered.

14. When the time Probatory, set at first by the Judge, is expired, let him
desire of the Judge, Publication. If the Judge will grant longer time to prove,
let him desire the Advantage of the same time also, to bring more VVitnesses
for himself, which he may, or may not, make use of as he pleases. If once the
Term given for proof be Expired, let him desire Publication, and Liberty to
take out a Copy of the depositions.

15. When he has got a Copy, let him diligently observe, if he can prove any
thing contrary to what the VVitnesses, or any of them have sworn; if he can,
let him at the next Court-day, offer a paper of general and Particular
Exceptions, showing the Particulars which he Excepteth against in their
depositions severally, as well as his general Exceptions against them all. Let
him desire a time to bring in witness, to prove his Exceptions. If the Judge
refuses to admit his Exception, or to give him due time to prove them, he may
again Appeal.

16. When once the Promoter has Allowed to have Publication, he may again
move for time, to Invalidate the proof of the Exceptions, but not to fortify
his first proof. If any Liberty of that Nature be desired, the defendant may
Appeal; for unless in a case for the King after Publication, no new VVitnesses
can be produced.

17. When the party against whom the Promotion is, peruseth the deposition,
let him strictly observe, whether the particulars he is charged with be proved
by two Witnesses; for it is a Rule in their Law, Vox unius est Vox Nullius, and
if the Judge will admit the thing proved by one Witness a Prohibition Lies: for
the Kings Judges, will not only see, that those Courts shall keep to matters
truly belonging to their Jurisdiction; but also that in the prosecution of
them, they shall keep to the Received Rules of their own Law, in those main
points of proof, etc.

18. It is an usual thing upon presentiments by Church-VVardens, when the party
presented calls for proof of the presentment, to tell them, That the Church
Wardens presentment is a Conviction, they being sworn Officers. But this is
contrary to the Law of England, which allows no presentment by Officers ex
Officio to be a Conviction, If Grand Juries at Assizes and Sessions do present,
this is no Conviction, but the persons must after this be Indicted, and proof
made by VVitnesses. If therefore the Ecclesiastical Court Insists on this, the
person may appeal; or (which it may be is better) he may have a prohibition
from the Kings Court at Westminster as some greater Lawyers think.

19. When the time for proof is Expired, and Publication made, and Exceptions
given in and proved, and Publication of those proofs also made; either party
may move for a time to be set to Conclude, and to give the Judge Information of
the whole state and merit of the Case, and also to give Sentence in it.

20. At the day set, the Party Accused, or Promoted against, may Appear, and
show to the Judge the whole state of the Case, and plead it himself; or, if he
will, by an Advocate, if any be at hand; or for ought I know, if there be none
by Attorney, or Counselor at Common Law; after which the Judge will appoint
upon desire a day to give sentence.

22. At that day the Party must have a form of an Absolutory Sentence, ready to
tender to the Judge, if the Judge give Sentence against him he may appeal
within 15 days, by virtue of the statute, 24. Hen. 8. 12.

22, All along the Prosecution, the person against whom the Prosecution is,
shall do well after every Court, to get the Acts of the Courts in his Case,
under the Registers hand, and to keep them by him carefully. So much I thought
fit to add here for the Readers Instruction, how to behave and Conduct himself
when Troubled in those Courts, because it is a practice very little understood,
by means whereof greedy Proctors, Solicitors and other ill men frequently make
a prey of honest people therein concerned.

I shall now Recount the ways and means how to get off from the Writ De
Excommunicato Capiendo. -- We told you before, no Bail would be accepted, nor
will an Habeas Corpus avail you, (unless you have a mind only to change the
Prison) nor does a Prohibition or Homine Replegiando Lie. But the several ways
to help (according as the Case happens) are as follows;

1. If the Party Imprisoned has brought a PROHIBITION, by which the
Ecclesiastical Court has been commanded to proceed no further, and to absolve
the Person, if Excommunicated, and the Judge has disobeyed the Writ, and
signified and procured the Party to be imprisoned, the person that is
imprisoned at any time in Term, upon a Motion, shall have first an Attachment
against the Judge, and then a Writ of Supersedeas to the Sheriff, to deliver
the Prisoner to follow the Attachment, without any Submission to the Bishop at
all, or any Caution. Such Writ may be found in the Register of Original writs,
page 66. Nay if the Attachment be granted, and the Person be Imprisoned, or a
Writ out, commanding him to be taken, and the Term be done before the
Attachment can be served, the Register tell us, that he shall have the same
Writ during the Vacation out of Chancery: Nay, it is the Opinion of men
skilled in the Law, that he shall have such a Supersedeas, upon Affidavit made,
that the proceedings are contrary to a Prohibition served upon the Judge,
though no such Attachment be taken out.

2. If the Party imprisoned, or against whom the Writ is to take him, though he
be not taken, has appealed according to the Statute, 24 Hen. 8. 12. If he
brings into the Court of Chancery an Authentic copy of his Appeal, he shall
have a Writ of Supersedeas to stop the Sheriff from apprehending him, or to
deliver him if he be apprehended, only this must be within a Year after his
Appeal, that it may appear to the Court, he has not deserted his Appeal; you
may find forms of such a Supersedeas also in the Register of Original Writs;
both these are founded upon excellent Reason. The Law of England will not
suffer Ecclesiastical Judges, either to invade their Right, or to exalt
themselves against their Authority, nor yet suffer Inferior Ecclesiastical
Courts to invade the Right, Power, and Authority of Superior Courts in their
own Order.

3, If a Person be sued in the Ecclesiastical Courts for a matter not within
their Jurisdiction, and they have caught him upon contempt, in not appearing or
not obeying their Sentence: Upon a suggestion to the Kings Courts, if it appear
to them, that the Original matter was not cognoscible in the Ecclesiastical
Courts, they will supersed the Proceedings, and order the imprisoned Person to
be discharged.

4. If the imprisoned Person, or he against whom the Writ is out, though he be
not taken, bring a Copy of the Bishops Significavit into the Courts at
Westminster, and make it appear to the Judges there, that the cause of
Excommunication is not therein expressed, together with the day when it was
pronounced, if he be not said to be excommunicated Majori Excommunicatione; if
it be not signed by the Bishop, or said to be done Authoritate nostra
ordinaria: if the Party Excommunioated be not expressed by name, the Court will
deliver the person. Dr. Cozens mentions three of these cases, and the Reader
also may find them in the Register of Writs. The first he says he cannot find
in the Register, viz. That the Articles or matter of the Libel must be
expressed, nor indeed do I find it there, but it is in several Reports. The
reasons are, 1. Because the Law will not suffer men to be imprisoned for every
light offense, (this Dr. Cozens gives. 2. Because the Kings Courts can recieve
Significavits from none but the person to whom (if need be) they may write to
discharge the Prisoner: Nor will the Court suffer a person to be
Excommunicated, and lie in Prison for a Crime which the Ecclesiastical Court
has no judgment in; nor yet unless it appears to the Court, he has stood
Forty days excommunicated. Again heretofore whole Cities and Communities have
been excommunicated, therefore the person must be expressed by name, or he
shall not lie there.

5. Let him procure the Copy of the Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo and observe,
first, if it be issued in Term-time. 2. If there were full twenty days betwixt
the Test and Return. 3. If it be made Returnable the next Term. 4. If there be
due Additions in it. 5. If before it was delivered to the Sheriff, it were
Entered upon Record in the King's Bench, and made Returnable into that Court.
All these things are Required by the statute 5 Eiz: 23; If any of these Errors
be found, he shall upon motion in the Kings Bench be discharged, and the Writ
will be declared Illegal.

Lastly, If he can be delivered by none of these ways, he may at any Sealing in
the Chancery whether it be in Term, or out of Term, upon a petition to, or
motion before the L. Chancellor have the Writ, de Cautione Admittenda, granted
him (in case he has before offered the Bishop a Bond of 10. l: or 20 l. with
Sureties stare and parere mandatis Ecclesiae in forma Juris) when he has it,
let him by some Attorney, or Attorneys Clerk send it, and tender a Bond and
Sufficient Sureties with it to the Bishop, and demand the Discharge of the
Prisoner; If it be not presently done, let him certify so much, and at the
next Seal move for a second Writ to the Bishop; or (which it may be is more
advisable) let him move for a second Writ to the Sheriff, (the form of it is
in the Register.) In that the King commands the Sheriff to admonish the
Bishop to accept the Caution, and to deliver the Prisoner, and further commands
him, that in case he does it not in his presence, the Sheriff should do it
himself. If the Sheriff yields not Obedience; upon another Motion, he ought to
have a Writ to the Coroners, commanding to take security of the Sheriff to
appear at Westminster such a day, to show reason why he has contemned the
Kings Writ, and further it commands the Coroners to take the Caution of the
Prisoner, and to deliver him. The Reader may find all this in the Register
where are the Forms of all these Writs, and also in Dr. Cozens Apology, p. 1.
C. 2. who being himself a Judge in the Ecclesiastical Courts, cannot be
presumed to have told us any thing but what is Law, contrary to their own
Interest.

It is true, the Bishop upon taking such Cautionary Bonds, does ordinarily
Insist upon the persons paying the Prosecutors charges, but it is unreasonable,
1. Because he has nothing to do but to Execute the Command of the Writ, which
speaks not a word of charges. 2. Because if the charges be legally due, the
Promoter must have also a legal way to Recover them; if not, it is Extortion
for the Ecclesiastical Judge to Exact them. 3. Because it is no sufficient
Return to the King's Writ, which mentions no such thing, to say, He could not
discharge the Prisoner, because he would not pay the Promoter's Charge.

But because the Legal Charges are small, usually the Prisoner for his Liberty
will pay the charges, which are as follow.

l. s. d. For the Adversary's, Proctor every Court-day until he was
Excommunicated, and that day when the Significavit was decreed: For every day
00 01 00 For the Proctor's Procuratory Letter, Seal and Wax. 00 01 08 For
certifying the Service of the Citation 00 00 06 For the Articles, if there were
any 00 05 00 For an Act of Court, for every day 00 00 02 For the Significavit
00 05 00 For the Significavit to deliver the Prisoner 00 05 00 For the
Excommunication and the Schedule 00 02 04 For the Writ de Excommunicato
Capiendo, and the charge of Entering it upon record in the King's Bench about 01
01 00 02 01 08 If the business have proceeded no further than a Libel and
Articles, this is all the Legal Charges; but if it has proceeded further,
there may be for the Copy of the Answer 00 00 09 For every Witness Examined 1
s. and for the first 00 01 06 For a Fee to the Proctor at Inform. 00 03 00 For
a Definitive Sentence 00 11 00 For the Advocate at the Sentence 00 10 00

But note, the Charges are more or less, as the Cause went further or lesser
way before the Excommunication.

But if the Bishop will not take the Caution, and discharge you, you may have a
second Writ directed to the High Sheriff, commanding him to go to the Bishop,
and require him to take the Caution, and to deliver the Prisoner, and requiring
him to do it himself, if the Bishop still refuse. And if the Sheriff do not do
so, you may have a Writ to the same purpose directed to the Coroner to do it,
as you may see in that Authentic Law-Book, The Register of Original Writs,
fol. 66, and 67. So careful were our Forefathers for the Liberty of the
Subjects Persons. And hereby it appears that the Bishop is bound by Law to take
such Caution, that is, Fidejussory Caution, I mean by Bond and Sureties, and
thereupon to absolve the person Excommunicated, though he will not take an
Oath, stare mandatis Ecclesiae, To obey the commands of holy Church. As for
what shall be accounted such sufficient Caution, the practice is for the Party
and two Friends (for there must be Two Sureties) to be bound in a Bond of 10 l.
(seldom more, or at most 20 l.) to the Bishop, conditioned, that the Party
shall obey the Commands of the Church, but such Bond when entered into is but a
Formality; for they are never put in Suit, and indeed signify nothing.

Thus have we given our honest Contrymen some few Directions how to act in
this difficult and troublesome Affair, being a Mystery unknown to many common
practisers of the Law.

Note also, That by the Statute of Car. 1. Ca. 11. For taking away the high
Commission Court, there is the following Clause.

And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid that no Archbishop, Bishop,
nor Viccar general nor any Chancellor Official nor Commissary of any Archbishop
Bishop, or Viccar general, nor any Ordinary whatsoever nor any other Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer or Minister of Justice, etc. shall Ex officio,
or at the Instance, or promotion of any other person whatsoever urge, enforce,
tender, give, or minister unto any Church Warden Sideman, or other person
whatsoever any Corporal Oath, whereby, he or she shall or may be charged or
obliged to make any presentment of any Crime or offense, or to confess or to
accuse himself or herself of any Crime, offense, delinquency, or misdemeanor,
or any Neglect, matter or thing, whereby or by reason whereof he or she shall
or may be liable, or exposed to any censure, pain, penalty, or punishment
whatsoever, upon pain and penalty that every person who shall offend contrary
to this Statute shall forfeit and pay Treble damages to every person thereby
greived and the sum of 100 l. to him or them who shall first demand and sue for
the same.

And tho by the Statute 13 Car. 2. Ca. 12. part of this Statute is abrogated,
yet this Clause is Excepted, and confirmed by an express Proviso of the said
last Act. And there are many precedents since His Majesty's Restoration, where
Church Wardens being prosecuted in the Spir. Court for not Swearing to the
Bishops Book of Articles of Inquiry, have moved the King's Bench or common
Pleas, and obtained a prohibition to stop such proceedings, as particularly in
the Case of one Waters of Chichester in the Common Pleas.

AND now coming to speak of the Laws upon which Protestant Dissenters are
commonly prosecuted or threatened to be prosecuted, I must for the Reader's
better understanding, distinguish them; for the truth is, They are of two
different Natures and kinds.

1. Some Statutes which were wholly designed against Papists, and ought only to
be Exerted against them, which yet some now would wrest and distort, and make
them Serve as Rods wherewith to lash dissenting Protestants for not coming to
Church, Receiving the Sacrament, etc.

2. The Laws that were indeed made against Puritan Sectaries (as they call
them) or dissenting Protestants.

I shall first briefly sum up all the first Sort, how many and what they are,
and show you the Reasons why they ought not to be turned upon such dissenters:
The Statutes I mean are in number Five, viz. The 1. Elizabeth, Ca. 2. The 23.
Elizabeth Ca. 1. The 29. Elizabeth Ca. 6. The 1. Jac. Ca. 4. and 3 Jac. Ca. 4.
which we shall handle in order.

1. The Act of the 1. Eliz. Cap. 2. Was made Immediately after that Queens
coming to the Crown, when she found nothing but Papists and Protestants in
General. For the word Puritan in those days was not known, (much less our
modern Terms of Reproach, Whig, Sectary, or Fanatic) and she being a good
Protestant (having been Educated therein) and resolved to support that
Religion, casting about with her wise Council how to do it, That the
Indifferent and moderate sort of Papists might not be too much disgusted or
alienated from the Protestant Religion, but be rather invited to close
therewith, It was therefore on mature deliberation Concluded to go on gently as
to the Reformation, and not to throw off all the Ceremonies at once: And
therefore having a pattern of Protestant discipline made in King Edward the 6.
time she follows the same steps as near as could be in the beginning, and
builds on the same Foundation which her pious Brother and his wise and honest
Council had laid. Therefore the first Act she passed, was to take off the
Jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome (which had been Re-introduc'd by her Sister
Mary of unhappy Memory) and to take off all Coercive power whatsoever from
Ecclesiastical Persons, and all was annexed to the Imperial Crown of England.
This Act was Entitled, An Act to Restore to the Crown the ancient
Jurisdiction, etc. 1. Eliz. Ca. 1. And hereby all the Laws made in the time of
Queen Mary for settling the Popes Authority in England were Repealed. And also
[Section the 18th] power is given to the Queen to grant Commissions under the
Broad Seal of England to such [Bishops or Laymen, no matter which] as she
should appoint to hold Ecclesiastical Courts, and none might do it without,
upon pain of a Praemunire, and also the Oath of Supremacy is formed and hereby
Injoined.

The very next Act is That which we have now under Consideration Entitled An
Act of Uniformity, and Common Prayer, and Service in the Church, and
Administration of the Sacrament, Which amongst other things Inflicts the
penalty of 12d. for not coming to Church every Sunday and Holy Day.

Now that this Act was intended against Papists may be concluded as well
because, the whole Act runs for the beating down of the Fopperies and
superstitions of the Church of Rome, and how could it aim at any sort of
Protestants, since at that time of day there were none but Papists and
Churchmen in England.

This Twelvepence is not forfeited till Conviction, which must be by a Jury; to
which purpose, the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and of Assize, and Mayors and
Head-Officers of Corporations are Authorized To inquire, hear and determine the
same, -- But the party must be Indicted the nextSessions or Assizes after the
Offense or not at all. So that they can upon this Act Prosecute at once for no
more defaults than there are Sundaies and Holy Days between one Sessions or
Assizes and another, And when the party is so Convicted the said Courts are to
make out process for Levying the Twelve pences, which shall be Levied by the
Churchwardens for the use of the poor.

However there being 52 Sundaies and 29 Holy Days (appointed by our Liturgy to
be observed) in the year, the Constant charge by this statute for not coming to
Church would be but 4l. 1s. p. An. [And yet by the way, Note, That We have more
Holy Days or Feasts to be observed since his Majesty's Restoration than ever
the Church of England owned before. For there were anciently but 27. But upon
the Review of the Book of Common prayer, my Lords the Bishops were pleased to
add 2 New ones viz. The Conversion of St. Paul and St. Barnabas, and whereas,
in our old Common-prayer-Books, it is said The Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel, in our present Books, it is St. Michael and all Angels, Which seems
an Affront to S. Michael at once to leave out his Title of Archangel, and at
the same time bring in all other Angels (as well of the lower as Higher
Hierarchies) to share with him in a Festival, the Honor of which he had
enjoyed so long, solely and Entire to himself -- but this by the by] So that
upon the whole matter, If any body should be busy to Execute this Act upon the
Protestant dissenters from the Established Church of England, yet considering
the trouble of such a Conviction, and the difficulty of proving a Negative viz.
that a man was not at Church, for note the words are, -- shall repair to his
own Parish Church, or to some usual place where Common Prayer shall be used, So
that if he were at Mr. Read's Meeting House, I Conceive he were safe from this
Act. All this I say Considered the Labor would be more than the trouble --
therefore let us proceed.

2. The second Act of this kind, is 23 Eliz. Cap. 1. Entitled An Act to Retain
the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due Obedience. And by this, to Reconcile
any or for any to be Reconciled to the Sea of Rome, To withdraw or be
withdrawn from the Established Religion, to the Romish Religion; Is made
High Treason; And that every one saying Mass shall forfeit 200 Marks and every
one that hears it 100 Marks, And every one above 16. years old not repairing to
some Church or Chapel, but forbearing the same contrary to the said Stat. 1.
Eliz. C. 2. shall being lawfully Convicted forfeit 20 l. for every month, And
the Justices at the Quarter Sessions are Empowered to Inquire into the Offenses
against this Act, Except Treason, And if any Indicted hereupon (Except for
Treason) will submit in open Court and conform before Judgment given, he shall
be discharged.

Now that this Statute was expressly and wholly made against the Papists is
evident by the whole Scope thereof, as punishing saying of Mass, and drawing
the Queens Subjects to Popery, etc. More especially by its preamble (which
always opens and declares the Scope of a Law) whereas since the Statutes made
in the 13. year of the Reign of the Queen our Sovereign Lady, Entitled, An Act
against the bringing in, and putting in Execution of Bulls, Writings and
Instruments, and other Superstitious things from the Sea of Rome, diverse ill
affected Persons have practiced by other means than by Bulls or Instruments.
Written or Printed to withdraw Her Majesty's Subjects to obey the said usurped
Authority of Rome, and IN RESPECT OF THE SAME [pray mark] to persuade great
numbers to withdraw their due Obedience from Her Majesty's Laws established for
the due service of Almighty God -- For Reformation WHEREOF, be it Enacted, viz.
That to withdraw to the Church of Rome shall be Treason; and not coming to
Church shall forfeit 20 l. p. month -- Nothing can be more plain than that this
Levelled wholly against the Papists, and cannot at all affect dissenting
Protestants.

3. The Statute of 29. Eliz. Cap. 6. Is only a Reinforcement of the last Act,
and therefore must be only intended of the same Persons, viz. Popish Recusants
[For as yet there were no other] whose Penalties this Statute Increases for not
coming to Church: For where is by the former Statute of 23d it was to be only
20 l. p. month and bound to the good Behavior after Conviction; This gives to
the Queen and Her Heirs, a Right to 20 l. p. month for every month after such
Conviction till they came to Church: And if default be made of payment of the
20 l. a month, then to seize all their Goods, and 2 parts of their Real Estate
(...) But this is still concerning Popish Recusants, for it respects the same
that were Offenders against the Statute of the 23. And they were only Papists:
Therefore it is absurd and unjust to turn the Edge on it upon Protestants.

4. We come now to the Statute of 1. Jac. Ca. 4. which confirms all the former
Statutes made against Popish Recusants in the Queens time, But provides for
their being discharged, tho Convicted, upon their coming to Church.

And that it means and intends none but Jesuits and Popish Priests and other
Popish Recusants appears manifestly, not only in the Title but in the first
Section of the Act it self, and so throughout: The Title, is, An Act for the
due Execution of the Statutes against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants,
[the 2 former words, including the Romish Clergy, the latter the Laiety] etc.
and begins thus -- For the better and more due Execution of the Statutes
heretofore made [Against whom?] as well against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and
other SUCHLIKE Priests [That is, other Popish Priests tho not bred up in the
Serminaries] as also against all manner of Recusants [That is Papists tho not
in Orders] Be it Enacted, etc. That all and every the Statutes heretofore made
against Jesuits, seminary Priests and other Priests, Deacons, and Religions
and Ecclesiastical Persons whatsoever made, ordained or professed, or to be
made by any Authority or Jurisdiction derived, Challenged, or pretended from
the Sea of Rome, together with all those made against any manner of Recusants
[That is Papists still, but Lay men not in Orders nor professed of any Order of
Monks or Friars as those before mentioned were] shall be put in due and Exact
Execution. -- Nothing can be more absurd than to rack and force this Law so far
besides its Scope, as to make use of it against Protestants agreeing with the
Church of England in all the Doctrines and only differing in a few Indifferent
Ceremonies, When it most manifestly appears intended only against Jesuits,
Romish Priests, and other Papists.

5. And now was discovered the Hellish Powder Plot of the Papists which
occasioned the making of the Statute 3 Jac. Ca. 4. Entitled, An Act for
discovering and Repressing Popish Recusants. So that both the occasion and the
very Title, shows evidently against whom this Act is designed, which also
appears further in the preamble; the whole purport of this Act all along being
only to Reinforce the rest of the Acts against Popish Recusants, and for that
as thereby appears, some of them did come to Church and heard divine Service,
to save the Penalties in the former Acts, and yet continued Papists still in
their hearts, Therefore by this Act they were all to take the Sacrament once a
year, And if they refused they should forfeit 20 l. the 1st year, for the 2d
year 40 l. and for every year afterward 60l. until he or she have received
the said Sacrament.

And by the 4th Section, the Church Wardens and Constables are to present the
monthly absence of all POPISH Recusants, -- but they are not bound by this Act
to present any but Papists. For from this Act we may observe, that none can be
Prosecuted upon this Act or any of the other which it refers to (which are all
those here before rehearsed) unless they be POPISH Recusants, for so are the
express words of the Act. And without doubt should any busy Officer whatsoever
Present ot prosecute any person thereupon other than a Popish Recusant, the
person so presented may Join Issue, that he is no such person as these Acts
intend, being not a Papist.

So that upon the whole matter, we may conclude, It is an abuse, and utterly
Illegal, to Prosecute Protestants on such Laws as were made solely and wholly
against Papists, as will further appear in our next Observation; and we have
heard some Judges have declared so much.

However I shall here add the Judgment of the House of Commons in the Case, for
tho I know and own a vote of either or both Houses cannot Repeal a Law, nor
alter its sense, yet certainly the House consisting of so many wise discreet
persons, and a great number of them Excellently Learned in the Laws, they are
as like to Interpret a doubtful Law, and hit upon the true Interpretation how
far and to what it does extend, as two or three little swaggering Justices, or
any single Judge: At least were I an Officer, I should rather incline to credit
their opinion, and not run an hazard by employing the Toils made for
restraining the Wolves and the Foxes, to entangle and destroy the Innocent
sheep, merely because they do not all exactly tread in the very same steps and
bite punctually all of one Sort of Grass.

Sabbati Sexto die Nov. 1680.
Resolved Nemine contradicente, That it is the opinion of this House, That the
Acts of Parliament made in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James against
Popish Recusants, ought not to be extended against Protestant dissenters.

And now having discharged these unlawful weapons, let us see what Legal Arms
there are or have been really formed against the Sectaries. And the first was
the very sword of Goliath, there was none like it.

1. I mean the Act of 35 Eliz. Ca. 1. (which some would make us believe has had
as many Lives as a Cat) entitled An Act to Retain the Queen's Majesty's
Subjects in their due Obedience. This was the first Law that was made since the
Reformation, against those we commonly called Sectaries, Conventiclers, or
Protestant Dissenters; and this Act indeed, beyond all dispute, was made
against them, and them only; for the Popish Recusants are expressly Excepted out
of it, as appears by the Act: And that the Reader may better judge of the true
difference between this Act, and those others before recited, made against
Popish Recusants, by the style and expressions. I shall here insert the first
Paragraph, and give you the substance of the rest of it.

For the preventing and avoiding of such great Inconveniences and Perils as
might happen and grow by the wicked and dangerous practices of seditious
Sectaries, and disloyal Persons; Be it Enacted by the Queen's most Excellent
Majesty, and by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled; and by the Authority of the same, That if any
person or persons, above the Age of sixteen years, which shall obstinately
Refuse to Repair to some Church, Chapel, or usual place of Common Prayer, to
hear Divine Service, Established by Her Majesty's Laws and Statutes in that
behalf made, and shall forbear to do the same by the space of one month next
after, without any lawful cause, shall at any time after forty days next,
after the End of this Session of Parliament, by Printing, Writing, or Express
Words or Speeches, advisedly, or purposely practice, or go about to make or
persuade any of Her Majesty's Subjects, or any other within her Highness's
Realms or Dominions, to deny, withstand, and impugn Her Majesty's Power and
Authority, in cases Ecclesiastical, United and Annexed to the Imperial Crown of
this Realm; or to that end or purpose shall advisedly or maliciously move, or
persuade any other person whatsoever, to forbear, or abstain from coming to
Church, to hear Divine Service, or to Receive the Communion, according to Her
Majesty's Laws and Statutes aforesaid, or to come to, or be present at any
unlawful Assemblies, Conventicles or Meetings, under color or pretense of any
Exercise of Religion, contrary to Her Majesty's Laws and Statutes; or if any
person or persons which shall obstinately Refuse to Repair to some Church, by
the space of one month, to hear Divine Service, as is aforesaid, shall after
the said forty days, either of him or themselves, or by the Motion,
Persuasion, Inticement or Allurement of any other, willingly Join in, or be
present at any such Assemblies, Conventicles, or Meeting under color or
pretense of any such Exercise of Religion, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm as is aforesaid; That then every such person so offending, as
aforesaid, and being thereof lawfully convicted, shall be Committed to Prison,
and there to Remain, without Bail or Mainprise, until they shall Conform, and
yield themselves to come to some Church, Chapel, or usual place of
Common Prayer, and hear Divine Service, etc.

Then the Act goes on, and provides, That if the person do not Conform within
three months after Conviction, he should Abjure, that is, be Banished, and swear
never to come back without leave; And if he will not swear so, then the same to
be Felony, without Benefit of Clergy.

From which Act these 3 things are observable.

1. That the same was wholly intended against the Puritanes or Sectaries, for
the Papists are expressly exempted by a particular clause, Sect. 12. in these
words, 'Provided that No Popish Recusant, or Feme Covert shall be compelled or
bound to abjure by virtue of this Act.

2. That Q. Eliz. and her wise Parliament did not intend or take such
Protestant Recusants to be within the meaning of, or punishable by the other
before mentioned Statutes against popish Recusants: For if they had so
understood, they might have punished them sufficiently on those old Laws
without giving themselves the trouble of making this new Law against them
Frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora. God and the Law do
nothing in vain.

3. If it be objected, That all those Laws as well as this ought to be
construed to one and the same end and scope, and that all the before mentioned
Acts of Qu. Elizabeth, and K. James are equally to be applied to all Dissenters
from the Established Church of England: I answer that cannot be; for since in
this Act no Papists are concerned, being particularly exempted as aforesaid:
Then it necessary follows, if the Popish Recusants shall not be punished by
this Act made against Sectaries and seditious Conventiclers, that then the
Sectaries and Conventiclers, Protestant Dissenters, that is, Protestant
Recusants (for that it is they aim at, to color the laying the other Acts upon
them) shall not be prosecuted upon those Laws made only against Popish
Recusants; for if they should, then you leave the Protestant Recusants in a far
worse condition than the Papists, the one being provided and not the other.

But still note, that all that I have said about this Act of the 35. of Eliz.
comparing it with the others made against Popish Recusants, is only to show the
nature of the one and the other: For the truth is, this Act of the 35th of
Eliz. is not now in force, -- As appears thus:

1. The very words thereof show it to have been originally but a temporary Act,
for the last words of it are these, -- This Act to continue no longer than to
the end of the next Session of Parliament.

2. By several Acts it was continued till the 1st year of K. James, and then it
was enacted, that the same should be continued, and remain in Force until the
end of the first Session of the next Parliament.

3. The second and next Session of Parliament began and holden by Prorogation
the 5th of Nov. in the 3d year of K. James, and ended the 27th of May next, and
was then prorogued to the 18th, of Nov. 1606. In which Session there was no
continuance of this Statute of the 35th of Eliz. so that there it expired,
absolutely ceased, and was of no more force than if it had never been, and so
continued for many years buried in Oblivion.

4. In a Parliament held the 21. of K. James, ca. 28. It is (amongst other
things) enacted, 'That this Statute of the 35. of El^z. shall be adjudged ever
since the Session in the Seventh Year of His Majesty's Reign of England, to
have been of such force and effect, as the same were the last day of that
Session, and from thenceforth to the end of the first Session of the next
Parliament. -- But the truth is, that the said Statute of the 35th of Eliz. was
in no force, nor of any effect at the last day of the Session in the 7th year
of K. James, being expired and gone long before, viz in the 3. year of that
King as aforesaid. And being so down then this Stat. of the 21. Jacobi can no
way set it up again; for this only sets up what was in force in that Session of
the 7th of K. James, and no otherwise.

5. So likewise in the 3. Caroli primi, cap. 4. this Act (amongst others) is
mentioned; but how? -- That it shall continue to the end of the first Session
of the next Parliament, in such force and effect as it was the first year of
Charles the first, -- when indeed it was then in no force at all.

6. In the 16th Caroli secundi, cap. 4. an Act was made, Entitled, An Act to
prevent and suppress seditious Conventicles. Which begins thus: Whereas an Act
made in the 35th year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lady Queen Eliz.
Entitled, An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due
Obedience, has not been put in Execution, by reason of some doubt of late
made, whether the said Act be still in force, although it be very clear and
evident: And it is hereby declared, that the said Act is still in force, and
ought to be put in Execution: For providing therefore of further and more
speedy Remedies, etc. Be it enacted, etc. And the last clause of this Statute
of the 16 Car. 2di. runs thus: Provided that this Act continue in force for 3
years after the end of this present Session of Parliament, and from thence to
the end of the next Session of Parliament, after the said 3 years, and no
longer.

Now how far these words -- It is hereby declared that it is in force, and
ought to be put in execution; without saying, it is hereby enacted, that it
shall be in force, might operate to give some Life and strength to the
aforesaid expired Statute of the 35th of Eliz. I shall not determine: But
suppose it were thereby set on foot again, this last Statute is but one entire
Statute, and that part which declares or inables the Statute of the 35th of
Eliz. to be in force, is joined and annexed to the rest, and is altogether but
one Law, and has its period at the time before prefixed, and then that
declarative part must die with the rest.

Now that Session wherein this Statute of 16 Car. 2. was made, ended the 16th
and 17th of Car. 2. Then the three Years, for which it was to continue
commenced, and ended the 20th Car. 2d. but after the three years it was to
continue till the next Session of Parliament, which next Session, after the
three years, began 10. October, 1667. and by Adjournments was continued to the
24th of October, 1670, being the 22d of Car. 2d. and then was the end of that,
and with it this Conventicle Act expired, so that now there is no pretense of
the 35th of Elizabeth's being in force; for the declarative part in this
Conventicle Act cannot enforce or give Life to any thing longer than it lives
itself: For if the Declaring part of this Act, after it self is extinguished,
can be read, urged or construed as a Law to enforce and enliven another
Statute, which has no being of a Law in it self, then it would necessarily
follow, that an expired Law is as Authentic as a Law in being, which is absurd.

From what has been said, it appears, That as Protestant Dissenters ought not
to be prosecuted on the Laws made against Popish Recusants; so likewise it is
very evident, That both the Statute of the 35th of Eliz. and also that of the
16th of Car. secundi, are Expired, and of no force. And indeed it is happy for
the Nation that they are so; for had these two Acts been still in force, being
of a cruel sanguinary nature, much mischief might have accrewed to the people
of this Kingdom.

So that there are now no Laws in being to punish the Conventiclers, and the
Nonconformist Ministers, who did not Conform to the Act of Uniformity made in
this King's Reign; but the Act commonly called the 5 Mile or Oxford Act: And
the Conventicle Act made the 22th of this King.

These we shall severally consider.

Anno 17. Caroli Secundi, Ca. 2. An Act for Restraining Nonconformists from
Inhabiting in Corporations.
Whereas diverse Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Lecturers, and other persons in holy
Orders have not declared their unfeigned Assent and Consent to the use of all
things contained and prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer. and
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,
according to the use of the Church of England, or have not subscribed the
Declaration or Acknowledgment contained in a certain Act of Parliament made in
the 14 Year of His Majesty's Reign, and Entitled, An Act for the Uniformity of
public Prayers, and Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and
Ceremonies, and for the establishing the Form of making, ordaining, and
consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons in the Church of England,
according to the said Act, or any other subsequent Act, And whereas they or
some of them, and diverse other person and persons not ordained according to
the Form of the Church of England, and as have since the Act of Oblivion taked
upon them to preach in unlawful Assemblies, Conventicles, or Meetings, under
color or pretense of Exercise of Religion, contrary to the Laws and Statutes
of this Kingdom, have settled themselves in diverse Corporations in England
sometimes three or more of them in a place, thereby taking an opportunity to
distill the poisonous Principles of Schism and Rebellion into the hearts of His
Majesty's Subjects, to the great danger of the Church and Kingdom.

II. Be it therefore enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, by and with
the Advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in
this present Parliament assembled; and by the Authority of the same, That the
said Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Lecturers, and other persons in Holy Orders, or
pretended Holy Orders, or pretending to Holy Orders, and all Stipendiaries, or
other persons who have been possessed of any Ecclesiastical or Spiritual
Promotion, and every of them, who have not declared their unfeigned Assent and
Consent as aforesaid, and subscribed the Declaration aforesaid, and shall not
take and subcribe the Oath following.

I A. B. do swear, That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to take
Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that Traitorous position of taking
Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against those that are
commissioned by him, in pursuance of such Commissions; and that I will not at
any time endeavor any Alteration of Government either in Church or State.

III. And all such person, and persons as shall take upon them to preach in any
unlawful Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting, under color or pretense of any
exercise of Religion, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, (2.)
shall not at any time from and after the 24th day of March, which shall be in
this present year of our Lord God One thousand six hundred sixty and five,
unless only in passing upon the Road, come or be within five Miles of any City,
or Town Corporate, or Borough, that sends Burgesses to the Parliament, within
His Majesty's Kingdom of England, Principality of Wales, or of the Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, (3) or within five Miles of any parish Town or place,
wherein he or they have since the Act of Oblivion been Parson, Vicar, Curate,
Stipendiary, or Lecturer, or taken upon them to preach in any unlawful
Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting, under color or pretense of any exercise of
Religion, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, (4) Before he or
they have taken and subscribed the Oath aforesaid, before the Justices of the
Peace at their Quarter Sessions, to be holden for County, Riding, or Division
next unto the said Corporation, City, or Borough, Parish, place or Town, in
open Court; (which said Oath the said Justices are hereby empowered there to
administer,) (5) Upon forfeiture for every such Offense the sum of Forty pounds
of lawful English Money; the one third part thereof to His Majesty and His
Successors, the other third part to the use of the poor of the Parish where the
Offense shall be committed, and the other third part thereof to such person or
persons as shall or will sue for the same by Action of Debt, Plaint, Bill, or
Information in any Court of Record at Westminster, or before any Justices of
Assize, Oyer and Terminer, or Jail-deliver, or before any Justices of the
Counties Palatine of Chester, Lancaster, or Durham, or the Justices of the
great Sessions in Wales, or before any Justices of Peace in their Quarter
Sessions, wherein no Essoin, Protection, or wager of Law shall be allowed.

IV. Provided always, and be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That it shall not be lawful for any person or persons restrained from coming to
any City, Town Corporate, Borough, Parish, Town, or place, as aforesaid, or
for any other Person or Persons as shall not first take and subscribe the
aforesaid Oath, and as shall not frequent Divine Service established by the
Laws of this Kingdom, and carry him or her self reverently, decently, and
orderly there, to teach any public or private School, or take any Boarders or
Tablers, that are taught or instructed by him or her self, or any other, upon
pain for every such Offense to forfeit the sum of Forty pounds, to be recovered
and distributed as aforesaid.

V. Provided also, and be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that
it shall be lawful for any two Justices of the Peace of the respective County,
upon Oath to them of any Offense against this Act, which Oath they are hereby
empowered to administer, to commit the Offender for six Months without Bail or
Mainprise, unless upon or before such Commitment, he shall before the said
Justices of the Peace, swear and subscribe the aforesaid Oath and Declaration.

VI. Provided always, that if any person intended to be restrained by virtue of
this Act, shall without fraud or Covin be served with any Writ, Sub-poena,
Warranr, or other Process, whereby his personal appearance is required, his
Obedience to such Writ, Sub-poena, or Process shall not be construed an Offense
against this Act.

Note, That as to the Penalty of Forty Pound, the party must be tried at the
Assizes or Sessions before it is forfeited. But any two Justices of Peace may
commit for six Months, unless before them he will swear and subscribe the Oath in
this Declaration specified, the Assent and Consent, and the Declaration therein
referred unto, which if he do he puts himself out of their power.

Now the Assent and Consent he has spoke of is appointed by the Stat. 13, and
14. of Car. 2di, chap. 4. as follows.

I A. B. do here declare my unfeigned Assent and Consent to all and every thing
contained and prescribed, in and by the Book entitled, the Book of common
Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church, according to the use of the Church of England, together with the
Psalter or Psalms of David, pointed as they are to be sung or said in Churches;
and the form and manner of making, ordaining, and consecrating of Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons.

The Declaration is by the Act last mentioned, as follows.

I A. B. do declare, that it is not lawful, upon any pretense whatsoever, to
take Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that Traitorous position of
taking Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against those that are
commissioned by him; and that I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of
England, as it is now by Law established: And I do declare, That I do hold
there lies no Obligation upon me, nor any other person, from the Oath commonly
called the solemn League and Covenant to endeavor any change or alteration of
Government, either in Church or State; and that the same was in it self an
unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm against the known
Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom.

But note, that this last branch of this Declaration, by a subsequent clause of
the same Act, was to continue but till the 25th day of March, 1682. so that now
the same is not to be required. -- And thus much for this Five-Mile Act.

We now proceed to the other Statute against Protestant Dissenters, viz.

Anno Vicessimo Secundo Caroli Secundi Regis,
Cap. 1. An Act to prevent and suppress Seditions Conventicles.
For providing further and more speedy Remedies against the growing and
dangerous practices of Seditious Sectaries, and other disloyal persons, who
under pretense of Tender Consciences, have or may at their Meetings contrive
Insurrections (as late Experience has shown;) (2.) Be it enacted by the King's
most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and
by Authority of the same, That if any person of the Age of sixteen years, or
upwards, being a Subject of this Realm, at any time after the tenth day of May
next, shall be present at any Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting, under color or
pretense of any Exercise of Religion, in other manner than according to the
Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, in any place within the Kingdom
of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, at which
Conventicle, Meeting or Assembly, there shall be five persons or more Assembled
together over and besides those of the same household; if it be in a house where
there is a Family inhabiting; or if it be in a house, field, or place where
there is no Family inhabiting; then where any five persons or more, are so
Assembled as aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful to and for any one or more
Justices of the Peace of the County, Limit, Division, Corporation or Liberty
wherein the Offense aforesaid shall be Committed; or for the chief Magistrate
of the place where the Offense aforesaid shall be committed: and he and they
are hereby Required and Enjoined upon Proof to him or them Respectively made of
such Offense, either by Confession of the Party, or Oath of two Witnesses, (3.)
Which Oath the said Justice and Justices of the Peace, and Chief Magistrate
respectively, are hereby Required and Empowered to Administer; or by Notorious
Evidence and Circumstance of the fact, to make a Record of every such Offense
under his or their Hands and Seals respectively; which Record so made as
aforesaid, shall to all intents and purposes be in Law taken and adjudged to be
a full and perfect Conviction of every such Offender for such offense; and
thereupon the said Justice, Justices and Chief Magistrate respectively shall
Impose on every such Offender so convict as aforesaid, a Fine of five shillings
for such first Offense; which Record and Conviction shall be certified by the
said Justice, Justices or Chief Magistrate, at the next Quarter Sessions of the
Peace, for the County or place where the Offense was committed.

2. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if such Offender
so convicted as aforesaid, shall at any time again commit the like Offense or
Offenses, contrary to this Act, and be thereof in manner aforesaid convicted,
then such Offender so convict of such like Offense or Offenses, shall for every
such Offense incur the penalty of ten shillings; (2.) Which Fine and Fines for
the first and every other Offense, shall be Levied by Distress and Sale of the
Offenders Goods and Chattels; or in case of the poverty of such Offender, upon
the Goods and Chattels of any other person or persons who shall be then
convicted in manner aforesaid of the like Offense at the same Conventicle, at
the discretion of the said Justice, Justices, or Chief Magistrate respectively,
so as the Sum to be Levied on any one person in case of the poverty of other
Offenders, amount not in the whole to above the Sum of ten pounds, upon
occasion of any one Meeting as aforesaid: (3.) And every Constable,
Headborough, Tythingman, Churchwardens, and Overseers of the Poor
respectively, are hereby Authorized and Required to Levy the same accordingly,
having first received a Warrant under the Hands and Seals of the said Justice,
Justices, or Chief Magistrate respectively so to do; (4) The said Moneys so to
be Levied, to be forthwith delivered to the same Justice, Justices, or Chief
Magistrate, and by him or them to be distributed, the one third part thereof to
the use of the King's Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, to be paid to the High
Sheriff of the County for the time being in manner following; that is to say,
the Justice or Justices of Peace shall pay the same into the Court of the
respective Quarter Sessions, which said Court shall deliver the same to the
Sheriff, and make a Memorial on Record of the payment and delivery thereof,
which said Memorial shall be a sufficient and final discharge to the said
Justice and Justices, and a charge to the Sheriff, which said discharge and
charge shall be certified into the Exchequer together, and not one without the
other: And no Justice shall or may be questioned, or accountable for the same
in the Exchequer or elsewhere, than in Quarter Sessions; another third part
thereof to and for the use of the Poor of the Parish, where such Offense shall
be committed; and the other third part thereof to the Informer and Informers,
and to such Person and persons as the said Justice, Justices, or chief
Magistrate respectively, shall appoint, having regard to their diligence and
Industry in the discovery, dispersing and punishing of the said Conventicles.

3. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person who
shall take upon him to preach or teach in any such Meeting, Assembly, or
Conventicle, and shall thereof be convicted as aforesaid, shall forfeit for
every such first Offense the sum of Twenty pound, to be Levied in manner
aforesaid, upon his Goods and Chattles; (2.) And if the said Preacher or
Teacher so convicted be a stranger, and his Name and Habitation not known, and
is fled and cannot be found, or in the Judgment of the Justice, Justices, or
chief Magistrate, before whom he shall be convicted, shall be thought unable to
pay the same, the said Justice, Justices, or chief Magistrate respectively, are
hereby empowered and required to levy the same by Warrant as aforesaid upon the
Goods and Chattels of any such persons who shall be present at the same
Conventicle, any thing in this or any other Act. Law, or Statute to the
contrary notwithstanding; and the Money so levied to be disposed of in manner
aforesaid. (3.) And if such Offender so convicted as aforesaid, shall at any
time again commit the like Offense or Offenses contrary to this Act, and be
thereof convicted in manner aforesaid, then such Offender so convicted of such
like Offense or Offenses, shall for every such Offense incur the penalty of
Forty pounds, to be levied and disposed as aforesaid.

4. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person
that shall wittingly and willingly suffer any such Conventicle Meeting, or
unlawful Assembly aforesaid, to be held in his or her House, Out-house, Barn,
Yard, or Backside, and be convicted thereof in manner aforesaid, shall forfeit
the sum of 20 l. to be levied in manner aforesaid, upon his or her Goods and
Chattels; or in case of his or her poverty or inability as aforesaid, upon the
Goods and Chattels of such persons who shall be convicted in manner abovesaid,
of being present at the same Conventicle; and the Money so levied to be
disposed of in manner aforesaid.

5. Provided always, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no
person shall by any clause of this Act be liable to pay above Ten Pounds for
any one Meeting, in regard of the poverty of any other person or persons.

Provided also, and be it further enacted, That in all cases of this Act where
the penalty or sum charged upon any Offender, exceeds the sum of Ten shillings,
and such offender, shall find himself aggrieved, it shall and may be lawful for
him within one Week after the said penalty or Money charged shall be paid or
levied, to appeal in writing from the person or persons convicting, to the
judgment of the Justices of the Peace in the next Quarter Sessions, (2.) To
whom the Justice or Justices of Peace, chief Magistrate or Alderman, that first
convicted such offender, shall return the Money levied upon the Appellant, and
shall certify under his and their Hands and Seals, the Evidence upon which the
conviction past, with the whole Record thereof, and the said Appeal: (3.)
Whereupon such Offender may plead and make defense, and have his Trial by a
Jury thereupon: (4.) And in case such Appellant shall not prosecute with
effect, or if that upon such Trial he shall not be acquitted, or Judgment pass
not for him upon his said Appeal, the said Justices at the Sessions shall give
treble costs against such Offender for his unjust Appeal (5.) and no other
Court whatsoever shall intermeddle with any cause or causes of Appeal upon this
Act, but they shall be finally determined in the Quarter Sessions only.

7. Provided always, and be it further Enacted, that upon the delivery of such
Appeal as aforesaid, the person or persons appellant, shall enter before the
person or persons Convicting into a Recognizance, to Prosecute the said Appeal
with Effect. (2.) Which said Recognizance the Person or Persons Convicting is
hereby Empowered to take, and Required to Certify the same to the next quarter
Sessions. (3.) And in Case no such Recognizance be entered into, the said Appeal
to be null and Void.

8. Provided always that every such Appeal shall be left with the Person or
Persons so Convicting as aforesaid, at the time of the making thereof.

9. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Justice,
Justices of the Peace and Chief Magistrate respectively, or the respective
Constables, Headboroughs and Tything-men by Warrant from the said Justice,
Justices, or Chief Magistrate respectively, shall and may with what Aid, Force,
and Assistance they shall think fit, for the better Execution of this Act,
after Refusal or Denial to enter, break open and enter into any House or other
place, where they shall be Informed of any such Conventicle as aforesaid, is or
shall be held, as well within Liberties as without; (2.) And take into their
Custody the Persons there unlawfully Assembled, to the Intent they may be
proceeded against according to this Act: (3.) And that the Lieutenants or
Deputy Lieutenants, or any Commissionated Officer of the Militia, or other of
his Majesty's forces, with such Troops or Companies of Horse and Foot; and also
the Sheriffs and other Magistrates and Ministers of Justice, or any of them,
jointly or severally within any of the Counties or Places within this Kingdom
of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, with such other
Assistance as they shall think meet, or can get in Readiness with the soonest,
on Certificate made to them respectively under the Hand and Seal of any one
Justice of the Peace or Chief Magistrate, of his particular Information or
Knowledge of such unlawful Meeting or Conventicle held, or to be held in their
respective Counties or Places, and that he with such Assistance as he can get
together, is not able to suppress and dissolve the same, shall and may, and are
hereby required and enjoined to Repair unto the place where they are so held or
to be held; and by the best means they can, Dissolve, Dissipate, or prevent all
such unlawful Meetings, and take into their Custody, such and so many of the
said Persons so unlawfully Assembled as they shall think fit, to the Intent
they may be Proceeded against according to this Act.

10. Provided always that no Dwelling House of any Peer of this Realm where he
or his Wife shall then be Resident, shall be searched by virtue of this Act,
but by immediate Warrant from his Majesty under his Sign Manual, or in the
Presence of the Lieutenant, or one Deputy Lieutenant, or two Justices of the
Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum of the same County or Riding.

11. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any
Constable, Headborough, Tythingman, Churchwarden or Overseer of the Poor, who
Shall know or be credibly Informed of any such Meetings or Conventicles held
within his Precincts, Parishes or Limits, and shall not give Information
thereof to some Justice of the Peace, or the chief Magistrate, and endeavor
the Conviction of the Parties according to his Duty, but such Constable,
Headborough, Tything-man, Churchwarden, Overseers of the Poor, or any person
lawfully called in Aid of the Constable, Headborough or Tything-man, shall
wilfully and wittingly omit the performance of his Duty, in the Execution of
this Act, and Be thereof Convicted in manner aforesaid, he shall forfeit for
every such Offense the Sum of five Pound to be Levied upon his Goods and
Chattels, and disposed in manner aforesaid. (2.) And that if any Justice of the
Peace, or Chief Magistrate shall wilfully and wittingly omit the Performance of
his Duty in the Execution of this Act, he shall forfeit the Sum of one
hundred Pounds, the one Moiety to the use of the Informer, to be Recovered by
Action, Suit, Bill or Plaint, in any of his Majesty's Courts at Westminster,
wherein no Essoign, Protection or Wager of Law shall lie.

12. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Person
be at any time Sued for putting in Execution any of the Powers contained in
this Act, otherwise than upon Appeal allowed by this Act, such Person shall and
may Plead the General Issue, and give the special matter in Evidence; (2.) And
if the Plaintiff be Nonsuit, or a Verdict pass for the Defendant, every such
Defendant shall have his full Treble Costs.

13. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that this Act, and
all clauses therein contained, shall be Construed most largely and beneficially
for the suppressing of Conventicles, and for the Justification and
Encouragement of all Persons to be Employed in the Execution thereof. (2.) And
that no Record, Warrant or Mittimus to be made by Virtue of this Act, or any
Proceedings thereupon shall be Reversed, Avoided, or any way Impeached by
reason of any Default in form. (3.) And in Case any Person offending against
this Act, shall be an Inhabitant in any other County or Corporation, or fly
into any other County or Corporation after the Offense Committed, the Justice
of Peace or Chief Magistrate before whom he shall be Convicted as aforesaid,
shall certify the same under his hand and Seal, to any Justice of Peace, or
chief Magistrate of such other County or Corporation wherein the said person or
persons are Inhabitants, or are Fled into. (4.) Which said Justice or chief
Magistrate respectively, is hereby Authorized and required to Levy the Penalty
or Penalties in this Act mentioned upon the Goods and Chattels of such person
or Persons, as fully as the said other Justice of Peace might have done, in
case he or they had been Inhabitants in the place where the Offense was
Committed.

14. Provided also that no Person shall be Punished for any Offense against
this Act, unless such Offender be Prosecuted for the same within three Months
after the Offense Committed. (2.) And that no Person who shall be Punished for
any Offense by Virtue of this Act, shall be Punished for the same Offense by
Virtue of any other Act, or Law whatsoever.

15. Provided and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every
Alderman of London for the time being, within the City of London and the
Liberties thereof, shall have (and they and every of them are hereby Empowered
and required to Execute) the same power and Authority within London and the
Liberties thereof, for the Examining, Convicting and Punishing of all Offenses
within this Act committed within London, and the Liberties thereof, which any
Justice of Peace has by this Act in any County of England, and shall be
subject to the same Penalties and Punishments, for not doing that which by this
Act is directed to be done by any Justice of Peace in any County of England.

16. Provided and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if the Person
Offending and Convicted as aforesaid, be a Feme-covert, cohabiting with her
Husband, the Penalties of five Shillings and ten Shillings, so as aforesaid
Incurred, shall be Levied by Warrant as aforesaid, upon the Goods and Chattels
of the Husband of each Feme-covert.

17. Provided also that no Peer of this Realm shall be Attached or Imprisoned
by Virtue or Force of this Act, any thing, matter or clause therein to the
contrary notwithstanding.

18. Provided also, that neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained,
shall extend to Invalidate or avoid his Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical
Affairs; (2.) But that his Majesty and his Heirs and Successors, from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, Exercise and Enjoy all Powers and Authority
in Ecclesiastical Affairs, as fully and as amply as himself or any of his
Predecessors have, or might have done the same, any thing in this Act
notwithstanding.

Notes upon the foregoing Act.
1. By the Title, Preamble and Scope of the Act it appears that the same is
intended for suppressing Seditious Conventicles under Pretense of Religious
Worship; that is, where the Conventiclers meet together under a pretense of
Worship, not according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England,
but indeed to carry on ill designs against the State.

2. If any such Conventicle be, the Justices knowing it by the Oaths of two
Witnesses, may make a Record thereof, and then the Persons so offending, shall
forfeit so as in the Act you have heard.

3. It must appear upon Oath before the Justices, or Confession of the Parties,
1. That it was a Seditious Conventicle, met together to disturb the Peace,
under pretense of Religion. 2. That the Worship there practiced, was not
according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England; so that the
Informers must be present the whole time of the Meeting: for if they only hear
a man Praying or Preaching, that is not contrary to the Practice of the Church
of England, and how does it appear that they did not read the Liturgy? 3. It
must be proved that there were Assembled five Persons or more, besides the
Inhabitants in the House.

4. If a party be Fined above ten Shillings, if he pay down the Money, or it be
levied within one Week after such Payment or Levy, he may Appeal from the
Justice Convicting, to the next Quarter Sessions, where he shall have a Trial
by Jury thereupon, and undoubtedly if it do not appear to the said Jury that it
was a Seditious Meeting, they ought to find for the Appealer.

5. A General Warrant from any Justice or Justices to Constables, to inquire
after, Seize, etc. all Conventicles in their Precincts, is not good; it ought
to particularize the House and Place, Houses and Places where the Conventicle
is, or Conventicles are held, and then the Constable ought forthwith to go,
and if he finds it so, to suppress it; but otherwise the Constable might be put
to endless Vexation in hunting after Meetings to no purpose, whereas the Act
enjoins him no such trouble; and if you go once and find no Conventicle, you
are not obliged to go a second time on the same Warrant, but ought to have a
new one, nor is the Constable obliged to turn Informer.

6. As to Breaking open Doors, you see the Act directs that it may be done,
first only in an House where it is Informed there is actually a Conventicle as
aforesaid (that is upon the Oaths of two Persons.) 2. the Constables, etc.
cannot do this without first there be a Demand and Denial to enter: 3. Nor then
neither without a Warrant from the Justice to that purpose. If a Constable upon
a light vain tale, without two persons Swearing it, that there is at such a
House a Meeting, and without Warrant shall venture to break open the Doors, and
there be found no Conventicle, he makes himself liable to be Indicted for
Burglary.

7. There is no power given to break Doors for Levying the Penalties, therefore
let the Constables and Officers be wary what they do in that Case.

8. Constables would do well to know and assert the Dignity of their Office,
they are not to run up and down like Lacquies after the Capricio's of every
Justice, and spend the Lords day Profanely in hunting after Meetings; if the
Justices are upon sufficient Oath Informed of a Meeting, and will make out a
Warrant specifying where it is, you will go, but to ramble about with them from
this place to that, you are not obliged; no more are you to seize or Imprison
persons on the verbal Command of any Justice, unless in visible Breach of the
Peace, but you must have a Warrant, specifying the persons Name and Offense,
before you can lay hold of him, or else you may repent it, when sued another
day for false Imprisonment.

9. Since by the Statute of the 29 of Car. 2d. Cap. 7. It is Enacted in these
words, Provided also that no Person or Persons upon the Lords day shall serve
or Execute, or cause to be served or Executed, any Writ, Process, Warrant,
Order, Judgment or Decree, (except in cases of Treason, Felony, or Breach of
the Peace) but that the service of every such Writ, Process, Warrant, etc.
shall be void to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever; and the Person or Persons
so Serving or Executing the same shall be as liable to the suit of the party
grieved, and answer Damages to him for doing thereof, as if he or they had done
the same without any Writ, Process, Warrant, Order, Judgment, or Decree at all.

It will concern all Constables and Officers to consider with what safety they
can execute any such Warrants at all on the Lords day, on peaceable Meetings,
it being evident that every man they disturb by Color of such Warrant on that
day, has by this Statute a good Action against them:

And so much for Laws against Dissenters.

In the next place, according to our Promise, we shall here add an Abstract of
the Laws against Popery and Papists; and perhaps as it is said, where there are
most Laws there are most Offenses, so here we may say, though there be such
abundance of Acts, of such severe and various Penalties, yet there are scarce
any sort of Criminals more rarely brought to Conviction or Punishment.

THE second Refusal of the Oath of Supremacy, punished as High Treason, 5 Eliz.
1.

To maintain or Extol Authority of the Sea of Rome, the second time, High
Treason, 5 Eliz. 1.

To obtain or put in Use any Bull from Rome, High Treason, 13 Eliz. 2.

To persuade or Reconcile, OR TO BE RECONCILED to the Roman Religion, High
Treason, 23 Eliz. 1. and 3 Jac. 4.

For Jesuit or Priest made by Authority from the Pope, to come into, or remain
in the Kings Dominions, High Treason. 27 Eliz. 2.

So for remaining in a Seminary six Months after Proclamation, and afterward
Returning, High Treason, 27 Eliz. 2.

For Concealing of a Bull or other Instrument from Rome, or reconciliation
offered, Punished as Misprision of Treason, 13 Eliz. 2.

To maintain or conceal those who persuade, or are Reconciled to the Roman
Religion, Misprision of Treason, 23 Eliz. 1.

To Receive, Relieve, Comfort Jesuit or Priest, knowing him to be such, Punished
as Felony, 27 Eliz. 2.

To go and serve a Foreign Prince, having not before taken the Oath of
Allegiance, and entered Bond not to be Reconciled to the Roman Religion, Felony,
3 Jac. 4.

The first Refusal of the Oath of Supremacy, is Punished as in Case of a
Praemunire, which imports a forfeiture of all Lands and Goods, Imprisonment for
Life, and a Deprivement of the Benefit of Law, 5 Eliz. 1.

To set forth or defend Power Spiritual in the Sea of Rome, Praemunire, 5 Eliz.
1.

To Bring or Receive any Agnus Dei, Crosses, Pictures, or such like from Rome,
Praemunire, 13 Eliz. 2. 23 Eliz. 1.

To aid any Person who has put in Use any Bull from the Sea of Rome,
Praemunire, 13 Eliz. 2. 23 Eliz. 1.

To send or give Relief to any continuing in Colleges or Seminaries beyond
Sea, Praemunire, 27 Eliz. 2.

Refusal of the Oath of Allegiance upon the second Tender, Praemunire, 3 Jac. 4.
and 7 Jac. 6.

For not Discovering of Priests made beyond the Seas, Imprisonment, 27 Eliz. 2.

Upon Indictment of Recusancy by Proclamation, Imprisonment, 29 Eliz. 6.

Those that are not able, or fail to pay their Forfeitures, are to be
Imprisoned until Payment, or Conformity, 23 Eliz. 1.

Women Covert Imprisoned for Refusal of the Oath of Allegiance, 3 Jac. 4.

For non-Payment of twelve pence for every Sunday, Imprisonment, 3 Jac. 4.

Women Covert Convicted for Recusancy, Imprisoned till her Husband pay ten
Pounds a Month, or a third part of his Lands, 7 Jac. 6.

Standing Excommunicated for Recusancy, House may be broken up for his
Apprehension, 7 Jac. 6.

Those who shall forbear to come to Church by the space of twelve Months, bound
to good Behavior, with Surety in the King's Bench, 23 Eliz. 1.

Every Recusant is Confined to five Miles Compass for Life, 23 Eliz. 2. To ten
Miles distant from London, 3 Jac. 5.

Not to come into the House where the King or his Heir Apparent is, 3 Jac. 5.

For absence from Church Service every Sunday twelve pence forfeited, 1 Eliz. 2.

And for every Holiday twelve pence forfeited, 3 Jac. 4.

For absence from Common prayer, every Month, twenty Pounds forfeited, 23 Eliz.
1. 3 Jac. 4.

For default of payment of twenty Pounds a Month, all Goods, two parts of Land,
and Leases forfeited, 29 Eliz. 6. and 3 Jac. 4.

At the Kings Election to take or refuse twenty Pounds a Month, or to take two
parts of the Recusants Estate, 3 Jac. 4.

All Copyhold Lands of Recusants forfeited, 25 Eliz. 2.

The Forfeitures of the Ancestor charged upon his Heir being a Recusant, 1 Jac.
4.

A Recusant forfeits for not Receiving the Sacrament according to the Service
Book, the first year twenty Pounds, the second year forty Pounds, the third
year and every year after sixty Pounds, 3 Jac. 4.

To the Presenter out of the Recusants Goods forty Shillings forfeited, 3 Jac.
4.

For every Recusant sojourner and Servant, ten Pounds for every Month
forfeited, 3 Jac. 4.

Two parts of Dower or Jointure of a Married* Woman forfeited, 3 Jac. 5.

Coming to Court, an hundred Pounds forfeited, 3 Jac. 5.

For not Baptizing of Children according to the Service Book publicly within a
Month after their Birth, an hundred Pound forfeited, 3 Jac. 5.

For Marrying otherwise than by a Minister, an hundred Pounds forfeited, 3 Jac.
5.

For Burying out of the Church or Churchyard an hundred Pounds forfeited, 3
Jac. 5.

For sending Children beyond Seas without License, an hundred Pounds forfeited,
1 Jac. 4.

For maintaining a Schoolmaster not going to Church, or allowed to teach, for
every Month ten Pounds forfeited, 23 Eliz. 1. and 29 Eliz. 6.

And forty Shillings per Diem forfeited by the Schoolmaster and Recusant that
keeps him, 1 Jac. 4.

All Goods and Lands during Life, for Breach of Confinement forfeited; 23 Eliz.
2. and 3 Jac. 5.

The like forfeiture for going or sending Children beyond the Seas to be Bred
in Popery, 3 Car. 2.

For Residing within ten Miles of London, an hundred Pounds forfeited, 3 Jac. 5.

For Practicing any Function expressed in the Statute of 3 Jac. 5 an hundred
Pounds forfeited, 3 Jac. 5.

Disabled to Reverse Indictment for want of Form or other Defect, 3 Jac. 4.

Disabled from the Practice of several Functions, whereby to gain their
Livings, viz. from practicing Common Law, Civil Law, or being a Steward,
Attorney, Solicitor or Officer in any Court; from Practicing Physic, or being
Apothecary, and from Bearing any Office in Camp, Troop or Band of Soldiers, or
in any Ship, Castle or Fortress, etc. 3 Jac. 5.

By the Wifes Recusancy, the Husband Disabled from Public Office or Charge in
the Commonwealth, 3 Jac. 5.

By Marrying otherwise than the Church of England allows, the Husband
disabled to be Tenant by Courtesy, the Wife disabled to have Dower, Jointure,
Free Banks, or any part or Portion of her Husbands Goods, 3 Jac. 5.

Disabled to Sue or Prosecute Actions, to present to a Benefice, to be
Executor, Administrator, or Guardian, 3 Jac 5.

Children sent beyond the Seas without License, are disabled to take Benefit of
Gift, Conveyance, Descent or Devise, 1 Jac. 4. and 3 Jac. 5.

Notwithstanding these Forfeitures, Recusants are no less Subject to
Ecclesiastical Sentences, 23 Eliz. 1. and 3 Jac. 45. [But Quaere, Whether one
Papist was qua Talis, ever Excommunicated since the Kings happy Restoration,
though many thousand. Protestants have been:] Refusal to Receive the Sacrament,
and take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, Ipso facto disables from any
public Trust, 25 Car. 2. ca. 2.

Peers and Members of Parliament disabled to Sit, until taking of Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and declaring against Transubstantiation and the
Idolatry of Rome, 30 Car. 2. Stat. 2.

Having thus Collected together diverse of the most remarkable and advantageous
of our Laws, whereby the Liberties of Englishmen are Guarded and Secured;
since the best of Laws are but insignificant Ciphers, if not Honestly put in
Execution; and since in the Execution of our Laws JVRIES are mainly concerned,
who if Ignorant of their Duty, or Corrupt, or Overawed, and not daring to make
use of that just power, wherewith the Law has invested and entrusted them, may
give up all those precious Privileges, and subject us to the worst kind of
slavery, under pretense of Law: therefore here in the last place, for the
Information of my honest Countrymen, the Freeholders of England, and others
who in Corporations are daily called to this important Service, I shall subjoin
a brief discourse of Juries.

SECT. I.
Of the Advantages Englishmen enjoy by this Trial by Juries, above any other
Nation under Heaven.
IT IS one of the miserable Follies of depraved humane Nature, that it commonly
sleights present Enjoyments, and rarely rates the good things it possesses at
their true value, till it is deprived of them. This grand Privilege of Trials
per pais, by our Country, that is by JVRIES, as it seems to have been as
Ancient as the Government or first form of Policy in this Island; for it was
not unknown to the ancient Britains (as appears by their Books and Monuments
of Antiquity) Practiced by the Saxons, [see King Ethelreds Laws in Lambert, p.
218. and Coke 1. part Instit. fo. 155.] and Confirmed since the Invasion of the
Normans by Magna Charta as you have heard, and continual Usage; so it is a
thing of the highest Moment and an essential Felicity to all English Subjects.

For look abroad in France, Spain, Italy, or indeed (almost) where you will,
and observe the miserable Condition of the Inhabitants, either entirely
subjected to the Arbitrary Lusts of Tyrants, who plunder, dismember or slay
them, according as the humor takes them, and many times without the least
provocation, merely for sport, and to Gratify a savage Cruelty: Or at best,
you will behold them under such Laws as render their Lives, Liberties and
Estates liable to be disposed of at the discretion of Strangers appointed their
Judges, most times mercenary, and Creatures of Prerogative; sometimes malicious
and oppressive, and too often partial and corrupt. Or suppose them never so
just and upright, yet still has the Subject no security against subornations
and the attacques of malicious, false and unconscionable Witnesses; yea when
there is no sufficient Evidence, upon mere suspicions they are obnoxious to the
Tortures of the Rack, which often make an Innocent man Confess himself Guilty
merely to get out of present pain: Or if he do with invincible Courage endure
the Question (as they call those Torments) he is many times so spoiled in his
Limbs as he scarce ever is his own man again.

Whereas such has been the goodness of God, and the prudent care of our
Ancestors, that to our inestimable Happiness, we are born and live under a mild
and Righteous Constitution, where all these mischiefs may be prevented, where
none can be Legally condemned, either by the power of Superior Enemies, or the
rashness or Ill will of any Judge, nor by the bold Affirmations of profligate
Evidence: For by a fundamental Law in our Government, No man's Life (unless it
be in Parliaement, which is a Supreme Court, and it is supposed will never do
any man wrong) shall be touched for any Crime whatsoever, but upon being found
Guilty on two several Trials (for so may that of the Grand and Petty Jury be
called) and the Judgment of twice Twelve men at least, all of his own Condition
and Neighborhood, and upon their Oaths, [Coke 3. part of Instit. p. 40.] That
is to say, Twelve or more to find the Bill of Indictment against him, and
Twelve others to give Judgment upon the General Issue of Not Guilty: All which
Jurors must be honest, substantial, Impartial men, and being Neighbors of the
party accused, or place where the supposed Fact was committed, cannot be
presumed to be unacquainted either with the matters charged, the Prisoners
course of Life, or the Credit of the Evidence: And all these must first be
fully satisfied in their Consciences, that he is Guilty, and so unanimously
pronounce him upon their Oaths, or else he cannot be condemned. For the Office
and Power of these Juries is Judicial: They only are the Judges, from whose
sentence the Indicted are to expect Life or Death; upon their Integrity and
Understanding, the Lives of all that are brought into Judgment do ultimately
depend; From their Verdict there lies no Appeal: By finding Guilty or Not
Guilty, they do complicately resolve both Law and Fact.

Judges are made by Prerogative, and many times heretofore they have been
preferred by Corrupt Ministers of State, and may be so again in Time to come;
and such advanced as would serve a present Turn, not always those of the most
Integrity and Skill in the Laws: Their places are so Honorable and Profitable,
and their Tenure so Ticklish, viz. durante beneplacito, merely during pleasure,
that they lie under no small Temptations, which perhaps with some may be never
the less unlikely to prevail, for their having generally been wont before to
take Fees; They are concerned in so many Causes, that they are the oftener
subject to be tempted, and are so few that they may be the easier corrupted:
They cannot be Challenged, and may be apt to think themselves above any Action,
and thence be encouraged to strain a point now and then. The major part of them
agreeing, is enough: they are never sworn at each particular Trial, nor ever at
all but once, and that exceeding generally: I say all these things may possibly
sometimes happen to Biass some Judges (for I intend not the least Reflection
hereby on any of those Honorable Persons who at present deservedly supply our
seats of Justice.) But nothing of that kind can reasonably happen to a Jury.
For, 1. They are returned by a sworn Officer. 2. Must be men of a clear
Reputation, and competent Estate. 3. Being Neighbors, they may know something
of the business on their own knowledge. 4. Their Office is but a trouble, not
accompanied with any great Honor, nor any profit at all. 5. They are all
solemnly sworn to each particular Cause. 6. The party may challenge 35 in case
of Treason and 20 of them in Felony, without showing any cause, and as many
more as he can assign cause against. 7. Of the Grand Jury Twelve at least must
join in the Verdict, and of the petty Jury every man of the Twelve must consent
upon his Oath, or else it is all nothing. And lastly, if they give a corrupt
Verdict between Party and Party, they are liable to an Attaint. [But I do not
find any Attaint lies in Criminal Causes, where the King is a Party.]

Now let any man of Sense consider, whether this method be not more proper for
bolting out the Truth, for finding out the Guilty, and preserving the Innocent,
than if the whole decision were left to the Examination of a Judge, or two or
three, whose Interests Passion, Haste, or Multiplicity of business may easily
betray them into Error.

Deservedly therefore is this Privilege of Trial by Juries ranked amongst the
choicest of our Fundamental Laws, which whosoever shall go about openly to
Suppress, or craftily to Undermine, and render only a Formality, does Ipso
Facto attacque the Government, and brings in an Arbitrary Power, and is an
Enemy and Traitor to his King and Country; For which reason English
Parliaments have all along been most Zealous for preserving this great Jewel of
Liberty, Trials by Juries, having no less than 58. several times since the
Norman Conquest been established and Confirmed by the Legislative Power, no one
Privilege besides having been near so often remembered in Parliament.

SECT. II.
What persons ought to be Jurymen, and how Qualified.
AS the Office of Juries is of such great Importance, so the Wisdom of our Law
has provided that the same shall be supplied with Persons of Ability, Honesty,
Integrity and Indifferency: for (as my Lord Cook says, 1. part Instit. Sect.
234. fo. 155.) He that is of a Jury must be Liber Homo, that is, not only a
Free man, and not Bond, but also one that has such Freedom of mind, as he
stands indifferent, as he stands unsworn. 2. He must be Legalis, and by the Law
every Juror that is returned for the Trial of any Issue or Cause, ought to have
three properties. 1. He ought to be dwelling most near to the place where the
Question is moved. 2. He ought to be most sufficient both for understanding and
Competency of Estate. 3. He ought to be least Suspicious, that is, to be
indifferent as he stands Unsworn, and then he is acounted in Law, Liber and
Legalis homo, otherwise he may be Challenged and not suffered to be Sworn; but
a man's being Excommunicated, (as was said before) is no Bar to his being a
Jury man, much less his being a Dissenter or Nonfrequenter of Church
Ceremonies, if he be otherwise qualified with Estate and Understanding; for at
that rate, if Popery should ever get uppermost, No Protestant at all would be
capable of being a Jury-Man, because a Nonconformist to Holy Church. Now if no
Statute excludes Protestants unconvicted of any Crime, or Dissenters (qua
tales) to serve on Juries, I should think we ought to wait at least till an Act
of Parliament be made to that purpose, before we deny them Liberam Legem; and
to Act otherwise, in my silly Opinion seems not only unwarrantable, but a
daring Usurpation of Legislative Power: In a word, Jurors must be free of and
from all manner of Bondage, Obligations, Affections, Relations and Prejudices;
they must be the Peers or Equals of the party they are to Try; they must be of
full Age, 21 Years old or upwards, not Outlawed, never Attainted or Convicted
of Treason, Felony, False Verdict, Perjury, or adjudged Infamous; they were
anciently all Knights, as we read in Glanvil and Bracton, and they must still
be persons of worth and repute; and as they are returned by a Sworn Officer,
the Sheriff, so they of the petty Jury must be every one Sworn every several
Trial by a particular Oath, the more to remind them of their Duty. Nay, it
should seem in ancient times, tho^ the Office and Duty were still the same as
at this day, yet their Honor and Dignity were much greater. The Mirror of
Justices, (a great part of which was Written before the Conquest, and augmented
by Andrew Horn, a Learned Lawyer in the time of King Edw. the 2d.) p. 209. [in
the French, and 153. in the English] makes no scruple to call them JVDGES,
Judges Ordinaries sunt Suitors; and Dr. Cowel in his Interpreter, tells us,
Juries were [anciently] Associates and Assistants to the Judges of the Court in
a kind of Equality, whereas now a days they attend them in great Humility: And
cites the Customary of Normandy, and Lambert, as being of the same Sentiment.
Nay, many Wise and Learned men have wondered, that since the Law has conferred
such ample power on Jurymen, why they should have no kind of mark of Honor or
Distinction, as liberty to Sit with their Hats on, from the time they are Sworn
to the Delivery of their Verdict, or the like; For as the Custom is now a
days, they sitting amongst the Crowd with their Caps off, as well as the worst
Malefactors they are to Try, it is not easy knowing them from the rest of the
Spectators. But this Obiter, I desire not to bring in Innovations, but only
that English men may preserve their ancient undoubted Privileges, to which
purpose it will concern all that are liable to be Summoned to serve on Juries,
heedfully to Inform themselves of their Duty and Office by Law, that so they
may uprightly discharge the same to God and the King, and their fellow Subjects.

SECT. III.
Of Grand Juries, their Duty, and the great Importance of their Office.
JUries are of two sorts. 1, The Grand Jury so called, both because it consists
of a greater number than Twelve, as commonly 21, 19, 17. or the like, [but note
they can make no Verdict
or Presentment, unless Twelve at least of them agree, and then what they do,
is Valid, tho the rest do not Consent;] as also because generally they are of
the greater quality, and likewise in respect of their Power, because the extent
of their Office is more great and general, as extending to all Offenses
throughout the whole County for which they serve. 2. The Petty Jury (in Cases
Criminal, called commonly the Jury of Life and Death) which always consists of
Twelve men, neither more nor less, who must every Man agree, or else it is no
Verdict.

The Oath of a Grand Jury-man, as I find it Inserted in the Collection,
Entitled The Book of Oaths, p. 206. is as follows.
YE shall truly inquire and due presentment make of all such things as you are
charged withal on the Kings behalf: The Kings Council, your own, and your
Fellows, you shall well and truly keep, and in all other things the Truth
present: So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.

But according to modern practice, and as we find it Published in the account
of the late Proceedings against the Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury,
said to be Published by his Majesty's special Command, is expressed somewhat
more largely.

The Oath Administered to the Grand Jury, as follows.
YOU shall diligently Inquire and true Presentment make of all such matters,
Articles; and things as shall be given you in charge, as of all other matters
and things as shall come to your knowledge touching this present Service, the
Kings Council, your Fellows and your own, you shall keep secret; you shall
present no person for Hatred or Malice, neither shall you leave any one
unpresented for Fear, Favor or Affection, for Lucre or Gain, or any hopes
thereof, but in all things you shall present the truth, the whole Truth, and
nothing but the Truth, to the best of your knowledge. So help you God.

The Office of a Grand Jury, or Grand Inquest, (for by both those Names it is
promiscuously called) is principally concerned in two things, Presentiments and
Indictments, the difference of which is thus: The First is when the Jury
themselves of their own knowledge or Inquiry do take notice of some Crime,
Offense or Nuisance, to the injury of the Public, which they think fit should
be Punished or removed; and in Order thereunto do give the Court notice thereof
in Writing briefly and without Form, only the Nature of the thing, and the
Persons Name, and the Place. And this is called a Presentment, being the matter
whereon to form an Indictment, from which the Presentment differs in these two
respects. 1. In that is always Originally the Act of the Grand Jury. And, 2.
That is not yet drawn up in Form; whereas Indictments are commonly drawn up
either by the Order of the Court, or at the Instance of some Prosecutor, and
are brought before, and delivered unto the Grand Jury, and the Witnesses Sworn
attend them, who Examine the said Witnesses, and as they think fit, Return the
Indictments indors'd either Billa Vera, [that is a true Bill,] or Ignoramus,
[We are Ignorant] that is, we do not find the matter, or there does not appear
to us such sufficient Grounds for the Accusation, that the Persons Life and
Reputation should be brought into question.

From whence it appears that the end of their Office is likewise twofold. 1.
To inquire after, and give notice of all Crimes, Offenses, Nusances, etc. in
the County for which they Serve, which by reason of their Inhabitancy and
Estates therein they are presumed to have best opportunity to discover, and to
find Bills against Malefactors where there are good Grounds for the same, that
so they may be brought to Trial if they are forthcoming, or may be proceeded
against to the Outlawry if they are fled, for their said Offenses. 2. To
preserve the Innocent from the disgrace and hazards which ill men may design to
bring them to, out of malice, or through subornation or other sinister ends;
for so tender is the Law of the Reputation and Life of a man, that it will not
suffer the one to be sullied, by the Parties holding up his hand at the Bar,
and the other endangered by a Trial, until first the Matter and Evidence
against him have been scanned, examined, and found by a Grand Jury upon their
Oaths against him. Therefore you see by their Oaths, They are sworn not only to
Inquire, but diligently to inquire, not to be negligent or slothful, nor to
take things upon trust or hurry them over carelessly, but to weigh the
Circumstances and sift the Witnesses, and search out the Truth of such
Informations as come before them, and to reject the Indictment if it be not
sufficiently proved; and if they have reasonable Suspicion of Malice,
Subornation or wicked Designs against any man's Life or Estate in such as offer
or come to Swear to the Bill of Indictment, they are bound by Law as well as in
Conscience to use all diligence to discover the Villainy; and if it appear to
them (whereof they are the Legal Judges) to be a Conspiracy or malicious
Conspiracy against the Accused, they are bound not only to reject such Bill of
Indictment, but forthwith to Indict all the Conspirators with their Associates
and Abettors; and that this is a main part of the Grand Juries Office, appears
not only from Legal reason, but by an express Statute, viz. 25 Edw. 3, 4. and
42 Edw. 3, 3. which says, That for preventing Mischiefs done by FALSE
ACCVSERS, none should be put to answer, unless it be by Indictment or
Presentment of good and lawful People of the same Neighborhood where such
Deeds be done, that is to say, by a Grand Jury.

The Grounds upon which Grand Juries are to proceed in giving their Verdicts,
are either,

1. From their own knowledge, and so they may find an Indictment against a
person tho there be never a Witness at all to it, and a Petty Jury may in like
manner find a person Guilty of a Felony or Murder whereof he stands Indicted,
tho no Witnesses appear against him to prove it, and the reason thereof is,
because the Juries being always of the Vicinage, the Law supposes they may know
the matter of their own knowledge, and therefore in all such Cases when a Jury
is charged with a Prisoner, and after the Indictment read, Witnesses fail to
appear, the Court always speaks thus to the Jury: Gentlemen, here is A. B.
stands Indicted of such a Crime, but here is no Witnesses come against him, so
that unless on your own knowledge you know him Guilty, you must Acquit him; and
certainly if the Juries knowledge of a man's Guilt, is enough to Condemn him, I
see not why their personal knowledge of a Prisoners Innocence, or of the
Witnesses Swearing falsely, should not be sufficient to Acquit him.

2. The other ground upon which the Grand Juries are to Proceed, is Testimony
of Witnesses, and this is called EVIDENCE, because it ought to be such as may
make the matter clear, manifest, plain and evident to the Jury; and of this
Evidence the Jury are the proper and only Judges, therefore they ought
(according to their Oath) diligently Inquire into the Quality, Repute, and
Circumstances of the Witnesses, the likelihood of what they Depose, and whether
they do not Swear out of Malice, Subornation, Self-Interest, Combination, or
some ill design; which to Discover, they will do well to Examine them apart, to
note their Variations and Contradictions, to ask them sudden questions, and
what questions are pertinent, not the Judges, but the Jury only can determine;
for they may know how to make use of them toward Discovery of the Truth, tho
the Judge does not, and it is They are upon their Oaths, not he, it is they must
satisfy their own Consciences, the Judge has nothing to do to Intermeddle, he
is bound by their Verdict: Let Witnesses be never so rampantly positive, yet if
the Jurors have good and reasonable grounds not to believe them, they will,
they must remain as Ignorant to the parties Crime as before: we find this
expressly asserted for Law in our Books, as Stiles's Reports, L. 11. tho there
be Witnesses who prove the Bill, yet the Grand Inquest is not bound to find it,
if they see cause to the contrary, so Coke L. 6. The Judges use to determine
who shall be Sworn, and what shall be produced as Evidence to the Jury, but the
Jury are to consider what Credit or Authority the same is worthy of. If a Grand
Jury are not Judges of Evidence, they signify nothing. If (as some would
persuade us) because People Swear desperately, tho they do not believe them,
they shall be bound to find the Bill, then they signify nothing, and are no
security to preserve Innocence. A lewd Woman once resolved to Indict the then
Archbishop of Canterbury for a Rape, she Swore it no doubt very heartily,
according to this new Doctrine of going according to Evidence, the Jury must
presently have found the Bill, the Archbishop must have been Committed to
Prison, Suspended from Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, his Goods and Chattels
throughout England Inventoried by the Sheriffs; would it, think you, in that
Case have been a good Excuse for the Grand Jury, to have said, that tho they
believed in their Conscience the Baggage swore false, yet she Swearing it
positively, they as so many Parish Clerks were but to say Amen to her Oath of
the Fact, and to find Billa Vera against that eminent Prelate? And if the Jury
be Judges of the Credibility of Evidence in this Case, and may go contrary to
it, why I pray may they not have the same Liberty where they find good Cause in
others?

If an Indictment be laid against a man for Criminal words, said to be uttered
in a Colloquium, or Discourse, tho the Witnesses roundly Swear all the express
words in the Indictment, yet unless they will Relate and set forth the
Substance of the whole talk, it is impossible the Jury should Judge of the
matter; for the foregoing and subsequent words may render Expressions that are
Innocent and Loyal, which taken to halfs, may be rank Treason; as if one should
say, To affirm the King has no more Right to the Crown of England than I have,
(which is the Opinion of the Jesuits, of his Majesty, if once Excommunicated by
the Pope) is detestable Treason: And two men at some distance, not well Hearing
or Remembering, or Maliciously designing against his Life, should Swear -- That
he said, The King had no more Right to the Crown than he had: Now that the Man
did utter these very words is true, but if you ask the Evidence the rest of the
Colloquium, they shall tell you there was much more Discourse, but they cannot
remember it; what satisfaction is this to a Jury? or would it not be hard for a
Man to be put to hold up his Hand at the Bar under the frightful Charge of
Treason in this Case? Or if a Minister in his Sermon should Recite that of the
Psalms, The Fool has said in his Heart there is no God: Jesuited Evidence now
may come and Charge him with Blasphemy, and Swear that he said, There was no
God: and ask them what Expressions besides he used, may excuse themselves and
say, It Is a great while ago, we cannot remember a whole Sermon, but this we
all positively Swear, He said there was no God.

The Inquiry of a Grand Jury should be suitable to their Title, a Grand
Inquiry; else instead of serving their Country, and presenting real Crimes,
they may Oppress the Innocent, as in the Case of Samuel Wright and John Good,
at a Sessions in the Old Baily, about December 1681. Good Indicts Wright for
Treasonable words, and Swore the words positively; but after a Grand Enquiry,
the Grand Jury found that Wright only spoke the words as of others, thus, They
say so and so -- and concluded with this -- They are Regnes for saying it; and
also Good at last Confessed that Wright was his Master, and Corrected him for
Misdemeanors, and then to be Revenged he comes and Swears against him, which
he Confessed he was Instigated to by one Powel; so the Grand Jury finding it to
be but Malice, Returned the Bill Ignoramus: whereas if they had not Examined
him strictly, they had never discovered the Intreigue, and the Master had
Causelessly been brought to great Charge, Ignominy and Hazard.

The Judicious Dalton, p. 539 says well, No less care or Concern at all lies on
the Grand Jury, than does on the Petty Jury: People may tell you, That you
ought to find a Bill upon any probable Evidence, for it is but matter of Course,
a Ceremony, a Business of Form, only an Accusation, the party is to come before
another Jury, and there may make his Defense: But if this were all, to what
purpose have we Grand Juries at all? why are the wisest, best men in a County
(for such they are or should be) troubled? why are they so strictly Sworn? Do
not Flatter your selves, you of the Grand Jury are as much upon your Oaths as
the Petty Jury, and the Life of the man against whom the Bill is brought, is in
your Hands: The Lord Cook 3. Iustit. 33. plainly calls the Grand Jurymen all
wilfully forsworn and Perjured, if they wrongfully find an Indictment; and if
in such a Case the other Jury through Ignorance, etc. should find the person
Guilty too, you are Guilty of his Blood as well as they: but suppose he get off
there, do you think it nothing to Accuse a man upon your Oaths, of horrid
Crimes, your very doing of which puts him, tho never so Innocent, to Disgrace,
Trouble, Damage, danger of Life, and makes him liable to Outlawry,
Imprisonment, and every thing but Death it self, and that too for ought you
know may wrongfully be occasioned by it, your rash Verdict gaining Credit, and
giving Authority to another Jury to find him Guilty: for if the Petty Jury find
a man Guilty never so unjustly, the Law suffers no Attaint or other Punishment
to lie against them, for this very reason, because another Jury, viz. the Grand
Inquest as well as they, have found him Guilty. If a Grand Jary find a Bill
wrongfully against a person, and it prove never so much to his damage, he has
no Remedy: for being upon their Oaths, the Law will not suppose any malice. One
of the Grand Jury cannot afterward be of the petty Jury, and why? Because,
says the Law, he has once already found the party Guilty, and if he should not
again, he must perjure himself. From all which it appears, what a weigh and
stress the Law puts upon the Verdict of a Grand Jury; and it is remarkable too,
that the Law directs them only to say, either, Billa vera, It is true, Or,
Ignoramus, We know not; and never, That it is not true: Which shows, That if
they be doubtful, or not fully satisfied, The Indictment must be Endorsed not
Billa Vera, We know it is true, but Ignoramus, We doubt it, We do not know it,
We are not certain it be true. If they find a Bill where they ought not, they
wound their own Consciences, and do an irreparable damage to the party; but
where they do not find the Bill, there is no harm done to any body, for another
Indictment may be brought when there is better Evidence.

SECT. IV.
That Juries are Judges of Law in some respects as well as Fact.
AMongst other devices to undermine the Rights and Power of Juries, and render
them Insignificant, there has an opinion been advanced, That they are only
Judges of Fact, and are not at all to Consider the Law; so that if a Person be
Indicted for a Fact which really is no Crime in it self by Law, but is workt up
by Words of form, as Treasonably, Seditiously, etc. if the Fact be but proved
to be done, though the said wicked Circumstances do not appear, they shall be
supplied by the Law, which you are not to take notice of, but find the Bill, or
bring in the Person Guilty, and leave the Consideration of the Case in Law to
the Judges, whose business it is -- Thus some people argue, but this is an
apparent Trapp, at once to Perjure Ignorant Juries, and render them so far from
being of good use, as to be only Tools of Oppression, to Ruin and Murder their
Innocent Neighbors with the greater Formality: For though it be true, that
matter of Fact is the most common and proper Object of a Juries determination,
and matter of Law that of the Judges, yet as Law arises out of, and is
complicated with Fact, it cannot but fall under the Juries Consideration.
Littleton, Sect. 368. teaches us, That the Jury may at their Election either
take upon them the Knowledge of the Law, and Determine both the Fact and Law
themselves, or else find the matter specially, and leave it to the Judges: It Is
by applying matter of Fact and Law together, and from their due Consideration
of, and right Judgment upon both, that a Jury brings forth their Verdict. Do we
not see in most General Issues, as upon Not Guilty pleaded in Trespass, breach
of the Peace, or Felony, though it be matter in Law, whether the party be a
Trespasser, a breaker of the Peace, or a Felon, yet the Jury do not find the
Fact of the Case by it self, leaving the Law to the Court, but find the party
Guilty or Not Guilty generally; so that though they Answer not to the Question
singly, what is Law, yet they determine the Law in all matters where Issue is
Joined. Is it not every days practice, when persons are Indicted for Murder,
the Jury does not only find them Guilty or Not Guilty, but many times upon
hearing and weighing of Circumstances, brings them in either Guilty of the
Murder, or else only of Manslaughter, per misadventure, or se defendendo, as
they see Cause? Besides, as Juries have ever been vested with such Power by
Law, so to exclude them from, or Disseize of the same, were utterly to Defeat
the End of their Institution. For then if a person should be Indicted for doing
any Common Innocent Act, if it be but Clothed and disguised in the Indictment
with the name of Treason, or some other High Crime, and proved by Witnesses to
have been done by him, the Jury though satisfied in Conscience, that the Fact
is not any such offense as it is called, yet because (according to this fond
Opinion) they have no power to Judge of Law, and the Fact charged is fully
proved, they should at this Rate be bound to find him Guilty: And being so
found, the Judge may pronounce Sentence against him, for he finds him a
Convicted Traitor, etc. by his Peers: And so Juries should be made mere
Properties to do the Drudgery and bear the blame of unreasonable Prosecutions.
But all this is absurd, and abhorred by the Wisdom, Justice and Mercy of our
Laws.

In every Indictment, Information, etc. there are certain words of Course,
called matter of form, as Maliciously, Seditiously, with such and such an
Intention, etc. And these sometimes are raised by a Just and reasonable
Implication in Law, and sometimes are thrust in merely to raise a pretense or
Color of Crime where there is really none. So that every Jury-man ought well
to understand this Distinction, where the Act or naked matter of Fact charged,
is in it self a Crime or offense against Law; as killing of a Man, Levying of
War against the King, etc. there the Law does in pleadings require, and will
supply those words; and if the Jury do find, and are satisfied, That the
substance of the Charge is such a Crime, and the person Guilty thereof, they
are bound to find it, though no direct proof be made of those Circumstantials.
But where the Act or matter of Fact is in it self Innocent or Indifferent,
there the purport of these Words (as that it was done maliciously, or with such
or such a design) is necessary to be proved: For else there is no Crime, and
consequently no fit matter to be put to Trial. In which Case, the Grand Jury is
bound in Conscience and Law to return an Ignoramus, and a Petty Jury Not Guilty.

SECT. V.
That Juries are not finable, or any way to be punished under pretense of going
contrary to Evidence, or against the Judges Directions.
MUch of what we have said of Grand Juries, is also applicable to Petty Juries,
so that we need not repeat it, only must Answer one Objection. Some Jurymen
may be apt to say, -- If we do not find according to Evidence, though we have
reason to suspect the truth of what they Swear, or if we do not find as the
Judge directs, we may come into trouble, the Judge may Fine us, etc. -- I
Answer, this is a vain fear: No Judge dare offer any such thing: you are the
proper Judges of the matters before you, and your Souls are at stake, you ought
to Act freely, and are not bound, though the Court demand it, to give the
Reasons why you bring it in thus, or thus; for you of the Grand Jury are sworn
to the Contrary, viz. To keep secret your fellows Counsel and your own; and you
of the Petty Jury are no way obliged to declare your motives, it may not be
convenient. It Is a notable Case before the Chief Justice Anderson in Q. Eliz.
daves. A Man was Arraigned for murder, the Evidence was so strong that 11. of
the Jury were presently for finding him Guilty, the 12th man refused, and kept
them so long that they were ready to starve, and at last made them comply with
him, and bring in the Prisoner not Guilty: The Judge, who had several times
admonisht this Jury-man to join with his Fellows, being surprised, sent for
him, discoursed him privately; to whom upon promise of Indemnity, he at last
owned that he himself was the man that did the Murder, and the Prisoner was
Innocent, and that he was resolved not to add Perjury and a second Murder to
the first. -- But to satisfy you that a Jury is no way punishable for going
according to their Conscience, though against seeming Evidence, and the Reasons
why they are and ought not to be questioned for the same, I shall here Recite
an Adjudged Case, that of Bushel, in the two and twentieth year of His Majesty,
Reported by the Learned Sir John Vaughan, whose Book is Licensed by the present
Lord Chancellor, the Lord Chief Justice North, and all the Judges then in
England: the said Case begins fol. 135. and continues 150. The whole well worth
Reading: but I shall only Select Certain Passages. --

The Case was this:

BUshel and others of a Jury having at a Sessions not found Pen and Mead (Two
Quakers) Guilty of a Trespass, Contempt, Unlawful Assembly and Tumult, whereof
they had been Indicted, were fined forty pound a man, and Committed till they
should pay it. Bushel brings his Habeas Corpus, and upon the Return it appeared
he was Committed, -- For that contrary to Law, and against full and Clear
Evidence openly given in Court, and against the Directions of the Court in
matter of Law, they had Acquitted the said W. P. and W. M. to the great
Obstruction of Justice, etc. Which upon solemn Argument was by the Judges
Resolved, to be an Insufficient Cause of fining and committing them, and they
were discharged, and afterward brought Actions for their Damage. The Reasons
of which Judgment are reported by Judge Vaughan, and amongst them he Uses
these that follow, which I shall give you in his own words.

Fol. 140. One fault in the Return is, That the Jurors are not said to have
Acquitted the persons Indicted, against full and manifest Evidence, Corruptly,
and Knowing the said Evidence to be full and manifest against the Persons
Indicted; For how manifest soever the Evidence was, if it were not manifest to
them, and that they Believed it such, it was not a Finable fault, nor Deserving
Imprisonment; Upon which Difference the Law of punishing Jurors for false
Verdicts, principally Depends,

And Fol. 141. I would know, whether any thing be more Common, than for two
men, Students, Barristers, or Judges, to deduce Contrary and opposite
Conclusions out of the same Case in Law? And is there any Difference that two
men should Infer distinct Conclusions from the same Testimony? is any thing
more known, than that the same Author and place in that Author, is forceably
urged to maintain contrary Conclusions, and the Decision hard which is in the
Right? is any thing more frequent in the controversies of Religion, than to
press the same Texts for Opposite Tenets? How then comes it to pass, that two
persons may not apprehend with Reason and Honesty, what a Witness, or many say,
to prove in the Understanding of one plainly one thing, but in the Apprehension
of the other clearly the contrary thing? must therefore one of these Merit Fine
and Imprisonment, because he does that which he cannot otherwise do, preserving
his Oath and Integrity? And this is often the Case of the Judge and the Jury.

And Fol. 142. I conclude therefore, That this Return, charging the Prisoners
to have Acquitted P. and M. against full and manifest Evidence first, and next
without saying that they did know and Believe that Evidence to be full and
Manifest against the Indicted persons, is no Cause of Fine and Imprisonment.

In the Margent of that Fol. 142. it is thus Noted: Of this Mind were ten
Judges of Eleven; the Chief Baron Turner gave no Opinion, because not at the
Argument.

And in the same fol. 142. he says, The Verdict of a Jury, and Evidence of a
Witness, are very Different things, in the Truth and Falsehood of them: a
Witness swears but to what he has heard or seen generally, or more largely, to
what has fallen under his Senses: But a Jury-man swears to what he can Infer
and conclude from the Testimony of such Witnesses, by the Act and force of his
Understanding, to be the Fact Inquired after; which differs nothing in Reason,
though much in the Punishment, from what a Judge, out of Various Cases
considered by him, Infers to be the Law in the question before him.

If the meaning of these Words, finding against the Direction of the Court, in
matter of Law, be, That if the Judge having heard the Evidence given in Court
(for he knows no other) shall tell the Jury upon this Evidence, the Law is for
the Plaintiff, or for the Defendant, and you are under the pain of Fine and
Imprisonment to find accordingly; and the Jury ought of duty so to do; then
every man sees, that the Jury is but a troublesome delay, great Charge, and no
use in determining Right and Wrong; and therefore the Trials by them may be
better Abolished than continued: which were a strange new found Conclusion,
after a Trial so Celebrated for many hundred Years.

It is true, if the Jury were to have no other Evidence for the Fact, but what
is Deposed in Court, the Judge might know their Evidence, and the Fact from it,
equally as they, and so direct what the Law were in the Case; though even then
the Judge and Jury might honestly differ in the Result from the Evidence, as
well as two Judges may, which often happens; but the Evidence which the Jury
have of the Fact, is much otherwise than that. For,

1. Being Returned of the Vicinage where the Cause of Action arises, the Law
supposes them thence to have sufficient Knowledge to Try the matter in Issue
(and so they must) though no Evidence were given on either side in Court; but
to this Evidence the Judge is a stranger.

2. They may have Evidence from their own Personal Knowledge, by which they may
be assured, and sometimes are, that what is deposed in Court is absolutely
false: but to this the Judge is a stranger, and he knows no more of the Fact
than he has Learned in Court, and perhaps by false Depositions, and
consequently knows nothing.

3. The Jury may know the Witnesses to be Stigmatized, and Infamous, which may
be unknown to the parties, and consequently to the Court.

Fol. 148. To what end is the Jury to be Returned out of the Vicinage, where
the Cause of Action arises? to what end must Hundredors be of the Jury, whom
the Law supposes to have nearer knowledge of the Fact, than those of the
Vicinage in General? to what end are they Challenged so scrupulously to the
Array and Poll? to what end must they have such a certain Freehold, and be
Probi and Legales homines, and not of Affinity with the party concerned? to
what end must they have in many Cases the View for Exacter Information chiefly?
to what end must they undergo the Punishment of the Villainous Judgment, if
after all this they Implicitly must give a Verdict by the Dictates and
Authority of another Man, under Pains of Fines and Imprisonment, when Sworn to
do it according to the best of their own Knowledge?

A man cannot see by another Eye, nor hear by another Ear; no more can a man
conclude or Infer the thing to be Resolved by another Understanding or
Reasoning; and though the Verdict be right the Jury give, yet they being not
assured that it is so from their own Understanding, are Forsworn, at least in
foro Conscientiae.

Fol. 149. And it is Absurd to Fine a Jury for finding against their Evidence,
when the Judge knows but part of it; for the better and greater part of the
Evidence may be wholly unknown to him, and this may happen in most Cases, and
often does.

Thus far Judge Vaughan, whose words I have faithfully Recited, and with it
shall conclude this Subject; Recommending those that would be further satisfied
in the Law touching the Power and Duty of Juries, to those two Excellent,
Learned Treatises lately published, the one Entitled, A Guide to English
Juries, etc. to be Sold by Mr. Cockeril at the Three Legs over against the
Stocks-Market; the other, The Security of English-mens Lives, or the Trust,
Power and Duty of the Grand Juries of England, Printed for Benj. Alsop in the
Poultrey; both which are extremely well worthy of every English man's Perusal,
that is liable to be called to that Office.

And now I shall take Leave of the Reader, who I hope will join with me and all
English Protestants in this Prayer:

THat Almighty God would preserve our Religion, put a stop to the Growth of
Popery, Confound all their Plots, Protect our present Gracious King, Defend us
both from a Foreign Yoke and Domestic Slavery, but continue to us the
Enjoyment of our good old Laws, Liberties and Privileges, and bring all those
to exemplary Justice that have or shall dare attempt to Subvert, Diminish or
Undermine them.

Amen.
FINIS.

