Raree Show Or the true Protestant Procession. A new Ballad
to the Tune of the Northumberland man.
1.
THis is the Cabal of some Prot^stant Lords
A forging the turn that not long since they had,
Here W -- ^ sits and searches Records*
to find Flaws in good Statutes, and varnish the bad.
2.
This is the Lord Tony that slyly sits here
Who to sham and contrive has never denied
And rather then the Good Cause should fall through his fear
He Will let out Rebellion by broaching his side.
3.
This is Popular Perkin that smirks and looks gay
The women extols the Spark up to the sky,
None danceth with so great a grace, as they say,
Yet some body thinks that he capers too high.
4.
Here flourishing E -- the tongue o'th Gang
With Rhetorical Artifice fancies fine things,
First vainly composeth a taking Harangue
then fosters a Villain in Libelling Kings.
5.
Here Is Docter Informant that never would stick out
To traffic in Oaths or tell a State-Lye,
Observe how he firks all the Jesuits about,
First blaws on a Beuk, and so Papists God b -- y.
6.
Here Is Wilmore that's troubled with scruples and stings
His Citizens conscience is nice and demure,
A Traytor's Indicted for treasonable things,
But he tells you it is false, he is a Protestant sure.
7.
These are some sage Cytizens that you see there,
Who out of their Zeal all our rights to maintain
And to keep out all slavery, have taken a care
to put up in the streets two Posts and a Chain.
8.
The sear some Apprentices that still do retain
Some Tenets their Masters approve and allows,
They come to direct a wise Monarch to Reign
Instead of sweeping their shop and cleaning of shoes.
9.
This is the Committee where greivance is scanned
Which Remonstrates the danger that threatens the State
Good service is here by suspicion Trapan'd
And Allegiance is reckoned Malignancy straight.
10.
Here Is the Synod of Saints that will sometimes refresh
The failings of nature with means of their own.
They Will preach you the mortification of flesh
With eyes up to Heaven and Breeches let down.
11.
These are the Cabal of the Covenantiers
That think they maintain the Religion the best
By pulling down Churches and their Overseers
And routing the Defender of Faith with the rest.
12.
These are the Remains of the Levelling Rump
That stink in the House and fresh Commons annoy,
And least the right James should be turned up for Trump
They cry out, a Court Card will their gaming destroy.
13.
That Lumber of Trumpery buzzing about
Are silly Subscribers that come at first dash,
To make up a large Petitioning rout
Of Link-boys and all such true Protestant trash.
14.
These there are the Hucksters that Treason retail,
They Will sell you a sheet with a penniworth in it;
That Is Courantier Care that never will fail
to scribble, whilst Langly dares Publish and Print.
15.
That Is the Club of a Pack of ingenious friends
that made Charles a Scotch Pedlar in the Rare show,
And I hope that our Monarch to make them amends
will give them a Yard of St. Johnstons or two,
Printed for A. B. 1681.


