A COLLECTION OF SEVERAL TREATISES CONCERNING The Reasons and Occasions OF THE
PENAL LAWS.

VIZ. I. The Execution of JUSTICE in England, not for Religion, but for
Treason: 17 Dec. 1583. II. Important Considerations, by the Secular Priests:
Printed A.D. 1601. III. The Jesuits Reasons Unreasonable: 1662.


LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, Bookseller to His Most Sacred Majesty. M.
DC. LXXV.

THE PREFACE.
THE design of publishing these Treatises, is to vindicate the Honor and
Justice of our Laws from the rude aspersions, which have been lately cast upon
them, by such who are better versed in Hollinshead and Stow, than in the true
Reasons and Occasions of those Laws. This is the present method of dealing with
our Church and Laws, when our Adversaries have been quite tired with scolding,
they betake themselves to throw dirt in the face of them; and I am sorry the
weakness or imprudence of any late Historians among us should furnish them with
dunghils for this purpose. But since we have to deal with such who have no
advantage, but what the weakness and mistakes of their Adversaries give them,
it were heartily to be wished, that some effectual course were taken, that the
History of our Church since the Reformation, might be delivered to Posterity
with greater care and sincerity than has yet been used about it.

It has been thought the wisdom of some of the best governed Nations in the
World, to take a great care of their Histories, by whom and in what manner they
were written. Josephus says, That none but the Highpriests and the Prophets
were allowed to write the Histories of the Jewish Nation; the like others say
of the Chaldeans, Egyptians, and Persians, who all looked upon the History of
their Country as a Sacred thing, and which none ought to presume to meddle
with, but such as were appointed for it, and whose employment was supposed to
free them from the suspicion of flattery or falsehood. But above all Nations,
the Chinese, as they were most remarkable for Political Wisdom, were the most
punctual in this matter; no man durst attempt any thing of History among them
besides him whose public Office it was, which he was bound to perform with all
fidelity, for his won time; but not to call in question, or correct any thing
before him; by which means, the History of that mighty Empire, though written
by multitudes of Authors, is one continued and entire Story without any variety
or contradiction. It is very well known, that the old Romans suffered none but
the Pontifex Maximus to make up the Annals of every Year; which himself was
only entrusted with the keeping of, that the People might, upon resort to his
house, have full satisfaction in all their doubts; and these were called the
Annals Maximi; and although some make this custom as old as the foundation of
that Government, yet Vopiscus more probably makes it to be one of the wise
Constitutions of Numa. Dion says, That while the Roman Senate continued its
Authory, the Actions of every year were solemnly read out of the Public
Commentaries to the Senate and People; and although particular persons would
write Histories according to their own inclinations, yet the Truth might be
discerned out of the Public Records: and although he very much laments the
uncertainty of their Histories afterward, when the Emperors would not endure
the Truth to be written; yet there were persons who would write, though they
died for it, which was the case of Cremutius Cordus and Titus Labienus; which
made Seneca say, Res nova and insueta, supplicia de studiis sumi: but it seems
by what follows in him, the World may bear the loss of such Writings; for,
rejoicing that this Persecution of Wits began after Cicero's time, he says,
Dii melius, quod eo seculo ista ingeniorum supplicia coeperunt, quo ingenia
desierunt. And it appears by Tacitus, that the custom of Public Annals was
preserved to his time for the greater Affairs, and the Diurna Acta Urbis for
lesser occurrences: and Tertullian frequently appeals to the Archives and
Public Commentaries. Which custom of preserving public Records of History,
did likewise obtain in most well-governed Cities; as Plutarch often quotes the
Delphick and Laconick Commentaries. These things I only mention, that it may
not be thought below the wisdom of a Nation to take care of the History of it;
and not to suffer it to be profaned or corrupted, by every mean, peevish, or
indiscreet Writer, that has so little wit and judgment, as to think himself
fit to write the History, either of his own or former times. None are fit for
such a work but persons of great judgment and capacity, and such who have had
the best portunities of understanding Affairs, and have the greatest reputation
for integrity to report them. And we want not some such as these, who are so
well known, that I need not name them, but they are but few in comparison with
others. It was complained of among the Romans, that L. Octacilius being but a
Libertine, though he were Pompey's Master, should presume to write a History,
that being a Work proper for the wisest Senators; and Learned men have long
wished for a perpetual Edict against scribbling Historians, as great debauchers
of Truth, and corrupters of the Faith of History. I wish it were as easy to
remedy as to complain of these things; but those of us who are concerned for
the Honor of our Church and Nation, find the continual and growing
inconveniences of this mischief; when we see all the false or indiscreet
passages of the worst Historians picked up, and upon all occasions made use of
as the best Weapons against our Church. But thanks be to God, things are not
yet so bad with us, but we have sufficient evidence left to clear our selves of
these reproaches, without being put to defend the weaknesses of every trisling
Historian. What if Hollinshead, or Stow, or Speed, or any later men have let
fall some passages, which the Enemies of our Church make use of to its
disadvantage? Must things presently be concluded to be just as such men have
said, without searching farther? Must we be judged by them, rather than by such
who were in the top of business, and knew all the first grounds and Reasons of
Things? rather than by those, who were as much concerned to have found out all
reproaches against our Penal Laws; and yet acknowledge them to have had such
Reasons for them, that no Government in the World, but upon the same
provocations, would have done the same things? This is that particular part of
our History, which I have endeavored to clear by these following Treatises,
which have these advantages to recommend them to the Readers Consideration,

1. That the first of them was penned by the direction of one of the Greatest
Statesmen of his Age, and one of the Wisest Persons this Nation has ever bred,
viz. the Lord Treasurer Burleigh. For when the Jesuits and their Party had
filled the Courts of the Princes in Christendom with their noise and clamours
of the dreadful Persecutions in England, that Great man thought it not below
him to write this Apology for the Execution of Justice here, and to show how
reasonable, just, and moderate the Proceedings of the State were, considering
the height and insolence of the provocations; and this was published in several
Languages, and dispersed in the Courts of Princes to undeceive them as to all
the false reports of the Romish Emissaries, who have taken upon them that
public Character of the Popes Ambassadors to lie abroad for his and their own
advantage.

2. But after that by the means of Cardinal Allen and others, they had
endeavored to blast the reputation of that Apology; and after the death of
that great Minister of State, the Secular Priests did publish their Important
Considerations, wherein they assert the Truth of what was said in the Apology,
and vindicate the Honor and Justice of the Penal Laws: which is the second
Treatise here published and printed according to their own Copy; and which has
been so much concealed, or bought up by those of that Religion, that it has
been heard of by sew, and seen by fewer Protestants.

3. And lest any should say, that all those dangerous Principles to Government
are since his Majesty's happy Restoration utterly disowned by them, I have
added a third Treatise, printed by one of their own Religion 1662. which
charges the Jesuitical Party so deep with those Principles and Practices as to
make them incapable of any Favor.

If other persons will pursue the same method in retrieving such considerable
Treatises as these are, they may do more service to our Church and Nation than
by writing Histories themselves; and I shall desire the late Apologist to set
these Authors of his own Church, against the petty Historians he so punctually
quotes on all occasions: And we have so much the more reason to consider these
things, since in a very late Treatise called the Bleeding Iphigenia, the Irish
Rebellion is defended by one of the Titular Bishops to be a just and holy War;
and seeing they still think it lawful, what can we imagine then that they want,
but another occasion to do the same things?

THE EXECVTION OF JUSTICE IN ENGLAND, For maintenance of Public and Christian
Peace, etc.
All Offenders cover their faults with contrary causes.
IT has been in all Ages and in all Countries, a common usage of all offenders
for the most part, both great and small, to make defense of their lewd and
unlawful facts by untruths, and by coloring and covering their deeds (were
they never so vile) with pretenses of some other causes of contrary operations
or effects: to the intent not only to avoid punishment or shame, but to
continue, uphold, and prosecute their wicked attempts, to the full satisfaction
of their disordered and malicious appetites. And though such has been the use
of all Offenders, Rebels do most dangerously cover their faults.
yet of none with more danger than of Rebels and Traitors to their lawful
Princes, Kings, and Countries. Of which sort of late years, are specially to be
noted certain persons naturally born Subjects in the Realm of England, and
Ireland, who having for some good time professed outwardly their obedience to
their Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, have nevertheless afterward been stirred
up and seduced by wicked Spirits, Rebellion in England, and Ireland.
first in England sundry years past, and secondly, and of latter time in
Ireland, to enter into open Rebellion, taking Arms and coming into the Field
against her Majesty and her Lieutenants, with their Forces under Banners
displayed, inducing by notable untruths many simple people to follow and assist
them in their Traitorous actions. And though it is very well known, that both
their intentions and manifest actions were bent, to have deposed the Queens
Majesty from her Crown, and to have traitorously set in her place some other
whom they liked, whereby if they had not been speedily resisted, they would
have committed great bloodsheds and slaughters of her Majesty's faithful
Subjects, and ruined their native Country: The Rebels vanquished by the Queens
Power.
Yet by Gods power given unto her Majesty, they were so speedily vanquished, as
some few of them suffered by order of Law according to their deserts, many and
the greatest part upon Confession of their faults were pardoned, Some of the
Rebels fled into other Countries.
the rest (but they not many) of the principal, escaped into Foreign Countries,
and there because in none or few places Rebels and Traitors to their natural
Princes and Countries: dare for their Treasons challenge at their first muster
open comfort or succor, Rebels pretend Religion for their defense.
these notable Traitors and Rebels, have falsely informed many Kings, Princes,
and States, and specially the Bishop of Rome, commonly called the Pope, (from
whom they all had secretly their first comfort to Rebel) that the cause of
their flying from their* Countries was for the Religion of Rome, and for
maintenance of the said Popes Authority. Whereas diverse of them before their
Rebellion lived so notoriously, the most part of their lives, out of all good
rule, either for honest manners, or for any sense in Religion, as they might
have been rather familiar with Catalin, or Favorers to Sardanapalus, than
accounted good Subjects under any Christian Princes.

As for some examples of the heads of these Rebellions, out of England, fled
Charles Nevill Earl of Westmerland, a person utterly wasted by looseness of
life, and by Gods punishment even in the time of his Rebellion, bereaved of his
Children that should have succeeded him in the Earldom: and how his Body is now
eaten with Ulcers of lewd causes, all his Companions do see, that no Enemy he
had can wish him a viler punishment. And out of Ireland ran away one Thomas
Stukeley, a defamed person almost through all Christendom, and a faithless
Beast rather than a Man, fleeing first out of England for notable Piracies, and
out of Ireland for treacheries not pardonable, which two Ringleaders of Rebels,
Charles Nevill Earl of Westmer land, and Thomas Stukeley.
were the first Ringleaders of the rest of the Rebels; the one for England, the
other for Ireland. But notwithstanding the notorious evil and wicked lives of
these and others their Confederates, void of all Christian Religion, it liked
the Bishop of Rome, as in favor of their Treasons, not to color their
offenses as themselves openly pretend to do, for avoiding of common shame of
the World, but flatly to animate them to continue their former wicked purposes,
that is, to take Arms against their lawful Queen, to invade her Realm with
Foreign Forces, to pursue all her good Subjects and their Native Countries with
Fire and Sword: The effect of the Popes Bull against the Queen of England.
for maintenance whereof there had some years before, at sundry times, proceeded
in a thundering sort, Bulls, Excommunications, and other public Writings,
denouncing her Majesty, being the lawful Queen, and Gods anointed Servant, not
to be the Queen of the Realm, charging and upon pains of Excommunication,
commanding all her Subjects, to depart from their natural Allegiances, whereto
by birth and by Oath they were bound. Provoking also and authorizing all
persons of all degrees within both the Realms to Rebel, and upon this
Antichristian Warrant, being contrary to all the Laws of God and Man, and
nothing agreeable to a pastural Officer, not only all the rabble of the
foresaid Traitors that were before fled, but also all other persons that had
forsaken their Native Countries, being of diverse conditions and qualities, some
not able to live at home but in beggary, some discontented for lack of
preferments, which they gaped for unworthily in Universities and other places,
some Bankrupt Merchants, some in a sort learned to contentions, being not
contented to learn to obey the Laws of the Land, have many years running up and
down, from The practices of the Traitors, Rebels, and Fugitives, to execute the
Bull.
Country to Country, practiced some in one Corner, some in another, some with
seeking to gather Forces and money for Forces, some with instigation of Princes
by untruths to make War upon their natural Country, some with inward practices
to murder the Greatest, some with seditious Writings, and very many of late
with public infamous Libels, full of despiteful, vile terms, and poisoned
lies, altogether to uphold the foresaid Antichristian and Tyrannous Warrant of
the Popes Bull.

And yet also by some other means, to further these intentions, because they
could not readily prevail by way of Force, finding Foreign Princes of better
consideration and not readily inclined to their wicked purposes, it was devised
to erect up certain Schools which they called Seminaries, Seminaries erected to
nurse seditious Fugitives.
to nourish and bring up persons disposed naturally to Sedition, to continue
their race and trade, and to become Seedmen in their Tillage of Sedition, and
them to send secretly into these the Queens Majesty's Realms of England and
Ireland under secret Masks, some of Priesthood, some of other inferior Orders,
with Titles of Seminaries for some of the meaner sort, and of Jesuits for the
stagers and ranker sort and such like; but yet so warily they crept into the
Land, as none brought the marks of their Priesthood with them, but in diverse
Corners of her Majesty's Dominions, these Seminaries, or Seedmen, and Jesuits,
bringing with them certain Romish trash, as of their hallowed Wax, their Agnus
Dei, many kind of Beads, and such like, have as Tillage-men, The Seminary
Fugitives come secretly into the Realm to induce the people to obey the Popes
Bull.
labored secretly to persuade the people to allow of the Popes foresaid Bulls
and Warrants, and of his absolute Authority over all Princes and Countries, and
striking many with pricks of Conscience to obey the same; whereby in Process of
small time, if this wicked and dangerous, traitorous and crafty course, had not
been by Gods goodness espied and stayed, there had followed imminent danger of
horrible uprores in the Realms, and a manifest bloody destruction of great
multitudes of Christians.

For it cannot be denied, but that so many as should have been induced, and
thoroughly persuaded to have obeyed that wicked Warrant of the Popes, and the
Contents thereof, should have been forthwith in their hearts and Consciences,
secret Traitors, and for to be indeed errant and open Traitors, there should
have wanted nothing but opportunity to feel their strength, and to assemble
themselves in such numbers, with Armor and Weapons, as they might have
presumed to have been the greater part, and so by open civil War, to have come
to their wicked purposes. But Gods goodness by whom Kings do Rule, Sowers of
sedition taken, convented, and executed for Treason.
and by whose blast Traitors are commonly wasted and confounded, has otherwise
given to her Majesty, as to his Handmaid and dear Servant, ruling under him,
the spirit of Wisdom and Power, whereby she has caused some of these seditious
Seedmen, and Sowers of Rebellion, to be discovered, for all their secret
lurkings, and to be taken and charged with these former points of High Treason,
not being dealt withal upon questions of Religion, but justly condemned as
Traitors. At which times, notwithstanding all manner of gentle ways of
persuasions used, to move them to desist from such manifest traitorous courses
and opinions, yet was the Canker of their Rebellious humors so deeply entered
and graven into the hearts of many of them, as they would not be removed from
their traitorous determinations. And therefore as manifest Traitors in
maintaining and adhearing to the capital Enemy of her Majesty and her Crown,
who has not only been the cause of two Rebellions already passed in England
and Ireland, but in that of Ireland did manifestly wage and maintain his own
people Captains and Soldiers under the Banner of Rome, against her Majesty (so
as no Enemy could do more:) These I say have justly suffered Death, not by
force or form of any new Laws established, either for Religion, or against the
Popes Supremacy, as the slanderous Libellers would have it seem to be, The
seditious Traitors Condemned by the ancient Laws of the Realm, made 200. years
past*
but by the ancient temporal Laws of the Realm, and namely by the Laws of
Parliament made in King Edward the Thirds time, about the year of our Lord,
1330. which is above 200. years and more past, when the Bishops of Rome, and
Popes, were suffered to have their Authority Ecclesiastical in this Realm as
they had in many other Countries.

But yet of this kind of Offenders, as many of them, as after their
Condemnations were contented to renounce their former traitorous assertions, so
many were spared from Execution, and do live Persons Condemned, spared from
Execution, upon refusal of their treasonable opinions.
still at this day; such was the unwillingness in her Majesty to have any blood
spilt, without this very just and necessary cause, proceeding from themselves.
And yet nevertheless, such of the rest of the Traitors as remain in Foreign
parts, The Foreign Traitors continue sending of persons to move sedition in the
Realm.
continuing still their Rebellious minds, and craftily keeping themselves aloof
off from dangers, cease not to provoke sundry other inferior seditious
persons, newly to steal secretly into the Realm, to revive the former seditious
practices, to the Execution of the Popes foresaid Bulls against her Majesty and
the Realm, pretending when they are apprehended, that they came only into the
Realm, by the commandment of their Superiors, the Heads of the Jesuits, to
whom they are bound (as they say) by Oath, against either King or Country, and
here to inform or reform Men's Consciences from errors in some points of
Religion, as they shall think meet: but yet in very truth the whole scope of
their secret labors is manifestly proved, to be secretly to win all people,
with whom they dare deal, so to allow of the Popes said Bulls, and of his
Authority without exception, as in obeying thereof, they take themselves fully
discharged of their Allegiance, and Obedience to their lawful Prince and
Country, yea, and to be well warranted to take Arms to Rebel against her
Majesty when they shall be thereunto called, and to be ready secretly to join
with any Foreign Force that can be procured to invade the Realm, whereof also
they have a long time given, and yet do for their advantage, no small comfort
of success: and so consequently the effect of their The Seditious Fugitives
labor to bring the Realm into a War external and domestical.
labors is to bring the Realm not only into a dangerous War against the Forces
of Strangers (from which it has been free above 23. or 24. years, a Case very
memorable and hard to be matched with an example of the like:) but into a War
Domestical and Civil, wherein no blood is usually spared, nor mercy yielded,
and wherein neither the Vanqueror nor the vanquished, have cause of triumph.

And forasmuch as these are the most evident perils that necessarily should
follow, if these kind of Vermin were suffered to creep by stealth into the
Realm, and to spread their poison within the same, howsoever when they are
taken, like Hypocrites, they color and counterfeit the same with profession of
devotion in Religion: it is of all persons to be yielded in reason, The duty of
the Queen and all her Governors to God and their Country, is to repel
practices of Rebellion.
that her Majesty and all her Governors and Magistrates of Justice, having care
to maintain the peace of the Realm (which God has given in her time, to
continue longer than ever in any time of her Progenitors) ought of duty to
Almighty God the Author of Peace, and according to the natural love and charge
due to their Country, and for avoiding of the Floods of blood, which in Civil
Wars are seen to run and flow, by all lawful means possible, as well by the
Sword as by Law, in their several seasons to impeach and repel, these so
manifest and dangerous colorable practices, and works of Sedition and
Rebellion. And though there are many Subjects known in the Realm, that differ
in some opinions of Religion from the Church of England, and that do also not
forbear to profess the same, yet in that they do also profess Loyalty and
Obedience None charged with capital Crimes, being of a contrary Religion, and
professing to withstand Foreign Forces.
to her Majesty, and offer readily in her Majesty's defense to impugn and resist
any Foreign Force, though it should come or be procured from the Pope himself,
none of these sort are for their contrary opinions in Religion prosecuted or
charged with any crimes or pains of Treason, nor yet willingly searched in
their Consciences for their contrary opinions, that savor not of Treason.

And of these sorts, there are a number of persons, not of such base and vulgar
note as those were which of late have been executed, as in particular, some by
name are well known, and not unfit to be remembered. The first and chiefest by
Office was Dr. Heth, that was Archbishop of York, and Lord Chancellor of
England in Queen Mary's time, who at the first coming of her Majesty to the
Crown, showing himself a faithful and quiet Subject, continued in both the said
Offices, though in Religion then manifestly differing, and yet was he not
restrained of his liberty, nor deprived of his proper lands and goods, but
leaving willingly both his Offices, lived in his own House, and enjoyed all his
purchased Lands during all his natural life, until by very age he departed this
World, and then left his House and living to his Friends: an example of
gentleness never matched in Queen Mary's time. The like did one Dr. Pool that
had been Bishop of Peterborough, an ancient grave person, and a very quiet
Subject. There were also others that had been Bishops and in great estimation,
as Dr. Tunstal Bishop of Duresm, a person Names of diverse Ecclesiastical
persons professing contrary Religion, never charged with capital Crimes.
also of very quiet behavior. There were also other, Dr. White, and Dr.
Oglethorp, one of Winchester, the other of Carlisle, Bishops: and Dr. Thurleby,
and Dr. Watson yet living, one of Ely, the other of Lincoln, Bishops: not
pressed with any capital pain, though they maintained the Popes Authority
against the Laws of the Realm: and some Abbots, as Mr. Fecknam yet living, a
person also of quiet and courteous behavior for a great time. Some also were
Deans, as Dr. Boxall Dean of Windsore, a person of great modesty and knowledge:
Dr. Cole Dean of Paul's, a person more earnest than wise: Dr. Reynolds Dean of
Exeter, and many such others having born Office and Dignities in the Church,
and had made profession against the Pope, which they began in Queen Mary's time
to change, yet were they never to this day burdened with capital pains, nor yet
deprived of any their goods or proper livelyhoods, but only removed from their
Ecclesiastical Offices, which they would not exercise according to the Laws.
And most of them for a great time were retained in Bishops Houses in very civil
and courteous manner, without charge to themselves or their friends, until the
time that the Pope began by his Bulls and Messages, to offer trouble to the
Realm by stirring of Rebellion: about which time only, some of these aforenamed
being found busier in matters of state tending to stir troubles, than was meet
for the common quiet of the Realm, were removed to other more private places,
where such other wanderers as were men known to move sedition, might be
restrained from common resorting to them to increase trouble, as the Popes Bull
gave manifest occasion: and yet without charging them in their Consciences or
otherwise, by any inquisition to bring them into danger of any capital Law, so
as no one was called to any capital or bloody question upon matters of
Religion, but have all enjoyed their life as the course of nature would: and
such of them as yet remain, may, if they will not be Authors or Instruments of
Rebellion or Sedition, enjoy the time that God and nature shall yield them
without danger of life or member.

The late Favorers of the Popes Authority, were the chief Adversaries of the
same, by their Doctrines and Writings.
And yet it is worthy to be well marked, that the chiefest of all these, and the
most of them, had in the time of King Henry the Eight, and King Edward the
Sixth, either by Preaching, Writing, reading or arguing, taught all people to
condemn and abhor the Authority of the Pope: yea they had many times given
their Oaths publicly, against the Popes Authority, and had also yielded to
both the said Kings, the Title of supreme head of the Church of England next
under Christ, which title the Adversaries do most falsely write and affirm, that
the Queens Majesty does now use: a manifest lie and untruth. And for proof that
these foresaid Bishops and learned men had so long time disavowed the Popes
Authority, many of their Books and Sermons against the Popes Authority remain
printed to be seen in these times, to their great shame and reproof to change
so often, and specially in persecuting such as themselves have taught and
established to hold the contrary.

A great number of Lay persons of livelihood, being of a contrary Religion,
never charged with capital Crime.
There were also and yet be a great number of others, being Laymen of good
possessions and Lands, men of good credit in their Countries, manifestly of
late times seduced to hold contrary opinions in Religion for the Popes
Authority, and yet none of them have been sought hitherto to be impeached in
any point or quarrel of Treason, or of loss of Life, Member, or Inheritance, so
as it may plainly appear, that it is not, nor has been for contrarious
opinions in Religion, or for the Popes Authority, as the Adversaries do boldly
and falsely publish, that any persons have suffered Death since her Majesty's
Reign, and yet some of these sort are well known to hold opinion, that the Pope
ought by Authority of Gods word to be Supreme and only Head of the Catholic
Church, and only to rule in all causes Ecclesiastical, and that the Queens
Majesty ought not to be the Governor over all her Subjects in her Realm being
persons Ecclesiastical: which opinions are nevertheless in some part by the
Laws of the Realm punishable in some degrees, No person charged with capital
Crime for the only maintenance of the Popes Supremacy.
and yet for none of these points have any persons been prosecuted with the
charge of Treason, or in danger of life. And if then it be inquired, for what
cause these others have of late suffered Death, it is truly to be answered as
before is often remembered, that none at all are impeached for Treason to the
danger of their Life, but such as do obstinately maintain the contents of the
Popes Bull aforementioned, which do import, that her Majesty is not the lawful
Queen of England, the first and highest point of Treason: and that all her
Subjects are discharged Such Condemned only for Treason, as maintain the
effects of the Popes Bull against her Majesty and the Realm.
of their Oaths and Obedience, another high point of Treason: and all warranted
to disobey her and her Laws, a third and a very large point of Treason.

And thereto is to be added a fourth point most manifest, in that they would
not disallow the Popes hostile proceedings in open Wars against her Majesty in
her Realm of Ireland, where one of their Company Dr. Sanders, a lewd Scholar
and Subject of England, a Fugitive and a principal Companion and Conspirator
with the Traitors and Rebels at Rome, was by the Popes special Commission a
Commander, as in form of a Legate, and sometime a Treasurer or Play Master for
those Wars, Dr. Sanders maintenance of the Popes Bull.
which Dr. Sanders in his Book of his Church Monarchy, did before his passing
into Ireland openly by Writing, gloriously avow the foresaid Bull of Pius
Quintus against her Majesty, to be lawful, and affirms that by virtue thereof
one Dr. Mooreton, an old English Fugitive and Conspirator, was sent from Rome
into the North parts of England, to stir up the first Rebellion there, whereof
Charles Nevill the late Earl of Westmerland was a Head Captain. And thereby it
may manifestly appear to all men, how this Bull was the ground of the
Rebellions both in England and Ireland, and how for maintenance thereof, and
for sowing of Sedition by Warrant and The persons that suffered Death, were
Condemned for Treason, and not for Religion.
allowance of the same, these persons were justly condemned of Treason, and
lawfully Executed by the ancient Laws temporal of the Realm, without any other
matter than for their practices and Conspiracies both abroad and at home
against the Queen and the Realm, and for maintaining of the Popes foresaid
Authority and Bull published to deprive her Majesty of her Crown, and for
withdrawing and reconciling of her Subjects from their natural allegiance due
to her Majesty and to their Country, and for moving them to Sedition: and for
no other causes or questions of Religion were these persons condemned: although
true it is, that when they were charged and convinced of these points of
Conspiracies and Treasons, they would still in their answers colourably pretend
their actions to have been for Religion: but in deed and truth they were
manifest for the procurement and maintenance of the Rebellions and Wars against
her Majesty and her Realm.

And herein is now the manifest diversity to be seen and well considered,
betwixt the truth of her Majesty's actions, and the falsehood of the blasphemous
Adversaries: that where the factious party of the Pope the principal Author of
the Invasions of her Majesty's Dominions, do falsely allege, that a number of
persons, whom they term as Martyrs, have died for defense of the Catholic
Religion, the same in very truth may manifestly appear to have died (if they so
will have it) as Martyrs for the Pope, and Traitors against their Sovereign and
Queen in adhering to him, being the notable and only open hostile Enemy in all
actions of War against her Majesty, her Kingdoms and People: A full proof that
the maintainers of the Bull are directly guilty of Treason.
and that this is the meaning of all these that have so obstinately maintained
the Authority and contents of this Bull, the very words of the Bull do declare
in this sort, as Dr. Sanders reports them.

PIus Quintus Pontifex Maximus, de Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine,
declaravit Elizabetham praetenso Regni jure, necnon omni and quocunque dominio,
dignitate, privilegioque privatam: Itemque Proceres, subditos and populos dicti
regni, ac caeteros omnes qui illi quomodocunque juraverunt, a juramento
hujusmodi ac omni fidelitatis debito, perpetuo absolutos: That is to say, Pius
Quintus the greatest Bishop, of the fullness of the Apostolic Power, declared
Elizabeth to be bereaved or deprived of her pretended right of her Kingdom, and
also of all and whatsoever Dominion, Dignity, and Privilege: and also the
Nobles, Subjects, and People of the said Kingdom, and all others which had
sworn to her any manner of ways, to be absolved for ever from such Oath, and
from all debt or duty of fealty, and so forth, with many threatening Cursings,
to all that durst obey her or her Laws. And for Execution hereof, to prove,
that the effect of the Popes Bull and Message was a flat Rebellion, it is not
amiss to hear what Dr. Sanders the Popes firebrand in Ireland also writes in
his visible Church Monarchy, which is thus.

Dr. Mortons secret Embassage from Rome to stir the Rebellion in the North.
Pius Quintus Pontifex Maximus, Anno Domini 1569. reverendum presbyterum
Nicolaum Mortonum Anglum in Angliam misit, ut certis illustribus viris
authoritate Apostolica denunciaret, Elizabetham quae tunc rerum potiebatur,
haereticam esse: ob eamque causam, omni Dominio and potestate excidisse,
impuneque ab illis velut ethnicam haberi posse, ne^ eos illius legibus aut
mandatis deinceps obedire cogi: That is to say, Pius Quintus the greatest
Bishop, in the year of our Lord 1569. sent the reverend Priest Nicholas Morton
an Englishman into England, that he should denounce or declare by the
Apostolic Authority to certain Noblemen, Elizabeth, who then was in
possession, to be an Heretic: and for that cause, to have fallen from all
Dominion and Power, and that she may be had or reputed of them as an Ethnic,
and that they are not to be compelled to obey her Laws or Commandments, etc.

Thus you see an Embassage of Rebellion from the Popes Holiness, the
Ambassador an old doting English Priest, a Fugitive and Conspirator, sent as
he says to some Noblemen, and those were the two Earls of Northumberland and
Westmerland, Heads of the Rebellion.

And after this, he follows to declare the success thereof, which I dare say
he was sorry it was so evil, with these words.

Qua denuntiatione multi nobiles viri adducti sunt, ut de fratribus liberandis
cogitare auderent, ac sperabant illi quidem Catholicos omnes summis viribus
affuturos esse: verum etsi aliter quam illi expectabant res evenit, quia
Catholici omnes nondum probe cognoverant, Elizabetham haereticam esse
declaratam, tamen laudanda illorum Nobilium consilia erant. That is, By which
denuntiation, many Noblemen were induced or led, that they were boldned to
think of the freeing of their Brethren, and they hoped certainly that all the
Catholics would have assisted them with all their strength: but although the
matter happened otherwise than they hoped for, because all the Catholics knew
not that Elizabeth was declared to be an Heretic, yet the Counsels and intents
of those Noblemen were to be praised. A Rebellion and a vanquishing of Rebels
very smoothly described.

This noble fact here mentioned, was the Rebellion in the North: the Noblemen
were the Earls of Westmerland and Northumberland: the lack of the event or
success, was that the Traitors were vanquished, and the Queens Majesty and her
Subjects had by Gods Ordinance the Victory: and the cause why the Rebels
prevailed not, was because all the Catholics had not been duly informed that
the Queens Majesty was declared to be (as they term it) an Heretic: which want
of information, to the intent to make the Rebels mightier in number and power,
was diligently and cunningly supplied by the sending into the Realm of a great
multitude of the Seminaries and Jesuits, whose special charge was to inform the
people thereof, as by their actions has manifestly appeared.

And though Dr. Sanders has thus written, yet it may be said by such as
favored the two notable Jesuits, one named Robert Persons (who yet hides
himself in Corners to continue his Traiterous practice) the other named Edmond
Campion (that was found out being disguised like a Royster, and suffered for
his Treasons) that Dr. Sanders Treason is his proper Treason in allowing of the
said Bull, but not to be imputed to Persons Persons and Campion are offenders
as Dr. Sanders is, for allowance of the Bull.
and Campion. Therefore to make it plain that these two by special Authority
had charge to execute the sentence of this Bull, these Acts in Writing
following shall make manifest, which are not feigned or imagined, but are the
very Writings taken about one of their Accomplices, immediately after Campions
Death.

Facultates concessaepp. Roberto Personio, and Edmundo Campiano, pro Anglia,
die 14. Aprilis 1580.
PEtatur a summo Domino nostro, explicatio Bullae declaratoriae per Pium
Quintum contra Elizabetham and ei adhaerentes, quam Catholici cupiunt intelligi
hoc modo, ut obliget semper illam and haereticos, catholicos vero nullo modo
obliget rebus sic stantibus, sed tum demum quando publica ejusdem bullae
executio fieri poterit. Then followed many other Petitions of faculties for
their further Authorities, which are not needful for this purpose to be
recited: but in the end follows this Sentence as an answer of the Popes, Has
praedictas gratias concessit Summus Pontifex patri Roberto Persnio, and Edmundo
Campiano in Angliam profecturis, die 14. Aprilis 1580.

Praesente patre Oliverio Manarco assistente.

The English of which Latin Sentences is, as follows.

Faculties granted to the two Fathers, Robert Persons, and Edmond Campion for
England, the 14 day of April, 1580.
Faculties granted to Persons and Campion, by Pope Gregory 13. Anno 1580.
LET it be asked or required of our most holy Lord, the explication or meaning
of the Bull declaratory made by Pius the Fifth against Elizabeth, and such as
do adhere or obey her, which Bull the Catholics desire to be understood in
this manner, that the same Bull shall always bind her and the Heretics, but
the Catholics it shall by no means bind, as matters or things do now stand or
be, but hereafter, when the public execution of that Bull may be had or made.

Then in the end the conclusion was thus added.

The highest Pontiff or Bishop, granted these foresaid graces to Father Robert
Persons, and Edmond Campion, who are now to take their Journeys into England,
the fourteenth day of April, in the year of our Lord, 1580.

Being present, the Father Oliverius Manarke assistant.

Hereby is it manifest, what Authority Campion had to impart the contents of
the Bull against the Queens Majesty, howsoever he himself denied the same.

And though it be manifest that these two Jesuits, Persons and Campion, not
only required to have the Popes mind declared for the Bull, but also in their
own Petitions, showed how they and other Catholics did desire to have the said
Bull to be understood against the Queen of England: yet to make the matter more
plain how all other Jesuits and Seminaries, yea how all Papists naming
themselves Catholics, do and are warranted to interpret the said Bull against
her Majesty and her good Subjects, you shall see what one of their fellows,
named Heart, who was condemned with Campion, did amongst many other things
declare his knowledge thereof the last of December, in the same year, 1580. in
these words following.

Hearts Confession of the interpretation of the Bull of Pius Quintus.
The Bull of Pius Quintus (for so much as it is against the Queen) is holden
among the English Catholics for a lawful sentence, and a sufficient discharge
of her Subjects fidelity, and so remains in force, but in some points
touching the Subjects, it is altered by the present Pope. For where in that
Bull all her Subjects are commanded not to obey her, and she being
excommunicate and deposed, all that do obey her are likewise innodate and
accursed, which point is perilous to the Catholics: for if they obey her,
they be in the Popes Curse, and if they disobey her, they are in the Queens
danger: therefore the present Pope to relieve them has altered that part of
the Bull, and dispensed with them to obey and serve her, without peril of
excommunication: which dispensation is to endure but till it please the Pope
otherwise to determine.

A Conclusion that all the infamous Books against the Queen and the Realm, are
false.
Wherefore to make some conclusion of the matters beforementioned, all persons
both within the Realm and abroad, may plainly perceive that all the infamous
Libels lately published abroad in sundry languages, and the slanderous reports
made in other Princes Courts of a multitude of persons, to have been of late
put to torments and Death, only for profession of the Catholic Religion, and
not for matters of state against the Queens Majesty, are false and shameless,
and published to the maintenance of Traitors and Rebels. And to make the matter
seem more horrible or lamentable, they recite the particular names of all the
persons, Difference of the small numbers that have been executed in the space
of five and twenty years, from the great numbers in five years of Queen Mary's
Reign.
which by their own Catalogue exceed not for these twenty five years space,
above the number of threescore, forgetting or rather with their stony and
senseless hearts not regarding, in what cruel sort in the time of Queen Mary,
which little exceeded the space of five years, the Queens Majesty's Reign being
five times as many, there were by Imprisonment, Torments, Famine and Fire, of
Men, Women, Maidens and Children, almost the number of four hundred: and of
that number, above twenty that had been Archbishops, Bishops, and principal
Prelates or Officers in the Church lamentably destroyed, and of Women above
threescore, and of Children above forty, and amongst the Women, some great with
Child, out of whose bodies the Child, by fire was expelled alive, and yet also
cruelly burned: examples beyond all heathen Cruelty. And most of the youth that
then suffered cruel Death, both Men, Women, and Children (which is to be noted)
were such, as had never by the Sacrament of Baptism, or by Confirmation,
professed, nor were ever taught or instructed, or ever had heard of any other
kind of Religion, but only of that which by their blood and death in the fire
they did as true Martyrs testify. A matter of another sort to be lamented with
simplicity of words, and not with puffed Eloquence, than the execution in this
time of a very few Traitors, who also in their time, if they exceeded thirty
years of Age, had in their Baptism professed, and in their youth had learned
the same Religion, which they now so bitterly oppugned. And beside that, in
their opinions they differ much from the Martyrs of Queen Mary's time: for
though they continued in the profession of the Religion wherein they were
Christened, yet they never at their death denied their lawful Queen, nor
maintained any of her open and Foreign Enemies, nor procured any Rebellion or
Civil War, nor did sow any Sedition in secret Corners, nor withdrew any
Subjects from their Obedience, as these sworn Servants of the Pope have
continually done.

And therefore all these things well considered, there is no doubt, but all
good Subjects within the Realm do manifestly see, and all wavering persons (not
being led clean out of the way by the seditious) will hereafter perceive, how
they have been abused to go astray. An Advertisement to all princes of
Countries abroad.
And all strangers, but especially all Christian Potentates, as Emperors,
Kings, Princes, and such like, having their Sovereign Estates, either in
succession hereditary, or by consent of their people, being acquainted with the
very truth of these her Majesty's late just and necessary actions, only for
defense of her Self, her Crown, and People, against open Invaders, and for
eschewing of Civil Wars, stirred up by Rebellion, will allow in their own like
Cases, for a truth and rule (as it is not to be doubted but they will) that it
belongs not to a Bishop of Rome as Successor of Saint Peter, and therein a
Pastor spiritual, or if he were the Bishop of all Christendom, as by the name
of Pope he claims, first by his Bulls or Excommunications, in this sort at
his will in favor of Traitors and Rebels, to depose any Sovereign Princes,
being lawfully invested in their Crowns, by succession in blood, or by lawful
Election, and then to Arm Subjects against their natural Lords, to make Wars,
and to dispense with them for their Oaths in so doing, or to excommunicate
faithful Subjects, for obeying of their natural Princes, and lastly himself to
make open War, with his own Soldiers, against Princes moving no Force against
him.

For if these powers should be permitted to him to exercise, then should no
Empire, no Kingdom, no Country, no City or Town, be possessed by any lawful
title, longer than one such only an earthly man, sitting (as he says) in St.
Peter's Chair at Rome, The Authority claimed by the Pope not warranted by
Christ, or by the two Apostles, Peter and Paul.
should for his will and appetite (without Warrant from God or Man) think meet
and determine: An Authority never challenged by the Lord of Lords the Son of
God, Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior, and the only Head of his Church,
whilst he was in his Humanity upon the Earth, nor yet delivered by any Writing
or certain Tradition from Saint Peter, from whom the Pope pretends to derive
all his Authority, nor yet from St. Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles; but
contrariwise by all Preachings, Precepts, and Writings, contained in the Gospel
and other Scriptures of the Apostles, obedience is expressly commanded to all
earthly Princes, yea, even to Kings by special name, and that so generally, as
no person is exempted from such duty of obedience, as by the sentence of St.
Paul even to the Romans, appears, Omnis anima sublimioribus potestatibus sit
subdita; That is, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers: within the
compass of which Law or Precept, St. Chrysostom being Bishop of Constantinople,
writes, that even Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and Monks are comprehended.
And for proof of St. Peter's mind herein, from whom these Popes claim their
Authority, it cannot be plainlier expressed, than when he writes thus: Proinde
subjecti estote cuivis humanae ordinationi, propter Dominum, sive Regi, ut qui
superemineat, sive Praesidibus ab eo missis: That is, Therefore be you subject
to every humane ordinance or creature, for the Lord, whether it be to the King,
as to him that is supereminent, or above the rest, or to his Presidents sent by
him. By which two principal Apostles of Christ, these Popes the pretended
Successors, but chiefly by that which Christ the Son of God, the only Master of
Truth, said to Peter and his fellow-Apostles, Reges gentium dominantur, vos
autem non sic: That is, The Kings of the Gentiles have rule over them, but you
not so, may learn to forsake their arrogant and tyrannous Authorities in
earthly and temporal causes over Kings and Princes, and exercise their Pastoral
Office, as St. Peter was charged thrice at one time by his Lord and Master,
Pasce oves meas, Feed my sheep, and peremptorily forbidden to use a Sword, in
saying to him, Converte gladium tuum in locum suum, or, mitte gladium tuum in
vaginam: That is, Turn thy Sword into his place, or, Put thy Sword into the
scabbard.

All which Precepts of Christ and his Apostles, were duly followed and observed
many hundred years after their death, by the faithful and godly Bishops of
Rome, that duly followed the doctrine and humility of the Apostles, and the
doctrine of Christ, and thereby dilated the limits of Christ's Church and the
Faith, more in the compass of an hundred years, than the latter Popes have done
with their Swords and Curses these five hundred years, and so continued until
the time of one Pope Hildebrand the first that made War against the Emperor.
An. Dom. 1074.
Pope Hildebrand, otherwise called Gregory the Seventh, about the year of our
Lord, 1074. who first began to usurp that kind of Tyranny, which of late the
Pope called Pius Quintus, and since that time, Gregory now the Thirteenth has
followed, for some example as it seems, that is: Where Gregory the Seventh,
in the year of our Lord 1074. or thereabout, presumed to depose Henry the
Fourth, a noble Emperor then being, Gregory the Thirteenth now at this time,
would attempt the like against King Henry the Eighth's Daughter and Heir, Queen
Elizabeth, a Sovereign Queen, holding her Crown immediately of God. And to the
end it may appear to Princes, or to their good Counselors in one example, what
was the fortunate success that God gave to this good Christian Emperor Henry
against the proud Pope Hildebrand, it is to be noted, that when the Pope
Gregory attempted to depose this noble Emperor Henry, there was one Rodulph a
Noble man, by some named the Count of Reenfield, that by the Popes procurement,
usurped the name of the Emperor, The Judgment of God against the Popes false
erected Emperor.
who was overcome by the said Henry the lawful Emperor, and in fight having
lost his right hand, he, the said Rodulph, lamented his case to certain
Bishops, who in the Popes name had erected him up, and to them he said, that
the self-same right hand which he had lost, was the hand wherewith he had
before sworn obedience to his Lord and Master the Emperor Henry, and that in
following their ungodly Counsels, he had brought upon him Gods heavy and just
Judgments. And so Henry the Emperor prevailing by Gods power, Pope Gregory the
Seventh deposed by Henry IV.
caused Gregory the Pope by a Synod in Italy to be deposed, as in like times
before him his Predecessor Otho the Emperor, had deposed one Pope John for
many heinous crimes: and so were also within a short time, three other Popes,
namely, Sylvester, Bennet, and Gregory the Sixth, used by the Emperor Henry
the Third, about the year of our Lord 1047. for their like presumptuous
attempts in temporal actions against the said Emperors. Many other examples
might be showed to the Emperors Majesty, and the Princes of the holy Empire
now being, after the time of Henry the Fourth: Henry 5. Frederick 1. Frederick
2. Lewis of Banar, Emperors.
as of Henry the Fifth, and after him, of Frederick the First, and Frederick the
Second, and then of Lewis of Bavar, all Emperors, cruelly and tyrannously
persecuted by the Popes, and by their Bulls, Curses, and by open Wars, and
likewise to many other the great Kings and Monarchs of Christendom, of their
noble Progenitors, Kings of their several Dominions: whereby they may see how
this kind of tyrannous Authority in Popes to make Wars upon Emperors and
Kings, and to command them to be deprived, took hold at the first by Pope
Hildebrand, though the same never had any lawful example or warrant from the
Laws of God of the Old or New Testament, but yet the successes of their
tyrannies were by Gods goodness for the most part made frustrate, as by Gods
goodness there is no doubt, but the like will follow to their confusions at all
times to come.

And therefore, as there is no doubt, but the like violent tyrannous
proceedings by any Pope in maintenance of Traiters and Rebels, would be
withstood by every Sovereign Prince in Christendom in defense of their Persons
and Crowns, and maintenance of their Subjects in Peace: so is there at this
present a like just cause Whatsoever is alwful for other Princes Sovereigns, is
lawful for the Queen and Crown of England.
that the Emperors Majesty, with the Princes of the holy Empire, and all other
Sovereign Kings and Princes in Christendom, should judge the same to be lawful
for her Majesty being a Queen, and holding the very place of a King and a
Prince Sovereign over diverse Kingdoms and Nations, she being also most lawfully
invested in her Crown, and as for good governing of her People, with such
applause and general allowance, loved, and obeyed of them, saving a few ragged
Traiters or Rebels, or persons discontented, whereof no other Realm is free, as
continually for these twenty five years past has been notably seen and so
publicly marked, even by strangers repairing into this Realm, as it were no
cause of disgrace to any Monarchy and King in Christendom to have her Majesty's
felicity compared with any of theirs whatsoever: and it may be, there are many
Kings and Princes could be well contented with the fruition of some proportion
of her felicity. And though the Popes be now suffered by the Emperor, in the
Lands of his own peculiar Patrimony, and by the two great Monarchs the French
King and the King of Spain, in their Dominions and Territories (although by
other Kings not so allowed) to continue his Authority in sundry cases, The
Title of universal Bishop is a Preamble of Antichrist.
and his glorious Title to be the universal Bishop of the World, which Title
Gregory the Great above nine hundred years past, called a profane Title, full
of Sacrilege, and a Preamble of Antichrist: yet in all their Dominions and
Kingdoms, as also in the Realm of England, most notably by many ancient Laws it
is well known, how many ways the tyrannous Power of this his excessive
Authority has been and still is restrained, checked, and limited by Laws and
Pragmatiques, both ancient and new: a very large field for the Lawyers of those
Countries to walk in and discourse. And howsoever the Popes Canonists being as
his Bombarders, do make his Excommunications and Curses appear fearful to the
multitude and simple people: yet all great Emperors and Kings aforetime, in
their own cases, of their Rights and Royal Preheminences, though the same
concerned but a City or a poor Town, and sometime but the not allowance of some
unworthy Person to a Bishopric or to an Abbey, never refrained to despise all
Popes Curses or Forces, but attempted always, either by their Swords to compel
them to desist from their furious actions, or without any fear of themselves,
in body, soul, or conscience, stoutly to withstand their Curses, and that
sometime by force, sometime by Ordinances and Laws: the ancient Histories
whereof are too many to be repeated, and of none more frequent and effectual
than of the Kings of France.

But leaving those that are ancient, we may remember how in this our own
present or late Age, it has been manifestly seen, how the Army of the late
noble Emperor Charles the Fifth, Father to King Philip that now reigns, was
not afraid of his Curses, Rome sacked, and the Pope Clement taken Prisoner by
the Emperors Army.
when in the year of our Lord 1527. Rome it self was besieged and sacked, and
the Pope then called Clement, and his Cardinals, to the number of about thirty
three in his Mount Adrian or Castle S. Angelo, taken Prisoners and detained
seven months or more, and after ransomed by Don Vgo di Moncada a Spaniard, and
the Marquess of Grasto, at about four hundred M. Ducats, besides the ransoms
of his Cardinals which was very great, having not long before-time been also
notwithstanding his Curses, besieged in the same Castle by the Family of the
Colonesi and their Fautors his next Neighbors being then Imperialists, and
forced to yield to all their demands. Neither did King Henry 1550. King Henry
the Second of France his Edicts against the Pope and his Courts of Rome.
the Second of France, Father to Henry now King of France, about the year 1550.
fear or regard the Pope or his Court of Rome, when he made several straight
Edicts against many parts of the Popes Claims in prejudice of the Crown and
Clergy of France, retracting the Authority of the Court of Rome, greatly to the
hinderance of the Popes former profits. The besieging of Rome and the Pope by
the Duke of Alva with King Philips Army.
Neither was the Army of King Philip now of Spain, whereof the Duke of Alva was
General, stricken with any fear of cursing, when it was brought before Rome
against the Pope, in the year of our Lord 1555. where great destruction was
made by the said Army, and all the delicate Buildings, Gardens, and Orchards
next to Rome-Walls overthrown, wherewith his Holiness was more terrified, than
he was able to remove with any his Curses. Queen Mary and Cardinal Pool
resisted the Pope.
Neither was Queen Mary the Queens Majesty's late Sister, a person not a little
devoted to the Roman Religion, so afraid of the Popes cursings, but that both
she and her whole Council, and that with the assent of all the Judges of the
Realm, according to the ancient Laws, in favor of Cardinal Pool her Kinsman,
did forbid the entry of his Bulls, and of a Cardinal Hat at Callis, that was
sent from the Pope for one Friar Peyto, whom the Pope had assigned to be a
Cardinal in disgrace of Cardinal Pool; neither did Cardinal Pool himself at the
same time obey the Popes commandments, nor showed himself afraid, being
assisted by the Queen, when the Pope did threaten him with pain of
Excommunication, but did still oppose himself against the Popes commandment for
the said pretended Cardinal Peyto: D. Peyto a begging Friar
who notwithstanding all the threatenings of the Pope, was forced to go up and
down in the streets of London like a begging Friar: a stout resistance in a
Queen for a poor Cardinals Hat, wherein she followed the example of her
Grandfather King Henry the Seventh, for a matter of Alum. So as howsoever the
Christian Kings for some respects in Policy can endure the Pope to command
where no harm nor disadvantage grows to themselves, The Kings of Christendom
never suffer the Popes to abridge their Titles or Rights, though they suffer
them to have rule over their People.
yet sure it is, and the Popes are not ignorant, but where they shall in any
sort attempt to take from Christian Princes any part of their Dominions, or
shall give aid to their Enemies, or to any other their Rebels, in those cases,
their Bulls, their Curses, their Excommunications, their Sentences, and most
solemn Anathematicals, no nor their Cross-keys, or double edged Sword, will
serve their turns to compass their intentions.

And now, where the Pope has manifestly by his Bulls and Excommunications
attempted as much as he could, to deprive her Majesty of her Kingdoms, to
withdraw from her the obedience of her Subjects, to procure Rebellions in her
Realms, yea, to make both Rebellions and open Wars, with his own Captains,
Soldiers, Banners, Ensigns, and all other things belonging to War: shall this
Pope, or any other Pope after him, think that a Sovereign Queen, possessed of
the two Realms of England and Ireland, stablished so many years in her Kingdoms
as three or four Popes have sit in their Chair at Rome, fortified with so much
duty, love, and strength of her Subjects, acknowledging no Superior over her
Realms, The Queen of England may not suffer the Pope by any means to make
Rebellions in her Realm.
but the mighty hand of God: shall she forbear, or fear to withstand and make
frustrate his unlawful attempts, either by her Sword or by her Laws, or to put
his Soldiers Invaders of her Realm to the Sword martially, or to execute her
Laws upon her own rebellious Subjects civilly, that are proved to be his chief
Instruments for Rebellion, and for his open War? This is sure, that howsoever
either he sitting in his Chair with a triple Crown at Rome, or any other his
Proctors in any part of Christendom, shall renew these unlawful attempts,
Almighty God, whom her Majesty only honors and acknowledges to be her only
Sovereign Lord and Protector, and whose Laws and Gospel of his Son Jesus Christ
she seeks to defend, will no doubt but deliver sufficient power into his
Maidens hand his Servant Queen Elizabeth, to withstand and confound them all.

Additaments to the Popes Martyrologe.
And where the seditious Trumpetters of infamies and lies, have sounded forth
and entitled certain that have suffered for Treason, to be Martyrs for
Religion: so may they also at this time, if they list, add to their forged
Catalogue, the headless body of the late miserable Earl of Desmond, who of
late, secretly wandering without succor, as a miserable Beggar, was taken by
one of the Irishry in his Cabin, and in an Irish sort after his own accustomed
savage manner, his head cut off from his body: an end due to such an
Arch-rebel. And herewith to remember the end of his chief Confederates, may be
noted for example to others The strange ends of James Earl of Desmond. D.
Saunders. James Fitzmorice. John of Desmond.
, the strange manner of the death of Dr. Sanders the Popes Irish Legate, who
also wandering in the Mountains in Ireland without succor, dyed raving in a
Frenzy. And before him, one James Fits-Morice the first Traiter of Ireland
next to Stukely the Rakehel, a man not unknown in the Popes Palace for a wicked
crafty Traiter, was slain at one blow by an Irish noble young Gentleman, in
defense of his Fathers Country which the Traiter sought to burn. A fourth man
of singular Note was John of Desmond, Brother to the Earl, a very bloody
faithless Traiter, and a notable Murderer of his familiar friends, who also
wandering to seek some prey like a Wolf in the Woods, was taken and beheaded
after his own usage, being as he thought sufficiently armed with the Popes
Bulls and certain Agnus Dei, and one notable Ring about his neck sent from the
Popes finger (as it was said:) but these he saw saved not his life. And such
were the fatal ends of all these, being the principal heads of the Irish War
and Rebellion, so as no one person remains at this day in Ireland a known
Traiter. To this number, they may if they seek number, also add a furious young
Man of Warwickshire, by name Somervile, John Somervile.
to increase their Calendar of the Popes Martyrs, who of late was discovered
and taken in his way, coming with a full intent to have killed her Majesty
(whose life God always have in his custody.) The attempt not denied by the
Traiter himself, but confessed, and that he was moved thereto in his wicked
spirit, by inticements of certain seditious and traitorous persons his Kinsmen
and Allies, and also by often reading of sundry seditious vile Books lately
published against her Majesty. But as God of his goodness has of long time
hitherto preserved her Majesty from these and the like Treacheries: so has she
no cause to fear being under his Protection, she saying with King David in the
Psalm, My God is my helper and I will trust in him, he is my protection, and
the strength or the power of my salvation. And for the comfort of all good
Subjects against the shadows of the Popes Bulls, it is manifest to the World,
The prosperity of England, during the Popes curses.
that from the beginning of her Majesty's Reign, by Gods singular goodness, her
Kingdom has enjoyed more universal Peace, her People increased in more
numbers, in more strength, and with greater riches, the earth of her Kingdoms
has yielded more fruits, and generally all kind of worldly felicity has more
abounded since and during the time of the Popes Thunders, Bulls, Curses, and
Maledictions, than in any other long times before, when the Popes Pardons and
Blessings came yearly into the Realm: so as his Curses and Maledictions have
turned back to himself and his Fautors, that it may be said to the fortunate
Queen of England and her People, as was said in Deuteronomy of Balaam, The Lord
thy God would not hear Balaam, but did turn his Maledictions or curses into
Benedictions or blessings: the reason is, for because thy God loved thee.

Although these former reasons are sufficient to persuade all kind of
reasonable persons to allow of her Majesty's actions to be good, reasonable,
lawful, and necessary: yet because it may be, that such as have by frequent
reading of false artificial Libels, and by giving credit to them, upon a
prejudice or forejudgment before grounded, by their rooted opinions in favor of
the Pope, will rest unsatisfied: therefore as much as may be, to satisfy all
persons as far forth as common reason may warrant, that her Majesty's late
action in executing of certain seditious Traiters, has not proceeded for the
holding of opinions, either for the Popes Supremacy, Reasons to persuade by
reason the Favorers of the Pope, that none has bin executed for Religion, but
for Treason.
or against her Majesty's Regality, but for the very Crimes of Sedition and
Treason, it shall suffice briefly, in a manner of a repetition of the former
reasons, to remember these things following.

The first reason.
First, it cannot be denied, but that her Majesty did for many years, suffer
quietly the Popes Bulls and Excommunications without punishment of the Fautors
thereof, accounting of them but as of words or wind, or of Writings in
Parchment weighed down with lead, or as of water-bubbles, commonly called in
Latin Bullae and such like: but yet after some proof that courage was taken
thereof by some bold and bad Subjects, she could not but then esteem them to be
very Preambles, or as forerunners of greater danger: and therefore, with what
reason could any mislike, that her Majesty did for a bare defense against them,
without other action or force, use the help of reviving of former Laws, to
prohibit the Publication or Execution of such kind of Bulls within her Realm?

The second reason.
Secondly, when notwithstanding the prohibition by her Laws, the same Bulls were
plentifully (but in secret sort) brought into the Realm, The (...) Pius Q^^^^^
set up at Paul's.
and at length arrogantly set upon the Gates of the Bishop of Londons Palace
near to the Cathedral Church of Paul's, the principal City of the Realm, by a
lewd person, using the same like a Herald sent from the Pope: who can in any
common reason mislike, that her Majesty finding this kind of denunciation of
War, as a defiance to be made in her principal City by one of her Subjects,
avowing and obstinately maintaining the same, should according to justice,
cause the offender to have the reward due to such a fact? The first punishment
for the Bull.
and this was the first action of any capital punishment inflicted for matter
sent from Rome to move Rebellion, which was after her Majesty had reigned about
the space of twelve years or more.

The third reason.
Thirdly, when the Pope had risen up out of his Chair in his wrath, from words
and writings to actions, and had contrary to the advice given by S. Barnard to
his Predecessor, that is, when by his Messages he left Verbum and took Ferrum,
that is, left to feed by the Word, and began to strike with the Sword, and
stirred her Noble men and People directly to disobedience and to open
Rebellion, Rebellion in the North.
and that her lewd Subjects by his commandment had executed the same with all
the Forces which they could make or bring into the field: who with common
reason can disallow that her Majesty used her principal Authority, and by her
Forces lawful subdued Rebels Forces unlawful, and punished the Authors thereof
no otherwise than the Pope himself uses to do with his own Rebellious
Subjects, in the Patrimony of his Church? And if any Prince of People in the
World, would otherwise neglect his Office, and suffer his Rebels to have their
wills, none ought to pity him, if for want of resistance and courage, he lost
both his Crown, his Head, his Life, and his Kingdom.

The fourth reason.
Fourthly, when her Majesty beheld a further increase of the Popes malice,
notwithstanding that the first Rebellion was in her North parts vanquished, in
that he entertained abroad out of this Realm, the Traiters and Rebels that fled
for the Rebellion, and all the Rabble of other the Fugitives of the Realm, and
that he sent a number of the same in sorts disguised into both the Realms of
England and Ireland, The Invasion of Ireland by the Pope.
who there secretly allured her People to new Rebellions, and at the same time
spared not his charges to send also out of Italy by Sea, certain Ships with
Captains of his own, with their Bands of Soldiers, furnished with Treasure,
Munition, Victuals, Ensigns, Banners, and all other things requisite to the
War, into her Realm of Ireland, where the same Forces with other auxiliar
Companies out of Spain landed, and fortified themselves very strongly in the
Seaside, and proclaimed open War, erecting the Popes Banner against her
Majesty: may it be now asked of these persons, Favorers of the Romish
Authority, what in reason should have been done by her Majesty otherwise, than
first to apprehend all such Figitives for stolen into the Realm, and dispersed
in disguising habits to sow Sedition, as some Priests in their secret
Profession, but all in their apparel, as Roisters or Ruffins, some Scholars,
like to the basest Common people, and them to commit to Prisons, and upon their
examinations of their Trades and Haunts, to convince them of their Conspiracies
abroad, by testimony of their own Companions, and of sowing Sedition secretly
at home in the Realm? What may be reasonably thought was meet to be done with
such seditious persons, but by the Laws of the Realm to try, condemn, and
execute them? and especially having regard to the dangerous time, The Popes
Forces vanquished in Ireland.
when the Popes Forces were in the Realm of Ireland, and more in preparation to
follow as well into England as into Ireland, to the resistance whereof, her
Majesty and her Realm was forced to be at greater charges, than ever she had
been, since she was Queen thereof. And so by Gods power, which he gave to her
on the one part, she did by her Laws suppress the seditious stirrers of
Rebellion in her Realm of England, and by her Sword vanquished all the Popes
Forces in her Realm of Ireland, excepting certain Captains of mark that were
saved from the Sword, as persons that did renounce their quarrel, and seemed to
curse or to blame such as sent them to so unfortunate and desperate a Voyage.

The Politic Adversaries satisfied.
But though these reasons, grounded upon rules of natural reason, shall satisfy
a great number of the Adversaries (who will yield that by good order of Civil
and Christian Policy and Government, her Majesty could nor can do no less than
she has done, first to subdue with her Forces her Rebels and Traiters, and
next by order of her Laws to correct the Aiders and Abettors, and lastly to put
also to the Sword such Forces as the Pope sent into her Dominions) Objection of
the Papists, that the persons executed are but Scholars and unarmed.
yet there are certain other persons, more nicely addicted to the Pope, that
will yet seem to be unsatisfied, for that, as they will term the matter, a
number of silly poor Wretches were put to death as Traiters, being but in
profession Scholars or Priests, by the names of Seminaries, Jesuits, or simple
Schoolmasters, that came not into the Realm with any Armor or Weapon, by force
to aid the Rebels and Traiters, either in England or in Ireland in their
Rebellions or Wars: of which sort of Wretches the commiseration is made, as
though for their contrary opinions in Religion, or for teaching of the people
to disobey the Laws of the Realm, they might have been otherwise punished and
corrected, and yet not with capital punishment. These kinds of defenses, tend
only to find fault rather with the severity of their punishments, than to
acquit them as Innocents or quiet Subjects. But for answer to the better
satisfaction of these nice and scrupulous Favorers of Traiters, it must be
with reason demanded of them (if at least they will open their ears to reason)
whether they think that when a King being stablished in his Realm, has a
Rebellion first secretly practiced, and afterward openly raised in his Realm by
his own seditious Subjects, and when by a Foreign Potentate or Enemy, the same
Rebellion is maintained, and the Rebels by messages and promises comforted to
continue, Many are Traiters, though they have no Armor nor Weapon.
and their Treasons against their natural Prince avowed, and consequently when
the same Potentate and Enemy, being Author of the said Rebellion, shall with
his own proper Forces invade the Realm and Subjects of the Prince that is so
lawfully and peaceably possessed: in these cases, shall no Subject favoring
these Rebels, and yielding obedience to the Enemy the Invador, be committed or
punished as a Traiter, but only such of them, as shall be found openly to carry
Armor and Weapon? Shall no Subject, that is a spial and an explorer for the
Rebel or Enemy, against his natural Prince, be taken and punished as a Traiter,
because he is not found with Armor or Weapon, but yet is taken in his disguised
apparel, with writings, or other manifest tokens, to prove him a Spy for
Traiters, after he has wandered secretly in his Sovereigns Camp, Region,
Court, or City? Shall no Subject be counted a Traiter, that will secretly give
earnest and pressed money to persons to be Rebels or Enemies, or that will
attempt to poison the Victual, or the Fountains, or secretly set on fire the
Ships or Munition, or that will secretly search and sound the Havens and Creeks
for landing, or measure the depth of Ditches, or height of Towers and Walls,
because these offenders are not found with Armor or Weapon? The answer I think
must needs be yielded (if reason and experience shall have rule with these
Adversaries) that all these and such like are to be punished as Traiters: and
the principal reason is, because the actions of all these are necessary
accessaries, and adherents proper, to further and continue all Rebellions and
Wars. But if they will deny, that none are Traiters that are not armed, they
will make Judas no Traiter, that came to Christ without Armor, coloring his
treason with a kiss.

The Application of the Scholastical Traiters, to others, that are Traiters
without Armor.
Now therefore it rests to apply the Facts of these late Malefactors that are
pretended to have offended but as Scholars, or Book-men, or at the most but as
persons that only in words and doctrine, and not with Armor did favor and help
the Rebels and the Enemies. For which purpose let these persons be termed as
they list, Scholars, Schoolmasters, Book-men, Seminaries, Priests, Jesuits,
Friars, Bead-men, Romanists, Pardoners, or what else you will, neither their
titles, nor their apparel does make them Traiters, but their traitorous secret
motions and practices: their persons make not the War, but their directions and
counsels have set up the Rebellions. The very causes final of these Rebellions
and Wars, have been to depose her Majesty from her Crown: the causes
instrumental, are these kind of Seminaries and Seed-men of Sedition: the fruits
and effects thereof, are by Rebellion to shed the blood of all her faithful
Subjects: the rewards of the Invaders (if they could prevail) should be the
disinheriting of all the Nobility, the Clergy, and the whole Commonalty, that
would (as they are bound by the Laws of God, by their Birth and Oaths) defend
their natural gracious Queen, their native Country, their Wives, their
Children, their Family, and their Houses. And now examine these which you call
your unarmed Scholars and Priests, wherefore they lived and were conversant in
company of the principal Rebels and Traiters at Rome, and in other places,
where it is proved that they were partakers of their Conspiracies? Let it be
answered why they came thus by stealth into the Realm? why they have wandered
up and down in corners in disguised sort, changing their titles, names, and
manner of apparel? Why they have enticed and sought to persuade by their secret
false reasons, the people to allow and believe all the actions and attempts
whatsoever the Pope has done or shall do, to be lawful? Why they have
reconciled and withdrawn so many people in corners from the Laws of the Realm
to the obedience of the Pope, a Foreign Potentate and open Enemy, whom they
know to have already declared the Queen to be no lawful Queen, to have
maintained the known Rebels and Traiters, to have invaded her Majesty's
Dominions with open War? Examine further, how these vagrant disguised unarmed
Spies have answered, when they were taken and demanded what they thought of the
Bull of Pope Pius Quintus, Six Questions to try Traiters from Scholars.
which was published to deprive the Queens Majesty, and to warrant her Subjects
to disobey her: whether they thought that all Subjects ought to obey the same
Bull, and so to rebel? Secondly, whether they thought her Majesty to be the
lawful Queen of the Realm, notwithstanding the said Bull or any other Bull of
the Pope? Thirdly, whether the Pope might give such license as he did to the
Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, and other her Majesty's Subjects to
rebel as they did? or give power to D. Sanders a natural born Subject but an
unnatural worn Priest, to take Arms and move Wars as he did in Ireland.
Fourthly, whether the Pope may discharge the Subjects of her Majesty, or of any
other Princes Christened, of their Oaths of obedience? Fifthly, whether the
said traitorous Priest D. Sanders or one Bristow a rebellious Figitive, did in
their Books write truly or falsely, in approving the said Bull of Pius Quintus,
and the Contents thereof? Lastly, what were to be done, if the Pope or any
other assigned by him, would invade the Realm of England, and what part they
would take, or what part any faithful Subject of her Majesty's ought to take?
To these questions very apt to try the truth or falsehood of any such seditious
persons, being justly before condemned for their disloyalty, these lewd unarmed
Traiters I say would no wise answer directly hereto, as all other faithful
Subjects to any Prince Christian ought to do. And as they upon refusal to
answer directly to these questions only, might have been justly convinced as
guilty of Treason, so yet were they not thereupon condemned, The offenders
executed for Treason, not for Religion.
but upon all their other former actions committed both abroad and in the
Realm, which were no less traitorous than the actions of all other the Spies
and Traiters, and of Judas himself before remembered which had no Armor nor
Weapon, and yet at all times ought to be adjudged Traiters. For these disguised
persons (called Scholars or Priests) having been first conversant of long time
with the Traiters beyond the Sea in all their Conspiracies, came hither by
stealth in time of War and Rebellion by commandment of the Capital Enemy the
Pope or his Legates, to be secret Espials and Explorers in the Realm for the
Pope, to deliver by secret, Romish tokens, as it were an earnest or pressed, to
them that should be in readiness to join with Rebels or open Enemies, and in
like sort with their hallowed baggages from Rome to poison the senses of the
Subjects, pouring into their hearts malicious and pestilent opinions against
her Majesty and the Laws of the Realm: and also to kindle and set on fire the
hearts of discontented Subjects with the flames of Rebellion, and to search and
sound the depths and secrets of all men's inward intentions, either against her
Majesty, or for her: and finally to bring into a Bead-roll, or as it were into
a Muster-roll, the names and powers with the dwellings of all that should be
ready to rebel and to aid the Foreign Invasion. These kinds of seditious
actions for the service of the Pope, and the Traiters and Rebels abroad, have
made them Traiters: not their Books, nor their Beads, no nor their Cakes of Wax
which they call Agnus Dei, nor other their Relics, nor yet their Opinions for
the Ceremonies or Rites of the Church of Rome: and therefore it is to be
certainly concluded that these did justly deserve their capital punishments as
Traiters, though they were not apprehended with open Armor or Weapon.

Now if this latter repetition, as it were of all the former causes and reasons
afore-recited, may not serve to stop the boisterous mouths, and the pestiferous
tongues, and venomous breaths of these that are infected with so gross errors,
as to defend seditious Subjects, stirrers of Rebellion against their natural
Prince and Country: Unreasonable and obstinate persons are left to Gods
Judgment.
then are they to be left without any further argument, to the Judgment of the
Almighty God, as persons that have covered their eyes against the Suns light,
stopped their ears against the sound of Justice, and oppressed their hearts
against the force of reason, and as the Psalmist says, They speak lies, they
are as venomous as the poison of a Serpent, even like the deaf Adder that
stops his ears.

Wherefore with charity to conclude, if these Rebels and Traiters, and their
Fautors would yet take some remorse and compassion of their natural Country,
and would consider how vain their attempts have been so many years, and how
many of their Confederates are wasted by miseries and calamities, and would
desist from their unnatural practices abroad: and if these Seminaries, secret
Wanderers, and Explorators in the dark would employ their travels in the works
of Light and Doctrine according to the usage of their Schools, and content
themselves with their Profession and Devotion: and that the remnant of the
wicked flock of the Seed-men of Sedition would ease from their rebellious,
false, and infamous railings and libellings: there is no doubt by Gods grace
(her Majesty being so much given to Mercy and devoted to Peace) but all color
and occasion of shedding the blood of any more of her natural Subjects of this
Land, should utterly cease. Against whose malices, if they shall not desist,
Almighty God continue her Majesty with his Spirit and Power long to reign and
live in his fear, and to be able to vanquish them and all Gods Enemies, and her
Rebels and Traiters both at home and abroad, and to maintain and preserve all
her natural good loving Subjects, to the true service of the same Almighty God
according to his holy Word and Will.

Many other things might be remembered for defense of other her Majesty's
Princely, honorable, and godly actions in sundry other things, wherein also
these and the like seditious Railers have of late time without all shame, by
feigned and false Libels sought to discredit her Majesty and her Government:
but at this time, these former causes and reasons alleged by way of
advertisements, are sufficient to justify her Majesty's actions to the whole
World in the cases remembered.

Important Considerations
Which ought to move all true and sound Catholics, who are not wholly
Jesuited, to acknowledge without all Equivocations, Ambiguities, or Shiftings,
that the Proceedings of her Majesty, and of the State with them, since the
beginning of her Highness Reign, have been both mild and merciful.
RIght Worshipful and our dear Friends. We your ancient Teachers and spiritual
Fathers, the secular Priests in England, that sundry years for your sakes, have
endured many calamities, but cannot frame our selves to the new Jesuitical
Faction, that bears so great a sway with you: are every where amongst you
accounted simple persons: men destitute of the Spirit of Government: without
all Policy and Providence, ignorant Pilots, how to cast about with our Ships in
sudden gusts or storms: not trained up in the managing of great Affairs, and
far unmeet (God wot) to take upon us the guiding of Souls. All which disgraces,
in the sense they are imputed unto us, we take in good part, whether they
proceed from your selves, or from your Spanish Statists, that can work wonders,
or from you both: and we must acknowledge, that if their courses, either
formerly taken, or still intended for the re-establishing of the Catholic
Faith in this Kingdom, be good, ours do come far short of that pitch: and well
you may think, as already you have (in your wisdoms) censured our weakness, and
judged of us. Howbeit, as yet by your good patience, we must be bold to rejoice
in our simplicity, and to confess in direct terms, and so tell you plainly, and
wish you all to mark it well: that, posteriores cogitationes solent esse
sapientiores. Experience is said to be the Mistress of Fools: but she is no
foolish Mistress. The Jesuitical Plots for the restoring of Religion in this
Land, by Treasons or Invasions, are not sanctified or blessed by the hand of
God. Some of us the ancienter sort of Priests, have ever misliked their courses
herein: and many other we know are of the same Judgment. The old approved paths
of our Forefathers, (when men have beaten their brains to the uttermost) will
always prove the best. Novelties and fine devices of busy and unquiet heads,
are, but as May-flowers that are gone in June; they may carry a fair show, but
they will not continue. The ancient manner of planting the Catholic Faith,
has been by Preaching, Prayers, private Instructions, Confessions,
Absolutions, and by the exercising of other Priestly Functions, given ad
aedificationem non ad destructionem, to teach Obedience, not Rebellion: to fill
men's hearts with joy and peace, by the inward working of the Holy Ghost; and
not to feed them with hopes of Invasions and Treacheries, with the Moonshine
in the water, and follies, or with preposterous cogitations, to think they may
expect for figs from thistles, or that men may do evil, that good may come of
it. As simple Priests as you esteem us, yet this we tell you, that we are not
ignorant of the Machiavilian Rules, which your Rabbis practice: nor of their
Wild-geese Races, wherein they have run themselves out of all honest breath.
But we know them, not to embrace them (we thank God) but to disclose them, or
rather to acknowledge them for wicked (being disclosed too apparently already
to our hands:) that you in time might eschew them, (if you will be advised by
us) and all the World at the length may bear us witness, how much we detest
them from our hearts, and abhor them. Whilst we had any hope, that these
Political Fathers (as they joy to be termed) would at the last have reclaimed
themselves, and grown more tractable and moderate in their designments against
our Sovereign and Native Country: we were silent in respect of the common
Cause, and very well content to undergo many inconveniences and miseries, which
we might have avoided (as we are persuaded) if we had sooner opened our selves,
and professed our said detestation of such their, no way Priestly, but very
irreligious courses: whereby the State has been most justly irritated and
provoked against us. For when we consider on the one side, what we know our
selves, concerning the Laws made of later years, with the occasions of them,
and likewise as touching the proceedings of the State here, since the beginning
of her Majesty's Reign, as well against us that are Priests, as also against
other Catholics of the Laity: and do find on the other side, what practices,
under the pretense of Religion, have been set on foot, for the utter subversion
both of the Queen and of her Kingdom: and therewith further call to mind, what
sundry Jesuits and men (wholly for the time or altogether) addicted to
Jesuitism, have written and published to the World in sundry Treatises, not
only against the said Laws and course of Justice, but in like sort against her
chief Counselors, (and which exceeds all the rest) against the Royal person
of her Majesty, her Honor, Crown, and most Princely Scepter: it may in our
opinions be rather wondered, that so many Catholics of both sorts, are left
alive in the Realm to speak of the Catholic Faith, than that the State has
proceeded with us from time to time, as it has done. It may seem strange to
some, that these things should proceed from us that are Priests: but diverse of
you can bear us witness, that they are no new conceits, bred in us, by reason
of the opposition we have with the Jesuits: and besides, no small number of
Catholics (as we are persuaded) have long expected this duty at your hands:
that thereby our Allegiance and Fidelity to our Queen and Country might be the
better testified, the hard opinion of us mitigated, our actions and profession
of duty better credited: the cause we stand for, more regarded: and we our
selves (for our plain dealing, and for the good of the Church) might be the
better reputed of, and esteemed, or at the least in some sort born with and
tolerated, as men that do distinguish between Religion and Treason.

We wish with all our hearts, (and groan every day at the contrary) that her
Majesty had continued in her obedience to the Sea Apostolic, as Queen Mary her
Sister of famous memory, had left her a worthy Example: but seeing that God for
our sins would have it otherwise, we ought to have carried our selves in
another manner of course toward her, our true and lawful Queen, and toward
our Country, than has been taken and pursued by many Catholics, but
especially by the Jesuits. And therefore (as well to discharge our own
consciences, as to satisfy many of you of the moderater sort of Catholics,
according to the old saying, Better late than never) we have thought it our
parts, (being her Highness natural born Subjects) to acknowledge the truth of
the carriage of matters against us, and the apparent causes of it: that the
blame may indeed, from point to point, light and lie where it ought to do, and
both sides bear no other than their own burdens, as the Laws both of God and
man do require. If hereby her Majesty may in any sort be appeased, and the
State satisfied, our own former courses bettered, and the Realm secured, that
the like shall never hereafter be attempted or favored by any of us, but be
revealed, if we know them, and withstood, if they be enterprised, with all our
goods and our lives, even to our uttermost ability, be their pretenses never so
fair, for Religion, or what else can be devised: we shall think our selves
happy, and will not regard what all the malice and spite of the Jesuits can
work or effect against us.

It cannot be denied, but that for the first ten years of her Majesty's Reign,
the state of Catholics in England was tolerable, and after a sort in some good
quietness. Such as for their consciences were imprisoned in the beginning of
her coming to the Crown, were very kindly and mercifully used, the state of
things then considered. Some of them were appointed to remain with such their
friends, as they themselves made choice of. Others were placed, some with
Bishops; some with Deans; and had their diet at their Tables, with such
convenient Lodgings and Walks for their recreation, as did well content them.
They that were in the ordinary Prisons, had such liberty and other commodities,
as the places would afford, not inconvenient for men that were in their cases.
But that our Brethren of the more fiery and Jesuitical humor may not snuff
hereat: we have thought it meet to cool their heat, with some of Master
Parsons, and his Fellow Master Creswels more gentle delays, (than are usual
with them:) who in one of their Books, do confess as much in effect, as here we
have set down, if not more: thus these great Emperour-like Jesuits do speak to
her Majesty. In the beginning of thy Kingdom thou did deal something more
gently with Catholics: none were then urged by thee, or pressed either to thy
Sect, or to the denial of their Faith. All things (indeed) did seem to proceed
in a far milder course: no great complaints were heard of: there were seen no
extraordinary contentions or repugnancies: Some there were that to please and
gratify you, went to your Churches. But when afterward thou did begin to
wrong them, etc. And when was that our great Monseigneurs? Surely whenever it
was: (to answer for you) we our selves (certain Catholics of all sorts) were
the true causes of it. For whilst her Majesty and the State dealt with the
Catholics, as you have heard, (which was full eleven years, no one Catholic
being called in question of his life, for his conscience, all that time:)
consider with us, how some of our profession proceeded with them. Her Highness
had scarcely felt the Crown warm upon her head, but it was challenged from her,
by some of her Neighbors, as Master Saunders notes. The French were sent into
Scotland to do somewhat, you may be sure: which concerned her Majesty (the
circumstances consisidered) to look unto. Afterward certain matters were
undertaken by her Majesty in France: and the Affairs in Scotland did so
proceed, as that the Queen there was compelled 1567. to fly into England,
where for a great time, she was very honorably entertained, her liberty only
excepted. But with these matters, what had we to do, that were either Priests
or private men? If either France or Scotland, had cause to repine or complain,
some of those Nations might have done, written, and spoken as it had pleased
them. It little became either Master Saunders (otherwise an excellent man) or
Master Parsons, or any other of our own Nation, to have intermedled with those
matters, or to write as they have very offensively done in diverse of their
Books and Treatises; to what purpose we know not: except it were to show their
malice, to dishonor their own Country, as much as lay in them, and to move a
greater dislike in the State of all that be Catholics, than before they had.
Kings ever have had, and will have their plots and practices for their own
safeties: it being as inconvenient to their Policy, for one Prince by his Might
to overtop another, as it is amongst the principal members of our natural
bodies, for one member to swell or grow too great above his due proportion.
Happy had we Catholics been at this day, if these men being Priests, had never
troubled themselves with State-matters, which they have managed, as Phaeton did
his Fathers Chariot: very greatly to our prejudice. Let them pretend never so
great skill in their disposing of Kingdoms ordine ad Deum: they have certainly
dealt with ours ordine ad Gehennam.

But this is not all which the State may justly challenge us for. In the time
of our said Peace, and upon the coming into England of the Queen of Scots,
whilst her Majesty of England and the State were busied, as partly you have
heard before: it pitieth our hearts, to see and read, what has been printed
and published out of Italy in the life of Pius Quintus concerning his Holiness
endeavors, stirred up by false suggestions to join with the King of Spain: for
the utter ruin and overthrow both of our Prince and Country. Would to God such
things had never been enterprised: and most of all, that they had never been
printed. We that have some skill with our Pens, presume too much a great deal,
upon our own Wits. What good the mentioning of these points can bring to the
Church, we see not: but sure we are, it has done much hurt, and given our
common Enemies very great advantage against us. For now it is usually objected
unto us, by every one of any reach, when we complain of some hard dealings
toward us: Yea, say they (very well good Masters) were you not in quiet? Who
then gave the cause that you were troubled? When her Majesty used you kindly:
how treacherously was she dealt with by you? Did not Pius Quintus practice her
Majesty's subversion: she (good Lady) never dreaming of any such mischief? Was
not one Robert Ridolphi, a Gentleman of Florence sent hither by the Pope (under
color of Merchandise) to solicit a Rebellion? Did not Pius Quintus move the
King of Spain to join in this Exploit, for the better securing of his own
Dominions in the Low Countries? Was not the Bull denounced against her Majesty,
that carries so fair a Preface of zeal, and pastoral duty: devised purposely,
to further the intended Rebellion, for the depriving of her Majesty from her
Kingdom? Had not the Pope and King of Spain assigned the Duke of Norfolk, to be
the Head of this Rebellion? Did not the Pope* give order to Ridolphi, to take
150000 Crowns to set forward this attempt? Was not some of that Money sent for
Scotland: and some delivered to the said Duke? Did not King Philip at the Popes
instance, determine to send the Duke of Alva into England with all his Forces
in the Low Countries, to assist the Duke of Norfolk? Are all these things true,
and were they not then in hand, whilst her Majesty dealt so mercifully with
you? How can you excuse these designments: so unchristian, so unpriestly, so
treacherous, and therefore so un-prince-like? When we first heard these
particulars, we did not believe them: but would have laid our lives they had
been false: but when we saw the Book, and found them there, God is our witness,
we were much amazed: and can say no more, but that his Holiness was
misinformed, and indirectly drawn to these courses.

But to proceed: it being unknown to the State what secret matters were in hand
against them, both at home and beyond the Seas: the Catholics here continued
in sort, as before you have heard, till the said Rebellion brake forth in the
North, 1569. a little before Christmas: and that it was known that the Pope had
excommunicated the Queen, and thereby freed her Subjects (as the Bull
imports) from their subjection. And then there followed a great restraint of
the said Prisoners: but none of them were put to death upon that occasion: the
Sword being then only drawn against such Catholics, as had risen up actually
into open Rebellion. Wherein we cannot see what her Majesty did, that any
Prince in Christendom in such a case, would not have done. And as touching the
said Bull, many both Priests and Lay Catholics have greatly wished, that it
had never been decreed, denounced, published, or heard of. For we are
persuaded, that the Pope was drawn thereunto, by false suggestions of certain
undiscreet turbulent persons: who pretending to him one thing, had another
drift in their heads for their own advancement. And therefore we have ever
accounted of it, as a sentence procured by surreption: knowing it to be no
unusual thing with the Pope, through indirect means and factious heads, to be
often deceived in matters of Fact: as we now find it, in the setting up of our
new Archpriest.

Now upon all these occasions, her Majesty being moved with great displeasure,
called a Parliament in the thirteenth year of her Reign 1571. wherein a Law was
made containing many branches, against the bringing into this Land, after that
time, of any Bulls from Rome, any Agnus Dei, Crosses or Pardons: and against
all manner of persons, that should procure them to be so brought hither, with
many other particularities thereunto appertaining. Which Law, although we hold
it to be too rigorous, and that the pretended remedy exceeded the measure of
the offense, either undutifully given, or in justice to have been taken: yet we
cannot but confess, as reasonable men, that the State had great cause to make
some Laws against us, except they should have showed themselves careless for
the continuance of it. But be the Law, as any would have it never so extreme:
yet surely it must be granted, that the occasions of it were most outrageous:
and likewise, that the execution of it was not so tragical, as many since have
written and reported of it. For whatsoever was done against us, either upon the
pretense of that Law, or of any other, would never we think have been
attempted, had not diverse other preposterous occasions (besides the causes of
that Law) daily fallen out amongst us: which procured matters to be urged more
severely against us.

In the year 1572. out comes Master Saunders Book, de visibili Monarchia;
wherein he takes upon him to set down, how the Pope had sent one Master Morton
and Master Web two Priests, before the said Rebellion, to the Lords and
Gentlemen in the North: to excite them with their Followers to take up Arms.
And the rather to persuade them thereunto, they signified unto them by the
Popes commandment, that her Majesty was excommunicated, her Subjects were
released from their obedience, and much more to that purpose. Likewise the said
Mr. Saunders does justify the said commotion, and ascribes the evil success
it had, to the over-late publishing of the said Bull (it being not generally
known of till the year after, when Master Felton had set it upon the Bishop of
Londons Gate:) affirming that if it had been published the year before, or when
they were in Arms, the Catholics would undoubtedly so have assisted them (the
said Rebels) as that they must (no question of it) have prevailed against the
Queen, and had certainly executed the said sentence at that time, for her
deposition from the Crown. Besides, whereas the State in the said Parliament,
had confirmed the attainder of the chief persons by name, that were as heads in
the said Rebellion: and had been in the field against her Highness, Mr.
Saunders (building Castles in the Air amongst his Books) does too much magnify
the said Rebels, to the great discredit of the Church of Rome, and his Holiness
actions in such matters, they being men arraigned, condemned, and executed by
the ancient Laws of our Country for high Treason. This intolerable and very
uncatholick course thus held by diverse, to the great offense of many good
Catholics of the graver and discreeter sort, and to the great hinderance of
our common Cause; has been since followed by Mr. Parsons, and some of his
sort, with no good discretion or foresight (God he knows) brag these great
Statesmen of their impregnable Wisdom and Policy never so proudly.

Furthermore, about the coming out of the said Book of Mr. Saunders, the whole
Plot before mentioned, of the Pope and the King of Spain with the Duke of
Norfolk for the disinheriting of her Majesty, and other intended mischiefs,
fell out to be fully disclosed. Afterward within some four or five years, it
was also commonly known to the Realm, what attempts were in hand by Mr.
Stukeley (assisted with Mr. Saunders and other Catholics both English, Irish,
and Italian) for an Enterprise by force in Ireland, under pretense to advance
the Catholic Religion: which for that time (through some defects) succeeding
not, the Pope himself in the year 1579. (abused still by false pretenses) did
set forward that course, and sending thither certain Forces, Mr. Saunders (too
much Jesuited) did thrust himself in person into that action, as a chief
Ringleader, and to persuade the Catholics, when he should come into Ireland,
to join with the Popes said Forces, for the better assisting of certain Rebels,
then in Arms against their Sovereign. Now whilst these practices were in hand
in Ireland, Gregory the Thirteenth renews the said Bull of Pius Quintus: and
denounces her Majesty to be excommunicated, with intimation of all other
particulars in the former Bull mentioned, which was procured (we doubt not) by
surreption: the false Jesuits (our Countrymen) daring to attempt any thing, by
untrue suggestions, and any lewd surmises, that may serve their turns. This
Stratagem accomplished, and ground laid, whereupon they imagined to work great
matters: these good Fathers (as the Devil would have it) come into England, and
intruded themselves into our harvest, being the men in our consciences (we mean
both them and others of that Society, with some of their adherents) who have
been the chief Instruments of all the mischiefs that have been intended against
her Majesty, since the beginning of her Reign, and of the miseries, which we,
or any other Catholics, have upon these occasions sustained. Their first
repair hither was Anno 1580. when the Realm of Ireland was in great combustion,
and then they entered, ( viz. Mr. Campion the Subject, and Mr. Parsons the
Provincial) like a tempest, with sundry such great brags and challenges, as
diverse of the gravest Clergy then living in England (Doctor Watson Bishop of
Lincoln and others) did greatly dislike them, and plainly foretold, that (as
things then stood) their proceeding after that fashion, would certainly urge
the State, to make some sharper Laws, which should not only touch them, but
likewise all others, both Priests and Catholics. Upon their arrival, and after
the said brags, Mr. Parsons presently fell to his Jesuitical courses: and so
belabored both himself and others in matters of State, how he might set her
Majesty's Crown upon another head (as appears by a Letter of his own to a
certain Earl) that the Catholics themselves threatened to deliver him into the
hands of the Civil Magistrate, except he desisted from such kind of practices.

In these tumultuous and rebellious proceedings by sundry Catholics, both in
England and Ireland, it could not be expected but that the Queen and the State
would be greatly incensed with indignation against us. We had (some of us)
greatly approved the said Rebellion: highly extolled the Rebels, and pitifully
bewailed their ruin and overthrow. Many of our affections were knit to the
Spaniard: and for our obedience to the Pope, we all do profess it. The attempts
both of the Pope and Spaniard failing in England, his Holiness, as a temporal
Prince, displayed his Banner in Ireland. The Plot was to deprive her Highness
first from that Kingdom (if they could:) and then by degrees to depose her from
this. In all these Plots none were more forward, than many of us that were
Priests. The Laity, if we had opposed our selves to these designments, would
(out of doubt) have been overruled by us. How many men of our calling
Saunders, Morton, Web, etc.
were addicted to these courses, the State knew not. In which case (the
premises discreetly considered) there is no King, or Prince in the World,
disgusting the Sea of Rome, and having either force or metal in him, that would
have endured us, if possibly he could have been revenged, but rather (as we
think) have utterly rooted us out of his Territories, as Traiters and Rebels
both to him and his Country. And therefore we may rejoice unfeignedly, that God
has blessed this Kingdom with so gracious and merciful a Sovereign, who has
not dealt in this sort with us. Assuredly if she were a Catholic, she might be
accounted the Mirror of the World: but as she is, both we and all other
Catholics her natural Subjects, deserve no longer to live, than we hereafter
shall honor her from our hearts, obey her in all things (so far as possibly we
may) pray for her prosperous Reign and long life: and to our powers defend and
protect both her and our Country against any whatsoever, that shall by force of
Arms attempt to damnifie either of them. For in the said Garboils, and very
undutiful proceedings, how has her Highness dealt with us? From the time of
the said Rebellion and Parliament, there were few above twelve, that in ten
years had been executed for their consciences (as we hold, although our
Adversaries say for Treason:) and of those twelve some perhaps can hardly be
drawn within our account, having been tainted with matters of Rebellion. The
most of the said number were Seminary Priests, who if they had come over into
England with the like intents, that some others have done, might very worthily
have been used as they were. But in our consciences, nay some of us do know it,
that they were far from those seditious humors: being men that intended nothing
else but simply the good of our Country, and the conversion of Souls. Marry to
say the truth, as we have confessed before, how could either her Majesty or the
State know so much? They had great cause, as Politic persons, to suspect the
worst.

Besides to the further honor of her Majesty we may not omit, that the States
of the whole Realm assembled in Parliament Anno 1576. were pleased to pass us
over, and made no Laws at that time against us. The ancient Prisoners that had
been restrained more narrowly in the year 1570. were (notwithstanding the said
enterprises in Ireland) again restored to their former liberty, to continue
with their friends as they had done before. Such as were not suspected to have
been dealers or abettors in the said treasonable actions, were used with that
humanity, which could well be expected. But when the Jesuits were come, and
that the State had notice of the said Excommunication, there was then within a
while a great alteration. For such were the Jesuits proceedings, and with so
great boldness, as though all had been theirs, and that the State should
presently have been changed.

Her Majesty had seen what followed in her Kingdom upon the first
Excommunication: and was therefore in all worldly Policy to prevent the like by
the second. The jealousy also of the State was much increased by Mr. Sherwins
answers upon his examination, above eight months before the apprehension of Mr.
Campion. For being asked, whether the Queen was his lawful Sovereign,
notwithstanding any sentence of the Popes, he prayed that no such question
might be demanded of him, and would not further thereunto answer. Two or three
other questions much to the same effect, were likewise propounded unto him,
which he also refused to answer. Matters now sorting on this, fashion, there
was a greater restraint of Catholics, than at any time before. Many both
Priests and Gentlemen were sent into the Isle of Ely and other places, there to
be more safely kept and looked unto. In January following 1581. (according to
the general computation,) a Proclamation was made for the calling home of her
Majesty's Subjects beyond the Seas: (such especially as were trained up in the
Seminaries) pretending that they learned little there, but disloyalty: and that
none after that time should harbor or relieve them, with sundry other points of
very hard intendment toward us. The same month also a Parliament ensued,
wherein a Law was made agreeable in effect to the said Proclamation, but with a
more severe punishment annexed. For it was a penalty of death, for any Jesuit
or Seminary Priest to repair into England, and for any to receive and entertain
them, which fell out according to Bishop Watsons former speeches or prediction,
what inischief the Jesuits would bring upon us. We could here as well as some
others have done, show our dislike with some bitterness of the said Law and
penalty. But to what purpose should we do so? It had been a good point of
wisdom in two or three persons, that have taken that course, to have been
silent: and rather have sought by gentleness and sweet carriage of themselves
to have prevented the more sharp execution of that Law, than by exclaiming
against it when it was too late, to have provoked the State to a greater
severity against us. And to confess something to our own disadvantage, and to
excuse the said Parliament: if all the Seminary Priests then in England, or
which should after that time have come hither, had been of Mr. Mortons and Mr.
Saunders mind before mentioned (when the first Excommunication came out,) or of
Mr. Saunders his second resolution, (being then in Arms against her Majesty in
Ireland:) or of Mr. Parsons traitorous disposition, both to our Queen and
Country: the said Law (no doubt) had carried with it a far greater show of
Justice. But that was the error of the State: and yet not altogether (for ought
they knew) improbable, those times being so full of many dangerous designments
and Jesuitical practices.

In this year also, diverse other things fell out unhappily toward us poor
Priests, and other the graver sort of Catholics, who had all of us single
hearts, and disliked (no men more) of all such factious enterprises. For
notwithstanding the said Proclamation and Law, Mr. Heywood a Jesuit came then
into England, and took so much upon him, that Father Parsons fell out
exceedingly with him: and great troubles grew amongst Catholics, by their
brablings and quarrels. A Synod was held by him the said Mr. Heywood, and
sundry ancient Customs were therein abrogated, to the offense of very many.
These courses being understood (after a sort) by the State: the Catholics and
Priests in Norfolk felt the smart of it. This Summer also in July, Mr. Campion
and other Priests were apprehended: whose answers upon their examinations,
agreeing in effect with Mr. Sherwins before mentioned, did greatly incense the
State. For amongst other questions that were propounded unto them, this being
one, viz. If the Pope do by his Bull or Sentence pronounce her Majesty to be
deprived, and no lawful Queen, and her Subjects to be discharged of their
allegiance and obedience unto her; and after, the Pope or any other by his
appointment and authority do invade this Realm: which part would you take, or
which part ought a good Subject of England to take? some answered, that when
the case should happen, they would then take counsel, what were best for them
to do: Another, that when that case should happen he would answer, and not
before: Another, that for the present, he was not resolved what to do in such a
case: Another, that when the case happens, then he will answer: Another, that
if such deprivation and invasion should be made for any matter of his faith, he
thinks he were then bound to take part with the Pope.

Now, what King in the world, being in doubt to be invaded by his enemies, and
fearing that some of his own Subjects were by indirect means drawn, rather to
adhere unto them than to himself: would not make the best trial of them he
could for his better satisfaction, whom he might trust to? In which trial, if
he found any, that either should make doubtful answers, or peremptorily affirm,
that (as the case stood betwixt him and his enemies) they would leave him their
Prince and take part with them: might he not justly repute them for Traitors,
and deal with them accordingly? Sure we are, that no King or Prince in
Christendom, would like or tolerate any such Subjects within their Dominions,
if possibly they could be rid of them.

The duty we owe to our Sovereigns, does not consist in taciturnity or keeping
close within our selves such Allegiance as we think sufficient to afford them:
but we are (especially when we are required thereunto) to make open profession
of it, that we may appear unto them to be such Subjects as we ought to be, and
as they may rely upon, if either their Kingdoms or safeties be in hazard or
danger. And we greatly marvel, that any Jesuits should be so hard laced
(concerning the performance of their duties, toward the Fathers and Kings of
those Countries where they were born, and whose Vassals they are) considering
unto what obedience they tie themselves toward their own general, provincial,
and other Governors: unto whom they were no way tied, but by their own
consents, and for that it has pleased them voluntarily to submit themselves
unto them. If a quarrel should fall out, for example, betwixt the Jesuits and
the Dominicans, it would seem a very strange matter to the Provincial or
General of that Society, to be driven to be demanded of a Jesuit, which part he
would take. But therewith we have not to intermeddle: only we wish, that whilst
they look for so great subjection at those men's hands that be under them, they
do not forget their own Allegiance toward their Sovereigns: or at the least so
demean themselves as we poor men (every way their equals, and as sound
Catholics as themselves, that we go no further) may not be brought into hatred
with her Majesty, unto whom we profess all duty and true allegiance: let other
men qualify the same as they list.

About the time of the overthrow of the Popes Forces in Ireland: his Holiness
(by the false instigations of the Jesuits) plotted with the King of Spain, for
the assistance of the Duke of Guise, to enterprise upon the sudden, a very
desperate designment against her Majesty: and for the delivery and advancement
to the Crown of the Queen of Scotland. For the better effecting whereof,
Mendoza the Jesuit and Ledger for the King of Spain in England, set on work (a
worthy Gentleman otherwise) one Mr. Francis Throckmorton and diverse others. And
whilst the same was in contriving (as afterward Mr. Throckmorton himself
confessed 1584.) the said Jesuitical humor had so possessed the hearts of
sundry Catholics, as we do unfeignedly rue in our hearts the remembrance of
it, and are greatly ashamed that any person so entitled, should ever have been
so extremely bewitched. Two Gentlemen about that time also, viz. Anno 1583. Mr.
Arden and Mr. Somervile were convicted by the Laws of the Realm, to have
purposed and contrived how they might have laid violent hands upon her
Majesty's sacred person. Mr. Somerviles confession therein, was so notorious,
as it may not be either qualified or denied. And Doctor Parry the very same
year, was plotting with Jesuits beyond the Seas, how he might have effected the
like villainy. How the worthy Earl of Northumberland, was about this time
brought into the said Plot of the Duke of Guise (then still in hand) we will
pretermit. Mr. Parsons that was an Actor in it, could tell the story very
roundly at Rome: It wrought the noble Earls overthrow 1585. which may justly be
ascribed to the Jesuitical practices of the Jesuit Mendoza and others of that
crew. Hereunto we might add the notable Treasons of Mr. Anthony Babington and
his Accomplices in the year 1586. which were so apparent, as we were greatly
abashed at the shameless boldness of a young Jesuit, who to excuse the said
Traiters, and qualify their offenses, presumed in a kind of supplication to
her Majesty, to ascribe the plotting of all that mischief to Mr. Secretary
Walsingham. The treachery also of Sir William Standley the year following 1587.
in falsifying his faith to her Majesty, and in betraying the trust committed
unto him by the Earl of Leicester, who had given him the honorable Title of
Knighthood: as it was greatly prejudicial to us, that were Catholics, at home,
so was the defense of that disloyalty (made by a worthy man, but by the
persuasions (as they think) of Parsons) greatly disliked of many both wise and
learned. And especially it was wondered at a while (until the drift thereof
appeared more manifestly in the year 1588.) that the said worthy person by the
said lewd Jesuits, laid down this for a ground, in justifying of the said
Standley: viz. That in all Wars, which may happen for Religion, every Catholic
man is bound in conscience to employ his person and forces by the Popes
direction: viz. How far, when, and where, either at home or abroad, he may and
must break with his temporal Sovereign. These things we would not have touched,
had they not been known in effect to this part of the World: and that we
thought it our duties to show our own dislike of them: and to clear her Majesty
(so far as we may) from such imputations of more than barbarous cruelty toward
us, as the Jesuits in their writings, have cast by heaps upon her: they
themselves (as we still think in our consciences and before God) having been
from time to time the very causes of all the calamities, which any of us have
endured in England since her Majesty's reign. Which we do not write, simply to
excuse her Highness, although we must confess, we can be contented to endure
much, rather than to seek her dishonor: but for that we think few Princes
living, being persuaded in Religion as her Majesty is, and so provoked as she
has been, would have dealt more mildly with such their Subjects (all
circumstances considered) than she has done with us.

But now we are come to the year 1588. and to that most bloody attempt, not
only against her Majesty and our common Enemies, but against our selves, all
Catholics: nay against this flourishing Kingdom and our own native Country.
The memory of which attempt will be (as we trust) an everlasting Monument of
Jesuitical Treason and Cruelty. For it is apparent in a Treatise penned by the
advice of Father Parsons altogether, (as we do verily think) that the King of
Spain was especially moved and drawn to that intended mischief against us, by
the long and daily solicitations of the Jesuits, and other English Catholics
beyond the Seas, affected and altogether given to Jesuitism. And whereas it is
well known, that the Duke of Medina Sidonia had given it out directly, that if
once he might land in England, both Catholics and Heretics that came in his
way should be all one to him: his Sword could not discern them, so he might
make way for his Master, all was one to him: yet the said Father Parsons (for
so we will ever charge him, though another man by his crafty persuasion took
upon him to be the Author of that Book) did labor with all the Rhetoric he
had to have persuaded us, upon the supposed arrival of the Spaniard, to have
joined with him to our own destructions: telling us many fair tales, and
alluring us with sundry great promises, all of them mere illusions, falsehoods,
and most traitorous instigations and juglings. He ascribes it to error of
Conscience, and want of courage, terming the same an effeminate dastardy: that
we had then suffered her Majesty almast thirty years to reign over us. He
threatened us with Excommunication, and utter ruin both of our selves and all
our Posterity, if we did then any longer obey, abet, or aid, defend or
acknowledge her Highness to be our Queen, or Superior: and did not forthwith
join our selves with all our Forces to the Spaniards. The good Cardinal (by
Parsons means) is drawn to say, That the Pope had made him Cardinal, intending
to send him as his Legate, for the sweeter managing of this (forsooth) godly and
great Affair: and to affirm upon his honor and in the word of a Cardinal, that
in the fury of the Spaniards intended Conquest, there should be as great care
had of every Catholic and penitent person, as possibly could be. And to allure
the Nobility of this Realm, he promised them to become an humble Suitor on
their behalfs, that (so as they show them selves valiant in assisting the King
of Spain' s Forces) they might continue their noble Names and Families. Surely
they had been wise men, that should have relied much either upon his promise,
or the Spaniards courtesy. This Jesuit also tells all Catholics, the better
to comfort them (but indeed to the great scandal for ever of all Priesthood,)
and to show how just and holy the cause was they had in hand: that there were
diverse Priests in the Kings Army, ready to serve every man's spiritual
necessity, by Confession, Counsel, and all consolation in Christ Jesus. Also he
so advances the Forces of the Enemies, and extenuateth her Majesty's abilities
to withstand them, as he accounted the Victory obtained in effect before they
were landed, telling us, That besides the said great Forces, we should so be
assisted by the blessed Patrons both of Heaven and Earth, with the guard of all
Gods holy Angels, with our blessed Savior himself in the sovereign Sacrament,
and with the daily most holy oblation of Christ's own dear body and blood, as it
could not fall out otherwise, but that we must needs prevail. Which kind of
persuasions, some of them being ridiculous, the most very traitorous, and these
last most blasphemous, as tending so greatly to the dishonor of Religion, we
detest and abhor. And in all these Jesuitical and disloyal practices, this is
our comfort, that albeit we doubt not, but that the Pope as a temporal Prince
did join and contribute toward this intended Invasion: yet we find Father
Parsons declaration of Xistus Quintus sentence of deposition of her Majesty at
that time, and of his admonition thereunto adjoined, as in the Popes name, to
have no warrant at all besides his own bare affirmation, either of Breve or of
any other public Instrument, as in such cases had been most necessary,
otherwise than that he told us, it was the Popes pleasure that we should take
notice thereof by his Book which was then printed, and to have been scattered
amongst us. By warrant whereof (as we are persuaded) it was not lawful for us
to have killed a Goose, if her Majesty had forbidden us so to do.

Of these matters (to return still to our former Apologies) we would have said
nothing, were they not objected unto us, and showed us out of the Books
themselves, as notes and arguments of our traitorous hearts: our Adversaries
pressing the same upon us, as if they did belong unto us, and we were as guilty
of them, as either they that plotted or published them. Which conceit, if it
should take root in those that be in Authority, how could we hope for any
favor, but were rather to expect the greatest extremity that might be? So as
still we may say, that the proceedings held against her Majesty well weighed,
these foreign Jesuitical practices, have been the cause of all our troubles.

When it had pleased God to deliver her Majesty and this Kingdom from the said
intended Invasion, Mr. Parsons whether ashamed of the foil, (for the success
whereof he was so peremptory) or for that he thought matters would be better
managed in Spain, if he were there to give his advice, departed from Rome (as
we take it) and became a Courtier to attend King Philip: where by Mendoza his
fellow Jesuit's means, he grew shortly into so great estimation (not for any
goodness in him toward this Realm, you may be sure, but rather in respect of
his deadly hatred against it) that he procured a Seminary to be erected at
Valledolyd 1589. But we will leave his proceedings in Spain a while.

In these ten years last mentioned from 1580. till 1590. or but little before,
we find her Majesty to be excommunicated by Gregory the Thirteenth: Mr. Sherwin
and the rest of our Brethren too much Jesuited, refuse to answer, whether they
will take the Queens part or the Popes, if he should come by force of Arms to
assail her in her own Kingdom: Parsons and Heywood are found to be
Practitioners, but especially Parsons. The intention of the Duke of Guise is
entertained here and prosecuted: Her Majesty's life is sought by treachery:
Babington and his Companions shoot at the Crown: Stanley is a Treacherer,
breaks his faith, and is defended for so doing. Then followed the Invasion:
and lastly, Parsons plottings in Spain, and the erection of new Seminaries
there. Now let us consider, how we our selves all this while have been dealt
with. Such of us as remained in Prison at Wisbich (and were committed thither
1580. and others not long after committed also thither, to the number of about
thirty three or thirty four) continued still in the several times of all the
said most wicked designments, as we were before: and were never brought into
any trouble for them, but lived there, Colledge-like, without any want, and in
good reputation with our Neighbors that were Catholics about us. It is true
that toward the number of fifty (as our memory serves us) Priests and
Catholics of all sorts, within the compass of the said ten years were put to
death: we say upon our knowledges (concerning the most of them) for their
consciences: but our Adversaries (as they think) do still affirm for Treason.
Such Priests as in their examination were found any thing moderate, were not so
hardly proceeded with: insomuch as fifty five (to our remembrance) that by the
Laws (we acknowledge) might likewise have been put to death, were in one year,
viz. 1585. (what time great mischiefs were in hand) spared from that extremity,
and only banished. Which fact, howsoever some have written of it, the parties
themselves accounted it for a great benefit, and so would they also have done
(we doubt not of it) if they had been then of that number. Whereas therefore
Mr. Parsons (as we think) exclaimeth in a Pamphlet set out shortly after,
saying, Where are now the old Tyrants of the World, Nero, Decius, Dioclesian,
Maxentius, and the rest of the great persecutors of the Christians? Where is
Genserick and Hunricus with their Arrian Heretics? alluding to the State here:
we think both him, and diverse others that have written to the same effect, very
greatly to blame. Sure we are, that the general cause of Religion, for the
which both we and they contend (as often we have said) gets no good but hurt
by it: and contrary to the old saying, (be he never so bad, yet let him have
justice) though some hard courses have been taken by the State against us; yet
has it not by many degrees been so extreme, as the Jesuits and that crew have
falsely written and reported of it.

But to return to Father Parsons in Spain, and to proceed in the course of
things which have happened since 1590. The said Father Parsons so managed the
said Seminary erected in Valledolyd, as within three years, viz. 1591. twelve
or thirteen Priests were sent hither from thence. Also he procured some other
Seminaries to be erected in Spain, and furnished them with such Students as he
thought fit, which (for our parts) we greatly commend in him, if he took this
pains, and employed his favor with the King to a good end: whereof we have
some doubt, knowing the Jesuits fetches: but the State here did utterly condemn
him for it, finding that both he and some others were plotting and laboring by
all the means they could for a new Invasion. Whereupon a Proclamation was set
out 1591. as well for an inquiry or search for all such Seminary Priests, as
either were, or should hereafter come from Spain, as also from any other
Seminaries beyond the Seas, upon suspicion, that they were sent hither for no
other end, but to prepare a way for the said Invasion. Whereas we are verily
persuaded in our consciences, and do know it for many, that the Priests
themselves had no such intention, whatsoever the Jesuits had that sent them.
Against the said Proclamation, three or four have whet their Pens: but still,
whilst they seek to disgrace and gall the State, they have ever thereby wounded
and beaten us, being themselves in the mean time void of all danger. One of
them, Mr. Parsons by name, (as we suppose) writing in his said Pamphlet of the
new intended Invasion, mentioned in the said Proclamation, tells us, That the
King has just cause to attempt again that enterprise. And again he says, That
the King is so interessed (together with the Pope) to seck (as he terms it)
her Majesty's reformation, that he the said King is bound in. Justice to do it,
and cannot without prejudice of his high estimation and greatness refuse at the
soonest opportunity to attempt it. Marry withal to comfort us, he writes, That
the King intends no rigorous dealing with our Nation, in the prosecution of
his Invasion, when he comes hither. Which great favor of the King toward us,
we are to ascribe to good Father Parsons, if we may believe his dutiful Subject
Mr. Southwell the Jesuit. For thus he tells us, If ever, says he, the King
should prevail in that designment (of his new Invasion) Father Parsons assisted
with Cardinal Alanes Authority has done that in our Countries behalf, for
which his most bitter enemies, and generally all her Majesty's Subjects shall
have cause to thank him for his serviceable endeavors, so far has he inclined
fury to clemency, and rage to compassion. Sure we are greatly beholding to this
good Father, that has had so kind a remembrance of us. But we wish that he had
rather employed himself as a religious man in the service of God, and his
private meditations, than thus to have busied himself in setting forward and
qualifying it, when he has done so outrageous a designment: and do pray with
all our hearts, that neither we nor this Kingdom do ever fall into the hands of
the Spaniards, whose unspeakable cruelties in other Countries, a worthy
Catholic Bishop has notably described to all posterity. The same Mr. Parsons
also, together with his fellow Jesuit Mr. Creswell (as men that pretend
extraordinary love to their Country) have written a large Volume against the
said Proclamation, wherein what malice and contempt can devise, that might
provoke her Majesty to indignation against us, is there set out very skilfully,
they themselves well knowing that no other fruit or benefit could come unto us
by that discourse, except it were still to plague us.

Whilst the said Invasion was thus talked of, and in preparation in Spain, a
shorter course was thought of, if it might have had success. Mr. Hesket was set
on by the Jesuits 1592. or thereabouts, with Father Parsons consent or
knowledge, to have stirred up the Earl of Derby to rebellion against her
Highness.

Not long after good Father Holt and others with him, persuaded an Irish man
one Patrick Collen (as he himself confessed) to attempt the laying of his
violent and villainous hands upon her Majesty. Shortly after in the year 1593.
that notable Stratagem was plotted (the whole State knows by whom,) for
Doctor Lopez the Queens Physician to have poisoned her, for the which he was
executed the year after. This wicked designment being thus prevented by Gods
providence, the said traitorous Jesuit, Holt and others, did allure and animate
one York and Williams, to have accomplished that with their bloody hands, that
the other purposed to have done with his poison: we mean her Majesty's
destruction. Hereunto we might add the late villainous attempt 1599. of Edward
Squire, animated and drawn thereunto (as he confessed) by Walpole that
pernicious Jesuit. But we must turn again to Father Parsons, whose turnings and
doublings are such as would trouble a right good Hound to trace him. For in the
mean time, that the said Traiters one after another, were plotting and
studying, how best they might compass her Majesty's death they cared not how,
nor by what means, he the said Father Parsons so prevailed with the King, as he
attempted twice in two sundry years, his new Invasion, meaning to have
proceeded therein, not with such great preparation as he did at the first, but
only to have begun the same, by taking some Port Westward, toward which he came
so far onward as Silley with his Fleet. At both which times, God, who still
has fought for her Majesty and this Realm, did notably prevent him, by such
winds and tempests, as the most of his Ships and men perished in the Sea, as
they were coming hitherward. Furthermore the said good Father in the midst of
all the said traitorous enterprises both at home and abroad (devised and set
forward by him and his Companions) was plodding amongst his Papers, and playing
the Herald: how, if all his said wicked designments failed, he might at the
least, entitle the King of Spain and consequently the Infanta his Daughter to
the Crown and Kingdom of England. To which purpose he framed, and afterward
published a Book, wherewith he acquainted the Students in those Seminaries in
Spain: and labored nothing more, than to have their subscriptions to the said
Infantaes title, therein promising unto her their present Allegiance, as unto
their lawful Sovereign: and that when they should be sent into their Country,
they should persuade the Catholics there to do the like, without any further
expectation of the Queen of England's death, as Mr. Charles Paget affirms in
his Book against Parsons.

We spoke of the Seminaries in Spain before, somewhat suspiciously: and now you
see the reason that moved us so to do. Besides we do not doubt, but that in the
perusing of this our discourse, you will be assaulted with many strange
cogitations, concerning our full intent and meaning therein. Which although it
cannot choose, but that it does already in part appear unto you; yet now we come
to a more clear and plain declaration of our purpose. You see into what hatred
the wicked attempts of the Jesuits against her Majesty and the State, has
brought not only all Catholics in general, but more especially us that are
secular Priests, although we did ever dislike and blame them, nay detest and
hate them, no men more. For any of us to have been brought up in the Seminaries
beyond the Seas, has been, and still is (as you know) a matter here very
odious, and to us full of danger. But by Father Parsons courses with the
Seminaries in Spain, and now that he is Rector of the English Seminary in Rome,
and so takes upon him by his favor there to direct and command all the rest:
what will the State here think of the Priests, that shall come from any of
those Seminaries hereafter, where they must be brought up, according to the
Jesuitical humor, and sent hither with such directions as shall be thereunto
agreeable? The said Book of Titles compiled by Parsons, is here very well
known, almost to the whole Realm: and Mr. Charles Paget has not been silent as
touching the Infanta, and the bringing up of Students to be sent hither, as
Priests to promote her title. Sundry sharp courses have been taken already with
us, and many Laws are made against us. But now, what may we expect, but all the
cruelty that ever was devised against any man, if the State should think both
us, and all other Catholics to be either addicted, or any way inclined to the
advancement of any foreign Title against her Majesty, or her lawful Successors.

And it cannot choose, but that we should thereof be the rather suspected,
because at this time it is well known, that the infection of Jesuitism does
bear great sway in England amongst us, whilst our Archpriest (who takes upon
him to rule all) is himself overruled by Garnet the Jesuit, who as a most base
Vassal, is in every thing at the beck and command of Father Parsons.

For the avoiding therefore of all the further mischiefs that may ensue, we
first profess (as before we have often done) that we do utterly dislike and
condemn in our consciences, all the said slanderous Writings and Pamphlets,
which have been published to the slander of her Majesty and this Realm,
protesting that the Jesuitical designments beyond the Seas, together with
certain rebellious and traitorous attempts of some Catholics at home, have
been the causes of such calamities and troubles, as have happened unto us:
great (we confess) in themselves, but far less (we think) than any Prince
living in her Majesty's case, and so provoked would have inflicted upon us.
Some of us have said many a time, when we have read and heard speeches of her
Majesty's supposed cruelty. Why my Masters? what would you have her to do,
being resolved as she is in matters of Religion, except she should willingly
cast off the care, not only of her State and Kingdom, but of her life also and
Princely estimation? Yea, there have been amongst us of our own calling, who
have likewise said, That they themselves, knowing what they do know, how under
pretense of Religion, the life of her Majesty, and the subversion of the
Kingdom is aimed at: if they had been of her Highnesses Council, they would
have given their consent, for the making of very strait and rigorous Laws to
the better suppressing and preventing of all such Jesuitical and wicked
designments. Secondly, we do all of us acknowledge, that by our Learning
(secluding all Machiavilian Maxims) Ecclesiastical persons by virtue of their
calling are only to meddle with praying, preaching, and administering the
Sacraments, and such other like spiritual Functions, and not to study how to
murder Princes, nor to licitate Kingdoms, nor to intrude themselves into
matters of State, Successions, and Invasions, as Friar George did in Pannonia,
to the utter ruin of that beautiful Realm. Thirdly; we profess our selves,
with all godly courage and boldness, to be as sound and true Catholic Priests,
as any Jesuits, or men living in the world, and that we do not desire to draw
breath any longer upon the earth, than that we shall so continue; but yet
therewith we being born her Majesty's Subjects, do plainly affirm and
resolutely acknowledge it, without all Jesuitical equivocation, that if the
Pope himself (as some of the Apostles did) do come into this Land; or if he do
send hither some Fugatius and Damianus, as Eleutherus did, or some Augustine,
Laurence or Justus, as Saint Gregory did, we will to do them service, go unto
them, and lie down at their feet, and defend with them the Catholic faith by
the sacred Scriptures, and authority of the Church, though it cost us our
lives. But if he come or send hither an Army, under pretense to establish the
said Catholic Religion, by force, and with the Sword, we will ever be most
ready, as native born and true Subjects to her Highness, with the hazard of our
lives, and with all our might, to withstand and oppose our selves against him,
and to spend the best blood in our bodies in defense of the Queen and our
Country. For we are thoroughly persuaded, that Priests of what order soever,
ought not by force of Arms, to plant or water the Catholic faith, but in
spiritu lenitatis and mansuetudinis to propagate and defend it. So it was
planted in the Primitive Church, over all the World: and crescit and
fructificat sicut and in nobis est, ex quo die recepimus. The ancient godly
Christians, though they had sufficient forces, did not oppose themselves in
Arms against their Lords the Emperors, though of another Religion. But our
purpose is not to dispute this point.

And now lastly, we commend unto you all (our very right dear and beloved
Brethren) this our most humble Suit. First, that you will interpret the whole
premises no otherwise than we our selves have expounded our own meaning.
Secondly, we entreat you to remember, how dear we have been unto you, and that
we continue our unfeigned affection toward you still: assuring you, that
howsoever you are changed, we do affect you still, with a true and jealous love
in Christ Jesu.

Thirdly, we desire you by the mercies of God, to take heed of Novelties and
Jesuitism: for it is nothing but treachery, dissimulation, ambition, and a very
vizard of most deep hypocrisy. When other Kingdoms begin to loath them, why
should you so far debase your selves, as to admire them? Give us not occasion
to say with the blessed Apostle: You foolish Galatians who has bewitched you?

Fourthly, never give ear to any private Whisperers, or Jesuitical persuasions,
that shall tend to allure you from your duties and allegiance unto her Majesty,
or your native Country. All arguments, that can be brought to corrupt you in
either, assure your selves, are false and unlearned sophistications. The
Catholic faith, for her stability and continuance has no need of any
treachery or rebellion. The promise made to S. Peter, is her sure ground, and
is more dishonored with treasons, and wicked policies of carnal men, than any
way furthered or advanced. The word of the spirit, and not the sword of the
flesh, or any arm of man is that, which gives life and beauty to the Catholic
Church. We are fully persuaded in our consciences, and as men besides our
Learning, who have some experience, that if the Catholics had never sought by
indirect means to have vexed her Majesty with their designments against her
Crown: if the Pope and King of Spain had never plotted with the Duke of
Norfolk: if the Rebels in the North had never been heard of: if the Bull of
Pius Quintus had never been known: if the said Rebellion had never been
justified: if neither Stukeley nor the Pope had attempted any thing against
Ireland: if Gregory the Thirteenth had not renewed the said Excommunication: if
the Jesuits had never come into England: if the Pope and King of Spain had not
practiced with the Duke of Guise for his attempt against her Majesty: if
Parsons and the rest of the Jesuits, with other our Countrymen beyond the
Seas, had never been Agents in those traitorous and bloody designments of
Throckmorton, Parry, Collen, York, Williams, Squire and such like: If they had
not by their Treatises and Writings endeavored to defame their Sovereign, and
their own Country, laboring to have many of their Books to be translated into
diverse languages, thereby to show more their own disloyalty: if Cardinal Alane
and Parsons had not published the renovation of the said Bull by Xistus
Quintus: if thereunto they had not added their scurrilous and unmanly
admonition, or rather most profane Libel against her Majesty: if they had not
sought by false persuasions, and ungodly arguments, to have allured the hearts
of all Catholics from their Allegiance: if the Pope had never been urged by
them to have thrust the King of Spain into that barbarous action against the
Realm: if they themselves with all the rest of that generation, had not
labored greatly with the said King for the Conquest and Invasion of this Land
by the Spaniards, who are known to be the cruellest Tyrants that live upon the
earth: if in all their proceedings, they had not from time to time depraved,
irritated, and provoked both her Majesty and the State, with these and many
other such like their most ungodly and unchristian practices: but on the
contrary, if the Popes from time to time had sought her Majesty, by kind
offices and gentle persuasions, never ceasing the prosecution of those and such
like courses of humanity and gentleness: if the Catholics and Priests beyond
the Seas had labored continually the furtherance of those most Priest-like and
divine allurements, and had framed their own proceedings in all their works and
writings accordingly: if we at home all of us, both Priests and people had
possessed our souls in meekness and humility, honored her Majesty, born with
the infirmities of the State, suffered all things, and dealt as true Catholic
Priests: if all of us (we say) had thus done, most assuredly the State would
have loved us, or at least born with us: where there is one Catholic, there
would have been ten: there had been no speeches amongst us of Racks and
Tortures, nor any cause to have used them; for none were ever vexed that way
simply, for that he was either Priest or Catholic, but because they were
suspected to have had their hands in some of the said most traitorous
designments: none of her Majesty's enemies durst so readily have attempted her
State and Kingdom: we had been in better friendship with those that seek now
most to oppose themselves against us, and to all men (as we are persuaded)
bonus odor Christi, odor vitae ad vitam: whereas by following the said new
violent Spirits, quasi turbae impellentes parietem, we are become odor mortis
ad mortem, non solum iis qui pereunt, sed etiam iis qui salvi fiunt. And
therefore let us all turn over the leaf, and take another course, than hitherto
we have done.

To conclude, we do also further entreat and beseech you, to consider with your
selves, the state of the Seminaries beyond the Seas, as now they stand at the
disposition of the Jesuits, and join together with us, that the said Jesuits
may be removed from the government and direction of them. It is too well known,
how hotly they are addicted to the pursuing of a Spanish Monarchy: for the
advancement whereof, (because it tends to their own glory, being altogether
Hispaniated and transported into those humors, the better to resemble and
imitate their Founder and Father Ignatius Loyola a Spaniard) they will
certainly never cease to put in practice all the mischief, they can either
devise themselves, or learn amongst their company: which is, as they consort
themselves, the very School of Machiavellism. In the which our joint suit, if
we cannot prevail, it remains then, that you would be pleased to be entreated
by us, not to send or suffer your children or friends to go beyond the Seas
unto them, that so they may be driven, if needs they will train up Youths to
make them Traiters, to gather them up in other Countries, whereby they shall
not be able so much to infect or endanger us. Besides, we are fully persuaded,
that by this course, although at the first we be not heard, by reason of the
might that the Jesuitical faction are grown unto: yet his Holiness, when he
shall perceive it, and in the depth of his singular wisdom consider, what
inconvenience may come thereof, will easily be drawn to hearken unto us. Or
howsoever (as our Savior Christ says in another case) potens est Deus de
lapidibus istis suscitare filios Abrahae: though you never send your Sons or
Friends beyond the Seas, to the ruinating both of your selves, and of your
Country, if the Jesuits shall still have the direction of them: so say we that
the Church lived before they were born, and needs not for the advancement of
her glory, any of their traitorous practices: but is able of her self by the
assistance of God, to raise up Priests out of our own Universities, and from
among the Ministers themselves, remain they as yet never so stiff or hard
against us. And thus commending both you and our cause to God, and our selves
to your good favors, and charitable prayers, we take our leaves, and end this
tedious discourse, more profitable and pleasing to God (we trust) than
acceptable or grateful to many, which we can be but sorry for.

Your true Friends the secular Priests.
Whatsoever is written or contained in these Books, we submit all to the
censure and judgment of our holy Mother the Catholic Church.
FINIS.
THE JESUITS REASONS Unreasonable: OR, DOUBTS Proposed to the JESUITS

Upon their Paper presented to diverse Persons of Honor, for Non-Exception from
the Common Favor Voted to CATHOLICS.

JON. 1. 12. Tollite me, and mitti^e in mare, and cessabit mare a vobis: scio
enim ego quoniam propter me tempestas haec grandis venit super vos. LONDON,
Printed Anno Dom. M DC LXII.

REASONS why the Jesuits hope that they should partake of the favor showed to
other Priests, in taking away the Sanguinary Laws.
THE same Reasons, which moved the Peers to take away the Sanguinary Laws from
other Priests, may move them also, to take them away in respect of the Jesuits,
for the Jesuits are free born Subjects as well as others; they have been as
faithful to His Majesty as others; they are of tender Consciences as well as
others. The Jesuits all along have been furtherers of the King, and Actors also
as far as their Function bears; that is, they were in the Camp where some of
them were killed, others imprisoned, most of them lost their nearest Relations
in the War, and in a manner, all had their Friends undone for the King. All
those that depended on the Jesuits stood constant for the King, even to death:
amongst these were some signal persons, as Sir Henry Gage, Sir John Smith, Sir
John Digby, and others, who having been formerly Scholars of the Jesuits, were
actually, when they dyed, Penitents of the Jesuits, and Mr. Peter Wright who
was executed at Tyburn, for a Jesuit, was particularly maligned because he was
Sir Henry Gage his Priest. As for Noble persons who lost great Estates, and
endured much hardship for his Majesty, the late Duchess of Buckingham, the late
Marquess of Worcester, the late Earl of Shrewsbury, were Penitents of the
Society, as other prime Nobility yet in being.

Now whereas two things are objected against the Jesuits, they are both easily
answered; First, it is objected that the Jesuits teach the Doctrine of the Pope
deposing Kings. It is answered, That no Community can be less accused of that
Doctrine, than the Jesuits. It Is true, four or five Jesuits did many years ago
teach that Doctrine, as they had found it taught by others, ancienter than
their Order. But since the first of January 1616. the General of the Jesuits
forbade any of his to teach, preach, or dispute for that Doctrine, or print any
thing for it, to take away the aspersion which the Writings of some few have
brought upon the Society. And now actually all Jesuits are obliged under pain
of damnation, not to teach that Doctrine either in word, writing, or print,
which none in the Church but they only are.

Secondly, It Is objected that the Jesuits do particularly depend on the Pope.
It is answered, That they are obliged by a particular Vow to be ready to go
even to the utmost bounds of the Earth, to preach the Gospel to Infidels, when
the Pope shall think it fit to send them; and they have no other Vow, which
does particularly oblige them but this, which can prejudice no Kingdom. On the
other side, speaking of their dependence (which may bias their affections)
they have the least dependence of the Pope, of any Churchmen, for they are by
special Vow excluded from all Benefices, and Dignities, by which the Pope may
win the affection of other Churchmen.

As for what is said of the Venetians, and French banishing the Jesuits, it is
answered that both those Estates have repealed their Acts.

Lastly, That the Jesuits being willing to submit to whatsoever all other
Catholic Priests shall agree to, and offering all the security which others
offer, they hope they may be partakers of the same favors which shall be
granted to others; that so, that mercy may extend to all, and the World may see
that the Sanguinary Laws are truly taken away.

PREFACE.
I Expect Censures and Clamours as loud as can be against me, of uncharitable,
uncatholick, unchristian, etc. for seeming to lay load upon the already
oppressed, and contribute to, and even provoke a persecution against our Fellow
Catholics. I think I have said my worst against my self: let me see how I can
justify my action. Premising therefore that the case of you Jesuits is
apprehended by your selves, and your Abettors already desperate, and your
Exclusion remediless, and so cannot be said to spring from this paper of mine;
I address to my Defense, and offer my Motives why I publish this little
Treatise against you.

My first is, To wipe off the aspersion laid upon Gods Church by some Tenets of
yours; and strongly fastened on it by your haughty calling only your selves the
Catholic Church, and all dissenters from your Tenets, Heretics.

My second, Because I understand you are about to make the Common good stoop to
the Particular one of your Order: as is your constant practice; contrary to the
Law of Nature, and Principles of Christianity. For I have been informed that
you in a boasting manner affirm, the Parliament will proceed no farther about
taking away the Sanguinary Laws: and that some friends of yours endeavor to
make it believed that it is not for his Majesty's interest to make good his
solemn promise from Breda, of having regard to tender Consciences.

My third is, Your stomachful frustrating my expectation. For I was really glad
when I heard you had published Apologetical Reasons why you should not be
excepted; hoping you would sincerely renounce the criminal Doctrines and
Actions of your Predecessors, and free Religion from scandal. But finding no
such thing, per verba de praesenti, but on the contrary, a comparing and
preferring your selves before others: I thought my self obliged to do right to
the Common Cause.

My fourth, To oblige you to repentance, and a hearty retractation of your
unlawful Tenets and Practices; that so you may deserve and have as much favor
as others; which is the worst I wish you: and not to wrong your own Credits and
Consciences, and fool others with dissembling shows of loyalty, which every one
may see to be mere hypocrisy.

My fifth, Because I owe that duty to the Civil Magistrate, whose hearty
Subject I am, to resent a mockery put upon him (as this your paper will appear
to be) under color of offering satisfaction: Every true hearted Subject owing
his best endeavor to his King and Country, that none lurk among them, unless
their faltring Principles of Aequivocation and disloyalty be purged out.

My sixth, To offer even your selves an advantage, if your courage and cause
will stretch to improve it. For the following Doubts are, many of them, such as
Protestants themselves urge against your Reasons: and are communicated here to
you, partly on purpose that you may provide better satisfaction.

My last (to satisfy even the passionate too) is, Because your unchristian
spirit of Calumny is still as unquiet as ever; having, of late, most unjustly
aspersed Principal Persons of almost every Body but your own; which comportment
of yours makes it but fit, if Truth and the Common Good favor you not, neither
should I. To think and declare thus much satisfies me; if it do not others, I
cannot help it. Only I wish your favorers to beware of doing any thing that
may be interpreted an abetment of you, till you approve your selves heartily
loyal; lest they discover themselves too deeply tainted with your Principles
and temper.

The Jesuits Reasons Unreasonable. DOVBTS.
1. TO begin then. My first Doubt shall be, Whether you Jesuits have ground to
hope the same favor with others. For, if you, by your unjust and wicked
practices provoked the Magistrates to enact those Laws: if the rest of Priests
and Catholics were by you plunged in such miseries, upon discovery of your
Negotiations, which were imputed to the whole Body of them, how can you be
thought to deserve remission, whose seditious Principles are too deeply guilty
of the Blood of Priests and Catholics shed in the Kingdom ever since you first
came into it? Those who know your practices in the Countries, where you, by the
means, ordinarily, of deluded Wives, govern the Great Ones, know this to be
your Maxim, to manage Religion, not by persuasion, but by command and force.
This Principle did your chief Apostle of England, Robert Parsons, bring in with
him. His first endeavors were to make a List of Catholics, which, under the
conduct of the Duke of Guise, should have changed the state of the Kingdom,
using for it the pretense of the Title of Queen Mary of Scotland. But, her
Council at Paris, which understood business better, were so sensible of his
boldness, that they took from him the Queens Cipher which he had purloyned, and
commanded him never more to meddle in Her affairs. Poor Edmund Campian, who is
generally accounted an innocent and learned man, and others suffered for such
practices of his.

Parson's endeavors being suppressed by this Queen, he turned himself to the
Spaniard, and, with all his might, fostered the Invasion of Eighty eight, which
is known to have been another occasion of Sanguinary Laws. He wrote, on that
occasion, his Dolman, to justify the Spaniards Title to England, degrading the
Scottish succession and Title of our Sovereign. He wrote also Leicester's
Commonwealth (at that time called commonly Blewcoat, because it was sent into
England bound in blew paper) which extremely exasperated the State, and
augmented its indignation against Catholics. The same man, at Queen Elizabeth's
death, procured a Bull from the Pope to the Catholics in England against King
James; to hinder his coming to the Crown, unless he would give liberty of
Conscience, and, as his friends gave out, had twenty thousand men listed for
that effect, had not his Majesty prevented the danger with sweet words.

Next followed that detestable Machination of blowing up that Royal Race, and
the whole Nobility, with the House of Commons, which was the occasion of the
Oath of Allegiance, and all the Persecution of Catholics following upon it:
King James professing, not to persecute for Religion, but for Treason. This you
allege not to be, originally, your Invention; but, is it no guilt to follow
another man's wickedness, when it leads to so horrid a crime? For, without
doubt, both by prayers beforehand, and by public testifications after the
Fact was discovered, you were highly accessory to it: nay, many years after you
did, and peradventure to this very day still do pertinaciously adhere to it. I
could urge great and manifest instances of this, were it not to lose time. That
monstrous Straw, of which all Christendom rung so long, and the Pictures of
Garnet and Oldcorne cannot be denied, nor want they evidence of your inward
minds.

After these came out the ridiculous and satirical Books against King James,
the Corona Regia, and the Quaeries. And yet your so well affected spirits could
not be at rest, till your Patriarch Parsons was shamefully turned out of Rome
by Monsieur Bethunes, the French Ambassador, and order from the King of France;
being discovered to plot a new Treason against his Country to introduce the
Duke of Parma. Thus you followed King James to his death.

Direct Treason against King Charles, of glorious memory, before the Wars, I
cannot accuse you of: but, how refractory you were to the Queens desires and
orders at Rome, for his late Majesty's assistance, is well known; and what you
have done since the beginning of the Wars, and how you have behaved your
selves, both in and out of England, is fitter for me to remit to his Majesty,
and the Courts Informations, than to e^gage my pen in far fewer and weaker
which I could produce. Only I shall add this word; If Colonel Hutchinson were
well examined and pressed, he would perhaps discover ^^^ange secrets, about
your treating with Cromwell, no doubt much to his Majesty's advantage. So that,
leaving you this Doubt to ruminate upon, whether the condition of them, who
have guiltily provoked and deserved the Sanguinary Laws, be the same with
theirs who have suffered for being mistaken to be their Fellows; I proceed to

2. My Second Doubt, about your first Reason. That the Jesuits are freeborn
Subjects as well as others. In which, methinks, I find one of your usual
sleights of Equivocation. For, a Jesuit may signify the man who is a Jesuit;
and may signify, with the complexion of being a Jesuit. In the former sense
there is no difference between any other Priest, Regular or Secular, and a
Jesuit, as to freeborn; but, in the second, there is a wide one. For, the
others have nothing against them, but such Laws as had their beginning from
difference in Religion: their degrees and communities having been accepted by
the Laws of the Kingdom; in virtue of which they are freeborn Subjects and
parts of the Commonwealth, as far as difference of Religion permits.

Now, it being the Law of England that no Ecclesiastical Community may settle
here, unless admitted by the Civil Power, (as we see in proportion, practiced
in all Catholic Estates) and Jesuits never having participated of this favor,
all your practices of usurping Jurisdiction, making Colleges and Provinces in
or for England, possessing your selves of great sums of moneys for such ends,
and the like actions, have been hitherto all usurpations* unlawful both in
respect of the Donors and Acceptors. It Is unlawful for any man (even according
to the sense and practice of Catholic times) by virtue of your privileges, to
live, or preach in England, or any of his Majesty's Dominions; and whoever
entertains you in such quality, is subject to the penalties ordained by the
Ancient Laws. Neither, without some main Reason which might force the aforesaid
Statute, ought you to hope or attempt any further stay in England, in way of a
Body, till first you have obtained particular grace from the Civil Magistrate.

3. My Third Doubt is, Whether you have been as faithful to His Majesty as
others; Which is your second Reason. For which I must note a Maxim or Practice
found among you Jesuits, and acknowledged by all who look into your ways; which
is, in quarrels of Princes and Great Men, to have some of your Fathers on one
part, and others for the contrary. Which as I no ways deny to be very
politickly done, and to show that you are Wiser than the Children of light; so,
on the other side, I affirm it is a manifest sign you are faithful to neither. I
speak not this as to single men, (if there be any among you who prefer your
loyalty to your Prince before obedience to your Superior) but as to the
Community or Superiors, who give this direction or connivence to their single
Subjects, to act on both sides; by which they are convinced of acknowledging
duty to neither, but to work for their own interests. Nor can the like be
imputed to other Communities, whose obedience is more rational and free;
without obligation to follow their Superiors Judgments further than to the
observation of Canons and Rules.

4. My Fourth Doubt is, Whether you are (as you say) of tender Consciences as
well as others: (your third Reason) for which I remit him who desires a further
information, to The Mystery of Jesuitism, translated some years since out of
French: The Author whereof is both learned in your Divinity, and an upright and
scrupulous Roman Catholic, as his Book manifests. Where every indifferent
Reader may see, as clear as noonday, that your Conscience is so tender as to
stretch to all kind of Villainies, by the award of that Theological Bawd,
commonly called Probability, by which whatever three Divines hold (or, perhaps,
one) is accounted Probable and lawful to be practiced: and whoever understands
any whit of the world, knows your General can, with a whistle, raise whole
Legions of Divines to speak what he has a mind should pass for probable; nay,
every Provincial can raise above three to make it de fide. The World has seen
the experience, about Deposing Princes, Equivocations, mental Reservations, and
diverse other juggles.

Although this seems enough for this point, yet it is not amiss to add a Maxim
of obedience which you have among you, viz. That the Subject ought blindly to
obey his Superior without examination, whenever it is probable there is no sin
in the action. Out of which persuasion, if three Divines at the most, say a
thing may be done, which the Superior will have done; it is not in a Subjects
power, under pain of damnation, to refuse to do it. Whereby it is plain, the
tenderness of your Consciences is only about doing or not doing what your
Superior orders you.

5. My Fifth Doubt, concerning your Fourth Reason, is, whether all you say
proves any heartiness for his Majesty. For, I question not the truth of all
this, but the Quaere remains, whether you Jesuits were the first movers, or the
Gentry which did the King service, to whom you adhered for not losing your
places, and interest you had in the parties. Had you pleaded that any of this
Gentry which you name, was unwilling of himself, and his Jesuit had induced
him, or made him constant, when he would have relented, this reason had been
somewhat strong: now, it is one of the probable Arguments which are subject to
be turned to what pleases the Orator.

But to speak somewhat to particulars; It Is known Col. Gage's relations were to
others more than to you; and I could name by whose solicitation he took arms
for the King, who was not of your Coat. As for Sir John Digby, there are alive
who know by whom he was armed, and sent to the Kings Party, in whom you had not
so great interest. Concerning the Noble Persons you name, though you had the
industry to make your selves their Ordinaries, yet were they not, for the most
part, so addicted to you, that they had not great Relations to other
Ecclesiastical Bodies. So that it may appear, their own inclinations, and not
your persuasions (as far as is clear) were their motives to follow the Kings
Party. I could say more, were it fitting to enter upon private men's particular
actions. And so much to your Reasons.

6. My Sixth Doubt concerns the Answer to the first Objection, Whether Jesuits
teach the Doctrine of the Popes deposing Kings. My Doubt is, what your Answer
is, whether I or no? for I can find neither. First, you compare your Body to
others, which is no Answer to the Question, but a spiteful and envious
diversion, to examine others actions, who are sufficiently cleared, because not
questioned. Secondly, you tell us that some Jesuits did teach it; but that,
since the first of January 1616. your General has forbidden any of his, to
teach, preach, or dispute for that Doctrine; which answers not the Question,
and is a thing I am prone to believe. For I have been informed, that it is a
known practice of your Society, that your Generals should forbid some actions,
which they are not unwilling their Subjects should practice, to the end that
they may reject weak men, by saying it cannot be true, because they have a Rule
against it; and to more understanding Parties they may excuse the fault, by
laying the defect on Particulars, who will not obey their commands.

But, I must farther note a cunning in this Answer. For true it is, the
Parliament of Paris ordered the principal Jesuits to get such an order from
their General, for France; upon which I suppose, you build your answer: not
explicating whether it reaches to other Countries, as particularly to England,
which I never heard so much as pretended: and therefore it answers nothing to
the real Question, unless you produce the extension to the whole World; which
you cannot do, since it is plain, Santarellus's Book was printed in Rome about
ten years after 1616. teaching the power of Deposing in all latitude. Wherefore
either Santarellus's fact was a manifest disobedience to the nose of his
General, or the answer given, an open Imposture, making a special Decree for
France a general one, and so your answer fallacious and none. No more than your
fair inference, that all Jesuits are bound under pain of Damnation, not to
teach that Doctrine; which is a pure slur you use to put upon men unaccustomed
to your ways: whereas it is a known position of yours, that none of your Rules
bind under so much as a Venial sin, much less under Damnation.

And it seems you think there is no Mortal sin, but Disobedience, or you esteem
the Doctrine good, though forbidden you, else you would not have added that
Clause, that None in the Church but you, were bound under pain of Damnation,
not to teach that Doctrine: whereas all good Christians think it damnable to
teach any wicked Doctrine, such as this is declared to be by all France. I wish
to God you would instance in what Sermons or serious Discourses any of you have
argued against this Doctrine; out of which it might be gathered, that in your
hearts you dislike it. I hear you and yours have much exclaimed against some
even late Pamphlets that touch the Oath of Allegiance; though none of those
Books (as far as I understand) press the taking of the Oath it self, in its
present terms, but only oppose this King-dethroning Doctrine. Surely, unless
you declare your selves farther, this must cause a main suspicion, that you
dislike the Oath, not as Moderate Catholics do, for the ambiguity of the
expression, but because the Doctrine of Deposition pleases you.

And why should the Peace of Kingdoms, and the quiet of all Christendom depend
upon your Generals Order, for that is all the security I can find your Paper
gives us? who will assure us your Generals Order may not alter to morrow, and
that which you call now a mortal sin to do, becomes then as mortal a sin not to
do? and has not then the World reason to fear that, where and when the interest
of your Body will either dispense with your obedience to your General, or
prevail so far with him as to revoke the Prohibition you speak of, you will be
ready again to maintain the same Deposing Power with as much fierceness as
those few whom you now seem to disowne?

For, who are those few? Bellarmine, of whom one of your Society (though in
Prison when he spoke it) said, King James was no more to be compared to
Bellarmine, than Balaams Ass to Balaam: Suarez, whom you esteem the Master of
the World: Lessius, under the name of Singleton: Fitzherbert the chief, in his
time, of your English Writers: Patriarch Parsons, Mariana, Salmeron, Becanus,
Vasquez; Omnes Capita alta ferentes, and of whom you will renounce none for
less than being frightened to lose a Province; as when, in France, you were
threatened to be put out, if you had not condemned Suarez and Santarellus: With
these deserves to be ranked, for his Merits in the same kind, F. Symonds, of a
far later date, who procured to be condemned at Rome those three Propositions
(expressed in the Christian Moderator) of which the first was expressly made to
disclaim the Popes power in absolving Subjects from their Obedience to the
Civil Government. Are all these but four or five? Nay, I could reckon above
four or five besides all these: so that, there is no farther security of your
not preaching this Doctrine, than until the Pope please to attempt again the
Deposition of some King of England: for then no doubt but your Generals Decree
will be released, and the Interest of your Order to preach this Doctrine again.

As to that perverse and unseasonable insinuation, that Others, too, have
defended the Popes deposing power, as well as you: I answer, perhaps Flattery
or Errors may have prevailed so far with some others besides Jesuits: yet,
with this difference in the point we now treat: some persons of other
Communities have written for that exorbitant power in the Pope, and very many,
and far more against it: not only the faculties of Paris and Sorbonne, but
seven or eight whole Universities in France, have unanimously and solemnly
condemned it: All this while, what single Jesuit has spoken one unkind word
against it? though both particularly suspected, and highly concerned to clear
themselves. Cry you mercy! you there subscribed also their Condemnation of it.
But why find I not that alleged here, if there be not some juggle in it? Sure
you would not have waved urging it among your best Reasons, did not your hearts
disavow that forced compliance then, and so hate the Medium for the Conclusions
sake. Your Generals Prohibition (as your Reasons seem to express it) is, Not to
teach, etc. that Doctrine; and then you are free, at least to teach, etc. the
contrary; which who of you ever did so much as in a private Conference? Nor
will it help you, if your Generals Prohibition be to speak either for or
against that Opinion (which I believe is the truth, though your Reasons
craftily dissemble it;) since then, you neither have hitherto given, nor can
hereafter give the least satisfaction to Princes, without disobeying your
General.

Let any one but cast his eye upon F. Lloyd (or Fisher) a famous man in his
generation, and consider what he writes in his Answer to the Nine Points. That
he omitted the discussion of the Ninth Point, about the Pope's Authority to
depose Kings; for, being bound by the command of his General given to the whole
Order, not to publish any thing, of that Argument, without sending the same
first to Rome, to be reviewed and approved; his Answer to that Point could not
have been performed without very long expectation and delay. And so goes on;
referring His Majesty and the Reader in general, to the Treatises lately
written on that Subject, to which, said he, ' It Is not needful any thing should
be added. And, I ask, first, is not this Jesuits proceeding with his King
extremely, both uncivil and disloyal too? his Majesty commands an English
Jesuit to write concerning the Opinion of deposing Kings, and giving away their
Kingdoms by Papal power, whether directly or indirectly: What says the Jesuit
to this important question, wherein all Princes, and particularly his Majesty
was so nearly concerned? He could not answer it without sending it first to
Rome to be approved, etc. and so excused himself, and made no answer at all;
which now of these two will you guess was the Jesuits supreme Sovereign, the
King or his General? Nor should I have stayed so long upon the example of one
particular Jesuit, though never so eminent among them, but that by these their
Reasons, I see they all cleave to the same Principle, of not meddling with this
point, whatever it costs them, without leave of their General.

Secondly, I ask concerning those late Treatises here mentioned by the Jesuit;
were they not those very Books which Paris and so many whole Universities of
France publicly condemned? I have this motive to think so; F. Fisher wrote
this Book 1626. these Treatises were that very year condemned, and some of
them, as Santarellus, printed but the year before. But, that F. Fisher adhered
to the affirmative of the Popes deposing power, is clearly evident by his other
excuse, that commonly Kings are not willing to hear the proofs of coercive
Authority over them, etc. As also, when his Adversary objected, that Suarez's
Book was burnt by the Hangman, he answers (far from disliking his Brother
Jesuit) in these peremptory words; I likewise demand of you, says Fisher, if
Jesuit Suarez his Book be prejudicial to Princely Authority, why is the same
allowed in all other Catholic Kingdoms, etc? Does this sound, as if the
Jesuits had changed their inclination to that Doctrine; whilst one of their
eminentest Writers strives thus to defend, nay, applaud, even Suarez, one of
the most offensive and extragavant, even, Jesuits, that ever meddled with that
Subject?

7. My Seventh Doubt, is about your dependence on the Pope, which you
gloriously explicate to consist in this, that The Jesuits are obliged by a
particular Vow, to be ready to go even unto the utmost Bounds of the Earth, to
preach the Gospel to Infidels. I desire to know, by what virtue you explicate
your Vow in these words? the terms of your Vow are these, In super promitto
specialem Obedientiam summo Pontifici circa missiones: which, by the tenor of
the words, signifies to go whither he shall send you, and do what he shall
command you in your Missions. First, there is never a word of preaching the
Gospel, nor of Infidels; and your Missions may be as well to Catholics as to
Infidels; as we see the Peers de la Mission, in France, for the most part, are
employed among Catholics: and I would demand whether your Mission into England
be not as well to Catholics as to Protestants? Wherefore, by this Vow, you are
bound to do whatever the Pope commands you: as for example, if the Pope should
excommunicate or depose the Prince, and command you to move the Catholics to
take Arms; you were bound by your Vow to do it. And, therefore, it is no wonder
if you give the Pope a Catalogue of these men, and their qualities, (for they
are, generally speaking, those who are eminentest in your Order) and brag to
him how great an Army of Pens and Tongues you bring devoted to him, to further
any attempt or design he shall command.

Besides, is it not well known, that none of your Order go into Infidels
Countries, but such as desire it, whereof no small part do it for
coffeehouse they find in your Colleges? and that the Pope may as well send
one of the Pillars of St. Peter's Church in Rome, to preach to Infidels, as one
of your professed Fathers, if it be against your General's, and his own will?
Therefore, this special obedience is but a flash of vanity above others; by
which the Pope has a Chimerical power over you; such as your subtilty in
Divinity will call potentiaremota, which, without your own wills, shall never
come into Act.

Yet do I not think that His Majesty will quarrel with you for this Vow, as you
explicate it: though, to tell you my sense of it, I do not know how it stands
with His Prerogative, that the Pope shall have power over his Subjects, which
may be useful to him, to send them, without his leave, to Japan and China; But,
this Authority you assume to your selves, and further: For, you do not only
oblige your Subjects to come in, or go out of the Kingdom, when you command
them; but play the Judges of life and death, upon the Kings natural Subjects,
without his leave, or any crime that, according to Civil Laws, deserves
punishment. You presume by your power, to send them to Watten, or some such
place, wherein either your selves have high Justice, or the high Justice is at
your Devotion, there frame Process against them, and execute them, without
making account to His Majesty of the life of his Subject, for pretended crimes
committed in England.

This (taking the whole story together) I conceive to be no less than making
your selves Sovereigns over His Majesty's Subjects, that is, to be an Act of
high Treason. Yet, all parts of this Action are evidently in your hands, in
virtue of your obedience, and your having such places of high Justice in your
Command: so that your Subjects have other Sovereigns than the King's Majesty,
whom, by consequence, they ought to fear more than him, since their power is
more immediate, and pressing and pressed on their Consciences. As for the
practice, it is said to have been used upon one Thomas Barton, an eminent
Scholar among you, who wrote a Book called The agreement of Faith and Reason.
How true it is, I undertake not to justify; but if you will justify your selves
from High Treason, it behooves you to produce the man. And so you have my
seventh Doubt.

8. My Eighth Doubt is, that you equivocate with us in this word Dependence:
for you turn it to be dependence by Vow, whereas more likely it means
dependence of Interest, and signifies, that it is your interest to engage the
Pope to you, by maintaining all height of Supreme Authority in him, though it
be never so irrational and against Gods Law. For, by so doing, you also can use
it all for your own Interest, in procuring for your selves and friends whatever
lies either in the Popes Authority or Grace, as Exemptions, Privileges,
Benefices, etc. For, men look not on your Body as on others, whose Generals
have no other power than according to their Rules, to look to their Discipline:
But on you they look as on an Army managed by one man; whose Weapons are Pens
and Tongues; and the Arts of Negotiation, and all plausible means of commending
your selves to the World. Which you exercise in such a height, as to have had
the boldness to threaten the Pope with a Schism; to tell the King of Spain your
Tongues and Pens had gotten him more Dominions than his Armies; to attempt
breaking the Liberties of Venice; to be able to raise Seditions in most
Countries; and to be dreadful to the very Kings and Princes. And all this,
because, as Christ proposed to his Disciples the love of one another, for the
Badge of Christianity; so, your Generals propose to you blind obedience for the
Badge of a Jesuit; that is, by cooperating with them, to make them powerful and
great Lords and your selves invincible, and terrible to all that oppose you.

For this end you exalt the Popes Infallibility; that you may get your
Opponents condemned in Rome, and then cry them down for Heretics. For this
reason you teach, the Pope to have all Authority in the Church, and other
Bishops to be but his Deputies, (so joining with your Brother-Presbyters in
really destroying the Hierarchy) that, when you, by Grace or surreption, have
purloyn'd a Command from that Court, you may treat all that resist you, as
Schismatics and Rebels to the Church. Yet if we believe Mr. White
(acknowledged an able man) they are both damnable Heresies, and destructive of
Faith and Church: and many others also of our most learned, dislike them,
though their courage, etc. reaches not to brand them so severely. In this
complication of Interests, then, and not in your glorious Vow, consists the
dependence you have so specially on the Pope, in a matter not of Religion, but
of Temporal profit and greatness.

9. My Ninth Doubt is, about the comparison you make between your selves and
others; telling us how you are by special Vow, excluded from all Benefices and
Dignities, by which the Pope may win the affection of other Churchmen.
Concerning which I first inquire, whether this be roundly true? I doubt you would
be loath to reject all the Abbeys and Benefices annexed to your Colleges, to
verify this Vow, as you have set it down in your Paper: and therefore the
effect of your Vow is only, that private men may not be alienated from your
Order, with hope of quiet lives in such Benefices; and not the contempt of the
Power, and Honor following it; as is sufficiently testified by another Vow of
yours; which is, that, if any of yours, for special reasons, be made Bishop, he
shall be bound to be subject to the Provincial, or Rector of the place of his
Residence, and to take their advice in the government of his Church; which you
extend as far as to Cardinals, to a capacity of which Eminent Dignity,
notwithstanding your special Vow, your Dispensations easily reach. So that your
Vow is no Religious one, of despising Honors; but a politic abuse, masked
under the veil of Religion, that the abler men of your Order may not be
separated from it, and so the Body may remain the stronger, and your General
more potent to resist the Pope himself.

Neither does this any way diminish, but increase your dependence on the Pope;
both, because it is by him your Houses are furnished with Benefices, and those
never to return to the Popes Donation; as because you oblige your Friends, by
procuring others for them, you being at his elbow, to suggest this or that
friend, on whom all his Benefices may be conferred: by which means you get the
endearment due to the Pope from those Friends, to the increase of your own
power and riches; and your selves still find out new pretended necessities to
beg more: So that this Holy Vow of yours no ways makes you less subject to the
Pope, but to suck his paps the harder: as those know, who have seen what passed
in France and Flanders these late years; especially under the Archduke Leopold.

10. Yet have I another Doubt concerning this Vow of yours, viz. Whether it
does not make you as refractory to Kings and Princes, as to the Pope? For to
speak truth, whatever the Right is in other Countries, in England, where the
Canons and Concordates with the Pope have been out of use a hundred years, and
by consequence, have no force, even in your own Doctors opinions; and therefore
things are to be governed by Nature and Reason: at least, in England, I say,
all such Benefices and Collations belong more to the King than to the Pope.
For, it being clear, that the Offices to which Benefices are annexed, are to be
provided of able men; and who are able men none can tell that understand not
the Office: it is plain, that Secular Clergymen ought to be the chusers of
Officers of their kind, Regulars of Regular Superiors; and by consequence, the
Donors of such Benefices.

But, the people first got an influence on the choosing of Bishops, because
'twas rationally believed those would be able to do most good, who were in the
peoples good liking. But, when Bishops grew to have great Revenues, and to be
esteemed men of so high Quality in the Commonwealth, the Emperors and Kings
began to cast an eye on their Election; and not without reason: for it concerns
them that none be in eminent places, but such as they are secured of will breed
no disturbance in the Commonwealth. After this, if any Clergyman had done the
King service, he found it the best way of recompense to cause him to be chosen
into a place of Authority and Eminency. The Popes title to the giving of
Benefices began by his Office of Patriach of the West; which, since the Council
of Nice, he more narrowly looked to the government of; exhorting and correcting
by Letters such Bishops and Churches there, as did not their duties. And this
held, till Pepin found how efficacious the reverence of the Pope was to make
him obeyed, and accepted for King of France. Since which time, whether for
Ambition, or for security sake, men began to think no Act firm, unless it were
ratified at Rome.

In times following, the Popes began to have need of Christian Princes: and
these found it the sweetest way to help the Popes, by granting imposition upon
the Clergy. So came the first fruits to the Popes; and, to assure those
Incomes, the custom of having Bulls from Rome to confirm the Elections of the
Clergy, was likewise introduced. So that, this Authority of the Popes comes
from the Princes Agreements with them, and not from any Superiority or Power of
the Popes. Wherefore, these Agreements being, by time and essential changes,
annulled; all giving of Benefices belong to the Chusers and the King.

I come now to the close. If your renouncing of Benefices make you less subject
to the Pope, as you pretend; it makes you in England less subject to the King.
And, if it makes you more hardly rewardable, and more pressing on the Pope, it
will make you the like to Kings. As, in Leopold's time, you were so wholly the
means for coming to Benefices, that hardly a command from Spain could take
place for any that was not your Confident.

11. My Eleventh Doubt is, how you answer your banishment out of France and
Venice, viz. that Both these States have repealed their Acts. Which answer
makes nothing to this, that you either did not deserve the sentence, or
deserved to have it released; one of which any judicious man would have
expected at your hands. Now, to come to particulars; the Venetians were so
resolute against you, that they made it Treason for any of their State so much
as to motion your return, and refused diverse Princes intercessions for you.
Till their case reducing them to fear the slavery of the Turk, if they had not
the Popes assistance, promised them largely if they would re-admit you: they
rather chose to struggle with your Treasons at home, than admit the Barbarians
conquest of their Dominions. Whether they have cause to repent, or not, I know
not; But, the current news at this present is, that the Pope, who procured your
admittance, has; having found you so unfaithful to him, notwithstanding all his
love to you, insomuch that he is about question you, by what means you are so
suddenly raised to so great wealth: wherein, I fear, he will not find obedience so
ready as he found flattery, when he was to pleasure you.

Your measure in France was, indeed, hard; the fault being not proved to be
universal but particular; and so, in diverse places, was never executed, and
easy to be repealed, having proceeded more out of presumption than proof. But,
your case in England is far different; your whole English Congregation
following their Head, Parsons, and maintaining his Acts even since his Death.

12. My Twelfth Doubt is, concerning your conclusion, Whether you intend to
mend what, hitherto, you have done amiss; or rather to persist in your
Equivocations and Dissimulations. For, first, whereas you being the chiefly or
only suspected Body, are therefore bound to offer more satisfaction than
others; you make your Proposition to submit to whatever all other Catholic
Priests shall agree to: which sounds as much as, if any disagree, you will
adhere to them; or, in plain terms, that you will agree to no more than by shame
you shall be forced to, for not plainly appearing the worst of Priests and
Enemies to the Catholic Cause.

13. My Thirteenth Doubt is, why you, pretending to be the greatest Divines
among Catholics, remit your selves to the determinations of others, and not,
as good Subjects ought, examine what satisfaction is necessary and fit to be
given the State; and both offer it your selves, and provoke others to do it,
not standing so scrupulously upon your Generals decree, which surely should not
be thought to bind in such extreme cases: even the Laws of the Church, and of
general Councils we know oblige not, where our obedience would ruin us; and
will you still more precisely observe your own Bylaws, than the sacred Canons
of the Universal Church? Methinks therefore, in due satisfaction concerning the
pretenses of the Pope against the King; whatever Catholic Doctors hold
favorable to Princes, in these differences, should by you be gathered
together, and subscribed, and promised to be maintained with all your power.
As, first, the Doctrine, which denies that the Pope has any Authority in any
case to depose, or temporally molest the King, or any of His Majesty's
Subjects. Likewise that he has no Authority to release any lawfully made Oath
of Allegiance, or other promise to his Majesty, or any of his Subjects. And,
because none of these, or the like assertions can be strong and firm in the
mouth of him that holds the Pope's Infallibility in determining points of
Faith; but, whenever the Pope shall determine the contrary, he must renounce
what before he held for good: therefore you should do the like in respect of
the Pope's Infallibility.

Moreover, because, if the Pope, by his own, or any others Authority, may force
his Majesty's Subjects to go into Countries where they cannot enjoy the
protection of their Prince, the Subjects are not free to maintain these
assertions: therefore, this Position, also, that a Subject of England is bound
to appear before any foreign Tribunal, without His Majesty's consent, is also
to be condemned. Nor is it less necessary you should expressly renounce the
Doctrines of Equivocation and Mental Reservation; without which all the rest
afford very little security; And I could wish you would find some way how to
assure us, that, when you solemnly make your disclaim of these last Opinions,
you do not practice them even while you renounce them. Unless such Tenets be
stubbed out of the heads and tongues of your Preachers, there cannot be
expected any hearty Allegiance in the Jesuited Party, whose consciences are
governed by you; but such a one as shall waver with every blast from Rome.

Neither can any Priest exempt himself from subscribing the condemnation of all
these. For, Ignorance of necessary truths is not to be allowed in Teachers.
And, supposing that every one knows the Propositions are not Articles of
Catholic Faith, the manifest Inconveniences that follow them, will evidently
convince they are to be condemned. For, temporal subjection to Princes is the
main ground of the peace and good government of the Commonwealth; and what is
against that, is against the Law of God and Nature.

I should think it, therefore, not so much your best, as your only way, to lay
aside your private Interests with the Pope, and declare your selves not the
last, but the forwardest in your Allegiance to His Majesty, that you may cancel
your former proceedings, and blot out the settled Opinion of your Dissimulation.
You can do it, if you will; for you teach men to depose their own private
consciences on the Opinions of others. You cannot deny but the contrary
Opinions are asserted by Catholic Doctors; and therefore by your own Maxims,
it is lawful for you to hold them, nor will I now dispute those Maxims. It
concerns you deeply; for, you must have a special favor from the Civil State:
and not to pretend to such, is to profess you break the Catholic Parliament's
Statutes, and press the Popes exorbitant Authority, and draws all your
adherents into Treason before God and a Praemunire by the Laws. Think therefore
soberly, and conclude strongly what you have to do: and, let not your General's
Interest oversway Truth and Justice, and your private Good.

Yet one reflection occurs to me worth your notice, rising from the Report I
touched at the beginning, That you, seeing your selves shut out from the Favor
Voted by the House of Lords, to other Catholics, are casting about how to stop
the progress of that Vote, and prevent its growing into an Act. Whereupon I
raise this Quaere, why you, who are but a particular Body, should not rather
take up your roots and transplant; than so to seek your private benefit, that
you care not to hazard the whole? Do you not remember how and why you went from
Venice? you voluntarily departed in pure Obedience to the Pope, upon a quarrel
betwixt Him and that State; and were only kept out, not sent away: And, were it
not now as high a Charity, and as much for your reputation, to yield for a
time, till your own deportments shall deserve your restitution; to which
nothing can more conduce, than your peaceable departure, especially where the
circumstances are so different: When you left Venice, you were conceived to
hope a speedy return, by the Popes Arms and Triumph over your own Country;
whereas, if you now go away, your departure will be absolutely free from the
blemish of that suspicion, and remain to all posterity an Action of pure
Heroic Virtue; while, in so tender a case, you prefer the public before your
own present private good. You who could leave a Country, where you were rich
and prosperous, merely to comply with the Pope; can you not now depart from a
Country, where your selves say, you are poor and afflicted, for the universal
good of Religion? Else, will not this pitch of Reluctance savor too rankly of
the rich glue which indeed fastens your hearts here; and betray at length to
the inquisitive, that your yearly Rents got by the Mission in England, are more
than ten times as much as what belongs to all Missions besides, both Secular
and Regular?

Only this word more: I shall desire you to consider how the Catholics of
England, nay of all the World, will be scandalized and provoked against
Jesuits, if they see you palpably and uncharitably drive on your own Interest
alone, without caring what becomes of Religion, unless you may have your wills.
This I propose, only upon supposition, that the Report is true. For, if you
endeavor no more than to procure your selves may be included in the Act,
without endangering your Neighbors, I heartily wish you may prove it just:
but, bethink your selves well of this Dilemma; If your solicitings stop the
progress of the Act, how will you be hated, as guilty of the continuance of
those Sanguinary Laws? if your endeavors do not stop it, how will you be both
hated for attempting it, and scorned for miscarrying in it?

FINIS.

