A Collection OF POEMS Written upon several OCCASIONS By several PERSONS.

With many Additions, Never before in Print.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Collins and John Ford in Fleetstreet, and Will.
Cademan at the Popes (...) New-Exchange Stra^d. 1673.

THE TABLE
THe Temple of Death Page ^ To Ce^ia. You tell me, Celia, you approve. 14
Answer (...), I wish as well as you 18 To Celia* Princes make Laws, by which 19
To Cloris, Cloris, I justly am be^ray^d 21 To a Lady, who told him, he could
not Love 22 To Cloris, Cloris, you live adored by all 24 A farewell to Love 27
Song Though, Phillis, your prevailing Charms 28 Epilogue, to every Man in his
humor 29 To a very ^o^ng Lady 32 The Forsaken Mistress 33 The Divided Heart 36
To M. J. N. on his Translations out of French and Italian 37 (...) Urania 40 To
S^lvi The Nymph that undoe^ me 41 To Celia. As in those Nations where 42 The
Submission 43 C^nstancy 44 The ^^d^fference 46 A Pastor^l Dialogue 49 To a
Lady, who fled the sight of him 52 To a Lady who asked him how long he would
Love her 53 Song. Tell me no more you love in vain 54 To the Marchioness of New
Castle, on her Poems 56 Epilogue to Tartuff 5^ The Imperfect Enjoyment 61
Prologue at the opening of the D^ke's New Playhouse 65 Falling in Love with a
Stranger at a Play 67 Indifference excused 69 The Platonic 71 To a D^vout
Young Woman 73 Song. When Aur^lia first became 74 To Cloris Cloris, I cannot
say your Eyes 76 Song. A^relia, art thou mad 77 Song. Love still has something
of the Sea 79 A Dial^gue between Amyntas and Celia 82 Song. Get you gone, you
will undo me 85 Song. Phillis, you have enough enjoyed 88 Song. Madam, for your
Commands to stay 89 Awake my Eyes, at night my thoughts pursue 90 Song Phillis,
lets shan the Common Fate ib. Distich 92 The painted Apples that adorn ib.
Song. Not Celia, that I juster am 94 Thirsis, no more against my flame advise
95 Song. I ask not my Celia would love me again 97 Song Drink about till the
day find us 98 Song Walking among thick shades alone 99 Song. As I sat
thoughtfull in a shade 102 ^ong. The Grave my Envy now begets 106 The Ballers
Life, A S^ng 108 Song When Cold De^p^i^ 109 To Celia. Celia. the faithful
servant you disown, 116 To Celia. All things submit themselves to your Commands
113 As he la^ in the Plain, his Arm 116 Song. How charming are those pleasant.
118 Song. Give over foolish heart, and make haste. 120 Song. With so much
ungrateful Swains 121 Song: Dear Am^nda, in vain you so coily. 127 A Panegyric
sent by a Gentleman to his Mystress with his Picture. 124 A Letter sent from a
Gentleman to his Friend. 12^ A Memento Mori. 134 Song. Of ^ll the brisk
Dancers. 135 The Pot Rapsodes. 136 Song. It is not. Chloris: 137 Song. Ah,
Chloris. 140 Song, To Chloris 141 Octavio to Portia 142 Song. When as my
Thirsis 144 Song. Though Damon. 148 Song. If thou boast 149 Song. To Lucinda.
150 To (...) Mystress 152 So^g. Faith, now my Dear 154 To (...). 155 The
distract^d Lover to the Air of, Awake all ye (...). 156 To La^rinda 1^8
Prologue to the Impertinent, Acted at the Mid^le Temple 159 Prologue at Oxford
161 Prologue to the Ord^^ary. 163 Epilogue to the Ordinary 166 A Prologue
spoken at Court to the Emp^ress of Morocco 168 A Part spoken by the Lady
Elizabeth Howard. 170 Another Prologue spoken at Court to the Emperess of
Morocco 1^2 Song. Forgive me. Jove. 175 Song. A^! cruel eyes 176 Song. Nay Let
me alone 177 Song. In the Dutch Lover 1^8 Song. O^ the time that is past ^^8
Song. On the London Ladies 183
THE TEMPLE OF DEATH.
IN those cold Climates where the Sun appears
Unwillingly, and hides his face in tears,
A dreadful Vale lies in a Desart-Isle,
On which indulgent Heaven did never smile.
There a vast Grove of aged Cypress Trees,
Which none without an awful horror sees,
Into its withered arms dep^iv'd of leaves,
Whole flocks of ill-presaging Birds receives;
Poisons are all the plants the soil will bear,
And Winter is the only season there.
Millions of graves cover the spacious field,
And springs of blood a thousand Rivers yield,
Whose streams oppressed with carcases and bones,
Instead of gentle murmurs, pour forth groans.
Within this Vale a famous Temple stands,
Old as the Universe which it commands;
Round is its figure, and four Iron Gates
Divide the World by order of the Fates.
There come in crowds doomd to one common grave
The young, the old, the Monarch and the Slave.
Old age, and pains which Mankind most deplores,
Are faithful Keepers of those sacred doors;
All clad in mournful blacks, which also load
The sacred walls of this obscure abode,
And Tapers of a pitchy substance made,
With clouds off noak increase the dismal shade*
A Monster void of Reason and of Sight,
The Goddess is that sways this Realm of Night*
Her Power extends over all things that have breath,
A cruel Tyrant, and her name is Death.
The fairest object of our wondering eyes
Was newly offered up her sacrifice;
The adjoining places where the Altar stood,
Yet blushing with the fair Almeria's blood.
When sad Melintus, whose unhappy flame
Is known by all that ere converst with fame;
His mind possessed with fury and despair,
Within the sacred Temple made this prayer:
Great Deity* who in thy hands do bear
That rusty Scepter which poor Mortals fear,
Who wanting eyes thy self respectest none;
And neither spar'st the Laurel nor the Crown,
Oh! thou whom all Mankind in vain withstands,
Each of whose blood must one day stain thy hands:
Oh, thou that every eye which sees the light,
Closest again in an eternal night,
Open thy ears, and hearken to my grief,
To which thy Power alone can give relief;
I come not hither to prolong my fate,
But wish my wretched life a shorter date:
And that the Earth would in its bowels hide
A soul which Heaven invades on every side;
That from the sight of day I might remove,
And might have nothing left me but my love.
Thou only Comforter of Minds oppressed,
The Port where wearied spirits are at rest;
Conductet to Illysium, take my life,
My breast I offer to thy sacred knife:
So just a grace deny not, nor despise
A willing, though a worthless, sacrifice.
Others their frail and mortal state forgot,
Before thy Altars are not to be brought
Without constraint: the noise of dying rage,
Heaps of the slain of every sex and age,
The blade all reaking in the gore it shed,
With several heads and arms confusedly spread,
The rapid flames of a perpetual fire,
The groans of wretches ready to expire:
This Tragic Scene makes them in terror live,
Till that is forced which they should freely give;
Yielding unwillingly what Heaven will have,
Their fears eclipse the glory of their Grave.
Before thy face they make undecent moan,
And feel an hundred deaths in fearing one;
The flame becomes unhallowed in their br^st,
And he a Murderer who was a Priest;
His hands profaned in breaking Natures chain,
By which the body does the fool detain:
But against me thy strongest forces call,
And on my head let all the tempest fall;
No shrinking back shall any weakness show.
And calmly I Will expect the fatal blow.
My limbs no trembling, in my mind no fear,
Plaints in my mouth, nor in my eyes a tear.
Think not that time, our wonted sure relief,
That universal cure for every grief,
Whose aid so many Lovers often have found,
With like success can ever heal my wound:
Too weak's the Power of Nature, or of Art,
Nothing but death can ease a broken heart.
And that thou may behold my helpless state,
Learn the extremest rigor of my fate:
Amidst th'innumerable beauteous Train
Paris, the Queen of Cities, does contain
The fairest Town, the greatest, and the best,
So fair Almeria shined above the rest.
From her bright eyes to feel a hopeless flame,
Was of our youth the most ambitious aim;
Her chains were marks of honor to the brave,
She made a Prince whe^e're she made a S^av^.
Love, under whose tyrannick power I gr^an,
Showed me this B^auty ere '^was fully blown;
Her doubtf^l hand, and her anpractis'd look,
Their first assurance from my Conquest took;
By wounding me she lea^^t the fatal Art,
And the first sigh she had was from my heart.
My eyes with tears wetting her snowy arms,
Rendered the tribute due unto her charms:
But as I soonest of all Mortals paid
My vows, and to her beauty al^^rs made,
So amongst all those slaves that sighed in vain,
She thought me only worthy of her chain.
Lov^s heavy burden, my submissive heart
Endured not long before the bore her part,
My violent flame melted her frozen breast,
And in soft sighs her pity she expressed
Her gentle voice allayd my raging pains,
And her fair hands sustained me in my chains
Tears from her eyes attended on my moan,
And they looked kindly upon me alone.
My hopes and dangers were less mine then hers,
Those filled her soul with joys, and these with tears.
Our hearts united had the same desires
And both alike burned with impatient fires*
Too faithful Memory, I give thee leave
Thy wretched Master kindly to deceive.
Make me not once possessor of her charms*
Let me not find her languish in my arms
Past joys are now my cruel fancies Theams,
Make all my happy nights appear but dreams.
Let not those scenes before my eyes be brought,
But hide her love from my tormenting thought
And in its place disdainful beauty show,
I^ thou would not be cruel, make her so,
And something to abate my deep despair,
Oh let her seem less gentle, or less fair.
But I in vain flatter my wounded mind,
Never was Nymph so lovely, or so kind.
No cold repulses my desires suppressed,
I seldom sighed but on Almeria's breasts.
Of all the passions which mankind destroy,
I only felt excess of love and joy.
Numberless pleasures charmed my sense, and they
Were as my love, without the least allay:
As pure, alas, but not so sure to last,
For, like a pleasant dream they all are past.
From Heaven her beauty like fierce lightning came
which breaks through darkness with a glorious flame
A while it ^hines, a while our sight it chears,
But soon the sh^rt-liv'd comfort disappears,
And thunder follows, whose resistless rage
None can withstand, and nothing can assuage.
So often the light which those bright flashes gave,
Serves to conduct us only to our Grave.
When I had first begun Love's joys to taste,
Those full rewards for fears and dangers past,
A Fever seized her, and to nothing brought
The richest work that ever Nature wrought.
All things below, alas, uncertain stand
The firmest Rocks are placed upon the Sand:
Under this Law both Kings and Crowns must be^^^
For no beginning is without an end.
A sacrifice to Time Fate dooms us all,
And at the Tyrants feet we daily fall;
Time, whose bold hand alike does bring to dust
Mankind, and Gods in which Mankind does trust:
Though now her wasted spirits begin to faint,
Her patience ties her tongue from all complaint,
And in her heart as in a Fort remains,
But yet at last yields t^ her resistless pains.
Thus while the Fever amorous of his prey,
Through all her veins makes his delightful way^
Her Fates like Semile's, the Flames destroy
That beauty they too eagerly enjoy.
Her charming face is in its Spring decayed,
Pale grows the Roses, and the Lillies fade.
Her skin has lost that ^ustre, which surpast
The Sun's, and did deserve as long to last;
Her eyes, which used to pierce the hardest hearts,
Are now disarmed of all their flames and darts;
Those Stars n^w heavily and slowly move,
And sorrow triumphs in the Throne of Love.
The Fever every moment more prevails,
Its rage her body fee^s, and Tongue bewails*
She who^e disdain so many Lovers prove,
Sighs new for Torment, as they ^^gh for Love,
And with loud cries, which rend the neighboring air
Wounds my sad heart, and wakens my despair.
Both gods and men I charge now with my loss,
And wild with gries, my thoughts each other cross
My heart and tongue labor in both extremes,
That sends up humble prayrs, while this blasphemes
I ask their help whose Power I defy,
And mingle sacrilege with Piety.
But that which does still more perplex my mind,
To love her truly, I must seem unkind;
So unconcerned a face my sorrow wears,
I still restrain unruly floods of tears.
My Eyes and Tongue put on dissembling forms
I show a calmness in the midst of storms.
I seem to hope, when all my hopes are gone,
And almost dead with grief, discover none.
But who can long deceive a loving eye,
Or with dry eyes behold his Mistress dye?
When Reason had with all its terrors brought
The approaching danger nearer to my thought*
Off on a sudden fell the forced disguise,
And showed a sighing heart in weeping eyes,
My apprehensions now no more confined,
Exposed my sorrows, and betrayed my mind,
The fair afflicted, Soan perceives my tears,
Explains my sighs, and thence concludes my fears,
With sad presages of her hopeless case,
She reads her Fate in my dejected Face,
Then feels my torment, and neglects her own,
While I am senfi^^e of hers alone;
Each does the others burden kindly bear,
I fear her Death, and the bewa^ls my fear*
Although we suffer under Fortunes darts,
It Is those of Love alone which reach our hearts.
Meanwhile the Fever mocks at all our fears,
Grows by our sighs, and rages at our tears;
Those vain effects of our as vain desire,
Like Wind and Oil increase the fatal fire.
Almeria feeling the unjust destinies
About to shut her lips, and close her eyes,
Weeping, in mine put her fair trembling hand,
And with these words I scarce could understand;
Her Passion in a dying voice expressed
Half: and her sighs, alas, made out the rest.
It Is past, this pang Nature forsakes the strife,
Thou must thy Mystriss lose, and I my Life.
I die, but dying thine, the Fates may prove
Their Conquest over me, but not my Love;
Thy Memory, my Glory, and my pain,
In spite of Death it self, shall still remain,
Ah! Dear Melintus, my hard Fate denies
That hope is the last thing which in us di^s:
From my grievd breast all those soft thoughts are fled
And love survives, although my hope is dead;
Yyield my life, but keep my Passion yet,
And can all thoughts but of Melintus quit.
My flame in^reases as my strength decays,
Death, that puts out the light, the heat does raise,
Which leaves me not, though I from hence remove
I lose my Lover, but I keep my Love.
The figh which sent forth that last tender word,
Up toward the Heavens like a bright meteor soared
And the kind Nymph bereft of all her Charms,
Falls cold and breathless in her Lovers Arms,
Which shows, since Death denied him then relief;
That it is in vain men hope to die with grief.
Goddess, that now my Fate has understood,
Spare but my tears, and freely take my blood,
Here let me end the story of my cares,
My grief it self enough the rest declares*
Thou see by all my misery thus display'^*
Whether I ought not to implore thy aid,
Thus to survive a guilt upon me draws,
And my sad wishes have too just a caus^^^
Come then, my only hope, in every place,
Thou visitest, men tremble at thy face,
And fear thy name, once let thy fatal hand
Destroy a Swain, that does the blow demand.
Vouchsafe thy Dart, I need not one of those,
With which thou do unwilling Kings depose,
Thy weakest my desired release will bring,
And free my Soul already on her wing.
To CELIA.
YOu tell me, Celia, you approve,
Yet never must return my love*
An answer that my hope destroys,
And in the cradle wounds our joys;
To kill at once what needs must die,
None would to birds and beasts deny
How can you than s^ crue^ prove,
As to preserve, and ^^rture love.
That beauty Nature kindly meant
For her own pride, and our content;
Why should the Tyrant honor make
Our greatest torment* let us break
His yoke, and that base power dis^ain,
Which only keeps the good in pain.
In Love and War the Impostor ^o's
The best to greatest harms expose.
Come then, my Ce^^a, let us no more
This Devil for a God adore;
Like foo^ish Indians we have been,
Whose whole Religion is a sin*
If we the Laws of Love had kept,
And not in d^eams of Hon^ur slept,
He would have surely, long ere this,
Have crowned us with the highest bliss;
Our Joy had then been as complete,
As now our Folly has been great:
Let Us lose no time then, but repent,
Love wlecome's best a Penitent.
ANSWER:
THirsis, I wish, as well as you,
To Honor there were nothing due*
Then would I pay my debt of love
In the same coin that you approve;
Which now you must in friendship take,
It Is all the payment I can make;
Friendship so high, that I must say,
It Is rather love with some allay.
And rest contented, since that I
As well my self as you deny.
Learn then of me bravely to bear
The want of what you hold most dear;
And that which Honor does in me,
Let my example work on thee.
To CELIA.
PRinces make laws by which their subjects live
And the high gods rules for their worship give
How should poor Mortals else a service find
At all proportioned to their mighty Mind?
Had it been left to us, each one would bring,
Of what he liked himself, an offering;
And with unwelcom zeal perhaps displease
The offended Deity he would appease.
All powers but thine this mercy do allow,
And how they would be served themselves do show
A rude Barbarian would his captived fo
Fully instruct in what he would have him do.
And can it be, my Celia, that Lov^
Less kind then War should to the vanquished prove;
Say, cruel Fair, then, would you that my flame
Should for a while move under friendships name;
Or may it boldly like it self appear,
And its own tale deliver to your ear,
Or must it in my tortured bosom live
Like fire in quiet flints, and no light give;
And only then humbly send forth a small
Spark, when your self does on that subject fall;
My passion can with any laws comply,
And for your sake do any thing, but die.
To CLORIS.
Cloris, I justly am betrayed
By a design my self had laid,
Like an old Rook, whom in his cheat
A run of Fortune does defeat.
thought at first with a small sum
Of love, thy heap to overcome;
Presuming on thy want of art,
Thy gentle and unpracticed heart.
But naked Beauty can prevail,
Like open force, when plots do fail.
Instead of that thou have all mine,
And I have not one stake of thine:
And, like all winners, do discover
A willingness to give me over.
And though I beg, thou will not now;
'Twere better thou should do so too
For I so far in debt shall run,
Even thee I shall be forced to shun.
My hand, alas, is no more mine,
Else it had long ago been thine,
My heart I give thee, and we call
No man unjust that parts with all.
What a Priest says moves not the mind,
Souls are by love, not words, combined.
To a Lady, who told him he could not Love.
MAdam, though meaner Beauties might,
Perhaps, have need of some such slight;
Who to excuse their Rigor, must
Say they our passions do mistrust,
And that they would more pity show,
Were they but sure our loves were tru^.
You should those petty Arts despise,
Secure of what is once your prize,
We to our Slaves no frauds address,
But as they are our minds express.
Tell me not then I cannot Love,
Say, rather, you it never can move;
Who can no more doubt of your charms,
Then I resist such powerful arms:
Whose numerous force that I withstood
So long, was not through any hope I could
Escape their power, but through despair,
Which often makes Courage ont of fear.
I trembling saw how you used those
Who tamely yielded without blows:
Had you but one of all them spared,
I might, perhaps, have been ensnared,
And not have thus, e're I did yield,
Called Love's whole Force into the Field.
Yet now I Am Conquered I will prove
Faithful as they that never strove.
All flames in matter where too fast
They do not seize, the longer last.
Then blame not mine for moving slow
Since all things durable are so.
The Oak that is for three hundred years
Designed in growing, one out-wears.
Whilst flowers for a season made
Quickly spring up, and quickly fade,
To CLORIS.
CLoris, you live adored by all,
And yet on none your favors fall.
A stranger Mistress never was known*
You pay us all in Paying none.
We him of avarice accuse,
Who what he has does fear to use
But what disease of mind shall I
Call this thy hated penury?
Thou will not give out of a store,
Which no profuseness can make poor.
Misers, when dead, may make amends.
And in their Wills enrich their friends;
But when thou dy'st, thy Treasure dies,
And thou can leave no Legacies.
What madness is it then to spare,
When we want power to make an Heir?
Live, Cloris, then at the full rate,
Of thy great Beauty; and since Fate
To Love, and Youth, is so severe;
Enjoy'm freely while thou art here.
Some caution yet I Would have thee use,
Whene're thou do a servant choose.
We are not all for Lovers fit,
No more then Arms or Arts of Wit.
For Wisdom some respected are,
Some we see powerful at the Bar;
Some for Preferment waste their time
And the steep Hill of Honor climb;
Others of Love their business make,
In Love their whole diversion take.
Take one of those, for in one breast
Two passions live but ill at rest:
And even, of them, I Would have thee fly
All that take flame at every eye.
All those that light and faithless are,
All that dare more then think thee fai^^
Take one of Love who nothing says,
And yet whom every word betrays.
Love in the cradle pretty shows,
And when it can speak unruly grows.
A Farewell to Love.
ONce more Loves mighty chains are broke,
His strength and cunning I defy,
Once more I have thrown off his yoke,
And am a man, and do despise the Boy.
Thanks to her pride, and her disdain,
And all the follies of a scornful mind,
I had never possessed my heart again,
If fair Miranda had been kind.
Welcome fond wanderer, as ease
And plenty to a wretch in pain,
That worn with want and a disease,
Enjoys his health and all his friends again.
Let others waste their time and youth,
VVatch and look pale, to gain a peevish maid,
And learn too late this dear-bought truth,
At length they are sure to be betrayed.
THough, Phillis, your prevailing charms
Have forced me from my Celia's arms
That kind defense against all powers,
But those resistless eyes of yours:
Think not your conquest to maintain,
By rigor and un^ust disdain;
In vain, fair Nymph, in vain you strive
For love does seldom hope survive.
My heart may languish for a time,
Whilst all your Glories in their prime
Can justify such cruelty.
By the same force that conquered me,
When age shall come, at whose command
Those troops of beauties must disband;
A Tyrants strength once took away,
What slave so dull as to obey!
EPILOGUE
To every Man in his humor.
IN treaty shall not serve nor violence*
To make me speak in such a Plays defense.
A Play where Wit and Humor do agree
To break all practiced Laws of Comedy:
The Scene (what more absurd) in England lies,
No Gods descend, nor dancing Devils rise;
No captive Prince from nameless Country brought
No battle, nay, there is not a duel fought.
And something yet more sharply might be said,
But I consider the poor Author's dead;
Let that be his excuse -- Now for our own,
Why -- Faith, in my opinion, we need none.
The parts were fitted well; but some will say,
Pox on 'em Rogues what made 'em choose this Play?
I do not doubt but you will credit me,
It was not choice, but mere necessity;
To all our writing friends, in Town, we sent,
But not a Wit durst venture out in Lent;
Have patience but till Easter-Term, and then
You shall have Jigg and Hobbyhorse again.
Here Is Mr. Matthew, our domestique Wit,
Does promise one of the ten Plays h'as writ;
But since great bribes weigh nothing with the just
Know, we have merits, and in them we trust;
When any Fasts, or Holy Days, defer
The public labors of the Theater,
We ride not forth although the day be fair,
On ambling Tit to take the Suburb-air,
But with our Authors meet, and spend that time
To make up quarrels between sense and rhyme.
Wednesdays and Fridays constantly we sat
Till after many a long and free debate,
For diverse weighty reasons 'twas thought fit,
Unruly sense should still to rhyme submit.
This the most wholesome Law we ever made.
So strictly in this Epilogue obeyed,
Sure no man here will ever dare to break.
Enter Johnson's Ghost. Hold, and give way, for I my self will speak,
Can you encourage so much insolence,
And add new faults still to the great offense
Your Ancestors so rashly did commit
Against the mighty Powers of Art and Wit?
When they condemned those noble works of mine
Sejanus, and my best loved Cataline:
Repent, or on your guilty heads shall fall
The curse of many a rhyming Pastoral:
The three bold Beauchamps shall revive again,
And with the London Prentice conquer Spain
All the dull follies of the former age
Shall rise and find applause upon this Stage.
But if you pay the great arrears of praise,
So long since due to my much injured Plays,
From all past crimes I first will set you free,
And then inspire some one to write like me.
To a very Young Lady.
SWeetest bud of Beauty, may
No untimely frost decay
The early glories which we trace,
Blooming in thy matchless face;
But kindly opening, like the Rose,
Fresh beauties every day disclose,
Such as by Nature are not shown
In all the blossoms she has blown:
And then what conquest shall you make,
Who hearts already daily take;
Scorcht in the Morning with thy beams,
How shall we bear those sad extremes
Which must attend thy threatening eyes
When thou shall to thy Noon arise
The forsaken Mistress. DIALOGUE.
Phil. TEll me, gentle Strephon, why
You from my Embraces fly;
Does my love thy love destroy;
Tell me, I will yet be coy.
Stay, O stay, and I will feign
(Th^^gh I break my heart) disdain;
But lest I too unkind appear,
For every frown i will shed a tear.
And if in vain I court thy love,
Let mine, at least, thy pity move:
Ah while I scorn, vouchsafe to woo,
Methinks you may dissemble too.

Str. Ah Phillis, that you would contrive
A way to keep my love alive,
But all your other charms must fail,
When kindness ceases to prevail.
Alas! no less then you, I grieve,
My dying flame has no reprieve,
For I can never hope to find,
Should all the Nymphs I court be kind,
One Beauty able to renew
Those pleasures I enjoy in you,
When Love and Youth did both conspire
To fill our breasts and veins with fire.
It Is true, some other Nymph may gain
That heart which merits your disdain,
But second Love has still allay,
The joys grow aged, and decay.
Then blame me not for losing more
Then Love and Beauty can restore:
And let this truth thy comfort prove,
I would, but can no longer love.

The Divided Heart.
AH! Celia, that I were but sure
Thy l^ve, like mine, could still endure;
That time and absence, which distroy
The cares of Lovers, and their joy,
Could never rob me of that part
Which you have given me of your heart;
^^^ers unenvied might possess
Whole hearts, and boast that happiness.
It Was nobler Fortune to divide
The Roman Empire in her pride
^^en on so^e low and barbarous Throne,
(...) p^a^'d, to rule alone.
Love only from thy heart exacts
The several d^bts thy face contracts,
And by that new and juster way
^^cures thy Empire and his sway*
Favoring but one he might compel
The hopeless Lover to rebel.
But should he other hearts thus share,
That in the whole so worthless are,
Should into several squadrons draw
That strength which kept entire could awe,
Men would his scattered powers deride,
And conquering Him those spoils divide.
TO Mr J. N. on his Translations out of French and Italian.
WHile others toil our Country to supply
With what we need only for Luxury,
Spices, and Silk, in the rich East provide,
To glut our Avarice and feed our pride
You foreign learning prosperously transmit,
To raise our Virtue; and provoke our Wit.
You ^orreign learning prosperously transmit,
To raise our Virtue, and provoke our Wit.
Such brave designs your generous soul inflame
To be a bold Adventurer for Fame;
How much obliged are Italy and France,
While with your voice their Music you advance?
Your growing Fame with Envy can oppose,
Who sing with no less art then they compose;
In these attempts so few have had success,
Their Beauties suffer in our English dress:
By artless hands spoiled of their native air,
They seldom pass from moderately fair:
As if you meant these injuries to atone,
You give them charms more conquering then their own
Not like the dull laborious Flatterer,
With secret art those graces you confer.
The skilful Painters with slight strokes impart,
That subtle beauty which affects the heart.
There are who publicly profess they hate
Translations, and yet all they write translate:
So proud, they scorn to drive a lawful trade,
Yet by their wants are shameless P^rates made*
These you incense, while you their thefts reveal
Or else prevent in what they meant to steal
From all besides; you are secure of praise,
But you so high our expectation raise,
A gen^ral discontent we shall declare,
If such a workman only should repair.
You to the dead your Piety have shown,
Adorned their monuments, now build your own:
Drawn in the East, we in your lines may trace
That Genius which of old inspired the place:
The banished Muses back to Greece you bring,
Where their best airs you so divinely sing;
The world must own they are by you restored
To sacred shades, where they were first adored.
Virtues Urania.
HOpeless I languish out my days,
Struck with Urania's conquering eyes:
The wretch at whom she darts these rays
Must feel the wound until he dies.
Though endless be her cruelty,
Calling her beauties to my mind,
I bow beneath her tyranny,
And dare not murmur she is unkind
Reason this tamness does upbraid,
Proff^^ing to arm in my defense;
But when I call her to my aid,
She Is more a Traitor then my sense.
No sooner I the war declare
But strait her succor she denies,
And joining forces with the fair,
Confirms the conquest of her ey^s.
Silvia.
THe Nymph that undoes me, is fair and unkind
No less then a wonder by Nature designed;
She Is the grief of my heart, the joy of my eye,
And the cause of a flame that never can die.
Her mouth from whence wit still obligingly flows
Has the beautiful blush, and the smell of the rose;
Love and destiny both attend on her will,
She wounds with a look, with a frown she can kill
The desperate Lover can hope no redress,
Where beauty and rigor are both in excess;
In Silvia they meet, so unhappy am I,
Who sees her most love, and who loves her must die.
To Celia
AS in those Nations where they yet adore
Marble and Cedar, and their aid implore,
It Is not the Workman, nor the precious Wood,
But it is the Worshipper that makes the God:
So, cruel Fair, though Heaven has given thee all
We Mortals (Virtue, or can Beauty) call,
It Is we that give the Thunder to your frowns,
Darts to your Eyes, and to our selves the wounds.
Without our Love, which proudly you deride,
Vain were your Beauty, and more vain your Pride*
All envied beings that the world can show,
Still to some meaner thing their greatness ow;
Subjects make Kings, and we (the numerous Train
Of humble Lovers) constitute thy Reign.
This difference only Beauties Realm may boast;
Where most it favors, it enslaves the most
And they to whom it is indulgent found,
Are ever in the rudest fetters bound.
What Tyrant yet, but thee, was ever known,
Cruel to those that served to make him one.
Valor's a Vice, if not with Honor joined,
And Beauty a Disease, when it is not kind.
The Submission.
AH! Pardon, Madam, if I ever thought
Your smallest favors could too dear be bought
And the just greatness of your Servants flame
I did the poorness of their spirits name;
Calling their due attendance, Slavery,
Your power of Life and Death, flat Tyranny;
Since now I yield, and do confess there is
No way too hard that leads to such a bliss.
So when Hippomanes beheld the Race,
Where loss was Death, and Conquest but a Face,
He stood amazed at the fatal strife,
Wondering that Love should dearer be then Lise
But when he saw the Prize, no longer staid,
But through those very dangers sought the Maid,
And won her too: O may his Conquest prove
A happy Omen to my purer Love,
Which, if the honor of all Victory
In the resistance of the Vanquished lie,
Though it may be the least regarded Prize,
Is not the smallest Trophy of your eyes.
Constancy.
FEar not, my Dear, a slame can never die,
That is once kindled by so bright an eye:
Look on thy self, and measure thence my love
Think what a passion such a form must move;
For though thy Beauty first allured my sight,
Yet now I look on it but as the light
That led me to the treasury of thy mind,
Whose inward virtue in that feature shined.
That knot (be confiden^) will ever last,
Which Fancy tied, and Reason has made fast;
So fast, that time (although it may disarm
Thy lovely face) my faith can never harm;
And age, deluded when it comes, will find
My love removed, and to thy soul assigned.
The passion I have now shall never grow less,
No, though thy own fair self should it oppress
I could even hazard my Eternity,
Love but again, and* twill a Heaven be.
The Indifference.
THanks, fair Urania, to your scorn,
I now am free as I was born*
Of all the pain that I endured
By your late coldness, I am c^r'd.
^n losing me, proud Nymph, you lose
The humblest Slave your Beauty knows,
In losing you, I but throw down
A cruel Tyran^t from her Throne.
^ must confess I never could fin^
Your equal, or in shape, or mind.
You Have beauty, wit, and all things know,
But where you should your love bestow.
^ unawares my freedom gave,
And to those Tyrants grew a Slave;
But would you have kept what you have won,
You should have more compassion shown.
Love is a burden, which two hearts,
When equally they bear their parts,
With pleasure carry* but no one,
Alas, can bear it long alone.
^'m not of those who co^rt their pain,
And make an Idol of (...);
My hope in Love does never exp^re,
But I lose also the desire.
Nor yet of those, who ill received,
Would gladly have str^nge things believed
And if your heart you do ^ef^nd,
Their force against your honor bend*
Who e're does make his Victor less,
His own low weakness does confess;
And whiles her power he does defame,
He poorly doubles his own shame.
Even that malice does betray,
And speak concern another way:
And all such scorn in men is but
The smoke of fires ill put out.
He Is still in torment whom the rage
To detraction does engage;
In Love Indifference is sure
The only sign of perfect cure.
Yet, cruel Fair, if thou can prove
As happy in some other love,
As I could once have done in thine,
The Sun on happier does not shine.
A Pastoral Dialogue.
Thirsis. STrephon! O Strephon! once the jolliest Lad
That with shrill Pipe did ever Mountain glad
While'ome the foremost at our Rural Plays,
The Pride and Glory of our Holy Days:
Why do thou now s^t musing all alone;
Teaching the Turtles yet a sadder groan*
Swelled with thy Tears, why does the neighboring Broo^
Bear to the Ocean what she never took?
Why do our Woods, so used to hear thee Sing*
With nothing now but with thy Sorrows ring?
Thy Flocks are well and fruitful, and no Swain
Then thee more welcome to the Hill or Plain.

Strephon. No loss of these, or care of those are left,
Has wretched Strephon of his peace berest,
I could invite the Wolf, my cruel Guest,
And play unmovd while he on all did feast;
I could endure that every Swain outrun,
Out-threw, out wrestl'd, and each Nymph should shun
The hapless Strephon: But the Gods, I find,
To no such trifles have this Heart designed;
A feller grief, and sadder loss, I plain,
Then ever Shepherd, or did Prince, sustain;
Bright Galatea, in whose matchless face
Sateru al nnocence with heavenly grace,
In whose no less to be adored mind,
With equal light, even distant virtues shined,
Chaste, without pride; though gentle, yet not soft;
Not always cruel, nor yet kind too often:
Fair Goddess of these Fields, who for our sports,
Though she might well become despised Courts,
Beloved of all, and loving one alone,
Is from my sight, I fear, for ever gone;
Now I am sure thou wondrest not, I grieve:
But rather art amazed that I live.

Thirsis, Thy case indeed is pitiful, but yet
Thou on thy loss too great a price do set;
Women, like days are, Strephon, some be far
More bright and glorious then others are;
Yet none so wonderful were ever seen,
But by as fair they have succeeded been.

Strephon, Others as fair, and may as worthy prove,
But sure I never shall another love;
Her bright Idea wanders in my thought,
At once my Poison, and my Antidote;
The Stag shall sooner with the Eagle soar,
Seas leave their Fishes naked on the shore;
The Wolf shall sooner by the Lambkin die,
And from the Kid the hungry Lion fly,
Then I forget her face; what once I love,
May from my eyes, but not my heart remove.

To a Lady, who fled the sight of him.
IF I my Celia could persuade
To see those wounds her eyes have made,
And hear whilst I that passion tell,
Which, like her self, does so excel,
How soon we might be freed from care!
She need not fear, nor I despair.
Such Beauty does the Nymph protect,
That all approach her with respect;
And can I offer violence
Where love does join in her defense?
This guard might all her fears disperse,
Did she with Savages converse.
Then my Celia would surprise
With what is produced by her own eyes;
Those matchless flames which they inspire
In her own Breast, should raise a fire
For Love, but with more subtle Art,
As well as Beauty charms the Heart.
To a Lady, asking him how long he would love her.
IT is not, Celia, in our power
To say how long our love will last,
It may be we within this hour
May lose those joys we now do taste;
The Blessed, that immortal be,
From change in love are only free.
Then, since we mortal Lovers are,
Ask not how long our love will last*
But while it does, let us take care
Each minute be with pleasure past;
Were it not madness to deny
To live, because we are sure to die;
SONG.
TEll me no more you love; in vain,
Fair Celia, You this passion feign;
Can they pretend to love, who do
Refuse what Love persuades them to;
Who once has felt his active flame,
Dull Laws of Honor will disdain;
You would be thought his Slave, and yet
You will not to his power submit.
More cruel then those Beauties are,
Whose coyness wounds us to despair;
For all the kindness which you show,
Each smile and kiss which you bestow,
Are like those cordials which we give
To dying men, to make them live*
And languish out an hour in pain;
Be kinder, Ceiia, or disdain.
TO HER EXCELLENCE, THE Marchioness OF NEW CASTLE, After the Reading of Her
incomparable POEMS.
Madam,
WIth so much wonder we are struck
When we begin to read your matchless Book,
A while your own excess of merit stays
Our forward Pens, and does suspend your Praise,
Till time our minds does gently recompose,
Allays this wonder, and our duty shows,
Instructs us how your Virtues to proclaim,
And what we ought to pay to your Great Fame;
Your Fame, which in your Country has no bounds,
But wheresoever Learning's known resounds.
Those Graces Nature did till now divide,
Your Sexes Glory, and our Sexes Pride,
Are joined in you; and all to you submit,
The brightest Beauty, and the sharpest Wit.
No Faction here, or fiery Envy sways,
They give you Myrtle, while we offer Bays.
What Mortal dares dispute those Wreaths with you
Armed thus with Lightning, and with Thunder too?
This made the Great Newcastle's Heart your Prize,
Your Charming Soul, and your Victorious eyes
Had only power his Martial Mind to tame,
And raise in his Heroic Breast a Flame:
A Flame, which with his Courage still aspires
As if immortal Fuel fed those Fires:
This Mighty Chief, and your Great Self made One,
Together the same Race of Glory run;
Together in the Wings of Fame you move,
Like yours, his Virtue: and like yours, his Love.
While we your Praise endeav'ring to rehearse,
Pay that great Duty in our humble Verse,
Such as may justly move your Anger, You,
Like Heaven, forgive them, and accept them too
But what we cannot, your brave Hero pays,
He builds those Monuments we strive to raise:
Such as to after-Ages shall make known,
While he records your Deathless Fame, his own.
So when an Artist some rare Beauty draws,
Both in our wonder share, and our applause:
His skill from Time secures the Glorious Dame,
And makes himself immortal in her Fame.
EPILOGUE TO TARTUFF, Spoken by Himself,
MAny have been the vain attempts of Wit
Against the still-prevailing Hypocrite:
Once, and but once, a Poet got the day,
And vanquished Busy in a Puppet-play:
But Busy rallying, armed with zeal, and rage,
Possessed the Pulpit, and pulled down the Stage.
To laugh at English Knaves is dangerous then,
While English Fools will think them honest Men:
But sure no zealous Brother can deny us
Free leave with this our Monsieur Ananias.
A Man may say, without being called an Atheist,
There are Damned Rogues among the French and Papist
That fix Salvation to short band and Hair,
That belch and snuffle to prolong a Prayer?
That use to enjoy the Creature to express
Plain Whoring, Gluttony, and Drunkenness?
And in a decent way perform them too,
As well, nay better far, alas, then you;
Whose fleshly failings are but Fornication,
We godly phrase it, Gospel-Propagation,
Just as Rebellion was called Reformation.
Zeal stands but Centr'y at the Gate of Sin,
Whilst all that have the Word pass freely in
Silent, and in the dark, for fear of Spies,
You march, and take Damnation by surprise,
There Is not a roaring Blade in all this Town
Can go so far toward Hell for half a Crown,
As I for six Pence, for we know the way;
For want of Guides Men often go astray:
Therefore give ear to what I shall advise,
Let every married Man, that is grave and wise,
Take a Tartuff, of known ability,
To teach and to instruct his Family,
Who may so settle lasting Reformation,
First get his Son, then give him Education.
The Imperfect Enjoyment.
AFter a pretty amorous discourse,
She does resist my love with pleasing force;
Moved not with Anger, but with Modesty,
Against her will she is my Enemy.
Her eyes the rudeness of her Arms excuse,
Whilst those accept what these seem to refuse;
To ease my passion, and to make me blessed,
Th'obliging smock falls from her whiter breast;
Then with her lovely hands she does conceal
Those wonders Chance so kindly did reveal;
In vain, alas, her nimble fingers strove
To shield her Beauties from my greedy Love;
Guarding her Breasts, her Lips she did expose,
To save a Lilly she must lose a Rose;
So many charms she has in every place,
A hundred hands cannot defend each Grace.
Sighing at length her force she does recall,
For since I must have Part, she will give me All.
Her arms the joyful Conqueror embrace,
And seem to guide me to the fought-for place.
Her love is in her sparkling eyes expressed,
She falls of the bed for pleasure, more then rest.
But Oh, strange passion! Oh, abortive joy!
My zeal does my devotion quite destroy
Come to the Temple where I should adore
My Saint, I worship at the sacred door;
Oh, cruel chance! the Town which did oppose
My strength so long, now yields to my dispose;
When, overjoyed with victory, I fall
Dead at the foot of the surrendered wall
Without the usual Ceremony, we
Have both fulfilled the amorous mystery
The action which we should have jointly done,
Each has unluckily performed alone;
The Union which our Bodies should enjoy,
The Union of our eager souls destroy.
Our flames are punished by their own excess,
W'd had more pleasure had our Loves been less;
She blushed and frowned, perceiving we had done;
The sport she thought we scarce had yet begun;
Alas, said I, condemn your self, not me,
This is the effect of too much modesty.
Hence with that peevish virtue, the delight
Of both our Victories was lost in the fight;
Yet from my shame your glory does arise,
My weakness proves the vigor of your eyes;
They did consume the Victim, ere it came
Unto the Altar, with a purer flame:
Phillis, let then this comfort ease your care,
Y'ad been more happy had you been less fair.
A PROLOGUE Spoken at the opening of the DUKE'S NEW PLAYHOUSE.
It Is not in this as in the former Age,
When Wit alone sufficed t'adorn the stage;
When things well said an Audience could invite,
Without the hope of such a Gaudy Sight:
What with your Fathers took would take with you
If Wit had still the Charm of being New;
Had not enjoyment dulled your appetite,
She in her homely dress would yet delight;
Such stately Theaters we need not raise,
Our Old House would put off our dullest Plays.
You Gallants know a fresh Wench of sixteen
May drive the Trade in honest Bombarine
And never want good Custom, should she lie
^n a back-Room, two or three stories high:
But such a Beauty as has long been known,
Though not decayed, but to Perfection grown,
Must, if she mean to thrive in this lewd Town,
Wear Points, laced Petticoats, and a rich Gown;
Her Lodgings too must with her Dress agree,
(...) with Damask, or with Tapestry;
H^^e China, Cabinets, and a great Glass,
To ^^rike respect into an Amorous Ass.
Without the help of Stratagems and Arts,
An old Acquaintance cannot touch your Hearts.
M^thinks it is hard our Authors should submit
So tamely to their Predecessors wit,
^^nce, I am sure, among you there are few
Would grant your Grandfathers had more then you
But hold! I in this business may proceed too far,
And raise a storm against our Theater;
And then what would the wise Adventures say,
Who are in a much greater fright to day
Then ever Poet was about his Play?
Our apprehensions none can justly blame,
Money is dearer much to us then Fame:
This thought on, let our Poets justify
The Reputation of their Poetry;
We are resolved we will not have to do
With what is between those Gentlemen and you.
Be kind, and let our House have but your praise,
You Are welcome every day to damn their Plays
Falling in love with a Stranger at a Play.
FAIR Amarillis, on the Stage, whilst you
Behold a seigned love you gave a true;
I like a Coward in the Amorous War,
Came only to look on, yet got a Scar;
Fixed by your eyes, I had no power to fly,
They held me whilst you gained the Victory:
I thought I safely might my sight content,
To which the power to like (not love) I lent;
And if I ventured on some slight Discourse,
It should be such as could no passion nurse:
Led by the treacherous luster of your eyes,
At last I played too near the Precipice:
Love came disguised in wonder and delight*
And I was conquered e're I knew him right;
Your words fell on my passion like those showers;
Which swell and multiply the rising flowers;
Like Cupid's self, a God, and yet a child,
Your looks at once were awful, and yet mild:
Me thoughts you blushed, as conscious of my flame,
Whilst your strict virtue did your beauty blame:
But rest secure; you are from the guilt as free,
As Saints adored from our Idolatry;
And Love a Torment does for me prepare,
Beyond your rigor in my own despair.
Indifference excused.
LOve, when it is true, needs not the aid
Of sighs nor tears to make it known;
And to convince the cruel'st Maid,
Lovers should use their love alone:
Into their very looks 't will steal;
And he that most will hide his flame
Does in that care his pains reveal,
Silence it self can love proclam:
This Aurelia made me shun
The paths that common lovers tread:
Whose guilty passions are begun,
Not in their Hearts, but in their Head.
I could not sigh, and with crossed arms
Lament your Rigor and my Fate,
Nor tax your beauty with such charms
As men adore, and Women hate:
But careless live, and without Art,
Knowing my love you must have spi'de,
And thinking it a foolish part,
To strive to show what none can hide.
The Platonic.
FAIR Octavia, you are much too bla^
To blow the fire, and wonder at the
I did converse, it is true, so far was mine;
But that I loved, and hoped, was wholly thine;
Not hoped, as others do, for a return,
But that I might without offending burn.
I thought those eyes which every hour
Could not remember all the wounds they
Forgotten in the crowd I wished to lie,
And of your coldness, not your anger, die;
Yet since you know I love, it is now no time
Longer to hide, let me excuse the crime;
Seeing what laws I to my passion give,
Perhaps you may consent that it should live,
First, it never shall a hope advance
Of waiting on you, but by seeming chance,
I at a distance will adore your eyes,
As awful Persians do the Eastern Skies,
I never will presume to think of Sex,
Norwith gross thoughts my deathless love perplex
I tread a pleasant path without design;
And to thy care my happiness resign,
From Heaven it self thy beauty cannot be
A freer gift then is my love to thee.
To a Devout Young Woman.
PHillis this mighty zeal assuage,
You over-act your part;
The Martyrs at your tender Age,
Gave Heaven but half their heart.
Old men (till past the pleasure) never
Declaim against the sin,
It Is early to begin to fear
The Devil at fifteen.
The World to Youth is too severe,
And like a treacherous light,
Beauty the Actions of the fair
Exposes to their sight.
And yet this World, as old as it is,
Is often deceived by it too;
Wise Combinations seldom miss,
Let Us try what we can do.
SONG.
WHEN Aurelia first became
The Mistress of his heart,
So mild and gentle was her reign,
Thirsis in hers had part.
Reserves and care he laid a side,
And gave his Love the Reins;
The headlong course he now must bide,
No other way remains.
At first her cruelty he feared,
But that being overcome,
No second for a while appeared,
And he thought all his own:
He called himself a happier (...)
Then ever loved before;
Her favors still his hopes out-ran;
What Mortal can have more?
Love smiled at first, then looking gra^^
Said, Thirsis leave to boast;
More joy then all her kindness gave,
Her fickleness will cost.
He ^poke, and from that fatal time,
All Thirsis did, or said,
Appeared unwelcome, or a crime,
To the ungrateful Maid.
Then he despairing of her heart,
Would fain have had his own
Love answered, such a Nymph could part
With nothing she had won*
TO CLORIS.
CLoris, I cannot say, your eyes
Did my unwary heart surprise,
Nor will I swear it was your face,
Your shape, or any nameless grace;
For you are so entirely fair,
To love a part injustice were;
No drowning man can know which drop
Of water his last breath did stop;
So when the stars in Heaven appear,
And join to make the Night look clear,
The Light we no one's Bounty call,
But the united work of all;
He that both lips, or hands adore,
Deserves them only, and no more;
But I love all, and every part,
And nothing less can ease my heart.
Cupid, that Lover weakly strikes,
Who can express what it is he likes.
SONG.
AUrelia, art thou mad
To let the World in me
Envy joys I never had,
And censure them in thee.
Filled with grief for what is past,
Let us at length be wise,
And the Banquet boldly taste,
Since we have paid the price.
Love does easy souls despise,
Who lose themselves for toys,
And escape for those devise,
Who taste his utmost joys.
To be thus for Trifles blamed,
Like theirs a folly is,
Who are for vain swearing damned,
And knew no higher bliss.
Love should like the year be crowned,
With sweet variety;
Hope should in the Spring be found
Kind fears, and jealousy.
In the Summer flower should rise,
And in the Autumn Fruit;
His Spring does else but mock our eyes,
And in a scoff salute.
SONG
LOve still has something of the Sea,
From whence his Mother rose;
No time his Slaves from doubt can free,
Nor give their thoughts repose:
They are becalmed in clearest days,
And in rough weather tossed;
They wither under cold delays,
Or are in tempests lost.
One while they seem to touch the Po^^,
Then straight into the Main,
Some angry Wind in cruel sport,
Their Vessel drives again.
At first, disdain and pride they fear,
Which if they chance to escape,
Rival^ and falsehood soon appear
In a more dreadful shape.
By such degrees to joy they come,
And are so long withstood,
So slowly they receive the sum,
It hardly does them good.
It Is cruel to prolong a pain;
And to defer a Bliss,
Believe me, gent^^ Hermione,
No less inhumane is.
An hundred thousand oaths your fears,
Perhaps would not remove;
And if I gazed a thousand years,
I could no deeper love.
It Is fitter much for you to guess,
Then for me to explain;
But grant, O grant that happiness
Which only does remain.
A Dialogue between Amyntas and Celia.
Celia. Amyntas I am come alone
According as I said;
But whither is thy Honor flown?
I fear I am betrayed:
Thy looks are changed, and in the place
Of innocent desires,
Methinks I see thy eyes and face
Burn with unusal fires.

Amyntas. See's not my Celia Nature wear
One Countenance in the Spring,
And yet another shape prepare,
To bring the Harvest in?
Look on the Eagle, how unlike
He to the Egg is found,
When he prepares his Pownce to strike
His Prey against the ground;
Fears might my Infant Love become;
Twere want of kindness now,
Should modesty my Hope benum,
Or check what you allow

Celia. Amyntas hold, what could you worse
To worst of Women do?
Ah! how could you a passion nurse,
So much my Honors Foe?

Amyntas. Make not an idol of a Toy,
Which every breath can shake,
Which all must have, or none enjoy,
What course so e're we take:
Whilst Women hate, or Men are vain,
You cannot be secure;
What makes my Celia then a pain
So fruitless to endure?

Celia. Could I the World neglect for the e,
Thy love, though dear it cost,
In some unkind conceit of me,
Would be untimely lost:
Thou would thy own Example fear,
And every heedless word
I chance let fall beyond thy care,
Would some new doubt afford.

Amyntas. If I am jealous, it is because
I know not where you love;
With me fulfill Loves gentle Laws,
And all my fears remove.

Celia. Women, like things, at second hand,
Do half their value lose,
But whilst all Courtship they withstand,
May at their pleasure choose.

Amyntas. This were a fine Discourse, my Dear,
If we were not alone;
But now Love whispers in my ear,
There Is somewhat to be done.
She said she never would forgive,
He kissing, swore she should;
And told her she was mad to strive
Against their mutual good.
What farther past, I cannot tell,
But sure not much amiss;
He vowed he loved her dearly well,
She answered with a kiss.

SONG.
GEet you gone, you will undo me,
If you love me, don't pursue me;
Let that inclination perish,
Which I dare no longer cherish;
It does of late so fast prevail,
It must go now or not at all:
For should it gather farther strength,
'Twould give my Honor Laws at length:
With harmless thoughts I did begin,
But in the Crowd Love entered in;
I knew him not he was so gay,
So innocent and full of play;
At every hour, in every place,
I neither saw; nor formed your face;
All that in Plays was finely writ,
My thoughts for you, and me were fit.
My Dreams at night were all of you,
Such as till then I never knew:
I sported thus in young desire,
Cheered with light, free from his fire:
But now his Teeth and Claws are grown,
Let me the Fatal Lion shun;
You found me harmless, leave me so;
For were I not, you would leave me too.
SONG.
PHillis, you have enough enjoyed
The pleasures of Disdain;
Methinks your pride should now be cloyed,
And grow it self again:
Open to Love your long shut Breast,
And entertain it is sweetest Guest.
Love that can heal the wounds he gives,
And can ill usage slight;
May laugh at all that Fate contrives,
Full of it is own delight,
For in his Chains we are happier far,
Then Kings themselves without 'em are.
Leave then to tame Philosophy
The joys of quietness;
With me into Loves Empire fly,
And taste my happiness:
Where even Tears and Sighs can show,
Pleasures the cruel never know.
MADAM, for your Commands to stay,
Is the mean duty of a Wretch,
Whose service you with wages pay:
Lovers should at occasion catch,
Not idly wait till it be brought,
But with the deed overtake your thought;
Honor and Love let them give over,
Who do their duty, and no more.
AWake my Eyes, at night my thoughts pursue
Your Charming Shape, and find it ever new
If I my weary breast to sleep resign,
In gaudy Dreams your love and beauty shine^*
Dreams with such Ecstasies Pleasures filled,
As to those joys they seem can only yield:
Nor do they yield perhaps, would you allow,
Dear Flavia, that I once might know.
SONG
PHillis, let us shun the common Fate,
And let our love never turn to hate;
I Will dote no longer then I can,
Without being called a faithless Man,
When we begin to want Discourse,
And kindness seems to taste f force,
As freely as we met, we will part,
Each one possessed of their own heart.
Thus whilst grave Fools themselves undo,
We'll Game, and give off Savers too:
So equally the match we'll make,
Both shall be glad to draw the stake.
A smile of thine shall make my bliss;
I will enjoy thee in a kiss
I Will love and hate just where you do,
And for it no other reason know.
When from this height my love does fall
We Will bravely scorn to love at all:
If thy affection first decay,
I Will the whole blame on Nature lay.
Alas what Cordial can remove,
The hasty Fate of dying Love?
I Will grieve as for a friend deceased
And with the next as well be pleased:
Thus we will all the World excel,
In loving, and in living well.
DISTICH.
ALthough no Art the Fire of Love can tame
It Is often extingiush't by an equal flame.
THE painted Apples that adorn,
Of yon'd fair Tree, the Airy top,
And seems our dull approach to scorn,
From their weak Stalk must one day drop;
And out of reach of Mortals placed,
Be the vile food of Worms at last;
Thus ends of Humane things the Pride,
Born down Times ever-flowing Tide.
Thy Matchless Beauty, that we all
Now with such heat and passion court,
Though kept from worthy Lovers, shall
Confess its Tyranny but short:
Then do not Love with Anger meet,
Nor cruel be, to seem discreet:
Shunning what Nature does intend,
Things seldom meet a Nobler and.
SONG
NOt Celia that I juster am,
Or better then the rest
For I would change each hour like them,
Were it my interest.
But I am tied to very thee,
By every thought I have
Should you my heart but once set free,
I would be no more slave.
All that is Woman is adored:
In thy dear self I find:
For your whole Sex can but afford.
The handsome and the kind.
Why then should I seek farther store,
And still make love anew?
When change it self can give no more,
It Is easy to be true.
SONG.
THirsis no more against my flame advise,
But let me be in love, and be you wife;
Here end, and there begin a new address,
Pursue the vulgar, easy happiness:
Leave me to Amaranta, who alone
Can in my sullen heart erect her Throne:
know as w^ll as you it is mean to burn,
For one who to our ^lame makes no return:
But you like me know not those conquering eyes,
Which mock prevention by a quick surprise:
And now like a hurt Deer, in vain I start,
From her, that in my breast has hid the Dart.
Though I can never reach her Excellence,
Take somewhat in my hopeless Loves defense.
Her Beauty is her not esteemed Wealth,
And Graces move about her eyes by stealth;
Virtue in others, the forced Child of Art
Is but the constant temper of her Heart:
All charms her Sex so often courts in vain,
(Like Indian Fruit, which our cold Earth disdain)
I^ her grow wild, as in their Native Air;
And she has all perfection without care.
O Loves harms she has a gentle sense,
(...) Beauty else would clogg her innocence:
Like a wise Prince she rules her servants so,
That neither want nor Luxury they know;
None vainly hoping what she may not give,
Like humble slaves at small expense we live:
And I the wretched comfort only share,
To be the last whom she will bid despair.
SONG.
I Ask not my Celia would love me again,
In its own pleasure my love is paid;
I Will find such excuses for all her disdain,
That shortly to frown I Will make her afraid.
Her neglect of me, of her self I Will think care;
Her cruelty, I her strict Virtue will name;
When least kind she seems, I Will believ her most near
And call her refusal, but a Virgins Fame.
Thus all that was wont heretofore to cure love,
In me shall increase, and stir up the fire;
I Will make her at last some kind remedy prove,
Since all others but increase my desire.
Whilst no man enjoyes that which I court in vain,
And Celia to none is kinder then me;
To (...) Honor I Will yield, and never complain,
But dy^ at her feet, if so it decree.
SONG.
DRink a bout till the day find us,
These are pleasures that will last,
Let no foolish passion blind us
Joys of Love make too much have.
Maids are long ere we can win 'um,
And our Passions wast the while;
In a B^er Glass we will begin 'um,
Let some Fool take the other toy.
Yet we will have store of good Wenches,
Whom their own high bloods shall court,
After two or three good Drenches,
To outdo them at the Sport;
Joining thus both Mirth and Beauty,
To make up our full delight:
In Wine and Love we pay our Duty
To each friendly coming night.
SONG.
WAlking among thick shades alone,
I heard a dying voice
Which sighing said, now she is gone
I Will make no second choice.
I looked and saw it was a Swain,
Who to the flying wind,
Did of some Neighboring Nymph complain,
Too fair, and too unkind.
He told me how he saw her first,
And with what gracious eyes,
And gentle speech that flame she nursed,
Which since she did despise.
(...) Vows she did as fast receive,
(...) could breath 'em to her;
(...) in her Eyes proclaimed her leave,
That he alone should woo her.
They feed their flocks still near one place,
And at one instant me^
He gazing on her lovely face,
Fell deeper in the Net.
She seemed of her new Captive glad,
Proud of his Bondage he;
No Lover e're a prospect had
Of more felicity*
But the false Maid, or never loved,
Or gave so quickly over;
E're his was to the height improved,
Her kindness was no more.
Even her dissemblings she let fall,
And made him plainly see,
That though his heart she did enthrail,
Her own was ever free.
Now least his care should pity move,
She shuns his very sight;
And leave him to that hopeless love,
She did create in spite.
Her name I could not make him tell,
Though vowing him my aid;
He said he never would reveal,
In Life, nor Death, the Maid.
Then a wild look the Shepherd cast,
And falling underneath
A Beach, where he had seen her last,
Resigned his ^^most breath.
SONG.
AS I sat thoughtful in a shade,
There I spied a loving pair,
Who closely by each other laid,
Past their time in softer care:
While she looked sadly on the ground,
On her Eyes the Youth's were fixed;
In which me thought he gladly found
Jealousy with kindness mixed:
But his soon dull and heavier grew,
When she raised her drooping Head,
And told him, since he was untrue,
With his Faith her Love was fled.
Though Jealousy be full of pain,
Constant Love can suffer more:
The death of yours, says the grieved Swain,
Shows it was but weak before.
The Nymph replied, since you can prove
False to one so kind as I,
Alas, how hard is it to love
And how easy it is to die!
He answered, and did gently seize,
Her fair hand he did adore;
Since you can die with so much ease,
You can love me still with more.
Disguise not then your tender heart,
Fear I should another be,
Betrays, in spite of all your Art,
That you were born for only me.
Like gentle Dew on withered leaves,
Love is lost on almost all:
But the fresh Flower with joy receives
That which there would vainly fall:
To fairest Nymphs Love adds a grace,
And no kind one can be foul;
Love gives a Beauty to the ^ace,
And a softness to the Soul.
Since therefore feigned inconstancy,
With the world deceives you too,
Henceforth my flame shall rather be
Seen by all, then not by you.
As by some waters purling noise,
Often repose we soonest find;
So these fond Turtles murmuring joys,
Rock't asleep my restless mind.
Which I from this blessed couple brought.
Freed from all my duller care;
But, in i^^ pl^ce, ala^s, I thought
Him too happy* Her too fair.
SONG
The Grave my envy now beget,
That did my pity move;
Who, by the right of wanting Wit
Are free from cares of love.
Turks honor Fools, because they are
By that defect secure*
From slavery, and toils of War,
Which all the rest endure.
So I, that suffer cold neglect,
And wounds from Celia's Eyes,
Begin extremely to respect
These Fools, that seem so wis^.
It Is true, they set their silly hearts
On things of no delight;
To pass all day for men of parts,
They pass alone the night:
But Celia never breaks their rest;
Such servants she disdains;
And so the Fops are dully blessed,
While I endure her chains.
SONG. The Ballers Life,
THEY have too many hours, that employ 'em
About Business, Ambition, or News,
While we that know how to enjoy 'em,
Wish in vain for the time which such Blockheads misuse:
They that toil in impertinent care,
May strive to be often at leisure;
They cannot be worse then they are;
But we whose business is pleasure,
Have never a moment to spare.
With dangerous Damsels we dally,
Till we come to a closer dispute;
And when we no more Forces can rally,
Our kind foes give us leave to retire and recruit;
Then drooping to Bacchus we fly,
Who Nobly regarding our merits,
With succors always is nigh;
And thus reviving our spirits,
We love, and we drink till we die.
SONG.
WHEN cold despair
Would quench my passion, and end all my care,
Then gentle words, and gentle sighs recall
My vanishing hopes which fain would stay;
But stranger fears soon drives my hopes away;
And back again to grief I fall*
Her favor thus, like Cordials given in vain
To dying men, does but prolong my pain.
Ah Gloriana, why
Like all your other Lovers may not I
Have leave, alas, soon to despair and die?
Be rather cruel, then but kind in part,
Hide those soft looks, or show as soft a heart.
To Celia.
Celia, the faithful servant you disown,
Would in obedience keep his love unknown
But bright Idea's such as you inspire,
We can no more conceal, than not admire;
My heart at home, in my own breast did dwell
Like humble Hermit in a peaceful Cell,
Unknown, and undisturbed, it rested there,
Stranger alike to hope, and to despair:
But Loves Tumultuous Train do^s now invade
The sacred quiet of this hollowed shade,
His fatal flame shine out to every eye,
Like blazing Comets in a VVinter Sky.
Fair and severe like Heav'^^ you enjoin,
Commands that seem^ (...) your own design;
Forbidding what your (...) us to:
Since if from Heavenly power you will allow,
That all ^ur faculty (...) ^lain,
What ^^re we will, is that the Gods ordain;
But they and y^u, ^ights without Limit have.
Over your Creatures, and more yours, your sl^ve:
And I am one, born only to admire,
To humbl^ 'ere to hope, scar^e to desire,
A thing whose ^liss depends upon your will;
Who could be proud, you would deign to use him ill,
How can my passion in ^it your offense,
That challenges so little recomp^nce*
Let me but ever love, and ever be
The Example of your power and cruelty;
Since so much s^orn does in your breast reside,
Be more indulgent to its Mother, Pride;
Ki^^ all y^u strike, and trample on their Craves,
But own the Fates of your neglected slaves:
When in the crowd yours undistinguished lies,
You give away the Triumph of your Eyes:
Permi^ me then to glory in my Chains,
My fruitless sighs, and my unpitied pains:
Perhaps obtaining this, you will think I find
(...) Mercy then your Anger has^d sig^^d,
But Love has carefully contrived for me,
The last perfection of Misery*
For to my State those hopes of Common peace,
Which Death affords to every Wretch, must cease
My worst of Fates attends me in my Grave,
Since, dying, I must be no more your Slave.
To CELIAE
ALL things submit themselves to your command,
Fair Celia, when it does not Love withstand;
The power it borrowed from your eyes alone,
All but himself would yield to who has none;
Were he not blind, such are the Charms you have
He Would quit his Godhead to become your Slave.
Be proud to act a Mor^a^ Heroes part,
And thr^w himse^f for Fame on his own Dart?
But Fate has otherwise disposed of things,
In different Bonds subjecting Slaves, and Kings.
That Fate (like you, resistless) does ordain
That Love alone should over Beauty Reign.
By Harmony the Universe does move;
And what is Harmony, but mutual Love?
See gentle Brooks, how quietly they glide,
Kissing the rugged Banks on either side,
Whilst in their Crystal Stream at once they show,
And with them feed the Flowers which they bestow;
Though pressed upon by their too rude embrace,
In gentle murmurs they keep on their pace
To their Loved Sea; for even streams have desire
Cool as they are, they feel Love's powerful fires.
And with such passion, that if any force
Sto^ or molest^um in their Amorous course,
They swell with rage, break down, and ravage ore
The B^nks they kissed, the flowers they sed before.
Who would resist an Empire so Divine,
Which Universal Nature does enjoin?
Submit then Celia er'e you be reduced,
For Rebels vanquished once, are vil^ly used.
And such are you, when e're you dare obey
Another passion, and your Love be^^ay.
You are Loves Citadels, by you he reigns,
And his proud Empire over the World maintains;
He trusts you with his Stratage^s and Arms,
His frowns, his smiles, and all his conquering charms.
Beauty's no more but the dead S^yl which Love
Mannures, and does by wise Commerce improve;
Sailing by Sighs through Seas of tears, he sends,
Courtship from Foreign hearts: For your own ends*
Cherish a Trade; for as with Indians we
Get Gold and Jewels for our Trumpery,
So to each other for their useless ^oyes,
Lovers afford Inestimab^e J^yes:
But if you're ^ond of Trisles, be, and starve,
Your Gugaw Reputation preserve;
Live upon Modesty and empty Fame,
Foregoing Sense, for a fantastic Name.
SONG.
As he lay in the Plain, his arm under his head
And his Flock feeding by, the fond Celadon said
Love's a sweet passion, why does it torment?
(...) a bitter (said he) whence are Lovers content
Since I suffer with pleasure, why should I complain
Or g^^eve at my Fate, when I know, it is in vain
Yet so pl^asing the pain is, so soft is the Dart,
That at once it both wounds me, and tickles my heart
To my self I sigh often without knowing why;
And w^ence ab^^^t from Phillis, m^ thinks ^ could die;
But oh! what a pleasure still follows my pain;
When kind Fortune does help me to see her again.
In her eyes (the bright Stars that foretell what is to come,
By soft stealth now and then I examine my doom.
I press her hand gently, look languishing down,
And by passionate silence I make my love known.
But oh! how I Am blessed when so kind she does prove,
By some willing mistake to discover her love;
When in striving to hide, she reveals all her flame,
And our Eyes tell each other what neither dare name
SONG.
HOw Charming are those pleasant pains
Which the successful Lover gains!
Oh! how the longing Spirit flies,
On scorching sighs, from dying eyes?
Whose intermixing Rays impart,
Love's welcome Message to the heart.
Then, how the active Pulse grow'n warm,
To every sense gives the Alarm!
But oh! the Raptures, and the Qualms,
When Love unites the melting Palms!
What ecstasies! what hopes and fears!
What pretty talk, and amorous t^ars
To these, a thousand Vows succeed,
And then, oh H^avens the secret deed!
When sense and Soul are bathed in bliss,
Think, dear Aminda! think on this;
And curse those hours, we did not prove
The ravishing delights of Love.
SONG.
GIve or foolish heart, and make have to despair,
For Daphne regards not thy vows nor thy prayer
When I plead for thy passion, thy pains to prolong,
She courts her Ghittar, and replies with a Song;
No more shall true L^vers thy Beanty adore,
Were the Gods so sever^* men would worship no more.
No more will I wait like a Slave at thy door,
I Will spend the cold nights at thy window no more:
My lungs in long sighs I no more will exhale,
Since thy Pride is to make me grow sullen and pale;
No more shall Amyntas thy pity implore,
Where the Gods so ingrate, men would worship no more.
No more shall thy Frowns or free humor persuade,
To court the fair Idol my Fancy has made;
When thy Saints so neglected, their follies give over
Thy Deity's lost, and thy Beauty's no more.
No more, etc.
How weak are the Vows of a Lover in pain,
When flattered by hope, or oppressed by disdain?
No sooner my Daphne's bright Eyes I review,
But all is forgot, and I vow all anew;
No more cruel Nymph I will murmr no more,
Did the Gods seem so fair, men would worship them more.
SONG.
WIth so much ease ungrateful Swains,
Your faithless vows have cured your pains
You think by those your perjuries betrayed,
That all ar^ false, or else may so be made?
And every smile or pleasing word proclaims,
The coldest Nymph an off^ing to your flames.
Vain S^epherd know that now is the time
To ^^ff^r for thy boasted crime:
Repeated Vows with me less credit find,
Then smiling Sea's, or the uncertain Wind.
Deep Sighs and frequent tears as things of course,
So common are that they have lost their force.
Thy Passions Truth will best appear
Disguised in doubts and guilty fear;
When all the Heart and careful Tongue conceal,
The Sense disordered, and the Eyes reveal;
Such dark confusion makes the flame shine bright,
So stars are best discerned through shades of night.
One stolen look can better woe,
Then Sighs and Tears and Vows can do.
The falsest Hearts like empty Vessels found,
But may thy feigned; become a real wound,
That thy severer Penance may declare
How great men's crimes, and women's virtues arse.
SONG.
DEar Aminda, in vain you so coily refuse,
What nature and Love do inspire;
That formal old way which your Mother did use,
Can never confine the desire
It rather adds Oil to the fire.
When the tempting delights of woing are lost,
And pleasure's a Duty become;
We both shall appear, like some dead Lovers ghost,
To frighten each other from home;
And the Genial bed like a Tomb.
Now, low at your feet your fond Lover will lie,
And seek a new Fate in your eyes;
One Amorous smile will exalt him so high,
He can all but Aminda despise;
Then change to a frown, and he dies.
To love, and each other, we'll ever be true;
But to raise our Enjoyments by Art,
We'll often fall out, and as often renew,
For to wound and cure the smart,
Is the pleasure which captives the Heart
A PANEGYRIC sent by a Gentleman, with his Picture to his Mystriss.
Go, Envied Picture. With her leave, presume
To go where banished I must never come.
Thou art not from Orinda's Eyes debarred;
She doomed the substance, but the shadow spared;
How different is my punishment to theirs.
Who for their fins are sent to offer Prayers*
And visit Saints at some far distant shrine?
But my hard penance is to stay from mine.
Yet this may freely pass she is pleased to grant
My Deputy may visit my fair Saint:
My Duty to my Picture I resign,
The Pilgrim That, but the Devotion's Mine.
Since I Am debarred the freedom to be just,
To this small Envoy I my vows entrust.
This dumb Sollicitour placed in my stead,
May mind you of that cause, it cannot plead.
Whene're you look on this, think on my state,
And let my Offering be my Advocate.
But go thou false Diss^mbler. For each Line,
Which while with her kind Presence blessed, was mine;
Now in her absence no Resemblance bears,
To look like Me it wants my Griefs and Tears.
Wanting her presence, all my looks and sense,
Which were employed to admire her Excellence.
She gone, are grown so stupid and so dull
My shadow wants a Body, I a Soul
To him that Loves the gentle Fates allow
A Constancy in all things but his Brow.
He may look Dull, or Gay; be Mean, or Brave,
As he is a happy or a wretched Slave,
Who then Paints Me --
Must draw me in my Chains, each Feature mould
Just as the state I with my Conq'r^ur hold.
And to describe each Line must look on You:
Beauty that can make Shadows False, or True.
However go, and her fair Hand salute.
Thy want of Merits she will ne'^e dispute
So much of Heaven reigns in her Generous Heart
She can give Honors though to undesert.
If my best Hopes prove true, and she prove Kind,
Thou from her Favors may Preserment find.
She may v^uchsafe to wear thee at her Breast.
Thus Worn, thus Ray^^d, thus honored, and thus Blessed
Had it but half the Love and flames I felt,
I would burst the Crystal, and the Gold would melt
And at the approach of so sublime a Bliss,
Break through its Prison walls to force a Kiss
But oh that Blessing's not for souls and Sense
Her Virtues cherish naught but Innocence.
Dull Picture cold and senceless as thou art,
Thou may press near her Bos^ me and her Heart.
That Rape is not for Flesh and Blood designed,
Her Smile's too great a bl^ssing for Mankind.
Though you are a poor ^ow Present, yet that Seat
Her B^some w^l^ en^t^^l thee Rich and Great.
Thy cancel^^ Imperfections then are ceast.
The Sacred L^dging Con^e^rates the Guest.
Thy Price is from my Entert^^nment given,
It Is the He^ven makes the S^in^s, ^^no^ they Heaven
It Is thy Ex^^ted ^^^e thy Worth declares,
Base Mete^^s t^us when (...) high* ^^em Stars.
From her fair Hand thy borrowed Luster hold,
She can lend value to thy worthless Gold.
But if her favors can the Gift advance,
How much would they the Offerers worth in hance?
I Would tell her, (were it not a thought I find
Too large to be to breath and words confined)
How blessed, how proud, how glorious I should be;
How Generous, how Divine, how Charming she,
To make her Acts of Grace thus near of Kin,
To wear this at her Breast, and Me within.
A LETTER sent from a Gentleman to his Friend.
DEAR Jack! I wonder what a devil
Obliges thee to be so Civil,
Thus long to stay in Countrey-village,
To mind thy Fathers Ploughs and Tillage,
When we, in Town, for our diversion,
Drink hard, sometimes, to cure a Tertian,
And twenty other things, as Hector
And VVench, which ( Jack) thou may conjecture;
We want thee, 'Faith, to help us out here,
VV'are damnably put to the Rout-here;
For the other day seven Bacchanalians
Fell briskly on us, they were Aliens;
And to those jolly Rites inured,
We drunk while drink could be endured;
Sev'n Brimmers in a Hand went round,
In which sev'n worthy Wights were drowned
Poor Shallow Ned that night lay rough,
And ever since has had a Cough.
Which makes Him bark like angry Puppy,
Against those who such large doses sup-ye;
But wenching He does much delight in,
And is esteemed an Arrant Knight in;
Besides, the Rogue does know some women
That are not Whores, I mean not common.
To one of which, who he protested
Was with all Ornaments invested.
He led me --
When rest from drink had lent me leisure,
A Miss for wedlock ( Jack) not pleasure.
I laughed in sleeve to think the Youngster
Imagined I would keep a Long-stir.
With Complements as for my life,
And all to yoke my self with wife;
Though as I live I still must own,
Her beauty might become a Throne;
But I, like Rogue, indoctrinated,
In such Intrigues devoutly prated
Much modish Nonsense; which as good hap,
Or Love would have it, stirred her blood up
With such delight that all our discourse
Was from our eyes, where Love had's Course.
So free that kisses were as common,
As those we give to naughty woman,
And mingled palms had bred such heat,
That all our Love came out in sweat.
Of which I this took Notice -- Dammee
Madam, said I, your hands are Clammy.
She blushed and looked as if displeased
-- When I to mend the matter --
Laughed at my impudence, and this pleased.
But I Will be short, this my first visit,
So well, on my part did solicit.
That ere months end to me, a whole-age
I of my Miss had better Knowledge.
But now methinks I see thy Grotto
Where on's inscribed the ancient Motto.
Which used to me to be thy Story,
Debauched Young men, Memento Mori.
And now --
That thou may see I make no waste on it.
I have thought fit to give the a Taste on it.
A Memento Mori.
AH! the sad hour
When friends shall loure
And say, He Is breathing now his last,
When thoughts of Love and Drink are past;
When Tyrant Death usurps that brain,
Where little Maggot used to reign;
And with its damned unmodish Witches,
Pulls out the flame of my Caprici's;
And with ill tastes that Mouth's infecting,
Which Cheats in Wine was still detecting,
When 'stead of Frontigniac or Champaign,
They give me juice of E La Campane*
And 'stead of Songs and bawdy Verses,
One Hopkins's damned Rhyme rehearses;
Another, he falls on his Knees;
That, that alone is a Disease!
For ( Jack) thou know I never could pray,
Unless 'twere on a Holiday;
When Organ, Voice and Violin,
Wheedles our wicked thoughts from sin;
And then methinks I am in Heaven,
With Bacchus drinking Brimmers seven.
When Pan and Phoebus make us Music,
Without which, praying would make you-sick:
But without Complement or Prayer,
Which are but words, and words but Air*
Bacchus will take me to his Table,
And seat me 'midst the jolly Rabble.
A NEW SONG.
OF all the brisk Dancers my Saleena for me,
For I love not a woman unless she be free;
The affection that I to my Mystriss do pay,
Grows weary unless she do meet me halfway:
There can be no pleasure till humor do hit,
Then Jumping is as good as affection in wit.
No sooner I came, but she liked me as soon;
No sooner I asked but She granted my boon.
And without a preamble, a Portion or Joynter,
She promised to meet me, where ere I appoint her,
So we struck up the Match, and Embraced each other
Without the consent of Father or Mother.
Then away with the Lady that is Modest and Coy
Let her end be the pleasure that we do enjoy.
Let her tickle her Fancy with secret delight,
And refuse all the day what she longs for at night.
I believe my Sallena say they are all mad
To pick on dry bones while flesh may be had.
The Pot Rapsodes.
I Will leave the dish and hugg the Glass,
Whatere's the meat give me the sauce:
Who swallows Crit, and never drinks
Slike him that speaks before he thinks,
Meat's but a gross parenthesis,
No essence, but in liquid bliss.
Jove were a mortal were it not,
He Is deified by the Pot;
Europa sat not on his Back,
Had he not swam through Seas of Sack.
I Will mount my thoughts to Giant height
I Am Constellation in conceit.
I Will pluck down Sol, and mount his Sphere,
Then sullen Daphne shall appear;
And seeing me grasp Pboebus rays,
Shall cringe and crown me with her Bays
I Will rape the Moon; it shall be said,
Cynthia 'th changed the name of Maid.
Her twinkling Girls shall all be taken,
No Virgin left to bear her train.
Thus Conquering Sun, Moon and Stars,
With gods themselves I Will wager Wars.
Or if on Earth my Mind can rest,
I Will be a Monarch at the least.
Our dull Plebeians shall grow quicker,
Rinc^ng their muddy brains in liquor:
The Miser then shall scatter Cash,
For Wine shall change his Balderdash;
And sing, and drink, and sing,
Till every subject turn a King.
The Conquered Gods shall make us legs,
Entreating they may sip the dregs.
Thus will we tipple till the World
Into Oblivion is hurled,
And when we seel Old Age does come;
We'll post into Elyzium,
And there our chiefest Joy shall be
To think of past Felicity.
SONG.
IT is not, Chloris, your disdain
Can ever cover with despair,
Or in cold Ashes hide that care;
Which I have fed with so long pain,
I may perhaps my Eyes refrain,
And fruitless words no more impart,
But yet still serve, still serve you in my heart.
What though I spend my hapless days
In finding Entertainments out,
Careless of what I go about:
Or seek my peace in skilful ways,
Applying to my Eyes new Rays
Of Beauty and another flame,
Unto my heart, my heart is still the same.
It Is true, that I could love no sace*
Inhabited by cold disdain,
Taking delight in others pain.
Your looks are full of native grace,
Scorn there, by chance, alone has place;
And it is my hope I may in time remove,
This scorn one day, One day by endless Love.
SONG.
AH Chloris would the Fates allow
We still might love as we love now,
The world has no such ^oyes in store,
Fancy it self can wish no more.
For nothing sure so sweet can prove,
As pleasures of b^ginning Love.
But Love when to his height arrived,
Of all our Joys is shortest lived;
His Morning past he sets so soon,
That none can find his afternoon,
And of that little time is lent,
Half in unkindness is misspent.
Since Face to Love so shore life gives,
And Loves so tender while he lives.
Let us remove mean doubts away,
So to prevent his first decay;
Like Vines, no second wound, Love bears
But weeps away his life in Tears.
To CHLORIS.
CHloris, since you my passion know,
And ev'^y ^^^k my Love ^oes ^how,
Sin^^ ^^^^^est which so ^^ng did ^way,
To your soft (...) gives ^^y;
A slave to all the Motions of your Will,
Why would you have me pine and languish still.
I know you cannot love to see
The many pains that torture me,
When at your feet my self I lay,
You always turn your eyes away:
Beauty a softness from its Nature takes,
Which cannot look upon the wounds it makes*
Nor can your tender breast yet be
From all Arrests of Passion free:
No, it is some happier Love, I fear,
Has taken up the Lodgings there*
While like an importuning Beggar, I
Turned out of doors, must thenceforth starve and die
OC^AVIO to PORTIA.
MAY the bright Portia, to whose sway
So many Lovers yield each day,
Not be displeased, if even to her
Octavio dares his hopes prefer:
And vows none else had e're the power
To make him love above an hour:
It Is you have found at once the Art,
To conquer and reform his heart.
Too much 'twas given t'inconstancy before,
But now it is so well placed, ^^ill change no more.
Your scorn can never put ^ut that Fire,
Which your more pow^^^ul Eyes ^^spire.
Be as dis^ainfu^ (...) will,
He Will s^ff^r a^^ ^n^ love you still.
Yet do not you im^erious grow,
Because his humble flames you kn^w:
Nor over your ^lave with rigor ^eign,
Because he cannot break his chain.
Like Kings, who never treat their Subjects well
When they are once assured they cannot rebel.
He hopes like all great Beautyes you,
Take pleasures only to subdue,
All hearts to love, but will not think fit,
To torture Slaves that bow to it;
So some brave Hero seeks to kill,
By all the ways of force and skill.
While his pro^d foe maintains the strife,
But gives him, when he yield, his life.
Hearts that are hardn'd against threat^ing steel,
The gentle touches of compassion feel.
SONG.
WHen as my Thirsis first did view me,
With languishing and charming eyes,
With many a sigh he seemed to woo me.
And did my foolish heart surprise,
With those false looks that are in fashion,
But I my folly loath to own,
striving to hide that rising passion;
Care to concea^ it made it known
For the brisk youth did so^^ discover
A mighty tumult in my face.
All the disorder of a Lover,
When Passions combat in that place;
Emboldn'd then he straight drew nigh me
With gentle sweetness ^n ^is eyes*
Saying, fair Celia, do not fly me,
Or my poor humble heart ^espise.
A Tribute which I never did pay ^et,
To any Nymph upon the Plain,
And should you cruelly betray (...)
But oh! that caution was in vain;
Yet said I love will soon be flying,
Which in a moment has its Birth,
As the too early Flowers are dying,
The very minute they come forth.
My Love said he from Fate arising,
I can no more quit then avoid:
But Love, produced from flow advising,
By the same means might be destroyed.
That which I have for that bright face, is
A sympathy, not lazy love.
The steel the Loadstone thus embraces,
And of it self will never remove.
Then many amorous Vows he uses,
To vouch his constancy and truth.
Hard is that heart that once refuses
To love and trust the lovely Youth.
He plays then with my dangling Tresses,
And humbly ga^e on my face.
Kisses my hand, my breast he presses,
Ala's, with too bewitching Grace.
My blood grew ^hill, my heart too panting,
Like the gen^^^ Murm^ring D^ve^;
The skillful Youth no ^^^^ing wanting
That fatal minute soon improves.
He gently then lays me down by him,
And many winning O^ths he swore,
Asking what I ^ou'd not deny him,
He had subdued me so before.
Ah then he robbed me of that treasure,
Which never can be rei^^r'd again.
But Oh the pain, yet Oh the pleasure,
And Oh that both might still remain.
But soon alas from me h^ parted,
And now in vain I make my moan,
Since m^ he sa^^ly has d^s^rt^d;
I Will sigh, and pine and dy^ alone.
SONG.
THough Damon is haughty ^and seems to despise,
The f^tte^s he lately has w^rne,
Yet ^e k^^ws in ^is soul that his Phillis's eyes;
Were she willing could conquer his scorn
Then let not presumption so blind thee fond Damon
To think that this ^umour shall e're bring my flame on
If he had been humble, obliging and free,
Perhaps I had pitied his pain,
B^t sin^^ pride and Inconstancy in him I see;
He shall know H' has but lengthened his chayn.
For now I perceive what the Fop does endeavor
My Arts shall detain him my Captive for ever.
SONG.
If thou boast an Empire Cupid,
Why do thou permit thy State;
Cowardlike as blind as stupid;
To be ruled by a greater Fate.
Fate in thy affairs seems rectour,
Lovers spite of thee may fall,
Less poor child the ar^ no Proctor;
Fate is Governor of a^l.
Neither have thine Arrows power,
Since it was my Celia's eyes,
Blasted me thou can not bow her,
Save with me she sympathize.
Nor e're was that yet procured
By thine, but b' a natural Art.
Nature 'twas that first inured,
Joining bodies, well as hearts.
SONG to LUCINDA.
LUcinda, since we have confessed
To each other, each others love,
Why should our flames be still suppressed,
And not to Action move.
Both kindled at the first kind Enterview,
And both with equal care and vigor grew.
Mine scorched and scorched, nor durst your passion say,
You loved till forced they did themselves betray.
Now let us study to improve
Our Passions with that fire,
That may not quickly waste our love,
But still preserve desir^.
And silently enjoy at such a rate,
That distance may our Fancies recreate;
Dealing our Loves with that equality,
As born together, so their Deaths may be.
Lucinda shall but whispered be,
Used as the Names of Saints;
And called on as a Deity
To satisfy Complaints.
No other wishes dare attempt my breast,
Now it is with bright Lucinda so possessed.
She fills my thoughts with glory, then I Will cry
Lucinda loves; Lucinda! so do I.
To his Mistress.
A Flame as sacred as the vows of those,
Who to devotion do their life's dispose.
My love has nourished and to you,
It is an offering due.
And with you let it burn,
Though I may hope but small return;
Yet may my doubtful thoughts have rest,
To know it is harbored in your breast.
Where is but kindly cherished I Will not fear,
But it may kindle the like passion there.
A flame it is as chaste as your own thought,
Free from the vices Nature would have taught;
Refined by virtues that attend,
A Lover and a friend.
With freedom then you may receive,
What with such Innocence I give;
And if some heat from you't procures,
There Is still no fear of hurting yours.
For in that Love no poison is conv^y'd,
Where friendship is the chief ingredient m^^^.
My love thus lodged I could contented live,
But when I think how true how much I give;
Your generous mind bids me expect,
From you the like effect.
Then fear not boldly to bestow,
Your love where you in reason owe.
For that and Justice too will say,
It is a debt you ought to pay;
But if your inclination disapprove,
My resolution shall be still to love.
SONG.
FAith now my dear I must prevail,
I know you will not deny me,
For if I wait another gale;
This fortune then may fly me.
Come let us enjoy, I am resolved,
There is no danger near us
Safe as in Rocks we are here involved,
Where none can 'spy nor hear us.
The pleasant murmures of the Trees,
Our gentle whispers smother,
And since no Sun nor Moon can see,
We Will wink at one another.
Silent and vigorous we will be,
As Birds in our embraces,
I neither will nor shall thou see
The Language of our faces.
Our souls alone shall have discourse,
Till every sense is stupid;
And we are inspired by a fresh force
To propagate a Cupid.
To FLORIDA.
FLorida, why will thou marry,
Now the World is grown so wide,
Liberty would have you tarry,
Till Convenience make you Bride.
Husband is a word sounds dully,
Fit for gravity and Age,
Dear, my life, my joy, my bully,
Are the words that more ingag^.
I Would not have thee out of fashion,
Whilst thy youth and beauty holds,
But to most have equal passion;
And to some stark kind and cold.
Humor in the greatest lovers,
Is allowed to admit of change,
Since the wise do shoot at revers;
It Is no crime for us to range,
The distracted LOVER to the Air of Awake all ye dead.
IM'e now in love, but Oh but Oh,
How severe are the effects that from thence do fl^w.
Diseases are trifles to their cruelty,
Those create but a pain, these misery;
Distracted souls so made by Love,
Are blessed they cannot disapprove.
The harsh practices that fate on them does throw,
Whom lov's little God by his power brings to woe;
Then cruel she, or come or come,
And allot me thy breast, or a tomb, a tomb.
It Is nobler far to kill, to kill
A condemned stave then to keep him still;
With his breast full of horror expecting then,
Every moment a death, yet knows not when.
Conquest delayed in none is brave,
When they may give a sudden gr^ve.
To those that are clothed in black despair,
Delays like some poisons corrosive are,
Then once more send thine eye, theine eye,
That will sure^y destroy, and I dye I dye.
To LAURINDA.
LAurinda, thou can show alone
More Beauty then was ever shown,
I Have roved and find no smiles,
TO express thine eyes by, but thine eyes
Angels we see not but by thee,
We may conclude such creatures be.
Where then we do so much perf^ction find,
We know that body must have such a mind;
Thou needst no Arts nor Artifice,
For Ornaments but this is this.
And may thy self, thy self prefer
In Church, or Court, or Theater,
Where needful Females show their tricks
As nature too had Heretics;
And this with care so plainly have devised
As if 'twere glorious to be so disguised.
Happy Laurinda where the gall
Of cancker'd t^ngues can never fall,
Whose thoughts are fed with V^stall fire,
And whom both Sexes do admire.
It Is you I love beyond degree,
Yet almost think it blasphemy
But if a Deity can to Love incline,
Kill me to say the blessing's mine.
Prologue to the Impertinents acted at the Middle TEMPLE.
THe Author of this Play comes to receive,
His final doom which only you can give:
The ill-judging Town has favored what he writ
Yet what so er'e they do it is not fit,
'T should pass for current 'till you license it.
Though they their favor to him did allow,
He may be found a Malefactor now;
But to your Judgment he must humbly bow.
He by your common law condemned must be,
But for releif flies to your Chauncerie.
He fears your Justice when you know that he,
A Member of this learned Society*
Lest fruitful Law for barren Poetry,
Yet (Fathers of the Law) if ye will please,
TO unbend your cars, and give your minds some ease
From all the weights which they have born ere while,
He hopes the mirth in's Play may gain your smile.
And he is not so far gone but that he may,
Plead once before you in a nobler way.
Prologue at Oxford.
YOur most obliging kindness one year shown
A second time has brought your Servants down
From the tumultuous and unlearned Town,
Where Pride and Ignorance in a full cry,
Dare all the Powers of Art and Wit defy:
To the calm dwellings of the Muses here,
Where all things soft and gentle do appear.
When sacred Learning flourishes in peace,
And without noise each moment does increase;
Hither we come and with such pleasure too,
As we can never hope to afford to you.
And yet with this we cannot be content,
But you must pay for our divertisement:
A Lover thus to's Mistress does impart,
The treasure of his purse as well as heart;
For that of which She has an equal part,
What pleasure is it to give you delight,
When most of you are fit to Judge and write.
Here none to appear fantastic take great pains,
Or under huge white Perr'wigs have no brains;
No blustering Bullyes come in here half drunk,
For Chyna Oranges and love to Punck;
To fly at Vizard Masks talk Nonsense loud,
And with their noise out-vye Bear-baiting Crowd
Poets should be above such Judges raised,
To be condemned by such is to be praised:
But to his Nursery of Art and Wit,
Our Poets humbly all their Pens submit.
To you what 'ere they can invent is due,
Since all that is Wit and Art is taught by you.
Thus Inland Brooks into the Ocean flow,
To which their streams and f^^n^^i^s too they ow
But Po^ts must their empti^ess ^e ^^^e,
Who can but give what they received before.
PROLOGUE to the Ordi^ary.
From you g^ve men of ^^^^n^^s and ^f trade
W^o were f^r indust^y, n^^ pl^^sure, made
We ^eldom do imp^o^e, or h^pe for aid.
F^r w^ bu^ rarely ^re ^bligd by y^u,
Y^u com^ but when y^v^ no^^i^g else to do;
^ fi^es, our Wit to yo^ n^e^^s no ^x^us^,
For you all Wit do l^ke a Mystri^s u^e;
A thing you sel^^m ^^e, w^ile some are cloyed
With Wit, as with a Wise too o^t enj^y'd;
Nay, you will think that Wit which is ^o^^^,
A Quibble, or a little Punn takes (...);
(...) ^llness does men for business prepare,
Whi^ Wit delights in ease, and hates all care
But to the young brisk men who think it fit,
To spend no Afternoon but in the Pit,
Whether we will or no we must submit.
Some come with lusty Burgundy half-drunk,
T'eat China Oranges, make love to Punk;
And briskly mount a bench when the Act is done,
And comb their much-loved Pe^iwigs to the tune,
And can sit out a Play of three hours long,
Minding no part often but the Dance or Song;
These are our trusty friends, but some there are,
Most bloody Judges, who no Poets spare;
But I have heard some injured Authors say,
That th^se m^st parlou^ ^e^^^^ers of a ^ay,
With little Wit which they so much employ,
Which by R^fl^ction only they enjoy,
Would even those from whom they took't destroy.
So does the famed E^lightne^ of the Night,
Ecli^se the Sun, from whom sh'ad all her light;
And these Mock (...) hiss and whistle loud,
And with their noise cut-vie Bear-baiti^g Crowd.
But Ladies, you are sweet, and soft, and fair,
And will the Poet and the Actors spare;
But b^sy men and Sparks are welcome now,
The little Miss^s and great Ladies too,
You altogether make a Noble S^ow.
You Have paid fo^'t, and whatever Poets say,
Think or say what you please of this our Pl^y.
EPILOGUE to the Ordinary.
OUR PROLOGUE huff^, but we are ^umo^ ^^ow,
An^ ^^ar (...) sto^me which hangs upon eac^ brow,
S^in S^a fig^ts at first some have been b^ld,
Who in the h^at took sh^lter in the H^ld:
But now the danger of your ^hunder's nigh,
We have no refuge, but to m^rcy fl^^:
We yield our s^lves, an^ you so generous ^e,
S^bmitti^g foes, th^u^h (...) s^ great, you will s^are.
Gal^ants if you are off^nded at our P^ay,
And think w^have c^urs^^y treated ^^u to day:
Think what a^f mi^e there is now of Wit,
And that w^ b^ing the b^st that we ca^ g^t;
We are poor Farmers, and make homely ^are,
While ^^r ^i^h La^dlor^s may great Fea^ts prepare;
Bu^ their R^venu^ n^w is almost sp^nt,
And you wi^^ little wit must b^ c^^t^n^:
N^nsenc^ sh^l^ wear the g^y disg^i^^ o^ R^ime,
And though not understo^^, sh^^l swee^ly clime:
N^w emp^y shows must want ^f se^^^ supply,
A^g^ls shall dance, and (...) Witches fly:
You shall have (...), t^^n^e and ^ig^t^ing too
An^ Co^jar ^s raise s^^^its to your view:
The upp^r G^ll'ri^ sh^^^ have t^eir desire,
Who love a Fool, a D^vi^ an^ a ^^ia:
Damned Plays shall b^ a (...) wit^ m^g^ty s^en^s
And Fustian shall b^ sp^k^ i^ ^^ge Machines:
And we w^^^ ^urling ^^r^ams (...) w^rks show
And you may l^ve t^ (...) it (...),
S^ Poets s^ve their wit (...).
This all our S^r^blers can (...) wi^h ^as^.
T^^kle the fools, though not the Witty please*
I^ you ^xp^ct ^^ue Com^dy again,
That repres^nts not Monst^rs, but shows men;
Your exp^ctation will be crossed, we fear,
For we have little hope to see such here.
A Prologue spoken at Court to the Emperess of Morocco.
THE mighty Army now assembl^d here,
Of dreadful Critics w^ll might make us fear;
But, Sir, to your Protection we retire;
No For (we know) will at your quarters fire,
Though n^'re so bad, if you but grace our P^ay,
We and our Poet shall be safe to day:
Your Royal stamp can make all money pass,
And none da^es c^ip your Coin, though but of brass:
Our valiant Hero's, like their Ladies, quake,
And they (poor souls) all wish they now could take
Morocco's deepest black their Cheeks to hide,
That when they blush, it might by none be spied.
Like bashful Brides called to the Marriage bed,
They cannot go back, and dare not forward ^read;
But you, great Sir, may soon remove their f^are,
And ease those hearts where you have the greatest share.
Y^u with a smile can troubled minds assure,
As with a Touch you sickly b^^i^s cure.
To the Audience.
Now Gallants, something should to you be said:
But B^auty better much then Wi^ can plead:
None will this fair Petitioner withstand;
I can but only beg; She, may command.
Spoken by the Lady Elizabeth Howard.
As tiu'rous ^^v^rites that have slighted long
A Fa^tion, which at last they find grow strong,
Think with themselves how they b^time may close
And make a Peac^ with the i^ ^revailing foes:
So ou^ young Ladies almost dead with fear,
Reflection ^^l they may have angered here:
And with a fl^tt^ ri^g Prologu^ would ^xcuse
T^^ (...) rigor which they once did use.
This humbl^ Erran^ I am sent to do^,
Bu^ it would ill b^c^me (...) to woo,
No^ shall we need ^t sure to such as you.
M^thinks you should not r^il at us to day,
And you are too gallant to mind the Play.
But though you do, we hope at last each scene
Where we shall act, will tak^, though never so mean.
In a fine ^adies Mouth all fine will show,
As wi^^s blow sweet when they through Gardens blow.
Use w^ll the Power we put into your hands,
And know, long at i^s height no Empire stands.
You were at ours, we at your mercy now,
And must like Vassals to our Vassals bow;
Yet my brisk Monsieurs, be not too severe,
You Have but a little time to dominere,
And every Jest of yours may cost you dear:
It Is b^t ^ik Royal slav^s, this night you reign:
The Play once done, we shall be crowned again,
And you, poor Captives, must resume your ^hain.
Then do your w^rst, we will the shock abide,
You can at most but a f^ign'd Love deride,
When in good earnest you shall come to woo,
It will be then our tu^n to laugh at you.
Another Prologue spoke at Court to the Emperess of Morocco.
WIT has of late took up a trickt' appear,
Unmannerly, or at the b^st severe:
And Poets share the Fa^e by which we fall,
When kindly we attempt to please you all.
It Is hard, your scorn should against such prevail,
Whose ends are to divert you, though they fail.
You Men would think it an ill-natured Jest,
Should we laugh at you when you did your best.
Then rail not here, though you see reason for it
If Wit can find it self no better sport.
Wit is a very foolish thing at Court.
VVit's business is to please, and not to fright,
It Is no Wit to be always in the right,
You Will find (...) none, who dare be so to night.
Few so ill-bred will venture to a Play,
To spy out faults in what we Women say
For us no matter what we speak, but how,
How kindly can we say -- I hate you now.
And for the men, if you will laugh at'em, do;
T^^y mind themselves so much, they will never mind you --
But why do I descend to lose a Prayer
On those small Saints in Wit, the God sits there.
T^ you (Great Sir) my Message hither tends,
From Youth and Beauty your Allies and Friends.
See my ^redentials written in my Face,
They challenge your Protection in this place,
And hither come with such a force of charms,
As may give Check even to your prosperous ^rmes:
Millions of Cupids hovering in the Rear,
Like Eagles following, fatal Troops appear.
All waiting for the slaughter, which draws nigh.
Of those bold Gazers, who this Night must die.
Nor can you ^ca^e our soft Cap^ivitie,
From which old Age alone must s^t you free.
Then tremble at the fatal Cons^qun^ --
Si^ce, it is well known for your own part (Great Prince)
Against us you still have ma^e a weak d^fenc^ --
Be generous, and wise, and take our part;
Remember we have eyes, and you a heart.
Else you may find, too late, that we are things
Born to kill vassals, and to conquer Kings.
But oh! to what vain Conquest I pretend,
Whilst Love is our Commander, and your Friend.
Our victory your Empire more assures,
For Love will ever make the Triumph yours.
A SONG.
FOrgive me Jove!
Or, if there be a kinder god above,
Forgive a Reb^l to the Power of Love:
H^^r me (kind Cupid) and acc^pt my Vow,
Min^, who ^e voutly at t^y Altar Bow;
O! hear me now:
Dorinda ^ear, and what Ive done amiss
Pardon, and seal that pardon with a Kiss.
Stay! methinks the melting Saint,
Kindly Echoes my complaint;
Look! I fancy I descry
Pi^y dropping from her eye;
Ha^k! she says Philander live,
All thy Errors I forgive:
And now, ah me! to repent I begin,
That against so much goodness I ever should Sin;
But never again, oh! never will I,
Offend my Dorinda, for sooner I Will dye.
SONG.
AH Cruel Eyes! that first enflamed
My poor resistless heart;
That, when I would my thoughts have blamed they still increase the smart:
What pow, r above
Creates such Love.
To languish with desire*
May some disdain
Increase my pain,
Or may the flame expire.
And yet I die to think how soon
My wishes may return,
If slighted, and my hopes once gone,
I must in silence mourn:
T^en Tyrannels
D^ but express,
The Mystry of your power,
'^^s as s^on said.
You Will l^ve and wed
As studying for'^ an hour.
I yield to Fate, though your fair eyes
Have made the power your own;
'Twas they did first my heart surprise,
Dear Nymph 'twas they alone:
For honor's sake,
Your heart awake,
And let your pity move:
(...) in ^^spair
O^ on so fair,
I bid adi^u to Love.
A SONG.
NAy! let me alone, protest I Will be gone*
It Is a folly to think I^le be subject to One:
Never hope to Co^sine
A Young Gallant to dine,
Like a Sch^lar of Oxford, on naught but the Loyn,
For, after Enjoyment, our Bellies are full;
And the same dish again makes the Appetite dull.
By your Wantoning Art;
Of a Sigh, and a Start,
You endeavor, in vain, to inveigle my heart?
For the Pretty Disguise
Of your Languishing Eyes,
Will never prevail with my Sinews to rise:
And 'twas never the Mode, in an Amorous (...)
When a Lover has dined, to persuade him to (...)
Faith Betty the Jest
Is almost at the best,
It Is only variety makes up the Feast?
For when we have enjoyed;
And with pleasures are cloyed?
The vows, that we made to love, ever are (...)
And you know, pretty Nymph, it was ever (...)
That a meal should be made of a Relishing (...)
A SONG in the Dutch-Love^.
Amyntas bid me to a Grove,
Where all the Trees did shade us,
The Sun it self, though it had strove,
It could not have betrayed us,
The place, secured from Humane eyes,
No other fear allows,
But, when the Wind does gently rise,
To kiss the yiedling boughs.
(2)
Down there we sat upon the Moss,
And did begin to play,
A thousand wanton tricks to pass
The heat of all the day;
A many kisses he did give,
And I returned the same,
Which made me willing to receive.
That which I dare not name.
(3)
His Charming Eyes no Aid required
To tell their amorous tale;
On her that was already fired,
'Twas easy to prevail:
He did but kiss, and clasp me round,
Whilst those his thoughts expressd,
And laid me sof^ly on the ground,
Oh^ who can guess the rest.
SONG.
O The time that is past,
When she held me so fast,
And declared that her honor no longer could last,
When no light, but her languishing eyes did appear
To prevent all excuses of blush^s and fear.
When she sighed and unlac'd,
With such trembling and haste,
As if she had longed to be closer embraced,
My Lips the sweet pleasure of K^sses enjoyed,
While my hand was in search of hid treasure employed.
My heart set on fire
With the flames of desire,
(...) pursued what she seemed to require;
(...) she cried, for pity sake, change your ill mind,
(...) Amyntas be civil, or I Will be unkind,
Dear Amyntas, she cries,
Then casts down her eyes,
(...) in Kisses she gives, what in words she denies,
(...) of my Conquest I purposed to stay
(...) free consent had more sweetened the prey.
But too late I begun
For her passion was done;
(...) Amyntas, she cries, I will never be won:
(...), and your Courtship, no pity can move,
(...)'ve slighted the Critical minute of Love.
Song on the London Ladies
(1)
TIme was, thou must dwindle thy money and time
And, the dearest of all thy vigor, and prime
To Court a coy Mistress, that longed for it as much
As thou could desire to give her a touch:
But now the rate's known; the best will turn up
Foe a Guiny, a Pullet, and the other old cup:
A World it is of pleasure, one Necklace of Pearl,
Will conjure the richest, or modestest Girl.
(2)
All Trade is for gain, all Commodities sold,
Fear not; for thy coin thou may justly be bold.
A pox on fine words; the contemplative fool
Talks of Love, and of flame; an oh! what mis-rule,
These keep in his heart: now a sigh, then a groan;
And her very jeca's sufficient alone
To fill him with raptures, sweet dreams, and what not!
When alas! all the while her flames are as hot.
(3)
In company with her, each glance drops a Charm,
And she gives him her hand, to keep him still warm;
For this is the man she designs her lewd life,
To cloak with the serious name of a Wife:
To the modest all distance, with those that are free
She can tickle, and kiss, and kinder yet be:
Adieu to fond Courtship, all Arguments lie,
In the briskest assault, when the pockets let fly.
(4)
Love is banished the world, and virtue is gone
To some private recess, to lament all alone;
For now she grows barren, and none of her race
Can be found either with, or without a good face:
To the Man, to the Park, to the Pit, or the Box;
Where you will, you cannot miss: there is meat for the Cocks.
And thus will it be, for old Eve at the first,
And her Daughters e're since have made all Men accursed.
FINIS.

