A COLLECTION OF DIVERSE ORDERS and RULES, Heretofore established for the making
and passing Entries in the Custom House, as well for Merchandise, as for Goods
from Port to Port within this Nation.

Published by Order of the Commissioners of the Customs.

LONDON, Printed for Laurence Blaiklock, and are to be sold at his shop near
Temple Bar. 1650.

A Collection of diverse Orders and Rules heretofore established for the making
and passing Entries in the Custom House, etc.
WHereas certain reasonable and necessary Articles, Orders and Directions
bearing Date the 27th January, in the seventh year of the late Queen
Elizabeth, remaining upon Record in the Court of Exchequer, and diverse other
Rules and Penalties by several Statutes, Acts and Ordinances of Parliament,
have been since devised and made for the better levying and receiving of the
Customs and Subsidies: The due execution and practice whereof, have been for
some years past much neglected, to the great hurt and damage of the
Commonwealth, as well in matter of Custom and Subsidy as by the Importation
and Exportation of goods prohibited.

For prevention whereof, and to the end the said Articles, Orders, and
Directions may be hereafter duly observed, and put in Execution, for the more
regular management of the affairs of the Customs, and that none may pretend
ignorance thereof, or unwittingly commit any Offenses contrary thereunto, we
the present Commissioners of the Customs, have made a Collection of some of
the aforesaid Articles, Orders and Rules, and have caused them to be published
in Print, as fo^followeth: viz.

The Surveyor, Searcher, or other Notice of the coming in, and going out of
Ships.
Officer attending in any Port or Creek, shall give knowledge to the Collector
of the head Port to which they belong (with all convenient speed) of every Ship
that comes in, or goes out, at any Tide by way of Merchandise, or with goods
from another Port by Certificate.

There shall be one Shippers Book Shippers Books.
Outward, and another Inwards, in every Custom House, wherein every Shipper
going out, or coming in by way of Merchandise, or with Commodities of this
Nation to or from any other Ports by Certificate, shall enter openly in the
Custom House the name of the Ship, and of the Master, the Burden, of whence
and to, or from what Place it is fraighted, before he take in any Lading, or
discharge any Goods, Wares, or Merchandises whatsoever.

The Master or Purser of every Shippers Entry Inwards.
Ship coming in by way of Merchandise, shall deliver under his hand and upon
his Oath before the Collector, or Checque, one Bill of the particulars and
contents of the whole Lading of the Ship, with the Names of the several
Merchants, or the Mar^^e, Package and outward form of the Goods and Merchandise
according to his knowledge; And shall also make Declaration upon Oath, That he
has not broken Bulk since he came into the Port, or into any other Port in
this Nation or the Dominions thereof, otherwise than in the said Bill shall be
expressed; and shall answer to such other questions concerning the Lading of
his said Ship, as shall be demanded of him by the said Collector, or the
Checque. But in case he has broken Bulk in any other port, Then he shall
deliver likewise upon his Oath the particulars of the goods so delivered in the
Port, where he first did break Bulk; which Entries and ^eclarations so made as
aforesaid, shall be entered into the Shippers Book Inwards after the Ships
Entry, and be filed together in Order, and with the Shippers Book shall remain
and be kept safely in the Custom House.

Every Master of a Ship that shall Shippers Entries Outward.
Lade any Goods or Merchandise for the part beyond the Seas, shall enter his
Ship with the Collector and Checque before he take in any Goods, and before
his Departure shall give notice of his whole Lading, with the names of the
Merchants that have Laden Goods in him, and shall answer upon Oath to such
Questions concerning the same as shall be demanded of him, upon pain of the
forfeiture of 100 l.

All Masters or Pursers of Ships Time allowed for the Entering and discharging
Ships Inwards.
arriving from any foreign parts, shall within four days after their
arrival, make Entry of their Ship or Vessel in the said Port as aforesaid,
and shall unlade and discharge the same with all convenient speed; And if such
Ship or Vessel shall not be fully unladen within thirty days after the Entry
(unless in case of necessity appearing to the Collectors) the Owner and
Propriator of such goods as shall remain on Board at that time, shall bear
the charge of such Officers as shall continue on Board: And the Master of such
Ship or Vessel respectively, combining with the Merchant therein, shall lose
his Portage.

The Master of any Ship that Penalty for a Shipper consenting to Land or Ship
goods.
shall suffer goods to be Landed or Shipped without payment of Subsidy and
other Duties, or at an unlawful time or place does forfeit 100 l.

No person may Lade, or carry any No Strangers Ships may be employed from Port
to Port.
Goods or Merchandise from Port to Port within this Nation, in any Ship or
Bottom whereof any Stranger is Owner, Master, or part Owner, upon pain of
forfeiture of the Goods.

Every Merchant, or other, that will Entries of Merchandise Outward.
transport any goods by way of Merchandise for foreign Ports, shall make his
Entry particularly thereof, with the Collector and Checque by a bill under his
hand, or the hand of his Assign, with the name of the Ship, the Master, the
burden, of whence, and to what place it is fraighted, with the marks and
numbers of the Packs, Caske, Fardles, or other bulk, and the true quantity and
quality of the goods therein contained; which Bill shall be forthwith entered in
a Book by the Collector, and delivered to the Checque to be entered by him
likewise, and to file and keep the Bill of every Ship together as they shall be
e^tred, and the true value of the goods, and of the Custom, Subsidyes, and
duties thereupon due, shall be likewise set forth, and charged in the Books at
the time the Merchant makes his Entry.

All Goods and Merchandise allowed Store and Portage.
for Store, Portage, or provision, Inwards or Outward, shall be valued
according to the Book of Rates (although the same neither does nor shall pay
any Custom or Subsidy) and shall be entered in Books distinctly and apart by
themselves.

No Entry, nor agreement with any Entries to be made in the Customhouse.
Merchant or others, for Custom or Subsidy, shall be made by the Collector or
others; nor any Cocquet, Warrant, or Certificat, Sealed or Subscribed, but
openly in the Custom House.

The Searcher or Surveyor Searcher to have the Cocquets and Warrants at the
Landing and Shipping of Goods.
shall have al Cocquets, Certificats, and Warrants delivered unto him before
the Shipping or Landing of any goods therein contained, and at the time of the
Shipping or Landing thereof, shall have the said Cocque^^, Certificats, and
Warrants with them, that the Goods may be thereby examined and tried.

Every Merchant shall have his Particular Cocquets.
particular Cocquet, and Certificat by himself, sealed and subscribed openly
in the Custom House, by the Collector and Checque, bearing date the same day
that he eatred his Goods.

All Entries, Inwards or Outward, Indorsment of Licenses.
by License, shall be indorsed upon each particular License, with the name of
the Merchant, the date of the Cocquet or Entry, and the particular quantities
Shipped or Landed by virtue thereof, shall be also set out and Entered in the
Books to which they properly belong.

All Merchandise Customed Outward Certificates or Indorsements of Cocquets.
in any Ship or Vessel, which for some cause cannot be Laden aboard, the same
Ship shall be appointed to another Ship by Certificat openly sealed,
subscribed, and delivered in the Custom House, upon the Oaths of the Searcher
or Surveyor, and of the Owners thereof, openly taken, that the said Goods did
not pass according to former Cocquet.

Every Merchant or other that will Entryes Inwards.
enter any Merchandise inwards, or take up any Goods by store or Portage, shall
make Entry thereof particularly, and deliver a Bill thereof at large under his
hand or the hand of his Assign, to the Collector, with the name of the Ship,
and of the Master, the burden, of whence, and from what place it was
fraighted, with the marks and numbers of the Fardles, Bulk and Package, in the
margent, and and the true quantities and qualities of the Goods therein
contained. And the said Collector shall with all convenient speed cast up the
value of the Goods, and Merchandise therein, and the Customs and Subsid^es
thereupon due, and write it upon the said Bill, with the number and date of the
Bill, according to which it shall be presently entered in the Book Inwards, to
be kept by the said Collector, and then by him delivered to the Checque, to be
likewise Entered, according to which Bill, another being subscribed by the said
Collector and Checque, and numbered and dated as the former shall be to the
Surveyor* Searcher or Waiter, a Waarant to suffer the Wares and Merchandise
therein contained to be Landed and discharged according.

All manner of Wares that any Bills at sight.
Merchant enters at sight, shall be taken up by a Warrant (ad visum) Dated the
day of the Entry thereof, subscribed and delivered openly in the Custom House
to the Searcher or Surveyor, who shall see the same brought to the
Custom House Key or Wharfe, and give knowledge thereof to the said Officers,
which Officers shall suffer the said Goods to be taken up in the presence of
the Surveyor or Searcher, and veiwed in some convenient place; and the Owner
thereof shall forthwith make an Entry thereof particularly under his hand, or
the hand of his assign, with the Collector and Checque, and thereupon a
warrant shall be made for the ^learing and passing of the said wares as above
said.

In every Port where more then Waiters to be appointed by the Collector.
one (whether Searcher, Surveyor, or Waiters) are appointed to attend, There
the Collector of the same Port shall nominate, and direct under his hand which
and how many of them shall take charge of every respective Ship, going forth or
coming into the same Port, either from beyond Sea, or from any other Port
within this Nation, to see the Goods and Merchandise therein cleared and
discharged, according to such warrants as he or they shall receive from the
Collector and Checque.

Every Merchant Stranger that enters Bonds of employment
any Merchandise brought from beyond Seas, shall enter into Bond with the
Collector, for employment to be made according to the Statute.

Every Searcher or Surveyor Searchers and Surveyors Book.
shall enter in a Book the day of the going out and coming in of every Ship,
by way of Merchandise, or by Certificat from another Port, with the name of the
Ship and Master, and the Date of every man's Cocquet, warrant and Certificat, as
they in order of the days of every month Wharfingers Crane-keepers, or
Officers consenting to fraud in matters of Custom.
shall fall out.

If any Wharfinger, Crane keeper, Searcher, Lighterman, Waiter or other
Officer, do consent or know of any Goods shipped or landed without payment of
Subsidy, etc. or at an unlawful place, or an unlawful time, and do not
disclose the same within one month after he shall forfeit 100 l.

Every Officer that makes any False Cocquets and Warrants.
Cocquet or warrant contrary, or disagreeing to the Entry of any Goods or
Merchandise, shall be fined and punished according to his Offense.

Every Merchant, English or Stranger, Entering Strangers Goods in an English
man's name.
That shall enter the Goods of a Stranger in the name of an Englishman, shall
forfeit and lose the Goods and Merchandise so entered, and all his Goods
personal.

English men Inhabiting beyond English men inhabiting beyond Sea.
Sea, and sworn Subjects to foreign Princes, are to pay Customs and other
duties, as Strangers, so long as they so continue.

Every one borne out of the Nation, Denizens.
and after made Denizen, shall pay like Customs as before he was made denizen,
except Merchants of the Stillyard.

If any Searcher shall give way to Connivence of the Searcher.
the transportation of money or unlawful passingers, he shall lose his place,
and all his goods, and suffer one years imprisonment.

All Officers whom it concerns Seisures.
in their respective places, shall be diligent and careful to make stay, and
seizure of Goods, Wares and Merchandise, that shall be brought in or carried
out, or intended to be carried out of this Nation, or the Dominions thereof,
contrary to the Laws, or any Act or Ordinance of Parliament.

All Goods and Merchandise that The custody of Seisures.
shall be seized or stayed as aforesaid, shall presently after such seizure or
stay be delivered into the charge and Custody of the Commissioners of the
Customs for the time being, or of the Collector in the Port where such seizure
or stay shall be made, there to remain until a sufficient warrant and
discharge (as well in respect of the Custom and Subsidy, as of the seizure and
forfeiture) shall be brought for release and delivery thereof.

A Note in writing of all and every The Register for Seisures.
seizure and stay of Goods, and of all suits and Informations, for or
concerning the Importation, or Exportation of Goods prohibited or uncustomed
shall be forthwith by the party that does seize or prosecute the same,
delivered to the Register for seisures and forfeitures for the time being,
resident at the Custom House, in the Port of London; The said Register taking
no fee or recompense for the entering thereof.

No Officer or other person, shall No Composition without Seizure.
make composition or agreement for the seizure or forfeiture of any Goods
prohibited or uncustomed, without License out of the Court of Exchequer, or
other lawful Warrant first had and obtained by the Offender, upon the pains
and penalties by the Laws in that behalf made and provided.

All Compositions, Fines, Recoveries; The moiety of Seizure to be paid before
the Goods be released.
Warrants, Orders, and other discharges to be had, made, or granted, for, or
upon the aforesaid seisures and informations be entered in the Register
aforesaid, and the monyes thereupon due and payable, be satisfied and paid to
the Commissioners of the Customs, for the use of the Navy, before the
respective Goods therein concerned be released or delivered.

All Appraisments of Goods, Appraisements.
Wares and Merchandise seized as aforesaid, be showed and delivered to the
Register aforesaid, before they be returned into the Cxchequer to be by him
examined and entered, and if the Goods be to much undervalued, the said Register
is to make stay thereof, and to acquaint some of the Barons of the Exchequer
therewith, to the end that a review, and new appraisement may be made of the
Goods.

Every Merchant that carries any Coast Cocquets for foreign Goods.
foreign Goods or Merchandise, from the Port where they were first entered to
another Port by water or by Land, shall bring a Certificat from the Collector
of the Port where they were first entered, testifying the payment of the
Custom, with the true quantity and quality of the Goods, and shall not
dicharge his Goods before he deliver his Certificat to the Co^lector of the
Port to which the Goods shall be brought, upon pain of forfeiture of the said
Goods, And if the Certificat be not made according to the first Entry, the
Collector shall lose his place.

Every person or persons, that will English Goods Customable or prohibited.
Ship or carry any Goods or Merchandise (prohibited, or whereof any the duties
of Custom or Subsidy are payable) to discharge the same in any other Port or
place within this Nation, shall before the Shipping thereof declare, and
manifest under his or their hands, to the Collector and Checque of the
Customs, in the Port where the same shall be Shipped, in the open
Custom House, the nature, Length, number, and other contents, and the value of
such Goods, together with the name of the Ship, and of the Master, the place of
whence, and for which he is fraighted, and with the approbation of the said
Collector and Checque shall also make and enter into a sufficient obligation
Bond.
in the Law, in which he shall be bound with sufficient sureties, in such sum
of money as shall amount to double the value of the Goods so declared, and
manifested, with condition that the same shall be discharged at some Port or
Creek within this Nation, and in no other Place. And in case any of the said
Goods or Merchandise, shall be Shipped or Laden in any Ship or other Vessel,
to be carried or passed between Port and Port as aforesaid, before such
Declarations shall be made, and security given as aforesaid,

That then all and every the said The forfeiture of the Goods.
Goods and Merchandise, shall be forfeited and lost, the one moiety or the
value thereof to be to him or them that will seize or sue for the same, and the
other moiety or value thereof, or the Fine or Composition for the same to be
paid to the Commissioners, and Collectors of the Customs, for the time being,
for the use of the Navy.

That every person or persons, that Return within four months.
shall Ship such Goods, and shall be bound as aforesaid, shall within four
months next after the Shipping thereof, bring a true Certificat from the Port
or Place, where he or they shall discharge the said Goods, testifying that the
same Goods so Shipped, and the true nature, Length, Weight, Number, and other
contents or value thereof is there discharged, which Certificat shall upon
discharge of the Goods be delivered to the Party discharging the same without
delay.

All and every the said Bonds* for Bonds to be delivered into the Exchequer and
redelivered to the parties.
which Certificats are returned, shall be delivered half yearly into the
Exchequer, with the Certificats thereunto annexed, and indorsed also thereupon,
And every Easter Term after the account of the Officers that did take them is
past, The said Bonds shall be delivered to every person that will sue for the
same, paying only twelve pence, for the delivery thereof, to the Officer that
has the Custody of them.

All other of the said Bonds that be expired, and no Certificat returned
according to the conditions, shall be delivered into the Exchequer half
yearly, that execution may be had thereupon. Forfeited Bonds.


Every person that brings any Goods, Wares or Merchandise, from any Port
within this Nation, into another Port within the same, by Certificat, shall
make Entry thereof under his hand, and shall bring his Certificat to the
Commissioners or Collectors of the Subsidy in the respective Ports, which
Commissioners, Collectors, or their Substitutes, shall make a Warrant at large,
to the Waiters or Searchers to suffer the same Goods, Wares and Merchandise, to
be taken up acording to the Entry and Certificat.

In the passing of Goods from Port to Goods Customable.
Port within this Nation, the Collectors and other Officers are to understand
by Goods Customable, All Wares and Commodities growing, wrought or manufactured
within this Nation; and all foreign Commodities and Merchandises, which have
been imported and remained in this Nation ( viz) by an English man above twelve
months, and by a Stranger above nine months, and the property altered, by the
Sale thereof made by the first Importer.

And by Goods prohibited to be exported, Goods prohibited outward.
Moneys, Bullion, Plate, Jewels, Woollen yarne, and Cloth undrest, Horses,
Mares, Oxen, Kine, Sheep, Copper, Brass, Bell metal, Pan metal, Gun
metal, shruffe, White Ashes, Butter, Cheese, Wood, and Corn (when it is above
the price limited by Statute) Also Leather, Hides, Tallow, and all things made
thereof, Skins of Sheep or

Pelts, and of Stag, Hind, Buck, Do or Fawn, Goat or Kidd, Wool, Worsted
Yarne Woollen Flock, Woollfells, Fullars Farth, and Clay of what kind soever.

It is further to be noted, That by Grocery and Saltery wares is meant
foreign Commodities only, which have been formerly brought from beyond the
Seas, and the duties paid Inwards, and that no Merchandise or manufactures, of
England or Wales, are to pass under those general names.

The Collectors and other Officers of the Customs, are likewise diligently to
observe and perform the Articles, Rules and directions annexed to the present
Book of Rates, and such others as are directed by any Ordinance of Parliament
published 16 De: 1647. or by a late Act made for the Raising and Levying of
Money, by way of Excise; or by any other Statute Act or Ordinance of
Parliament, now in force for or concerning the payment of the Subsidy of Tomage
and Poundage, or the importation or exportation of Goods prohibited.

FINIS.

