Divine SONGS and MEDITACIONS Composed By An Collins.

LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop. Anno Dom. 1653

To the Reader
Christian Reader,
I inform you, that by divine Providence, I have been restrained from bodily
employments, suting with my disposicion, which enforced me to a retired Course
of life; Wherein it pleased God to give me such inlargednesse of mind, and
activity of spirit, so that this seeming desolate condition, proved to me most
delightful: To be brief, I became affected to Poetry, insomuch that I
proceeded to practice the same; and though the helps I had therein were small,
yet the thing it self appeared unto me so amiable, as that it enflamed my
faculties, to put forth themselves, in a practice so pleasing.

Now the furtherances I had herein, was what I could gather (by the benifit of
hearing,) at first from profane Histories; which gave not that satisfactory
contentment, before mentioned, but it was the manifestacion of Divine Truth, or
rather the Truth it self, that redu^^^ my mind to (...) peaceful temper, and
spiritual calmnesse, taking up my thoughts for Theological employments.

Witness hereof, this Discourse, Songs and Meditacions, following; which I
have set forth (as I trust) for the ben^fit, and comfort of others, Chiefly for
those Christians who are of disconsolat Spirits, who may perceive herein, the
Faithfulness, Love, and Tender Compassionatnesse of God to his people, in
that according to his gracious Promise, He does not leave nor forsake them.
Heb. 13.5. But causes all things to work for their good. Romans 8.28. This I
doubt not, but most Saints in some measure, do experimentally know, therefore I
will not seek by argument, to prove a thing so perspicuous. And now (Courteous
Reader) I have delivered unto you, what I intended, only it remains that I
tell you, That with my Labors, you have my Prayers to God through Jesus
Christ; whose I am, and in him,

Yours, in all Christian affection AN COLLINS.

The Preface.
BEing through weakness to the house confined,
My mental powers seeming long to sleep,
were summond up, by want of wakeing mind
Their wonted course of exercise to keep,
And not to waste themselves in slumber deep;
Though no work can be so from error kept
But some against it boldly w^ll except:
Yet since it was my morning exercise
The fruit of intellectuals to vent,
In Songs or counterfets of Poesies,
And having therein found no small content,
To keep that course my thoughts are therefore bent,
And rather former works to vindicate
Than any new concepcion to relate.
Our glorious God his creatures weakness sees,
And therefore deals with them accordingly,
Giveing the means of knowledge by degrees,
Unfolding more and more the Mystery,
And opening the Seals successively, Rev. 6.

So of his goodness gives forth demonstracions,
To his Elect in diverse Dispensacions.
In legal wise he did himself express
To be the only Lord Omnipotent
A just avenger of all wickedness,
A jelous God in power emminent,
Which terror works, and pale astonishment;
Since plagues for sin are holden forth thereby,
But with no strength to crush inniquity.
Now with the Law the Gospel often appears,
But under vailes, perspicuous unto f^w
Who were as those which of good tidings hears,
Rejoyceing much at the report or show
Of that the Saints now by po^^essing know;
Often spoke the Prophets Evangelicall,
Whose words like kindly drops of rain did fall.
But when the plenerie of time was come
The springs of grace their pleasant streams out deald
Felicity did evidence on her some
Salvacion and the way thereto reveald,
Who wounded were in spirit, might be heald;
Here God declares the Beauties of his Face.
Great Love, rich Mercy, free Eternal Grace.
This time was when the Son of Righteousness
His Luster in the world began to spread,
Which more and more to his he does express
^n terms so large that they that run may read,
And to himself he does the weaker lead;
^^e to his bosum will his Lambs collect,
and ge^tly those that feeble are direct. Isa. 40.11

And so in them a life of grace instill
Where^y they shall be able to obey
All Gospel precepts su^ing with his will,
And that without regard of s^rvill pay,
But with free hearts, where Christ alone does sway
Causing the apprehensions of his love,
To gender love, which still does active prove.
Where Christ thus rules, I suppose remains
No heart that hankers after Nov^lities
Whose ground is but the Scum of f^othy brains
Perhaps extracted from old Heresies,
New formed with Glosses to deceive the eyes
Of those who like to Children, do incline
To every new device that seems to shine.
I am persuaded they that relish right,
The Dainties of Religion, Food divine,
Have thereby such a permanent delight,
And of best Treasures, such a lasting m^ne,
As that their hearts to change do not ^cline,
I therefore think their tastes of Truth is ill,
Who Truths profession quickly alter will.
I speak not this to manifest des^^ght
To true Religions growth or augmentacion,
Nor do J take offense of greater L^ght
Which brings probatum est or commendacion
From Truth it self, having thereto relacion,
But rather with the Saints I do rejoice,
When God appears to his in Gospel voice.
Now touching that I hasten to express
Concerning these, the offspring of my mind,
Who though they here appear in homly dress
And as they are my works, I do not find
But ranked with others, they may go behind,
Yet for their matter, I suppose they be
Not worthless quite, whilst they with Truth agree.
Indeed I grant that sounder judgments may
(Directed by a greater Light) declare
The ground of Truth more in a Gospel-way,
But who time past with present will compare
Shall find more mysteries unfolded are,
So that they may who have right informacion
More plainly show the pathway to Salvacion.
Yet this cannot prevayl to hinder me
From publishing those Truths I do intend,
As strong perfumes will not concealed be,
And who esteems the favors of a Friend,
So little, as in silence let them end,
Nor will I therefore only keep in thought,
But tell what God still for my Soul has wrought.
When Clouds of Melancholy over-cast
My heart, sustaining heaviness thereby,
But long that sad condition would not last
For soon the Spring of Light would blessedly
Send forth a beam, for helps discovery,
Then dark discomforts would give place to joy,
Which not the World could give or quite destroy.
So sorrow served but as springing rain
To ripen fruits, indowments of the mind,
Who thereby did abillitie attain
To send forth flowers, of so rare a kind,
Which wither not by force of ^un or VVinde:
Ret^ining virtue in their operacions,
Which are the matter o^ those Meditacions.
From whence if evil matter be extracted
It Is only by a ^^ider generation,
Whose natures are of vennom so compacted,
As that their touch occasions depravacion
Though lighting in the fragrantest plantacion:
Let such conceal the evil hence they pluck
And not disgorg themselves of what they suck.
So shall they not the humble sort offend
Who like the Be, by natures secret act
Convert to sweetness, fit for some good end
That which they from small things of worth extract,
Wisely supplying every place that lackt,
By helping to discover what was meant
Where they perceive there is a good intent.
So trusting that the only Sov'rain Power
Which in this work always assisted me,
Will still remain its firm defensive Tower,
From spite of enemies the same to free
And make it useful in some sort to be,
That Rock I trust on whom I do depend,
Will his and all their works for him defend.
The Discourse.
YOu that indeared are to piety,
And of a gracious disposicion are,
Delighting greatly in sincerity
As your respects to godly ones declare;
For whose society you only care:
Dain to survay her works that worthless seem,
To such as honnest meanings dis-esteem.
But those that in my love I have preferred
Before all creaturs in this world beside,
Me works, I hope, will never dis-regard,
Though some defects herein may be espide;
Which those that have their judgments rectifide:
Can but discern, yet not with scornful eye,
As their mild censures chiefly testify.
Unto the public view of every one
I did not purpose these my lines to send,
Which for my private use were made alone:
Or as I said, if any pious friend
Will once vouchsafe to read them to the end:
Let such conceive if error here they find,
It Was want of Art, not true intent of mind.
Some may desirous be to understand
What moved me, who un^kilfull am herein,
To meddle with, and thus to take in hand,
That which I cannot well, end or begin;
But such may first resolve themselves herein,
If they consider, it is not want of skill,
That's more blame worthy, than want of good will
1 Then know, I chiefly aim that this should be
Unto the praise of Gods most blessed name,
For by the mouths of sucking babes does he,
Reveal his power, and immortal fame; Psalm. 8.

Permitting Children to extall the same:
When those that were profound, and worldly wise
In ignominious sort did him despise.
2 Next in respect of that I have received
Is nothing to that some have, I do confess,
Yet he to whom one Tallent was bequeathed,
Was called to strict account, nevertheless;
As well as he that many did possess, Mat. 25.

From which I gather, they have no excuse,
Which of ability will make no use.
3 Moreover this is thirdly in respect
Of some near Kindred, who survive me may,
The which perhaps do better works neglect,
Yet this, they may be pleased to survay
Through willingness to hear what I could say,
Whereby they may be happily drawn to look,
And read the Scriptures touched in this book.
4 And lastly in regard of any one,
Who may by accident hereafter find,
This, though to them the Auther be unknown,
Yet seeing here, the image of her mind;
They may conjecture how she was inclined:
And further note, that God does Grace bestow,
Upon his servants, though he keeps them low.
Even in my Cradle did my Crosses breed,
And so grew up with me, unto this day,
Whereof variety of Cares proceed,
Which of my self, I never could alay,
Nor yet their multiplying brood destray,
For one distemper could no sooner die,
But many others would his room supply,
Yea like the messengers of Job, they have,
One come; before another can be gone,
Al^ mocions of delight were soon defast,
Finding no matter for to feed upon,
They quickly were disperced every one,
Whereat my mind it self, would much torment,
Upon the rack of ^estless discontent.
The summers day, though cheerful in it self,
Was wearisom, and tedious, unto me,
As those that comfort lack, content or health,
To credit this may soon'st persuaded be,
For by experience truth hereof they see.
Now if the summers day, cause no delight.
How irksome think you was the winters night.
'Twere to no end, but altogether vain,
My several crosses namely to express,
To rub the scar would but increase the pain,
And words of pity would no grief release,
But rather aggrevate my heaviness,
Who ever chose my crosses to conseale
Till to my grief they would themselves reveal
So (to be brief) I spent my infantcy,
And part of freshe^t years, as has been said
Partaking then of nothing cheerfully
Being through f^ailty apt to be afraid,
And likely still distempered or di^ma^d,
Through present se^ce of some calamity,
Or preconceipt of future m^sery.
But as the longest w^nter has an end
So did this fruitless disco^t^nt e^^^re,
And God in mercy ^me refresh^ng ^end,
whereby I learned h ^ g^odnesse to admire,
And also larger b^essings to desire;
For those that on^e, ^a^e (...) grace ^ndeed,
Will thirst for more and ^^a^e it till they ^peed.
But that I may proceed Me^^ ^all,
When first ^^e ^e^t e^^e w^n^e^ ngs o^ my m^nde,
Began to ^et^e and ^e ^^^e with a^l
No more to be (...) with every wind
It such a p^e^^ng exerci^e did find,
Which was (...) Wo^^^^ day,
The ^e^ ^e o^ Hea^e^ng shou d ^o it ^onvay.
But liveing where profaneness did abound,
Where little goodness might be seen or heard;
Those consolations, could be but unsound
Having to godliness no great regard:
Because that of the means I was debard,
Through ignorance of better exercise
I then delighted pleasant histories
Whereof the most part were but feigned I knew
Which not-with-standing I no whit despised,
Imagining although they were not true,
They were convenient being moralized;
Such vanities I then too highly prised:
But when profane discourses pleased me best
Obscenities I allwaies did detest.
But all this while, the sumes of vanities
Did interpose between my souls week sight,
And heavenly bliss, devine felicities;
Until that morning starr so matchless bright
The Sun of righteousness reveald his light
Unto my soul, which sweet refreshings brings,
Because he coms with healing in his wings,
Whose blessed beams my mind eradiates
And makes it sensible of piety, Mal 4 2

And so by consequence communicates
Celestial health to every faculty:
Expeling palpable obscurity;
Which made my soul incapable of grace,
Which now she much desires for to embrace.
Perceiving well that nothing can afford
Her either final rest, or full content,
But saveing Graces, and Gods holy word,
Which is a means those Graces to augment;
With Prayer, and the blessed Sacrament:
Which means with reverence my soul affects
And former pleasing vanities rejects.
Together with unnecesary grief,
Whose ill effects can hardly be expressed,
For certainly it argues unbeleife
Which hinders many from eternal rest,
who do not seek in time to be redrest; Heb. 3.19

Therefore I would establish inward peace,
How-ever out-ward crosses do increase.
If cross disgrace or dismal accident,
Indignity or loss, befalls me,
Immediately distempers to prevent,
I called to mind how all things orderd be,
Appointed, and disposed, as we see.
By Gods most gracious providence, which is,
I am persuaded, for the good of his.
Yet am I not so firm I must confess
But many times discomforts will intru'd,
Which often prevails to hinder quietness,
And by that means, some sorrows are re^^'d:
Which hope will help me quickly to excl^'d*
So though distress contin^ for a night, Psalm. 30.^

Yet joy returns by the morning light.
Wi^h confidence these favors will increase
My soul has recolected all her powers,
To praise the auther of this blissfull peace,
Which no untimely cross event devouers;
So permanent are the celestial Flowers:
Those graces which are ever converse^t,
Where holiness combinds with true content.
O! what trancendant ravishing delights
What bliss unspeakable they do po^esse,
Whose merth to holy praises them excites,
And cheers them to go on, in godliness,
The very quintisence of happiness,
As is attainable, or may be had
In this life present, which were elce but bad.
There is a kind of counterset content,
VVherwith some are deceivd, it is to be feared,
Who think they need not sorrow, or lament,
Being to sensual ple^sures so indeard;
Whose minds are stupid, and their concience ceard
Elce might th y see all Ea^thly delectacion,
To be but vanity, and hearts vexacion. Eccl. 2.

To lightning, carnal merth we may compare,
For as a flash it hastes and soon is gone,
Foretelling of a Thunder clap of care,
It also blastes the hear^ it lights on;
Makes it to goodness, senceless as a ston;
Disabling every part, and ^a^ulty,
Of soul and body unto piety.
But sacred joy i^ like the Suns clear light,
Which may with clouds, be sometimes overcast,
Ye breaks it forth anon, and shine^ more bright,
Whose lively force continually does last;
And shows most Orient, when a storm is past:
So true delight may be eclipsed we see,
But quite extingu^sht, can it never be.
So now I will go on with my Discourse,
When knowledge, plefant to my soul became,
Unto Gods word, I often had recour^e,
Being informed rightly that the same;
Would be as fuel to enc eace the fl me
Of holy Zeal, which must with knowledge dwell,
For without other, neither can do well, Romans 10

Then sought I carefully to understand,
The grounds of true Religon, which impart
Divine Discreshion, which goes far beyand,
All civil pol^cy or humane Art;
VV^ich sacred principles I got by heart:
Which much enabled me to appreh nd,
The e^ce of that whereto I shall attend.
First touching God, there is one God I know,
who has his being of himself alone, Romans 1.20.

The fou^ta^n whence al ^ream of goodness flow
But body p^^^s, or passions has be none: Ia. 1 7

And such Diety ^e^e is but one; 1 Cor. 8.4.

Eternal, Infini^e, ^^^ne i^ ee, 1 John. 5.7.

One p^^^ct Essen^^ (...) Persons Three.
The first whereof for order, is the Father,
The Glorious Fountain of the Trinity,
Having his being, nor beginning neither
Of no one but himself, undoubtedly;
Begets his Son, from all eternity,
And with his Son, the Holy Ghost forth sends
From ever-lasting which for aye extends.
The Son, the second Glorious person is,
For Power, Substance, and Eternity,
Alone as is the Father, who it is,
Of whom he has his being, too, only;
Yea the whole being of his Father, by
A Sacred and Eternal Genneracion,
A mistrey past all imaginacion. Jsaiah. 53.8

In Trinity the Holy Ghost is third,
Proceeding and so sent forth equally, John. 15.7.

Both from the father and the son, or word, John. 1.1

Being of their Power, Substance, Magisty;
And thus distinguished are the Trinity:
By whom were all things made, that ever were,
And by whose Providence preserved are.
What has been said of God shall now suffice,
Of whom I frame no Image in my mind,
But I conceive him by his properties,
He is incomprehensible I find;
Filling all places, in no place confind;
I will therefore his wondrous works admire,
Not vainly after secret things inquire.
Next unto God, my self I sought to know,
A thing not so facile, as some suppose,
But that I may the faster forward go,
I leave to speak, what may be said of those,
And haste to that I purpose to disclose:
Which being well considered may convert,
To lowest thoughts, the proudest haughty heart.
Touching my self and others I conceive,
That all men are by nature dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.1.

And Satan's slaves; not able to receive,
The things of God, which brings true comfort in:
Good accions still they fail in managing;
But apt they are to every vanity,
As vowed servants to inniquity.
Do but observe the carnallist how he
Neglects all calings, fit to be professed,
Waits all occasions, ill implyd to be,
Consumes his wealth, deprives himself of rest;
To please that darling sin that likes him best:
Judge what a hellish bondage he is in,
That Is Satan's slave, and servant unto sin;
As all men in the state of nature be,
And have been ever since man's woeful fall,
Who was created first, from bondage free,
Until by sin he thrust himself in thrall;
By whose transgression we were stained all,
Not only all men but all parts of man,
Corrupted was: since sin to reign began.
The Soul who did her makers Image bear,
Which made her amiable fair and bright,
Right Orient and illustrious to appear,
To his omniscient eye and pure sight,
Who does the inward Purity delight,
Lost all her beauty, once so excellent,
As soon as unto sin she did consent.
The eye of understanding was so bleared,
That no spiritual thing it could behold,
The will corrupted, and the concience ceared,
And all the affections were to goodness cold,
But hot to evil, not to be contrould;
The members of the body then proceeds
As instruments to execute bad deeds.
But see what was the consequence of this,
The curse of God which did the fault ensue,
Thus man by sin deprived was of b^iss,
The thoughts hereof might cause us to eschew
That bitter root whence all our sorrows grew:
Sickness of body, and distress of mind,
With all afflictions laid upon mankind.
Whether in body goods or name it be,
And which is wo^c^, the sou^es perplexity,
Whose concience is awake, from deadness free
When she considers what felicity,
She has exchanged for endless misery;
Can but torment her self with bootlesse care,
Fore-see-ing that her pains eternal are.
If this be so, the vilest liveing creature
Is in a better case then man; for why?
When this life ends with such by course of nature,
There with is ended all his misery;
But man tormented is eternally;
Twere so, but that our God we gracious find,
Who sent a Savior to restore mankind.
The second person of the Trinity, John. 1.1

The only Son of God omnipotent,
Who being God from all eternity,
To take our nature freely did assent, Heb. 2.16.

With all afflictons thereto insident:
In all things, like to other men was he,
Save that from sins he still remained free.
So that two whole and perfect natures were,
In the same person joined really.
And neither of them both, confounded are,
Nor does the Humane of it self rely;
But it subsisteth in the Deity,
Nor can these natures separated be,
Both perfect God, and perfect man was he.
This much touching our Saviors person; Now,
His Offices we ought to know likewise,
And what he has performd for us, and how
He freed us from the foresaid miseries,
And how Gods dreadful wrath he satisfies;
His Offices shall briefly named be,
A Priest, a Prophet, and a King, is he.
A Priest, for that he has for man's transgression
Full satisfaction made to God the father, Heb. 7.15.

And likewise makes continual intercession
For those who to his fould he means to gather;
Or to eternal heavenly mancions, rather:
The means whereby Gods wrath he satisfies,
Was his obedience and his sacrifice.
The Law of God he perfectly fulfild,
With full obedience and integrity,
As God had pre-ordained, then did he yield
A painful ignominious death to die,
The wrath of God appeased was thereby,
Which in full measure came upon him then,
Even what was due unto the sins of men.
A Prophet to instruct his Church he is,
Which does him honor by sinceare profession,
His Spirit qualifies the hearts of his,
And makes them pliable to such profession,
His word does take when grace shall have possession,
For by the word no good efect is wrought
But where the heart is by Gods spirit taught.
Our Savior is a King undoubtedly,
Although he seems to have no Kingdoms here,
Yet in their hearts he means to Glorify,
A Kingdom he erects of grace, and there
He reigns, and by his spirit rule does bear,
But here appears his machlesse dignity
He King of Glory is Eternally.
For when he by his death had finished
The work of our redemcion, freed from pains,
He took his body that before was dead,
With all that to a perfect man pertaines;
With which he gloriously ascends and reigns:
At the right hand of God he does remain
Until to Judgment he returns again.
Christ's sufferings are sufficient for to free,
All men from woe and endless misery, 2 These. 3.2

But all men have not faith, and therefore be,
Unlikely to have benefit thereby,
For it is Faith with which we must apply,
The merrits of our blessed Redeemer
And to our selves each in particular.
Faith is a Grace which does the soul refine,
Wrought by the Holy Ghost in contrite hearts,
And grounded on Gods Promises divine,
Things superexcellent this same imparts,
To those that have it planted in their hearts:
But ere this faith is wrought, the heart must be,
Made capable of it, in some degree.
First God does take the hammer of his Law,
And breaks the heart which he for Grace will fit^
Then the seduced soul is brought in aw,
And does immediately it self submitt,
When sight of sin, and sorrowing for it,
Has wrought humility, a virtue rare
Which truly does the soul for Grace prepare.
The Law of God is most exact and pure
Requireing of us perfect holiness, Psalm. 19.1.

To which is life eternal pr^mis'd sure,
But curses unto them that it transgress,
Whether by frailty or by wilfulness;
Though none but Christ, and Adam ere his fall
Could keep this Law, yet it may profit all.
For here we may perceive how much we fail,
VVithall what danger we incur thereby,
Then if we can our own de^ects bewail,
We may for sucour to our Sa^iour fly,
Whose Righteousness will all our wants supply:
Then here are Rules set down for Gods Elect
Whereby they will their course of life direct.
This Law by Gods most skillful Hand was wrote,
And placed in two Tables orderly,
Showing what is to be done, and what is not;
Withal what good or evil coms thereby,
In Ten Commandments so distinctly,
Wherewith as with a Touch stone try we may,
How we offend our God, or him obey.
1 They sin against the first who think or say,
As does the fool, there is no God at all,
So they that through profaneness disobay,
And want of knowledge is a breach not small,
Who loves or fears a creature most of all,
And puts trust therein and seeks there to
Makes that their God, and so break this they do.
2 The second violated is by those
That Images erect, or them adore,
By such also who in devocion goes
To Saint or Angel, succor to implore,
Who set by superstisious Relics store,
And worship God after men's fantasies,
And not as he commands, breaks this likewise
3 When those that seem religious prove profane
Gods name is much dishonored thereby;
Even so likewise their error is the same,
Who use his word, or works, or Titles high,
For evil ends, or elce unreverently:
By witchcraft, cursing, swearing, blasphemy,
This violated is undoubtedly.
4 Whosoever by preparation does not fit
Himself to keep the Sabbath, breaks the same,
As those that holy exercise omit,
Or come thereto only for fear of blame,
Nor have delight or profit by the same;
So it is broke by carnal recreations,
By worldly works, by speech, or cogitacions.
5 When that inferiors disobedient are,
Ungrateful, stubborn, saucy, impudent,
Failing in reverence, love, respective care,
To their superiors, hating Government,
Such grossly break this Fifth Commandment:
As those superiors whose bad Discipline
Or ill example, makes inferiors sin.
6 This is transgrest by murder, or debate,
By being mindful of revenge likewise,
By sinful anger, envy, malice, hare;
By vexing words, and scornful mockeries,
Which are occasions of e^treamities,
Distress of mind, heart-griefe, perplexity,
And life has often prejudice thereby,
7 All thoughts impure this Commandment breaks,
So lewd pastimes, light gesture, wanton looks,
Wearing apparel contrary to Sex,
Ill company, vain ^alk, lacivious books,
An all that may en^ice like baits or hooks,
To Fornication or Adultery,
Which breaks this Precept most apparently.
8 This is transgrest by any kind of stealing,
By coveting our neighbors goods also,
By fraud oppression, or deceitfu^l dealing,
By not disposing well of that we ow,
Refusing hone^t works to undergo,
By being not content with our estate,
Not helping those we should commiserate.
9 This violated is by false witness bearing,
Likewise by any Lie we bre^k the ^ame,
By raiseing false reports, or gladly hearing
Ill of our nighbour, touching his good name,
By not maintaining his deserved fame,
By speaking truth of him maliciously
And not exhorting him in secrecy.
10 This is transgrest by lusts, and mocions vain
Though we thereto give no consent at all, To. 7.7

As the rebellion of the flesh, or stain
And blot, we have by sin Original,
Corrupsion of our nature we it call;
From which because that no one can be free,
Then all transgressors of the Law must be.
Who by the morrall Law beholds his sin
And sees withal there is left him no defense,
To sorrow therefore now he does begin,
His Conscience being touched with lively sense
Of Gods displeasure for his great offense,
Dispairing of salvation, in respect
Of ought that by himself he can effect.
The curse contained in this exquiset Law,
Does work this sorrow so effectually,
For truly he alone is brought in aw,
Whose Conscience is informed of this hereby;
Who breaks but one commandment only
In all his life, and that in coggitacion,
Is not-with-standing subject to damnacion.
Thus when the heart is fitted and prepared,
The seeds of Faith foth-with are cast therein,
Which in their orders briefly are declard:
The first is when one wearied under sin,
To feel the wiaght thereof does now begin
And thereupon acknowledges with speed
That of a Savior much he stands in need;
The second is a vehement desire,
Or ardent longing to participate
Of Christ, and eke his benifits entire
And nothing else can this desire abate,
Consume o^ limit, quench or mittigate:
As does the Heart the water brook desire,
So humble Souls a Savior does require.
The third i^ flying to the Throne of grace,
Even from the sentence of the Law so strict,
Which does profane security deface,
Beca^se that thereby the Conscience is prict,
Which does the humble man for good afflict
By showing such the danger of their case,
And for a ever, sending them to grace.
Now this is done by fervent supplications,
By constant prayer, most prevailing known,
^xprest with hearty strong ejacculacions,
For Gods especial grace in him alone,
In the forgiveness of his sins each one;
And in his prayer, persevear will he
Vnti^l the thing peticion'd, granted be.
Then God, as he has promised, will prove
Propicious to the sinner penitent,
And let him feel the assurance of his Love,
His Favor, Grace, and Mercy Excellent
The which in Christ, appears most emminent:
A liv^ly Faith this full assurance is,
Wr^^^ (...) by Gods Spirit, in the hearts of his.
But there are diverse measures or degrees
Of Saving Faith, the least whereof is this,
When he that has a humble Spirit sees
He cannot feel, his Faith so little is,
As yet the full assurance, inward bliss,
Of the forgiveness of his sins so free,
Yet pardonable finds them to be.
And therefore prays they may be pardoned,
And with his heart the same of God requires,
Recals himself, as formerly misled,
Giveing no rest unto his large desires,
His Soul it faints not, nor his Spirit tires,
Although he be delayed yet still he prays,
On God he waits, and for an answer stays.
That such a man has Faith it does appear
For these desires do plainly testify,
He has the Spirit of his Savior dear,
For it is his special work or property,
To stir up longings after purity:
Now where his Spirit is there Christ resides,
And where Christ dwells is true Faith though weak abides
Of saveing Faith the largest quantity,
Is when a man comes on in Faith until,
He finds the full assurance happily
Of Gods free mercy, favor, and good will,
To him in Christ, which does his joy fulfill:
Finding he has obtained free remission,
And that he is safe in Gods divine tuision.
This full assurance of his grace and love,
The Lord vouchsafes his servants true who he,
Does for their inward sanctity approve,
Whose outward doeings also righteous be,
For such alone the evidence may see,
Of his inheritance, true happiness,
Which for Christ's merits sake they shall possess.
A Christian in his insantcy in grace
Finds not this full assurance usually,
Until he has been practiced for a space
By sound Repentance with Sincerity:
And finds Gods Love to him a^undantly
Then shall his soul this full persuasion see,
Which is the strength of Faith or highest degree.
By Faith in Christ much profit we do gain,
For thereby only are we justifide,
At peace with God free from eternal pain,
And thereby only are we sanctifide,
Where faith is, by those friuts, it may be tried:
True faith being by friuts discovered
A barren faith must deeds be false and dead.
Now to be justifide, is to be freed,
From gilt and punishment of sin likewise,
To be accepted as for just indeed,
With God, whose grace it is that justifies;
And not our works, as vainly some surmise:
But that we may still orderly proceed,
It follows next how we from sin are freed.
The sins of those that God will justify,
Were by Chri^^s sufferings so abolished.
As that they cannot hurt them finally,
Were they as Scarlet or the Crimson ^ed
They shall be w^ite as Snow and cl^ared, Esaias 16.16

Even by Christ's Blood, the w to free was sp n^
The faithful, from deserved punish^ent.
Now comes to b^ considered how they may
Wi^h God, for Perfect just, accepted be,
Who of them-selves by nature (truth to say)
Are in no part from sins corruption free,
How such are taken for just, here may we see,
Christ's righteousness is theirs, by imp^^^cion,
And so esteemed by gracious acc^p^acion.
The true believers benifits are great,
Wh ch they by beig just^fi^^ po^^esse
For such shall stand be ore Gods judgment seat,
As worthy of Eterna^l Happiness,
Even by the merits of Christ's Righte^usnesse,
For of themselves, they cannot merit ought,
Who are not able to think one good thought.
Then far from doing any work whereby
They might deserve Salvation on their part,
For God whose only perfect purity,
Will f^nd in our best works no true disart,
But rather matter of our endless smart:
For in Christ's Blood the Saints which are most dear
Must wash their Robes before they can be clear.
Though by good works we do not gain Salvacion
Yet these good Duties that our God requires,
We must perform in thi^ our conversacion,
With all our might, endeavors, and desires,
Before this short uncertain time expires,
And at perfection must we allwaies aim,
Though in this life we reach not to the same.
For he that by his Faith is justifide,
It follows also necessarily,
That such by Faith are likewise Sanctifide,
Corrupcion of our nature is thereby
Disabled so, as that inniqu^ty
No longer rules, being by grace subdude,
Whereby the heart to goodness is renude.
Corrupcion of our nature purged is,
By virtue of Christ's Precious Blood only
Which when by Saving Faith applied is,
Serves as a corrasive to mortify
And kill the power of inniquity,
Whence it is that those who Sanctified be,
From sins dominion, happily are free.
The other part of true Sanctificacion,
Is life or quickenning to holiness,
And may therefore be called re^ovacion,
Like a Restorative it does redress,
And him revive, that is dead in trespass;
It Is by the power of Christ's Resurrection,
That we are raised from sin to such perfection.
Sanctificacion must be then entire,
Not for the present, perfect in degree,
Yet in respect of parts and true desire,
Each part and power Sanctified must be,
Although no part from all Corruption's free;
Yet every power must with goodness suit,
Though in this life no part be absolute,
Like as a Child new born without defect,
A perfect man he may be said to be,
Because his body's perfect, in respect
Of parts, though not in stature or degree
Of grouth, until of perfect age he be;
So have the faithful imperfections some,
Till to a perfect age in Christ they come.
The graces of the Spirit will appear,
And spring up in his heart that's Sanctifide,
And these the fruits of Righteousness will bear
Which in his conversacion are discride,
These graces has he that is Sanctifide,
A detestacion of inniquity,
And love to goodness, Zeal and Purity,
Whereof Repentance blessedly proceeds,
Which is endeavor, purpose or intent
To leave all sin which causefull sorrows breeds
And not to give allowance or consent
To break Gods Law, or least Command^ment:
But ever walk exactly there-unto,
Though to the flesh it seems too much to do.
So that continual combats will arise,
Between Gods image, on the soul renewde,
And Satan's image, greatest contraries
Which ever seek each other to exclude,
Though in the end the worst shall be subdude:
Yet in this life it will in no wise yield;
Against whose force, Faith is the only shield.
Now when a man ha^h got the victory,
In such a conflict or extreme temptacion
He sees Gods love to him abundantly,
By reason of his special conservacion,
Which of his favou^ is a demonstracion;
Now this increases peace of conscience most
Together with joy in the Holy Ghost.
But if the wicked do so far prevail,
By Gods perm^ssion by some provocacion
To overcome the faithful being frail,
And subject to be snared with temptacion
When not suspecting such abominacion;
But this their fall i^ through infirmity
Who shall not be forsaken utterly.
For soon a Godly sorrow will arise
And overflow the ^eart of such a one,
Which blessedly the same so mollifies,
That it relents for hav^ing so mis-gone
Which godly grief or sorrow is all one
For having so displeased God by sin,
Who has to him a loveing Father been.
Yea he for this abhors himself as vile
Acknowledging his execrable case,
Till he be reconsil'd to God, that while
Himself by lowest thoughts he does abase,
As far unworthy to find any grace;
Yet cries to God in this humiliacion
For the return of wonted consolacion.
And when he has attained recovery,
The breach without delay he fortifies
With stronger resolucion manfully,
And with a Watch impregnable likewise,
Against assaults of this his enemies,
And all assaies of their re-entery
Through which so many perish finally.
This much touching the ground of Truth I hold,
Which since at first they rectified my mind,
I will not cast them off, as worn and old,
Nor will be so alone to them confind
As not admit of things of higher kind;
But will as God shall light dispense to me,
(By aid divine) walk up to each degree.
A Song expressing their happiness who have Communion with Christ.
WHen scorched with distracting care,
My mind finds out a shade
Which fruitless Trees, false fear, despair
And melancoly made,
Where neither bird did sing
Nor fragrant flowers spring,
Nor any plant of use:
No sound of happiness.
Had there at all ingresse,
Such comforts to produce,
But Sorrow there frequents,
The Nurce of Discontents,
And Murmering her Maid
Whose harsh unpleasant noise
All mental fruits destroys
Whereby delight's convayd.
Whereof my judgment being certifide
My mind from thence did move,
For her concepcion so to provide,
That it might not abortive prove,
Which fruit to signify
It was conceaved by
Most true intelligence
Of this sweet truth divine
Who formed thee is thine, Esaias. 54.5.

Whence sprang this inference;
He too, that's Lord of all
Will thee beloved call,
Though all else prove unkind;
Then cheerful may I sing
Since I enjoy the Sp ing,
Though Sesterns dry I find.
For in our Union with the Lord alone,
Consists our happiness.
Certainly such who are with Christ at one
He leaves not comfortless,
But come to them he will
Their Souls with joy to fill,
And them to Fortify
Their works to undergo
And bear their Cross also,
With much alacrity:
Who his assisting grace
Do feelingly embrace,
With confidence may say,
Through Christ that strengthens me
No thing so hard I see
But what perform I may. Phil 4.14

But when the Soul no help can see
Through sins interposicion,
Then quite forlorn that while is she,
Bewailling her condition;
In which deplored case
Now such a Soul has space,
To think how she delayed
Her Savior to admit
Who should to her for it,
And to this purpose said,
Open to me my Love,
My Sister, and my Dove, Can. 5.

My Locks with dew wet are
Yet she remissive grew,
Till he himself withdrew
Before she was aware.
But tasting once how sweet he is,
And smelling his perfumes,
Long can she not his presence miss,
But grief her strainth consumes:
For when he visits one
He comes not alone,
But brings abundant grace
True Light, and Holiness
And Spirit to express
Ones wants in every case;
For as he wisdom is,
So is he unto his
Wisdom and Purity, 1 Cor. 1.30

Which when he seems to hide,
The ^oul missing her guide,
Must needs confused lie.
Then let them know, that would enjoy
The firm fruition,
Of his Sweet presence, he will stay
With single hearts alone,
Who [^ u^^] their former mate,
Do qui^e ext^rm^nate:
With all things tha^ defi^e
They that are Christ's, truly,
The Flesh do Crucify
With its affections vile
Then grounds of truth are sought
New Principles are wrought
Of gra^e and holiness, Gal. 5.

Which plantings of the heart
Will spring in every part,
And so it self express.
Then shall the Soul like morning bright
Unto her Lord appear, Can. 6.1^

And as the Moon when full of Light
So fair is she and clear,
With that ^nherent grace
Tha s darted from the Face
Of Christ, that Sun divine,
Which has a pu^ging power
Corruption to devour,
And Conscience to refine;
Per ection thu^ begun
As pure as the Sun,
The Soul shall be likewise
With that great Blessedness,
Imputed Righteoussenesse
Which freely Justifies.
They that are thus complete with Grace
And know that they are so,
For Glory must set Sail apace
Whilst wind does fitly blow,
Now is the tide of Love.
Now does the Angel move;
If that there be defect
That Soul which sin does wound,
Here now is healing sound,
If she no time neglect;
To whom shall be reveald
What erst has been conceald,
When brought unto that Light,
Which in the Soul does shine
When he that's most divine,
Declares his presence bright.
Then he will his beloved show
The reason wherefore she
Is seated in a place so low,
Not from all troubles free;
And wherefore they do thrive
That wicked works contrive;
Christ tells his also
For who as friends he takes
He of his Council makes,
And they shall secrets know: John 15.15

Such need not pine with cares
Seeing all things are theirs,
If they are Christ's indeed; Cor. 3.21.

Therefore let such confess
They are not comfortless,
Nor left in time of Need.
A Song showing the Mercies of God to his people, by interlacing cordial
Comforts with fatherly Chastisments.
AS in the time of Winter
The Earth does fruitless and barren lie,
Till the Sun his course does run
Through Aries, Taurus, Gemini;
Then he repayres what Cold did decay,
Drawing superfluous moistures away,
And by his luster, together with showers,
The Earth becoms fruitful and pleasant with flowers
That what in winter seemed dead.
There by the Sun is life discovered.
So though that in the Winter
Of sharp Afflictions, fruits seem to die,
And for that space, the life of Grace
Remains in the Root only;
Yet when the Son of Righteousness clear
Shall make Summer with us, our spirits to cheer,
Warming our hearts with the sense of his favor,
Then must our flowers of piety favor,
And then the fruits of righteousness
We to the glory of God must express.
And as when Nigh^ (...) pa^^ed,
The Sun ascending our Hemisphear,
Ill fumes devouers, and opes the powers
Which in our bodies are, and there
He draws out the spirits of moving and sense
As from the center, to the circumference;
So that the exterior parts are delighted,
And unto motion and action excited,
And hence it is that with more delight
We undergo labor by day then by night.
So though a Night of Sorrows
May stay proceedings in piety
Yet shall our light like morning bright
Arise out of obscurity,
Then when the Sun that never declines
Shall open the faculties of our minds,
Stirring up in them that spiritual mocion
Whereby we make toward God with devocion
When kindled by his influence
Our Sacrifice is as pleasing incense.
Now when we feel Gods favor
And the communion with him we have,
Alone we may admit of joy
As having found what most we crave,
Store must we gather while such gleams do last
Against our trials sharp winterly blasts
So dispairacion shall swallow us never,
Who know where God once loves, there he loves ever
Though sense of it often wanting is
Yet still Gods mercies continue with his.
So soon as we discover
Our souls benumbed in such a case,
We may not stay, without delay
W must approach the Throne of Grace,
First taking words to our selves to declare
How dead to goodness by nature we are,
Then seeking by him who for us did merit
To be enliv'd by his quickening Spirit,
Whose flame does light our Spark of Grace,
Whereby we may behold his pleased face.
From whencc come beams of comfort,
The chiefest matter of true Content,
Who taste and see, how sweet they be,
Perceive they are most excellent,
Being a glimce of his presence so bright,
Who dwells in unapproachable light:
Whosoever has happily thi^ mercy attained,
Earnest of blessedness endless has gained,
Where happiness does not decay
There Spring is eternal, and endless is day.
A Song declaring that a Christian may find true Love only where true Grace is.
NO Knot of Friendship long can hold
Save that which Grace has tied,
For other causes prove but cold
When their effects are tried;
For God who loves unity
Does cause the only union,
Which makes them of one Family
Of one mind and communion.
Commocions will be in that place,
Where are such contraries,
As is inniquity and grace,
The greatest enemies,
Whom sin does rule she does command
To hold stiff opposicion
Against grace and all the faithful band
Which are in her tuision.
This is the cause of home debates,
And much domestic woes,
That one may find his household mates
To be his greatest foes,
That with the Wolf the Lamb may bide
As free from molestacion,
As Saints with sinners, who reside
In the same habitacion.
By reason of the Enmity
Between the woman's Seed
And man's infernal enemy,
The Serpent and his breed,
The link of consanguinity
Could hold true freindship never,
Neither has near affinity
United friends for ever.
For scoffing Ishmael will scorn
His only true born brother:
Rebeckahs sonns together born
Contend with one another,
No bond of nature is so strong
To cause their hearts to tarry
In unity, who do belong
To masters so contrary.
The wicked ordinarily
Gods dearest children hate,
And therefore seek (though groundlesly)
Their credits to abate,
And though their words and works do show
No color of offenses
Yet are their hearts most (they trow)
For all their good pretenses.
And those that strongest grace attain,
Whereby sin is vanquished,
By Satan and his cursed train
Are most contraried;
Because by such the Serpent feels,
His head to be most bruised,
He turns and catches at their heels,
By whom he is so used.
His agents he does instigate,
To vex, oppose, and fret,
To slander and calumniate,
Those that have escaped his net,
Who servants are so diligent,
That like to Kain their father
They whose works are most excellent
They mischief will the rather.
Yet there are of the graceless crew
Who for some private ends
Have sided with prefessors true
As truly pious friends,
But to the times of worldly peace
Their friendship was confined.
Which when some crosses caused to cease
The thread of league untwined.
Such friends unto the Swallow may
Be fitly likened,
Who all the pleasant Summer stay
But are in Winter fled:
They cannot 'bide their friend to see,
In any kind of trouble,
So pittyfull (forsooth) they be
That have the art to double.
Such will be any thing for one
Who has of nothing need,
Their freindship stands in word alone,
And none at all in deed,
How open mouthed so e're they are,
They be as closely handed,
Who will (they know) their service spare,
They Are his to be commanded.
Therefore let no true hearted one
Releife at need expect,
From opposits to virtue known,
Who can him not afect:
For his internal ornaments,
Will ever lovely make him
Though all things pleasing outward sense
Should utterly forsake him.
In choice of Friends let such therefore
Prefer the godly wise,
To whom he may impart the store
That in his bosom lies:
And let him not perniciously
Communicate his favors,
To all alike indifferently,
Which shows a mind that wavers.
Gods children to each other should
Most open hearted be;
Who by the same precepts are ruled,
And in one Faith agree,
Who shall in true felicity,
Where nothing shall offend them
Together dwell eternally,
To which I do commend them.
A Song demonstrating The vanities of Earthly things.
SHall Sadness persuade me never to sing
But leave unto Sirens that excellent thing,
No that may not be, for truly I find,
The sanguin complexion to mirth is inclined.
Moreover, they may who righteousness love,
Be soberly merry, and sorrows remove,
They only have right to rejoicing allwaies
Whose joy may be mixed with prayer and praise.
Wherefore rejoices the epicure?
As though his fadeing delights would endure,
Whereas they are ended, as soon as begun,
For all things are vanity under the Sun.
Riches and Honor, Fame and Promocion,
Idols, to whom the most do their devocion;
How fadeing they are, I need not to show,
For this by experience, too many do know.
They that delight in costly attire,
If they can compass the things they desire,
Have only obtained, what sin first procured,
And many to folly are thereby alured.
Learning is sure an excellent thing,
From whence all Arts and Sciences spring,
Yet is it not from vanity free,
For many great Scholars profane often be.
Whosoever has studied Geometry,
Or gained experience in Geography,
By tedious labor much knowledge may gain,
Yet in the conclusion, he will find all is vain.
He that has studied Astronomy,
Though his meditacion ascend to the Sky
He may mis of heaven and heavenly blis,
If that he can practice no studdy but this,
But they that delight in Divinity,
And to be exquisit in Theology,
Much heavenly comfort in this life may gain,
And when it is ended their joys shall remain.
What should I speak more of vanities,
To use many words when few may suffice,
It argues folly, therefore I have don,
Concluding, all is vanity under the Sun.
A Song manifesting The Saints eternal Happiness
SOund is the Mind
Which does that Hope possess
Whose object is Eternal joy
Or Heavens Happiness;
Such healthful hearts
Their spirits do sustain,
In thinking on the Rest which for
Gods peeple does remain,
A Treasure inaccessible,
Or Everlasting Life,
A blessed State which never shall
be cumbered with strife
Salvacion
With endless Glory clear, Heb. 4.6
2 Timothy 2.10

And each good thing to be desired
Are in their Fountain there;
Flowers are here,
Together with the weeds
Exposed to all kind of storms,
Which much confusion breeds:
Some for weakness are dismayed,
And some are comfortless,
because of some defect of sense,
Or want of comeliness.
Grant some may have
Proporcion so complete,
That correspondency o^ parts
Declares Perfections seat
Yet doub les ^uch
Then bu^then have also
By reason of their travel which
They needs must undergo,
For in every calling is
A tedious weariness
Which whosoever fol^owe^ carefully
Is driven to confess
Further suppose
One might be freed from all
Afflictions which external are,
Or crosses corporal
Yet if the soul
Be sencible of sin
It cannot be but such will have
Enough to do within:
For to Preserve the heart and ways
From being over grown
With fruits of that contagious seed
That Is in our nature sown.
Doubting some times
The Soul with anguish tires,
Who must anon encounter with
inordinate desires:
Lust often prevails,
And then the consequence,
Will be a great ecclips of grace,
And loss of comfort sense,
In striving to ^ecover peace,
The soul is often oppressed.
As he that is conscious of his sin,
Has here but little rest.
From all those woes
And many more that be,
T e Sa^nt that finished has his course
Shall be for ever free,
And likewise have
For ever to posesse
A most exquisit Diadem,
The Crown of righteousness, 2. Tim. 4.8.

Of that divine inheritance
Which fades not away, 1. Pet. 1.5.

They shall be really posest,
And ever it enj y.
Bodies which here
Are matter thick and gross,
Attaining to thi^ happiness,
Are freed from their dross:
And as the Sunn
Appears in brightest Sky, Mat. 13.43.

So every body glorified
Shall be for clarity,
And likewise be impassible,
Un^apable of pain
Having agility to move.
Whose vigor shall remain.
Glorified Souls,
Are filled with all delight,
Because the spring of B^u^y is
The object of their sight:
Also they have,
(Their joy to amplify)
Immediate sweet c^mmunion with
The blessed Trinity.
Which satisfies the appetite,
Which else were empty still,
Because no finite c mfort can
Content the mind and will.
Briefly a word
O^ place and company
Which Saints in G o^y shall enjoy,
The place is heavenly
Jerusalem, Heb. 12.

The city of the Lord:
Discovered by such precious things
As pleasure most affo d, Rev. 21.

The consorts, Angels numberless,
The whole Assembly
Of Saints, Heb. 12.
who shall for ever dwell
With Christ Eternally.
Why has the Lord
For his, such Joys prepared
Because their pacient sufferings
He richly will reward,
This light distress
Which for a moment dures
An excellent eternal weight
Of Glory his procures, 2 Cor. 4.17

But our afflictions merit not
This Glory that exceeds
But it as Gods all other gifts, Romans 8.18.

Of his free-Love proceeds. Romans 6.23.

Now they that have
This Hope of Heaven sure,
Show it by striving to be clean
As Christ our Lord is pure, 1 John: 3.3.

Also they take
Their croses cheerfully
Because a substance they expect,
Eternal heavenly, Heb. 10.34.

To which my Soul aspired still
And cannot settled be,
Till she returns again to him
That gave her unto me. Ecl 12.7.

A Song exciting to spiritual Alacrity.
DIscomforts will the hear^ contract
And joy will cause it to dilate;
That every part its part may act,
A heart enlarged must animate.
Unfruitful ones therefore they are
That planted be in sorrows shade,
Since by the blasts of cloudy care
They are unfit for action made.
The ill effects of fruitless grief
Are in this place no further shown,
Because the means of true releife
Is mo e convenient to be known.
Now he in whom all fulness dwells
All good and means of good must be, Col. 1 9.

His presence Satan's rule expells
And does from Legal terror free. Gal. 3.13.

So that their Souls which are so blessed
His sacred presence to enjoy,
Can never be so much distressed
But consolacion find they may.
Having a hiding place secure, Isay. 32.1.2

And covert from the stormy wind,
And streams of water perfect pure
To vivi^y and cheer the mind.
If scorched with afflictions heat
They to their shady rock may fly,
And be in safties bosom seat
And lap of true felicity.
Where are delights Angelical,
The quintisence of all good things,
Refined wine to cheer withal
And food which life eternal brings.
Which though the Saints by faith posesse,
Do not suppose it solace give,
But truly real happiness,
As they that feel alone believe.
Who thence abundant strength collect,
In all conditions to support,
No ^ oubles can them much deject,
Who have this souls defensive Fort.
Suppose temptacion sift them sore,
Sufficient grace will them relieve, 2 Cor. 12.9.

And make their Faith appear the more,
Which will to them the Conquest give.
Or be their Scourge some outward Cross,
As causlesse hate, or poverty,
Decay of parts, disease, or loss
Of Credit, Friends, or Liberty.
Nay were their state composed of woes,
In whom the Morning Star does shine,
Whose lively luster will disclose,
To his a heritage divine,
Which he of Love did them procure,
With freedom, not to Adam dain'd
To taste the Tree of Life most pure,
Whereby the soul alone's sustained
The sense of Love-Eternall, does,
with Love, Obedience still produce,
Which active is, and passive both,
So sufferings are of special use.
Bearing the soul with joy and peace,
Through true believing, evermore,
Whose sweet contentments take increase,
From heavens never-fayling store.
Another Song exciting to spiritual Mirth.
THe Winter being over
In order comes the Spring,
which does green Herbs discover
and cause the Birds to sing;
^he Night also expired,
^hen comes the Morning bright,
which is so much desired
(...) all that love the Light;
^his may learn
^hen that mourn
(...) put their Grief to flight.
^^e Spring succeeds Winter,
^^d Day must follow Night.
^e therefore that sustaineth
^ffliction or Distress,
which every member paineth,
and finds no relesse;
^^t such therefore despair not,
^at on firm Hope depend
^^ose Griefs immortal are not,
^^d therefore must have end:
^^ey that faint
^^h complaint
Therefore are too blame,
They ad to their afflictions,
And amplify the same.
For if they could with patience
A while posesse the mind,
By nward Consolations
They might refreshing find,
To sweeten all their Crosses
That litile time they 'dure;
So might they gain by losses,
And sharp would sweet procure;
Bu if the mind
Be inclinde
To Unquietness
That only may be called
The worst of all Distress.
He that is melancolly
Detesting all Delight,
His Wits by sottish Folly
Are ruinated quite:
Sad Discontent and Murmors
To him are insident,
Were he posest of Honors,
He could not be content:
Sparks of joy
Fly away,
Floods of Cares arise.
And all delightful Mocions
In the concepcion dies.
But those that are contented
However things do fall,
Much Anguish is prevented,
And they soon freed from all;
They finish all their Labors
With much felicity,
Their joy in Troubles savours
Of perfect Piety,
Cheerfulness
Does express
A settled pious mind
Which is not prone to grudging
From murmoring refinde.
Lascivious joy I praise not,
Neither do it allow,
For where the same decays not
No branch of peace can grow;
For why, it is sinister
As is excessive Grief,
And does the Heart sequester
From all good: to be brief,
Vain Delight
Passes quite
The bounds of modesty,
And makes one apt to nothing
But sensuality.
This Song shows that God is the strength of his People, whence they have
support and comfort.
MY straying thoughts, reduced stay,
And so a while retired,
Such observacions to survay
Which memory has registered,
That were not in oblivion dead.
In which reveiw of mental store,
One note affords comforts best,
Chiefly to be preferred therefore,
As in a Cabinet or Chest
One jewel may exceed the rest.
God is the Rock of his Elect
In whom his grace is incoate,
This note, my soul did most affect,
It does such power intimate
To comfort and corroberate.
God is a Rock first in respect
He shadows his from hurtful heat,
Then in regard he does protect
His servants still from dangers great
And so their enemies defeat.
In some dry desert Lands (they say)
Are mighty Rocks, which shadow make,
Where passengers that go that way,
May rest, and so refreshing take,
Their sweltish Weariness to slake.
So in this world such violent
Occasions, find we still to mourn,
That scorching heat of Discontent
Would all into combustion turn
And soon our souls with anguish burn,
Did not our Rock preserve us still,
Whose Spirit, ours animates,
That wind that blows where it will
Sweetly our souls refrigerates, John. 3.8

And so distructive heat abates.
From th^s our Rock proceeds likewise,
T^o (...) streams, which graciously
Releives the ^oule which scorched lies,
Through sense of Gods displeasure high,
Due to her for inniquity.
So this our Rock refreshing yields,
To those that unto him adhere,
Whom likewise mightily he sheilds,
So that they need not faint nor fear
Though all the world against them were.
Because he is their strength and tower,
Whose power none can equalize,
Which only gives the use of power
Which justly he ^o them denies,
Who would against his servants rise.
Not by self power nor by might,
But by Gods spirit certainly, Zach. 4.^

Men compass and attain their right,
For what art thou O mountain high!
Thou shall with valleys, even ly.
Happy was Israel, and why,
Jehovah was his Rock alone, Deu. 33.29.

The Sword of his Excellency,
His shield of Glory mighty known,
In saving those that are his own.
Experience of all ages shows,
Tha^ such could never be dismayed
Who did by Faith on God repose,
Confessing him their only aid,
Such were alone in safty stayed.
One may have friends, who have a will
To further his felicity,
And yet be wanting to him still,
Because of imbecility,
In power and ability.
But whom the Lord is pleased to save,
^uch he is able to defend,
^is grace and might no limmits have,
And therefore can to all extend
Who do or shall on him depend.
Nor stands he therefore surely,
Whose Friends most powerful appear,
Because of mutabillity
^o which all mortals subject are,
Whose favors run now here, now there.
^ut in our Rock and mighty Fort,
^f change no shadow does remain,
^is favors he does not Transport
^s trifles movable and vain,
^is Love alone is lasting gain.
^herfore my soul do thou depend,
upon that Rock which will not move,
^hen all created help shall end
^hy Rock impregnable will prove,
whom still embrace with ardent Love.
Another Song.
THe Winter of my infancy being over-past
^hen supposed, suddenly the Spring would have
Which uses every thing to cheer
^ith invitacion to recreacion
^is time of year.
The Sun sends forth his radient beams to warmthe ground
The drops distill, between the gleams delights abound,
Ver brings her mate the flowery Queen,
The Groves she dresses, her Art expresses
On every Green.
But in my Spring it was not so, but contrary,
For no delightful flowers grew to please the eye,
No hopeful bud, nor fruitful bough,
No moderat showers which causes flowers
To spring and grow.
My April was exceeding dry, therefore unkind;
Whence it is that small utility I look to find,
For when that April is so dry,
(As has been spoken) it does betoken
Much scarcity.
Thus is my Spring now almost past in heaviness
The Sky of pleasure's over-cast with sad distress
For by a comfortless Eclips,
Disconsolation and sore vexacion,
My blossom nips.
Yet as a garden is my mind enclosed fast
Being to safety so confind from storm and blast
Apt to produce a fruit most rare,
That is not common with every woman
That fruitful are.
A Love of goodness is the chiefest plant therein
The second is, (for to be brief) Dislike to sin,
These grow in spite of misery,
Which Grace does nourish and cause to flourish
Continually.
But evil mocions, currupt seeds, fall here also
when of springs profaneness as do weeds where flowers grow
Which must supplanted be with speed
These weeds of Error, Distrust and Terror,
Lest woe succeed
So shall they not molest, the plants before expressed
Which countervails these outward wants, and purchase ^est
Which more commodious is for me
Then outward pleasures or earthly treasures
Enjoyd would be.
My little Hopes of worldly Gain I fret not at,
As yet I do this Hope retain; though Spring be lat
Perhaps my Sommer-age may be,
Not prejudicial, but benificiall
^n^ g^^ for me.
Admit the worst it be not so, but stormy too,
I Will learn my self to undergo more then I do
And still content my self with this
Sweet Meditacion and Contemplacion
O^ heavenly b is,
Which for the Saints reserved is who persevere
In Piety and Holiness, and godly Fear,
The pleasures of which blis divine
Neither Logician nor Rhetorician
(...)
Another Song.
HAving restrained Discontent,
The only Foe to Health and Wit,
I sought by all means to prevent
The causes wh c^ did nourish it.
Knowing that they who are judicious
Have always held it most pern^cious.
Looking to outward things, I found
Not that which Sorrow might abate,
But rather cause them to abound
Then any Grief to m^^tigate
Which made me seek by supplicacion
Internal Peace and Consolacion
Calling to mind their wretchedness
That seem to be in happy case
Having external happiness
But therewithal no inward grace;
Nor are their minds with know^^^dg poll sht
In such all virtues are abo^^^^t
For where the mind's obscure and dark
Th^re is no virtue resident,
Of goodness there remains no spark
Distrustfullnesse does there frequent
For Ignorance the cause of error
May also be the cause of terror
As does the Sunbeams beutify
The Sky, which else does dim appear
So Knowledge does exquisitly
The Mind adorn, delight and clear
Which otherwise is most ob^cure,
Full of enormities impure.
So that their Souls polluted are
That live in blockish Ignorance,
Which does their miseries declare
And argues plainly that their wants
More hurtful are then outward Crosses
Infirmities, Reproach, or Losses.
Where saving Knowledge does abide,
The peace of Conscience also dwells
And many Virtues more beside
Which all obsurdities expels,
And fills the Soul with joy Celestial
That she regards not things Terrestiall.
Since then the Graces of the Mind
Exceeds all outward Happiness,
What sweet Contentment do they find
Who are admitted to possess
Such ma^chlesse Pearls, so may we call them:
For Precious is the least of all them.
Which when I well considered
My grief for outward crosses ceast,
Being not much discouraged
Although afflictions still encreast,
Knowing right well that Tribulacion
No token is of Reprobacion.
Another Song.
EXcessive worldy Grief the Soul devouers
And spoils the activnesse of all the Powers,
Through ind^^posing them to exercise
What should demonstrate their abilities,
By practic^ll improvement of the same
Unto the Glory of the givers name.
Though Envy wait to blast the Blossoms green
O^ any Ve tu soon as they are seen,
Yet none may therefore just oc^asion take
To shun wha^ Virtue manifest should make,
For like the Sun shall Virtue be beheld
When Clouds of Envy shall be qui^e dispeld;
Though there be some o^ no di^a^^ at all
Who no degree in worth can lower fall.
Preferred before the Verteous whom they taunt
Only because of some apparent want,
Which is as if a Weed without defect
Before the Damask Rose should have respect,
Because the Rose a leaf or two has lost,
And this the Weed of all his parts can boast;
Or elce as if a monstrous Clout should be
Preferred before the purest Lawn to see,
Because the Lawn has spots and this the Clout
Is equally polluted thoroughout
Therefore let such whose virtue favors merits,
Show their divinly magnanimious spirits
By disregarding such their approbacion
Who have the worthless most in estimacion,
For who loves God above all things, not one
Who understands not that in him alone
All causes that may move affection are,
Glimpses whereof his creatures do declare,
This being so, who can be troubled
When as his gifts are undervalued,
Seeing the giver of all things likewise
For want o^ knowledge many underprise.
A Song composed in time of the Civil War, when the wicked did much insult
over the godly.
With Sibells I cannot Devine
Of future things to treat,
Nor with Parnassus Virgins Nine
Compose in Poems neat
Such mental mocions which are free
Concepcions of the mind,
Which notwithstanding will not be
To thoughts alone confind.
With Deborah twere joy to sing
When that the Land has Rest,
And when that Truth shall freshly spring,
Which seems now deceast,
But some may waiting for the same
Go on in expectacion
Till quick conceit be out of frame,
Or till Life's expiracion.
Therefore who can, and will not speak
Betimes in Truths defense,
Seeing her Foes their malice wreak,
And some with smooth pretense
And colors which although they gloss
Yet being not ingraind,
In time they shall their luster lose
As cloth most foully staind.
See how the Foes of Truth devise
Her followers to defame.
First by Aspersions false and Lies
To kill them in good Name;
Yet here they will in no wise cease
But Satan's course they take
To spoil their Goods and Wealths increase,
And so at Life they make.
Such with the Devil further go
The Soul to circumvent
In that they seeds of Error sow
And to false Worships tempt,
And Scriptures falsely they apply
Their Errors to maintain,
Opposing Truth implicitly
The greater side to gain.
And to bind Soul and Body both
To Satan's service sure
Thereto they many ty by Oath,
Or cause them to endure
The Loss of lightsom Liberty
And suffer Confiscacion,
A multitude they force thereby
To hazard their Salvacion.
Another sort of Enemies
To Lady Verity,
Are such who no Religion prise,
But Carnal Liberty
Is that for which they do contest
And venture Life and State,
Spurning at all good means expressed,
The force of Vice to bate.
Yet these are they, as some conceit,
Who must again reduce,
And all things set in order strait
Disjoynted by abuse,
And wakeing wits may think no less
if Fiends and Furies fell,
May be supposd to have success
Disorders to expel.
How-ever Truth to fade appear,
Yet can she never fall,
Her Friends have no abiding here,
And may seem wasted all;
Yet shall a holy Seed remain
The Truth to vindicate,
Who will the wrongeds Right regain
And Order elevate.
What time Promocion, Wealth, and Peace,
The Owners shall enjoy,
Whose Light shall as the Sun increase
Unto the perfect Day
Then shall the Earth with blessings flow,
And Knowledge shall abound.
The Cause that is now derided so,
Shall then most just be found.
Profaneness must be fully grown,
And such as it defend
Must be ruind or overthrown,
And to their place defend,
The Sonns of stri^e their force must cease,
Having fulfild their crime,
And then the Son of wished peace
Our Horizon will clime.
That there are such auspicious days
To come, we may not doubt,
Because the Gospels splendant rays
Must shine the World throughout:
By Jews the Faith shall be embraced
The Man of Sin must fall,
New Babell shall be quite defaced
With her devices all.
Then Truth will spread and high appear,
As grain when weed a^e gone,
Which may the Sain^s afflicted cheer
Often thinking hereupon;
Since they have union with that sort
To whom all good is tied
They can in no wise want support
Though most severely tried.
Another Song
TIme past we understood by story
The strength of Sin a Land to waste,
Now God to manifest his Glory.
The truth hereof did let us taste,
For many years, this Land appears
Of useful things the Nursery,
Refresht and fenced with unity.
But that which crowned each other Blessing
Was evidence of Truth Divine,
The Word of Grace such Light expressing,
Which in some prudent Hearts did shine,
Whose Flame inclines those noble minds
To stop the Course of Prophanacion
And so make way for Reformacion.
But He that watches to devour,
This their intent did soon discry,
For which he strait improves his power
This worthy work to nullify
With Sophistry and Tyranny,
His agents he forthwith did fill
Who gladly execute his will.
And first they prove by Elocution
And Hellish Logic to traduce
Those that would put in execucion,
Restraint of every known abuse;
^hey separate and 'sturb the State,
and would all Order overthrow,
^he better sort were charged so.
^ch false Reports did fill all places,
^orr^^ting some of each degree,
(...) whom the highest Title graces
from hearing slanders was not free,
which Scruple bred, and put the Head
^ith primest members so at bate
which did the Body dislocate.
Lying Spirit misinformed
(...) common peeple, who suppose
things went on to be reformed
^^ey should their ancient Customs lose,
^d beside to courses tied
which they nor yet their Fathers knew,
^d so be wrapped in fangles new.
^eat multitudes therefore were joined
(...) Satan's plyant instruments,
^ith malice, ignorance combined,
^d both at Truth their fury vents;
^st Piety as Enemy
^ey persecute, oppose, revile,
^en Friend as well as Foe they spoil.
^e beuty of the Land's abollisht,
^h Fabericks by Art contrived,
(...) many of them quite demollisht,
(...) many of their homes deprived
Some mourn for friends untimely ends,
And some for necessaries saint,
With which they parted by constraint.
But from those storms has God preserved
A people to record his praise,
Who since they were therefore reserved
Must to the height their Spirits raise
To magnify his lenity,
Who safely brought them through the fire
To let them see their hearts desire
Which many faithful ones deceased
With tears desired to behold,
Which is the Light of Truth professed
Without obscuring shadows old,
When spirits free, not tied shall be
To frozen Forms long since composed,
When lesser knowledge was disclosed.
Who are preserved from foes outrageous,
Noteing the Lords unfound-out ways,
Should strive to leave to after-ages
Some memorandums of his praise,
That others may admiring say
Unsearchable his judgments are,
As do his works always declare.
Meditacions
The first Meditacion.
THe Morning is at hand, my Soul awake,
Rise from the sleep of dull security;
Now is the time, anon 'twill be to late,
Now have thou golden opportunity
For to behold thy natural estate
And to repent and be regenerate.
Delay no longer though the Flesh thee tell,
It Is time enough hereafter to repent,
Strive earnestly such mocions to expel,
Remember this try courage to augment
The first fruits God required for sacrifice,
The later he esteemed of no price.
First let us behold our natural estate
How dangerous and damnable it is,
And thereupon grow to exceeding hate
With that which is the only cause of this;
The which is Sin, yea Disobedience
Even that which was our first parents offense.
The reasonable Soul undoubtedly
Created was at first free from offense,
In Wisdom, Holiness, and Purity,
It did resemble the Divine Essence,
Which being lost, the Soul of man became
Like to the Serpent, causer of the same.
The Understanding Will, Affections clear,
Each part of Soul and Body instantly
Losing their purity, corrupted were
Throughout as by a loathsome Leprocy
The rays o^ V^rtu were extinguished quite
And Vice usurpeth rule with force and might.
This sudden change from sanctitude to sin
Could but prognosticat a fearful end,
Immediately the dollour did begin,
The Curse that was pronounced, none might defend,
Which Curse is in this life a part o^ some,
The fullness thereof in the life to come.
The Curse that to the Body common is
The sense of Hunger, Thirst, of Sickness, Pain:
The Souls Callamities exceeds this,
A Taste of Hell, she often does sustain,
Rebukes of Conscience, threatening plagues for sin,
A world of Torments often she has within.
Unless the Conscience dead and seared be,
Then runs the soul in errors manifold,
Her danger deep she can in no wise see,
And therefore unto every sin is bold,
The Conscience sleeps, the Soul is dead in sin,
Nere thinks of Hell until she comes therein.
Thus is the Conscience of the Reprobate,
Either accusing unto desperacion,
Or elce benumbed, cannot instigate
Nor put the Soul in mind of reformacion;
Both work for ill unto the castaway,
Though here they spent their time in mirth and play.
Yet can they have no sound contentment here,
In midst of laughter often the heart is sad:
This world is full of woe and hellish fear
And yields forth nothing long to make us glad
As they that in the state of nature die
Pass but from misery to misery.
Consider this my soul, yet not despair,
To comfort thee again let this suffice,
There is a Well of grace, whereto repair,
First wash away thy foul enormities
With tears proceeding from a contrite heart,
With thy beloved sins thou must depart.
Inordinate affections, and thy Will,
And carnal wisdom, must thou mortify,
For why, they are corrupt, profane and ill,
And prone to nothing but impiety,
Yet shall thou not their nature quite deface,
Their ruins must renewed be by grace.
If that thou can unfainedly repent,
With hatred thereunto thy sins confess,
And not because thou fear punishment
But that thereby thou did Gods Laws transgress
Resolving henceforth to be circumspect,
Desiring God to frame thy ways direct.
Each member of thy body thou do guide,
Then exercise them in Gods service most
Let every part be thoroughly sanctifide
As a mere Temple for the Holy Ghost;
Sin must not in our mortal bodies reign
It must expelled be although with pain
Thou must not willingly one sin detain,
For so thou may debarred be of blis,
Grace with inniquity will not remain,
Twixt Christ and Belial no communion is,
Therefore be careful every sin to fly,
And see thou persevere in piety.
So may thou be persuaded certainly,
The Cur^e shall in no wise endanger thee,
Although the body suffer misery
Yet from these and death thou shall be free;
They that are called here to Holiness
Are sure elected to eternal bliss.
A Taste of blessedness here shall thou say,
Thy Co^scienc^ shall be at Tranquillity,
And in the Li^e ^o com thou shall enjoy
The sweet frui^i n of the Trinity,
Society with Saints then shall thou have,
Which in this life thou did so often crave.
Let this then stir thee up to purity,
Newness of life, and speedy Conversion,
To Holiness and to integrity,
Make conscience of impure thoughts unknown
Pray in the Spirit with sweet Contemplacion
Be vigilant for to avoid Temptacion.
The Preamble.
Amid the Oceon of Adversity,
Near whelmed in the Waves of sore Vexa^ion,
Tormented with the Floods of Misery,
And almost in the Gulf of Despairacion,
Near destitute of Comfort, full of Woes,
This was her Case that did the same compose:
At length Jehovah by his power divine,
This great tempestious Storm did mittigate.
And cause the Son of Righteousness to shine
Upon his Child that seemed desolate,
Who was refreshed, and that immediately,
And Sing^ as follows with alacrity.
The second Meditacion.
THe storm of Anguish being over-blown,
To praise Gods mercies now I may have space,
For that I was not finally orethrown,
But was supported by his special grace;
The Firmament his glory does declare, Psalm. 19.1

Yet over all his works, his mercies are. Psalm, 145.9

The Contemplacion of his mercies sweet,
Has rav shed my Soul with such delight
Who to lament erst while was only meet,
Does now determine to put grief to flight,
Being persuaded, hereupon does rest,
She shall not be forsaken though distressed.
Gods Favor toward me is hereby proved,
For that he has not quite dejected me;
Why then, though c ostes be not yet removed
Yet so seasoned with patience they be,
As they excite me unto godliness,
The only way to endless happiness.
Which earthly muckworms can in no wise know
Being of the Holy Spirit destitute,
They savor only earthly things below;
Who shall with them of saving Grace dispute,
Shall find them capable of nothing less
Though Christianity they do profess.
Let Esaus portion fall unto these men,
The Fatness of the Earth let them possess
No other thing they can desire then,
Having no taste of Heavens happiness,
They care not for Gods Countenance so bright,
Their Corn and Wine and Oil is their delight.
To compass this and such like is their care,
But having past the period of their days,
Bereft of all but miseries they are,
Their ^weet delight with mortal life decays,
But godliness is certainly great gain, ^. Tim. 6.6

Immortal bliss they have, who it retain.
They that are godly and reg^nerate,
Endu'd with saving Knowledge, Faith, and Love,
When they a future bliss premeditate,
It does all bitter passion quite remove;
Though often they feel the w^nt of outward things
Their heavenly meditacions, comfort brings.
They never can be quite disconsolate,
Because they have the only Comforter
Which does their minds always illuminate,
And make them fleshly p easures much abhor,
For by their inward light they plainly ^ee
How vain all transitory pleasures be.
Moreover, if they be not only void
Of earthly pleasures and commodities,
But oftentimes be greivously an oyd
With sundry kinds of great Calammities,
Whether it be in Body, Goods, or Name,
With patience they undergo the same.
And why? because they know and be aware
That all things wo^k together for the best,
To them that love the Lord and ca led are, To. 8 28.

According to his purpose, therefore blessed
Doubtless they be, his knowledge that obtain,
No Loss may countervail their blessed Gain.
Which makes them neither murmor not repine
When God is pleas^d with Crosses them to try,
who out of darkness caused light to shine. 2 Cor 4.6.

Can raise them Comfort out of Misery
They know right well and therefore are content
To bear with patience any Chastisment.
This difference is betwixt the good and bad;
When as for sin the godly scourged are,
And godly Sorrow moves them to be sad,
These speeches or the like they will declare:
O will the Lord absent himself for ever?
Will he vouchsafe his mercy to me never?
What is the cause I am afflicted so?
The cause is evident I do perceive.
My Sins have drawn upon me all this woe,
The which I must confess and also leave,
Then shall I mercy find undoubtedly, Pro. 28.13.

And otherwise no true prosperity.
Whilst sin has rule in me, in vain I pray,
Or if my Soul inniquity affects,
If this be true, as it is, I boldly say,
The prayer of the wicked, God rejects; Pro. 15, 8.

If in my heart I wickedness regard
How can I hope my prayer shall be heard. Psalm. 66

If I repent, here may I Comfort gather,
Though in my prayers there be weakness much
Christ siteth at the right hand of his Father
To intercede and make request for such, Romans 8.33

Who have attained to sincerity,
Though something hindered by infirmity.
I will forthwith abandon and repent,
Not only palpable inniquities,
But also all alowance or consent
To sinful mocions or infirmities;
And when my heart and ways reformed be,
God will withold nothing that is good from me
So may I with the Psalmist truly say, Psalm. 84.

It Is good for me that I ave been afflicted,
Before I troubled was, I went astray, Psalm 119

But now to godliness I am ad cted;
If in Gods Laws I had not took delight,
I in my troubles should have perished quite.
Such gracious speeches usually proceed
From such a Spirit that is Sanctifide,
Who strives to know his own defects and need
And also seeks to have his wants supplide;
But certainly the wicked do not so
As do their speeches and distempers show.
At every cross they murmor, vex and fret,
And in their p^ssion often will they ^ay,
How am I with Calamities bes^t!
I think they will me utterly destray,
The cause hereof I can in no wise know
But that the Destinies will have it so
Unfortunate am I and quite forlorn,
Oh what disastrous Chance befalls me!
Under some hurtful Plannet I was born
That will (I think) my Confusion be,
And there are many wickeder then I
Who never knew the like adversity.
These words do briefly show a carnal mind
Polluted and corrupt with Ignorance,
Where godly Wisdom never yet has shined
For that they talk of Destiny or Chance;
For if Gods Power never can abate,
He can dispose of that he did cr^ate
If God alone the True Almighty be
As we believe, acknowledge, and confess,
Then supreme Governor likewise is he
Disposing all things, be they more or less;
The eyes of God in every place do see
The good and bad, and what their actions be.
The thought hereof suffices to abate
My heaviness in great'st extremity,
When Grace unto my Soul did intimate
That nothing comes by Chance or Destiny,
But that my God and Savior knows of all
That either has or shall to me befall
Who can his servants from all troubles free
And would I know my Crosses all prevent,
But that he knows them to be good for me
Therefore I am resolved to be content,
For though I meet with many Contradictions
Yet Grace does always sweeten my Afflictions.
The third Meditacion.
FAint not my Soul, but wait thou on the Lord
Though he a while his answer may suspend,
Yet know (according to his blessed word)
He will vouchsafe refreshing in the end,
Yea though he seem for to withdraw his grace,
And does not always show his pleasing face.
As by the Sun, though not still shining bright,
We do enjoy no small Commodity,
Whilst that the day is governed by his Light,
And other works of Nature testify
His wonderful and rare Effects always,
Though often vayled be his shining rays.
So it is no small mercy, though we see
Gods Countenance not always shining bright,
That by the same our minds enlightened be,
And our affections guided by that Light,
And whilst the winter-fruits as it were we find
In Patience, Sufferings, and Peace of mind.
Then let it not be told in Ashkelon,
Neither in Gath let it be published,
That those that seek the Lord and him alone
In any case should be discouraged,
Lest it rejoice the wicked this to see,
Who think the ways of grace unpleasant be.
Where as they are most pleasant, sweet, and fair
Yiedling delights which only satisfy
Our minds, which else transported are with care
And r^stlesse wanderings continually,
But those that do no taste hereof attain
Seek rather for content in pleasures vain.
When Kain had lost the happy harmony,
He by a peace ^ull Conscience might enjoy
His nep^ew ^ball then most skillfully
Invented Musi^k, thereby to convey
Unto the outward ear some melody,
But no true joy come; to the heart thereby.
For it is only a Certificate
Brought by Gods Spirit from the Throne of Grace
That may delight the Soul Regenerate,
Which certifies her of her happy case,
That she is already in a gracious state,
Which will in endless glory consummate.
Again, the blessed Soul may take delight,
To think on Sions great prosperity,
In that the Gospel long has shined bright,
Sustaining no Eclips by Heresy,
So that the means of knowledge is so free,
Gods Worship rightly may performed be.
If then my Soul, the Lord thy Portion be
Delight'st his Word and sacred Covenants
Whereby his Graces are conveyed to thee,
As Earnests of divine inheritance,
And which may cause true comfort to abound
Thy Lot is fallen in a pl^asant ground,
Then let not any trouble thee dismay
Seeing the Light of Grace to thee has shon^
The sable Weed of Sadness lay away,
And put the Garment of ^alvacion on.
With chearfullnesse, Gods blessings entertain
Let not the object of thy mirth be vain,
Which as a Cloud would stop the influence
Of that true Light that does the Soul refine
And predi^poseth it through lively sense
To that eternal brightness most divine;
Then chiefly to admit that joy, accord,
Which comes by the Favor of the Lord.
God's Favor ever highly estimate,
As the prime motive of true happiness,
Whereof, since that thou did participate,
In Life or Death, fear no kind of distress;
When humane help sha l fayl thee utterly
Then is Gods saving opportunity.
Deadness of spirit that thou may avoid,
The lively means of godliness embrace,
And cease not seeking though thou be delayed,
But wait till God do manifest his grace,
For thy deliverance, prefix no day,
But patiently the Lords due leisure stay.
The fourth Meditacion.
ALas my Soul, often have I sought thy Peace,
But still I find the contrary increase,
Thou being of a froward disposicion,
Perceivest not thy merciful Physician
Does give thee for^hy health these strong purgacions
So may we call out daily molestacions,
Which how to bear, that thou may understand
Take heed of two extremes under Gods hand,
The one is, too light taking thy Distress,
The other's, hopeless Grief or Pensiveness;
Between these two, observe with heedfull eye
A middle course or mediocrity;
Consider for the first, if one correct
His Child, who seems it to disrespect,
VVarding the blow or setting light thereby,
How is he beat again deservedly;
So if that thou should seem to disregard,
The Chastisments of God, or seek to ward
The same by ways or means impenitent,
How just shall God renew thy punishment:
If Physic for our Bodies health be taken,
We hinder not the working of the same,
Strong Physic if it purge not, putrifies,
And more augments then heales our malladies,
And as is s^yd, our manifold Temptacions,
Are nothing but thy scouring Purgacions,
VVherin a dram too much, has not admission,
Confected by so Skillful a Physician
Who will not have their bitterness abated,
Till thy ill humors be evacuated;
Then loose it down for thy Humilliacion,
And hinder not its kindly Opperacion,
As thou may by untimely voyding it
By vain contentments, which thou may admit,
Which makes us drive repentant thoughts away,
And so put far from us the Evil day;
But that content which is by such means got
Is like cold water, taken in fevers hot,
Which for the present, though it seem to ease,
Yet after it increases the disease;
But thou do rather unto Grief incline,
At Crosses therefore, subject to repine,
Supposing often, thy present troubles are
Intolerable, and thy bane declare;
Whilst thou for this, thy self do maserate
Despair unto thee does intimate,
That none has been afflicted like to thee,
Unparaleld thy visitacions be;
The by-waies being thus discovered,
Endeavor in the right way to be led,
With true Repentance, hope of pardon join,
Deny thy self, and trust for help divine,
Seek first with God in Christ to be at peace,
Who only can thy Tribulacion cease,
For he that laid the Rod (affliction) on,
The power has to pull it off alone;
Twere but in vain for one that were in debt,
To see the Officers a discharg to get,
Till with his Creditor he does agree
He cannot walk out of his danger free;
So vain are they, which think their course is sure,
When in the use of means they rest secure,
Whereas if God his blessing does restrain
We by the creature can no help attain:
Though it has pleased God out of his grace,
Natural cau^es over things to place.
Yet keeps he to himself, (blessed be his name)
The staff and operacion of the same;
Then do not think my Soul to find redress
By means of Friends, or by self Skilfulnesse,
But rather all created helps deny,
Save as they serve for God to work thereby:
Now forasmuch as God is just alone,
Know, without cause he has afflicted none,
Since without doubt, his ways so equal be,
For some great fault he thus corrects thee,
Therefore to lowest thoughts thy self retire,
To seek the cause that moved God to ire.
Which when thou find, whatsoere it be
As thy right hand or eye so dear to thee,
Resolve for ever to abandon it,
Be watchful lest the same thou recommit,
Renew thy Covenant with God, and vow
In the remainder of thy days, that thou Will walk before him with an upright heart
If for that end his grace be on thy part,
If when hereto thou do thy forces try,
In them thou find a disability,
Then look to Christ, who does thy weakness veiw
And of compassion will thy strength renew,
From him alone thou m^yst that grace derive
Which like a Cordial or Restorative,
Will strengthen and repair thy faculties,
Which else are dead to holy exercise,
Twill make thy Understanding apprehend
God as a Father, who in Love does send
Correction to his Children when they stray,
When without check the wicked take their sway;
This grace once tasted, so affects the will,
As it forsakes that which cannot fill;
The well of living waters, to frequent,
Can only fill the Soul with true content;
The memory it does corroberate,
To keep a store, the Soul to animate,
Gods precious promises the treasures be,
Which memory reserves to comfort thee;
The over-flowings of this grace divine
To goodness the affections will incline,
Turning the hasty current of thy love
From things below, unto those things above,
Seeing it is the grace of Christ alone,
Which makes the Soul to be with God at one,
Endeavor for it, give thy self no rest,
Till feelingly thereof thou be possessed.
The fifth Meditacion.
SUch is the force of each created thing,
That it no solid happiness can bring,
Which to our minds may give contentments sound
For like as Noah's Dove no succor found,
Till she returned to him that sent her out,
Just so the Soul in vain may seek about,
For rest or satisfaction any where,
Save in his presence, who has sent her here.
Gods omnipresence I do not deny,
Yet to the Faithful he does spec'ally,
Alone his gracious presence evidence,
Who seeing all true blessings flow from thence,
Are troubled only when he hides his Face,
Desiring still to apprehend his Grace,
This Grace of God is taken diversely
And first it does his Favor signify,
That independent Love of his so free,
Which moved him to his merciful Decree,
His Merum beneplacitum it is
That Is motive of all good conferd on his:
The fruits of this his Love or Favor dear,
Are likewise called Graces every where,
Election and Redemption, graces are,
And these his Favor chiefly do declare.
Faith, Hope, Repentance, Knowledge, and the rest,
Which do the new Creac'on manifest,
Now these are counted Grace habitual.
And lastly, this the Grace of God we call,
His actual Assistance on our side,
VVherby we overcome when we are tried;
How ever then the word is understood
Grace is the chief desirable good.
It Is Summum bonum; is it so? for why?
Because without it no Prosperity,
Or earthly Honors, in the highest degree,
Can make one truly happy said to be,
For as we might their miseries condole
Who should inhabit near the Northern-Pole,
Though Moon and Stars may there apear most bright
Yet while the Sun is absent, still it is night,
And therefore barren, cold, and comfortless,
Unfit for humane creatures to possess:
More fruitless, empty comfort is the Mind,
Who finds the Sun of Righteousness declind,
Yea, though all earthly glories should unite
Their pomp and splendour, to give such delight,
Yet could they no more sound contentment bring
Then Starlight can make grass or flowers spring;
But in that happy Soul that apprehends
His Loving kindness, (which the Life transcends)
There is no lack of any thing that may
Felicity or true delight convey;
As whilst the Sun is in our Hemisphere,
We find no want of Moon nor Starlight clear,
So where the Fountain of true Light displayes
H^^^^^nes, there is no need of borrowed joys,
For w^^re he is who made all things of naught,
T^e^^ (...) presence still ^resh joys are wrought
Nor ^e^d he ^elp to m^ke a happy one,
Since all pe^fection is in him alone,
Grant th^n hi^ Grace is most to be desired
And nothing else to be so much required;
But here a carnal crew are to be blamed,
By whom the Grace of God so much is named
Who are experienced in nothing less
As do their course and practices exp^esse,
For though they say the Grace of God's worth all
Yet will they hazard i^ for Trifles small,
Here^f they will put you out of all suspicion
When Gods Grace coms with men's in competicion
For holy duties lightly such neglects,
Whereby Gods Love is felt with its effects,
The favor of a mortal man to gain
Though but a show thereof he do attain,
And that perhaps for some employment base
Which one cannot perform and keep true Grace,
Therefore it is probable, how ere they prate,
Gods Grace they value at too low a rate
For to be purchased by them, since they leave
Their hold of it, a shadow to receave;
But they that do in truth of heart profess
That they have found this Pearl of Blessedness
Will not adventure it for any thing,
Whatever good it promises to bring,
Because they know the choicest quintesence
Of earthly pleasures greatest confluence,
Cannot procure that sweet blissful peace
Which from Gods Favor ever takes increase;
Yet many times it comes to pass we see,
That those who have true grace so senseless be
Of it, that they in seasons of distress,
Abundance of impacience do express,
But it is their sin, and brings an ill report
Upon their chiefest Comfort, Strength, and Fort;
Such therefore should endeavor patiently,
To bear whatever cross upon themly,
And that by strength of this consideracion
Tha^ they have need of this their tribulacion
It may be to mind them of some offense
Which they committed have (perhaps) long since
Yet they remain unhumbled for it, 1 Pet 1.6.

Or elce (may be) some Duty they omit,
In which remissive course they will remain,
Till with a Rod they be brought home again;
Or if they would consider how they prove
The Lords great Patience toward them, and Love
In waiting for their turning to his ways,
They would not think so grievous of delays,
Of restitucion to that solace sound,
Which in the sense of Grace is ever found,
Which whosoever will in Heart and Life preserve,
These following directions must observe;
The first is, to purge out inniquities
With all that might offend Gods puer eyes,
The next is, to have Faith in Christ, and Love
Of God, and that which he does best approve;
Humility must likewise have a place
In them that will be sure of true Grace, Iam. 4.6

Then there must be sincear Obedience
To all Jehovah's just Commandments,
For God will manifest himself to those,
Who by Obedience, Love to him disclose. Ioh. 14

Now lastly, that which fits one to embrace
The sense of God's exceeding Love and Grace
Is skilfulnesse in that most blessed Art
Of walking with the Lord with upright heart,
That is to manage all things heedfully,
As in the veiw of Gods omniscient eye,
And so, by consequence, by Faith to join
In union with the Trinity divine;
This is the very life of happiness,
Which one may feel far better then express:
But lest whilst being wrapped above my sphere,
^ith sweetness of the Theme, I should appear
Quite to forget the nature of a Song,
and to some this might seem overlong,
^y thoughts their workings, speedily suspends,
and at this time my Meditacion ends.
Finis.
Verses on the twelvth Chapter of Ecclesiastes.
ALl Earthly Glories to their periods post,
As those that do possess them may beho^d,
Who therefore should not be at too much cost
With that which fades so soon, dies and grows old
But rather mind him in their youthful days,
Who can give glory which shall last always.
Ere Light of Sun or Moon or Stars expire,
Before the outward sense eclipsed be,
Which does direct the heart for to admire
These works of God which obvious are to see,
The Fabric of the Earth, the Heavens high,
Are to the mind discoverd by the eye.
Again, before the strong men, low shall bow,
And they that keep the house shall tremble sore
Ere natures force be spent, or quite out-flow;
And wonted courage shall be found no more,
When weakness shall each part emascula^e
And make the stoutest heart effeminate.
Moreover, ere the grinders shall be few
Which for concoction does the food prepare,
And Dames of music shall be brought so low
That for their melody none much shall care;
Harsh and unpleasant, then the voice shall be
The breast being not from obstructions free.
Also before that, causlesse fears arise,
By reason of much imbecility,
Conceit of harms will in the way surprise
Such feeble ones, which would from shadows fly
When chilling Frost of sad decrepid age,
The force of vital vigor shall aswage.
The Almond Tree shall blossoms then declare,
Gray hairs presage to them the end is nigh,
Natural heat havin^ no more repair,
Desires fail, as flames wanting fuel, die,
Not^ing remaining whe^^y strength s supplied
The marrow wasted, and the moisture dried.
And ere the ^l^er co^d ^e loose and weak,
Before the ve^n^ be stopped, and sinews shrink
And (...) or Pi^cher break,
^e (...) for want of spirit shrink
The ^e^^ whereas he animals reside,
Now full of ma^adies, and ^^upyfide.
The Body thus out-worn and quite decayed,
The dust returns to the Earth again;
To God who gave it, is the Soul convayd
Who does with it as be did preo^dain,
How ever some to vent their falacy
Conclude the Soul does with the Body die.
Which if were truth why did our Savior say?
Fear him not which the Body kills alone, Mat 10

And has no might the Soul for to destray,
If with the one the other must be gone;
But that they may declare impostors skill
Twixt Soul and Spirit they distinguish wi l.
The Soul (say they) does with the Body die,
Then there is a third part which they Spirit call,
Who does return to God immediately
Leaving the Dead till judgment general,
And then returning breathing does infuse
In Soul and Body, whereby life ensu^s.
For which they have no S^ripture (I suppose)
Save what they wrest unto their own Perdicion,
As this, where it is said, the word with power goes
Twixt Soul and Spirit by divine commission
Twixt joints and marow it does penetrate, H^b. 4.12.

Seeing all secrets, heart can meditate.
The joints and marrow of the Body be
Not several species, but of kind the same,
The Body to support, each part agree,
And every member has its several name;
So Soul and Spirit is one entire thing,
Immortal by the virtue of its Spring.
More texts of Scripture these Deceivers wrest,
Which should be answered, Truth for to defend;
But seeing here I have so long digrest,
What I begun, I hasten now to end,
Which is to stir up youth their God to mind,
Before effects of evil days they find
All here is vanity the Preacher says,
Yea use of many books are wearisome,
If chiefly don for self-respect or praise
It doubtless will to such a snare become:
Of all the matter, then the End let us hear,
Keep Gods commandments with son-like fear,
FINIS.

