Par Nobile.

TWO TREATISES.

The one, concerning The EXCELLENT WOMAN, Evincing a person Fearing the Lord,
to be the most Excellent Person: Discoursed more privately upon occasion of the
Death of the Right Honorable, the Lady Frances Hobart, late of Norwich, from.
Pro. 31. 29, 30, 31.

The other, Discovering a Fountain of Comfort and Satisfaction, to persons
walking with God, yet living and dying without sensible Consolations:
discovered, from Psalm. 17. 15. at the Funerals of the Right Honorable, the
Lady Katharine Courten, preached at Blicklin, in the County of Norfolk, March
27. 1652.

With the Narratives of the holy Lives and Deaths of those two Noble Sisters.

By J. C. D. D. late Minister of the Gospel in Norwich.

Prima gratia est timor Domini: Bernardus in Sermon. de donis Sp. Sancti. Sine
hac gratia prima gratiarum, quae totius Religionis exordium est, nullum bonum
pullulare ve^ manare potest. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1669.

THE Excellent WOMAN: Discoursed more privately from Proverbs 31. 29, 30, 31.
Upon occasion of the Death OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE, The Lady FRANCES HOBART.

By J. C. D. D.

Connexa sunt timor, and Religio, nec manner potest altera sine altero.
Bernardus. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1669.

TO THE Right Honorable, THE Lady ELIZABETH COUNTESS, Dowager of Exeter.
Madam,
THat noble person (to whose memory these sheets are devoted) and my relation
to her, were so well known to your Ladyship, that I am sure you will find no
difficulty to conclude that something of this nature is but a debt to her
memory, and especially from my self, upon whom she laid so many obligations,
that if I should hold my peace, the very stones would speak: Nor Madam, can I
think discourses of this nature useless, being, though of no significancy, in
subsidia mortuorum, to advantage the dead; yet not insignificant both in
solatium, and ad exemplum vivorum, for the comfort and example of those who are
alive, that others may learn the steps of holiness, by which she ascended that
blessed Mansion into which we believe her entered, and by which she mounted to
that pinnacle of honor in the Church of God, upon which we lately saw her, and
which her memory yet possesses. This (Madam) being determined, I had no
difficulty to find out to whom I should inscribe them. Both the subject matter
of the discourses, and your Ladiship's near relation to her Ladyship challenged
that at my hands. The design of the sheets (Madam) introductive to the sequent
Narrative of her Ladiship's life, is to evince a great truth to the world,
concerning which the practical errors, which we daily see in it, give us
reason to believe it not sufficiently persuaded, viz. That the person fearing
the Lord is the most excellent person. Were the world better convinced of this
most demonstrable Proposition, those persons would not find it so difficult to
reconcile the world unto them, and to gain a quiet room, in the latitude of it,
wherein to pass the time of their so journing here with fear; only leading such
a conversation, as might comport with the fear of God, according to the degrees
of light they have received. Those Madam, who know the value of persons fearing
Jehovah, must from principles of reason have a kindness for every one whom they
see afraid to sin against that great and glorious Name, though that timoration
makes them recede from them in some practices, wherein they could desire them
to be like themselves. But Madam, how unreasonable soever the more peevish
world shows it self in their judgment of, and behavior to such persons.
Your Ladyship has for many years declared your self to have a juster
apprehension, and testified it both by your own choice of the right ways of
the Lord, and your exemplary kindness to those whom you have found walking
therein. These Papers, Madam, will justify your Ladyship's judgment, and may
possibly help to confirm what your Honor has so long believed.

To the latter part of these sheets your Ladyship is entitled by your near
relation to that Honorable person whom they concern, and the intireness of
affection, which you mutually bare each to other. She seldom mentioned your
Ladyship in your absence; but the form of her mention was, My dear Sister of
Exeter. With your Ladyship it was that she consulted in her difficulties,
refreshed her self in her dark and sad hours; to whom therefore does her
Picture more of right belong, than unto your self? It might indeed have
deserved a better hand, but as it is, I dare say your Ladyship will see many a
line in her countenance, which you will remember and say, Sic vultus, sic illa
manus, sic ora ferebat, that it is exceeding like your Ladyships noble Sister.
If your Ladyship asks why it comes so late after her Funerals, I must
answer, Madam, that your Honor is not altogether ignorant what has happened
to me since that time; notwithstanding which, the Copy of these sheets were in
the Stationers hands more than two years since, and unhappily (through his
slowness) perished in your dreadful Burning: since which I have indeed had time
enough to have revived them, but have been distracted with so much business of
other natures, as before this time I have not been able to finish what long
since I intended, and had begun. They now come forth not in so good a dress as
I could wish, but as imperfectly as works use to do, finished in so many parts
as I have been enforced to finish them in, and by.

Such as they are, I most humbly offer them to your Honor, as a small oblation
to the memory of her to whom your Ladyship knows I owed much more; and as a
poor acknowledgement of the many obligations which it has pleased your
Ladyship to lay upon me, who have no way, but such as this; and my fervent
prayers to approve my self

Your Honors most humbly obliged Servant, J. C.

To the MEMORY OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE Lady FRANCES HOBART, late of
Norwich.
YOu who think Honors dispensations be
From the severer acts of Piety,
Who judge your selves too great for to be good,
And that Religion would but stain your blood:
That Kneeling wears out cloths too fast, and Prayer
Is but Fanatics beating of the Air:
Who at a Sermon, think an hour, an age;
And five hours, but a moment on a Stage;
To whom to live is nothing, but to cat,
And drink, and sleep, and dress, and play, and prate,
And make some visits, that your friends may see
What fine, gay nothings of mankind you be,
Whose sensual lives might justly raise disputes,
Whether your souls be Rationals, or Brutes:
Turn here your wanton eyes, here you may spy
A true Exemplar of Nobility;
One, who judged to be eminently good;
The best improvement of her noble blood,
Who sacrificed the advantage of her birth,
And whatsoever else she had from earth,
To credit ways of Piety, and show
The world, that Godliness is not below
The highest mortal; who with you could glory
Of all those things, which serve to fill your story.
Birth, Breeding, Beauty, Riches, Honors, she
Knew what there was of true felicity
In these. The strains of courtesy and wit,
What Courtship several qualities would fit
She knew, how to receive a Complement,
And to return it with a Grace, when lent;
And one thing more she knew, which was, to call
These Trifling Vanities, and slight them all.
To her to live, was to Read, Hear and Pray;
Her life was but one constant Sabbath day.
She sometime went abroad ('it is true) but trod Act. 10. 38.

Her Savior's path, she went, but doing good.
Had she been Catholic in the Romish sense,
What stock their thrifty Church had raised hence
For poorer Madams! Oh! how many pair
Would she alone have watched for unto prayer?
How many might have sat at Cards, and sent
Their Beads to her, to drop for them? or spent
Their time at Plays, and charged her with their share
Of close Devotions? she had had to spare.
She of Moguntia, whom the Priest espied V. Gaz^^ pia bilaria Land. 1657. p.
67. Ex Coesar^ l. 5. cap. 5.

With troops of Devils, riding all astride,
On her long train, to Church (they from her glass
Came with her something tardy unto Mass;
Mean while, where were the Exorcists to endure
Upon the holy ground fiends so impure?)
Had notwithstanding escaped the purging fire,
If this rare Lady had been of their Quire;
Her early presence, and her Zeal (no doubt)
Had cleared the hallowed soil, scared spirits out.
The Holy Water had been spared, her eyes
Had dropped the lazy Ladies Sacrifice.
Fond Catholics! charge us no more that we
Advancing Faith, teach good works needless be.
This Protestant out-did you every one.
And yet looked to be saved by Faith alone.
Love to your selves is what makes you so free,
And by your works you think to satisfy.
Her good deeds were no peuance; yet their store
Was every whit as great, if not much more
Than yours, which are designed in Commutation
For Purgatorial pa^ns, or expiatio^
Of some fla^gtious crimes. Her purer love
To Christ, constrained her noble soul above
Your Lott'ry deeds, you would nere your pence throw down,
Did not you vainly hope to draw a Crown.
You put your Alms to interest, for gain,
She lent, she gave, and looked for naught again.
You in Devotions who were wont to go
To Walsingham, hence forward, learn to know
The way to Chapplefield, there you may see
The place where once this Saint abode, where she
So long wrought Miracles of Love: Far more
Than your dull College, that was there before.
Thence weeping pass to Blicklin vault, and there
Pay your Devotions to her Sepulcher:
When this is done, go you and do likewise
Acknowledge Christ the only Sacrifi^e
For Sin. Take Heaven upon the gift of Grace,
Then work as she. Thus you may see the place
Where she abides, and a Saint Frances find
(Can you believe't?) that was not of your mind.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 10. read feeble Dove, p. 5. l. penult. r. Dinah, p. 6. l. 9. r.
she, p. 19. l. 12. dele ordinarily, p. 24. l. 1. r. from spending, p. 43. l.
13. r. Jedid^ah, p. 46. l. 20. r. their, p. 54. l. 3. r. account of, p. 58. l.
30. r. Jael, p. 59. l. ult. r. lazy, p. 64. l. 16. r. excel, p. 76. l. 28. r.
because, p. 77. l. 1. r. these are, p. 80. l. penult. r. on, p. 86. l. 13. r.
peruse Justinians, etc. p. 101. l. 8. r. the loss, p. 103. l. ult. r. all the,
p. 110. l. 22. r. Paul, p. 121. l. 17. r. in the Land, p. 122. l. 3. r.
demission, p. 153. l. 12. r. and custos.

In the second Part.

In the Epist. Ded. p. 3. l. 13. r. Navis, p. 6. r. approve himself, p. 178. l.
22. r. a, p. 183. l. 8. r. Root, p. 187. l. 3. the verse misquoted, 30, for 39.
p. 195. l. 16. r. in, p. 199. l. 22. r. the, p. 201. l. 32. r. eternal, p. 208.
l. 17. r. An hungring after, p. 210. l. 2. a comma at doubting, p. 212. marg.
r. Cant. 8. 5. p. 217. l. penult. r. has done. p. 222. l. 18. r. in, p. 232.
l. 4. blot out do, p. 240. l. 9. r. to, p. 240. l. 21. r. face.

TO THE Honorable Memory OF THE Lady FRANCES HOBART, late of Chapplefield in
Norwich.
NAtures Endymion, whose Lyntean eye
Did's Mistress secret Cabinet descry,
Who plants described from Leb'nons Cedar tall,
Unto the creeping Hysop on the wall;
Who (seeing Knowledge puffs up) might vaunt
His held in cap^te, by special grant
From the Lord Paramount, who, virtue, vice,
Nature and Art, what not? did enterprise;
Remits the search to a more sagacious mind,
Saying, A virtuous woman who can find?
One of a thousand men, no female mate,
Sure God d^d Male and Female, good create.
And though the strong man armed first attaque^
The weaker Sex, and her his Engine makes;
Yet God (to countermine) makes her also
The Magazine of Arms, and Champion too;
An Achillean Spear, to wound and heal;
Right Weapon-Salve, cause both of woe and weal:
And now (through grace) goodness in man and woman,
Without exception, does enter common.
Virtue is not monopoliz'd, but mean
Nor's Phoenix masculine but Epicene.
Here was a Virtuous Woman: Solomon
Might here have had for his Deucalion
A Pyrrha; one, where each becoming grace
Ambitious of an advantageous place
To show it self, agreed in one Tense
To make themselves a noble residence.
Here you might see greatness and cou^tesie
In-laid, and counterpointed equally.
There Is Modesty like to the Morning Rose,
Which Phoebus tyring, does but half disclose;
'Bove them with eyes lift up, and bended knee,
Is Closet-piety; This you may not see.
That Is Charity on her attendant stands
With cheerful aspect, free, and open hands.
She in the old dress, which there you standing see
Waiting on her, is Madam Constancy.
And that below which hangs down the crest
Humility, which graceth all the rest.
If Virtue need an adventitious praise,
Beauty and Honor here, did lend its bays.
Heroic Virtue from prolifick womb
Of Noble blood, by the holy Spirit does come.
If Rarity Encomiums may indite,
Of The better side she was an Heteroclite.
Not many Noble called chosen ones:
All goods are rare, Pearls are called Unions.
Goodness impaled with greatness, is indeed
A Noble Vine, and wholly a right seed.
How! O Vinedressers! for the Vine laid waste,
Whose shadow was so sweet, whose fruit did taste
So gratefully: It Is cut up branch and root,
Nor slip, nor cion left again to sprout.
The comfort's this, she is no withered gourd,
A Tree of Righteousness, Plant of the Lord,
By him transplanted; she more fruit shall yield
In the Elysian, than in Chapplefield.
To the Illustrious Memory OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE Lady FRANCES HOBART,
late of Capplefield in Norwich.
OH! for a Sea of tears, for tears of blood!
Oh! for an hundred eyes to weep a flood
Of waters, waters far more sharp than brine
With perfect grief, fit Victimes for this shrine.
A Song's desired, my poor Muse complied,
But ere she sang it out, she burst and died.
Grief set the Cliff so high, sorrow so rackt
Her tender heart strings, that when touched, they cracked:
She yet is loath to yield, she hopes to groan
A shattered verse or two over such a stone.
Ah! for one doleful shrick to rend the Sky,
Then would she on this grave lie down and die:
But dying, leave some Legacies to give
To any who have yet an heart to live.
A broken heart, within which riven frame, I^pr^mis.

In every chink, this Noble Lady's Name.
A face gutt'red with tears, a panting breast, Item.

Which when the tongue gives in, may sigh the rest:
And when the fancy fails, a bleeding eye, Item.

To weep a more Pathetick Elegy.
These her neglected Arms she gave to me,
That I with them might hug this Prodigy
Of Virtue, which in a fast Gordian knot
I Will tie, and with her relics let them rot.
Here lies extinguished a fallen Star,
Which fixed in the spangled frame, would very far
Outshine those lesser lights, whose beaming would
Darken the Sun, and turn the Moon to blood.
How had the Pilgrims flockt about her Tomb,
Had there been ever such a Saint at Rome.
Add but her merits to that Churches store,
And they might sin whole Ages on her score.
Ah Lord! what thing is this the world calls man!
Whom some few inches of a grave can span,
Though nere so swelled with honor, nere so vast,
That Kingdoms cannot hold, yet found at last,
Though now more room, more earth, more worlds they crave,
Coopt up within the confines of a grave.
How did this stately Cedar lately 'expan'd
Her high and lovely top, with which she fanned
The Air, and from it gave a lovely shade,
Refreshing such as the world weary made.
Alas! she is fallen, and in a Vault is sunk,
All we can say, 's Here lies a goodly Trunk,
Which in a moment, by a sudden turn
Is ashes made, and fitted for an Urn;
An Urn on which the Mourner only must
Grave this, Here lies Honorable Dust.
With this great Lady's, see another Hearse,
Over which my breathless Muse cannot sing 2 verse.
It Is needless; why? they were in Virtue, blood,
Honor and Piety, what e're is good,
And to be praised both, the very same,
Repeat what is said, change but the christen name:
It Is true of both; and thus indeed they were
Two Noble Sisters, A thrice Noble Pa^r.
A short Account Of the Holy Life and Death Of the Right Honorable, The Lady
Frances Hobart, the Relict of Sir John Hobart, late of Blicklin in the County
of Norfolk, BARONET.
SAint John heard a voice from Heaven, Rev. 14. 13.
saying write; to which when he replied, What shall I write? the answer was,
Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea says the
Spirit that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them. A
phrase which implies not any motion of works, but rather the promotion of the
person that has wrought, and remuneration for his or her work. This reward
they have partly in Heaven, where Christ rewards his Saints though not for the
merit of their works, yet according to them, Rev. 22. 12. both for nature and
degree, and they partly have it upon the Rev. 22. 12.
Earth, whiles the name of the wicked ^otts; their memory is blessed, and
wherever the Gospel is preached, what they have done is told in remembrance of
them. The Widows, while they wept for Dorcas, showed the Coats and Garments
Acts 9. 39.
she had made. Solomon commands that the Virtuous Woman should have the fruit
of her hands, and that her own works should praise her in the Gates. This is my
present task, and the last office I have to perform, to that great and noble
person, whose death has turned us into an house of mourning.

I shall begin with her cradle, and consider her in the threefold period of her
life, while a Virgin, a Wife, and a Widow: but I shall lightly pass over the
two former, knowing nothing but what I gathered from her Ladyships various,
occasional discourses during the eighteen last years of her life, in which, I
had the honor of a daily converse with her Ladyship, as to which I had the
advantage of a stricter observation.

This noble Lady was born in London in the year 1603. being the eldest of eight
daughters who all lived to marriageable years, with which it pleased God to
bless the Right Honorable, John, (late) Earl of Bridgewater, Vicount Brack^^y,
and Lord Elsmore, Lord President of Wales. By his noble Lady the Lady Frances
daughter to the Right Honorable Ferdinando Earl of Derby.

Of this twice noble stock, this Excellent Lady was the First-fruit, a
circumstance possibly not inconsiderable, for gaining credit to the following
relation of her virtuous life: there being something of that in Horace true,

Fortes creantur fortibus, and bonis
Est in Juvencis, est in Equis, patrum
Virtus, nec imbellem feroces
Progenerant Aquilae columbam.
Doctrina sed vim promovet infitam.
Rectique cultus, pectora roborant.
Such as the Parents, such the children be,
The breed of Horses, and Neat beasts we see.
In Spirit, like their damms and Sires prove,
Fierce Eagles bring not forth a Sable Dove.
-- etc.
It holds not indeed as to infused habits; Justus non gignit justum, sed gignit
hominem, (said Augustine) but as to Moral habits which have their seeds and
rudiments in nature, there is much in it. Splendid and noble actions, are much
advantaged by this foundation, though education raises the building, and Grace
at last lays the Cornerstone, perfecting what thus is began in nature, and
improved by instruction and education.

This Noble Lady had no sooner passed the hands of her Nurse, and began to use
her tongue, but she was in her Fathers house betrusted to the tuition of a
French Gentlewoman (whom I have often heard her mention with a great deal of
honor) from her she learned to speak the French tongue, before she could
distinctly speak English; a faculty which she retained to her dying day: And
having her Organs of speech so early formed to it, she so naturally accented
it, that Natives of that Country would hardly believe her born in England.

The years of her Nonage were spent in learning things proper for that Age, and
which might accomplish her for that noble station which she was ere long to
take up in the World. Now she learned to handle her Lute, to sing, dance, etc.
things in her maturer Age of which she made little or no use, and far less
reckoning; but they fitted her for the Court, which she was to be acquainted
with, before she could be dismissed into the Ceuntry: Now she learned to read,
to write, and cast account nimbly and exactly, and to use her Needle, and order
the affairs of an household, things which were afterward to her and her dear
husband also of extraordinary advantage. Now partly by the diligence of her
Governess, partly by the Care of one Mr. Moor (her Fathers Chaplain) partly by
the superintendent care of my Lord her Father, she was fully instructed in the
principles of Religion. As to which I have often heard her with honor mention
her Governess, and her Noble Father. Her father for seasoning her against
Arminian Principles, and once suspending her from the Sacrament upon his
re-examination of her, after that his Chaplain had passed an hasty approbation
of her. Her Governess, for the good stories she would tell her, the good
counsel she would give her, and her care of her information as to Religion: She
would always say, that she learned of her to be a Calvinist in point of
Doctrine, and a Presbyterian as to Discipline, for it seems she was both,
flying her own Country for her Religion, or at least the Daughter of Parents
who upon the massacre so fled (for truly I do not well remember every
particular in her Ladyships relations though I often heard them.) I have often
heard her discourse with a grateful remembrance how exactly the hours of her
days were distributed to these several kinds of instruction: So as no time was
left her, unless a little proportion for exercise; and what was assigned for
her more private devotions (as to which her Governess was her most faithful
monitor) or for the more public Religious Duties of the Family, her presence
at which was as diligently required by my Lord her father.

The Evangelist records concerning our Luke 2. 15.
Savior, That he went down to Nazareth and dwelt with his Parents, and was
subject to them. Indeed subjection to Parents, is the greatest virtue can adorn
so tender an age; the want of this in our Children, is often caused by our
selves, God ordinarily securing the Parental Authority, till themselves
prostitute it. This Rare Lady was bred up in this subjection: I have heard her
say that till she was married she never more than once sat down in the
presence of her Lady-mother: never was allowed to stay in a room with her when
she received the visits of other Ladies, etc. these and many other things of
like severity I remember I have had in discourse from her which now have slipped
my memory. She did not take a liberty like Denial to go see the Daughters of
the Land at her own pleasure. Her mother was like the cloud unto her, when she
moved to Court the Daughter moved also, when she sat at home the daughter
moved not at all. I have often heard her mention it to the great honor of her
Mother, That she would require her constant attendance upon her self; both
going to the Court, and returning from it; and she was to her mother as the
Centurions servant unto him. If they said unto her Go she went, if they said
Come, she came, if Do this, she did it. Having attained to riper years she
frequently was at the Court of King James, and Queen Ann, and was in great
favor with that Queen, and King Charles the first, then Prince of Wales. I do
not remember any thing I have heard from her much momentous as to this part of
her life, unless frequent sad reflections upon her self, for mispending part of
many Lords days, in masks, and other Court pastimes, according to the fashion
of others in her circumstances. This she would often mention with bitterness,
and honorably mention and prefer before her self one of her Noble Sisters, who
in her youth had a just sense of that error, and courage enough to resist the
temptations to it. It was the only thing in which I ever heard her repent her
obedience to, and attendance upon her Mother, whom yet she thought exceeding
pious, and paid always a just honor to her mention and memory; which
reverence she had also for her Noble Father. I remember the Passion she fell
into when she heard of his death (though I communicated it to her with as much
advantage as I could to hinder sudden passions) which made me as the Jews cry
out, Behold, how she loved him! The sequel of this discourse will evidence that
it is not through want of more momentous matter, that I instance in these
things of more minute consideration: But I have the rather mentioned them, to
let my Readers see, how far we are degenerated from the ancient culture of
youth, and that orderly Discipline, under which those male and female Worthies
were educated, who have done famously in our Ephrata, and what probably is one
great cause of that impudent licentiousness which dishonors the present
generation.

The Generous Soul of this excellent Lady was ordained to higher things than
Balls, and Masks, and Visits. It now grew time for a Plant bred under so rare
a cultivation, to be removed into another place, That her God might have the
glory, and her generation the fruit of such an education. Her native beauty,
and the rare parts she began to discover, made many noble persons desire her in
marriage, but to show how early she was mortified to the vanities of youth,
with the approbation of her Parents, she at last chose a Widower for her first,
and only husband: Sir John Hobart of Blicklin in the County of Norfolk,
Baronet; he was the eldest Son of Sir Henry Hobart at that time Lord Chief
Justice, and Chancellor to the Prince. A Person indeed (as to title) in the
lowest order of the Nobility, but one whose Estate bare a full proportion to
his quality, and whose noble spirit, and temper far better suited this
excellent Lady than a greater title with another temper and spirit would have
done. She was married to this worthy person in the year.

In her Conjugal Relation she was now more perspicuous, she was now planted
upon an hill, where those rare seeds which had been sown in her ingenuous Soul
during her Nonage began to spring up, and bring forth abundant fruit, in that
triple capacity to which this relation (in some little succession) entitled
her, that (I mean) of 1. a Wife to a worthy Husband. 2. A Parent to Children,
and 3. a Governess to a numerous Family of Servants.

The Philosopher having rationally evinced the difference of virtues, with
relation to their subjects, and shown some more proper to those that Govern,
and others to such as are governed; for the Virtues of a good Wife reckons up,
Chastity, Prudent ordering of the affairs of the household within doors.
Reverence to her Husbands person, seen in a respective behavior to him, a
concealing his weaknesses, and obedience to his commands. Together with a just
sympathy, and patient sharing with him the vicissitude of Providence under
which he is exercised. All which (being in themselves but moral virtues
dictated by the light of Nature) God in holy Writ, by several Precepts, and
recommendations in the allowed examples of his Saints (there canonized) has
made the religious duties of the Christian Wife, in obedience to his superior
commands, and under the encouragement of many great, and precious promises, for
the glorifying of his holy Name who first instituted this relation (and
therefore to him of right it belonged to give laws to it) who also in his Word
has superadded another duty of a good Wife, not understood by the Philosopher,
(viz.) a due regard to the salvation of the Soul of her Husband, 1 Cor. 7. 16.
What know thou O Wife, whether thou shall save thy husband?

For the first of these, this excellent Lady rated her self by Julius Caesar's
reckoning, not judging it enough for her to be thus virtuous, unless she also
lived above the suspicion of the contrary. To let us know that she had not
forgot the Law of her Mother, she would often mention a saying of hers: That
temptations to the Violation of the honor of Ladies in this particular,
originally proceeded from some too light and familiar carriage first in
themselves; and that wanton was suffered to come too near who came to be
denied. Her constant behavior therefore was tempered with that affability, and
gravity which in conjunction best became a person of her Ladyships honor. And
that she might show the Church of Rome a Protestant Lady possessed of that
threefold chastity which they make so meritorious, as she had managed her state
of Virginity (and that upon the most public Theater in our English World) so
as she would often bless God who had taught her so to behave her self that none
ever durst offer any rudeness to her, and her conjugal relation, without the
least stain upon her honor: So having lost the man of her bosom, and again
reduced to a single condition, she grew to be something superstitious in this
thing, not only resolving (through Gods assistance) to go to her Grave having
been only the Wife of one Husband; but almost looking upon it as a piece of her
duty, and often reckoning it a piece of the honor of her fathers house, that
none of her Noble Sisters (left Widows) had married a second time.

The Philosopher allots to the virtuous wife, the governance of the house
within doors, and a wiser than he had before in the description of his Virtuous
Woman told us, That she Prove. 31. 27. 11.
looks well to the affairs of her household, and the heart of her husband
trusts in her: She was not indeed under such circumstances, as she needed to
lay her hands to the spindle, or to hold the distaff (yet that was often her
divertisement) but it might truly be said of her, that she looked well to the
affairs of her house, and that the heart of her Husband trusted in her. And
that not only as to the affairs of her House within, in respect of which she
was so vigilant as (during the time that I waited on her) it was no easy thing
for any servant to impose upon her) but also to those which were more
extrinsecal, and ordinarily no women's employment. Perceiving her dear Husband,
engaged in a great debt, she undertook the management of his whole estate, and
auditing all his accounts, and that to so good a purpose, that in a few years,
she had shortened his debt Six thousand pounds.

The Apostle treating of the duties of the Wife, says, Ephesians. 5. 31. Let the
Wife see she reverence her husband, and St. Peter observes that Sarah did so,
and attested it by calling him Lord, which yet had not been much significant if
it had not been conjoined, with a prudent concealing infirmities, and a due
Obedience to his just commands. This Noble Lady did not only so in words, but
really testify the honor and reverence she bare unto her head. Her prudent
concealing infirmities was obvious to all (though no proper matter for this
discourse). Her Obedience to her Husbands commands was so absolute as if she
had learnt of Aristotle, that the Commands of the husband are Arist. Oeconom.
lib. 2.
a law, by God imposed on the Wife by matrimonial conjunction. She had indeed
learned of a better Tutour, Ephesians. 4. 22. Wives submit your selves to your own
husbands as unto the Lord, for the husband is the head of the Wife, even as
Christ is the head of the Church.

But (above all) most remarkable was this incomparable Ladies Christian patient
sympathy with her dear husband, in those bodily afflictions with which it
pleased God to exercise (...).
him, exemplifying that of Demosthenes, how valuable to an husband on a sick
bed a good Wife is. It pleased God to exercise him with successive afflictions,
though in different degrees even from her first Espousals to him and to allott
him this Noble Lady, as much for a Nurse as for a Wife. Her care for him, and
tenderness of him was beyond expression, of which I was an ocular witness for
the seven or eight last months of his life, when his distempers grew heaviest
upon him. In the day time she confined her self to his Chamber, seldom leaving
him for an hour, unless to wait upon public Ordinances, or to take her daily
bread, or perform her secret Devotions. In the night she watched with him to
such a strange excess, as all about her wondered her thin body could bear,
seldom laying her self down to take any rest till two or three of the Clock in
the morning, and then upon an ordinary Couch in his Chamber, where she might
hear every groan, and be at hand to every need. Thus she approved her self a
Virtuous Wife according to the rules of Philosophy, with this difference, that
she did all this, from a more noble Principle, in a more excellent Manner, and
to a more noble End. But this was not all, she was as much a meet help for him
as to the things of Eternity, and the salvation of his soul, as in the things
which concerned this life.

The familiar Compellation which her Noble husband (generally) used to her was,
My dear Saint, and this (not without a just cause) from the experience he had
had of her as to spiritual things. When thou art converted (says our Savior)
strengthen thy Brethren. No sooner had God wrought a change in the heart of
this Noble Lady, but her great solicitude was for the husband of her bosom,
that sin might not rest upon him. When Christ had called Philip, Joh. 1. 45.
Philip finds Nathaniel, and says unto him, we have found him of whom Moses
in the Law, and the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth. This Lady rightly
apprehended that this spiritual charity ought to begin at home. By her prudent
monitions, and passionate entreaties her husband was won from what had been the
vanities of his youth.

To abhor the things wherein he had formerly delighted, to inquire after,
choose, be acquainted with, and to delight in those good ways of God, with
which formerly he had no acquaintance, and against which (for want of a due
knowledge of them) he had formerly taken up a prejudice. He was naturally
inclined to some excess in passion, and in the vanity of his youth had
contracted an habit of swearing, of the evil of which being convinced, he found
it yet difficult wholly to leave it, and as a means in order to it enjoined his
Lady, privily to pinch his Arm, when she heard any Oath slip from him, to which
reproof he would ordinarily with a great deal of kindness reply, I thank thee
my dear Saint; and by this means was at length able wholly to abstain from that
vice, and to fear an Oath, unweariedly to desire, and to be present at private
Fasts, and other Religious duties, severely to reprove others (especially his
servants) and admonish his friends of those errors which had formerly been too
much his own pleasure and delight. In short, by the blessing of God upon the
public Ministry of the Word, upon which he now diligently attended, and the
more private means of this Excellent Lady. This worthy person before he died,
was brought to such a good hope, through grace, for several months, without
perturbations, to look upon death every day making its nearer approaches to
him, and at last, not without testimony of a true hope in God, quietly to
commit his Soul into the hands of his blessed Redeemer. A person who did
remarkably serve his generation, and doubtless he had been an eminent
instrument, if it had pleased God to have granted him a longer life, being one
who might err, through prejudice, or misapprehension, but of that nobleness of
temper, height of courage and spirit, that he never valued cost, nor wanted an
heart to go through with any thing of the goodness and justice of which he was
once convinced, and to whom (excepting Academical, learning, which his younger
years were not patient of) nothing was wanting which could constitute, adorn,
and accomplish a brave and ga^ant man.

But I am digressed, and must return; we have hitherto only viewed this noble
Lady in her Conjugal capacity, as she stood concerned in her husband. We must
now view her in her Parental relation, (for God had not given her a barren
womb, nor dry breasts, though indeed for the further trial of her faith and
patience, he made her ordinarily to bring forth to the grave^ ^he was the
Mother of Nine Children, of which only one (that a daughter) lived to
marriageable years, the rest died all either in their infancy, or before they
had arrived to their years of Puberty. The young Lady (who was the only Coal
God had left her alive) was afterward married to an Honorable and worthy
person, Sir John Hobart Baronet, the heir of her Fathers honor and Family, by
whom it pleased God after some years to give her a Son, after which this young
and noble Lady did not long survive, being immaturely taken away by the
Smallpox, many years before the death of our Noble Lady; nor did her only
Child long survive its mother, so that she lived to see her wise God stripping
her of every branch that had sprang out of her root, to let her know he had a
better name for her than that of Sons and Daughters.

Concerning her deportment to her other Children (whiles she enjoyed them) I
can say nothing, having not had the advantage of knowing her till some years
had past after God had deprived her of them: Only may rationally presume it not
unlike to what she showed to the only surviver. For her I could say much, if
while she had a being with us, by her pious disposition, affable and ingenuous
temper, and most virtuous conversation, in short, by whatsoever
accomplishments, could perfect and adorn a young and Virtuous Lady, she had not
both approved her self to all to whom she was known, and also commended her
betwixt whose knees she was educated to such an (...) of feminine perfection.
The instruction of her Father (which she heard) and the Law of her Mother,
which she did not forsake, proved an Ornament of grace unto her head, and as
chains of Gold, and Orient Pearls about her neck. And indeed, as there was
nothing wanting in nature to accomplish that young and excellent Lady; so her
virtuous Mother had resolved that nothing should be wanting which either her
own care, or the Art of others could help her to. Nor did this Rare Lady, show
more of a Mother to her while she lived; than of a Christian Mother, when it
pleased God to extinguish this light of her eyes, and quench this only coal
which he had left her; taking her death with that due sense, which became so
tender, and indulgent a mother; and yet with that patience and fortitude, which
became ont only her rational soul, who considered she had brought forth a
mortal Daughter, but also a submissive Christian; who had learned not to
repine against Heaven, but in a great measure to melt down her own, into the
divine will.

If we once more turn, and consider this Noble person in the relation of a
Mistress to a numerous family of Servants, we shall find her there conversant
with the same honor which discovered it self in all her other capacities.
Though Aristotle was a stranger to her, yet she had learned this rule. So to
behave her self, toward her Servants, as that her carriage would neither allow
them to be proud or malapert; nor yet did discourage them into any baseness of
spirit. After that the choice of her servants came entirely to her self, her
great care in the first place was to procure persons fearing God, to be nigh
unto her. The number of these being few in this great licentiousness of Youth,
she preferred virtuous and sober persons, she might indeed (as to such) be once
and again deceived, but none ever abode in her house, when she had once
discovered them to be Drunkards, Unclean persons, Profane, Swearers or Cursers,
Enemies to Religion and Godliness, or any other way scandalous: and her eye was
so much about her house, her care so much for the discipline of it, as it was
not easy for any such person to be long concealed, but he was discerned either
by her Ladyships own eye, or by her Steward's.

She always gave noble messes of meat to her servants, and portions to her
maidens; and she also took more than ordinary care for the better Concerns of
their immortal Souls. In short, there is none ever served her who will not
praise her in the gates; none who ever waited upon her but will rise up and
call her blessed.

3. But my Pen hasteneth to the consideration of this Honorable person in the
third, and last period of her life; when she was again reduced to a single
state: In this she was indeed best known unto me, having had the happiness to
wait upon her during this whole time, and for some little time before (about
seven or eight months) from whence I shall begin my story. It was in September
1646. that I was invited by Sir John Hobart (at that time alive) to take my
Chamber in his house, (whiles I discharged my Ministerial Office in the City);
and to take some oversight of his Family as to the things of God. Sir John
himself having lately been valetudinarious, and the Family without any
spiritual guide, I found it in some disorder, and the several persons in it
(my Ladies Daughter only excepted) being persons grown in years, I apprehended
it no easy thing to reduce it to a due Religious Order, and Discipline. My
design was (it being a Family of much leisure) to bring it up to a Course of
Prayer (in conformity to David's Copy, Morning and Evening and at Noontime;
Reading some portion of Scripture twice each day, and expounding it, as my
leisure would allow me) Catechizing once every week, a stricter observation of
the Lords days, and Repetitions of Sermons, both on that, and other days,
when we had attended upon the public Ordinances. I did not do this, as
thinking it what God requires of all Families, but in regard, I thought God
expected more of us to whom he had given more leisure from distracting
occasions of the World: Partly, in regard my hands at that time were not so
full of more public employment, but I could attend this more than ordinary
service in the Family; and indeed, because I thought I saw the Family so much
behind hand as to spiritual knowledge, as ordinary performances in a short time
were not like to reach the end which I aimed at.

As to the generality of the Servants, I feared this might prove like the
putting of New Wine into old Bottles, and be judged a yoke they were not able
to bear. I therefore first communicated my thoughts to my Lady (Sir John
Hobarts sickly state not allowing much liberty of discourse at that time). Her
Ladyship cheerfully approving my thoughts, propounded them to her husband, who
with great expressions of thankfulness, testified his approbation to me, and
commanded his Servants diligently to attend the duties; and himself, when his
distempers would permit him, was never absent ordinarily (for some time) at our
Prayers. At Noon and Night he was with us. The Morning Service was by seven of
the Clock, rarely after eight, from which her Ladyship, unless in a bed of
sickness) in eighteen years I think was hardly twice absent, and was ordinarily
with the first of the Family in the room where they were performed, before her
sickliness brought them to her own Chamber.

The business of Catechizing was more difficult, yet made easy by these noble
Parents, prevailing with their own Daughter, to go before the Family in a noble
Example, which she continued until she had attained a competent knowledge in
the most necessary Principles of Religion. From the time I first came into the
Family, it pleased God to keep Sir John Hobart, in a dying condition (though he
had some more lucid intervals than other:) within less than eight months God
removed him into a better life. It was his great satisfaction all along his
sickness to see his dear Daughter, making such a proficiency in the knowledge
of the things of God, and so willing to set an example to his Family; and he
mentioned it as his dying comfort, that he had seen his Family before his death
in a course of Reformation, which he doubted not but his Lady would bring to
perfection.

Now was this Excellent Lady brought to the third and last period of her life.
Now she sat solitary as a Widow; mourning as a Turtle that had lost her Mate,
and for a while not knowing how to receive comfort because He was not. Having
recovered her self from her passion, and learned to hold her peace because this
was the Lords doing, she made it her first request to me, that I would abide
with her, and keep on the course of Religious duties in the Family, which I had
began, proposing to me an high encouragement from an assurance that I should
find her, proposing to her self the pattern of the man according to Gods own
heart, Psalm. 101. 1, 2, 6, 7. endeavoring to walk in her house with a perfect
heart. That those who were of a froward spirit should depart from her: That her
eyes should be upon the faithful in the land, they should serve her. That he
who wrought deceit should not dwell in her house; he that told lies should not
tarry in her sight. To which resolution she was afterward very severe. The
times began to be troublesome, through the distempers of the Army, and some
fears began then to arise, that Ministers, who could not comply with the
extravagancies of that time should not be suffered to enjoy their public
liberty: Her Ladyship partly to obviate that Evil, partly to give her self
advantage (however times fell) to do good to the Souls of many; at no small
charge, converted some less useful lower rooms of her house into a Chapel
which was conveniently capacious of more than 200 persons. Here she obliged me
at first to preach a Lecture every week, and to repeat one or both of my
Sermons every Lords Day at night, after the more public Sermons were finished
in the Town, which for 16 years was continued to a very full Auditory, and to
the great advantage of many younger persons, and of those who had not such
advantages as they desired in their own houses, for hearing again what they had
been hearing in the day time. A work of piety the more remarkable for this, her
Ladyships Chapel lying in the way to that field where the younger persons were
formerly wont to profane the latter part of the Lords day, by idle walks,
discourses and Recreations, intercepted many of them, and proved a bait to
allure them both (from the example of it) into a further reverence of the
Sabbath; and (from the Doctrine they heard there) to bring them to a further
acquaintance with God. After this she engaged me also to preach a Morning
Sermon there on the Lords days (those monthly days only excepted when I was
to administer the Communion of the Lords Supper more publicly). This course
her Ladyship continued so long as I had a liberty to preach, or her Ladyship a
liberty to hear. But, that I may speak more distinctly:

The Christian Philosopher divides all virtue into Piety, and Probity; which
indeed is our Saviors division of the whole Law into the two Precepts: Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart; and Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. We must first consider her Ladyships obedience to the
first, and then to the second.

1. Even from her Childhood some seeds of severer piety began to discover
themselves in her. I have heard her mention the pleasure she then took in
reading Mr. Dod's Exposition of the Commandments. Then (as I have heard her
relate it) her pleasure was in those Ministers whose Doctrine was most lively,
and whose lives were most pure and holy. But her self would constantly own the
fixed change of her heart to have been wrought by God under the Ministry of
that eminent Servant of God, Mr. John Carter, late Minister of St. Peter's
Mancraft in Norwich, of whom she was a constant Hearer. Her pious Soul having
thus been kindled with an holy fire, quickly flamed in a Gospel conversation,
her light shining out so before others, that they saw her good works, and
glorified her Father which was in Heaven: And I doubt not but many in the view
of them, glorified God in the day of their Visitation. I know not whether (in
the memory of any) the City of Norwich was blessed with any person of her
quality, who in any proportion to her, encouraged the ways of God with her
Purse, and recommended them by her unparalled example. Let us take the due
proportion of a Christian single-woman from the great Apostle of the Gentiles,
and compare her with his Rule. He speaking, 1 Cor. 7. 34. of married and
unmarried Christian women, says, The unmarried 1 Cor. 7. 34.
woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and
spirit, but she that is married, cares for the things of the world, that she
may please her husband. And the same Apostle giving us the description of a
Widow indeed, deciphereth her thus: 1. Negatively, she is one that lives not
in pleasures, for (says he) The woman that lives in pleasure is 1 Timothy 5. 5.
dead while she lives. 2. Positively he describes her thus, She trusts in
God, and continues in 9.
supplications night and day: and directing what Widow he would have dignified
in the Church he says, If she has been the Wife of one husband, (by which I
conceive he understands Chastity) if she be well reported of for good works, if
she have brought up children, and lodged strangers, if she have washed the
Saints feet, if she has relieved the afflicted, and diligently followed every
good work. We shall find this excellent Lady Saint Paul's qualified Widow.

1. Negatively: She was none of those who lived in pleasure while she lived.
Very far from spending her precious time in sleep, or banquets, at Balls or
profane Plays, or insignificant Visits, or that spend their Estates in soft
and gay Garments, or indulging their Palats, besides what time she necessarily
spent in the services of her body, she spent all her hours, either in the more
public or private exercises of Religion, or in such Visits where she might
either do or receive good; if she made any other, they were her burden rather
than pleasure, to repay the civilities of others, never being patient of being
outdone in Civilities. She seldom spent half an hour either in a Dinner or
Supper, and both ate and drank in so small proportions, that (not denying
allowances for particular constitutions) she was a perfect demonstration, how
little Nature would be content with: she was so far from taking pleasure in
costly raiment, that for some years after the loss of her dear husband, she
could not be persuaded to wear a silk Gown; and professed to do it, that she
might have abundantly to relieve poor Christians in want: and when at any time,
she saw an object of charity requiring a greater proportion than suited her
present stock of money, she would yet do it, telling me, it was but wearing a
Gown two or three months longer: For Music, Dancings, Gamings, her serious
mortified Soul was grown a perfect stranger to them.

Until some few years before her death, when infirmities increasing upon her,
suffered her not to do as formerly. This was the constant course of her life.
She seldom was in her bed after Four of the Clock in the morning, (toward her
latter end, her health enforced her to abide in it longer; yet to the last,
Seven was her utmost hour): from the time she rose till Seven of the Clock, she
spent her time in the private Devotions and retirements of her Closet; then she
came out to the more public duties of the family, which she never missed, and
seldom but was first in the room, in Prayer, Reading the Scriptures,
Expounding, one or more of these Exercises (as opportunity served) and some
discourses afterward she then usually spent more than an hour, the rest of her
time till Noon was spent in her Chamber in dressing, or in her Closet, reading,
looking over Accounts, etc. Sometimes for half an hour she walked. Then she
came out again to Prayer in her Family, in which, and in Dinner, and following
Discourses she usually spent two hours, and sometimes exercised her self for
half an hour afterward. Her afternoon was spent in reading, or making Visits
chiefly to such Christians, as she had an Interest in; or sometimes in spinning
or sowing with her Maids. About Six she again came to her Family Duties: in
which, at Supper, and discourses after it, she ordinarily spent three hours,
and then withdrew to her Closet, for many years together there she abode
reading and praying till Twelve or One of the Clock: till at last with no
ordinary difficulty, she was persuaded by her learned Physician to abate an
hour or two of that excess, for her health sake. Thus she lived a most
mortified life to all the contents of this World, excepting only what arose
from Communion with God, and his people; using as great severity to her self as
those who judge such Castigations of their body the price of Heaven.

2. The Positive part of St. Paul's description, in the first place respects
Religion; so he describes her to be one, 1. Trusting in God. 2. Continuing in
supplications night and day. 3. Caring for the things of the Lord, that she
might be holy in body, and mind, and spirit. The first is an internal, the
second a more external Act of Religion. Trusting in God, as it speaks our
secret affiance in, and adherence to the promises for this life or that to
come, is so secret an act of the soul, that oft-times, the Soul that does it,
cannot discern the truth of its own act, much less can another discern it
otherwise than from the effects. Some of those effects, which will come nearest
the certain discovery of this habit, are, an unfeigned love to the Word and
Ordinances of God; Freedom from distracting ears for to morrow; Love to God;
Fear of offending him; Hope in his mercy, etc. How much this admirable Lady
valued the Word and Ordinances of God, was conspicuous to all that knew her,
most to us who had the advantage of more intimate communion with her: Besides
that she was rarely to be found alone without her Bible before her, she had
drawn up for her self a method for reading the Scripture (to which she was very
strict) so as every year she read over the Psalms Twelve times, the New
Testament thrice, and the other part of the Old Testament once. Besides this,
that she might want no satisfaction to any doubt arising upon her reading the
Scripture, she had furnished her self with a large Library of English Divines,
which cost her not much less than 100 l. of which she made a daily use: She was
(while in health) unweariable in her attendance upon Sermons, such especially
where the Truths of God were opened most lively, and with least vanity, and in
fullest evidence of Scripture; she ordinarily heard three or four Lecture
Sermons in the week, and three on the Lords day, till her distempers so
prevailed upon her, that she could not attend them without that heaviness which
she was loath to discover, and which was her great affliction. This her love to
the Word argued that she had chosen the Promises in it for her portion, and had
cast her Soul upon them; how else were they so precious to her?

She was indeed a Lady exercised with her doubts and fears, and
love-jealousies; rather evidences for, than against this adherence to her dear
Lord. I have seen her in great agonies and conflicts, and almost refusing to be
satisfied, but could never find that they argued more, than an earnest
thirsting after further evidences of divine love than it pleased God for some
time to vouchsafe her. She was possessed indeed of a Noble Estate, and so had
not that temptation as others to distrustful cares for the things of this
life; yet so far as she could, she exercised this act of faith, never caring
for to morrow, nor considering what it might bring forth: But freely spending
her whole revenue in pious and charitable works (that of it I mean which she
could spare from the frugal expenses of her household) prosessing she desired no
more, than to make her accounts of Receipts and Disbursements even at the years
end. Her love to God was beyond the love of Women, whether we view it in the
more secret motions of her soul, or in more imperate acts: What sighs? what
heartbreaking sadness, have I been a witness to from her, when she lay (at any
time) under apprehensions of any degrees of divine desertions? or any
suspicions of the truth of Grace in her own heart: What tears (in such dark
hours) have I seen flow from her eyes in her Closet more privately? What groans
have I heard from her, while we have been praying more publicly? On the other
side, if at any time, she could have laid hold upon any good Word of God, if
she had found any more freedom of spirit or heart, or felt what she judged an
Efflux of divine love upon her Soul, What a cheerfulness did we all the day see
in her countenance? what freedom did we discern in her converse? It was no hard
matter for me from the observation of her converse and countenance in the
daytime, to judge how it had sared with her Ladyships spirit in her addresses
to God that morning. Her dread of God was exceeding great. I have sometimes
trembled to hear with what earnestness she would adjure me to be faithful to
her in the business of her Soul, and not to suffer sin to rest upon her. Her
fear indeed was for some time too too servile, favoring too much of the spirit
of Bondage, but it was afterward, more constantly Filial, in all things
discovered by a reverential sense of the great and glorious Majesty of God, and
a fear of wilful sinning against him.

Nor was this Excellent Lady's Religion such as to evince it to the World, she
was put to flee to the plea of a good heart as a Sanctuary. Out of the
abundance of Grace in her heart her mouth spoke, her whole outward man moved in
a just conformity to her external profession: She was exemplarily diligent and
devout in all Religious performances.

Prayer was her great delight. To that form are the first spiritual words which
the Child of God speaks. The first account we have of Saint Paul after his
conversion was, Behold he prays, and this seems to have been the first
study of this Excellent Lady: In the external performance of which, she found
some difficulty, to relieve her self in which, she had furnished her Closet
with most valuable English books, which contained Forms of Prayer, upon several
occasions; in none of which she could find a full satisfaction, but ever and
anon she was still at a loss for words fitted to the altering complexion of her
spirit. To help her self, she procured her Pastor to draw up several Forms
fitted to the frame of her Soul, at several times: And in this work when I was
come into her Family she often employed me, but still she remained
dissatisfied, that she gave us so frequent troubles, and that after some years
owning her self to be Gods child, she should in any exigent be at a loss for
words to take unto her self, and to say Abba Father. I humbly advised her to a
praevious study of the more general matter, and method of Prayer, and of the
Divine Promises, which are the sacred Obligations which Prayer puts in suit. As
to the former, I drew up for her Ladyship a Scheme (which she kept hanging
before her in her Closet to her dying day, describing to her the plainer and
more ordinary method, and the more general matter of Prayer, and commended to
her some Books which gave the fullest account of the Promises. After some small
exercise of her self in both of them, she needed her Prayer-books and Forms no
longer, but was able (as occasion ministered it self) to pour out her Soul to
God according to her necessities, without any further Monitor than the Spirit
of Supplications in conjunction with the pious workings of her own breast. And
indeed after this she was no friend to Forms, she judged that they could never
be used with that warmth of affection, which attends the words of a good
Christian, formed in his own heart: That whosoever limited himself by them would
never from his performance in duty understand any thing of the frame of his
heart. And that no knowing person could have other need of them, than as a
Supplement for his own laziness, neither studying the Scriptures nor his own
Heart. Whatever be determined as to her judgment in the ease, her Ladyship for
15 or 16 years before her death would not allow her self the use of them. She
prayed much in her Closet, Thrice each day in Communion with us in the Family.

She was as diligent in hearing the Word, ordinarily hearing three Sermons on
the Lords Day, and more Lectures in the Weekday, till her increasing
distempers (of late years) more indisposed her. Her Sabbath day service, and
the hearing of one weekly Lecture which her Ladyship at her own charge erected
and maintained, she continued while she was able to go down stairs, yea and
after that in her Bedchamber to her dying-day.

Once every month, she (in Communion with us) received the Lords Supper, and
that not without praevious preparation before she came, and most ardent
devotion when she was present at that sacred Institution. Of her private
Fastings, and extraordinary times of Prayer, I shall say nothing, though in
them she was not wanting.

Her love to the Ministers and servants of God was beyond comparison; she had
not only (like the Shunamite) prepared a Table, a Bed, and a Candlestick for
the Servants of God who passed that way, but (like Lydia) she would adjure them
(if they judged her faithful) to come to her house. To this purpose she had
set apart one Chamber in her own house, to which she had given the name of The
Ministers Chamber. She highly prized any laborious Godly Minister, and that for
his works sake; and she had as little kindness for any who attended not their
Work, or whose lives defamed their Doctrine, and Function, having nothing but
the color, and form of their Coat to make them known: she had indeed a
peculiar kindness for some, but a great love for all, whom by any thing she
could discern deriving from Christ, and dedicating their time and hearts to his
service. So far as I could estimate it, she every year spent the fourth part of
her Revenues upon good Ministers, and poor Christians. Her charitable acts were
like that pious act of Araunah, of whom the Scripture says, As a King he gave
unto the King. What she did of this nature, she did nobly, and a very large
heart and hand God had given her. How often has she lodged strangers, relieved
the afflicted, washed their wounds (instead of their feet) washing of which
being not our guise? How diligently did she follow every good work? Her Coach
was ordinarily seen waiting for her, at the doors of poor and mean persons,
whiles others (like Michal) looked out at their wanton Windows, saw it, and
mocked. It pleased her Ladyship when she came home to fancy what the wanton
Gallants of the Town said, How glorious was the Lady Frances to day, spending
her time in Visits to poor Knitters? She had an answer ready (with a small
alteration) from the man according to Gods own heart, It was before the Lord,
with such as he has chosen to Eternal life, leaving Vain persons to perish in
the recompense of their iniquity.

While others were measuring the ground with their idle feet, she (upon her
bended knees) was taking her turns with God, and taking the height of the
third Heavens: While they were discoursing of the Mode, in this or the other
habit, she was discoursing with poor Christians upon sick and Deathbeds, about
the long white Robe of Christ's righteousness; the New Name, the white Stone,
the Chains about the Saints necks; while they were laughing, and pleasantly
busied at their Feasts, Balls, and Plays, she was in her Closet, mourning, and
offering up to God the spiritual sacrifice of Prayers and Tears, both for her
self and them. She was of our Divine Poets mind, that Kneeling never spoiled
Silk-stocking, nor Gown neither, and that Christian Cottages never dishonored
a more stately Coach. I have known some very mean Christians (but indeed of
great grace, and great experience in the ways of God) from whom lying on their
beds of afflictions, she would hardly be two days absent; nor did she judge
any time too long to spend with them. She would often say to me, that she
believed Love constrained equally (if not more) in spiritual Relations, than in
those that were natural; and when in her dark hours, she sometimes ran the fate
of other Christians, wanting such evidences of Grace, as she desired to have
found, she would from this relieve her self, that if St. John's Argument were
infallible, 1 John 3. 14. We know that we have passed from death to life,
because we love the Brethren, she yet had a ground of hope, for if her heart
did not strangely deceive her, she loved them, and that because of their
holiness, etc. nor was she any of those that said she had Faith or Love, and
had no Works. None of those whom St. James reflects upon, Who if a Brother or
Sister were naked, and destitute of daily food, would say to them, James 2. 15,
16.
Depart in peace, be you warmed, and be you filled, notwithstanding gave them
not those things which were needful to the Body. Her love did not evaporate,
and spend it self in an emptyhanded Visit, or mere pitying of such as were in
affliction, she many ways refreshed their bowels, if she found their bodily
distempers difficult, she would ordinarily send her own learned Physician to
them (who himself was a Luke too toward such as feared God) if she found them
under spiritual trouble, she would direct me to them: She would put her own
hands to their wounds, send them dishes from her own Table, when she had been
with them at any time like the good Samaritane in the Gospel, when she came
away she would take out money from her purse, and give to Nurses, saying to
them, Take care of this person, and whatsoever you spend more, when I come
again I will repay you. Her self denial in all acts of piety, and charity to
the souls and bodies of others, was the just admiration of all sober persons in
the place where God had fixed her, for which she was universally honored, even
by those who were of far different complexions from her.

Nor was she at all morose in her converse. Her piety taught her civility, and
affability, and a readiness to do good to all, though her delight (according to
that of David) was in those Psalm. 16. 3.
whom she apprehended dear unto God; and she was (according to the Apostles
direction) most abundant in doing good to those of the Gal. 6. 10.
household of Faith. Though her Expenses were great and noble, yet those upon
her self were mean and inconsiderable: She cared not to be known by so pitiful
a badge of Honor as Costly Apparel, but was far more ambitious, of purchasing
to her self an honorable report from good works, which yet she did not to be
seen of men, and was careful as to the most of them, that they should neither
be taken notice of in the doing, nor that any record should be left of them,
her desire was to have praise not from Men but from God. Lands quia merebatur
contempsit, and quia contempsit magis merebatur: So little did she affect
applause, that drawing her last will (at least the Preface to it) with her own
hand whiles I had the liberty of my public Ministry, she willing me to preach
at her Funerals, added (as I remember these very words) And I desire him to
forbear all commendations of me, a vile sinful Creature. Thus did this Noble
Lady go in and out before us, commending the holy ways of God, not only to all
in the house with her, but to all that dwelt round about her. Thus did she
shine in her Horizon; she was not a reed shaken with the wind, not one carried
about with every wind of Doctrine; she was not a person known by her clothing
in soft and costly raiment (yet she had been no stranger to Kings houses) she
was a burning and a shining light, and for many years the people of God, in the
City of Norwich, rejoiced in her light, to say nothing of more extraordinary
advantages, they enjoyed at least three opportunities each week for hearing the
Word of God at her Ladyships charge. But she, according to the will of God had
(with David) served her generation, and her time now was come when she must
fall asleep.

It must and may be owned (for she judged it no blot upon her honor) that she
was a Nonconformist as to some Modes of Worship in present use; as well as to
some Doctrines more now in credit than formerly: for the latter, she was
beholden to her Noble Father, who (as it was said before) early prejudiced her
against the Arminian principles, and for the former, she was wont to
acknowledge it to those who had the charge of her tender years, who sowed those
seeds, which afterward brought forth this fruit, indeed nothing so prejudiced
her against forms of Prayer, as her own experience of them. For the two or
three last years of her life therefore, she restrained her self to those
exercises of Religion, which were performed within her own walls, or in some
other places not so public. As to which she yet enjoyed a great liberty, by
reason of that honor which persons of all persuasions had for her. It was not
the will of God she should long survive that liberty, which was so precious to
her. The Lords day next preceding the time when the Act restraining religious
meetings took place, was (if I remember right) the last time she went down her
stairs; I remember while I helped her in going up the stairs from her Chapel
to her Chamber, that night she told me, The Act would do her no prejudice, for
she should never go down more. This (as I remember) was about the latter end of
June, or beginning of July, 1664. The Dropsy (her fatal disease) had three or
four months before seized upon her, but death (by it) made such gradual
approaches, that till that time she was able (without much disturbance) to walk
up and down. That very night (as I remember) was the first time, that she
complained of her legs failing her to that degree, yet was her life lengthened
out till the latter end of November following: Indeed her whole life was a time
of Afflictions, through the valetudinarious condition of her Noble Husband; the
loss of Children, and her own subjection to distempers, through stubborn
splenetick obstructions. Nor was she for some years before without some
prospect of the death by which she should dye, though it was a kind of death,
which she above all others dreaded, and would often say concerning it, Father,
if it be possible let that Cup pass from me.

The time of her last sickness presented us with no great variety of temper in
her as to her spiritual condition (...) kept on her course of Religious Duties
in her House, and Chamber, as formerly. Her work was done both as to this, and
as to another life, her House and her Soul was set in order, so as she had
little to do, but to sit still, and wait for the salvation of God, all the
remaining days of her appointed time till her great change came. I do not
remember that during her long sickness, she more than twice discovered to me
any conflicts in her Spirit, though I constantly attended upon her, and as
constantly inquired upon the frame of her spirit. She had sown in tears before,
and had now nothing to do but to reap in joy. Her death was a long time both
by her self, and us foreseen in its causes, but as to the particular time we
were a little surprised, when she thought the day of her change (in
probability) at some distance, she lost her senses and speech, and after two or
three days quietly fell asleep in the Evening upon the Lords day, Nov. 27.
1664.

Thus lived, thus dyed this twice noble, Excellent Lady about the 61 year of
her Age. Possibly the Noblest Example of Piety, and truest Pattern of Honor,
Liberality, Temperance, Humility and Courtesy, which it has pleased God in
this last Age to show upon the stage where he had fixed her.

A Woman indeed not without her infirmities (to assert that, were to discharge
her of her relation to Humane Nature) but as they were of no scandalous
magnitude, and the products of Natural Temperature, not of Vicious Habits; so
they were so much outshined by her eminent Graces, and Virtues, as a curious
eye would hardly take notice of them. In short, None ever lived more desired,
nor died more universally lamented by all sober persons in that City, to which
she related. She was buried in a Vault belonging to the Family of her Dear and
Noble Husband at Blicklin in Norfolk, December. 1. 1664. therein paying her
deceased Husband a last Obedience, who (as I have often heard her pleasantly
say) made it his first request to her upon her Marriage-day.

PROVE. 31. V. 29, 30, 31. Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou have
excelled them all.

Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain; but a woman that fears the Lord she
shall be praised.

Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise her in the
gates.


OVT of the abundance of the heart (says our Savior) the mouth speaks,
which argues every man in the best capacity, to discourse upon such Subjects,
which have had the latest, and fullest possession of his thoughts; you know (I
suppose) what has made the latest, and deepest impression on my thoughts, I
think I may say upon yours also. I mean the severe dispensation of God to us
all in taking from us (to use Solomon's expression) (...). A noble, virtuous
woman. An elect Lady, to use the Apostles phrase, A great mother in our Israel.
Upon whose separation from us, who is there amongst us, fearing the Lord, that
is not crying out; Ah? my mother! my mother! The Chariots of Norwich and the
horsemen thereof! I have therefore resolved to make an Excellent woman the
subject of my discourse upon this occasion; you have had her pattern in that
noble example, whom now the Providence of God has taken from us; you have her
description in the text; A woman fearing the Lord: while I am discoursing the
Excellency of the woman in the text, both absolutely, as considered in her
self, and comparatively as weighed with others in the balances of Religion,
and Reason: I shall satisfy my self that as to our deceased friend, I shall
fulfill the will of God in the close of my text, Giving of her, the fruits of
her hands and causing her own works to praise her in the gates.

We read of Solomon, 1 Kings 4. 32. that he spoke three thousand Proverbs.
Some of the principal of which are doubtless recorded in this excellent portion
of holy writ. The notion of Proverbs must not be taken so strictly as we
usually take it, but in a further latitude of sense as comprehending all
figurative speeches, especially such as have in them ought of a similitude,
Nomine He. (...) significatur omnis sermo figuratus. Mercer.
(of which sort are many of these sentences) some therefore interpret (...)
axioms or remarkable sentences, specially calculated for the regulating of our
conversations. These Solomon repeateth as the dictates of his parents to him,
Prove, 1. 8. He brings in his father speaking; My Son hear the instructions of
thy Father, and forget not the law of thy Mother. Now that he might show, that
that general admonition had an influence upon him, he in a great part of this
sacred piece of holy writ, records the instructions of his Father, and in the
beginning of this Chapter he also records the Law of his Mother. So this
Chapter begins. The words of King Lemuel, the prophecy which his Mother taught
him. Interpreters generally agree, that this Lemuel was Solomon (there was no
King of the Jews named Lemuel). Nor need any stumble at the name, who wistly
considers, that at his birth, the Lord named him Gedidiah, which not only
argues him to have had another name beside that of Solomon 2 Samuel 12. 25. Apud
eos Deus Deo. Cui est Deus.
(whether so many as some talk of I know not) but the import of that name is
much the same with that of this in the text. That signified, Beloved of God,
this may either be translated, God is with them, or to God, or who has God for
his God; as Critical writers have observed, The learned Mercer, rejects the
first Etymology as jejune, yet it is owned by the Hebrew Doctors, and followed
both by Munsterus and Clarius, etc. Mercer rejects it as only significative
of the time when Solomon ruled over Israel, while God was yet with them, before
their Apostasy; either of the latter is probable enough, signifying, either a
man set apart for God, or a man who had God for his God. Which by the way may
control the severe sentence, which some Popish Authors give against this
excellent person as to his eternal state.

I conclude then, and thatwith the generality of Interpreters, that the former
part of this Chapter, contains Solomon's repetition of some excellent Maxims
instilled into him by his mother Bathsheba, which she fitteth to his future
capacity of being King over Israel. Where by the way we may observe, the
advantage of good principles instilled into children in their youth. They may
in the heat and vanity of their youth, bury these instructions, but they often
have a resurrection, and are afterward to advantage remembered. They are like
seed thrown under the clods, which upon the next kind shower will discover
themselves. In this Chapter Bathsheba persuaded her Son Solomon,

1. To take heed of two species of Luxury, both of them such as persons under
his circumstances are exceeding prone to offend by, in regard of the great
affluence of the world upon them, and which have a very ill influence upon
persons of that Eminency, not only with reference to their bodily life and
health, but with reference to their public duty.

The sum of this first Instruction, you have, v. 3, 4. Give not thy strength
unto women, nor thy ways unto that which destroys Kings. It is not for
Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink wine.

2. Secondly, She exhorts him, to the performance of those positive duties;
which concerned him in his Regal Capacity. The execution of justice and showing
of mercy, v. 8, 9. Open thy mouth for the dumb, in the cause of all such as are
appointed for destruction. Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and plead the
cause of the poor and needy.

From the tenth verse to the end, is the second general part of the Chapter,
where you have the character of a virtuous woman, whether those also were the
words of Bathsheba (as some think) instructing Solomon her Son in the choice of
a wife, and by him recorded for our instruction: Or whether they Originally be
the words of Solomon from the pattern of his excellent Mother, describing a
desirable woman (which is the opinion of others) is as unprofitable to dispute,
as difficult to be determined.

You have the character of a virtuous woman, from the tenth to the nine and
twentieth verse. In these last verses you have both the conclusion of that
discourse, and also of this whole Book of divine Aphorisms. In it you have,

1. The Elogium, or commendation of a virtuous woman. Many daughters have done
virtuously, but thou have excelled them all. Favor is deceitful, and beauty is
vain; but a woman that fears the Lord she shall be praised.

2. Secondly, An advertisement, or admonition to the world to take notice of
her, and to honor her; according to her value. Give her of the work of her
hands, and let her own works praise her in the gates. In the former part we
have observable,

1. A short description of an excellent woman. There are many good women [many
that have done virtuously.] Who then is this same excellent woman? who had made
her self high, or to ascend above the ^^st, (as it is in the Hebrew) (...).
What is this beloved above another beloved? The text tells you, A woman, the
fear of the Lord, we translate it, A woman fearing the Lord. I shall anon take
further notice of the Hebraism.

2. A Second thing which you have remarkable is the order or method which
Solomon uses in commending of her; which is per modum comparationis comparing
her with other women, and showing her Superlative excellency, and in the words
of the text, you have a double comparison. The first of persons. Many daughters
(i. e. many women) have done virtuously, but Thou have excelled them all, or
have ascended, or lifted up thy self above all, where you have

1. A Concession in those words, Many Daughters have done virtuously, he grants
there were many, who in there kind had done worthily, and there was an honor
due to them. 2. A Position asserting the supereminent excellency of this
person; But thou have excelled them all.

Solomon speaks of this woman, as David (his Father) of the sword of Goliath;
There is none to it. There is none to her, This is she that is the chiefest of
ten thousand.

2. Secondly, you have a Comparison of adjuncts from which persons may be
commended. Virtue, Favor: Beauty and the fear of the Lord. Concerning Virtue,
or Strength, or Riches, or Diligence, (for all these things are comprehended
under the term (...)) he speaks nothing at all diminutively; he only
asserteth an excellency in the fear of the Lord above all these; they are as
Stars, ordinary Stars that have their luster, She as the Sun out-shining them
all in glory. For the other two, he speaks more diminutively of them. Favor
is deceitful; Beauty is vain; so not worthy to come into any noble Elogium, of
any person, (that indeed is not explicitly spoken, but necessarily understood)
as you may gather from what follows. But [saith he] A woman fearing the Lord,
she shall be praised. It is a short elliptical speech, as much as if he had
said, but the fear of the Lord has nothing in it will deceive, but much that
is of real and abiding worth, and that which makes the person possessed of it
truly worthy of honor and commendation.

The second part of the Text, I called an Advertisement or admonition to the
world, to take notice of such persons, and to give them their due honor. Give
her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise her in the gates. I
shall little insist on that.

I intend not to discourse every Proposition into which the words of my Text
might regularly be resolved. There are only two which my eye is upon, which I
think contain much of the will of God revealed in this Text, (other things in
it will f^ll in more collaterally) they are these.

Of all persons (or) of all women, the person, the woman, fearing the Lord, is
the most excellent person, Propos. 1.
or most excellent woman.

That concerning such, it is the will of God Propos. 2.
that the fruit of their hands should be given them, and their own works should
praise them in the gates.

The Demonstration of the truth of the first Proposition, is what I intend for
the chief subject of my discourse; something of the latter will fall in in the
application of my discourse. This then is the Proposition.

Prop. That of all persons, of all women in the world, that person, that woman,
that fears the Lord, is the most excellent person.

Many (says Solomon) have done virtuously: but thou have excelled them all,
thou have made thy self to ascend above them all. She shall be praised. In the
opening of this Proposition.

1. I will enquire into the true notion of the person here extolled, A woman
fearing the Lord, or A woman the fear of the Lord, according to the Hebrew
phrase (which as I shall anon show you, is not without its Emphasis) Thus I
shall open the subject of the Proposition.

2. I shall endeavor to demonstrate the Superlative excellency of this Person
above others. So I shall confirm the Praedicate, and under these two heads, I
shall bring whatsoever I shall speak to the Proposition, before I come to the
Application of it.

1. The first thing to be inquired is; Who is this woman fearing the Lord.
(...). as it in the Hebrew, this I shall open to you in three particulars.

In the Hebrew the Abstract is put for the Saepius abstractum ponitur pr^
concreto, seu substantivum pro adjectivo, cum insigni Emphasi and energia.
Glassius.
Concrete, which argues a great Emphasis. It is in the Hebrew very Emphatical;
word for word, A woman, the fear of the Lord. Some think it a mere Ellipsis of
the Verb Substantive, and to be expounded by Cui est, that is, A woman that
has the fear of the Lord. But others more probably think there is in this way
of expression a special Emphasis, and that it signifies an eminent degree of
that quality or adjunct, which is so expressed, in the subject to which it is
applied. A way of speaking very familiar to the Hebrew tongue. Thus Haggai 2.
8. Christ is called, The desire of all Hag. 2. 8.
Nations; that is, eminently desirable. Thus a Shepherd is said to have been an
Abomination Genesis 46. 34
to the Egyptians, Genesis 46. 34. that is, highly abominable; his employment such
as the Egyptians above all others detest. So Psalm. Psalm. 140. 12.
140. 12. Let not an evil speaker, [Heb. a man of tongue] be established. Nor
is it unusual in other languages. Thus in Latin we call one Scelus, that is
eminently vile; in English we call one a Beauty, that is eminently Beautiful.
So here, a woman, the fear of the Lord, that is, a woman eminently fearing the
Lord. So that whatsoever qualities we shall find in Scripture expressed under
this common head of the fear of the Lord: or whatsoever actions we shall find
according to the phrase of holy writ expressed under that notion; this form of
expression signifies a person eminent for those qualities; or in those
exercises; and the phrase signifies much more than an ordinary dread of God.
To open this yet a little further:

1. There is a natural dread of God, which all creatures have, and the worst of
men are not without something of it: For fear being in us a passion necessarily
moving upon the apprehension of an imminent evil. As the infinite superiority
of God over his creatures makes every rational creature presently apprehend it
in his power to do it harm, it must necessarily dread him; especially
considering the natural conscience of guilt, which every such creature has,
exposing it to the stroke of his just, as well as almighty Arm.

2. There is a slavish fear of God: such the Devils have; they fear and tremble
(says the Apostle) this does but gradually differ from the other.

3. There is a filial, reverential fear of God; like that wherewith the child
fears his Father. The Angels have a reverential fear of God, though they know
themselves confirmed in goodness, and in no possibility of offending him; yet
they fear God with a reverential fear, arising from the apprehension of the
superlative excellency of the great Creator above the firstborn, and most
excellent of his Creatures. Thus the children of God fear him, and not only
with a reverential fear, but with a filial fear; they fear lest they should
offend him. This last is the most excellent fear of God. Now of it there are
different degrees according to the different manifestations of the Spirit of
God to his Saints and Christians different proficiencies in grace. Now this way
of expressing this excellent quality, signifies; One possessed of the most
excellent kind of fear, and also in the most eminent degree. And this I take to
be the particular Emphasis and Energy of the term in this place.

2. Secondly, It is a known Rule in Divinity; That words in holy Writ
signifying any notions of the senses and affections; yea and of the
intellectual part also, there used, must be understood not to denote only the
particular acts of that sense Verba sensus and affectum and effectum denotant.
or faculty which they properly express, but all the actions, and the
deportment of the whole soul, and outward man also, which are any way directed
by that sense, or regulated by that affection or passion, and our duty in order
to it, or consequently from it. Without the true understanding of this Rule, we
shall not be able fully to comprehend the true sense of an infinite number of
Scriptures. Thus it is said, Psalm. 1. 6. (with reference to God) that he
knows the way of the Righteous. The meaning Psalm. 1. 6.
is, he loves, approves, watches over the way of the righteous. Thus Psalm.
16. Thou Psalm. 16.
wilt not suffer thy holy one to see corruption; that is, to corrupt, to
experience corruption. So John 8. Abraham saw my day and rejoiced; John 8.
the meaning is, he foreknew such a day, he believed it, he hoped for it and
rejoiced. So Hearing in Scripture often (indeed most ordinarily) signifies
much more than bare hearing, viz. hearkening, attentive hearing, believing,
obeying. So for words signifying Passion. Thus the wrath and anger of God in
Scripture, when it is threatened, does not only signify Gods just will to
punish, but also his acts of vindicative justice. I will bear the indignation
of the Lord (says the Prophet) because I have sinned against him: That is, I
will bear those punishments which the wrath of the Lord has brought upon me.
So here. The fear of the Lord does not only signify an inward awe and dread of
God caused by the Spirit of God, in the hearts of creatures, upon the
apprehension of Gods Majesty, Greatness, Power, Glory, Goodness, or other
Attributes; but it also imports, all those external acts, all that outward
deportment and behavior which naturally flow, or which according to the divine
rule should flow from that principle. So that the woman fearing Jehovah, is not
only she, who in the contemplation of the Majesty, Power, Greatness, Glory,
Justice and Goodness of God, reverenceth and dreadeth him, carrying in her
heart a continual awe of the great God of Heaven and Earth, which makes her
heart and thoughts stoop and bow at the meditation or hearing of him in
consideration of that infinite Majesty, Glory, Greatness and Power, which
naturally require that homage from every reasonable nature; but also in the
whole of her conversation, in all her actions, both before and toward God and
men (in obedience to that principle of Religion) [Fear] exercises her self in
all things to keep a good conscience void of offense, not daring to do any
thing which may provoke this God to displeasure whom she thus dreadeth, and
being exactly careful to do all things, which, and as he commands. This is
the woman fearing Jehovah, so far as we have yet discovered her. But this is
not all which this term imports. Once more.

3. It is very ordinary, as in other Writings, so in holy Writ, by a figure
called Synechdoche, to express a part of a thing for the whole. Look as the
Philosopher says of moral virtues, Virtutes sunt concatenatae, the Virtue
(like beads) are all strung in a chain; and none can properly be denominated
virtuous, who in some degree or other has not all habits of virtue. So I may
say in matters of grace. The graces of Gods Spirit are in a chain too. Thou
have ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished my heart with
one of the chains about thy neck, Cant. 4. 9. A man cannot have one, but he
must have all of them; nor from a single habit can any be denominated a
gracious person, in regard of this concatenation of grace. It is ordinary in
Scripture to find a gracious person expressed, Synechdochically; under the
notion of one singular special habit of grace (especially some one more
principal operative habit.) Now of all habits, there are none more operative
than those of Fear and Love: None that take more hold on the souls, or whose
influence upon it is more evident. Hence in Scripture it is very ordinary to
find an holy, gracious, person expressed under the notion of one fearing God
[or] one that loves God. Divines have observed, that the former is more common
to the Old Testament, which gives account to the Church of God, under its
Paedagogical estate, when the dispensation of the Covenant of Grace was more
terrible, and the latter to the New Testament, where it is more sweet. Thus the
grace and godly conversation of Obadiah, 1 King. 18. 5. of Job, Job 1. 8. of
the whole body of severer professors, Mal. 3. 16. is expressed, and so very
frequently, and in the New Testament, where the dispensation is more sweet and
gentle, it is more ordinary to express the same things, under the notion of
believing and loving, 1 John 4. 21. He that loves God, John 21. 15. Simon Son
of Jonas, James 2. 5.
love thou me? Jam. 1. 12. To them that love him, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Those that
love his appearance. So Romans 8. 28. and in many other places. But yet though
(as the Apostle speaks) we be come now to Mount Sion, and we have not
received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but the spirit of Adoption,
teaching us to cry, Abba Father. And (as the Apostle says) Perfect love
casts out fear. Yet those texts must not be understood of an awful,
reverential fear and dread of God (such as even the holy Angels have: Nor yet
of that filial fear of God, which every child of God has, and must carry with
him even to the gates of Heaven; but only of servile slavish fear: for even
under the New Testament we shall find the servants of God expressed under this
Notion. A godly man in Thesi is thus described, One that fears God, and
works Act. 10. 35. Act. 10. 22.
Righteousness. So also Act. 13. 26. Cornelius in particular is thus described,
A man that fears God: and we shall find that the fear of God is so eminently
necessary to the constitution of a godly man, that any wickedness (by warrant
of Scripture) may be presumed of those that want it. Abraham thus excused
himself to Abimelech, for his not trusting his people with his life, and the
honor of Sarah. I said, the fear of God was not in this Genesis 20. ^1
place. And (on the other side) Joseph gives this as a sufficient security to
his brethren, that whatever they feared, he would do them no wrong. This do,
and live. For I fear God. Genesis 42. 18
So that you see it is but a reasonable figurative way to express the whole of
inherent grace, under the notion of The fear of the Lord; and to express the
whole course, practice and exercise of godliness, under this single habit or
act as a common head; and this I think enough to have spoken for the
explication of the subject in the Proposition, and to give you the true notion
of a woman, or a person fearing the Lord; or (as the Hebrew phrase in the Text
is) The fear of the Lord. It is in short, An eminently gracious, godly woman:
Or (if you will) you may take it more largely thus. A woman, or a person, who
being possessed of all the graces of the holy Spirit of God, communicated in
regeneration, and being grown up to some degree of perfection in those
spiritual habits, eminently lives in a diligent caution, and taking heed of
whatsoever is contrary to the holy will of God, and a diligent and exact
performance of all those duties of an holy life and conversation, which those
sacred principles command and produce, in obedience to the whole revealed will
of God. This is the woman of whom this text speaks. The Woman, the fear of
Jehovah. Let me now come to the second thing, to inquire what is said of this
person.

That which (in short) is said of her, is that she is the most excellent woman:
There are many others praiseworthy in their order and kind; many to whom sua
laus debetur; but there is none like unto her; she has (to speak in the Hebrew
dialect) ascended above them all. Others may deserve some praise, but she shall
be praised; she in the most eminent manner deserves praise. Two things then
are said,

1. She is the most excellent person.

2. She deserves most true and eminent praise.

The latter justly follows upon the former. That therefore is it alone which
I shall insist upon, and the general question is,

Quest. 2. Wherein it does, or may appear, that a woman fearing the Lord (in
this sense) is the most excellent woman, that person the most excellent person?

The commendation in the text being in the superlative degree, the most natural
way to demonstrate the truth of the Proposition, is that which Solomon here
directs us to, per modum comparationis, comparing her with other women or
persons to whom the world gives praise or honor; and showing you the
excellency of her, and those perfections of which she is possessed, above all
other persons of her order whom the world admireth and doteth upon; and above
all those things, for which the mistaken world so admireth others. This
therefore is the method which I shall follow, having the Holy Ghost himself for
my guide. I will then

1. Enquire what those things are, which a^ adjuncts to persons inhance their
value, either really, or in the opinion of men, weighing them all in the
balance of reason and Religion, as I go along, and showing you what there is
of excellency in them.

2. Secondly, I will show you, what there is in this supereminent quality [The
fear of the Lord] which makes it to outshine all those other excellencies,
even before any abatement of their value, and supposing them not subject to
those accidents, which indeed they are subjected to, which will enforce a
rebatement (in any reasonable soul) of what they are at first blush and
appearance worth.

3. Lastly, I will consider both the one and the other in their due
circumstances, and so consider both the one and the other, substracting what
either Reason or Religion will show reasonable to be subtracted from the
appearing value of those other things: And then I hope it will be easy for us
to cast up the total sum of each, and by comparing them together, to judge of
the truth of the Proposition.

1. As to the first, set aside what is here comprehended under the notion of
[The fear of the Lord] all things which either in reality or in opinion do
inhance the value of any person, may be reduced to three heads.

1. The ornaments, perfections and accomplishments of the body, which is our
outward man.

2. The endowments of the mind.

3. More external, accidental, foreign advantages to our persons.

The first head is, The ornaments, perfections and accomplishments of our
bodies. There are strength and beauty, both mentioned in the text in the terms
(...) and (...) the word (...) is a word of very large interpretation.
Primarily, it signifies natural strength and courage. Thence in Scripture it
is ordinarily used, to express an Army, which is ordinarily made up of strong
men. Men of strength (as the Hebrew dialect is) Thus Genesis 47. 6. If there be
Genesis 47. 6.
amongst them any men of strength, or activity (as we translate it; for
activity depends upon Judge. 11. 1.
strength) So Jephthah is called A mighty man of valor. Where the same word is
again used, it is translated Army, Exodus 14. 9. Jer. Exodus 14. 9. Jer. 37. 7.
37. 7. It is true that amongst us strength does not ordinarily fall into the
commendation of the female sex, but you know of old, Deborah and Joel were
renowned for this. Judge. 5.


2. Beauty is that bodily ornament which more ordinarily commends the woman;
it lies in the perfection and proportion of bodily parts, and in a due mixture
of colors proper to flesh and blood.

But the indowments of the mind are things

1. Knowledge, which is the furniture of the intellectual part of the soul; the
object of it is as large as Heaven and Earth, and all things contained in it.
Without knowledge (says Solomon, Prove. 19.) the soul is not good: without
divine knowledge, not spiritually good; without natural knowledge, not morally
good. Knowledge is a great ornament.

2. Moral virtues. Nobleness of spirit, chastity, temperance, sobriety,
justice, mercy and pity, bounty and liberality, meekness, humility, affability,
courtesy. The woman endued with these and such like habits, is far more
excellent than her neighbor, that is lewd, drunken, intemperate, ill-tongued,
morose, immodest, etc. This kind of excellency is expressed in the text under
the term (...) which both in the text and verse. 21. is translated virtue.

A third thing is activity of spirit; when one is disposed and ready for
business; apt to manage affairs, and agile in it. Thus we translate this word,
Genesis 47. 6. If there be Genesis 47. 6.
amongst them, any men of activity. It is used, Exodus 18. 21. to express the
fit qualifications Exodus 18. 21.
of Magistrates; we there translate it able, able men; where certainly it
signifies knowledge, prudence, and almost all moral virtue, together with
activity of spirit. The woman of an industrious, active, diligent spirit and
temper, is far more excellent than her who is of a slothful, crazy, idle
temper, and this also is comprehended in the text under the term (...) as you
may see by comparing v. 10. of this chapter with the following verses, the
(...) mentioned v. 20. is expounded by Solomon to be one that seeks wool,
and flax, and works willingly with her hands; that rises while it is night,
and gives meat to her household, and a portion to her Maidens. This now is a
second sort of things which raise the value of a person in the world.

The third and last sort I call more external advantages; such as are not
inherent in our persons, but foreign to us; and indeed alone signify little or
nothing to the commendation of a rational creature as such: These are,

1. Noble Parentage and Relations; to be born atavis regibus, of noble
progenitors, related to great persons or families; these are some of those
things which the Heathens called good things of fortune, and the Poet knew not
how to call Ours,

-- Vix ea nostra voco.

2. Honors; which are looked upon highly by many, but are things still without
us, having their original in the favor of others.

3. The Affection and Favor of men, which begets a good and honorable name.

4. Riches, a great estate in money or lands, etc. the word (...) often
signifies Riches, Jer. 17. 3. I will give thy substance (...) and all Jer. 17.
3. Isa. 30. 7.
thy treasures to the spoil, Isa. 30. 7. They will carry their riches upon the
shoulders of young Asses. Honors, credit and reputation are expressed under
the other term in the text (...) often used in Scripture to express the favor
of others to us. Thus the world accounts him or her that is rich, honorable,
in credit and favor with the world, more excellent than those that are of mean
parentage, mean estate, or of no repute in the world. And thus I have given you
a short account of the most of those things which raise the value of any person
in the world, to which might have been added, Wit and Fancy, and some noble
virtuous actions. The latter is mentioned in the text, Many daughters have done
virtuously.

And indeed, though it be the great error of the men of the world to over-rate
those things; and because of them to set too high a value upon the person
possessed of them; yet there is something of true worth, value and excellency
in them; and they, (at least some of them) and some of them more than others)
do confer something of excellency upon the person whom it pleases God to bless
with them; Solomon himself yields it, when he says in the text, Many Daughters
have done virtuously: And that leads me to a further consideration, what
there is of real value in these things, we shall find (if we wisely consider
it) That the true excellency which these things have, and which they can confer
upon the person blessed with them chiefly depends upon these things.

First, They are all of them the gifts of God, That one is more nobly and
ingenuously born, is Gods gift, who breathed his soul into a finer piece of
clay than another. He is our Potter, and they are his hands that have shaped
one body into a more lovely and beautiful form than another, and has knit the
joints of one more strong than another. It is he that has given to one a
quicker understanding, a more dexterous wit and fancy, a more solid judgment,
a more tenacious memory, a more active spirit than another. All this comes
from the Lord. It is he that has more disposed the mind of one than another to
moral virtue, meekness, ingenuity, courtesy, sobriety, etc. It is he that has
given to one more than to another favor in the eyes of Princes, and great
persons, or in the eyes of the common people. It is he that has given to one a
greater estate than to another; and by whose guidance and assistance one does
more noble and virtuous actions than another. Promotion comes not from the
East, nor from the West, nor from the South, but God is the Judge, he pulls
down one, and sets up another, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 67. 6, 7. Favor is
not to men of skill, Eccles. 9. God gave Joseph favor in the eyes of his
Keeper, and the Israelites in the sight of the Egyptians. It were easy to show
you the Scripture speaking the like concerning Riches, and
other-accomplishments of Nature, and gifts of Providence (so Christians call
them, acknowledging the donor of them) the Heathen called them the gifts of
fortune, which they dreamed to be one of the four causes of all things, and
made to be a God. Now I say, this puts an excellency upon the things
themselves, and also upon the person possessed with them; whosoever has them, has
more to show for a favor that God has to him, than he that wants them,
unless he has this same excellent thing in my text.

A second thing which commends these, usefulness as to our comfortable being
and subsistence in this life. Riches and Favor, though they be things more
external and foreign to what truly makes up a reasonable creature, or adorneth
him, considered in that capacity; yet they have this excellency in them, that
whosoever is possessed of them, is at a better advantage than another man for a
comfortable subsistence in the world, and to do good to others, than he that is
poor, and of no credit and reputation in the world. Strength and health of body
(upon which strength you know much depends) are necessary and advantageous to
us, for our comfortable subsistence. An Active, busy, diligent spirit, is that
also which makes rich (through the blessing of God) and upon this account all
these things have a true and real excellency in them, and ought to be looked
upon as the blessings of God, which we ought to acknowledge and to receive with
thankfulness at his hand.

Lastly, There is an excellency in some of approvableness to the reasonable
nature of man. All of them do not so approve themselves to our rational part;
reason understands not the excellency of great parentage, or a fair face, nor
of riches, or honors, etc. But now knowledge, prudence, sobriety, temperance,
modesty, with other moral virtues, are things which have in them a certain
innate and connatural beauty, even reason being Judge, and make the person
possessed of them as much to excite another that is ignorant, immodest,
impudent, intemperate, foolish, as light excels darkness; and upon this
account it was that the wiser Heathens valued them, though they knew nothing of
the revealed mind and will of God in reference to them, and considered them not
at all as falling under a divine precept, but only as improvements of nature,
and due products of a soul that had not lost its reason, and was not
metamorphosed by debauchery. The Heathens had no other eye than that of reason;
no other balance than that in which to weigh things that differed.

And now I think we have made a just estimate of other things (the fear of the
Lord only excepted) which either do, or may put a value upon any person in this
world above his neighbor: we have seen what they are, and how much they
signify. The sum is this, That there are many things which either really, or
at least in common opinion make a man or woman to excel; Bodily perfections,
strength, health, beauty; mental endowments, knowledge, judgment, wit,
prudence; moral virtues, temperance, sobriety, etc. An active diligent spirit
and temper, fitted for business in our respective callings; things more
external, such as honor, estate, favor, credit and reputation. And though it
be very usual (as I have said) to over-rate these things, and to overvalue
persons blessed with them, because of them; yet these things, considered as the
gifts and favors of God, and as things of singular advantage to us, with
reference to the comfortable being and subsistence of our outward man in the
world; and as some of them are naturally far more approvable to the reasonable
nature of man, than their contraries have some true, real worth and excellency
in them; and persons possessed of them, may (in their degrees) be justly judged
more excellent and valuable than those that want them. But the person fearing
Jehovah, is yet the most excellent person. Others upon the aforementioned
accounts, have ascended, (to use the Hebrew phrase) or do excel many others in
the world: But the person that eminently fears the Lord, has (as the text
speaks) eminently ascended above them all. Amongst them all, there is none
like to that person, and that brings me to the next thing which I promised you
in the explication and demonstration of the Predicate of the Proposition.

Quest. 2. What there is in this supereminent Quality [The fear of the Lord]
which so raises the price of its subject, that the person which has it, by
reason of it, so much out-shineth others?

In my former discourse I gave you the just value of all valuable things in the
world (this only excepted) which make one person in the world considerably to
differ from another in any degree of excellency, without making any
rebatements, for the accidents, to which those things are subjected. I shall
anon make that rebatement. My present work is, to rate The fear of the Lord,
and show you the true value of it.

In the general, I must say of it as Job has spoken before me; Silver shall
not be weighed Job 28. 15.
for the price thereof; it cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the
precious Onyx, or the Sapphire. The Gold and the Crystal cannot equal it; and
the exchange of it shall not be for Jewels of fine Gold. No mention shall be
made of Coral, nor of Pearls: for the price of wisdom is above Rubies; the
Topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it, nor shall it be valued with pure Gold. Or
in the words of Solomon, Happy is the man that finds wisdom* (Wisdom, and
Prove. 3. 13, 14, 15, etc.
Grace, and The fear of the Lord, are much the same in the dialect of
Scripture) and the man that geiteth understanding; for the merchandise of it is
better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine Gold; she
is more precious than Rubies, and all the things thou can desire, are not to
be compared unto her. Length of days are in her right hand, and in her left
hand riches and honor. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths
are peace. She is a Tree of Life to all that lay hold upon her, and happy is
every one that retains her, Prove. 8. 11. All the things that may be Prove. 8.
11.
desired, are not to be compared with her. Lest you should doubt what is meant
by wisdom, Job expounds both himself and Solomon, Job 28. 28.
Job 28. 28. The fear of the Lord that is wisdom.

But, lest you should judge these empty word^, blowing up a thing beyond its
due value; let us but rationally consider The fear of the Lord, and the person
blessed with it, and we shall find these were not vain words. I shall
demonstrate to you the superlative excellency of this spiritual quality, and
the person endued with it, if you please with me to consider these six or seven
things.

1. The particular fountain or spring head from which it flows.

2. The particular subject which it blesses, ^r channel in which it runs.

3. The excellent object to which it moves.

4. The admirable end toward which it works.

5. The noble actions to which it principleth.

6. The admirable use of it, not only in reference to God and our selves, but
also with reference to others in our political converse.

7. The train of good things which ordinarily attend it.

I shall speak something to each of these in their order.

Let us first then consider the particular fountain, or springhead from which
the fear of the Lord flows. The Apostle tells us, That Jam. 1. 17.
every good and perfect gift comes down from above, from the Father of Lights.
I told you before, that health, strength, beauty, honor, riches, favor with
men; and those other things before mentioned, of a less valuable consideration,
came from God. The Lord raises up one, and pulls down another. The blessing
of the Lord makes rich. It is as true, and in a more eminent manner concerning
The fear of the Lord, Jer. 32. 40. I will put my Jer. 32. 40.
fear into their hearts. God is the Author of every good gift and thing, but in
a different manner. Divines distinguish betwixt a more general love of God to
his creatures, which they call his (...), and his more special distinguishing
love, which they call (...). Not to dispute that distinction, it is most
certain, that there is a Will in God freely to do good to the Sons and
Daughters of men, which we call his Love. It is as certain, that this free and
just Will of God, is not to do alike good to all; to some he wills to show
some particular grace and mercy which he wills not to others. Upon the first
account, He makes his Sun to shine, Mal. 5. 46.
and his Rain to fall upon the just and unjust. He leaves not the Heathen
without a testimony of his love, giving them fruitful times Acts 14.
and seasons.

From this fountain flow riches, honors, and all other effluxes of his
goodness, which we call the gifts of common Providence. Divines rank them under
the notion of (...), things for this life; yea and there are some (...),
spiritual gifts, and spiritual means; such as knowledge, and the fruits of
restraining grace (our natural endeavors only supposed) such are the habits of
moral virtues; all these flow from the more general, common love of God. But
now there are others flowing from a special distinguishing love, in reference
to the spiritual and eternal advant^ge of our souls. From his Convenant-love;
and such is this supernatural quality. And I will make an everlasting Jer. 32.
4.
Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good: but
I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall never depart from me. Now
this is enough (in the first place) to evince the excellency of the fear of the
Lord, and the superlative excellency of the person possessed of it, above the
value of such as are possessed of more inferior gifts. Let us but argue
rationally, and after the manner of men. If there be any excellency in the
favor of a man; or if the collation of a man's favor, does imprint any
excellency upon the person upon whom it is bestowed; then certainly the more
any one has of that favor; or the greater and higher degrees he has of it,
the more he has of excellency. The story is known of the Emperor, who
displeased his Courtier by giving him a Ring, when he gave another a kiss: what
was he angry for? the Ring for use in the world, was more worth than a kiss.
What use could be made of that? Oh! but the kiss spoke an eminent degree of the
Princes love, and so imprinted a greater excellency upon him that had it. When
the Lord gives unto any strength, beauty, riches, honor, they are but as so
many Rings: But where he gives his fear, there he gives the kiss; and this
speaks a greater excellency in the fear of the Lord, and in the person
blessed with it, than in any other thing, or person: the soul that has this,
has indeed ascended above them all; in the favor of God that soul has
ascended above them all. As you see, the strength of this demonstration
depends upon these two postulata.

1. That the person in favor with God i^ upon that account more excellent than
any other person that is not so. And this is no hard thing to be granted by
those who judge, that the favor of an earthly Prince, who is but a mortal man,
does give an excellency to the person blessed with it.

2. That the greater degree of favor any soul has with God, the greater is
his excellency; which easily follows if the former be granted. This is the
first thing.

But secondly, Let us consider the particular subject which the fear of the
Lord blesses. Or if you will, the special channel in which it runs; or
indeed the capacity in which it blesses the soul. Take the most of the
aforementioned gifts, they only innance the price and value of the outward man.
Beauty is subjected in the surface of the body; strength in the nerves and
bodily parts; riches, honor, favor, great friends and relations, they are
indeed the gifts of God, and of great use and advantage; but the advantage of
them is from their usefulness, to the well-being of the outward man, and the
accommodation of a man in this life. Some indeed of the things aforementioned
innoble the inward man; that does knowledge, prudence, moral virtue. Some
distinguish betwixt the body, the mind, and the Spirit. The Apostle seems to
allow that distinction, 1 These. 5. 23. If it be allowable, 1 These. 5. 23.
none of the things aforesaid (the fear of the Lord only excepted) reach
further than the mind, that is, the soul of a man considered as a a rational
substance. Look upon the soul as a noble immortal being, under an ordination
to an eternal existence in happiness or misery; and these things signify
little to it. A noble person may go to Hell. A rich and honorable man; a
knowing prudent man; a comely, beautiful person, may have their portion in the
lake that burns with fire and brimstone. Yea, and the Apostle says, not many
of them will go to Heaven; Not many noble, not many wise, etc. But now the most
noble inward part of man; and that not considered only as a rational substance,
but in its most excellent capacity, ordained to eternity, is the subject
wherein this excellent quality resides. That which it blesses. The price of
the body is raised by strength, beauty, a good and healthy constitution. The
price of the mind is raised by knowledge. wit, judgment, memory, and by moral
virtues. But the value of the soul considered as a spiritual being, that is
immortal, and under ordination to eternity, is raised by grace, by the fear of
the Lord, and indeed by that only. This is that which marketh out a soul for
Heaven, while another is left in the road to everlasting burnings. The seat of
this noble quality is not the surface of the outward man, (which is the throne
of that pitiful thing which the world so much doteth on) which we call (beauty)
nor yet the bones, sinews, nerves of a man, which are the seat of strength: nor
the head of a man, which is the seat of knowledge and prudence: nor the (...),
the rational part of a man, which is the seat of moral virtue, where it sits
as a Queen, and gives Laws to brutish passions, and all motious of the
sensitive appetite: But it is the immortal soul considered as a spiritual
substance, and destinated to immortality and life, and an eternal existence.
Now this soul, and thus considered, is the better part of man, man considered
in his most excellent capacity; and whatsoever blesses, adorneth, and
advantageth the soul, considered in this notion, and under this capacity, must
needs be more excellent than what only commends the body, which is but the
outside of a rational creature, or the mind which a Pagan may have, in as good
a condition as a Christian. As that house is the more noble and excellent house
which has the best inside, and where the rooms are best furnished; not that
which has nothing but a lofty gay front. So doubtless in the judgment of
reason, that man or woman whose soul is ennobled with the most excellent
qualities, is far more valuable than he or she, who have nothing to commend
them but a well proportioned body, or an hansom face, Pro. 11. 22. Pro. 11. 22.
As a Jewel of gold in a Swines snout; so is a woman of beauty (we may add pari
ratione, a woman of strength, wit, parts, etc. without discretion) without the
fear of the Lord. The woman fearing the Lord, is The Kings Daughter, all
glorious within: She is excellent in the most excellent part, and in the most
excellent capacity. Others may have an excellent outside; she has a most
excellent inside: Others may be painted Sepulchers; she has a most excellent
soul: They have excellent limbs, and features in their faces; she has the most
excellent qualities in her nobler and more inward part: They are (it may be)
well accommodated for this life; she is best prepared for eternity; therefore
she must needs ascend, or be lifted up above them all. It is an usual saying
amongst Philosophers, Animus cujusque est quisque. The mind of the man is the
man. It is much more true of the soul, considered in the capacity I mentioned.
The bodies indeed of the Saints are called The Temples of the Holy Ghost; but
it is by reason of the redeemed souls which inform them. The Holy Ghost
dwells in the whole person of the believer as his Temple. The body is but as
the Outward Court into which common excellency comes; such as strength, beauty,
etc. The mind of man is as the Inner Court, into which come a better sort of
divine gifts; this is ennobled with knowledge, prudence, etc. and other habits
of intellectual and moral virtues. But the soul considered in the capacity
(before expressed) as a spiritual, immortal substance, is that part of man into
which the Holy Ghost enters, and which is as it were his throne: Here the fear
of the Lord resideth, and makes it truly excellent. I shall now conclude my
second demonstration; That is the most excellent quality, which ennobleth the
most excellent part, and that in the most excellent capacity; and that is the
most excellent person whose better and more excellent part is so ennobled and
made excellent. But the fear of the Lord ennobleth the more noble and excellent
part, and that in the noblest and most excellent capacity.

Thirdly, The truth of the Proposition will the excellency of the object, to
which this excellent quality moves the soul, and for an union with which it
prepares it. The force of the demonstration depends upon the principle, That
the more excellent any object is toward an union, with which any quality is
subservient, and working, the more excellent that habit or quality is: which is
a principle so justifiable to reason, and allowed by common consent and
judgment, that I need not insist on the proof of it. Take all other qualities
or advantages which the creature can afford, they serve us no further than to
the creature, preparing us for an union with that. For instance, Beauty is an
amiable gift of God; but wherein does it serve us? it indeed may commend the
woman to an husband; but it will not at all commend her to Christ. Wisdom and
Knowledge are rare habits, and prepare us for an union, and endearment to, and
with wise and learned men; but they commend not a soul at all unto God. The
like may be said of those other distinguishing excellencies before mentioned.
But now this excellent habit, The fear of the Lord, commends the soul to the
Creator, and prepares it for a glorious union with him who is the supreme good,
and unquestionably the most excellent object. The beautiful, the knowing, the
wise person may be abominable to God; a child of wrath, and abhorred by him;
but in every Nation, he that fears God and works righteousness, is accepted
of him (says the Apostle.) Reason teaches us to judge those the most
excellent persons in the world, who upon a just account are most approvable to
the wisest and most excellent persons of the earth, and those things the most
excellent which render any so acceptable upon this account (if there were no
other, we should set a great rate upon knowledge, virtue and wisdom, above what
we set upon beauty, and riches, and bodily strength, etc. because they commend
us to the more judicious, rational, and wiser part of the world. By the like
parity of reason (certainly) if we will but use our reason, and accordingly
form our judgment, we must judge the fear of the Lord the most excellent
quality; and the person who fears the Lord, the most excellent person; he
alone is the Jedidiah, the person whom God loves, the soul whom God cares
for. This, and this alone is that which commends the Creature to the Creator.

Fourthly, That is the most excellent quality which directs to, and prepares
the soul for the most excellent end. There is an end to which the wise Creator
has ordained and designed every thing which he has made: and there is an end
which every rational agent propounds to it self in working: and there is an
end or issue, which every thing will have. The great end of man in point of
action, for which God has created him, is the glorifying of his holy Name. The
wise man says, God made all things for himself. And the Apostle says, For him
are all things. God in working, worked for the best ends, cause he could work
for no greater, wrought for himself. The Apostle says of man particularly, We
are created in Christ Jesus unto Ephesians. 2. 10.
good works, which God had before ordained that we should walk in them. Man's
great end in point of fruition and privilege, is the enjoyment of God here, in
the influences of grace; hereafter in the beatifical vision of his glory. There
now are the great ends of man; the ends for which God has created him, and
which the wiser sort of men will propound to themselves. Besides these great
ends of man, there are also some little ends of humane actions to which men
direct much of their action; such as the obtaining of a comfortable being and
subsistence in this life, etc. An end (though in it self considerable) yet
exceeding little in comparison with the former, as every one will judge who
has but learned to compare Time with Eternity, and the soul with the body, and
outward man. Take now all those other things before mentioned, as things either
in reality, or vulgar estimation, raising the price of one mortal above another
(this only excepted) the highest end they move toward, which they dispose and
prepare the creature for, is no more than a sweet and happy being in this
life, and that too, according to the various humors of men; as one fancieth
happiness to lie in riches; a second, in pleasure; a third in intellectual, or
moral virtue. Bodily strength and health are great blessings of God; but what
further fruit do they bring forth, than what tastes well to a mortal pallat?
what do they signify more, than that such as are blessed with them, pass the
time of their mortality with less pain, sorrow and trouble, than those that
want them? Beauty is an amiable gift; but has it any further influence upon
man's felicity than this, that whose are blessed with it, stand in a nearer
capacity to some creatures favor than others, more deformed and uncomely, to
whom being united by marriage, or some near degrees of affection, they shall
(probably) in the world have a life of more content, pleasure, and outward
satisfaction, than others who are not under so lovely circumstances. Come from
them to the indowments of the mind; knowledge, prudence, a diligent,
industrious, or active spirit, etc. and indeed what ever else can be named
(this fear of the Lord only excepted) they neither direct the soul to its best
and noblest end; nor any way prepare and dispose it for the obtaining of it
unless in a very remote capacity. What Is the issue of knowledge, wisdom, but
this, that the persons thus far blessed, stand upon better ground to live in
the world than other men, as well in regard of the satisfaction these habits
give to the mind, as of the light that arises from them to direct a man's
converse, and the usefulness of such a person unto others. The same might be
said of moral virtues, Riches, Honors, great Relations, etc. They none of them
look beyond this life, nor contribute any thing to an happiness beyond it. Nay,
it were yet something, if they perfectly blessed a man, so long as he is
circumseribed with the limits of time and mortality; but how little do they, if
I shall evidence they come short of this? than which there is nothing of more
easy demonstration. For to us who are Christians, there is something more
required even to such an happiness, than an affluence of worldly contentments.
We know and believe that there is a God, that this God is the chiefest good,
and consequently (building upon the rational principle of all Philosophers) we
conclude that happiness even on this side of Heaven, must lie in the enjoyment
of this God; having an interest and portion in him; nor can any assent to
principles of reason above Atheism, but his reason will enforce his
subscription to this; for if he believes there is a God, he must acknowledge
him supremely good; and his reason will tell him, happiness must needs lie in
an union with the highest good. The Heathen Philosophers indeed, having not the
light of divine revelation, according to their various humors (not knowing of
any possibility of enjoying God) judged pleasures, riches, honors, knowledge,
virtue, to be the greatest good, and consequently man's happiness to lie in the
fruition of them. But we, though our common share in reason with them,
enforces us to agree with them in that main principle, That man's chiefest
happiness must necessary lie in his union to, and fruition of the greatest
good. Yet being further enlightened, cannot agree with their notion of that
good; for although they had their dark notions of a divine being, yet the
possibility of a creatures union with God through Christ, Gods in-dwelling in
the soul, the having of God for their God, reconciled in Christ, were things
which Aristotle and Plate never dreamt of: But we having, by the light of the
divine Spirit, made these discoveries, even their reasonable principle,
enforces us to conclude, That the highest enjoyments and happiness of man even
in this life, must needs be his union with, and enjoyment of God. His being
made partaker of the Divine Nature, and transformation into the Divine Image.
So that all those other things do not reach so much as this end, the happy
being of a man in this life; for we all know it is possible that men and women
may have strength, beauty, knowledge, prudence, wit, great relations, riches,
honors, etc. and yet enjoy nothing of God, but be at infinite distance from
him, whom we acknowledge the supreme and chiefest good. But now this excellent
habit, The fear of the Lord, does both evidence our present union with God, and
his special favor to us; and also it works us up to further degrees of union
and communion with him.

But further yet, we who are Christians, are taught to look beyond this life,
to consider our selves as creatures under an ordination to a certain Eternity,
either in happiness or misery. We know that our souls are immortal substances;
and will not, as the sensitive souls of beasts when they die, evaporate into
air: Hence we are concerned to consider wherein the happiness of a soul in its
state of separation lies; and believing the Scriptures, we cannot but believe
that even these immortal bodies shall in the Resurrection put upon immortality,
these corruptibles incorruption, and so are concerned further to inquire
wherein the happiness of the soul and body lies in its state of reunion. Here
again we cannot but with the Philosophers agree, that it must needs lie in an
union with, and an enjoyment of the best and chiefest good, which the holy
Scripture calls, A seeing of God as he is; knowing him as we are known; being
ever with the Lord: In one word, Eternal life. This now our reason naturally
working upon Scripture hypotheses, inforceth us to believe: and that this is
the noblest and highest end of man as to privilege, to which it is but
reasonable that he who knows it, should direct all his actions. Now let us
consider all those other pretty things, and see what they signify with
relation to this end. The strong man, the beautiful woman, the knowing, the
prudent and politic person, may all of them go to Hell: the morally virtuous
person may be for ever excluded the Kingdom of God (that righteousness
exceeds not the righteousness of Scribes and Pharisees.) The Apostle, 1 Cor.
1. 26. speaking of those whom God has chosen, says, Not many noble; not many
wise after the flesh; not many mighty; but God has chosen the foolish things
of the world to confound the wise. The poor of this world has God chosen,
says St. James. Could you look into the black dungeon of infernal spirits,
where miserable souls are reserved in chains, unto the further judgment of the
great and terrible day, you would see there many a Goliath, whose strength could
not rescue him from the potent arm of divine Justice. Many a Thais, whose
beauty, instead of commending her to those eyes (which see not as man sees)
rather betrayed her into that miserable pit. Many a Prince and Emperor, who
knew not God, nor obeyed the Gospel of the Lord Jesus. Many a cunning
Achitophel, whom God took in his craftiness. Many an ingenuous Atheist; many a
rich Dives; but amongst them all, you would not find one single man or woman,
that in this life feared the Lord. No, Prove. 3. 18. Wisdom is a tree of life to
them that lay hold on her. All those other notes of distinction make some
difference betwixt one creature and another as to this life; but as to the
noblest and highest end of man, the blessed and happy enjoyment of God to all
eternity; nothing but grace, nothing but the fear of the Lord makes any
difference at all; without this, all persons, noble and base, rich and poor,
beautiful or deformed, knowing or ignorant, witty or heavy, prudent or foolish,
virtuous or vicious, will go to the same place of torments. This therefore must
be the most excellent habit; and the person possessed with it, the most
excellent person, because leading to, and prepared for the most noble and
excellent end.

Again, the fear of the Lord will appear to those noble actions to which the
soul is by this principled. Humane actions are ordinarily divided unto such as
are natural; such as eating, drinking, etc. moral, and civil, or political,
such are the works of our callings, giving to every one their due, living
soberly and temperately, etc. and such as are Religious, which are our actions
of homage to God: of these now the second are more noble than the first; and
the last the noblest of all. Again, as to our religious actions, they are
either more imperfectly, or more perfectly such. I call those more imperfectly
such, which indeed are so as to the matter of the act, but not as to the manner
or form of the performance; so prayer, hearing the Word of God, etc. But these
are not so in a perfect and true notion, unless performed from a due principle,
in a due manner, and to that due end which God has commanded. Now those are
our most noble and perfect actions, which are religious in the most proper and
perfect sense; and to those, this excellent quality; The fear of the Lord
principleth the soul. Others do but dispose and fit the body or mind for
natural or moral actions, strength, bodily activity do no more, no more do
knowledge, prudence, or the habits of moral virtues; or if some of those other
things do dispose and principle any to religious actions; yet it is but to such
actions more imperfectly considered. It is true, knowledge is an excellent
thing, and has its use, not only in fitting a man for greater perfections in
natural and civil actions, but also for religious services; it prepares men
for prayer, hearing the Word, etc. and the habits of moral virtues prepare men
for virtuous actions commanded in the word of God, and which are to be
performed in obedience to the command of God; but now Grace, the fear of the
Lord disposes, and prepares the soul for the most perfect performance of
religious duties; such as are truly religious in all circumstances, so as they
shall be acceptable unto God. Every one who gives to the poor, or does a just
action, does not that which is acceptable to God; but he alone who does those
things from a principle of faith, or in the fear of God, and in obedience unto
God, does that which God accepts. So says Peter, In every Nation, he that
fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted of him. Every one that
works righteousness, from the fear of the Lord, principling his soul to such
righteous acts, is accepted of God. So as this fear of the Lord upon this
account, is the most noble and excellent habit, as it principleth the soul to
its most noble acts, and to the truest and most perfect performance of them;
being that without which (as the principle) it is impossible a soul in its
highest acts of devotion should please God. The virtuous actions of men; yea,
the religious actions of formalists devoid of this principle, are no better
than splendid sins (as Augustine called the moral of the Heathens) so that by
the same reason that we judge, knowledge, prudence, or any other intellectual
or moral habits, more excellent than other ornaments of a man, as sitting and
disposing persons for more noble and brave actions. We must also judge The fear
of the Lord more excellent than them all, because it further ennobleth the
soul, preparing and disposing it yet to and for more brave and excellent acts,
as such whereby we most answer the end of our creation in glorifying of God,
and wherein, or in the performance of which in such manner as this directs,
we are acceptable unto God.

6. But let us further consider this noble and excellent quality, in the aspect
which it has upon us, not only in the performance of our duty to God, under
which respect we have already considered it; but in the influence which it has
upon us in our civil and political converse with men. David Psalm. 16. 3.
calls the Saints which are in the earth the excellent. Indeed they are so,
and that not only as Saints, as persons prepared for God (as the word (...)
from (...) translated Saints in that place seems to import) but also upon a
rational view, and a truly civil and political consideration. Persons fearing
the Lord, have not only the best souls, and are not only best considered in
themselves, and in reference to God, but they are also the best neighbors.
This will appear to you upon the digesting these two considerations.

1. That the Word of God considered as a systeme of precepts fitted for the
maintaining of humane society, is the most excellent body of such political
precepts, with all possible advantages of comfort to such as are engaged as c^^
relates in such societies.

2. Secondly, (which I told you in opening the subject of the Proposition) That
the person fearing the Lord, is a person who having the dread of God upon his
heart, exercises himself in a strict observance of the Divine Law, in all
things to keep a good conscience both toward God and toward man.

1. The first is a most demonstrable truth; take all the Laws of the wisest
Nations and Lawgivers that ever were in the world, pick out the best of those
of the twelve tables at Rome, amend what is deficient there by those of Solon
and Licurgus, refuse Justinians Code. Search all the bodies of Laws in the
world, and out of them all make one Systeme, one body of political and
domestic precepts; it will not prove so fitted for the comfortable and
advantageous living in humane society, as the Law of the Lord contained in the
holy Scriptures is. I durst appeal to the reason of a Cato or Aristides in the
case. Let but any person out of the Book of God, draw out those precepts which
it has given concerning Magistrates and Subjects, Husbands and Wives, Parents
and Children, Masters and Servants, or any political (...). Then let him but
suppose such a City in the world, where within doors, all Parents and Children,
all Masters and Servants, all Husbands and Wives lived exactly according to
those Rules, and without doors; the Public Magistrates, and the people
governed by them, the Ministers, and their respective flocks, neighbors and
friends, behaved themselves each to other according to those prescriptions, and
let him fancy if he can; and soberly tell me if he can, what could be wanting,
to the beauty, honor, and comfortable living of such a society. So true in
this case also is that of David, Psalm. 19. 7, 8. The Law of the Lord is
perfect. The Statutes of the Lord are right. It were easy to demonstrate this
in particular, were it not too large a digression.

Now I say in the second place, That a person fearing the Lord, is one who does
exercise himself in this, in a strict observance of the Divine Law, to keep a
conscience void of offense, both toward God, and toward men. Whence it must
necessarily follow, that the fear of the Lord is the most excellent quality,
and the person fearing the Lord the most excellent person, considered in a
political, as well as a religious capacity. The best neighbor, husband, wife,
parent, child, etc. as well as the best Christian. Let us but use our reason a
little. Is not that man or woman best prepared to, and fitted for humane
society, who is under the highest obligations imaginable, To do no kind of
wrong to another; To give to every one his due, and that in every capacity, and
as he has occasion; even to his enemies, and to the worst of men, without any
respect to his particular prejudices, to do all possible good; and who
accordingly so lives, so walks? The person fearing God,

1. As to these things is under the highest imaginable obligations.

2. Thus he walks, thus in a great measure he lives, giving still allowance
to humane infirmities.

1. I say first, he is as to these things under the highest imaginable
obligations. This will be evident to you, if you will consider, that the Law of
the Lord (which he owneth as his only Rule) requires these things at his
hands, that this Law is not only in his eye, but in his heart; that he stands
obliged to the performance of it, under the fear of the greatest terrors (such
the terrors of the Lord are) and under the encouragement of the largest
promises, and upon the highest principles of ingenuity. A man or woman not
fearing God, may be under obligations to do no man wrong; to give to every one
his due; to do good to others, etc. But I pray, what are his obligations? Let
us weigh them apart, and consider them with the obligations to the same things,
which are upon the hearts of persons fearing the Lord; and who have in them
this same principle.

1. Others may be under the obligations of humane Laws; and blessed be God for
them; to them we are beholden, that there are in the world no more murders,
thefts, and other disorders, to the utter confusion of humane society. Men are
afraid of the Ax, the Gallows, etc. But alas! what is the force of these,
compared with the terror of everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels? If he be under an obligation to avoid these enormous disorders in
humane society, who is only awed from them with the fear of a Gaol or Gallows?
what is he, think you, who is afraid of being tormented in Hell by the wrath of
God to all eternity? Where the worm never dies, and the fire never goes out?
It is true, there is the same obligation upon him that fears not God; he is
in danger of Hell fire; but it is the person fearing God who alone firmly and
fixedly believes any such thing. Others, if they do not laugh and mock at such
things; yet very faintly assent to Propositions of such a nature.

2. Obligations may lie upon others to just and virtuous actions, from the
rational beauty and comeliness of a just and sober conversation, above one
which is lewd and debaucht. Until reason in man be outlawed, and beas^ly
passions and affections have perfectly subdued it, moral virtue will commend it
self to humane nature. But what is the force of this obligation, compared with
the Will of God to that man, who has said, the Lord shall rule over him? Or to
the apprehension of a Conformity (by such actions) to Jesus Christ, to him to
whom Christ is precious, who has avowed Christ to be his Master, and assumed
to be his Disciple. What is this obligation to the consideration of a gracious
man, that these are the fruits of the Spirit which he has received, and in
which he stands obliged to walk, and that the contrary acts are the fruits of
the flesh, which he stands obliged to mortify: which if he so much as
savours, they will argue him to walk after the flesh, and conclude him liable
to condemnation, as having no interest in Jesus Christ. The gracious man does
not these things, because reason only approves them; but because God has
commanded, and because God does approve them, because they are the Will of God
concerning him, because Jesus Christ (while in the flesh) so walked, setting
him an an example, etc.

3. Thirdly, Others may have obligations upon them, to do some such things from
good nature. Some naturally are of more sweet and ingenuous natures than others
are; more naturally inclined to justice, pity, mercy; and this obligation
works very high where it is found. But alas! what is this to his obligation,
who has these things as branches of the Law of God engraven upon his heart,
and that in that deep sculpture which the finger of the holy Spirit uses to
make? to his who has a new name, yea and a new nature given to him; and from
that new nature, acts according to the prescript of Divine Law freely and
ingenuously, not from constraint. Luther sometimes said of such a one, Justus
non debet been agere, sed been agit. A passage that had need of a candid
interpretation; but thus far true, That a man or woman truly fearing God, is
not so much constrained by the force of a Divine Law (in which sense it may be
the Apostle says, that the Law is not made for him) as compelled by his new
nature, and the generous principles of the new creature; his nature is quite
altered; the things which he hated, he now loves; and what he formerly loved,
he now abhors.

4. Again, a man or woman not fearing God, may be under some obligations to
just and virtuous actions, which may make him a good neighbor. From Honor,
obedience to Governors, Courtesy to some who have done him a kindness; or an
ingenuous nature abhorring to do wrong to such as have done him none. But alas!
what are these, compared with the honor of maintaining the repute of a
Christian, of a child of God, who is concerned to walk unblameably, as a Spouse
of Christ, which must be presented without spot and wrinckle, who is pressed to
these actions from a far higher engagement upon his ingenuity, as they are the
prescripts of that God, who has loved him with an everlasting love; of that
dear Savior, who has not loved his life for his sake. I (says he) must love
mine enemies; do good to them that hate me; bless them that persecute me; and
pray for them who despitefully use me. Thus I shall be like my Father which is
in Heaven. Thus I shall fulfill the Royal Law of Love, under which my Savior
has laid me. I cannot say, I love him, if I do not keep his Commandments.

5. One not fearing God, may be principled to some such actions, from some
hopes, either from some particular friends, who (if he behave himself
virtuously) will do well by him; make him their heir, or for some hopes of
honor, credit and repute in the world; and these things oft-times go a great
way. But how much greater is the obligation to these things, under which a
gracious soul is from his hopes of the enjoyment of God here, and the blessed
fruition of him in the beatifical vision hereafter? These are the hopes of a
person fearing the Lord; how infinitely higher than all earthly hopes, of what
nature soever? What are all the hopes in the world laid in balance with them?
how much lighter than vanity? I will add but one thing more.

6. A person not fearing the Lord, may be engaged to the doing of these things,
from some Law that he has laid upon himself, some Oath or Promise. But what
are these to the correspondent engagements of this nature, which are upon the
hearts of all truly fearing the Lord. To say nothing of the Baptismal
Engagements, common to others with them (though better remembered by such as
have not received the grace of God in vain) or such as they have renewed in
their daily prayers, in sicknesses; or so often as they have come to the Lords
Table. What think you of that great engagement to these things (amongst others)
which every one fearing the Lord, takes upon him in the day when the Lord
calls him out of darkness into marvelous light, and puts his Spirit into
him. There is no obligation like to this; and reason it self will tell you so.
For by how much the reason is greater upon which the promise is made; by so
much usually the obligation arising from it does more constrain. God in the day
when the soul accepts and lays hold upon the Covenant of God, says to the
soul, I am thy God, and the God of thy seed; my Christ, i^ thy Jesus; my Son,
thy Savior; only walk thou before me, and be thou perfect. The soul replies,
My God, I bless thy Name; I own thee as my God; I accept this Christ as my
Savior, and as my King and Lawgiver, as well as my Priest, and Redeemer.
After this solemn stipulation betwixt the Lord and his soul, he finds amongst
the Laws of Christ; Defraud no man; owe nothing to any but this, that you love
one another. Love your enemies. And many more moral and political precepts, he
is certainly under the highest imaginable obligation to do these things which
are contained in the Book of the Divine Law, and which do unquestionably (if
duly performed) make him that does them excellent in all his moral capacities,
whether Political or Oeconomical. But

2. Secondly, As every man fearing God i^ under the highest imaginable
obligation to do these things; so in a great measure he does them, giving an
allowance to humane frailty, (for who lives and sins not against God?) But
unless a man in these things aims at his duty: unless he sets his heart and
his hand to it, the notion of one fearing the Lord, as I opened it to you, will
not agree to him. I am not speaking now of such as mock the world with vain
shows, and mere appearances of Religion, when in the mean time they are but
painted Sepulchers, full of filth and rottenness; but of one truly fearing God
(which none can do, who has not a respect to all Gods Commandments.) I say,
such a one, take him with all his failings, is a most excellent person; and
that not considered only absolutely in himself, and relatively toward God; but
considered also as a neighbor, and one truly fitted for politic society. Such
a one may have his errors and deviations from the avowed rule of his life;
either from ignorance, or mistakes of his duty; or from particular passions, or
unusual and impetuous temptations; but take him in the whole course of his
life, in his relative capacity, he is the most excellent person. Murders,
quarrellings, private revenge, thefts, intemperance, drunkenness, uncleanness,
cheating, defrauding, oppression, lying, perjury, false witnessing, evil
speaking, reviling, malicious practices. (The great things which disorder
humane societies) are inconsistent to such a degree with his principle, that he
stands obliged to abstain from the appearances of them, and to hate the
garments spotted with them, and not to allow them a room in his most secret
thoughts. Whence by the way you may observe, how unjust prejudices, and evil
reports by a sinful world, are taken up, concerning the right ways of our God.
There is nothing of all neighborhood can be charged upon the principles or
professions of those that walk according to that sacred Rule. If any have
called themselves Jews, which are not indeed so: Or if any who have not the
root of the matter in them, have stumbled and fell, and given those who have
watched for their halting occasion thus to blaspheme, let them bear their own
burden; In the mean time, let an holy God and his ways be discharged from any
such imputations. The fear of the Lord still remains most excellent; the most
excellent principle of moral and political actions; and whosoever truly fears the
Lord, is, and according to all true principles of reason must be concluded,
even as to these things, to be the most excellent person, Do this and live
(says Joseph) for I fear God. I durst not abuse you; I dare do you no wrong,
for I fear God; and though this were sufficient to have said, yet considering
what advantage the peevish world has always taken from the miscarriages of
individual profession, to charge profession at large; I shall but offer this
further demonstration for the stopping of every mouth. Let any one proportion
any number of inhabitants in any place, to the number of those in it whom it
may be the world in reproach calls Puritanes; those I mean who profess to
Religion and Godliness; and observe, in which number in a few years, he finds
most blots, and confessed irregularities of life (political life) from that
very Rule, which reason it self dictates to be most comely and honest betwixt
political relations; which every one must own to be a fair trial of the matter
in issue. A particular professor may err; and in that white society, one blot
makes a great show, especially advantaged by the worlds prejudice, and the
eagerness it has against them to find something whereof to accuse them; but if
you compare their number, and errors, with the like number, and the disorders
of others, it will be enough to recover your reason to a just opinion of them.

7. Lastly, It will appear, that men or women fearing the Lord, are the most
excellent persons, if we consider the train of blessings and good things which
the fear of the Lord brings along with it to the heart and house of those in
whom it dwells. It is a way of reckoning which the world has taken up, by
which to rate the excellency of persons from such eminent favors, as Princes
or noble persons have bestowed on them; and certainly it is good upon a
supposition, either that Princes are the most judicious of men, so as they can
least err in misplacing their honors; or that an higher hand of God does
direct them (both which failing) possibly the judgment of excellency from this
foundation is but erroneous (though only reversible in f^ro Coeli.) Thus we
judge the Duke more excellent than the Earl; the Earl than the Baron; the Baron
than the Knight, etc. Their excellency lies in this, that the Prince has
delighted to honor them; they are his Counselors, his subordinate
Magistrates. Others possibly may be found as learned, as virtuous, etc. but in
this they have ascended. The Prince (who is the fountain of honor) has
conferred most honor on them.

What shall we then say to the men and women whom the Lord of Lords, the King
of Kings, the God of Heaven and earth has delighted to honor; and that not
with the titles of Dukes, Earls, etc. but with the title of his Sons. To as
many as received him, he 1 John 12.
gave a right to be called the Sons of God. What manner of dignity is this?
(says the blessed 1 John 3. 1.
Apostle.) Christ is not ashamed to call them Brethren; they are all Kings and
Priests to the most high God. Though their Kingdom (like their Lords) is not of
this world. And as they are the persons whom the Lord delights to honor; so
they are those whom the Lord has delighted to bless; he has blessed them
again and again, yea and they shall be blessed, Psalm. 112. 1. Blessed i^ the
man that Psalm. 112. 1, 2, 3.
fears the Lord, v. 2. His seed shall be mighty on the earth, v. 3. Wealth
and riches shall be in his house. Again, Psalm. 128. Blessed is he Psalm. 128. ^.
that fears the Lord. v. 2. Thou shall eat the labor of thy hands; happy
shall thou be, and it shall be well with thee; thy wife shall be as a fruitful
Vine by the sides of thy house; thy children like Olive plants round about thy
table. Behold thus shall he be blessed that fears the Lord. In short, this
fear of the Lord is the same with what the Apostle calls Godliness; of which
he says, that it is great gain; having the promise of this life, and of that
which is to come. It is the same with seeking the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
righteousness thereof, Matthew. 6. 32. as to which the promise is made -- and all
other things shall be added unto you. It is true, such are the mysterious
dispensations of infinitely wise providence, that we do not see all these
things falling out to be the particular portion of every one truly fearing God
in this life; but the promise of these things is theirs; and he who has
promised they shall find both able and faithful; only they must also allow him
to be only wise; one who is so indulgent a father, that when his children want
bread, will not give them stones, nor Scorpions instead of Fish. And his mere
indulgence it is (guided by his infinite wisdom) which is the cause that the
things promised in these promises, are often not given to his children in
specie, but in the value, They should have these things, if their wise father
did not see they would be losers by them; if they have them not, that he may
not seem guilty of breach of promise (for he cannot lie nor repent) they are
made up in things infinitely better (and such exchange is no robbery) or else
they have a satisfied mind in the want of them (and godliness with contentment
i^ great gain.) It may be they have them not at their own desire, having prayed
(as Agur) that God would give them neither poverty nor riches, but food
convenient for them.

Thus I have largely demonstrated the Proposition, and made it good to you,
that upon all rational accounts, which way soever we look to make up a
judgment. The man or woman fearing Jehovah, is the most excellent person; and
the fear of the Lord is the most excellent quality or habit. You heard before
what pretenses other persons, or things, ha^^ to any degrees of excellency; and
you have heard now, what transcendent, superlative excellency, these persons or
things have above them; how (according to the dialect of the text) they ascend
above them all. But I have yet a third thing to do, which will give a further
evidence to this truth.

3. I have before considered those other excellencies in their full latitude of
worth; supposing them not at all subject to vanity, nor liable to any
rebatements from their true value, by reason of any accidents which may
depretiate them. I must now take another view of them in their state of vanity,
and show you what both Reason and Religion show necessary to be rebated from
the true value of them; and then consider, whether the fear of the Lord be
under such a subjection yea or no; if not, this will be (and that no slighty)
further evidence; That the fear of the Lord, is the most excellent thing; and
the person fearing the Lord, the most excellent person. For this I have a
foundation in my text. Favor (says Bathsheba) is deceitful. Beauty is vain.
Favor, i. e. the favor of men; whether of great men, which is the spring of
honor; or of the (...), vulgar, which is the spring of same, credit and
reputation. This is deceitful, (...) a lie, a mere falsity. Beauty is vain; we
translate it in concreto, but it is in the Hebrew, in the abstract, (...)
vanity; Vanity it self, that is, most vain.

It were easy to show you by a plenty of witnesses, that the words in the
Hebrew are both of vast signification, and ordinarily used to express the
utmost emptiness, or unworthiness of things; either upon the account of the
Nothingness of them in reality; or the Emptiness of them, as to the satisfying
our expectations: Or the Sin and Corruption which ordinarily cleaves to them,
and attends them: Or the uncertainty and inconstancy of them: Or their
perishing nature; or any other accounts: For indeed (...) and (...) are words
generally used in Scripture, either to express things of naught; or things that
are sinful; and so worse than naught. But I will reduce my discourse to some
certain heads, and in some few particulars show you the emptiness and vanity of
all other appearing excellencies, in some few particulars.

You have heard that all their excellency lies either in the approveableness
of some of them (such as are the intellectual and moral virtues) to the Reason
of a man: Or in their usefulness and subserviency to our comfortable
subsistence in the world; or in this, That they are the gifts of God, by which
he makes one person to differ from another. But the falsehood now, and the
vanity of all those things for which we must rebate, lies chiefly in these
things.

1. They are far bigger, and more glorious in appearance, than they are in
reality.

2. They are such as never fill and satisfy the mind of the person that is
possessed of them.

3. They are (many of them at least) dangerous snares to our immortal souls.

4. They are all of them subject to eclipses, mutations and changes, which when
they fall under, the former advantages which any person had from them, will not
recompense the disadvantages which he or she will have from their
disappointments, in the lots or abatement of them.

5. They neither at all help, or make us to excel in the most needful time.
I'will speak something to each of these.

1. I say, Those other things are far bigger, more, and more glorious in
appearance than they are in reality. Thus they are (...) and (...) Any thing
which seems to be something, and is nothing; or which seems to be more than
indeed it is, so far as it comes short of what it seems to be; so far it is
no better than a falsehood, and meer^lye. I will not instance in all those other
things which I mentioned, as raising the price of men and women each above
other: (that were too large a work) I will instance but in some few of them.
Take that pretty thing which we call Beauty; it is indeed in appearance a great
thing. Does not the vain woman think so, who in the morning beholding her own
reflection in her glass, and espying a little better air of her countenance, a
better mixture of colors in her cheeks, than in other women's, thinks this is
warrant enough for her to admire her self, stretch out her neck, and mince it
with her feet all the day after? Or if the view of her face does not in all
points please her, she thinks it worth the while to spend both her money and
her precious time to mend it with patchings and paintings, with trickings and
trimmings of her self? And does not the vain gallant think Beauty something,
who is so bewitched with it, that forgetting the noble soul of which he is
possessed (ordained to higher employments;) and the reason which he inheriteth
(which should guide him to a better purpose) thinks his money and his time well
spent, while both are miserably expended to evidence his dotage upon this
painted Sepulcher, which it may be within is nothing but darkness, filth and
rottenness? In the mean time, let us look wistly upon this thing which we call
Beauty; is it any more than a perfection of b^dily parts, pl^ced in a due
proportion each to other, and with a due and proportioned mixture of such
colors as are proper to flesh and blood?

As to the former, what is there in it more, than is to be found in many an
Horse or Dog, it may be an higher degree? As to the latter, what is there more
than in a Rose or a Lilly? Nay, what so much, as in many a flower of the field,
or in many a picture? As to many of these it may be said (as our Savior said
of Solomon compared with the Lilly) The most beautiful woman is not for color
like one of them. Oh what a lie is beauty then! that which in outward
appearance is such, that a vain woman will sacrifice her soul, life, estate,
time, to obtain, preserve or maintain it? that which a vain man will spend all
that he is worth in a base service and homage to it? when in reality it is no
further perfection, than may be found in a Dog, an Horse, or other brute
creature; yea in a vegetable creature; in a pitiful flower or plant, above
what can be found in any of the Sons and Daughters of men? For Favor or
Honor; it is a thing that carries a great show in the world; what high
thoughts of themselves does it raise in them that are ^^gnified with it? what a
supercilious eye do those that have it but in a superior degree, cast upon
those but a step beneath them? How much does it make vain man admired, served,
complemented in the world? But in reality, what is this gay thing? The world is
yet at a loss where to find its residence; whether in honorante, or in
honorato; in the person that gives, or that receives it. Certain it is, that
it is a mere air, and in reality just nothing; that which is often gained by
fordid persons, which neither betters the man, as to his body, mind, nor soul;
only serves him as to a comfortable subsistence in this life, and gains him
the wall, a cap and a knee, and a title. Take Riches, another thing which in
vulgar opinion carries with it a great notion of excellency, and imprinteth
upon man a considerable difference from his neighbor: They make a fair show,
and have a great appearance; hence whosoever has them, swells in the opinion of
himself, and all he world does him homage. But what is silver and gold in
reality? What is gold more than yellow sand? and silver more than white earth,
considered in it self, without the relative value which men put upon it? Indeed
more (by far) is to be said for the inward habits of the mind; Knowledge,
Prudence, Sobriety, and the rest of the moral virtues; but neither are they
without their vanity, as I shall show you anon. I shall add no more to this
first thing, demonstrating the vanity and emptiness of such other things, as
inhance the price of one man above another. They are a great deal more in
appearance, than they are in reality.

2. The second thing which I instanced in, was this, They are such as never
fill or satisfy the mind of the person possessed of them, like dreams of
feasts, notwithstanding which, we are hungry; lies in our right hand; like wind
in the body, which often fills the stomach, and spoileth the appetite to its
proper food, but never nourishes the body, nor satisfies the hunger. I shall
show,

1. That they will not satisfy the wants of the soul.

2. That they less satisfy the souls expectation.

1. I say first, They will not satisfy the souls wants. The true wants of the
reasonable soul, are, and can be satisfied with nothing but divine influences.
It is a noble spirit; and none but the Father of spirits can fill its
emptiness. The soul while it sleeps in the Lethargy of sin, while it sojourneth
in its estate of estrangement from God (like the Prodigal) it feeds Swine,
and fills its belly with the husks; but after it has once fixed its
resolution to return to its Fathers house, nothing less than God can fill it;
it cries out (as once Rachel for children) Lord give me Christ or else I die.
It is plainly impossible that any thing but the favor of God, and the sense of
that favor, or at least good hopes of it through grace should ever satisfy
that soul, that is once awakened to consider its self (as in its natural
constitution) a spiritual, immortal being, ordained to an Eternity: and as it
is (in its depraved estate) by nature a child of wrath. I say again, the soul
thus reflecting upon it self, can be satisfied with nothing less than the
sense, or firm hopes of Gods favor, making over the Righteousness of Christ
unto it, and accepting it as righteous in and through Christ; and whatsoever
soul is satisfied without this, is either ignorant of its own state and
capacity, or exceeding vain and careless, not regarding its highest concerns.
As Abraham, when God bid him ask what he would, and he would give it him,
replied, What can thou give me, whiles I go childless? So the awakened soul
says, What can God give me whiles I go childless? Beauty is a pretty thing;
but what is it to Eternity? Riches are useful things, but they will not ransom
my soul from the pit of Hell. Honor will serve me to take a place or the wall
in this world; but it will not give me a place at Gods right hand. Pleasure is
a sweet thing, oh! but endless torments will be a dreadful issue of it. Great
Friends and Relations are great blessings; but it is Christ alone can stand my
friend in the Court of Heaven, to speak for me, that I may not be sent unto
eternal burnings.

2. And as nothing but divine influences will satisfy the souls wants: so
nothing else will satisfy the souls expectation. The wise man, who had as
great experience as any mortal man ever had, cries out; The eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing. The soul never cries, enough
Lord, till Christ be to it all in all. Every thing (the fear of the Lord only
excepted) is like the grass on the house tops, with which the mower fills not
his hand: nor be that gathers sheaves his arm. What vain woman was ever
satisfied with beauty? or what vainer worldling had his expectation ever
satisfied with the returns of gold and silver? who was ever satisfied with
honor, or the favor of men? what student was ever filled with knowledge? Poor
vain man looks upon these things at a distance, and expects much from them,
and promises himself rest and content in them: But though God has given man
many outward blessings; yet he has excepted the Rest of the mind from them.
Hence man thinks, could I but arrive at such an estate, at such a degree of
honor, knowledge, then I should be satisfied; but alas! he finds that he is
but like the sick person, that ^^ncieth first one thing, then another, to
please his pallat, and give him rest, which when he has tried, answers not
the expectation he had upon it. The more a man has of these things, the more
he still would have; are they not then deceitful? are they any thing better
than a lie? But has now the fear of the Lord any such vanity attending it?
surely no. I have learned (says St. Paul) in all estates to be content;
content to want, content to abound, etc. It is true, till a Christian be in
Heaven, he never has so much of divine influence, as he desires no more.
There is a spiritual thirst which will never be quenched, but by the Rivers of
pleasure, that water the celestial Paradise. But yet grace, as it leads to a
fullness of satisfaction; so it presently possesses the soul of a
proportionable satisfaction; so as it says to all the Hamans and Dives of the
world (as Esau to Jacob) I have enough my Brother, I have enough; keep what
thou have unto thy self. Diogenes never undervalued Alexanders great offers,
with so true an heart, as the soul possessed with it, undervalueth the whole
Creation. Nor does this ever fail the souls expectation. Every gracious soul is
so far from finding any frustration in its expectations, from the enjoyments of
God, that (as the Queen of Sheba to Solomon) it confesses, that the half of
that sweetness and content in the holy ways of God, which it has met with
since it turned into them, was never told unto it. But this is enough to have
spoken to the second thing.

3. Thirdly, Many of those other things which I mentioned, are most dangerous
snares and traps to the poor creature.

I shall open this general unto you by showing you,

1. That those other excellencies are often occasions to souls of great
sinnings against God.

2. That many of them expose the person that has them to great dangers and
suffering; which the sweetness and good of them can in no measure compensate.

1. I say first, diverse (if not all of them) are occasions of great sinnings to
the soul that is (seemingly) blessed with them. And this is indeed a very great
vanity. Here I might enter into a large discourse, showing you what snares and
temptations to sin lie in Beauty, Wisdom (worldly wisdom I mean) Riches,
Honors, etc. In short, in all those other things which I mentioned (the fear
of the Lord alone excepted) by which one man is in the way of excellency
distinguished from his neighbor.

1. More generally, They are all of them great occasions to men, to think of
themselves above what they ought to think (which is the Apostles Periphrasis of
Pride.) There is naturally in us all a propension to Pride. Now that corruption
wants an hill for to stand and show it self upon, until a man has discovered,
or at least sancieth that he has discovered, in himself something in which he
excels another; which being once discovered, he thinks he has warrant
enough to vaunt himself, and to be a self-admirer, to scorn, slight and
undervalue others (how worthy soever) if they be not, or he judges that they
are not equal with him, in that particular thing wherein he sancieth his own
excellency. But besides this snare which lies in them all, there is scarce any
of them but has a peculiar snare in it, if not more than one. Beauty is an
occasion to chambering and wantonness. Knowledge (says the Apostle) puffs
up. Worldly Prudence too too ordinarily exalts the soul above the wisdom
which is from God; whence the Apostle advises men to become fools, that they
may be wise. Riches, honor, and favor of men, are usual temptations to pride,
luxury, oppression of others, etc. Prove. 18. 23. The poor uses entreaties, but
the rich answers roughly, Micah 6. 12. The rich are full of violence. Upon
which, as well as upon other accounts it is that our Savior says, Matthew. 9.
23. That it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a Needle, than for a
rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God. Do not rich men oppress you? (says
the Apostle, James 2. 6.) It would ask me a great deal of time at large to
discourse to you the several snares for the soul, which lie hid in all those
creature excellencies which I have instanced in. But now in this fear of the
Lord, there is nothing of this danger. Solomon tells us, That the fear of the
Lord is to depart from iniquity. So Job, chap. 28. v. 28. The fear of the Lord,
that is wisdom; and to depart from evil, that is understanding. So that we may
say of the fear of the Lord, as Solomon speaks of the man made rich by the
blessing of the Lord. The blessing of the Lord makes rich, and adds no
sorrow with it. Other things give a man some shadow of happiness in this life;
but there is sorrow added therewith; and oft-times they do ten thousand times
more harm to the soul, than good to the outward man. But now the fear of the
Lord is a Rose without a prickle; it makes the soul of a man happy, and adds
no sorrow therewith. Instead of exposing the soul to temptation, it armeth the
soul against all temptations to sin against God. Amongst all other
excellencies, one would think the habits of moral virtues should be most free
from this vanity; yet even they have in them a most dangerous snare. The person
morally righteous, being very apt to raise up to himself a confidence in the
flesh, and to despise the Righteousness of God, which (as the Apostle says) is
revealed from faith to faith. Upon Romans 1. 17.
this very account it was, that Saul (when Christ was discovered to him) judged
those things loss, which he once accounted gain, Phil. 3. 7. But what things
were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. What these things were, he
tells you, verse. 5, 6. One was, [touching the righteousness which is of the
Law blameless.] How was this loss to him, but as his pron^ness to rest in that
as sufficient, hindered him from accepting of the righteousness of God revealed
from faith to faith. This very thing kept the Jews from submitting to the
Righteousness of God. This made our Savior tell the Pharisees, and other Jews,
that Publicans and Harlots should enter into the Kingdom of God, but the
children of the Kingdom should be cost out. Now in the fear of the Lord there
is no snare; it keeps the soul from sin, but no way exposes the soul to sin.

2. Those other distinctive excellencies, are great snares, as they expose the
person possessed of them, to great suffering, and give him no satisfaction and
comfort in suffering. These sufferings which usually attend those other
excellencies, flow from the envy, malice, jealousy, covetousness or ambition
of others. If a man or woman excel their neighbor in riches, favor,
knowledge, honor, etc. they presently become the objects of their envy and
hatred: this arises from the pride of our fellow creatures, that will not
allow them patience to be excelled. It were endless to tell you, what some men's
riches, and honors, and favor of men, have cost; and what beauty has cost
others; and what is most sad. Their sufferings afford them no satisfaction
proportionable to their smart; they under them bear the whole weight of their
cross with their own shoulders. It is true the fear of the Lord too does not
indemnifie the persons possessed with it, from trials of scourgings, and cruel
mockings; no not from the fiery trial, which the Apostle would not have
believers think strange. Saint Paul had both troubles without, and fears
within. And it was said of old, That he who departs from evil, makes himself
a prey. Which is a sentence verifieth it self still, and will hold so long as
there is a World to hate us, which hated Christ first (And the Disciple is not
above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord) or any of the seed of the
Serpent in the world, which will be till our Lord has trodden all his enemies
under his feet. But as usually the sufferings of Gods people on this single
account, are not proportionable to those others mentioned: so neither are they
without such a proportionable comfort and satisfaction, as makes them indeed no
sufferings to them. The Martyrs fire is become a bed of Roses. The sufferings
of this life not worthy to be compared with the glory to be revealed.

4. A fourth thing which evineeth the vanity and deceitfulness of those other
excellenciet, is, their subjection to vicissitudes and changes. I take this to
be a principle adjudged by reason; That supposing a thing to have in it some
grains of excellency; yet if it be subject to diminution, putrefaction; or any
kind of consumption, there must be a proportionable deduction and abatement
from its excellency. For we reasonably judge, that any thing which has any
intrinsecal goodness in it, it is the more excellent, by how much it is more
during, and of longer continuance. Now take all those excellencies which I
mentioned as contradistinct to this fear of the Lord: They all of them have an
uncertainty in them, which must necessarily with considerate persons, abate of
their true value. Though beauty be but a pitiful thing, yet how much more
valuable were it than it is, if we did not see it a flower which upon every
frost, or cold wind; every sickness and disease will fade? how much more
valuable were strength than it is, if age and sickness would not make it abate?
and riches, if they would not take to themselves wings and flee away; and
honor, if it were an indelible character. But alas! all these things are
gourds; they come up, and they perish too in a night. Beauty lasts but a few
years, if in the mean time no disease abate, or take it away. Strength has no
longer date. Riches are subject to the hand of violence, who may plunder them,
and to the thief, who may break through and steal the goods which we had
thought laid up for many years. They are also subject to the disposal of divine
Providence, who often declares them movables, and disposes of the stock of
this world this or that way, as it pleases him. Honors depend upon the wills
of Princes, and are given and taken away, when, and as they please. There is
nothing of a certainty, or of a perpetuity in any of these things. But now the
fear of the Lord is subject to no such accident. I will (says God) put my fear
into their hearts, that they shall never depart from me. It is a thing (as I
have showed you) of infinite value, and is not subject to any change at all. It
is a Jewel with which, when the soul is once adorned, it never puts it off
any more; but wears it till it enters Eternity, and puts on the Crown of
Glory for evermore. It is the seed of God, of which the Apostle speaks, which
abides in men, and keeps the soul that it cannot sin the sin unto death. It
is the wellspring of living water, which when once it springs up in the soul,
it springs up unto eternal life. It is a Jewel that will not be debased;
gold, that will not admit of rust. O the excellency of grace above all the
perishing excellencies of other things! which (as the Apostle speaks of those
beggarly elements) perish with the using. We may say of this fear of the Lord,
compared with other excellencies, as the Prophet speaks of the grass and the
flower, compared with the word of the Lord; The grass withers, and the flower
fades; but the word of the Lord endures for ever. Beauty withers, and
strength withers; Riches fade, and Honors fade; and all other created
excellencies wither and fade; but the fear of the Lord abides for ever.

5. Lastly, All those other excellencies fail the persons which have them in
the most needful times. If there were something of vanity in beauty, some
deceitfulness in favor, some emptiness in all those other things which I
mentioned; yet much might be spoken for them, would they but serve a soul in an
evil day. But if this be found true of them, that (like Swallows) they all
leave us in Winter, and are furthest off from giving us that satisfaction which
we desire from them, and they in appearance promise us in a time when we have
most need of them; certainly this must needs depreciate them in the view of
every rational eye. Now that they do this is demonstrable past all denial. We
have two evil days; (I mean evil to our sense) the day of Affliction, and the
day of death. In the day of affliction, be it bodily or spiritual, external or
internal, what do all things in the world signify? or wherein does one man
differ from another, save only by the fear of the Lord. The beauteous face has
lost its lovely color. The strong man's finews are loosed. The knowing man is
ignorant how to give himself ease. The prudent man is not wise enough to remove
the distemper; nor yet under it to comfort himself. None of them, by their
knowledge, learning, wisdom, can save themselves from death; nor redeem their
souls from the pit. As dies the fool, so also dies the prudent man; leave
this life, and what profit has the poor creature of all those fine things
which before differenced him from his neighbor? wherein does he now differ? he
is alike laid in the grave with him. But in these hours the fear of the Lord is
excellent, and of infinite advantage to the soul that is blessed with it.

1. In a day of Affliction. It is true, grace, and the fear of the Lord does
not deliver a man from the common incidents of that mortal condition into which
sin has brought us; it does neither free us from troubles without, nor yet
from fears within; but it gives the soul comfort and satisfaction in this
hour. Lord remember (says Hezekiah) how I have walked before thee in truth,
and with a perfect heart. A man fearing God in an hour of affliction, is quite
another man from one under the same kind and degree of affliction that he is;
fuller of strength, fuller of comfort; more satisfied with his condition.

2. In the day of Death. It is true, the first curse must have its
verification. We have sinned, and we must die. But dies the child of God as a
fool dies? dies a man fearing the Lord, as the man who has no fear of God in
his heart? surely there is a great difference in their latter end. Even Balaam
had some sight of this, when he desired that he might die the death of the
righteous; that his latter end might be like his. See that famous instance of
David, a man indeed according to Gods own heart; yet you know how he failed
both in the matter of Bathsheba and Vriah. He comes 1 Samuel 23.
to his death bed, and the Scripture records his last words; He considers
the Rule which God had set him, that he who ruled over men should be just,
ruling them in the fear of the Lord: that his light should be like the light of
the morning, etc. He considers again that his house had not been so with God,
as it ought to have been? what comforts him? Thou have (says he) made a
Covenant with me, well ordered, and s^re in all things, etc. This, and this
alone is that which in these hours of distress, can relieve a poor creature:
and the worst of men will give in their evidence to this. They will at their
dying hour, and when they lie upon beds of sickness, cry out, Favor is
deceitful; Beauty is vain. They will then agree with Solomon, to warn their
friends to fear God, and keep his Commandments, telling them, this is the end
of all.

This now is sufficient to have spoken in the Explication or evidence of the
point, which may all be summed up in this one Argument.

Whosoever is possessed of that quality which both in it self considered
absolutely, and in respect of all circumstances, is the most excellent person.

But that man or woman in whom the true fear of the Lord is, and dwells most
eminently, is possessed of the most excellent habit; whether it be considered
in it self more absolutely, or with respect to circumstances. Therefore that
person is the most excellent person.

I come now to the Application of the Point.

In the first place, what you have heard vulgar mistake, concerning the
excellent of the earth; and also to abate those high conceits which men
ordinarily have of themselves; who in the little things of the world differ a
little from their neighbors. The world (if this Doctrine be true) is greatly
mistaken, both in their judgments concerning the most excellent things, and
concerning the most excellent persons.

1. I say first, in their judgments as to the things that differ; and are more
excellent than other. If you should run to and fro the streets of your City,
and ask every one whom you meet, Friend, let me have your opinion; what do you
judge the most excellent thing in the world? it is very like they would not all
agree in their answers; some would say, Pleasures, and a satisfaction of their
lusts. Others would say Riches; if a man had as much money as he could spend, a
plentiful estate to live on. Others would say, Honor and Favor: if a man be
great at Court, a favorite to Princes, they will judge him the happiest man
alive. It may be others would judge Learning and Knowledge is most excellent;
or Moral Virtue is the most excellent: but where shall we find a person who
would say, The fear of the Lord is the most excellent thing? Some rare person
possibly might be found, who would say with David; There be many that say, who
will show us any Psalm. 4.
good? Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. Or with
Solomon; after he had tasted of all those sweet things which the world affords,
Eccles. 12. 13. Hear the conclusion of all, Fear God, and keep his
Commandments. But the most of men would neither like David's nor Solomon's
judgment in the case. Nay, even of those who would say, Grace is the most
excellent thing; how few are they whose practice would not condemn them in what
they speak with their mouths? Man naturally loves, desires, valueth, chooses,
approves the things which he judges most excellent. The low opinion which the
most men have of Religion, and the fear of the Lord; their little endeavors
for it, and pursuit after it, are plain instances (let men say what they will)
that they judge other things more excellent. Yet, could you meet with any who
had the sentence of death in himself, any strong apprehensions that he must in
a short time go down to the pit, and upon whom the terrors of Hell had seized,
this man would tell you, that of all things, the fear of the Lord is most
excellent; which is enough to evince the truth of the thing, and that nothing
but the violence of temptations, and prevalence of corruptions makes men to
judge otherwise.

2. As what you have heard leads you to judge truly concerning the best
things; so it leads you also to a true judgment concerning the best persons.
What the Prophet complained in his time, is true in our time. We call the
proud, happy. We judge them the best, that are the richest; the most
honorable; and who are dignified with the greatest titles. Thus oft-times we
call a covetous worldling, a griping Usurer, or Extortioner; a swinish
drunkard, a sordid unclean person; a profane swearer, a blasphemous curser;
one that rends the sacred Name of God with unheard of oaths, revilings,
blasphemies. The best men in our Cities, in our Parishes (and yet we contend
our Parishes to be particular Churches, and these the members of them.) Away
with such more than Pagan Nonsense. The Heathens would not have judged thus.
What Roman did not prefer Cato before Clodius or Catiline? In the mean time,
what account is made amongst us of men and women fearing the Lord; they are
counted as the filth and off scouring of the earth; Fanatics, Precisians,
Puritans; the vilest persons on the earth; the only persons fit for all manner
of filth to be thrown upon; all manner of injuries to be done unto; the only
persons fit to be thrown into Gaols, etc. Yea and this fear of Jehovah is
become their crime; if they dared to sin against God, they might avoid these
dangers. Nor is it any wonder at all; The Disciple is not above his Master; nor
is the Servant above his Lord. They that said of our Savior, He has a Devil,
may be allowed to say so of his Disciples, I hope. The Apostle calls wicked
men, and such as have 2 These. 3. 2.
not faith, (...), unreasonable men. The Scripture ordinarily calls them
fools. Want of reason and understanding in men and women appears in nothing so
much, as in their judgment about persons and things that differ. Would not you
account that man a fool that should choose an Apple before a piece of Gold; and
prefer a serving-man, because dressed up in gay clothes, before a Prince, or
noble man? or before some other person of known intrin^ecal worth and
excellency? and are not those persons fools, and unreasonable men, who when
reason thus many ways evinceth the fear of the Lord to be the most excellent
thing; and persons fearing the Lord to be the most excellent persons; yet dote
upon other things, and persons, as more excellent than it, or them; desire,
choose, delight in any persons rather than these? yet this is the ordinary
course and practice of the world. What more despicable than the fear of the
Lord? Who makes himself so much a prey, so odious and despicable, as he who
dares not to sin against God, and is afraid of disobeying his sacred precepts?
Is not their judgment an evidence of their folly? Do they not still make it
good, that wanting faith, they are unreasonable men?

But leaving the ignorant world, which Will not this Doctrine convince Gods
people of many errors in practice? There are a people in the Lord, who own the
Lord, and seriously profess unto his fear; yet neither live as if they judged
the fear of God the most excellent thing; or those who fear the Lord the most
excellent persons. Give me leave to speak freely to you, who I know do own what
you have heard to be truth, and will profess a cordial assent unto it. Do you
indeed judge the fear of the Lord, Grace, the best and most excellent thing? Do
you judge persons fearing the Lord, the most excellent persons? I had rather
you should judge your selves, than my self to pronounce sentence against you.
Let me therefore only offer you two or three Questions to propound to your
selves.

1. Whether do you not value your selves more for other things, than for the
fear of the Lord, with which you are blessed? It is true, through a demissiori,
and humbleness of mind. Some naturally have lower opinions of themselves than
others have; but there is none lives but has some value for him, or her self.
Men will speak vilely and meanly of themselves; and a child of God, from a
principle of Grace, is vile and mean in his own eyes; but yet there is none who
has not some good thoughts for himself. Now I would have you inquire of your
own souls, what that is which raises your thoughts of your selves; Whether it
be the fear of the Lord or no? The Prophet calls out to us, Jer. 9. 24. Let
Jer. 9. 24.
not the strong man glory in his strength; nor the wise man in his wisdom; nor
the rich man in his riches: but let him that glories, glory in this, that he
understands and knows the Lord. I am afraid, that if we ask our own hearts,
wherein they chiefly glory? we shall find them sincerely making us some other
answer than this, that we glory chiefly in this, that we understand and know
the Lord. Take a man or woman fearing God, if they have but the advantage of a
little parentage, a little birth or breeding, or some great relations; are they
not apt to glory in these more than in this, That God is their Father, the Lord
Jesus Christ their Savior? etc. If they have but a little honor, or estate,
are not their hearts more apt to glory in this, than in the riches of grace
they have in possession? or the riches of glory which they have in reversion?
than in this great honor which the Lord has dignified them with, that they
should be called the Sons of God? It is reported of Theodosius a Christian
Emperor, that he gloried more in this, that he was the servant of Christ, than
that he was the Emperor of a great part of the world. I am sure we should
glory more in our interest in Christ, than in all the world besides. But alas
how few are to be found that are truly of that good Emperors mind; that make
their boast of God, and what he has done for their souls; and look upon this
as their great glory? yet if they do not, they do not in practice attend to
what they profess to believe concerning the excellency of the fear of the Lord.

2. Whether do you value others according to the fear of the Lord which you see
in them? The Psalmist gives this as the character of one who shall come to
Heaven, Psalm. 15. 4. He in whose eyes a vile person is contemned; but he
honors them that fear the Lord. Who is a vile person? there is a vile person
in man's account; thus those are vile who are poor and servile; whose condition
in the world is mean and abject, are accounted vile. There is also a vile
person in Gods account; so the only vile person is the lewd, debaucht,
impenitent sinners; such as God has in judgment given up to vile affections,
Romans 1. 26. One that speaks villainy, Isa. 32. 6. Thus 1 Samuel 3. 13. The Sons
of Samuel that lay with the women, who came to the Tabernacle and were profane
in abusing holy things, are called vile persons. So the profane swearer,
curser, blasphemer; the brutish drunkard, the beastly unclean person; these
are all vile persons; God counts them so, the Scripture calls them so (let
their circumstances in the world be what they will) God overlooks them, as
signifying nothing in his eyes; they are all base, vile persons in his eyes.

Now this is made the character of one that shall dwell in Gods holy hill; he
must be one in whose eyes a vile person is contemned. Not that he shakes off
his natural duty, or his moral subjection and duty to such a one, if God has
put him or her in a subjection to them. A godly child honors his Parent (as
his Parent.) A godly woman will honor and obey her husband (as her head.) A
godly person will give honor and obedience to such as are in Authority over
him, though possibly they may be vile persons, but not as such; they will in
their hearts contemn their vile affections and dispositions, their lewd and
profane courses, whiles they give that reverence and honor to them, which the
Laws of Nature, God and Man require, with respect to the Authority with which
they are clothed toward us, and the subordination in which we are set toward
them. But it is further added, He honors them [the Hebr. is, he glorifieth
them] that fear the Lord. Musculus observes, that it is an easy thing to
contemn a vile person, especially if his malice has hurt us; but it is not so
easy to honor them that fear the Lord; especially if they be such whose lives
before have been stained with sin, and they are but in the exercise of
Repentance. Or in case they live under wicked Magistrates, and are black
through persecutions. Or in case they be mean, and of small estate in the
world. But Sirs, if we be such as fear the Lord our selves,

1. We cannot but have a true honor and value for those in whom we see the
fear of the Lord, let their circumstances in the world be what they will; be
they never so much reviled, persecuted, abused, be they never so mean and poor,
in never so vile and abject a condition. But alas, how few are there who fall
not under the reproof of the Apostle; Having the faith of God without respect
of persons. If one comes near them with a gold Ring, and goodly Apparel (yea
though Jam. 2. 1.
he or she be a vile person, which yet seems not to be the Apostles case) and
there come also a poor man having vile raiment; have we not respect to them
that have the gold Ring, and the goodly Apparel? and do we not despise the poor
Christian that has the vile raiment? Do we not say to the former, Sit thou
here in a good place? and to the poor, Sit thou there, or under my footstool?
Thus, do we not despise the poor, and in them oft-times those that fear the
Lord in an eminent measure and degree, and (at least) interpretatively (as St.
James says) Blaspheme that holy Name by which we are called? It is our duty to
value others according to the fear of the Lord in them; and more or less
excellent according to that degree of the fear of the Lord which we discern in
any of their souls; and we should do so if we truly judged the fear of the
Lord. As it is the most excellent thing, and the persons that fear the Lord,
the most excellent persons.

3. Ask your selves, what more excellent thing you do than others? Wherein you
live a more noble, excellent life than others live? In reason, those who judge
themselves the more noble and excellent persons, stand obliged to live more
distinguishing excellent lives ratable to their honor and dignity. The
Gentleman thinks himself obliged to live as a Gentleman; the Noble man as a
Noble man. And it speaks a low and dirty spirit, for any man to look upon his
honor and dignity, as that which gives him privilege for a low and for did
converse. Christians, do you live according to your order and dignity? You that
are Christians indeed, are the excellent of the earth: David calls you so;
reason evinceth you to be such. You have ascended above all others in divine
favor; you excel others in spiritual gifts; in what do you live ratably to
your order? It was our Saviors question to his Disciples, What do Mat. 5. 47.
you do more than others? Matthew. 5. 47. In what does your conversation toward
God more distinguish you? Are you more in sufferings, in prayers, in reading
the Word, in hearing of it, in communion with Gods people, more holy, more
patient? etc. Wherein does your conversation more shine before men? Are you
more humble, more meek, more just and exact in your dealings? more free and
liberal, more compassionate and merciful? This is to live ratably to your order
and profession; and if you do not do this, you do not live like the most
excellent persons. But I proceed.

Thirdly, What you have heard may give you 3 Branch.
the true notion of one fearing the Lord. The fear of God is an excellent
thing, and in some degree approves its self to the natural reason of men; but
more yet to those who in an outward Profession (at least in some degree) own
the Scripture as the Rule of their life and conversation. Hence it is that
every one is a pretender to it, and thinks it an high dishonor to him, to be
thought or discoursed of as a person not fearing the Lord. Hence you shall
observe in our Law, in the ordinary indictments for Felonies, this is put in,
Such a one not having the fear of God before his eyes, did this or that, etc.
But amongst those who would be thought persons fearing the Lord, we shall find
that the number of such as indeed do fear him, is a very small number. You may
judge from what you have heard, who they are who indeed do fear God. Our
Savior says, Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Not every one who says, he fears the Lord, does indeed
fear him. How many are there that say so, to whom we must reply, as Samuel to
Saul, boasting of his obedience, What then means the bleating of the Sheep,
and the lowing of the Oxen? What mean those bold and presumptious actions
against the Commandments of the Lord? What means that course of sin which they
run; that trade which they make of dishonouring God? Yea and as it is not every
one that faith, he fears the Lord; nor is it every one that has some dread
of God upon him, at some times, of whom it can be said, that he is a person
fearing Jehovah. There is so much Majesty and Power, so much Greatness and
Ability to punish every created Being in the Divine Being; that every creature
naturally dreadeth God; even the Devil that hates God, yet trembles: (So the
Apostle tells you) The Devils believe and tremble. And there was never any
person in the world so vile, but at one time or other, something of this
discovered it self in him. That wretched Emperor of Rome, who so impudently
defied the Deity; yet when it thundered, would run under a bed. But it is not, I
say, every one who has some awe and terror of God upon his spirit, who can be
called, A person fearing God. For then God said no more of Job than might have
been said of Saul, Ahab, or Pharaoh, who were made at last to reverence the
Divine Majesty, and to tremble before the Maker of Heaven and Earth, Prove. 8.
13. The fear of the Lord is (...) ^vil, Prove. 16. 6. By Prove. 8. 13. 16. 6.
the fear of the Lord (...) from evil. That man fears the Lord (...) ^^th not
only a reverence and dread of ^od upon his heart, but in whom this dread
works to make the person that has it to take heed of every sin, and to
perform every duty, to avoid all that the Lord forbids, and to do all that
God commands. This it is for a man or woman to fear Jehovah. But you will
say, ^^ this be so, where is that person to be found of whom this can be
predicated; or how shall any person satisfy himself, that he is by the fear of
the Lord distinguished from another? This is a great question; and the Holy
Ghost having thought fit to express the whole of Grace and Godliness by this
notion, the resolution of it will exceedingly tend to the satisfaction of such
souls as thirst after righteousness. To which purpose now I shall lay down some
few Conclusions, which will open this thing to you.

1. A true fear of God in what soul soever it is found, is not only the product
of sense; but the operation of faith. This is one great and material difference
betwixt that fear and dread of God which may be found in a natural man, and
that which is sound in every true child of God. There is a terror, and awe,
and dread of God, which (as I told you before) sometimes seizes the hearts of
the greatest Atheists, and most debaucht wretches in the Earth. But this dread
is ordinarily but the effect and product of sense: the poor wretch sees some
terrible work of God, and trembles; or feels something of the weight of Gods
hand. Hence, as soon as the impression is off his sense, the fear and dread of
God is also off his heart. And thus it will be with all that fear, which is but
the product of sense. The natural man's fear is not at all caused from faith;
neither from the habit of faith which is within us; nor from the object of
says which is without us (I mean the Word of God) he does not fear God,
because of what the holy Scriptures tell him concerning God, he believes not
that. But now the fear of God in a gracious soul is the issue of says. A
Christian knows the Scripture, and what that reveals concerning God: and now
the Lord having by his Spirit wrought up his soul to give a firm and steadfast
assent to what is revealed in his Word: he fears the great God as much when
he sees or feels nothing of the greatness of his power in his works of
Providence, as when he is under the greatest demonstrations of sense. It is the
precept of Solomon, Prove. 23. 17. Be thou in the fear of the Lord at all times.
Indeed, he that is not in the fear of the Lord at all times, does truly fear
the Lord at no time: for where fear is the operation and fruit of says, the
effect is as abiding and permanent as the cause: now the cause of the fear of
the Lord in that person, is his firm assent to what is revealed in the holy
Scriptures concerning God. The Word of the Lord abiding the same for ever; and
the Propositions in it having an eternal verity; and the seed of God also once
cast in the soul, ab^ding at all tim^s in it, it is impossible but this soul
should have a fear and dread of God upon his heart in health, as well as in
sickness; in prosperity, as well as in adversity; in a time of the greatest
liberty, as well as in a time of the greatest straits, when the Providence of
God may propose the greatest objects of terror unto him. If the soul of any at
all times dreadeth and reverenceth the great God of Heaven and Earth; and that
by reason of what the Word of God reveals, and it believes concerning him;
this is an excellent sign, that the true fear of God is in that soul. Though it
is true, the various workings of Divine Providence, may make this fear (as to
the servile part of it) higher and greater at some one time than at another.

2. Although the true fear of the Lord in any soul, be not consistent with a
course of deliberate sinning against God, and defying the Divine Majesty; yet
it is confistent in the same soul with many sinnings, both of ignorance and of
infirmity. If there were none feared God, but such as were wholly free from
sin, there were no such excellent person in the world as I have been
discoursing of: For who lives and sins not against God? But I must open
this General.

1. I say, the fear of God is not (in any soul) consistent with open defiances
of the Divine Majesty, or constant courses of deliberate sinning. There are
some in the world that live in an open defiance of Heaven; the Atheistical
blasphemer, the profane swearer and curser; and such like eminent sinners:
Every one that comes near them, may say, the fear of God is not in these
persons: No nor with any course of deliberate or presumptuous finning, when a
man is free and under no height of temptation, to do this or that thing which
he knows to be what God has forbidden him to do, and yet he will do it, and
does do it; and that not once only, but again and again, from one day to
another, making a course of it, how dwells the fear of God in that soul? God
has said, he that does these things shall die; he shall be plagued in this
life, and he shall die eternally. The poor wretch knows this, and yet
presumptuously does these things; how can the dread or fear of God be in any
judgment of charity judged to dwell in this soul?

2. But I say, the fear of God is consistent in the soul with much sin; either
sins of ignorance, or sins of infirmity. Experience teaches this.

1. For sins of ignorance: a servant may truly fear his master, and a child his
father; and yet they may both do many things that their superiors would not
have done, if they do not persectly know their will: It is so betwixt the child
and servant of God, and his Father and Master which is in Heaven.

2. I say it is also consistent with much sinning of weakness and infirmity:
Sins of infirmities are of two sorts.

1. Such as are of pure weakness and infirmity, which are failures in such
things; as through our natural weakness and impotency we cannot perform.

2. Such as are mixed with something of wilfulness; but yet the great cause of
our admission of them, is some original weakness and infirmity in us. Such now
are those sins which we commit, upon the prevalence of some affection or
passion in us, whether love, or fear, or anger, etc. Lust prevailed on David;
fear on Peter: and truly it is hard to say what sin that is, which upon this
account, a soul truly fearing God, may not fall into. He that considers, that
Lot and Noah were surprised with Wine; and Lot committed incest, Abraham
fornication, or adultery rather: what David did in the murder of Vriah, and
taking of Bathsheba to his bed: what Peter did in the hour of temptation; and
what Job did in his passion, will (I say) be at a great loss to fix upon such a
sin, concerning which he can say, this is a sin which one fearing God cannot be
guilty of. On the other side; there is no sin which a child of God can live in,
making it his constant course and practice.

3. Though the fear of God will constrain a soul to every duty; yet even the
soul which truly fears God, may either through ignorance, or through
weakness, fail much in the performance of his duty. I say, the fear of God will
constrain a soul to the performance of every duty: By duty, I mean, whatsoever
God commands to be done; your reason teaches you this. Will any of you
think, that your child or servant fears you, who will not do every thing
which you command them? The Centurions servants feared him; he said to one, go,
and he went; to another, come, and he came, to a third, do this, and he did it.
Every soul that fears God, does likewise. But yet I say, even that soul which
truly fears God, may yet fail much in the performance of something of his
duty: And that,

1. Through ignorance or forgetfulness. The child that truly fears his
Father, may possibly not know; or if he has known, he may have forgotten
something that his Father would have him do: So may a child of God; We know in
part (says the Apostle) and what we do know, we (through forgetfulness of our
duty) do not always attend to in the hour when we should do it:

2. Secondly, Through wantonness; we have (the best of us) wanton hearts, which
are easily led aside from our duty; and while we are in the world, we are
encompassed with a multitude of temptations, we are subject to be flattered
from our duty, by the Sirens of the world, and to be frowned from our duty, by
the frowns of the world. And indeed, if the flatteries and frowns of the world
have no influence upon us; yet our spiritual duty is a thing that agrees not
with flesh and blood; it pincheth our flesh, and that is very ready to say to
us, Spare thy self; or to suggest to us, that God does not expect from our
hands; or at least will not strictly insist upon such measures of duty as the
holy Scriptures seem to lay out for us; but God will give us leave for five
hundred, to set down fifty. Who lives. and does not fail much in his duty?

But yet as to this point of duty, something will be seen more in a soul truly
fearing God, than in another soul.

1. First, The soul fearing the Lord, will not live in a constant neglect or
omission of any known duty. It is one thing to omit a duty at this or that
time; another thing never to perform it. A man or woman fearing the Lord, may
under the force of some temptation; or in a multiplicity of business, err; by
omitting a morning or evening sacrifice of prayer or praise, or in the strict
observation of the Lords day. But it is not possible that such a one should
live in a constant violation of the Lords Sabbath; or without God in the world
from day to day, and from week to week, never so much as calling upon his Name;
the reason is, because the fear of the Lord in his heart, biasseth him to his
duty; and though some worldly distraction (like a rub to a Boul) turns him
out of his road; yet when he is over that, the biass works again, and his soul
turns to his course. Again,

2. Secondly, A soul truly fearing the Lord, will hardly omit such duties as
God in his precept has put some special Emphasis upon. For as it is in our
commands to our children; though we may command them many things; yet there may
be some things that we lay a greater firess upon, that our children or servants
understand our special will to be, that we should be careful in them: So it is
in the precepts of God; there are some which (...) Lord has in his Word laid a
great Emphasis upon them: Our Savior justifies this distinction, when he
tells the Pharisees, They tithed Mint, and Annis, and Cummin; but neglected
the greater and weightier things of Gods Law. Now here the soul truly fearing
God, will be very strict, and will very rarely omit these. And hence possibly
it is that souls truly fearing God, are generally found very strict in the
matter of his worship; both as to the thing, and as to the manner of the
performance, God having in his Word more Emphatically and severely declared his
will in these things: So in matters of Righteousness and Mercy; and in all such
other things as are the weightier things of Gods Law.

Thus far I have showed you, how the fear of the Lord in any soul where it is,
works, both 1. In reference to the Word of God; it trembles at that. 2. In
reference to sin. 3. In reference to duty. I shall proceed yet a little further
in this Argument, giving you some notes of a person (...)? fearing the Lord.

4. Fourthly, A person fearing Jehovah, will have upon his heart a great awe of
Divine Judgment; or whatsoever looks like such. There is no person truly
fearing the Lord, but in some measure understands what that Lord is; and
being possessed with a true notion of God, it is as natural for the rational
creature to fear him, in the least roarings of his judgments; as for the
beasts of the Forest to tremble when the Lion roareth. For as their trembling
proceeds from a natural sense of their subjection to the Lion, and the Power
he has over them: So does this persons dread proceed from the apprehensions he
has of the Greatness and Majesty of the Divine Being; as also from what he
believes of his severity and justice. Besides this; There is no soul truly
fearing God, but has been at some time or other, less or more under the spirit
of bondage; or some way or other felt the weight of Gods hand; and as we say,
Ictus Piscator sapit; and it is natural for a child that has been once smartly
whipped, to fear the hand of the Father or the Master a second time: So it is
for the child of God, having once felt the weight of Gods hand, he trembles at
every lifting of it up, whether it be against himself or others. Now it is
true; the natural fear of a merely carnal man, as well as the reverential fear
of the child of God, will discover it self upon this occasion, and it may offer
a foundation of a new question; How that reverential fear of God in his
judicial dispensations, which is, and ought to be found in a child of God, may
be distinguished from that slavish and astonishing terror, which may fall upon
the vilest persons in the world. Let me have your patience to add a word or two
to this, before I shut up this branch of Application.

1. In the first place, take a carnal man, who has in him no more than a
natural dread of God, he is seldom or never affected at the lifting up of the
hand of God; only when it falls down heavy upon himself. Look as men in
correcting their children, they lift up their hands, first (in order to their
stroke) so the great God is set out to us in Scripture. Take the vilest of men;
they tremble when the hand of the Lord is upon them in some remarkable
judgment, that they feel the smart of Gods Rod; but they seldom take notice of
Gods hand lifted up, Isa. 26. 11. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will
not see; but they shall see, etc. There are three ways by which Gods hand may
be said to be lifted up.

1. In the comminations of his Word applied by his Messengers. God in his Word
has revealed his wrath plentifully against sinners. Now it is Gods usual
method (especially as to Nations, and such Nations where the Name of God has
been published) as of old to raise up his Prophets to give people warning; so
more lately to raise up some Ministers amongst such a people, faithfully and
powerfully to apply the threatenings of Gods Word to such a people. Now here
Gods hand is lifted up: This now the child of God that truly fears him, will
see and take notice of, and suit himself accordingly. You see it in the
instances of almost all the good Kings of Judah. But others will not see this
lifting up of Gods hand. Jeroboam stretches out his hand against the Prophet.
Ahab conmands Elijah to prison; and so does Zedekiah serve the Prophet Jeremiah.

2. Again, the hand of God may be said to be lifted up, when God sends either
some lesser judgments, as forerunners of greater; or else by some signs in
nature does indicare iram, declare his wrath. Now this lifting up again of the
Lords hand, the natural man will not see. There is that which God charge the
Jews with, by his Prophet Amos, chapter 4. 6, 8, 9, 10, 11. God sometimes shows his
signs in the Heavens, and alters the course of nature, as an indication of his
wrath. Of this nature was the Eclipse at our Saviors death; the Ensis
flammivomus, seen hanging over Jerusalem; many prodigious Comets, and other
signs taken notice of by all Histories, before Gods eminent pouring out of his
wrath upon a place. Take now a child of God, when he sees these things, he is
afraid, though he dare not venture to give a particular judgment of them; yet
they make him to tremble and reverence God, as believing he is doing some
terrible work, etc.

3. A third way whereby Gods hand may be said to be lifted up against a person
or Nation, is, when God makes some other like sinners examples of his
vengeance. Our Savior taught us this, when he made to his Disciples that
improvement of the Judgment of God fallen upon the Galileans, and upon those
upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell; telling the people, that except they
repented, they should all likewise perish. Now a man or woman truly fearing
God, takes notice of these liftings up of Gods hand, and fears; but usually
another never trembles till the vengeance of God overtakes himself; he puts
the evil day far from him, and will give no heed to such lesser judgments, as
usually forerun greater; nor yet will he take notice of any signs of Gods
approaching wrath; nor mind the beginnings of it upon others. But this is but
the first thing, and not universally in all points true. But

2. Secondly, If he does at all take notice of any of these things, he fears
with a superstitious, or with a mere servile fear. Fear much prevails according
to the natural constitutions. Persons naturally melancholic, are prone
exceedingly to fear; and where you find natural men thus complexioned, it is
not extraordinary to find them affrighted sometimes at the signs or beginnings
of Divine Vengeance: but one of these two faults their fear has: It is either
1. Superstitious: Or 2. Merely slavish. Superstitious, without any ground at
all from the words of God. Such are these fears raised by Astrologers, and
Stargazers, and vain observers. Thus it is given as the character of a wicked
man, That he fears where no fear is, Psalm. 53. 5. i. e. where Psalm. 53. 5.
there is no true ground of fear, no true and just ground. And Prove. 28. 1. He
flees when none pursues him. Or else, 2. His fear is a mere servile fear, and
that in a very great excess. God threatens his people, that in case they were
sound disobedient, (...) would Lev. 26. 36.
send a faintness upon their hearts, and the sound of a shaken leaf should
chase them. And such ordinarily is that fear of Judgment which falls upon the
hearts of natural carnal men: Or if not a judicial punishment; yet a mere
excess of natural passion.

3. Though a natural man may fear Divine Judgments; yet his fear never brings
him closer to God. A carnal man's fear of Gods Judgments, has many effects
upon him, and those very various, according to the different temper of persons.
Some are made by it desperate, and to defy the God of Heaven; as Julian the
Apostate (they say) threw up his Dagger to Heaven, and cried, Vicisti Galilee,
Thou have overcome me O thou Galilean. Others, their fear has such an
influence upon, that (like those rebellious Israelites, Jer. 42.) they will
presently resolve to remove from that place which God makes the Theater of his
Judgments. Thus in times of Plague, or other contagious Diseases, or War, they
will remove from their habitations. Yea, though upon a rational view of things,
a prudent man would see no great cause for it. Fear upon others has such an
effect as Nabals fear had upon him, to kill him: his heart upon it (says the
text) grew dead as a stone. Others, it may be their fear has an influence
upon, to bring them to some hypocritical humiliation. So Ahabs fear made him
walk softly, and put on sackcloth. But the fear of Judgments never has such
an operation upon a mere carnal man, as to make him take up any serious
thoughts of searching what the quarrel is which God has against him, and
thoroughly humbling himself before God for his sins, which have been the cause
of his wrath, and to turn from them by any serious resolutions, or endeavors
after reformation. This was the influence that Josiahs fears had upon him.
Indeed you shall see the difference betwixt the best of natural men in their
fears of Judgments, and the child of God, in those two instances of Ahab and
Josiah. Ahab was a most wretched Prince; God sends a Prophet to him, ^1 King.
21. 19, 20, 21. to tell him (in short) that God would ruin him and his family,
and all that belonged to him, v. 27. Ahab hears those words, he rends his
cloths, puts sackcloth upon his flesh, fasteth, lies in sackcloth, and goes
softly. Here Is the best of a carnal man; if his dread of God in his Judgments,
works thus far, and to a temporary abstaining from some gross sins, it is
all; you read not a word of Ahabs tending to inquire of the Lord; not a word of
any cordial humiliation, or resolved reformation, 2 King. 22. 11. Josiah
finds the Book of the Law, and hears there of the wrath of God, he rends
his cloths (so did Ahab) but he rests not here, v. 13. He tends to inquire of
the Lord for him, and for the people, and for all Judah, etc. was this all? No,
chap. 23. He sets upon a real and effectual reformation with all his might.
Thus you see how the dread and awe of God upon the heart of a child of God,
does not drive him from God, but unto him; it does not stupifie, but quicken
him; it does not put him upon a formal, temporary, particular reformation, but
upon a fixed, real, general reformation. Pharaohs fear flartled him, and put
him upon sending to Moses to pray for him; and put him upon some good thoughts
and resolutions at present; but yet Pharaoh, notwithstanding this, was one who
feared not the Lord. But thus much may serve to have spoken to this branch of
Application.

I come now to the last branch: I will shut up this discourse with a few words
of Exhortation. I will reduce all to three particulars.

1. To such as have not this fear of God in Exhort.
their hearts, to persuade them to labor for it.

2. To such as have this fear of God, to persuade them 1. To labor to grow in
this habit and exercise. 2. To live like excellent persons; and to show they
have this excellent blessing.

3. Lastly, To the men of the world in general; to persuade them.

1. To an undervaluing of all other excellencies.

2. To a true value of this excellent thing, and these excellent persons.

3. To give them of the fruit of their hands, and to suffer their works to
praise them in the gates.

In the first place; let me press a word of 1 Branch.
Exhortation upon such as yet fear not Go^, to persuade them to it. It is a
frequent precept in holy Writ, Levit. 19. 14. Fear thy God, I am the Lord, chapter
25. v. 17. 43. Eccles. 5. 7. Matthew. 10. 28. 1 Pet. 2. 17. Rev. 14. 7. Eccles.
12. 13. God calls to you, Fear God. Solomon calls to you, Fear God. Our Savior
calls to you, Fear him that can cast both body and soul into Hell fire. The
Angels in Heaven call to you, Fear God. All the Prophets and Apostles call to
you unavoce, and this is that which they say, Fear God. The meaning of this you
have heard. Not only dread the great and living God in the secrets of your
hearts; but let all your conversation savor of this fear: so comport your
selves in your whole carriage both toward God, and toward your neighbors, as
you may evidence to the world, not only that you have a natural sense of that
infinite distance which is between your Creator and you; and the power that he
has over you; but that you may show that you have this gracious habit of fear
wrought in you, and that you fear God in the Scripture phrase. You see this is
a great picce of the will of God concerning you, pressed upon you again and
again in holy. Writ. Give me leave to enlarge a little in pressing it upon you.
I shall first give you some Arguments. Secondly, I shall offer you some
directions in the case, from the text: And what I have said, furnishes me with
two great Arguments.

1. This is Wisdom. This is Grace, Job 28. 28. ^^e fear of the Lord, that is
wisdom, Prove. 1. 7. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Knowledge. That
man who has nothing of the fear of God in him, has nothing of God, nothing of
the Grace of God in him. On the other side, that person who has in him the
fear of God, has all; that is an holy, that is a gracious man. There can be no
more said of any, than that he or she are persons not fearing God. Nor can
there be better said of any, that he or she is a person fearing God.

2. Secondly, (You have heard) a person fearing God, is the most excellent
person in the world; Favor is deceitful; Beauty is vain; but a woman fearing
the Lord, she shall be praised. Others may call themselves excellent; and the
men of the world may call the proud happy; but the truly happy, the truly
excellent person is one fearing God. I might add a third.

3. This is the only person who deserves to be praised, and whose works will
truly praise him.

Let others be commended and admired for beauty, for riches and honor; and
another for learning; as the end of all is, to fear God, and keep his
Commandments; So that person that truly answers this end, and does fear God,
and keep his Commandments, will upon the best evidence, (which is that of
Scripture and reason) appear to be the person that is most worthy of praise and
commendation. Now if I could say no more than this, to engage any to this
study; yet in other things this would be enough. Every one naturally desires
the things that are excellent, and is naturally covetous of honor and praise.
Would you have that which is in it self most excellent? that which will make
you above all others excellent? that which most truly deserves praise, and
will make you the truest objects of praise? Oh get this fear of the Lord! Give
me leave to add another Argument or two.

4. In the fourth place, Consider the many Promises made in Scripture to the
fear of the Lord, Prove. 10. 27. The fear of the Lord prolongeth days, Prove.
14. 26, 27. In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence, and his children
shall have a place of refuge. The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, to
depart from the snares of death, Prove. 15. 16. Little with the fear of the Lord
is great gain, v. 33. The fear of the Lord is the instruction of wisdom, Prove.
19. 23. The fear of the Lord tends to life, chapter 22. 4. By the fear of the
Lord are riches, Psalm. 112. and Psalm. 128. are full of Promises to the man that
fears God. The things promised in these, and those many other Promises
annexed to the fear of the Lord, are such as every one defireth. Who would not
have long life, riches and honor? Either you believe the Scriptures, or you do
not believe them; if you believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God, you must
assent to whatsoever Propositions are revealed in them, as Propofitions of
eternal and infallible truth; whether the Proposition be dogmatical, or
promisory, etc. And indeed if you so believe, you cannot but judge your selves
reasonably engaged, to labor for this fear of the Lord which shall most
certainly have such a train of blessings waiting upon it.

5. I will add one thing more; There is no such preservative from all evil both
of sin and punishment. Evil of punishment is sensible evil. Evil of sin is the
greater evil, but not so obvious to sense, while the poor creature lives here.
As to the former (the evil of sin) there is no such preservative against that,
Prove. 16. 6. By the fear of the Lord men depart from evil. It is of the nature
of fear well rooted in the heart, to lay a restraint upon us, from provoking
the person of whose power we are afraid. And it is impossible that a soul should
truly fear God, and yet boldly, knowingly, and deliberately provoke him to
vengeance. There is no such preservative from the evil of sin, as the fear of
the Lord is. Nor is there any such preservative from evils of punishment. This
indeed follows upon the other; for all punishment is the fruit of sin, Prove.
28. 14. Happy is the man that fears always: but be that hardneth his heart
shall fall into mischief. It is not, he that fears always, but he that
bardneth his heart that falls into mischief. I shall add but one thing more.

6. Lastly, There is no such remedy against the slavish fear of the creature,
as this filial and reverential fear of God. Isa. 7. You shall find v. 3. That
God sent the Prophet to meet Ahaz: His business was to encourage him, and to
del^ver him from the fear of the two potent adversaries, Rezin and Pekah, chap.
8^ v. 13. (says he) Sanctify the Lord of Hosts; So out Savior, Man. 10. 10.
and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. And indeed it is but a
reasonable thing. A greater fear does as naturally swallow up a lesser, as a
greater pain (of the Stone, or the like) drowneth the lesser, and causes it
hardly to be discerned. Now this is no small advantage, The bondage of fear,
which in this life we are subject to, is no small bondage; and it is no small
blessing to be delivered from it. But let this be enough to have spoken by way
of motive, to persuade people to this fear of Jehovah.

I have spoken so much concerning the excellent habit, that me thinks I cannot
but in charity judge there is by this time kindled in your hearts some desires
after it, and hear you whispering; How should I get this fear of the Lord? In
order to it, let me commend to you something of Meditation, Observation,
Caution, Faith, Prayer.

1. The first thing is Meditation; as to which in this case, let me commend to
you a double Object; The Word of God: The Works of God.

The Word of God, Deuteronomy. 4. 10. I will make them to hear my words, that they may
learn to Deuteronomy. 4. 10.
fear me all the days they shall live. The holy Scriptures (as to the matter
of them) have much in them, which has a natural tendency to affect the hearts
of men and women with this dread of God.

1. They tell you what God is; what a great and glorious Majesly; what a pure
and holy God he is; what a just and severe God he is: How infinite his Power
is, that he kills and saves alive whomsoever he pleases; throws to Hell,
and brings to Heaven whom he pleases, from whence every rational soul must
necessarily conclude the subjection of his poor feeble nature unto him; and
this apprehension, as to any thing, is the foundation of fear in us: I mean, of
all reverential and servile fear. They likewise tell you what God is in his
Goodness and Mercy; and the apprehension of this is the foundation of all
filial fear.

2. They tell you what God has revealed that he will be, and show himself to
be, both to all impenitent and presumptuous sinners, and to all those who are
his children. And

3. They tell you much what God has been toward all sorts in the ancient
issues of his Providence. Now I would have you not only to read these, but to
meditate on them. Meditation is the souls stand upon its object; its weighing
of matter proposed, and attention to it. The want of this is one great cause
there is so little dread of God in the world. Have not men the Scriptures? What
house is there amongst us, in which are not many Bibles? Do they not read them?
many do, but they do it in a vain formality, without a due digestion and
meditation, so as the notions of holy Writ leave no impression upon their
hearts. Would men but allow the Word to have a place in their hearts: did the
Word of God dwell in them, it were impossible (one would think) but this savor
of it should be left behind; men could not talk and walk as they do.

2. Let the Works of God be also the matter of your meditation. Come and see
(says the Psalmist) what desolations he has wrought in the earth. The truth
is, the wheel of Providence has turned so strangely in the world, since the
world had an existence, that if men could give themselves leisure to think of
its motions, to consider them in their causes, in the manner of their
revolution, in the things brought to pass by them; one would think it
impossible but that it should affect their hearts with a dread of the Divine
Majesty: But of this more by and by.

2. The second thing which I shall commend to you, is, Observation. Observation
of the motions of Providence. I remember it is reported of Waldus, the Father
of those famous Christians the Waldenses, that he was converted, by seeing the
sudden death of one of his companion^ in the days of his vanity. Would we but
obs^rve, how Providence is every day ratifying the Promises; cutting of
blood-thirsty and deceitful me^* who, he has said, shall not live out half
their days; bringing the Councils of Ahitophels to folly; striking sinners
dead in their full career of sin, and sending them down in a moment to the pit;
and many other ways; men could not but fear that great and glorious Name: but
we see, and do not see. These, and such like examples are daily before our
eyes, and we observe them not; and therefore we fear not God. Christians, if
you would fear God, observe the workings of his Providence much how in his
great works he is daily confirming his Promises to his people, and his
threatenings to his enemies. If the Word of God will not make you fear him; yet
surely his works must: his works by which you see him justifying, and giving a
Being to his Word.

3. If you would get this fear of God, take heed of those things which have a
direct tendency to harden your hearts from his fear.

1. Take heed first of Atheistical Principles. There is a bundle of Principles
(some of which have grown too fast too in these evil times) which are
calculated for the very Meridian of Atheism; and devised as if it had been on
purpose to banish all dread of God out of men's hearts. That things are not
ordered by Providence, but come in a mere series and succession of necessary,
natural causes. That there are no spirits: no such things as indications of
divine wrath. That there is no Judgment to be made from Providence. If we
should see the Earth open and swallow up Corah, Dathan and Abiram; yet there is
nothing to be concluded, but these may be as honest men as those that do not go
down quick into the pit. These, and such like Principles, are Doctrines devised
on purpose, to make men faces of Brass, that they might not blush; and necks of
Iron, that they might not bow at any divine rebukes; but might outface God to
the utmost, until he tear them in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

2. Secondly, Take heed of customary sinning against God. Frequency in sin
takes away the sense of it; and a custom of daring God, makes men to forget
all kind of fear and dread of the Divine Majesty. Sin naturally hardens the
heart; and takes away all natural modesty.

4. Fourthly, Nothing so contributes to fear as faith. Both faith of assent,
and faith of adherence. Faith of assent is that habit by which we give assent
to the Proposition of the word. Faith of Reliance is a gracious habit, by which
we rest upon the person of the Mediator. Either of these has an influence
upon us to beget this fear and dread of God in our souls. The one as it
persuades us of the truth of what the Scripture reveals concerning the Glory
and Majesty of God; concerning his Purity and Holiness; concerning his Justice
and Severity; all which represent God unto us as the true and proper object of
our fear. The other, as it uniteth us to Christ; and endeareth him to our
so^ls, and so lays us under a sacred awe of sinning against him: as we
naturally fear to offend any person whom we dearly and entirely love and
honor. It is true the Apostle says, Romans 8. We have not received the spirit
for bondage again to fear. And again, Perfect love casts out fear. But those
texts must be understood, not of a filial, reverential fear; but of a slavish
servile fear; our daily experience teaches us, that the more entirely we love
any person, the more we fear to offend and grieve them, and to do any thing
which we think they will take ill at our hands. Faith therefore, as it is the
root of hope and love; so it is the kindest root of filial and ingenuous fear.

5. Lastly, Beg this Grace of God. It is a plant of our heavenly Fathers; it is
a part of Gods Covenant. I will put my fear into their heart, that they shall
never depart from me. O beg of God that he would bestow his fear upon you. The
fear of God is prima gratia, says Bernard, torius Religionis exordium -- radix
est custos omnium bonorum, i. e. The fear of the Lord is the first grace; the
very beginning of all Religion; the root and the keeper of all good things:
therefore pray that above all things God would bestow this grace upon your
souls. But I shall add no more to the first branch of the Exhortation.

Let me in the next place speak to you in whom God has created this fear of
his great and glorious Name. Two things this Doctrine calls to you for.

1. To grow in this excellent habit. 2. To live like excellent persons.
1. Labor to grow in this excellent habit. There is a fear of God, in which
the more perfect a Christian is, the more he decreaseth in it. This is that
servile and slavish fear which I mentioned dreading God, as a Judge, an Enemy,
one that can cast both body and soul into Hell fire. The more a soul grows up
into communion with God, and into an assurance of union with him; the more this
fear dies, and wears out of his soul. It is a dread of God which attends
the spirit of bondage, and much possesses the soul in the moment of its
conversion; and wears off as the soul comes to receive the spirit of Adoption,
touching it to cry Abba Father; and grows mo^^ perfect in Love. But there is
another fear; which, as the soul grows more perfect in love, and in the
exercise of grace; the more this grows up, and increases in the soul; this
is that fearing of the Lord and his goodness, of which the Scripture speaks.
Such a fear as the tender wife fears her husband with; and the dutiful child
its Parent, who (he knows) int^rely loves him: he fears not his Fathers rod,
but he fears his frown; he fears the change of his countenance toward him.
This is that habit of fear in which I would have you to grow.

2. And as in this habit; so in the performance of all acts and exercises, by
which you may testifiethis your reverencing of the great God of Heaven and
Earth. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom (says Solomon) it is
both the beginning and the perfection of it. The fear of the Lord is a grace
necessary at all times, especially in evil times. Cyril says, that the soul
that is full of the fear of the Lord, velut n^uro obsepta fortis est, is strong
as a City guarded with a wall; and in a manner invincible.

2. This Doctrine calls to you to live like excellent persons. I hinted the
reason of this before; every one should live ratably to his honor and dignity.
Persons fearing God are the most excellent persons; they should therefore live
like the excellent of the Earth, distinguishing themselves from others by their
lives, as God has distinguished them by his favor. But I have hinted this
before; and therefore shall not here enlarge upon that discourse.

I have but one word more to add, That is to the men of the world in general.
To them I shall speak (from the advantage of what you have heard) for three
things.

1. To undervalue other excellencies in comparison with this. Learn to speak
after Solomon; Favor is deceitful. Beauty is vain. Riches commend not a soul
to God; they profit not in the day of wrath. Why should you set your eyes upon
things that are not; and admire things that have nothing of worth in them,
proportioned to your affection to them, admiration of them, pursuit after them.
Knowledge is a fine thing; by it a man differs from a beast. Wisdom and Moral
Virtues are excellent things; by these things men outshine men, and excel each
other, as light excels darkness: But what are all these to the fear of the
Lord? O then let these things ride but in the second Chariot: let the fear of
God in the throne of your estimation be greater than they are. Remember,
nothing so much betraies your intellectuals, as want of judgment in things
that differ; and your judgment cannot but be erroneous, where it is contrary
to the judgment of God, and of holy men who spoke in Scripture as they were
inspired by God.

2. Let what you have heard bespeak a due value (in you) both of the fear of
the Lord, as the best things and persons fearing the Lord as the most excellent
persons. Certainly it is but reasonable that we should judge of persons, and
things, as God judges of them; as Solomon and David; and those great Worthies
we find recorded in Scripture have judged. David, Psalm. 16. calls the people
of God. The excellent of the Earth. Solomon tells you here, that Favor is
deceitful; and Beauty is vain: but a woman fearing the Lord, she shall be
praised. Though many Daughters have done virtuously, yet she has ascended
above them all. Oh let us thus judge. Regard not what vain men talk of people
fearing God: they speak after their Father (whose works they do) they do but
disgorge the profaneness, filth and malice of their own hearts: They have
hated Christ, and no wonder if they hate all those who bear any thing of the
Image and superscription. Let not the railings of these men; let not their hard
speeches, and bitter censures, and more bitter dealings, guide your judgment.
You will one day find, that the men whom they thus abuse, are no Reprobates.
Men in power and authority one day will know, that these are not these evil
doers, to whom they should be a terror. Ministers will know that they have
abused their texts, to turn the drift of them against persons fearing the Lord;
under the disguise of Schismatics, Fanatics, etc. terms which many use in
these days, not understanding what they mean. If it be some men's worldly
interest to do these things; yet (my Brethren) take you heed of treading their
steps. Let who will revile, and curse, and blaspheme. God has blessed the
persons that fear him; and you shall one day see they shall be blessed. Behold
the Lord comes (says the Apostle Jude) with ten thousand Jude v. 13.
of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all; and to convince all that are
ungodly amongst them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have committed; and
of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.

Lastly, Are persons fearing the Lord, the most excellent persons? give them
then the fruit of their hands, and let their own works praise them in the
gates. It is Solomon's improvement of this notion in the words following my
text. Certainly there is nothing more reasonable than this is; if it were, give
such persons as these the fruit of your hands: it were but according to the
manner of men, who use to give Presents to Princes Favorites. It were but to
make friends of your Mammon of unrighteousness, that when these things fail,
you may be received into everlasting habitations. But I say no more than give
them the fruit of their hands; do not defraud, abuse them; give them that
honor, that room in the world which they deserve, which they labor for; and
let their own works praise them in the gates. Envy them not the praise of their
own labors; the honor which their own works purchase for them.

This brings me ^o my last part of my work; that I may fulfill my text upon this
Noble person, for whom we are all mourners. But I shall reserve that to a more
full and particular discourse.

LIGHT IN DARKNESS: OR, A twofold Fountain of Comfort and Satisfaction, to
those, who walking with God, yet live, and may die unsatisfied, as to the
sensible manifestations of DIVINE LOVE: Discovered, In a Discourse first
Preached at the Funerals of the Right Honorable, the Lady Catharine Courten;
late Wife to William Courten, Esquire; and since enlarged for more public profit.

By John Collinges, (late) Preacher of the Gospel in Norwich.

Isaiah 50. 20. Who is amongst you that fears the Lord? and obeys the voice
of his servant; that walks in darkness, and sees no light? let him trust in
the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. LONDON, Printed in the year, 1669.

To His Worthy and Honored Friend, WILLIAM COURTEN, Esquire;.
Sir,
WHen I had once resolved to join these Sheets (long since drawn up, and in the
hands of some of your noble friends) in one Book with those, relating to your
Noble Aunt; I had no great dispute with my self, to whom (according to the
usual custom) I should inscribe them. You are the only Male Branch of this
excellent Root; the Heir of her Religion, Virtue and Honor; you were (while
she lived) next to your dear Father, the great object of her Love, Care, and
Pious Sollitude: For you it was that she so often, so passionately (even in her
greatest Agonies) begged our prayers; she had you only, and your sister to pour
out sighs and tears to God for, that you might be found constant, and walking
in the truth. You alone can lay a just claim to her picture, and these other
Papers devoted to a memorial of her. You are fittest to undertake the Patronage
of her Honorable and Precious Name, against such, as (to justify others)
would fasten a Debauchery in Religion upon her Urn, after fifteen or sixteen
years rest, in which, since her death, it might prescribe; for the Faith in
which she not only truly died, but in so eminent a Profession, and such
particular Declarations of it, as are not ordinary. (Alas! (Dear Sir) for the
sad occasion of this so late an impudent a slander, but the judgments of God
are a great deep) You Sir, since her death, have been visiting the seat of
iniquity, the Country of the great Whore, which has made so many drunk, and is
yet by parcels intoxicating souls with her superstitious and idolatrous
abominations; you went not out of curiosity, but upon a just call, and to pay a
duty to your Fathers Sepulcher. Had your rare Mother lived till you took that
Journey, she would have cried out with another kind of Devotion than Horace for
his friend Virgil.

Sic te cunctipotens Dues
Sic pelagi Dominus --
Ventorumque regat Pater
Obstrictis aliis praeter --
Naves quae tibi creditum
Debes -- finibus Italis
Reddas incolumem, precor
Et serves animae dimidium meae.
But it pleased God (by death seven years before) to deliver her from those
fears, in which your two years absence would have kept her: and though she
lived not so long as to attend you with her fervent prayers; yet Sir, I can
tell you, she had treasured up a large stock of prayers for you; and she had
begged a moving stock, which was working for you, when she ceased to be; and by
the infinite goodness of God hearing those prayers, you were preserved, both in
your going and coming, in the perils you ran by Land, and by Sea: Yea and
preserved also free from those sensual and superstitious tinctures, which too
too many bring home with them. You have (dear Sir) made it appear in your
practice, that the fopperies of the Romish Religion, are baits fit for no noble
and ingenuous souls, nor any that have once seen them in their proper element:
You have had an ocular demonstration of the folly that attends it, and the
licentious leudness tolerated and patronized by it: and while others in a Land
of Righteousness have learned wickedness; and from the very Tents of
Protestants have proved Renegadoes to the Faith, making shipwreck both of it
and a good conscience: You have defied the Babilonish Whore in her very bed of
filthiness; and been faithful where Satan has his Throne, treading upon the
Lion and the Adder, and (without harm) trampling the young Lion under your
feet. It Is (Sir) I hope, because the Lord has set his love upon you, that he
has delivered you; and he will set you on high; because you have known his
Name. Go on (dear and honored Sir) to make the tear of your Parents to be your
fear; to love that dear Savior, whom above all the world, your dying Mother
begged for your portion. (You must, Sir, give me leave chiefly to insist upon
the mention of your Mother (you know she alone was known to me so much as by
face.) Go on Sir, to justify her interest in Heaven, by making it appear that
her prayers were for you heard and accepted. Let all her Virtues and Graces be
read in your holy conversation. When she came to die (though it was in the
prime of her years) it was no grief of heart unto her, that she had consecrated
her life to God, and early drawn off her self from the perishing vanities of
the world. I can assure you Sir, she never repented her of one of those very
many hours which she had spent in prayers and tears on the behalf of her, and
your immortal soul; or which she had spent in reading the Word of God, or in
hearing of it preached in season, and out of season. I speak this, not Sir, as
in the least suspecting your forgetfulness of the Law, or the life of your
Mother; but you can never enough remember her; and (as the Apostle speaks) I
only desire to stir up your mind by way of remembrance. I hope (dear Sir) you
will please to pardon my offers of these Papers to you: I have told you your
interest in them; and though they be but an inconsiderable Present, yet your
ingenuity will enforce your acceptance of them from him, who (under his present
circumstances) knows not better how to improve himself:

Sir, Your most affectionate Friend and Servant, J. C.

LIGHT in DARKNESS.
PSALM 17. 15. But as for me, I will behold thy face in Righteousness: I shall
be satisfied when I awake, (or in watching) for thy likeness.
THE life of a Saint lies in contemplation and action: Contemplation, what God
is in himself; and what he is unto him: And spiritual action, doing what lies
in his power for God. The triumphing Saint beholds the face of God
continually; and this is the militant Saints object too; but with this
difference: The Saint triumphant beholds the face of God in glory: The Saint
militant beholds his face in duty: The one in Happiness; the Psalm. 27. 4. 1
Cor. 13. 12. 1 John 3. 2.
other in Righteousness: The former sees him face to face, clearly: these see
him, but it is in a glass, darkly: The former see him as he is; the latter, as
he will please to reveal himself, and as they are able to comprehend him; yet
both of them behold his face; the one by faith, the other by sight: And the way
to behold the Lords face in glory, is first (with the Psalmist) to behold his
face in Righteousness.

Satisfaction to our minds, is the greatest blessing we are capable of; and
indeed the portion of none but Gods people, who have an object in God,
proportioned to the capacity of their souls. Other souls may be filled with
wind; but these only with wholesome sood: Yea and every gracious soul has it
for his portion, though in different degrees, and from different accounts. The
Saints in glory see and are satisfied. The children of God in this life
believe, and are satisfied: both are satisfied; the one from Faith, the other
from Sight: the one from the evidence of things not seen; the other from the
glory and fullness of things which are seen: Those in Heaven, with waiting upon
God; these on Earth, with watching for Gods likeness. The living Saints
satisfaction is not so full as his, whose corruptible has put on incorruption.
In some things he may be unsatisfied, yea and go down to his grave in that
dissatisfaction, having received no other satisfaction from God, but what he
has found in the performance of his duty: but if he does so fall asleep, yet
he shall awake; and when he awakes, he shall be satisfied with the divine
likeness. So says the Psalmist, When I awake, I shall be satisfied with thy
likeness. I think it needless to dispute whether David was the Author of this
Psalm, or no. A critical Expositor Lorinus ad loc. (...)
notes, that some Greek Copies seem to favor another opinion, reading the
title of it, A Psalm to, or for David. The Hebrew affix, though it gives a
latitude to such a conjecture; (...)
yet it no way necessitates such a construction, being indifferently used to
express the Genitive as the Dative Case. It is generally agreed to be a Psalm
of David; and the title is no other, than that of other Psalms, which were
unquestionably penned by him.

Interpreters cannot agree the particular V. Vicars ad loc.
time or occasion of the composure: Some of the Hebrew Writers affirm it
composed at that time when Rabbah of the Ammonites was besieged by Joab as
Captain General of David's Army (the story of which you read, 2 Samuel 12.) But as
I see no foundation for that conjecture; so I have this to offer against it;
That David at that time being settled upon his Throne, and able to spare an
Army to invade his enemies; it is probable he had not so many, nor so
considerable enemies as he seems to complain of in this Psalm.

But leaving that disquisition, the matter of the Psalm seems to us more
considerable.

Who so wistly casts an eye upon it, will find it representing a child of
light in darkness; the man according to Gods own heart, under a very great
eclipse as to the light of his countenance; and that not only with respect to
more external Providence; but also as to more internal influences. He had
enemies from without, v. 9. The wicked oppressed him; deadly enemies compassed
him about. They spoke proudly, v. 10. They compassed him in his steps, v. 11.
They were to him like Lions, and young Lions, v. 11, 12. As to internal
influences, his condition was sad: He knew not what God would do with him, v.
2. He prays, Let my sentence come forth from thy presence. He had not lately
heard from God, but prays for an answer of his prayers, v. 1, 2, 6. Attend
unto my cry; give ear unto my prayer, etc. He was under a great temptation,
being poor and empty, when his enemies were both rich and full, v. 14. The text
speaks him under some dissatisfaction. This makes it probable, that this Psalm
was composed during his persecution by Saul, or disturbances from the rebellion
of Absalom; and most likely it was during the latter period of time, he being
then more under the eclipse of divine light, by reason of his sin, which had
occasioned him those great disturbances of his life, according to what Nathan
told him from God. This was his state; what now does he in this perplexity? 1.
He prays. 2. He believes. Athanasius notes right, that this Psalm is full of
faith. In the text you have the holy man's resolution in this great stress of
Providence; As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness, etc. You have
in the text,

1. David's Resolution; I will behold thy face in righteousness.

2. David's Encouragement and Satisfaction; I shall be satisfied when I awake
(or in watching for) with thy likeness.

It will be necessary I should spend some time in opening the words; for we
shall find some difficulty in them, and that (like Spices) when they are
bruised, they will send forth a more fragrant smell. After that I shall raise
such Observations as are clear in the words; and pitch upon some of them for
the subject of my discourse.

But as for me] These words which make Antithesis est qua David opponit spem
suam spei impiorum. Mollerius. V. Musc. West merum, Engl. Annot. Piscat. ad loc.
the Antithesis, are not in the Hebrew; but it is plain, that they, or some
others of like impor^, must be supplied, to make up the sense according to our
English Idiome; for it is evident, that there is a latent Antithesis in these
words; David declaring his resolution and satisfaction, in opposition to that
of his wicked enemies, mentioned, v. 14. Their bellies were filled with hid
treasure; they had their portion in this life; they were full of children, and
left the rest to their babes; this satisfied them. But [as for me] (says
David) if I had all these things; if I were full of riches, full of treasure,
it would not satisfy me. Piscator parallels it with that of David, Psalm. 4. 6.
Psalm. 4. 6.
There be many who will say, show us any good: Lord lift thou up the light of
thy countenance upon me. So here; Let the wicked enjoy their portions in this
life; let their bellies be Fruantur improbi suis bonis, etc. Lorinus ad loc.
filled with their hid treasure; let them have a plenty of substance, and leave
the rest to their babes; and let them if they will walk proudly; As for me, I
will behold thy face in righteousness.

I] I find some questioning whether the (...)
Psalmist speaks this of himself, or of some other. Hierom thinks that he
speaks of Christ: He indeed first beheld his Fathers face in righteousness; and
it is in him that we can so behold it: he also was the first fruits of them
that sleep, and awaking in the Resurrection, he was satisfied with his Fathers
V. August. ad loc.
likeness. It is eminently true of him; but doubtless, though this text
mystically may respect Christ, and morally concerns every child of God; yet
literally it respects David, who is first concerned in it.

Will behold thy face in righteousness] In righteousness. The question is, what
righteousness here the Psalm^st intends. If the text were (according to
Hierom) to be understood of Christ; the Righteousness could be no other, than
his own active and passive obedience to the whole will of God. But I said
before, the resolution doubtless is David's; and an analogous resolution is the
duty of every true child of God. We must make a further inquiry. This term
Righteousness is in Scripture taken in several senses; but as applicable to our
purpose there is,

1. A Justifying Righteousness, by which our souls stand righteous before God:
This righteousness (says the Apostle) is revealed from Romans 1. 17.
Faith to Faith. This is called the righteousness which is of God; and our
righteousness Christ's righteousness, as to the personal performance of it. Gods
righteousness, as to the imputation of it, it is he reckons it to us for
righteousness; the righteousness of faith; as faith is that hand which lays
hold upon it, and applies. Ours as imputed and applied to us. Surely shall one
Isa. 45. 24.
say, in the Lord I have righteousness and strength. The Prophet Isaiah sang of
old, Their righteousness is of me, says the Lord. Thus was the name of Christ
prophesied of, The Lord our Righteousness. And the Apostle says, He was made
of God for us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. And St.
Paul 1 Cor. 1. 30.
desires to be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness, but that
which is of God. Indeed in this Righteousness alone can we behold the
reconciled face of God; either in this life, or that which is to come. God (as
Joseph said to his Brethren, Bring your Brother Benjamin, or see my face no
more) has said to us ever since the fall; Bring me the Righteousness of
Christ, or see my face no more. This was that White Robe with which John in the
Revelations Rev. 7. 14.
saw the Elders clothed; the meaning was no more than that they had washed
their garments in the blood of the Lamb. Nor was David ignorant of this; it was
he that sang of imputed Righteousness, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Psa. 32. 1, 2.
Saying, Blessed is he whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered, and to whom the Lord imputes no sin. I will not exclude this from the
sense of the text.

2. But (secondly) there is also a Righteousness of Sanctification; and so
Righteousness is in Scripture taken either in a more Legal, or in a more
Evangelical notion.

Legal Righteousness lies in a perfect fulfilling of the whole Law of God, in
thought, word and deed. The stain of the least sin destroys this. David
cannot mean this. Thus the Apostle tells us, and tells it us out of David;
There is none righteous, no not one: And David tells us so much of his sins, as
may assure us, this was not in his thoughts. The righteous falls seven times
in a day; and who can tell how often he offends? David knew his own heart too
well, to think he had such a proportion of this Web, as would make him a long
white Robe, wherein to stand before that God who charge his Angels with
folly; and is of purer eyes than to behold any iniquity. The Apostle says,
That he who keeps the whole Law, Jam. 2. 10.
and offends but in one point, is guilty of all. And surely he who said, If
thou (Lord) should mark iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand? Psalm. 102. 3.
never thought that himself should.

2. Secondly, Therefore this Righteousness of Sanctification is taken in an
Evangelical sense, and so it signifies

1. That universal habit of holiness, of which the child of God is possessed,
teaching him to hate and strive against every sin; to love and to press after
every good work; and to endeavor to do the whole will of God: (though it may
be in many things he does offend) and this is that Righteousness which the most
solid Interpreters judge here to be chiefly intended; that which the holy
Psalmist elsewhere calls a respect to all Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6.
Then shall I not be ashamed, when I shall have respect to all thy Commandments.
I will not restrain the text to this; but this doubtless is a great part of
David's meaning; I will live an holy and righteous conversation, having a due
regard to all thy Commandments; and keeping up in my soul a true hatred of
every sin, and of every false way. Though I want the fullness which sinful men
have; though I be in a sad and afflicted condition; though I be in the dark,
and cannot behold the light of thy countenance; though my oppressors and my
enemies be many, and cruel, and bloody; yet will I not live like wicked and
ungodly men, who live more at case, and have a greater degree of fullness; but I
will keep on the course of an holy life and conversation, and then I shall
behold thy face either here, or hereafter; either before I fall asleep in
death; or when I shall awake in the resurrection.

This righteousness then is the righteousness of a good conscience; that which
Saint Paul calls a living in a good conscience before God. And again, he tells
us, herein he did exercise Acts 23. 1.
himself to keep a conscience void of offense both toward God, and toward men.

The Chaldee Paraphrast reads it, Truth; In truth will I behold thy face. Truth
is opposed to Hypocrisy, and to all falsehood of conversation.

And indeed none can (without presumption) hope to see God, but he who looks to
behold his face in the righteousness of Jesus Christ imputed to him. 2. In the
righteousness of an holy life and conversation: Without holiness (says the
Apostle) none shall see God.

3. But there is yet a third thing, which some understand by righteousness (in
this place) Alii per justitiam intelligunt innocentiam versus hosts. Lor.
and in other texts is most certainly understood by it. It is the particular
habit of Justice and Innocence, i. e. having an innocent heart, and a righteous
cause against unrighteous men. I will come to thee O God, who art a God of
Justice, and a Protector of innocent persons. Holy David at this time, was
afflicted, either by the persecution of Saul (as some think) or the rebellion
of Absalom (as others judge) both of them rose up against him without a cause
on their part; not for my wickedness, nor for my sin (as he elsewhere says.)
Now (says David,) though my enemies be many, and great, and cruel; yet I have
done them no harm: I have as to them a righteous heart, and against them a
righteous cause: I will bring this righteous cause before thee. This is the
righteousness of which he speaks, v. 3. Let thine eyes behold the thing that
is equal: thou have proved mine heart: thou have visited me in the night: thou
have tried me, and shall find nothing. So probably, v. 1. he prays, Hear the
right O Lord; (where the same word is used.) This sense will afford us this
note. Those who make their appeal to God in any cause, and seck his face,
hoping to behold his face, directing, countenancing, or assiting them, must be
sure their cause be a righteous cause.

One of the Hebrew Writers reads, I will behold thy face for Alms; the Rabbis
so interpret the word (...) because (they say) to give Alms is both a piece of
righteousness, and a fign of it: Indeed, whosoever goes to God, goes for Alms.
But I shall discourse no more as to this term, In Righteousness.

1. In the Righteousness of my Lord, the Mediator.

2. In the Righteousness of an holy conversation.

3. In the Justice, Innocence and Righteousness of my cause. This is all
comprehended in the term Righteousness. I now proceed.

Will I, or shall I behold thy face?] The word indifferently signifies the act
of the body, and of the mind, Psalm. 58. 10. The righteous shall rejoice when he
sees the vengeance; that is, when he shall with his bodily eyes see the
righteous God revenging him upon sinful men, Exodus 18. 21. Thou shall provide;
there it doubtless implies an act of Moses his mind, weighing and considering
what persons were fittest for Magistrates.

2. But it sometimes signifies not a bare intuition, but a most curious careful
scrutiny or beholding. It signifies to contemplate: Now when a man
contemplates, he does not barely look upon a thing; but he sixeth his eyes, and
thoughts, and studies upon it; from this word Prophets, we are called Seers;
and it is a word often applied to their vision, in which their minds were
wholly taken up; and their souls as it were wrapped up in exrasies. Star-gazers
from this word had their name in Hebrew. And Critics tell us our English word
Gaze, has its original from it. Now you know we use that word Gaze, to express
the action of them, who are a long time looking upon a thing, fully, steadily
and busily. Further yet; the word sometimes signifies to behold with delight
and Pleasure: To behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his Temple,
Psalm. 27. 4. That was a pleasant sight, Psalm. 84. 1. I will behold thy face in
righteousness; that is, with the eye of my body or mind, or both; I will
diligently, constantly, earnestly behold; I will take pleasure in beholding.

Thy face.] The word used here signifies any outward superficies, or exterior
countenance of a thing, being applied to God, it signifies the manifestations
of divine love, whether in the gracious issues of providence, or in the more
inward influences of divine love. God has neither essential, nor integral
parts, as we have; he has no head, no hands, no face: these things only agree
to God by analogy. The face is the more noble outward part of as man; most
conspicuous, and by which he is most known; in which more than by any part
else; a man's temper, and particular inclination and disposition to us is known.
So the face of God signifies,

1. The favor of God in the sensible manifestations of it. When we are angry,
we turn away our faces from our neighbors; and being reconciled again to them,
we again look upon them. So is the Lord in Scripture set out to us, Psalm. 13.
How long will thou hide Psalm. 13.
thy face? So when God is expressed as in favor with, and reconciled to a
people, he is set out as turning his face toward them. Hence in Scripture the
people of God pray for the favor of God; under this notion, Psalm. 80. 3. Psalm.
80. 3.
Cause thy face to shine upon us, and we shall be saved, Psalm. 31. 16. Make thy
face to shine 31. 16. 27. 8.
upon us, Psalm. 27. 8. etc. In this sense Cain spoke, Genesis 4. 14. From thy face
I shall be Genesis 4. 14.
hid, (id est) from thy favor. And it is by some learned Expositors observed,
that when the term favor is joined with behold, or shine, etc. it always thus
signifies. Thus Psalm. 67. 1. God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and make
his face to shine upon us, i. e. show us some token for good: this is sometimes
called the light of Gods countenance.

2. The fear of God sometimes signifies Gods glorious manifestation to his
Saints in Heaven; 1 John 3. 2. 2 Cor. 3. 16.
where (as the Apostle speaks) his people shall see him with open face; face
to face; as he is, etc.

I am inclined to understand the phrase in the utmost latitude; I will, or
shall [in righteousness] behold thy favorable face, in the influences of thy
love in this life, and thy glory in that life which is to come; and accordingly
it will not be different to interpret David's beholding. 1. In this life they
behold the favor of God, with the eyes of their mind, apprehending the love of
God in Jesus Christ to their souls, and being persuaded of it, according to
that of the Apostle, Romans 8. 38. I am persuaded that neither life, nor death,
nor Angels, etc. shall separate us from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. In the life to come, they shall behold the face, the presence,
and glorious manifestations of God; not only with the eyes of their minds, but
with their bodily eyes, Job 19. 26, 27. In my flesh shall I see God, whom I
shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another: Then we
shall see him face to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. and as he is, 1 John 3. 13. I have
now opened the former part of the text, which I called David's resolution; I
will behold thy face in righteousness, etc. And you see it comes to thus much.

O Lord, it pleases thee in the wisdom of thy providence, to prosper my bloody
and cruel enemies; they are full of riches, and children, yet they walk
proudly, and dishonor thy name; they have a large proportion of the good
things of this life; and they look upon them as their portion; let them do so.
As for me, I am indeed in a low condition, poor, and afflicted, and persecuted;
but I will look after righteousness: I will labor for the righteousness of
Jesus Christ, and endeavor to live an holy life and conversation, having
respect to all the Commandments, and walking closely with thee: Though I be
used cruelly, and unjustly; yet I will walk innocently, and manage a just and
righteous cause; and so doing, I will look toward thee, and hope in thee. Let
others look after the favor of the world, my business shall be, to contemplate
thee, to meditate; to fix the eyes of my soul on thee, that I may have the
manifestation of thy love to my soul here; and that I may enjoy thee in glory
hereafter. This shall be my aim; this my study: though I do not now see thee,
yet if my soul be clothed with the Righteousness of thy Son; if I endeavor to
walk closely with thee, I shall one day, either here, or in glory, behold thy
face; if I do not see thy face before I die, yet in the resurrection I shall
see it. When I awake, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness.

I come now to the Explication of the latter part of the text, which I told you
in those words: [I shall be satisfied] The Septuagint reads it, I shall be
feasted. 1. The word signifies a plentiful filling. The word by which the
Greek Interpreters translate it, signifies such a filling, as the beasts are
filled with: eating grass, you know, they make themselves very full, seeding
merely by sense, and according to appetite, under no regulation of reason: Thus
it is used, Hosea 13. 6. According to their pasture, so were they filled: and
their heart was exalted. To this degree are souls sometimes filled (in this
life) with manifestations of grace: Thus are the souls of the Saints filled
with Gods manifestations of himself to them in glory: Such sometimes are the
shinings of divine light upon the soul, on this side of Heaven, that it knows
not how to bear any more: it is filled with a joy unspeakable, and full of
glory. But in the other life, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can it
enter into the heart of man to conceive, what things God has prepared for them
that love him. Yet even then the glory of the Sun of Righteousness, will be
above the glory of the brightest Star: They shall be glorified with the same
glory, as Christ and his Father are glorified, as to the kind; not as to the
degree of it: we can receive but according to our capacity. In short, they
shall be so filled, as they shall desire no more: The word signifies perfect
fullness; and therefore Critics derive it from a word that signifies seven,
which in the dialect of Scripture, is the number of perfection: Seven times a
day will I Psalm. 119. 164. Genesis 4. 15. Pro. 24. 16.
praise thee; that is, many times. Vengeance shall be taken on Cain sevenfold.
She that has born seven languisheth, Prove. 24. 16. The righteous man falls
seven times a day: And so in many other texts.

But further yet, the word signifies a filing as with dainties, as a man is
filled at a feast, a man may be filled with bread, but at a feast we are
usually filled with pleasant bread (as Daniel calls it) So then, when David
says, he shall be satisfied, he in effect says, I shall be filled seven
times; filled brim full, perfectly filled, as at a feast: And indeed thus shall
the souls of Gods people be filled; but when, and how, are two questions which
by the remaining words must be resolved.

When I awake (says the text) or in awaking, (...)
or in watching, or in being made to awake, or to watch. For the form of the
words, it admits this variety of interpretation. The LXX. read it, When thou
shall appear unto me. The Vulg. Lat. When thy glory shall appear unto me. We
will first consider the original word in its latitude of significancy, and then
weigh what it here imports.

The word in the Hebrew comes from a roo, which signifies three things. 1. To
make tedious. 2. To watch. 3. To awake. The two latter alone can fit this text;
and betwixt those two interpretations, I find all valuable interpreters
divided. The Hebrew properly is in watching, or in awaking. We translate it,
when I shall awake (there is no material difference.) I will begin with the
first, which is something different from our English; I shall be satisfied in
watching; or while I watch for thy likeness. Thus this very word is translated,
Ezekiel. 7. 6. An end is come, it watches for thee. I confess I am loath to
exclude this sense of the words: IN shall be satisfied in watching for thy
likeness. Watching is but an empty, hungry action, and gives the soul no
satisfaction; but here is the difference betwixt watching for the world, and
watching for God. As to worldly things, Hope deferred makes the heart sick: as
to God it is not so. A watching and waiting for God, brings a proportionable
satisfaction: It ought in a great measure to satisfy a gracious soul, in his
hours of darkness, if he does but find God inabling him to watch for his
likeness.

2. But the word is otherwise translated and properly enough [in waking, or
when I shall awake] or be made to awake.] Thus the word is often translated in
Scripture, Psalm. 3. 6. and in many other texts. Psalm. 3. 6.


1. Some apply this to God, as if it should be when thou awakest. Indeed the
Hebrew is no more than in awaking, or in being made to awake. When thy
faithfulness shall awake V. Vicars ad locum.
(say they) I shall be satisfied with thy likeness. Indeed, when God seems to
us not to take care and regard his people, he is said to sleep (by a figure)
for he neither slumbereth nor sleeps) and the holy Psalmist calls to him as
to one asleep. Awake, why Psa. 44. 23.
sleep thou O Lord! God is said to sleep, when according to humane sense and
apprehension, he carries himself toward his people like a man that is asleep;
and in a conformity of phrase, when he turns his hand, and appears for his
people, then he is said to awake: and when God thus awakes, his people use to
be satisfied with his appearances for them: But though there be a truth in
this, yet I do not think it the sense of the text.

2. Others (as I noted before) making the words to be the words of Christ,
understand them of his Resurrection. Our Savior knew that when he by death had
satisfied Divine Justice, by the accursed death, and born the brunt of his
Fathers wrath, he should awake the third day, by a glorious Resurrection; and
having conquered death, and satisfied justice, he should again behold his
Fathers face clear from all clouds and frowns, ascending up on high, and
sitting on the right hand of God. This is Hierom's notion of the text: but
doubtless the text is not to be so restrained.

3. I agree therefore with those, who make these words the words of holy David,
promising himself satisfaction with the image or likeness of God when he should
awake.

1. By his awaking, I find some understanding, his recovery and deliverance
from that afflicted state in which at present he was. Indeed the time of
affliction, is a time of night, and often in Scripture is expressed under the
notion of darkness, which gives advantage to this interpretation, which both
Calvin and Mollerus favor, thinking it by others applied to the Resurrection,
argute magis quam proprie, more subtly than properly. According to them the
sense is this; At present it is night with me, and I am as it were asleep, and
in a bed of trial and affliction; but I know that this shall not be to me a
dead sleep. Though I am fallen, yet I shall rise again; though I be asleep, I
shall awake again; and when Gods time comes, I shall be satisfied with the
manifestations of his love, and the evidences of his favor to me.

But (with all due respect to those Interpreters whom this sense pleases,) I
rather incline to those, who interpret this awaking of the Resurrection. To
make it clear.

1. It is plain, it is a figurative expression. Waking you know has a
reserence to sleeping: Now sleep in Scripture is taken literally; so it
signifies the locking, or binding up of the exterior senses; and waking is
the freeing of the senses, in which sense it cannot be taken here; though I
meet with some who think that David here speaks as a Prophet, expecting the
visions of the morning.

2. Or else it is taken figuratively; so it is very often used to express
death. Our friend Lazarus sleeps, Joh. 11. 11. The Maid (says our Savior)
is not dead, but sleeps. And when Stephen died, it is said, he fell asleep. I
find this very word used, to express an awaking from the sleep of death, 2
King. 4. 31. The child is not awaked, meaning that it was dead, Isa. 26. 19.
Awake and sing you that dwell in the dust. But further yet, the awaking here
spoken of, relates to David. Now hearken what the Scripture says of David's
sleeping, Acts 13. 36. After that he had Act. 13. 36.
(according to the will of God) served, he fell V. Piscal. Ames. Engl. Annot.
Diodate, Ainsworth, ad loc.
asleep. What Is the meaning of that? is it not that he died? Now what is the
awaking related to this sleep, but the Resurrection? and in this sense I find
many eminent Expositors agreed. The Learned de Mui^ has another
interpretation, in which I find none going along with him; When I awake, that
is (says he) when I shall dye: while the soul is in the body, it sleeps; when
it leaves the body, it awakes; Quum expergefactia fuerit anima mea De Muis ad
locum.
de corpore, in quo velut, sepulta jacet, and evolaverit anima mea ad imaginem
tuam creata. To justify this his notion, he quoteth Jer. 51. 30. where the
souls of the wicked are said to sleep a perpetual sleep: In opposition to this,
he says, the souls of the Saints when they die, are said to awake. Indeed if
we con^^der sleep as it is the binding up of the exterior senses, and an
hinderance to them in their operations, and then reflect upon the soul, while
tied to the body, how much it is hindered, in the freedom of its communion with
God: There is some analogy betwixt the case of a soul in a state of conjunction
with the body and sleep: And it is true, that in death the soul is restored to
a greater freedom for communion with God: But I do not think this the sense,
nor is this the usage of the metaphor (I think) to be justified by parallel
Scriptures. One thing I must further observe, as to the form of the Hebrew
word. Grammarians observe, that the conjugation (...)
Hiphil (in which the word is found, adds facio to the original signisication
of a verb, which (if it has place here) it properly sigfies, in being made to
watch, or being made to awake, denoting to us the necessity of a divine
influence, both to uphold our souls, in watching and waiting for God, when we
do not see him; and also in restoring life to our dead bodies in the
Resurrection. It is God who gives spiritual life, and who giveeth the
aboundings of spiritual life, who first quickens the soul, and who further
quickens it, and keeps it up in its spiritual operations; and it is God who
quickneth the dead, Romans 4. 17. The words thus opened, afford us two things, as
grounds of David's satisfaction, in that dark condition in which he was. Though
his state was but at present sad, and uncomfortable: though lately he neither
had seen God, nor heard from him, only had seen and felt the srowns and
thunderings of his providence against him, yet he would be satisfied.

1. If he found God inabling him, in this his sad, perplexed, persecuted state,
to wait upon him, and exercise grace in watching for him.

2. In the assurance he had, that though as yet he were unsatisfied, and might
possibly fall asleep so in death; yet in the resurrection of the just he should
awake from that sleep; then he should have enough of God, and be fully
satisfied with his likeness. I have only that one term more to open.

With thy likeness.] The Hebrew word signifies, (...)
the imaginary form of a thing, Job 14. 16. An Image was before mine eyes.
Sometimes the real form of a thing presented to the bodily eye, Deuteronomy. 4. 16.
You saw no manner of similitude, on the day that the Lord spoke unto you in
Horeb, out of the midst of the fire; that is, God did not appear to you in any
real, sensible shape. Sometimes it signifies some real fignature of a thing
presented not to the eye of the body, but to the eye of the mind; to the
understanding. So Numb. 12. 8. The similitude of the Lord shall he behold: That
is, I will make an impression of my divine Nature and Majesty upon him, by
which he shall be able in some measure, to conceive of, and to comprehend me.
We cannot see the divine Essence; such glory is too great for mortal eyes; we
are not able to fix our eyes upon the Sun riding in the Firmament in its full
triumph of light, much less upon his Essence, whose brightness is such, that
even the Sun in its fullest glory, is darkness to him. God told Moses, he could
not see his face and live; but his similitude he should behold: he would make
upon his spirit an impression of his Majesty and Goodness. But let us now
inquire more strictly what this likeness of God in the text is: The Septuagint
interpret it; The glory of God. I shall be satisfied with thy glory; that is a
truth, but whether the whole of the truth, I doubt. Some think the Ark of God
is meant, which the wife of Phinehas, called the glory of Israel. And that
David in this his afflicted state, comforted himself with this consideration,
that he one day should again see the Ark of God; the power and the glory of God
in his Sanctuary. We read also, that when he fled from Absalom, and Abiathar
brought the Ark after him, he bid him carry it back again, if the Lord had a
pleasure in him, he would bring him back, and he should see it, and his holy
habitation. But I think we shall find that glorious Symbol of Gods presence, no
where styled Gods likeness.

Others think, that by Gods likeness here, David understands Christ, who is
indeed called the brightness of his Fathers glory; the express Image of his
person. And that David here comforts himself (as Job before him) that he should
see his Redeemer with those eyes. Those who interpret the text as the words of
Christ; by Gods likeness here understand the glory of God, wherewith Christ was
glorified after his resurrection from the dead, and ascension. But I take all
these senses to be too much forced upon the text.

There are three things which I think may be all comprehended under this term.

1. There is a likeness of God in us. Adam was at first created in Gods image
or likeness, Genesis 1. 26. And in our Regeneration the Genesis 1. 26.
image of God is said to be renewed in us, Col. 3. 10. And we are said to be
created after Col. 3. 10.
the image of God, in righteousness and holiness. Thus we are commanded to be
holy as the Lord is holy. This is now the image of God within us; the
impression of the spirit of Grace upon our hearts, by which we are made
partakers of the Divine Nature. I take this to be much the sense of the place;
Lord, if thou shall enable me in my dark hours to study, and to perfect
holiness, I shall be satisfied; though I want comfort, yet I shall be much
satisfied ^f I be but enabled to watch for a further degree in holiness.

2. Secondly, We may take likeness, for Gods manifestations of himself to us,
by his spirit of consolation. In this life we do not see God as he is; but he
sometimes makes gracious manifestations of his love unto his people in the
sensible consolations of his Spirit, reflecting divine Love upon the souls of
the Saints, and sealing them up to the day of Redemption. Now (says the
Psalmist) though I do not see the Lord in this likeness of his; though I want
the assurances of his love, and comfortable manifestations of his gracious
Spirit; yet Lord, it shall stay me, if I find thy grace inabling me, but to
wait for these manifestations.

3. Lastly, Gods likeness may be taken for the glorious manifestation of
himself to his Saints in another life; and this I take to come fullest up to
David's meaning. O Lord, though while I live here, I walk in the dark, and see
no light; while I am beholding thy face in righteousness, and watching for
thee; though I may go down to the grave, and sleep my sleep in the dust, not
fully satisfied, not seeing what of God I would do: yet this I know, that in
the resurrection I shall awake, and then I shall be made amends for all which
my soul has suffered in its dark and sad hours, under the ecclipses of divine
light: I shall then be filled with God; I shall see him as he is, face to face;
and my vile body shall be made like to my Redeemers glorious body. Thus I have
largely opened the words; take the substance of them shortly.

David was at this time in a sad condition, both

1. In respect of the persecution against him from without: And

2. The divine desertion which at this time clouded his inward man.

3. And the temptations which attended him in these straits.

In this verse he takes up his resolution what he would do; and also shows us
what stayed his heart, and gave him something of satisfaction in his perplexity.

That which he resolves to do, is to labor for the Righteousness of Christ,
in which to behold the face of God, to live an holy life and conversation, and
to manage his cause against his enemies in a just and innocent manner.

That which he fixes upon as his comfort, is,

1. Gods present inabling him to perfect holiness in his fear, and to wait for
the manifestations of divine light.

2. His sure hopes, that if he should fall asleep in death, not satisfied; yet
there would be a resurrection from the dead, and in that glorious morning, he
should awake, and then he should be filled with the manifestations of God: this
is the substance of the words. Now suppose your selves to hear David speaking
the same thing more copiously.

O Lord, my soul is in a sad and perplexed condition; without are fightings,
within are fears; mine enemies are many, and proud, and cruel as Lions; they
are men of power and estate, whose bellies are filled with hid treasure. I am
poor, and empty, hunted like a Partridge upon the Mountains: First Saul rose up
against me; now mine own Son is in rebellion, and my soul also, O Lord! walks
in the dark, and sees no light, I cry, but thou have not heard me; I am at a
loss to know what thou determinest to do with me.

If I had all that my proud and potent enemies have, all their treasure, all
their substance, all the good things of this life, all their sweet morsels, I
could not be satisfied with all those husks, while I want thy favor, and the
light of thy countenance. But this shall be my work; this shall be that which I
will study, and look after: I have fixed mine eyes upon thy love and favor;
let the men of the world look after that; let them look upon their great
estates, I will behold thy face, and labor for the light of thy countenance,
and that I may obtain it; I trust not in my own righteousness; in the
righteousness of my Lord I will behold thy face. I will endeavor in thy
strength to live an holy and righteous conversation; perfecting holiness in thy
fear; and in all things endeavoring to live up to thy mind and will discovered
to me: and for this cause, which I am (through thy providence) managing against
those who have risen up against me, I will manage it righteously, with all
integrity and innocence toward them who are so fierce and cru^l against me: And
in this resolution, O Lord, in my affliction, it will be a great stay unto me,
if I may but find the conunuance of thy strength inabling me to labor after
the perfecting of the renovation of thine image in my soul; and to wait for the
further shinings out of the light of thy countenance: if I can but find thee
thus appearing to my soul, I shall at present endeavor to be satisfied,
knowing that it will not be long before I shall fall asleep in death, and from
that sleep I shall awake in the morning of the resurrection, and then I shall
be abundantly satisfied with thy likeness, seeing thee face to face, and
rejoicing in thy presence for ever more.

The words thus opened, will afford us many Propositions; some I shall but
lightly touch upon, hastening to what I intend for the subject of a fuller
discourse.

First, From the tacit Antithesis, hinted in those words which our translation
supplies, necessary to give you the full sense. But as for me.

What will satisfy a man of the world, will 1 Obs.
not satisfy a child of God. Different natures require different food. Swine
will seed upon Acorns and offal. Dogs will feed upon bones, and excrements. But
man feeds upon none of these. A different genius and disposition requires a
different object to give it satisfaction: Gold and Silver satisfies a covetous
man: Wine and strong drink satisfies a drunkard: The Philosopher despises and
throws away these things to attend to contemplation, and the knowledge of the
reasons and causes of things: The child of God is of a different nature, of a
different disposition and inclination, and complexion from other men: he is
made a partaker of the Divine Nature; he has a new name, a new will, new
affections, new dispositions given to him. Sinners indeed are of several
complexions; give one wealth enough, and you satisfy him; give another objects
enough for his lust; give him sensual pleasure enough, and you satisfy him:
give a third honor and preferment enough, he asks no more: give the best of
them enough of humane learning and knowledge, and he will be content; whether
he has any portion in Christ; whether he finds any joy and peace of
conscience; whether he sees any thing of the light of Gods countenance, yea or
no. It is said of Abraham, that he gave the Sons he had by Keturah, portions,
and sent them away: they were not at all concerned for the promise of which
Isaac was heir. Wicked men are like Esau, they will sell their birthright for
a morsel of bread. The child of God cannot be thus satisfied, as Abraham
replied upon God, asking him, What he should give Protestatus sum me sic ab eo
nolle satia^i. Luther.
him? What can thou give me so long as I go childless? So do they say, Lord,
what can thou give me while I want thy presence? Luther protested God should
not put him off with worldly affluences: he judges all fullness Omnis copia
quae non est Deus meus est cgestas. Aug.
cmptiness, excepting only the fullness of him who fills all in all: the
reason of this is, his spiritual ilumination, and knowledge to discern things
that differ; the convictions and different apprehensions, which the holy Spirit
has wrought in his soul, which make it morally impossible to him to rest
satisfied with less than an infinite God, and a portion in him. Oh! how thin is
this number in the world how small is this generation of those who in truth
seek the Lords face? where almost is the person to be found, to whom God might
not give a portion in this life only, and quietly send him away without any
repining at all? who would no^ fall down, and even worship the Devil, for a
great estate, for a little momentany pleasure, for some considerable degree of
honor, or some other movables, and transi^nt vanities of this life? how few
are they who would look any further than to have such a portion of substance,
as they might have plentifully whiles they live, and divide the rest unto their
babes? Amongst all the complaints and murmurings we hear in the world, how few
are they that complain for want of the presence and influence of God? we hear
men complain for want of estates, honors, etc. but ah! how few for want of
grace? how few for want of the sense of divine love? for want of the enjoyments
of God? etc.

Secondly, From those words [I will behold thy face in righteousness] observe,

There is no beholding of Gods face but in righteousness: 2 Obs.
Whether it be in a way of duty, that we behold God; or whether it be in a way
of comfort. We must still behold him in righteousness, in the righteousness of
Christ imputed to us. Daniel of old prayed to be heard for the Lords sake: we
are commanded to ask in the Name of Christ, believing: Or, whether it be in the
way of comfort. Christ is the only glass in which we can behold our Fathers
face, and therefore we are bid to rejoice in the Lord, and joy and peace is
annexed to beliving, an act, of which Christ is the object. In the
righteousness also of an holy life. Without peace and holiness, no man shall
see God, (says the Apostle) not in glory, when this l^fe shall be determined,
not in this life, by the reflections of faith. Not in duty God hears not
sinners: he that lifts up hands unto God, must lift up pure hands, without
d^ub^ing. The very Heathens by the light of nature, could see that pure hands
must be reached out to the Altars, if they expected to find the Gods upon their
duties propitious. In the righteousness of an innocent and just cause. It is
^ll appealing to God in an unrighteous cause, and hopes of countenance and
assistance from him in unrighteousness, are but bold presumptions, and ^acit
reproachings of his spotless purity. Hence learn how few there are who truly
behold the Lords face in duty, who truly feel the warming influences of his
divine love. Ah! how many cheat themselves with images and dreams? how many
rise up from duty, thinking they have seen the face of God, when they have seen
nothing but the reflectiors of their own g^fts, or presumptions? how many dream
of beholding the face of God in the sensible consolations of his Spirit, who
alas have seen nothing but the spirit of delusions, cheating their souls with
false confidences and delusions? what do Papists talk of beholding Gods face in
their own, or their fellow creatures righteousness? what does any drunkard,
swearer, morally vicious and profane person talk of beholding the face of God,
whiles he lives a lewd and unholy life and conversation! If he makes many
prayers, God will not hear him; his heart is full of profaneness, his hands
are full of unrighteousness. Let no man dare to appeal to God in an unrighteous
matter, to seek counsel of God, or assistance from him in unrighteous causes.
The unrighteous soul can never behold the Lords face.

Thirdly, From David's present resolution, confidered with respect to the
present state of affliction in which he was. Observe,

It is the duty of Gods people, though Gods 3 Obs.
face be not toward them, yet in righteousness to be beholding it. This was
the Churches resolution, Isa. 8. 17. I will wait upon him who hides his face
from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him, Isa. 50. 10. Who is amongst
you who fears the Lord, and obeys the voice of his servant; that walks in
darkness, and sees no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay
upon his God. God expects that his people should not desert him, because in
the wisdom of his providence he is sometimes pleased to hide his face from
them. But I shall (I think have occasion) in my following discourse further to
enlarge upon this, I therefore pass it over here, and come to what I intend to
fix upon as the subject of my discourse.

Doct. It is the great duty of the people of God, although they want visions of
peace: yea, thougb they should fall asleep in death, without such sensible
manifestations; yet to stay their souls, and be in some degree satisfied; if
they find the Lord inabling them to watch for his likeness; and having a sure
confidence, that in the resurrection they shall be abundantly satisfied with it.

The Proposition is complex, and contains many within it. There is in it some
things implied, others expressed.

Five things are implied.
1. That a child of God may sometimes walk in darkness, and not satisfied with
Gods likeness. 2. That it is possible he may fall asleep, and die under a
dissatisfaction. 3. That during this his dark estate, it is his great duty to
watch for the likeness of God. 4. That though a child of God shall fall asleep;
yet he shall awake in a resurrection. 5. That when in that morning be does
awake, he shall be abundantly satisfied with Gods likeness.
These things are implied. Two things are expressed.

1. That under their darkness, it should much satisfy them if they find God
inabling them to watch for his likeness.

2. That if they die in this dissatisfaction, yet it ought to stay their
hearts, that in the resurrection they shall be abundantly satisfied with the
likeness of God.

I shall speak something first to those Propositions which are but implied in
the main Proposition. The first was this:

That Gods children may sometimes walk in 1 Prop.
darkness, and not be satisfied with his likeness.

1. In darkness, as to their outward man, Joseph, Job, David, almost all the
servants of God whom the Scripture has canonized, had their dark hours of
affliction; some of one kind, some of another. Many are the afflictions of the
righteous, bue God delivers them out of all.

2. In darkness, as to their inward man, there is a state of sin and ignorance,
which in Scripture is compared to darkness: This they cannot walk in; they are
translated out of darkness into marvelous light; they were indeed (as others)
darkened in their minds, but God has made a glorious light to shine in upon
them: But there is a darkness of the inward man, with respect to sensible
manifestations, and comfortable apprehensions of the love of God; this they may
walk in, Isa. 50. 10. They may walk in the dark and see no light, Isa. 50. 10.
though they be such as fear the Lord, and obey the voice of his servant. The
Spouse in Cant. 3. 1.
the Canticles, sought him whom her soul loved; she sought him, but she found
him not. David Psalm. 30. 6.
was troubled when God hid his face from him.

And as it is possible that they may be unsatisfied as to the manifestations of
Gods love unto them; so they may be, and often are as unsatisfied, as to the
image and likeness of God in them. Perfection is our rule, Heb. Heb. 6. 1.
6. 1. but though the Lord has for it up for our mark, 2 Cor. 13. 11. yet
there is none of 2 Cor. 13. 11. Phil. 3. 18.
us but shoots short; even Saint Paul counted not himself to have
apprehended; but forgetting what is behind, pressed forward to what is before,
unto the price of the high calling. Now the child of God cannot sit down
satisfied, whiles he sees himself short of the Rule which God has set him;
and this is reason enough for his dissatisfaction in the latter sense. For the
former, the reason lies here.

1. God upon the Covenant of Grace has reserved to himself a liberty,
(notwithstanding Christ's satisfaction) so to chastise his people, that they
might not go altogether unpunished. Some will not understand how God should
punish any of his Saints for sin, and think that the asserting of it derogateth
from Christ's plenary satisfaction, which indeed would have something of truth
in it, had not God in that Covenant reserved himself this liberty. If Psa. 89.
31, 32, 33, 34.
they break my Statutes, and keep not all my Commandments; then will I visit
their iniquity with a rod, and their transgressions with stripes. Nevertheless,
my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness
to fail. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of
my lips. By virtue of Gods Covenant with Christ for us, their earnest
salvation, and the welfare of their souls for ever is secured. Nay more,
afflictions, as they are tokens of divine wrath, and legal demands of
satisfaction to Gods Justice, cannot fall upon Gods people, but he has
reserved to himself the liberty of a Father, in love and kindness to chastise
his people with rods. The people of God therefore should not think it strange,
if they meet with these dark issues of divine providence; nor should any
entering into the ways of God promise himself a freedom from afflictions, and
trials of this nature. Christ has secured us eternal salvation, and all
necessary means and influences of grace in order to it; but he has not totally
exempted us from the rod of affliction: But this is not all. The second
Proposition speaks yet more.

The Child of God may not only live, but may 2 Prop.
also die and fall asleep unsatisfied, as to the likeness of God. This is true
both as to the likeness of God in them, and the manifestations of God unto them.

1. As to Gods Image in them; this lies in the perfection of holiness, and is
so far true, that it is hard to find a child of God, whoever as to this died
satisfied, what Christian on his deathbed ever said, he had faith enough, or
love enough, or holiness enough? David cries out, Although my house be not so
with God. And where is the soul, that departing to eternity, sees not reason to
complain that his heart has not been so with God as it ought to have been. The
best of men sins seven times in a day.

2. But it is true also as to the apprehensions of divine love, not being able
when they die to say assuredly, My Beloved is mine, and I am his. What shall we
say to the great example of our Lord and Savior? It is true, he knew he was
the eternal Son of God, that after his resurrection he should be glorified,
with that glory which he had with his Father from all eternity; and in this
respect might differ from some of his children, who dying, may want that
certainty, and only die with a good hope through grace: yet in this dying hour
he cries out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Nor can we well
understand how he should for us die under the curse, and sensible feelings of
divine wrath, unless we grant, that he died under the withdrawings of the
sensible manifestations of divine love: and certainly the Disciple is not above
his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord. Our own experience also proves it:
have not we known some persons, of whom while they went in and out with us,
could say, These are the anointed of the Lord; we saw them walking closely with
God, fearing every sin, making conscience of every duty, serving the Lord (so
far as we could judge) in spirit and truth; and this not in a fit, but
constantly; yet when they came to die, their Candles went out in obscurity: We
have not seen them in that triumph of faith, that fullness of joy and peace,
which it may be we did expect: Not able to say with Job, In Job 19. 26. Romans 8
38.
my flesh I shall see God; nor (with Paul) I am persuaded that neither life,
nor death, shall separate me from the love of God in Christ. Nor is there any
thing in spiritual reason to hinder it. Sensible manifestations are none of our
necessaries. God has no where promised, that they shall not fail the soul in
death. Mr. Rutherford (I remember) propounds this to be observed; Whether
usually, when in the time of their life, the Saints of God have felt many
reflections of divine love, many sensible consolations: God has not left them
to die in the dark: And on the contrary, when any of his children, have in the
time of their life, been full of fear and dejections, etc. God has not usually
in their sick and dying hours, shined upon them with visions of peace. It is
not to be fixed as a standing Rule, (for the Almighty is neither to be limited,
nor tracked in his goings) but it may be worthy of our observation.

Now this seems a very hard dispensation: Gods people oft-times know not how
to live without sensible manifestations of his love; but they are much more at
loss, how to satisfy themselves to die without it. May we therefore in any
degree of humility guess at some reasons of so sad a divine dispensation.

1. In the first place, it is enough (to a modest soul inquisitive in this
particular) to say, Even so, O Father, because it pleases thee. God will have
us to know, that the wind blows both where it lists, and when it lists;
and that his Spirit is not less free. We shall not know the hour when he will
visit his peoples souls; nor will he constantly come in at the same hour, that
he might assert his own liberty to us; this may be one, and indeed it is the
great reason to be assigned of this dispensation.

2. The Lord may have a design by it to make a trial of his servants faith. It
is a good faith that will long maintain a living Saint without sight: but it
must be a strong faith which will maintain a Christian in his dying hour
without it. This was the faith of Job, Though he kills me, yet I will trust in
him. This is a faith which holds out to the end, and shall have the Crown of
life, which God has promised. It is the last act of faith to serve a departing
soul. Love goes with the soul into another world; Faith parts with it at the
gates of death; the vision of faith is then changed for the beatifical vision:
What a man sees, how does he hope for? That faith that sees Christ through a
glass darkly, has its eyes in death quite out: The soul comes with open face
to behold the glory of God. It argues a great spirit in a soldier, to fight to
his last breath: And it speaks a courageous strong faith, for a Christian to
die believing: dying hope is a good hope; therefore it is given as the
character of a righteous man, that he has hope in death. And of the Hypocrite
it is said, Where is the hope of an Hypocrite, when God takes away his soul?
Job says, that his hope shall be like the giving up of the Ghost. Look, as
dying men fetch their breath shorter and shorter, till at last it quite fails
them: so are the presumptuous hopes of hypocrites; the nearer they come to
death; the shorter they fetch the breath of their hopes, till at last they
quite fail them, and they die either stupid, or despairing. God makes a great
trial of his Saints faith, when he calls them to die in the strength of it.

3. God may have a design in it to honor his Word. If we wholly lived upon
sight, the Word of God would not be so precious to us; the Promises would not
be so dear to us. (Though I consess it is a very suspicious comfort, which the
Word brings not into our souls) but yet consolatory dispensations are the more
special and extraordinary manifestations of the Spirit, in a more than ordinary
improvement of the Word. Gods Word appears, and is made very precious to the
soul, when it hangs its whole weight upon it, being not at all advantaged from
sensible reflections. I had perished (says Psalm. 119. 92.
David) in my affliction, if they Word had not been my delight. What an honor
there did holy David put upon the Word of God, acknowledging, that the whole
weight of his perishing soul hung upon it, and it sustained him. Indeed there
is a secret powerful influence of the Holy Ghost, tcaching and inabling the
soul to lay hold upon, and to apply this Word. But in faith of adhere^^e,
though the Spirit be the great Author and Finisher of it, teaching and inabling
the soul to lay hold upon, and to apply the Promise; yet it is by a more secret
and insensible act, and the Word appears most in maintaining that. Oh! faith
the soul, had it not been for such a Word, such a Promise; such a good word of
God is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance. In the reflex act of
Faith, which gives the soul a plerophorous evidence, or a full persuasion of
its evidence in God, the work of the Spirit appears more extraordinary and
glorious; the virtue of the Word does not so much show it self. Now the Lord
will sometimes honor his Word in the fight of his children, letting them see
that it is enough to support, bear up, and to uphold a soul, though it should
never see the face of God till it come in Heaven, yet the Word is enough
securely to carry it thither.

4. God in such a dispensation may have a design to teach his people, that
salvation does not depend upon sensible consolatory manifestations. Not upon
the sweet application of the Promises to the soul (an act wherein we have no
share, it being the Lords work alone, and marvelous in our eyes) but upon the
strong and steady application of our souls to the Promise. This latter is
justifying faith; the other is the faith of one already actually justified. We
are too prone to lay too much upon sensible comforts. Some there are who will
acknowledge no other notion of faith, but a full persuasion of the love of God,
and so indeed confound faith and sight, which the Apostle seemed so warily to
distinguish, when he told us, We live by faith, and not by fight. And again,
that hope which is seen, is no hope; and indeed, cut the throat of many a poor
Christians comfort, who, it may be, all his life, cannot come to such a
sensible evidence. Indeed the most judicious Christians are prone to lay too
much stress upon these consolatory manifestations, and to think all nothing if
they want them. Now this is a great error which the Lord may aim at the
correction of in his people by such dispensations, letting the soul see there
is virtue enough in his Word to bear it up through the deepest waters of
affliction, without the bladders of sensible manifestations. Enough in that,
and the souls application of it self to that, though until it come in Heaven,
it never sees the face of God. It is believing that carries the soul to Heaven,
i. e. an hungring and relying upon Christ, and his righteousness alone; not
that joy and peace which is the consequent of believing, and that too
inconsistent and uncertain. And indeed I do not know any one truth, that needs
more rooting and confirmation in a gracious heart. The life of sense is the
life of the Saint triumphant. The life of faith is the life of the militant
Christian. Though God sometimes condescends in such manifestations to the
infirmities and desires of his people, and is pleased to give them a glimpse of
glory, as the earnest penny of a future greater reward, which he intends
them: yet these must not be looked upon as the necessaries of a Christian; but
what God gives ^s ex abundanti, a pledge of future glory. Sometimes God gives
his children to go to Heaven in the sight of Heaven: As Stephen went to it,
seeing the Heavens opened, and Christ Jesus stanidng at the right hand of God,
pleading for him, and ready to receive him into the glorious mansions provided
for him: But as this is a note of singular and extraordinary favor, which God
is not bound to any particular soul by promise for: so God will sometimes
single out a child of his unto death, that shall go to Heaven without this
seal, that living Christians may not run away with an erroneous apprehension,
that these influences are necessary to salvation; and upon the death of such a
child of God the Lord proclaims. See here (my friends!) you of little of faith,
here is a child of mine, coming alone to me without the staff of sense; trusting
me upon the credit of my bare word: Here Is one that has not seen, and yet has
believed; that has dared to take my word for Heaven. Now be not faithless, but
believing.

5. Lastly, I do not know but God may sometimes do it in Justice: when one who
has been made partaker of Gods distinguishing love, has apostatized in his
profession, or run into some degrees of looseness of life, by which Gods Name
has been dishonored, the Lord may thus far chastize his Apostasy. I told you
before, that the Covenant runs with a notwithstanding sin, as to eternal
salvation; the unfaithfulness of man cannot make God unfaithful; he cannot
alter the thing gone out Psalm. 89. 33.
of his lips: But the comforts of Gods people may fail, and they may (for ought
I know) die, although not despairingly, yet doubting with an a king heart, and
with broken bones. Divines question whether holy David (though styled the man
after Gods own heart) ever after his fall into those two great sins of murder
and adultery, recovered the fullness of his comfort again. It is plain, by all
his penitential Psalms, that he lost them, and especially by that petition,
Psalm. 51. 12. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation. Though the Scripture
plainly evidenceth that he died strong in the faith; yet it speaks nothing of
sensible consolations. You have his last words, 2 Samuel 23. 1. These be the last
words of David. You will find these words to be a part of his dying speech.
Although my house be not so with God, that is, not so spotl^ss as the morning,
when the Sun arises, when the Sun arises without clouds; yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, well ordered, and sure in all things: for this
is my desire and salvation, although he make it not to grow. The words speak
much of David's adherence, and strong fiducial application of his soul to the
Covenant, but little of a fullness of joy and peace. I think we may determine
thus much, that if David did ever recover his fullness of peace, the Scripture
has not recorded it; that we might learn to serve the Lord with fear, and to
walk before him with trembling; yet neither is this the Lords constant dealing.
Peter denied his Master, cursed and swear; yet afterward Christ showed him
special favor. After Christ's resurrection the Angel bid, Go tell his
Disciples, and Peter, that he went before them into Galilee, Mark 16. 7.
Divines think those words [and Peter] are put in to assure Peter under some
dejection by reason of his fall, of the Lords favor to him, notwithstanding
his backshding. Peter was designed for a great service of his Master in the
work of the Gospel, to which a sad and dejected spirit would not a little have
discomposed him. Thus much may serve for the second Proposition, which I told
you was no more than implied. The third follows.

While a child of God does not behold the face 3 Prop.
of God, it is his duty to watch for it. Two terms must here be opened.

1. That of beholding Gods face.

2. That of watching for it.

There is a twofold beholding of Gods face.

1. By faith in righteoussness.

2. By sense in assurance.

1. There is a beholding of God by faith. Faith in Scripture is sometimes
expressed to us by the action of the mouth. He that eats my flesh, Joh. 6. 54.
and drinks my blood (says our Savior) dwells in me, and I in him.
Sometimes by the action of the hand; by receiving, and laying Joh. 1. 12.
hold upon Christ, and the Covenant. To as many as received him, he gave power
to be called the Heb. 6. 18. Prove. 3. 18. John 6. 35, 37.
Sons of God. Sometimes by the action of the feet; Coming, so often in
Scripture; Come unto me you that are weary and heavy laden: and he that comes
unto me, I will in no wise Isa. 50. 10. Cant. 3. 8. Psalm. 37. 7. Zech. 12. 10.
cast away: And so in many other texts: Sometimes by the actions of the whole
man; thus it is called a staying, a leaning, a trusting, resting, committing
our selves unto God. So also sometimes it is expressed by the action of the
eye. Now by this vision of faith it is impossible that one should be a b^liever
and not see God. Indeed the fight of this eye may possibly at sometimes be
clearer and quicker than at other times; it may sometimes be more full and
bright, at another time more dim, and weak, and imperfect: but faith is this
very visive faculty, if I may so speak, and a child of God must thus behold the
face of God, though not actually, or not gradually to such a degree at one
time, as at another, yet habitually it must always have a power thus to behold
God, though sometimes it exerts it more seebly sometimes more strongly, yet
more or less a gracious soul (in this sense) at all times does behold the Lords
face, even in its darkest hours, Isa. 8. 17 I will wait upon him who hid^s his
face from the house of Jac^b, and I will look for him.

2. There is another Vision, which I called the Vision of Sense, which is the
beholding of the Lords face, in the reflections of divine love; for this David
prays, Psalm. 4. 6. Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us; and
often in the Psalms, Make thy face to shine upon us. Now in this sense (as I
have showed you) it is very possible that Gods dearest children may not see his
face; and this is that beholding the Lords face, of which the Proposition is to
be understood, during the eclipse, or want whereof, it is the duty of the
child of God to watch for his likeness. So I told you here the word (...) may
be, and is sometimes in Scripture translated so. By the Likeness of God; I
understand (as before) either his likeness in us, (which the Apostle calls
the Image of God, in knowledge, righteousness and holiness) or Gods sensible
manifestations of himself; when a believer wants these; when he cannot bebold
the face of God, in such sweet apprehensions, it is even then his duty to watch
for Gods likeness; for Gods likeness in either sense, as it signifies both
holiness and comfort. I say, to watch for it; it is a metaphorical expression,
and signifies 1. Negation of sleep. 2. Industrious dil^gence to keep our selves
in a capacity fit to receive what we desire. 3. Patient expectation.

1. He who watches sleeps not. It is an ordinary metaphor in holy Writ, to
express death, and sinning, by sleep; the latter only is here meant. So (says
the Spouse) I sleep, but my heart waketh, 2 These. 5. 6. Let us not 2 These. 5. 6.
sleep, as do others. Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead. And
look as it is in sleeping; None lives, and sleeps not. Ephesians. 5. 14.
Some set themselves to sleep; some strive against it sometimes, yet fall
asleep through heaviness: Some by some more for in means are made to sleep. So
it is as to fin; some are greater sinners, sleep more than others; but none
lives and sins not against God; but one man sins wilfully and
presumptuously, sets himself to sin, his life is nothing e^e; another sets
himself against sin, yet through that heaviness which is in him from original
corruption, the remainder of the body of death, he often falls asleep; and
sometimes through Romans 7. 23, 24.
the methods, devices and depths of Satan, and the allurements of the world, as
from so many sleepy potions given him, he falls into a sleep. Now he who
watches in a spiritual sense, does not sleep in the first sense, according to
that of the Apostle, He that is born of God sins not. The child of God in
his dark hours, ought to take heed of wilful sinning against God; thoug^ he
walks in the dark of a divine desertion, yet he ought to take heed of a sinful
conversation; he must be able to say with David, I am become like a bottle
Psalm. 119. 83.
in the smoke, yet do I not forget thy Statutes: And with the Church, All this
is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely
in thy Covenant: Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined
Psa. 44. 17, 18, 19.
from thy way, though thou have sore broken us in the place of dragons, and
covered us with the shadow of death. This is the first thing implied in this
metaphorical expression: But this is not all.

2. There is a difference between watching, and bare waking: Watching is a
voluntary industrious action, whereby a man striveth to keep himself awake at
such a time when he is inclined to sleep, for the heeding of something in a
more special manner. To watch therefore in a spiritual sense, implies, to
labor, strive, and use all means and diligence, to obtain the likeness of God;
not only to eschew evil, but to do good. Thus watching for Gods likeness,
includes praying hearing, performance of all holy duties, lead^ g^an holy life
and conversation; that which the Psalmist calls, ordering our conversation
aright, that we may see the salvation of God: And this is, as the duty of a
child of God at all times; so more especially, in his hours of desertion and
darkness: you shall find this eminently exemplified in the Spouse, Cant. 3. 1,
etc. By night on my bed I Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3.
sought him whom my soul loves; I sought him, but I found him not. I will rise
now, and go about the City, in the streets, and in the broad ways, I will seek
him whom my soul loves, etc. v. 3. The watchmen that go about the City found
me, to whom I said, Saw ye him whom my soul loves? This is a second thing. A
child of God under a des^rtion, is not to sit still, and mourn, and be wail it
self; but to be up and doing, watching unto prayer, to all 1 Pet. 4. 7.
religious duties, to all parts of an holy and religious life; to be at such a
time especially, much in close and diligent communion with God, for the
recovery of its lost peace and comfort.

3. Lastly, The watchman is to look out for the morning, and with patience to
wait for it. This is also the duty of him that walks in spiritual darkness (I
mean, the want of sensible consolations) My soul waits for the Lord, more
than they that watch for the morning; (says holy David) Psalm. 130. 6. I say,
Psa. 130. 6.
more than they that watch for the morning. Thus the Church, Isa 8. 17. I will
wait upon Isa. 8. 17.
him that hides his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him.
Thus Habakkuk, for the answer of his prayer on the behalf Hab. 2. 1, 2, 3.
of the Church; I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon my Tower; I will
watch to see what he will say unto me. The vision is yet for an appointed time,
but in the end it shall speak, it shall not lie; though it tarry, wait for it.
Thus now I have opened this duty to you, and shown you what this is to watch
for God; to watch for his likeness. Now that this is a Christians duty in his
hours of darkness, appears,

1. From the Precept of God, obliging you to it, The will of God revealed, is
that which makes a Christians duty: God has bidden us watch and wait, and
order our conversation aright.

2. From the Examples of the Children of God, recorded in Scripture, wherein
they have done well; they are lights unto us, and oblige us to do likewise.
Look upon Job, David, the Church of God; all those of whom you have record in
holy Writ, see them in their dark hours, observe their practice, you shall find
them all fearful of sinning, resolved against it, full of prayer, and other
religious duties, and striving and resolving to order their conversation aright.

3. This will appear to be your duty, if you consider the several parts of it
as means prescribed by God in order to so good and blessed an end. The promise
of seeing God is made to such as order their conversation aright, Psalm. 50.
Psalm. 27. 14. Wait upon the Lord, Psa. 50. 23. Psa. 17. 14.
and he shall strengthen your heart. They that wait upon the Lord shall renew
their strength, like the Eagle, Isa. 40. 31. It is made to such Isa. 40. 31.
as ask, and seek, and knock. Ask, and you shall have; seek, and you shall
find; knock, and it shall be opened to you.

4. Lastly, Whosoever considers God in that freedom which belongs unto him, as to
the manifestations of himself to his peoples souls; or whosoever considers his
own distance from, and subjection unto God; and how little he deserves of any
such dispensation from him, will confess that it is not equal, that we should
forsake God, or abate in our zeal for, and duty to God, because he forsakes
us; and withdraw our duty from God, because he withdraws the light of his
countenance from us. God is a free agent, and as the wind blows where it
lists, so his Spirit moves; and as it is free in all its motions and
influences, so it is most free as to consolatory manifestations, being not of
the necessaries to our eternal salvation, but such influences as God, without
breach of Covenant, may in whole, or in part, for what time, and in what degree
he pleases to withold from those most in convenant with him. To which might
be added, that whatsoever the Lord has, is the product of infinite Justice,
Wisdom and Goodness. God in it is just, and does no more than he may do; he is
infinitely wise, and whatsoever he does is for wise and righteous ends; and he
is infinitely good, and would not do it, were it not for his peoples good.
Besides this, this watching against sin, unto prayer, and to other duties of an
holy life, are the moral and perpetual duties of Christians, from which nothing
of Gods dealing with us can exempt us: but I shall add no more to my discourse
upon the third thing implied in the Doctrine. The fourth follows, which is
founded upon the phrase, according to our translation of it [When I awake] that
is (as I formerly opened it) when I shall awake in the resurrection, when I
shall awake from the sleep of death; where is implied,

Though the Children of God shall in death fall 4 Prop.
asleep, yet they shall awake in a resurrection. Death in Scripture is
ordinarily expressed under the notion of sleep. David slept with his 1 King. 2.
10, 11, 43. Mat. 9. 24. Joh. 11. 11.
Fathers; so did Solomon, Jeroboam, Rehoboam. In the New Testament, the Maid
sleeps, says our Savior: and again, Our friend Lazarus sleeps. Great is
the Analogy betwixt death and sleep, if I had time, or that were the business
of my present discourse to show you. Death is a sleep common to the children of
God, as well as others. The Apostle to the Hebrews says, It is appointed for
all men once Heb. 9. 27.
to die, and after to come to Judgment. Your Fathers, where are they? And do
the Prophets live for ever? Zech. 1. 5. Who is he that lives, Zech. 1. 5. Psalm.
87. 48.
and shall not see death? For (says the wise man) in Eccles. 7. 2. Death is
the end of all, Eccles. 7. 2.
and the living shall lay it to heart. The wise man dies as the fool, Eccles.
2. 16. This ceasing of godly men, and failing of the faithful, put David to his
Help Lord, Psalm. 12. 1. and made the Prophet of old complain, that no man would
consid^r it. The Apostle asserts it, and also gives the reason of it, Romans 8.
10. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin. I take the words
to have an Analogy in them, and the sense to be, The body shall die because of
sin.

But although the great curse so far falls upon the best of men, who are made
alive by the second Adam, although the decree of Heaven touching them as well
as others, and their house of clay be such as must be dissolved as well as
others, and they must undergo the common fate of flesh and blood, and having
been wearied with the labors of this life, it is but reasonable they should a
while rest in their beds in the grave; yet they shall not be like those
mentioned by the Prophet, who shall sleep a perpetual sleep. Though they Jer.
51. 39.
sleep, they shall awake; though they fall, they shall arise, therefore their
enemy death has no cause to triumph over them. Our friend Lazarus sleeps; but
I go (says Christ) Joh. 11. 11. 23, 24.
that I may awake him out of sleep. Thy Brother shall rise again, says Christ
to Martha; she assents to it; I know that he shall rise again at the
resurrection in the last day. As death is called a sleep; so the resurrection
from the dead, is called an awaking out of sleep. Thus in Daniel, Many that
sleep in the dust shall awake, Dan. 12. 2. Awake and sing you that dwell in the
dust (says the Apostle.) That there shall be a resurrection, is an article of
our faith, and so momentous aone, that it is one of the pillars upon which
Religion stands. If the dead rise not, then is not Christ risen (says the
Apostle) and if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching in vain, and your
faith is also in vain; and the Apostles are found false 1 Cor. 15. 13, 14, 15,
16, 17.
witnesses for God, because they have testified of God that he has raised up
Christ, whom he raised not up if the dead rise not. And if Christ be not risen,
your faith is yet in vain, you are dead in your sins, and they also who are
fallen asleep in Christ are perished. By this, and a far greater plenty of
arguments, the Apostle confirms a necessity of a Resurrection. It is true, the
Resurrection belongs to wicked men, as well as to the children of God; they
also shall rise, they shall come to judgment; but the resurrection shall be so
much to the damage and detriment of sinners, that we shall find (in Scripture)
the Resurrection mentioned, as if it were the special privilege of Gods
people, Phil. 3. 11. If by any means I Phil. 3. 11.
might attain to the resurrection of the dead: they are called the children of
the resurrection, Luke 20. 36. But I shall forbear any further Luke 20. 36.
discourse upon this Proposition, remembering that I am in a Congregation of
Christians, of whose Religion this is one of the fundamental Doctrines, Heb. 6.
2. I come to the last of Heb. 6. 2.
these Propositions I told you were implied, viz

That in the Resurrection, Believers shall be Prop. 5.
satisfied with the Lords likeness. By the likeness of God here, I mean the
beatifical vision; the manifestation of God to his Saints in Heaven, when they
shall be satisfied with seeing him as he is, and beholding him face to face.

I observed before to you, the emphasis of the term satisfied; I told you that
it implies two things.

1. They shall be filled.

2. They shall be so filled, that themselves shall judge they have enough. A
man may be filled, and not satisfied: the glutton may be filled with meat; the
drunkard with wine and strong drink, yet neither of them satisfied: the
voluptuous man may have a fullness of pleasure, and yet not be satisfied: the
covetous man is filled with silver, yet not satisfied. The wise man says,
There are four things that say not, it is enough; and there are three things
that are never satisfied. Many more might be added; the ambitious man is never
satisfied with honor; the covetous man is never satisfied with gold and
silver; the voluptuous man is never satisfied with pleasure, and the objects of
his lust. No sinner says, he has of sin enough: No Saint says, he has
enough of grace; but especially as to all creature comforts, this is a vanity
which ordinarily does attend them; they fill, but do not satisfy, but are like
the grass upon the house top, which is got with a great d^^l of danger and
difficulty; and with which the mower fills not his arm; nor be that gathers
sheaves his bosom.

The child of God, while he lives here, is ordinarily not satisfied with grace;
he knows in part, and he prophecieth in part; he is not holy enough; he cannot
so perfect holiness as he desires; nor (ordinarily) has he those clear and
constant incomes of divine love, and visions of peace, as he wishes for: But
in the Resurrection he shall be filled; he shall be satisfied.

1. He shall be plenteously filled.

2. He shall be perfectly filled.

1. He shall be plenteo^sly filled: Here we are fed with morsels, as we are
able to digest, and accordingly as our wise Father sees best for us, as the
Israelites were fed with Manna; when we shall come in the heavenly Canaan^ we
shall be fed with milk and honey, and with a flow of it.

2. Secondly, He shall be perfectly filled. When our corruptible shall have put
on incorruption, and our mortal shall have put on immortality, we shall yet be
but finite Beings, and shall not be capacious enough to receive the fullness of
divine light and glory. The Schoolmen, though they agree the immediate passage
of the soul to God, when it departs from the body, yet will not allow it to
be perfectly blessed before the Resurrection, because they say, there will
remain in the soul in its state of separation, a desire to a second union; and
while one desire of the soul remains unsatisfied, there cannot be a
perfection of blessedness; but in that day that which is in part shall be done
away, that which is perfect being come.

1. The whole man shall then be satisfied with the likeness of God. Here the
soul sometimes beholds God by spiritual contemplation, by the vision of
faith, by spiritual reflection, (when God is pleased so far to indulge his
child) but here the eye of the body sees nothing of him, in the resurrection we
shall see him with these eyes in our flesh, says Job. After the dissolution of
our bodies, the soul indeed shall with open face behold the glory of God, but
our bodies shall be rotting and putrefying in the graves; but in the
resurrection, the whole man, both soul and body, shall see God, and be happy in
the enjoyment of him to all eternity. In our flesh we shall see him.

2. Secondly, The degrees of satisfaction we shall have there, are infinitely
above what the souls of Gods people enjoy here: Here we see, but it is as in a
glass darkly; there we shall see face to face: here if at any time God
uncovereth his comfortable face to us, yet we can but see him according to our
present capacity; but in that day the capacity of the soul will be enlarged,
and the soul to its utmost enlarged capacity, shall be filled with the
enjoyment of God: Here we see him by the eye of faith, sitting upon his Throne
of Grace, and that fight is full of glory; there we shall see him by the eye of
sense upon his Throne of Glory; that sight will be infinitely more glorious and
beatifical. Here the child of God sometimes sees God; and though nothing be
wanting, ex part objecti, to make him perfectly happy in that vision, God
being an unchangeable fullness; yet much is wanting ex part subjecti, our
capacities not being able to receive in much of so glorious a light; there is a
deficiency in our sight, and such a vastness of glory in the object, that we
can but comprehend a little of it. In short, the soul in that day shall be so
filled with the likeness of God, that it will be impossible for it to receive
any further additions. Yet to obviate the mistakes of some, who know not what
they say. As in this life, the measure of the fullness of the stature of Christ,
is but our mark, not the attainment of any soul; none so pure, so holy, so
righteous as Christ: so in that life which is to come, none shall be so
glorious as Christ. The children of God shall, like Joseph, ride in the second
Chariot; but Christ (who is the express Image of his Fathers person) shall be
greater in this Throne of Glory, than any of Gods people can be; he is of his
Fathers Essence; the brightness of his Glory; the Word; his Fathers express
Image, who so asserts an equality of the Saint, either in grace or glory, to
the only begotten Son of God, cannot avoid a double blasphemy. The exalting a
finite Being to the dignity of an infinite Subsistence; or the degrading the
Creator, and equalizing him with a creature. But this is a digression. Certain
it is, that the children of God in the resurrection shall be filled with the
likeness of God, though they shall not have so much of it as the only begotten
Son of God. The proof of this is evident from those many phrases in Scripture:
We shall see him as he is, face to face; we shall be like him; in which I have
before instanced.

I have now shortly opened those five Propofitions, which I told you were
implied in the Proposition; I come now to what is expressed. Here are two
grounds of some satisfaction, from David's example, (according to the various
sense of the word ((...)) for a child of God living under such a dark
dispensation; yea if God should call them to die under it.

1. They should be satisfied in watching for Gods likeness.

2. This should satisfy them, that they shall in the resurrection awake, and
then they shall be satisfied with the likeness of God. Let me shortly discourse
the reasonableness of both these. First, I say, Though a Christian should in
his life time walk without the sense of divine love; yet he ought to be
satisfied in case he finds God inabling him to resist sin, and to hope in
him, and by faith and patience to wait for him, and to order his conversation
aright before him; or in short, to watch for him, when he or she does not see
him: Yea if God should call him to die without those sensible comforts which
others have, and he possibly thirsts after.

I must first open to you how, and how far forth he ought to be satisfied, and
then give you some reasons for it.

Methinks I hear a child of God thus replying upon me, Ah Sir, is this
possible, that a Christian should be satisfied without the sense of Gods love?
a child that tenderly loves his Parent, satisfied under his frown? a wife under
jealousies of her husbands love? Are these things possible? Can a soul be
satisfied so long as it is crying out, where is my God become? Can a soul
awakened to a sense of eternity be satisfied, to leave the earth, and go it
knows not whither? This is an hard chapter, an hard saying, who can hear it?

1. I answer, when I say a Christian should be satisfied, my meaning is, not
that he should be so contented with such a dispensation, as not to desire an
alteration of it. This is indeed plainly impossible, that a Christian awakened
to consider what the love of God to the soul is worth, should live without
desires of the manifestations of it to him; they may be thus satisfied, that
never felt any thing of Gods wrath, nor were ever warmed with any beams of his
special favor; but he that has ever lived under any feeling of the wrath of
God; or that has ever been persuaded of the love of God, or felt any thing of
the warm influences of it, can never be in this sense satisfied; he must pant,
and breath, and thirst after Gods manifestations of himself to his soul, and
use all possible means for the obtaining of it.

2. But as there is a Satisfaction of complacence and delight, exclusive of any
motions, any endeavors, any desires for an alteration: so there is a
Satisfaction of content, in opposition to murmuring, repining, distrust and
unbelief; and in this sense he ought to be satisfied, that is,

1. Not to murmr and repine against God, as not just, or wise, or good.

2. Not to distrust God; not to give over waiting upon him, crying to him,
doing his duty, not to despond and cast away his hope in God as to his eternal
salvation, for want of these sensible manifestations, he ought to be so far
satisfied, as to be thankful for such influences of grace as he has, and with
a meek and quiet spirit, to commit himself to the good will and pleasure of
God; to trust in the Name of the Lord, and to stay upon his God; to continue
waiting upon God, and praying, and ordering his conversation so aright, that he
may see the Lords solvation. Thus far satisfied a Christian under these
circumstances ought to be.

1. First, Because he has what may reasonably give him satisfaction,
notwithstanding his want of such more sensible and comfortable reflections. If
you ask me what that is, I answer, that which the Apostle calls A sure word
of promise; a word which shall not pass away, though Heaven and Earth pass
away. Gods word of promise is security enough for our salvation, without the
broad-seal of assurance: This is sure to all the seed, Romans 4. 16. Romans 4. 16.
Hence the Apostle calls Hope, an anchor of of the soul, sure and steadfast.
The certainty of Heb. 6. 19.
the anchor depends upon the ground where it is cast. The certainty of hope
depends upon the infallibility of the Word. Now the promise is not made to them
that see by the vision of sense, but to them that believe; to them who behold
God by the steadfast eye of faith. To him that believes, Joh. 3. 18, 36. John
3. 18, 36.
He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life. And again, He is not
condemned: And to him that orders his conversation aright, I Psa. 50. 23.
will show the salvation of God: And often, to him that waits for God. What
are we, that the bare word of the Lord should not satisfy us? It is a quaint
notion I have somewhere met with, that God the Father had nothing but Christ's
word in security for all the souls, whom he took up into Heaven from Adam,
until Christ had died. No price was paid for them; only Christ had given his
word to his Father, that in the fullness of time he would come, and would die
for them; upon this security he took them all into Heaven. Has the word of
Christ been taken for the salvation of so many thousand souls (Christian!) and
do thou think it hard to take it for the salvation of thy single soul? Ah!
will a Christian say, God forbid I should not take his word; but I do not know
that word was made to me? nor that I have any share in it? I answer, thou
know it is made to them that believe; to them that order their conversation
aright; to them that love God; to them that wait on him; that thirst after him.
Can not thou say thou believe? or if that be not so clear to thee, can
thou not say, thou love God, that that thou thirstest after him, that thou
art afraid to sin against him? I must confess, if thou be able to satisfy
thy self in none of these, thy case is hard: but if thou can see any thing of
these, though thou do want such a satisfaction from sensible reflections as
thou desire, yet thou have a sure word of promise, which can never fall thee;
and therefore, though thou may breath, and thirst after the sensible
consolations of God; yet if God in his wisdom thinks fit to deny thee them,
thou ought to be so far satisfied, as to be thankful, not to repine, not to
murmr, but meekly to commit thy self to God, and quietly to wait upon him,
even whiles he h^des his face from thy sad soul. This is the first reason.

2. Again, They ought to be satisfied, because it is the will of God. It is
Gods will they should want these comfortable reflections; and it is Gods will,
that under the want of them, they should not repine, but trust in the Name of
the Lord, and stay themselves upon their God, Isa. 50. 10. that they should
wait Isa. 50. 10. Isa. 8. 17.
upon him that hides his face from the house of Jacob, and look for him, Isa.
8. 17. Such is the wisdom, justice and goodness of God in all his
dispensations, (of which we ought to be assured) that it should stop every
mouth, and make all flesh silent before him. The consideration Lev. 10. 3.
of the will of God, has continually satisfied the people of God, under all
his severer Psalm. 39. 3.
dispensations toward them. This silenced Aaron, when he had lost his two
eldest Sons, in the entry of their sacerdotical office, though they were sadly
cut off in their iniquity. This made David hold his peace; 1 Samuel 3. 18.
he considered that it was the Lords doing, to try his patience. This silenced
old Eli, under that dreadful denunciation against his whole family; It is the
Lord (says he) let him do 2 King. 20. 19.
what seems to him good. This silenced Hezekiah, when he heard that his
posterity should be rooted out, and carried captives into Babylon. This
satisfied the Disciples, Act. 21. 14.
when they heard they should see their beloved Paul's face no more, they said,
The will of the Lord be done. And this ought to silence every soul that has
learned to resign up his will to the divine will, and to say, Thy will be done
in Earth as it is in Heaven.

3. Thirdly, If we consider it wistly, we shall find all imaginable reason
concurring to quiet the soul under such dispensations. This may be reduced to
two heads.

1. God in such dispensations does the soul no wrong.

2. God under such dispensations yet is exceeding good to his people.

1. First, I say, God in such dispensations does the soul no wrong. Reason will
tell us, we cannot justly complain where no injury is done us. Why (says the
Church in the Lamentations) should a living man complain, a Iam. 3.
man for the punishment of his sin? A man, a living man, a man punished for his
sin, has no reason to complain. In thy darkest hours, thou art yet a living
man, and but punished for thy sin. This is that which the householder in the
Parable objected to the murmuring labourer; Friend! (says he) I do thee no
wrong; did not thou agree with me for a penny? Mat. 20. 23.
take therefore what is thy own, and go thy way; is it not lawful for me to do
with my own what I please? Three things are there said to satisfy the labourer.

1. He did him no wrong; therefore he had no cause to complain.

2. He had agreed with him for a penny; that was all was his own.

3. He might do with his own what he pleased.

All these things (Christian!) are applicable unto thee. Does the Lord hide his
face from thee? does he deny thee the light of his countenance, and only enable
thee by faith to devolve thy soul upon him, and patiently to wait for him? is
this all he will please to grant thee? I say first, God in these dispensations
does thee no wrong; what have thou earned? Can thou challenge these sensible
manifestations at Gods hand as due to thee in point of justice? if whatsoever
influences thou receivest from God, must be acknowledged influences of grace,
not debts, much more these; God therefore in denying them to thee, in
withholding them from thee, does thee no wrong at all; if he should resresh
thee with them, it were superabounding grace; but if he denies them to thee, he
does thee no injury. Again, May not God do what he pleases with his own? May
man do do it! and is God less free? are not these sensible manifestations, the
gales of his Spirit? and shall not that like the wind, blow where it pleases?
are they not his sealings? and shall not he set his seal where he ple^seth?
especially when in one sense he has sealed thee to the day of redemption; as I
shall show thee more by and by. Further yet, when thou acceptedst of the
Covenant of Grace offered to thee, did not God agree with thee for a penny? Is
not this the Lords Covenant, Believe and be saved? This indeed the Lord has
said, That whosoever comes unto him, he will in no wise cast away. But has he
any where said, That whosoever by faith comes unto him, shall walk in the
uninterrupted light of his countenance? If thou could not challenge these
comfortable manifestations as thy earnings; yet if thou could challenge them
as debts from God upon compact, thou might indeed complain of wrong done
unto thee in the want of them; but there is no such thing: promises indeed
there are of such kind of mercies; as there is of outward prosperity, health,
riches, etc. to be understood with a reservation to Gods wisdom, so far as he
sees good for thy salvation, and for his own glory. But thou will say to me,
this is a poor ground of satisfaction, if I were now going down into the
bottomless pit, God did me no wrong.

2. Secondly, Therefore (I say) God under such dark d^spensations, is yet
exceeding good and gracious to thee; if thou find him but inabling thee to
behold his face in righteousness, and to watch for his likeness; to believe and
to live an holy life and conversation. David in Psalm. 73. relates under what a
great temptation Psalm. 73. 1.
he was, by reason of his own afflicted state, and the prosperity of wicked
men, he begins the Psalm, Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a
clean heart. Thou art under a great temptation (possibly) by reason of that
darkness, in which it pleases God to keep thee, as to sensible evidences, yet
I will show thee thou have reason to say, Truly God is good to me. I will open
this in a few particulars.

1. Thou have the hope of glory. All thy exercises of grace, thy looking up to
God; thy waiting for him; thy fear of offending God; thy trouble when thou have
offended him; thy love, jealousies; thy waiting for God; all thy exercises of
grace, are branches springing from that root; and indeed the child of God
cannot be without hope. These all speak thy union with Christ, without whom
thou could do none of these things: Now where Christ is, there must be the
hopes of glory. Christ in you the hope of glory (says Col. 1. 27.
the Apostle) It was a portion of Scripture, which often refreshed the soul of
this excellent Lady (whose funerals we are celebrating) if I remember right, I
have heard her say, it was the first piece of Scripture which God sealed to her
soul: I am sure it was what often refreshed her in her latter days, and to her
very last hour; it was as the sword of Goliath, None to it, both for the
repelling of temptations, and the refreshing of her fainting soul.

2. Secondly, By hope (says the Apostle) we Romans 8. 24.
are saved. Now says the same Apostle, Hope that is seen, is no hope; for what
a man sees, why does he yet hope for. The hope of a child of God has this
character, it makes not ashamed. David says no more, but that his Romans 5. 5.
flesh should rest in hope, Psalm. 16. 9. And the wise man says no more, but
The Righteous Pro. 14. 32.
has hope in his death. It is not always true, that the righteous man has
assurance in his death; but he has hope in his death, an hope that makes not
ashamed in his death, and so stands distinguished from the Hypocrite, of whom
Job says, Where is the hope of the Hypocrite, when God takes away his soul?

3. This hope (Thirdly) is enough to give the soul joy. Hence you read of the
rejoicing of hope, which may be kept firm to the end; Heb. 3. 6.
it is not so with ordinary hope. Solomon says, Hope deferred makes the heart
sick: But it is so with this good hope through grace, because of the certainty
that attends it; the certainty of the word of promise upon which it leans.

4. Fourthly, Observe what the Apostle says of this hope, Heb. 6. 18, 19, 20.
That by two Heb. 6. 18, 19, 20.
immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a
strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope before
us; which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, sure and steadfast; and which
enters into that within the vail, whither the forerunner is for us entered,
even Jesus, who is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck. The two
immutable things, are Gods Word, and his Oath: His word of promise that is
immutable; Heaven and Earth shall pass away, before a tittle shall pass from
it. His Oath, in that God has condescended to our infirmity, that we might
hope steadfastly. O nos foelices (says Tertullian) quorum gratia Deus jurat. O
infideles, si juranti non credamus! These two are the grounds of our hope; and
the Apostle judges them sufficient for an anchor for our souls, both sure, and
steadfast; yea not only so, but to raise a strong consolation to those who fly
to it for refuge, and why? because it is entered within the vail; it is fastened
in Heaven: it is not like an anchor fallen in a sandy soil, it is entered within
the vail; and if you would know how Heaven comes to be so sure a soil for a
poor Christians hope, the Apostle tells you, that our forerunner Christ Jesus
is entered there, and that in the quality of a Priest, an eternal Priest, not
after the order of Aaron, who was daily to offer gifts and sacrifices for sin,
but after the order of Melchisedeck. Christ has died for our sins, and risen
again for our justification: he has said, that whosoever believes in him
shall not be condemned: he has made this Covenant with every Believer, and is
now entered into Heaven, in the quality of a Priest, an eternal Priest, who
stands always before his Fathers Throne, presenting his own mediatory
performances and merits unto his Father; the soul believes in him, then
raises an hope of salvation, though it wants sensible evidences; and this hope
is sufficient to give unto the soul a strong consolation, having fled to Christ
for refuge; however, to be an anchor to the soul, and that both sure and
steadfast, which therefore should stay it.

5. Fifthly, Faith, and strong Faith, is surely enough to carry a soul to
Heaven; though it wants sensible evidences, if it be not, what becomes of the
Covenant of Grace? what became of all the promises, repetitions, and branches
of that Covenant? but a child of God may have faith, and strong faith, and yet
want sensible consolation. I say, a Christian may have faith; I do not mean
only a faith of assent, which the Devils may have: (Saint James says) they
believe and tremble (they doubtless do agree to the Propositions of truth in
the Scripture) but I mean that faith which the Apostle calls, The faith of Gods
Elect; Justifying faith. It was indeed an unwary description, which some
ancient Divines gave of justifying faith, calling it a full persuasion of the
Love of God; and it may be much occasioned by the heat of their opposition to
the jejune faith of Papists, who would make justifying faith to be assent to
the Proposition of the Word; it is likely their so describing justifying faith,
gave too much advantage to the Antinomian notion, who to this day, will
understand nothing of faith under plerophory, or full persuasion; but
undoubtedly the act of justifying faith lies lower, in receiving Christ,
believing in him, relying upon him, committing our selves unto him, etc. Nor
can the other be the act of faith that justifies, being not to be found, but
in souls that are justified. For how can any soul whom God does not love in
Jesus Christ, be fully (and justly) persuaded of his love? Now the Lord loves
the righteous: until the soul be made righteous, through the imputed
righteousness of Christ, it can be no object of divine love. That soul who has
opened his Will (through divine grace) to receive and embrace Christ as
tendered in the Gospel, that is persuaded to rest, hang, trust, rely, commit
its self to him, and him alone for salvation, that soul truly believes. Now
this the soul does that watches for Gods likeness, though it want sensible
comforts.

Nay, this faith is strong faith. It is the note of a late eminent servant of
God, that faith is so much the stronger, by how much the fewer externals it
needs to support it. It was said of Abraham, that he was strong in the Romans 4.
18, 19, 20, 21.
faith, giving glory to God. Wherein did the strength of Abraham's faith appear?
v. 18. He staggered not at the promise; he against hope believed in hope; he
had nothing of sense to help his faith; his faith stood merely upon the
strength of the word; he had a word of promise, and he staggered not at the
promise: he was so far from having any help to his faith, from sense that he
had all the discouragement and hinderance imaginable, the matter to be believed
was, that God would give him a Son; for this he had the word of God. Thou shall
have a Son, says God: his wife was past childbearing; her womb was dead,
insomuch that she laughed, when she Genesis 18. 12.
heard the promise, and said, Shall I of a surety bear a child, who am old?
Abraham himself was beyond the age in which (ordinarily) children are begot; he
was an hundred years old. But though he had no encouragement, but all
imaginable discouragement from sense, both on his own, and on his wives part,
yet (says the Apostle) he distrusted not; he staggered not at the promise
through unbelief. Thus he was strong in faith; and thus he gave glory to God,
says the Apostle, giving him the honor of his power, of his truth and
faithfulness, etc. and this faith was imputed to him for righteousness, v. 21,
22. Now if the weakest faith (being true) be sufficient to carry the soul to
Heaven, much more shall a strong faith: such a faith as that of Abraham, the
Father of the faithful do it.

6. Lastly, Will it not satisfy thee (Christian!) to tell thee thou art
blessed? I have a good warrant to do that, Joh. 20. 19. (They are the words of
our Savior) to Thomas, Thou have seen (says our Lord) therefore thou have
believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet believed. You are (even
out of Christ's mouth) more blessed believing, when you do not see, than those
are who see, and therefore believe. But I shall enlarge no more upon this first
ground of satisfaction for Christians walking in the dark, and seeing no light.
I proceed to the second from the word considered, as it signifies to awake.

2. It ought to satisfy Christians walking in the dark, as to sensible
consolations, to consider that when in the resurrection they shall awake, they
shall be satisfied with the likeness of God. There is nothing more needful for
the explication of the Proposition, than I have already said in the opening of
some or other of the Propositions. In short, the substance of what I intend, is
this, that if it so pleases God, that any child of his should not only spend a
great part of his life, without any sensible comforts, any witnessings of the
Spirit to his spirit: Nay, if the Lord should call him to die without such
sensible evidences, yet he ought not to repine, or murmr against God; but to
be silent before him, and trust in him, cheerfully considering, that though he
dies, he shall rise again from the dead, and in the resurrection he shall be
fully, and abundantly satisfied with Gods full and glorious manifestations of
himself unto him, when he shall be blessed in the full and glorious enjoyment
of God to all eternity.

1. This is that which God has agreed with us for; this is the penny for which
he has contracted. But of this I spoke before.

2. This is infinitely more than any child of God has merited, or can merit at
Gods hand. It will be a great piece of the work of the Saints in Heaven, to
admire that rich and infinite grace, which has brought them thither. Yea,
though we should never see Gods face till we come in Heaven; yet we shall see
free grace magnified in bringing us thither at last.

3. Lastly, The satisfaction which the soul shall meet with when it comes in
Heaven, will be infinitely more than will make us amends for all the
dissatisfactions all the hours of sadness and darkness we have met with in this
life: and infinitely more than will recompense us for all our faith and hope,
all our watchings and waitings for and upon God. For our duties, we value them
above the Scripture rate, if we count them better than menstrous cloths, and
filthy rags, or reckon that they deserve any thing at the hand of God other
than wrath, and shame, and confusion of faith. And (says the Apostle, Romans 8.
18. Romans 8. 18.
I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. Every one of you would
easily determine this, were I able to show you but a little of those things,
which eye has not seen; nor has ear heard; nor can 2 Cor. 13. 12. 1 These. 1.
17. 1 John 3. 2.
it enter into the heart of man to conceive. To open to you what it is to be
ever with the Lord, to see him face to face, to see him as be is, to be like
the Angels in Heaven, to have our bodies made like unto his glorious body, and
our corruptible to put on incorruption. I say, were I able to open these, and
other expressions, by which it has pleased the Holy Ghost in Scripture to
express the state of the children of God in glory, you would easily agree this
with me, that the joys and satisfaction in the likeness of God, which shall in
Heaven be manifested to the souls of Gods people, shall abundantly recompense
them, for all their hours of darkness. I have now done with the Explication of
the Doctrine: I come to the Application, in which I shall be the shorter,
because it has been wholly practical almost.

Use 1. In the first place, what we have heard, may inform us much concerning
the Lot and Duty of Gods dearest servants. As to their Lot,

1. They may (in this life) be tempted, persecuted by men, deserted by God,
very much unsatisfied as to the Lords likeness, both in respect of holiness and
comfort: we are not by an interest in Christ privileged from trials; we may
have troubles without, and fears from within. By our turning into the ways of
God, we make the world our enemy; by deserting it, we inrage the Devil to a
further enmity; indeed we engage God to be our Father, but he is a wise Father,
who though he always loves, yet sometimes in prudence he frowns upon a child.
But here we must distinguish betwixt a seeming desertion, and a real desertion;
betwixt a total, and a partial desertion; betwixt a desertion as to the
necessary influences of grace, and as to the less necessary influences of it;
betwixt a desertion for a time, and for ever: God cannot cast on his people for
ever; he cannot totally desert them; he cannot withdraw the necessary
influences of grace; the union betwixt Christ and the soul cannot be dissolved;
there can be no intercession of the state of Justification; no total separation
of the Spirit from the soul, when once it has taken up an habitation in it,
but as to some influences of grace, not so necessary to salvation, as to
consolatory manifestations, as to degrees of quickening and strengthening
influences: God may forsake his Saints, and to such a degree, that the soul may
to it self seem utterly forsaken.

2. Secondly, You have heard that it is not repugnant to the justice and
goodness of God, to suffer his child to fall asleep in death, without a
satisfaction with Gods likeness, without such sensible comforts as others may
have. Light is sown for the righteous; joy for the upright in (...) 1.
heart: But it is like seed sown into the earth, which comes up sometimes
sooner, sometimes later; sometimes not till they come in Heaven, sometimes soon
after conversion; sometimes they walk all their life time much in the light of
the Lords countenance; sometimes they have an April day, with vicissitudes of
light and darkness, gleams and showers: sometimes God appears to their souls in
the very hour of death; they have been in darkness before, and then they cry
out, (as the Martyr to his Brother Austin) He is come, he is come. Sometimes
again, the light of this life, goes out in obscurity to them, and they go out
of this world weeping, yet carrying with them the precious seed of Faith and
Love, they shall return in the resurrection rejoicing, and bring their sheaves
with them. This may serve to regulate our expectations, that they rise not too
high for dispensations not absolutely necessary to salvation, and to direct our
charity, that we may not entertain uncharitable thoughts, nor pass uncharitable
censures upon those whom we have seen in this life strictly walking with God,
yet not dying with sensible comforts.

3. Thirdly, The Children of God (as well as others) shall fall asleep: Indeed
their death is but a sleep, and it shall not be a perpetual sleep. Death shall
taste of them, but it shall not feed upon them. Lazarus sleeps (says our
Savior) but I go to awake them. The children of God shall all sleep; but the
Lord will come to awake them; the last trump shall sound, and those who are
dead in the graves, shall awake, and shall arise; they shall hear the voice of
the Son of God, and live; their flesh shall rest, but it shall rest in hope.
The wicked also shall sleep, and their bodies shall rest, but in no hope of a
better state in the resurrection; it were well for them, if they might indeed
sleep a perpetual sleep, and wake no more. Thus far you have been informed of
the Lot of Gods people, and further of their great privilege, when they awake
in the resurrection, to be fully and abundantly satisfied with the Lords
likeness. But in order to their privilege, you have also been informed of
their duty.

1 Branch. At all times to keep on beholding the Lords face in righteousness;
in the righteousness of Jesus Christ, in the righteousness of an holy and
innocent life and conversation; to keep a conscience void of offense both
toward God, and toward man; to be continually laboring to perfect holiness
in the fear of the Lord; to be much in prayer, much in the exercise of faith,
hope, patience.

2. Especially are they to take care that in their hours of darkness, they be
not wanting to this duty. And further, doing this, they ought so far to be
satisfied, as not to murmr, not to repine, not to think God deals hardly with
them; but to be thankful, rejoicing themselves in this confidence, that when
they shall awake in the resurrection, they shall have what their heart could
wish; they shall be abundantly satisfied with the Lords likeness. Thus far what
you have heard serves you for Instruction.

Use. 2. Secondly, What you have heard may reflect with some check and reproof,
to many poor souls who truly fear God, yet are not come up in this thing to
their duty. How many do we meet with in the course of our Ministry, who, though
Christ be in them, the hopes of glory; though they cannot deny what God has
done for their souls; their souls tell them; they have put their trust in God,
and committed themselves to the arm of everlasting righteousness; they dare not
knowingly offend God, but make it their business, and herein exercise
themselves to keep a conscience void of offense, both toward God and man; yet
because possibly at present they have not those sensible reflections, which
others have and they desire, they cannot be satisfied, but are ready to
complain, and murmr; and like a teachy child, to throw away, and despise all
they have, because they cannot obtain this which they so passionately desire;
they can see no ground of hope, they are persuaded, that at last they shall go
to Hell, and one day perish with all their profession; they can find no
witnessings, no sealings of Gods Spirit. How often do we hear these, and such
like sad expressions from them? But Christians, I beseech you consider,

1. What God said to Jonah, Do you well to be angry? do you well to repine and
murmr? David Psalm. 25. 3. prays they might be ashamed who are transgressors
without a cause: Are you not transgressors without a cause? has not God given
you more than you have earned? has he not given you the penny you contracted
with him for? why are you angry then? why discontented? why lift you up your
voice against Heaven?

2. Again, How many thousands are there in the world, who have (as creatures)
as much claim to God as you, for whom the Lord has not done so much for as he
has done for you: He has given them portions in this life, and has sent them
away; they have pleasure, riches, honors, etc. but no faith, no hope, nothing
of grace, no interest in Christ; they are dead in trespasses and sins,
perishing to all eternity: You only want a spiritual banquet; the most want
spiritual bread, yet creatures under the same natural capacity that you are.

3. Though in one sense you be not sealed; yet in another sense you are sealed.
You read in Scripture of the sealing of the Spirit, Ephesians. 1. 13. chap. 4. 30.
2 Cor. 1. 22. Ephesians. 1. 13. 4. 30. 2 Cor. 1. 22.
We usually interpret those texts of Assurance, because seals are used for
confirmation: But possibly there is another sense as agreeable to the mind of
the Holy Ghost. A seal (you know) leaves the signature or impression of it
upon the wax; the wax has the image of the seal upon it. The Lords renewing
and stamping his Image upon the soul, is a sealing of it to the day of
Adoption. There is a seal of Regeneration and Sanctification, as well as a seal
of Assurance; and though the latter sealing be infinitely sweet, and pleasant
to the soul; yet the former is that which fitteth us for the Kingdom of Heaven;
Without holiness no man can see God. Is there not as much (think you) of the
operation of the Spirit seen in sanctifying, quickening, strengthening a soul,
as in comforting it, and assuring it of salvation? Is it our great mistake that
we will look upon nothing as the fruit of the Spirit, but joy and peace;
certainly the renewing and sanctifying of the soul is as much the operation of
the Spirit; and the strengthening and quickening of the soul, in the
performance of duty, or in the resistance of corruption, is as much the fruit
of the Spirit in the soul, as comforting and refreshing the soul is.

4. If God has thus far enabled you, viz. to behold his face in righteousness,
and to watch for his likeness, he has given you the necessaries of salvation,
the things which accompany salvation. What you want, is only what a soul may
want, and yet get to Heaven. Faith and Holiness, they are the necessaries to
salvation: a soul may go to Heaven without Joy and Peace; without Faith and
Holiness there is no salvation. When God has given you the bread of life, have
you not reason to be satisfied? Though you want that banquet with which he
sometimes is pleased to entertain the souls of his people?

The Example of this rare and eminent servant of God, might have at once (as to
this thing) have instructed and reproved many unthankful, discontented, and
repining Christians. It had pleased the Lord to strip her naked of most of her
creature comforts; he had sent such messengers as he sent to Job, to her, one
after another, till at last death came to assure her all (as to this life) was
gone; she was under a sad and inexpressible trial of affliction: It is true in
this sad and afflicted state as to her outward concerns, she had her lived
intervals, some glimmerings of divine light: sometimes Joy came over night, but
sorrow came again in the morning; the clouds returned after rain. That word,
Col. 1. 27. Christ in you the hope of Glory, often refreshed her; but her
adversary was busy, her comforts inconstant, her assurance little; yet she
lived in hope, and blessed God, and was thankful: she endured violent pains,
and in her suffering acted a strong says; and in the saddest distempers would
cry out, Oh Sir, Satan would have me let go my hold on Christ, but I will trust
in God till I die: Though he kills me, yet I will trust in him; tell me I pray
(Sir) may I not? She died in hope: her very last words were I hope, I hope; to
make good that of the wise man; that the righteous man has hope in his death;
and by hope I doubt not but she is saved, and now seeing what she hoped, and
with so great patience waited for. Hark and be ashamed, thou murmuring and
unthankful Christian, that art not so much as she disadvantaged from the
providence of God, yet can not tell how to be silent, because thou want
consolatory manifestations.

Use 3. In the third place; What you have heard in this discourse may be useful
to us for Consolation.

1. On our own behalf. 2. On the behalf of others.
1. As to our selves, concerning our dark hours. The people of God are
ordinarily very jeolous of their Saviors love, and very suspicious of their
own sincerity; they know not how to trust as the one, nor be confident as to
the other, without the encouragement of comfortable reflections; nor how to
believe they shall go to Heaven, if they go not to it in the fight of it. The
wise man says, a man knows not love nor hatred, by all that is before him in
this life; so that none ought to determine of himself in this case, from any
external dispensatious of providence. A Christian may be poor, and afflicted,
and yet a favorite of God; and as he ought not to judge himself from these
more external dispensations; so neither ought he to judge himself from the want
of sensible manifestations to his inward man. The child of God may walk in
darkness: Job, David, Heman, Asaph; all had their dark hours: if therefore that
be our lot, yet this is no ground of discouragement to us; no ground for any
sad conclusion against our souls, as to their best interests.

2. Again, what we have heard, affords us a great comfort against the fear of
death. The Scripture calls death, The King of terrors. Job 18. 14.
And the Apostle says, that even Gods people (through the fear of it) are all
their life time Heb. 2. 14.
subject to bondage. It is the common portion of all the Sons of men. It is
appointed for all men once to die; and it is our great interest to arm our
selves against the fears of it: you have heard from the former discourse,

1. That death is but a sleep.

2. That it is not a perpetual sleep, but a sleep from which we shall awake.

3. That at our awaking out of that sleep, we shall be satisfied with Gods
likeness.

1. I say (first) death is but a sleep. It is not an annihilation of a man,
that misapprehensions of it make it terrible to a man in his natural capacity.
It is not (to the child of God) the securing of a person to the Judgment of
the great day. In this notion unbelievers have reason to consider it, what is
it then? It is but a sleep. This gentle notion of death, should take the
terror of it off our spirits: no man is afraid to go to sleep; why should we
be more afraid to die but for unbelief and a reproving conscience?

2. Were it indeed a perpetual sleep, there would be less of relief in it; but
there shall be an awaking out of this sleep: though the night be long, there
shall be a morning. This doctrine of the Resurrection is indeed the great
argument of comfort against death. The Apostle having mentioned it to the
Thessalonians, to relieve them as to their sorrow for their friends asleep in
the Lord, concludes, wherefore comfort your solves with these words.

3. But yet the feast to which we shall awake in the Resurrection, is of a
further consequence, to relieve us under disturbances of this nature. This was
that which cleared the Martyr, that although he had an ill Supper, he should
have a good breakfast.

The sleep of death, is not like the sleep the Prophet speaks of. When a man
dreams he is at a feast, and when he awaketh behold he is an hungry. Indeed
there is no dreaming in this sleep; but when the child of God awaketh from it
in the resurrection, he shall awake to a feast, not an imaginary, but a real
feast, where he shall be filled with the likeness of God to all eternity.

3. Branch. Lastly, What we have heard administers great consolation to such as
mourn for their friends fallen asleep in the Lord. Have we had any friends, who
have made it their business to behold the face of the Lord in righteousness,
and to watch for the Lords likeness, who herein have exercised themselves to
keep a conscience void of offense both toward God, and toward men; and
possibly have had their sad hours for a long time sitting in darkness, and
seeing no light; and whose Candle possibly has at last gone out in obscurity,
as to visions of peace? They have indeed died, breathing and thirsting after
God, hoping and trusting in God, and quietly committing their selves unto him;
but not being able to say, Lo this is my God, I have waited for him; this is my
God, I have waited for him; I will rejoice and be glad in his salvation. I say,
have we known any so? have we had at any time any such friends, under such
circumstances? possibly we have been troubled, and have had sad thoughts for
them; but there is no reason; what though they have fallen asleep, they shall
awake; what though they fell asleep not satisfied, they shall be satisfied with
the Lords likeness, when they awake, they shall be satisfied. There are
thousands that die without any such troubled thoughts. Some it may be with bold
and groundless confidences, who will awake with terror and trembling. There be
many that shall in that day say, Lord, Lord, open unto us, have we not prayed
in thy name, and prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out Devils? to
whom the Lord shall say, Matthew. 7.
Depart from me, I know you not, you workers of iniquity. But there is no soul
who has truly believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who has walked strictly and
closely with God, and made it his, or her business to serve the Lord in truth;
to mortify his, or her lusts and corruptions; but though it may live in the
dark, and (it may be) die in some dissatisfactions, but that soul shall awake
in a glorious resurrection, and so awaking shall be satisfied, and filled with
the consolations of God. Mourn for loose walking Professors, who have lived
here without any fear of God, or any care to please God; and yet when they die,
have talked of full persuasions, and been full of presumptuous confidences; but
be not troubled for holy and gracious souls, whose lives have been full of
faith and holiness: though it may be they have had their fears while they
lived, and a dark hour when they died has clouded them, yet doubt not of them;
mourn not for them; those persons have not died without hope; do not you mourn
as those without hope; their salvation is certain, whether it has been
ascertained to them, or no, hoping in God, committing their souls unto God,
trusting in him, walking with him, they shall not be ashamed: trouble not your
selves for them; though they fall, they shall rise; though they sleep, they
shall awake, though through a too much love-jealousie, or through the wise
dispensation of God; when they fell asleep, they were unsatisfied; yet when in
the resurrection they shall awake, they shall be satisfied, inessably,
plenteously, abundantly satisfied with the Lords likeness; and in the joy of
that glorious day, they shall forget all their former sorrows.

Use 4. What you have heard may be applied by way of Caution,

1. To all ungodly impenitent sinners, such as never beheld the face of God in
righteousness, nor at all watch for his likeness, yet live without any fears,
it may be with strong confidences, and doubt not of being satisfied with the
Lords likeness in the resurrection of the just. Oh! the presumptuous groundless
hopes of an infinite number of Hypocrites! they make no question of salvation,
and think it great uncharitableness for any to doubt of their eternal welfare;
yet whosoever observes their lives, sees them neither exercising a good
conscience toward God nor man; instead of walking in righteousness, they live
in all manner of wickedness, yet they will tell you, they hope to be saved by
Jesus Christ; they are of the number of those whom the Apostle speaks of, who
are dead in trespasses and sins, who still have their conversation in the
world, according to the power of the Prince of the Air, who lives and works in
the children of disobedience, and walk fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, and
the desires of the mind, without Christ, and his righteousness, strangers to
the Covenant of Promise, having no true ground of hope, living without a God in
the world, in all neglect of duty toward God and man; yet these men hope to be
saved; these men hope in the resurrection, that they also shall be filled with
the likeness of God. I shall but offer one text of Scripture to such bold
presumptuous sinners; it is that in Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 29. 18, 19, 20.
29. 18, 19, 20. Lest there should be amongst you man, or woman, or family, or
tribe, whose heart turns away this day from the Lord our God, to go and serve
the gods of these Nations, lest there should be amongst you a root that bears
gall and wormwood. And it comes to pass, that when he hears the words of
this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace,
though I walk in the imagination of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst. The
Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy,
shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in this Book,
shall be upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under Heaven, and
the Lord shall separate him to evil, out of all the tribes of Israel, according
to all the curses of the Covenant, that are written in this Book of the Law,
etc. None can hope for the savor of God here or hereafter, but those only who
are clothed with the righteousness of Christ, and who live an holy and
righteous conversation before God, declining all manner of sin and wickedness,
and doing the whole will of God; and such who in this course of life (through
the grace of God inabling them) shall be found believing in God, and waiting
for him in those ways of holiness and well pleasing in his sight.

Others indeed may pretend that they hope; but indeed, could you look into the
secrets of their souls, you would find them without any true hope, not
attending to the eternal concerns of their souls, while they are in health and
at liberty, they are perfectly careless, neither hope nor fear much: when God
alarums them with a conviction, a terror of conscience, or a sickness, that
looks as if it would determine their days, then they begin to consider; and as
drowing men lay hold of every rush, every twig, never considering whether it
has in it strength enough to bear them; they lay hold upon every thing as a
ground of hope. God made them, and therefore they hope he will not damn them,
(as if Hell were prepared for none.) Christ died for all; as if (supposing that
were true) all therefore should be saved: They have been good Churchmen, paid
every man his own; they have been no drunkards, no swearers, etc. These, and
such like foundations of hope they lay; but (says Job) Where is the hope of
the Hypocrite, when the Lord takes away his soul? And again, Job 8. 11, 12, 13,
14, 15. Can the Rush grow up without mire? or the Flag without water? while it
is yet in its greenness, and not cut down, it withers before any other herb:
So are the paths of all that forget God; and the Hypocrites hope shall perish,
whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a Spiders web; he shall
lean upon his house, but it shall not stand; he shall hold it fast, but it
shall not endure.

2 Branch. Again (as I before hinted to you) what you have heard must be
cautiously understood, and practiced by Gods people. I told you, that such as
fear the Lord; such as are enabled by him to behold his face in righteousness,
and to watch for his likeness, though they see not Gods face in visions of
peace; though they live; though God calls them to die in the dark, yet they
should be satisfied; but how satisfied, you have also heard; not so, as to sit
down and think they have enough, and never look after the light of Gods
countenance; no, this is impossible; it is their duty to be so far satisfied,
as not to murmr, not to repine; but not to be so satisfied, as not to cry,
and pray unto God for further discoveries of himself unto their souls. But it
is more than time I should shut up this discourse.

Use 5. Lastly, This Doctrine may be applied by way of Exhortation, and it
looks upon all persons.

1. Upon unrighteous creatures. Such as are in a state of sin, without the
imputed righteousness of Christ, without any care of themselves, as to a
righteous conversation. That they would return from the vanity of their courses
unto God, and labor for a state of Righteousness. There are many Arguments in
Scripture to enforce this. The unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God, 1 Cor. 6. 9. The righteous Lord loves righteousness, Psalm. 11. But I
shall only insist upon what I find in the text. You have heard what I mean by
righteousness, and may easily apply what I have already said, to inform you
what it is to be in a state of righteousness, viz.

1. To be clothed with the righteousness of him who is the Lord our
Righteousness.

2. To lead a conversation holy in every thing, and conformable to the mind and
will of God. Watching against sin, and all temptations to sin, and watching to
all duty; both those of an holy communion with God, and those of an holy
conversation before God. Two great Arguments to enforce this Exhortation may be
drawn from my discourse.

1. This is the only way to behold the Lords face. No way to behold Gods face
in this life, but in righteousness. No hopes hereafter to behold his face in
glory, but in righteousness. Men may please themselves with dreams, and flatter
themselves with vain hopes; but no man in this life sees any thing of God; no
man enjoys any thing of God but the righteous man. The Lord hears not
sinners; the Lord accepts not the unrighteous person; nor can any (without
righteousness) ever hope to behold the face of the Lord in glory. Those who are
not clothed with the righteousness of Christ shall indeed behold the Lords face
in the day of Judgment, but it shall be his angry face; and it shall be
against their will that they behold the Lords face then; for they shall hide
themselves in mountains, and rocks, and dens, and shall cry to the mountains,
and to the rocks to fall on them, and to hide them from him who sits on the
Throne. They indeed shall be filled, but it shall be with their own ways, (for
the recompense of their hands shall be given them) and with the Lords wrath,
and vengeance on them for their sins; for this they shall have at the Lords
hand; they shall lie down in sorrow. Those alone, who while they lived, beheld
the face of God in righteousness, shall enjoy any thing of God here, or in the
life which is to come. They only shall hear that blessed sentence, Come you
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. This is my first
Argument.

2. It is no small thing that righteous persons have enough in this life, even
in their darkest hours, to give them satisfaction. A sinner has not enough
when he is at the fullest, to give him a satisfaction; his eye (even then) will
not be satisfied with seeing; nor his ear with hearing; nor his hand with
griping; he will never have enough: yet in his life he takes his portion, Son,
remember (says Abraham in that Parable, Luke 16. 24.) that in thy life time
thou had thy good things. But now see the state of a child of God: take him
when he is lowest, he has what is reasonably enough to give him satisfaction:
it may be he has not at all times his overflowings of joy, his spiritual
superfluities (as I may call them) but he has the perpetual feast of a good
conscience. Are not these two things enough to persuade some soul into a study,
and l^bour after righteousness? is it nothing to have communion with God, to
behold his face? it is the happiness of the blessed Angels to be ever beholding
the face of God; and certainly man is not capable of a greater privilege than
this is. It is the happiness of Heaven to behold him as he is, to see him face
to face; and is this no engagement to lay upon you to seek righteousness; to
tell you, that if you get into a state of righteousness, you shall be some of
them who shall see the face of God another day in glory, who shall be heirs of
glory, and joynt-heirs with the Lord Jesus Christ: Are your lusts more worth
than Heaven? and your carnal pleasures more valuable, than the pleasures of
beholding God, and being satisfied with his likeness?

2 Branch. Lastly, What you have heard may be of use to persuade you that fear
the Lord, to your duties under the ecclipses of divine love. It is the great
business of a Christian to study, and know, and practice what is his duty in
every estate. You have heard that it is the lot of Gods people, sometimes to
walk in the dark, and see no light; what their duty is under such a
dispensation, I have at large showed you; I beseech you that you would be
conscientious in the performance of it.

1. Do not murmr or repine against God; he does you no wrong.

2. Do not you leave beholding God, though it pleases not God to look upon you
with such a kind aspect, as (possibly) you desire. Do not give over your
waiting upon him in prayer, and in all his Ordinances. But on the contrary.

1. Appear often before him in the righteousness of Christ, and plead that with
him.

2. Walk close with God, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord.

3. Keep your watch; take heed of spiritual sleep, giving way to temptation, or
to your own corruptions.

4. Believe for that which you do not see; hope for him whom you cannot yet
behold; and with patience wait for the Lord: Never yet was a waiting soul
ashamed, nor a believing soul confounded: never yet did an holy soul perish. Do
this, and satisfy your self with holy David, That when you awake in the
Resurrection of the Just, you shall be abundantly satisfied with the Lords
likeness; and

Comfort your selves with these words.

A Narrative of the holy Life and Death of the Lady Katharine Courten.
Some useful Observations upon the latter part of the Life, and the Righteous
Death of the Right Honorable, the Lady Katharine Courten, one of the younger
Daughters of the Right Honorable, John, late Earl of Bridgewater, and late
wife of Will. Courten Esquire;.
I Shall not undertake the pourtraiture of this excellent Lady from head to
foot; partly because the circumstances of her birth, breeding and education,
were much the same with her elder Sisters, whose Copy I have given more fully,
so as I should but repeat the same things again; partly because indeed, till
the latter two years of her life, she was not at all known to me; and partly
because that part of her life was it alone, wherein she made not her self known
to the world.

It was about the first day of April, anno 1650. that her Lap (having received
an invitation from her noble Sister (whom we have formerly in this treatise
discoursed of) came to spend the retired part of her life with her at
Chaplifield-house in Norwich. Her time of health with us was about three
quarters of a year; the other was her dying time.

I will suppose that none who knew her derived from Adam, will think she was
not subject to like passions and infirmities with others of the same blood: but
as these were not such, but were consistent enough with eminent degrees of
grace; so neither were they her pleasure, but her burden. And the Apostle
tells us, that we have an High Heb. 4. 16.
Priest, who can have compassion upon our infirmities, being touched with a
feeling of them; having been in all points tempted like as we are, only without
sin.

I shall only copy out this excellent servant of God, so far, as the abundant
grace of God appeared in her, for our consolation, and our imitation of her
example.

Six things I observed in her, in the days of her health, speaking much of the
grace of God bestowed on her.

1. The first was her cheerful, quiet, thankful submission to Divine
Providence. I have not known (hardly read of any, Job alone excepted) whom the
Lord was pleased to blow upon with a series of sharper providence, than he did
upon this eminent Lady; he had even made her a mark for all his arrows: I have
often thought her afflicted condition much parallel to that of Job; he had
great substance, dear relations, an healthful body, and in a moment lost the
comfort of them all.

This noble Lady was removed from the great plenty of her Fathers house, by
marriage, to William Courten, Son and her of Sir William Courten, with whom she
enjoyed a plenteous estate, inferior to few subjects of England; Silver was
with her as dust, and as the stones of the field. He gave her an Husband, who
was to her the man of her bosom, the delight of her eyes, and as the breath of
her nostrils, he blessed them both with a numerous off spring: Thus he had made
her mountain to stand strong; and in this height of her prosperity, she began
to say, I shall never be moved. But it was not long before the Lord hid the
face of his providence from her, and she was troubled. First he strips off her
branches, taking away one child after another, until only one Son, and one
Daughter were left unto her. Then he causes an East Wind to blow upon her
estate, scattering, and breaking the ships that went for treasures to the
Indies, every year bringing some sad tidings or other of this nature, until the
Lord had stripped her naked; and her dearest Husband was not only ruined as to
his whole estate, but involved in an irrecoverable debt; and this noble Lady,
who lately equalized her greatest friends, in an affluence of the good things
of this life, became into a condition of dependence upon them, and through the
violence of men, is separated from her dearest relation, who was now
constrained in a remote Land to seek himself a City of Refuge, and to secure
her self from the snare of an oath (which she judged unnatural) it was, that
she retired to her noble Sister at Norwich; yet in all this she charged not God
foolishly: The Lord had given, and the Lord had taken, and she blessed the Name
of the Lord; with a meek and quiet spirit humbly kissing the Rod of God that
was upon her, and holding her peace, because it was the Lords doing, who she
freely acknowledged might do with her and hers, what he pleased; and she could
not say unto him, what do thou? Yea not only so, but taken up with the
admiration of the goodness of God to her, seen in the readiness of her noble
friends to show kindness to her and her remaining children in their afflicted
state; and much more affected with this, than with any trouble for Gods severer
dispensations to her. I have often heard her say, That she now saw more of the
goodness of God in one ten pounds which a friend sent her, and could better
acknowledge it, than she did before in those many thousands which were her own.
Nay, when after all this, it pleased the Lord to return upon her, and to lay
his hand upon her skin and flesh, visiting her with a tormenting, incurable
disease; yet she laid her hand upon her mouth; and not only acknowledged the
Lords justice, but also admired his mercy; and if at any time it pleased God to
give her any respiration from her tormenting pains, how straightened was her
tongue in the expressing the thankfulness of her heart? how did praise wait in
her thankful soul for God? Sometimes indeed I saw her troubled at Gods more
external dispensations to her; and that to a degree beyond what could be called
a just sense of them; but upon discourse with her, I constantly found the
cause. Either a bitter reflection upon the influence, which the sad providence
of God, blasting her dear Husbands estate, had upon many other persons and
families which she could never think on without tears, and which she would
often profess more troubled her, than her own, her dearest husbands and
childrens concerns: Or else some fears heightened in her by the advantage her
subtle adversary took of her afflicted state, lest the Rod of God should be an
indication of his wrath; the dread of which infinitely more troubled her, than
her low condition, as to the comforts of this life, upon which the Lord had
taught her to set a very cheap valuation. Verily it has often startled me, to
suppose my soul in her souls stead, and to think what I should have been, under
such dispensations, as it pleased God to measure out to her, which she embraced
with wondrous degrees of meekness and cheerfulness.

2. A second thing eminently conspicuous in this Excellent Lady, was, her
exceeding tenderness of conscience, and watchful jealousy over her own heart.
It would have made a good Christian to have suspected himself to have seen her
scrupulosity of every action, how wary she was in setting every foot, how
afraid of the least sin against God; she often discovered unto me (living with
her under the same roof) the state of her soul, what she found, what she
wanted, what she resolved upon, what grievances, and what comforts at any time
she had; but scarce ever did it without adjuring me to be saithful unto her, in
telling her what I judged of her condition in reference to eternity: indeed the
hearing her strictly charging me not to flatter her, but to deal faithfully
with her, has often made me tremble, lest through temptation or weakness, I
should fall short of my duty to her. Indeed, she was over-jealous, and through
fear of sin, would sometime scruple what was her duty, yea her greatest duty:
How often did I hear from her these words?

Oh Sir, Satan is very busy, he would have me let go my hold on my dear
Savior; but I am resolved to keep it until I die; Sir, may I not? I beseech
you tell me if you think I may not.

3. A third thing was, her admirable love to public Ordinances. She might
truly say with David, How amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord of Hosts? This
very thing was her great motive to choose her dear Sisters family for the place
of her recess, and rejoice in it, by reason of the private Chapel, where the
Ordinances of God were ordinarily dispensed, and she could attend them without
any public notice taken of her (as best suited her present condition) she was
never either absent from, or tardy at a Sermon, when by reason of the
prevailing of her bodily distempers, she could not go down the stairs, she
chose rather to be carried down, than to miss the Ordinance, till her
Physicians advice restrained her: Nor was her carriage at Religious exercises
less exemplary; her outward posture discovered with what reverence and
trembling she heard the holy Word of God; she received the Word of God as the
Word of God.

4. Her secret communion with God was as remarkable. Her way was not to set a
trumpet to her mouth, when she went to her devotions; but whatever company was
in the house, she was exceeding certain to her hours of secret prayer; and in
her discourse continually commended it, as that by which a Christian comes best
to understand his own heart; and by her countenance and discourse, when she
came from her closet, it was easy for us who conversed with her, to judge what
she had been doing: she was much in prayer, much in tears, much in reading the
holy Scriptures, in reading over good books, and notes of Sermons, which her
self had taken; and (as we could judge by her discourse) much in the
application of what she read to her own soul, and examining her heart by them.
Thus you have her copy toward God, though the lineaments of her perfections in
this are imperfectly drawn, and much is left to be understood. I omit any
discourse of her intellectual and moral virtues; she was a Lady of great
knowledge, prudence, humility, modesty, gravity and sobriety of behavior,
temperance, courtesy, nobleness of spirit, etc. but my design is to show you
how far she was an excellent Christian.

5. A fifth thing remarkable in her, was, her well ordered tender love to her
dearest relations. None could by the dejection of her countenance have known
that the providence of God had blown cross upon her, had not some sad thoughts
for the exiled state of her dear Husband, sometimes darkened her joy, and
disturbed her thoughts; nor was her love seen only in fond expressions, and a
fondness of behavior, in which the love of the most evaporates. Her husband
and childrens person were exceeding dear to her; but their souls were more
exceeding dear: She was acquainted with no Christian, whom she did not
importune for prayers for her dear husband and children. I remember it was her
great request to me in a great sickness which she had about a year before she
died, when we thought she had received the sentence of death, That I would not
in any prayers forget her husband and children when she should cease to be; for
her husband, that God would be with him, and keep him from the temptations and
pollutions of that Popish Country into which the Providence of God had driven
him: And for her children, that Jesus Christ might be formed in them. It was
the great ambition of this Elect Lady, that her children might be found walking
in the Truth; this was the portion she desired for them; this the treasure,
even a treasure in Heaven, where moth could not corrupt, nor thief break
through nor steal. How far it pleased God to hear her, her worthy and only Son
(yet surviving) being at that time in his childhood) is a living testimony,
who, as by his religious and virtuous disposition, he demonstrates that the
prayers of his Mother were not ineffectual for him, nor the Law of his Mother
forgotten by him: So having since the death both of his Mother and Father
visited Italy (where his Father died) is able to satisfy the world, that his
Father died in the communion of the Protestant Church (notwithstanding the
impudent assertions of some Popelings amongst us) being so kept by the power of
God; that although he daily conversed with persons of that Religion, yet they
were able to prevail nothing with him; but that he died in a perfect
abomination of the superstitious vanities of that fond Religion, and left with
his friend there, a perfect testimony of it to be communicated to his Son (as
it was accordingly) and if there were no other, yet their denial of him a room
amongst them for a burial-place, and enforcing his friends to bury him in the
place of their Heretics (of which his surviving Son can testify) is a
testimony beyond the contradiction of any, unless such whose tongues are less
considerable, because they resolve to keep them under no government of Truth.

6. A sixth thing remarkable in this Excellent Lady, was, her faithfulness to
her friend: Not an ordinary faithfulness seen in keeping counsels, and
concealing seerets, in ordinary help and assistance, but a spiritual
faithfulness, discerned in a prudent admonishing and reproving her friends, not
suffering sin upon them; a piece of faithfulness exceeding rare in this
flattering age: nor in this would she spare her dearest relations, were her
affection to them never so great, her obligations never so many, she truly
judged that her affections were thus best shown, her obligations thus best
discharged, by saving their souls from death; remembering that of Solomon; As an
ear-ring of gold, and as an ornament of fine gold; so is a wise reproof upon an
obedient ear.

Whosoever looked wistly upon her in the days of her liberty, saw these chains
about her neck, these jewels of grace adorning her conversation, her carriage
was grave and sober, yet innocently facete and cheerful. The nobleness of her
spirit discovered it self in a sweet affability and courtesy of behavior
toward all, an admission of persons far beneath her quality, to a great
freedom of converse with her, especially if they were such as feared God, and
whom she discerned to have any experience in his ways. As God had endued her
with a rare degree of knowledge, a piercing wit, and a notable judgment, and
other rare parts and indowments; so it was her constant business to make an
improvement of them for his glory. Her delight was in the Book of God, in that
she read, in that she meditated night and day. The hours she spent out of her
closet, not in Public Ordinances (which were not many) were usually spent by
her in discourses tending to edification; nor was she ever more in her element,
than when by debate with others she was sifting out some truth, in order to the
further information of her judgment, or guidance of her practice: she was
impatient of hearing what she conceived was contrary to truth, or which gave
way to the least sin against God; which evidently showed, that a zeal for God
had eaten her up; though possibly sometimes her passion betrayed her to some
failing, through some misapprehensions from which she could not be concluded
free, being a Daughter of Adam, subject to like infirmities with others.

Thus, for some few months, she went out, and came in with us, and we began to
bless our selves in the providence of God, who had sent amongst us so eminent
an example of holiness to go before us, and to be an helper to us in the ways
of God. But our wise God would let us know that we rejoiced in a gourd that
might go down in a night.

To make her a perfect pattern of his free grace; he who in his wisdom had
already taken away the most of her children, bereaved her of the comfort of her
dearest yokefellow, and stripped her naked of her worldly affluences, returns
again, and visits her person with his severe afflicting hand.

The nature of her distemper was such as it at first confined her to her
chamber, and at once deprived her both of her health, and what she valued far
more, her ordinary liberty of enjoying God in his Public Ordinances: yet for
several months, she was not a close prisoner, but had the liberty of her
chamber, an ability to discourse with her friends, and enjoyed much freedom in
family-communion with God, and her more secret communion with him.

But this was not enough to satisfy her thirsty soul; she would now be often
crying out, How amiable are thy Tabernacles O God? my soul longs, yea even
faints for the Courts of God. My heart and my flesh cries out for the living
God. The Sparrow has found an house, and the Swallow a nest; where she might
lay her young, even thine Altars O Lord of Hosts my King, my God.

During the time of this confinement to her chamber, she had little (as before)
to divert her thoughts from a too much poring upon Gods sad dispensations to
her; her affliction also was now doubled through want of Public Ordinances;
her bodily distemperature daily increased upon her: she very s^ldom heard from
her Husband; and what she heard, was but sad tidings, adding still affliction
to affliction, one sorrow to another. This indeed was a fit time for our grand
adversary, to play his game; and he who is watchful enough upon all
opportunities to ruin our souls, could not miss so fair a one as was here
offered. While she was therefore in the wilderness of solitude and affliction.
the tempter came; and even from this time to her dying day, he incessantly
followed her with successive temptations, if it had been possible to have
baffled her says and hope in God.

You read in Scripture of Satan's Depths, Devices, Methods: Many a devise he
used; into many a depth he dived: various were the methods he practiced, for
the final ruin of this rare and excellent person; but it was not possible to
destroy her Elect soul for which Christ had died.

Have you seen or read of the General of an Army, sighting a potent and a
subtle adversary, how he gains his ground by inches; now gains, and by and by
loses what he has got, being forced to give the ground he had gained; and
again to dispute for what he was once possessed of: Have you seen the adversary
enforced to retreat; but retreating to another work, and being forced from
that, retreating to a third: this you might have seen in this spiritual fight
betwixt this cminent Lady, and the great Dragon.

1 Tempt. Her first Temptation was, to doubt of Gods love, and to distrust him
for her eternal salvation, because of Gods sad dispensations to her. This was
one of Satan's weakest batteries, yet so managed and advantaged with the
increase of her trials, that for some weeks she had much ado to grapple with
her adversary here. I having the advantage of frequent discourse with her
Ladyship, and perceiving the stone upon which she stumbled, endeavored her
assistance, partly remembering her,

1. Of what Solomon says, That none can judge of love or hate by all that is
before him: Eccles. 9. 1.
For it may fall out alike to him that is spiritually wise, and to him that is
spiritually a fool.

2. Partly by minding her of what the Apostle tells us, That God chasteneth
whom he Heb. 12. 6.
loves, and scourges every one whom he receives.

3. Partly arguing thus with her; If afflictions be tokens of divine wrath,
then health and prosperity are signs of divine love, which is evidently salfe.

4. Par^ly by remembering her of the many examples of Gods children in
Scripture, to whom God had wrung out bitter waters in a full cup; who yet at
that time when they were so afflicted, were undoubtedly beloved of God, and
exceeding precious in his eyes. Such were Joseph, David, Job, Daniel, and many
others recorded in Scripture. With these, and such like Arguments I had
satisfied her sanctified reason and judgment, and thought I should have heard
no more of this temptation. But soon after it was enforced. Two things she had
to say:

1. The greatness of her affliction spoke more than a chastisement with a rod;
she was scourged with Scorpions.

2. The Lords multiplying afflictions, and repeating sad Providence to her,
seemed to argue that he had a quarrel against her: Why else should he return
upon her body, when he had served an execution upon all she had besides. To
this I replied;

1. That the afflictions of Gods people are not called cha^^isements, because
they are l^ght or little; but because they come from the hand of a gracious
Father, not as legal demands of satisfaction to divine Justice offended,
because they flow from a principle of love, not of wrath, and are designed to a
gracious end.

2. That for the multitude of them: Job had as many, yet was a person
singularly beloved of God; and one of whom God gave testimony, that there was
not one like him in all the East.

3. That as the afflictions of Job were of diverse hands, and exceeding heavy;
so the succession of them was much like to hers. God first took away his
children, then his estate; and last of all, let loose Satan upon his person,
and gave him a liberty to tempt him.

With these, and such like considerations, I endeavored to arm her against
this fiery dart; at last it pleased him, who was therefore tempted, that he
might be able to succor those that were tempted; by his mighty power to lift
her over this stone of stumbling, and she became fully satisfied, that she
could neither from the greatness, nor multitude of her trials, conclude any
thing against the love of God to her.

2. Tempt. If during her afflictions she did not also want the inward
consolations of the holy Spirit; but alas! (says she) I have no inward
assurance of Gods love; no sensible consolations, etc.

Perceiving that her adversary had betaken himself to a new battery, I
endeavored to direct her in the use of the Armor of God, for the rep^lling of
his darts thrown from hence, by offering to her consideration,

1. That even Gods dearest children have often wanted these influences of the
Spirit: What else made David cry out, When will thou comfort me? and vestor^
unto me the joy of thy salvation. What else made the Spouse Cant. 3 1. at such
a loss for him whom her soul loved? What else caused those sad complaints of
the Psalmist? Psalm. 77.

To this she replied, That it was true; but surely if she indeed had any
interest in God, he would not hide himself from one so pressed with affl^ctions
as she was. God indeed might thus try his children, in health and at liberty;
but would a tender Father so hide himself from so distressed and a dying child.
This was hard to imagine of God who is Love. I replied to this purpose, That
sensible consolations were not the necessaries of salvation. 2. That the love
of God to his children, is far more seen in giving the soul necessaries, than
accommodating it with superfluities. 3. That God is no where in Scripture tied
by his promise to Saints, for the comforts of assurance to be given them in at
this or that hour. 4. That it is a very great mistake in Christians, to judge
they want the manifestations of the Spirit, because they want these consolatory
reflections; for the Spirit manifests it self in the soul, as well by the
influences of strengthening and quickening, as comforting grace, and the
witnessings of it. That David was become like a bottle in the smoke, that his
eyes failed for Gods Word, saying, When will thou comfort me? Psalm. 119. 82,
83. yet he was at that time Gods child; yea, the man according to his heart.
That Job also (as might be gathered from several passages in his Book) often
wanted these sensible manifestations; at last I commended a Sermon upon that
subject to her; after the reading of which, her Spirit was more composed, and
she satisfied, that if she could but find the strengthening and quickening
influences of divine grace, she had no reason for want of sensible consolations
to conclude against her self.

3 Tempt. Satan perceiving this fiery dart well nigh quenched, betakes him
again to his quiver for another arrow: his next device was to persuade her that
she wanted also the strengthening grace of God; soon after I heard her speaking
to this sense;

It Is true (Sir) if I could but find the grace of God strengthening me unto
duty, against sin, I think I ought not to cast away my hope, though I do want
assurance; that I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved mine; but alas I want this!
Sir, I am now at such a pass, I cannot pray, etc. God has laid his hand upon
my mouth, and I cannot open it, so much as to say unto him, Abba Father.
Observing the subtilty of this crafty adversary, to persuade her from some
partial weaknesses, and those also much occasioned from bodily distempers, that
she wholly wanted the workings of the Spirit of Grace; I accordingly applied my
self to her.

She tells me, it was true, she had learned from the Apostle, Romans 8. 11. That
if she had the Spirit of Christ, she was his; which way soever the Spirit (as
the author of special and distinguishing grace) pleased to work in her; and she
did believe, That if the Spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead, dwelt
in Romans 8. 11. 15. Gal. 4. 6. Romans 8. 26.
her; he that raised up Christ from the dead, should also one day quicken her
mortal body, by his Spirit dwelling in her. But, Sir, said she. this spirit is
a spirit of supplication, a spirit of adoption, teaching to cry Abba Father; a
spirit helping our infirmities in prayer. To which I replied,

1. That this was no more than the lot of Gods children: Asaph (or whoever was
the author of that 77 Psalm) complained that he was so troubled he could not
speak. Psalm. 77. 4.


2. That the Lord had silenced her Ladyships tongue, by his own hand laid upon
it, in a continual course of afflictions. Now, though God indeed requires of us
the homage of our lips; Let me hear thy voice (says Christ to his Spouse,
Cant. 2. 14.) for it is comely. And Take unto you words, and say, (says the
Prophet) yet he does not expect this homage, where, by his providence, he
discharges our tongues of it.

3. That there is a praying without the voice, which also the Lord hears.
Groaning Psa. 102. 5. Psalm. 6. 8.
has a voice, Psalm. 102. 5. and weeping a voice, Psalm. 6. 8. Hezekiah
chattered like a Crane, yet the Lord heard him. In short, I besought her
Ladyship to consider, that the business of prayer was in Scripture expressed by
wrestling with God, by lifting up the eyes, hands, heart unto him; by pouring
out of the soul before him; all which might be without the use of words. Thus
Hannah prayed, and was 1 Samuel 1.
answered; yet spoke not a word: And I doubted not but her Ladyship thus could
and did pray.

4. Finally, I desired her Ladyship to observe that in Gal. 4. 6. God is said
to send his Gal. 4. 6.
Spirit into our hearts, teaching us to cry Abba Father. And Romans 8. 26. that
the Spirit helps our infirmities with strong cries and groans, Romans 8. 26.
which could not be uttered. Now groans (at least) are the language of the
hearts. There is indeed another assistance of the holy Spirit, teaching us what
to pray for; but this flows not from the Spirit, in a way of special grace;
but as it is the author of spiritual gifts, which those might have who had no
true interest in God, nor had received the Spirit of Christ, as a spirit of
Sanctification. With these, and such like considerations, I endeavored to
satisfy her Ladyship, who yet could hardly be satisfied, because she could not
pay so full and perfect an homage to God, as formerly she had done; but her
unweariable adversary again renews his assault. The next news which I heard
was this:

4 Tempt. Sir, I have seriously thought upon what you told me, and am
convinced, that though I spoke never a word, yet if I could keep my heart
lifted up to God, if I could wrestle with him with my Spirit, this were
acceptable prayer; but (whatever you may think,) I cannot do this: When at any
time I compose my self to prayer, I am tortured with pain, that I cannot do it;
at other times through drewsiness I fall asleep, etc.

By this time her Ladyships tormenting distemperatures prevailed upon her to a
great degree, so as night and day she had little rest, beyond the influence of
Anodines stupifying her sense. As soon as she had taken these, she used to
compose her self to secret prayer, by and by the operation of the medicine
overtook her, and enforced sleep: when the operation of the Anodine ceased, her
pains returned, and she awoke, and then, whenever she composed her self to it,
her pains disturbed her; only this she added to her complaint (to find out any
cause of which for a while posed me.)

That although at first when she composed her self to look up to God, she found
not much pain; yet when she was entered once into her duty, she was sure to be
racked with the increase of her pain. I know that the Devil is but a small
friend to our communion with God, and would in what he could hinder it: I also
knew he had a natural power (God permitting the exercise of it) by which he
could disturb bodily humors, and divert them to an affected part; but not
willing to impute it to a praeternatural cause (unless quite at loss) upon
further deliberation, I conceived there might be this natural cause of it.

This good Lady desired when she served the Lord, to serve him with her spirit;
and when she addressed her self to God, summoned up all her spirits to do it
with the more intention of mind, and fervor of spirit: Now this I conceived
might be a natural cause of the increase of her pain at such a time, in regard
that her spirits, which were wont to serve her body in the supportation of her
under her affliction, were at this time drawn up to another employment; and the
several parts of her body at present left destitute, it might give a natural
advantage to her infirmity; but this was but my particular fancy. I told her,

1. That short ejaculations were most suitable to her present condition, and
were heard of God, as well as longer prayers; for we are not heard for our much
speaking.

2. I minded her of a speech of Mr. Rutherfords; If I were in health, I would
desire but to cast one long look toward Heaven.

3. I told her, it was unreasonable for her Ladyship to conclude her self to
want the strengthening influences of the holy Spirit, because as to this or
that act of duty, possibly she might not discern such an influence of it. It
was likely that if her Ladyship examined as to many other duties she might find
it, and that with an evidence not to be denied.

4. I further told her, the influence of the spirit was most eminently seen in
its workings, in strengthening the soul to those exercises of grace, which are
most proper for our day; the present condition and dispensation I meant, under
which we are; and that Faith and Patience were those graces, the exercise
whereof God more peculiarly requires of his children in a day of affliction;
and if her Ladyship found the Spirit of God infusing, or exerting these habits,
she need not doubt of the strengthening influences of the Spirit: With these
things her Lad^ship for a while seemed satisfied, but her distempers still
increased; and during the violence of them, put her into a great disorder:
Satan still followed his game, and soon after she tells me;

5 Tempt. Ah (Sir!) you told me that Faith and Patience are those graces, the
exercise of which is most proper to my condition; and if I found the holy
Spirit infusing, or strengthening me to the exercise of these habits, I might
be assured that I was not without the strengthening influences of the Spirit;
though I did not find such an assistance as I desired to every particular duty.
But Sir, you see, I am very impatient, restless in my self, froward with every
body about me; I cannot be silent under the hand of God, nor keep my self from
roaring, etc. And for Faith (S^r) you know I have told you I have no assurance,
sometimes ind^ed I have had what I judged a flash of the light of Gods
countenance: Once I remember, after you had been praying with me, and in your
prayer mentioned and pleaded many promises: it pleased God (as I thought) to
seal some of them to my soul, and at some other times, that first word which
God was pleased to seal unto my soul, 1 Col. 27. Christ in you the hope of
Glory, has been returned to my soul, and comforted me, but I cannot call this
assurance; doubting quickly returned, and now Satan would have me let go also
my hold on Christ, but I am resolved not to let it go until I die; shall I not
so resolve? I beseech you Sir, tell me, should I not so resolve?

To this I replied;

1. That I rejoiced to hear her Ladyship acknowledging, that God had sometimes
sealed promised unto her soul; that those impressions did not abide constant,
was not to be wondered at, it being rarely the lot of any child of God to walk
in the constant light of his countenance: but I humbly conceived her Ladyship
had great ground to call these impressions of the Spirit of God upon a
threefold account.

1. They were made upon her soul after earnest prayer.

2. They came to one in a dark, sad and afflicted condition, and to an awakened
conscience, and to one who had for some time desired to walk close with God;
and this after long and patient waiting for God.

3. The return of that word in which the Lord had made her soul first to hope,
was a great evidence to me, that the Author of the first, was also the Author
of the second impression.

2. I rejoiced more to her Ladyships grant, that her Faith of adherence was
strengthened, and so strengthened, as she was resolved not to let it go until
she died: In which resolution I humbly besought her Ladyship to persist; I
entreated her Ladyship to consider, that there are not two better marks of a
strong Faith, than

1. The resistance, and repelling of temptations to doubt.

2. The casting of our souls upon God, and adhering to the promise, though we
want encouragement of sense: with Abraham, to believe in hope above hope: This
indeed is a strong faith, and gives much glory to God. And indeed I thought I
never was a witness to the actings of a stronger faith, than that of this noble
person: in the midst of her saddest torments, of her darkest hours, when she
was even distracted through pain and terrors, she would cry out to all our
amazement; It is my strong hold, I will not let it go; no, I will not let it
go; I am resolved I will not let it go; let Satan suggest what he will, it is
my strong hold, I have committed my self unto Christ, etc. Thus she would cry
out, bitterly weeping while she spoke in great Agonies of her spirit.

3. As to Patience, I desired her Ladyship to consider, that the grace of
patience was not a Roman fortitude, carrying one out under an affliction,
without any expression of passion; this an Heathen might do without any
assistance of distinguishing grace: and some distempe^atures were such, as the
best Christians could not so bear them: David roared; Job complained; Christ
himself cried out, My God, My God. Patience is a sacred influence of grace, by
which we are enabled in the hour of affliction, to hope in God whom we see not,
and meekly to submit to him under his severer dispensations, without any
murmuring, repining, or any frowardness of behavior. I told her, that although
her Ladyship did sometimes roar out, through extremity of pain, and were
restless through torments; yet the grace of patience was evidently made
manifest in her soul, in her humble owning the Justice of God; kissing his rod;
never repining, nor murmuring at his dispensations; only desiring strength to
bear what he would please to lay upon her, and her willingness to die or live,
as he should please to order (for it was now patience in her to be content to
live) finally in her willingness (in obedience to Gods command and ordinances)
(though she earnestly desired death) yet to use all means (though she had no
hope of cure) to prolong a miserable life so long as God pleased.

4. Finally, I told her, that although possibly sometimes in the height of her
distempers, some speeches might sound some impatience and unbelief; when the
extremity of her pain had almost totally deprived her of the use of her reason;
yet God would not impute this to her; for he weighs our performances with our
temptations. So the Apostle says, You have heard of the patience of Job: he
that looks in the story will find much in Job, which we should call impatience;
he cursed the day of his birth, chap. 3. And we find in his story, many other
very passionate and distempered speeches; yet the Apostle says not, you have
heard of the passion and frowardness; but you have heard of the patience of
Job. Though Job sometimes were very impatient; yet the Lord considering Jobs
patience, with his temptations, records him as a patient man, and so patient,
as to be propounded to his Saints in following ages, as an example of patience:
he says not, you have heard of the passion or frowardness; but you have heard
of the patience of Job. In short, I told her Ladyship, that we who were
spectators, could not but judge her (in the free use of her reason) full both
of faith and patience: for her few distempered hours, as they were not in
number equal to the rest; so neither would her tender Father judge her for them.

By these, and other Arguments, through Gods assistance, she seemed at last
satisfied, that although she yet wanted the consolations of the Spirit; yet she
was not without the strengthening influences of it.

But yet her adversary would not leave her; his next temptation was from her
apprechended want of Gods quickening grace; to which purpose she replies again:

6. Tempt. Sir, I remember you told me, that though I wanted the consolations
of the Spirit; yet if I found its quickening influences, I had no reason to
despond: but (Sir) I want these; my head, and my heart is dull; there is no
life left in my spirit; I lift up a lifeless soul to God in prayer; never was
any in so dull and dead a condition as I am.

To this I replied;

1. That if her Ladyship found the strengthening influences of the holy Spirit,
they would evidence a state of justification and favor with God; now those
were evident in her Ladyship; how else did her Ladyship in her dark condition,
commit her self unto God? rest upon him and patiently wait for him.

2. That as to quickening grace it was seen: 1. In exciting the soul to duty.
2. In inclining the soul in duty, so as it performs it with alacrity, delight
and vigor; and for the latter, it works in us by assisting us in the
improvement of our natural parts and powers: now this assistance might be
wanting to her Ladyship, through the indisposition of those Organs, by, and
through the means of which the Spirit perfecteth these operations: and her
Ladyship must consider, that her spirits were tired with succession of pain,
and stupefied by anodines medicines, which her learned Physician thought proper
for her for the allevation of her pain, which otherwise would soon have
destroyed her: That her dullness was no more to holy duties, than to any thing
else, and (as I conceived) wholly occasioned through these natural causes.

4. Lastly, I told her it was manifest, that God had not wholly withdrawn his
quickening grace from her, from her sense of her present distemperature, and
the quickening of her soul to the duty; though she did not find such quickening
in the duty as she desired, she might truly say, I sleep, but my heart waketh.
Her heart was awake to a sense of her infirmity; though she slept in respect of
so full an ability to perform the duty with that life and cheerfulness which
she desired, and had formerly experienced. I further told her, that Gods
dearest servants, under sad afflictions, or partial desertions, had wanted
degrees of quickening grace. How often does David cry out, Lord quicken me,
Psalm. 119. 25, 88, 154, 107. Psalm. 143, 11, etc.

It was some time before she could be convinced of this, that it was an
evidence of quickening grace, for her soul under its heaviness, to be kept
awake with the sense of her duty, and labor under the burden of its
infirmity; but at last she was as to this also in some measure satisfied.

And now her adversary was enforced in a great measure to quit all his strong
holds. Some of these temptations returned, but her judgment was established,
her faith strengthened, and she was never after kept long in bondage to any of
them, for an hour or two, or for a night; she might be in captivity to some of
them; but one might easily discern, from her adversaries shifting from one
temptation to another, that his strength was tired and he about to leave her
soul.

7 Tempt. Yet after this could one have thought, that her adversary should have
offered any suggestion to her, to have destroyed her self. But as to this
temptation (to which her spiritual adversary had a great advantage from the
inexpressible torturing pains which she felt) she was not with more advantage,
violence, and subtilty moved, than through grace strengthened, in the resisting
and repelling of it: she was not wont to parley with her adversary, not
affected to keep his counsels: once and again she was thus solicited. But as
God enabled her with indignation, to say, Get thee behind me Satan; so he g^ve
her wisdom to discover it to her dearest friends, and he quickly gave over this
temptation.

For some time before the Lord translated this servant of his, he had prepared
her for her dissolution, by creating in her strong desires to be dissolved that
she might be with Christ. She was much prone to suspect her own sincerity, and
would tell me.

That she sometimes feared lest she should desire death only to be freed from
her pain; but she hoped she did not desire it upon that account. For some weeks
before she died, she had many fainting and Convulsion fits; in every one almost
of which, we expected her change: when she recovered out of any of them, she
would be almost angry at her souls recovery; and usally her first word was,
Must I yet live longer? I remember above six months before her death, I being
in Essex, wrote a censolatory Letter to her Ladyship, in which I had this
passage amongst others:

Madam! if ever we come in Heaven, possibly we have many months or years
Journey thither, through this wilderness; your Ladyship (probably) may be there
in twelve months (to that purpose) when I returned, her Ladyship thank^ me for
my Letter, and told me, it much refreshed her; but she was troubled that I
should think she had yet twelie months Journey to Heaven; she chearsully told
me, she hoped she had a shorter voyage.

When the adversary of her salvation perceived he could not baffle her hope,
nor make the hand of her faith to shake; but still she was resolved to keep her
hold on Christ, and that her soul was willing, yea desirous to be dissolved and
to be with Christ.

8 Tempt. He once more attempts to spoil her comfort, and molests her with
extreme fears of a bitter death; and that her says would then fail, and her
courage abate. This (I think) was his last assault discerned by us, her
Ladyship was pleased to impart her fears to me: I humbly besought her Honor,
that now she had prevailed against Satan's horsemen; she would not suffer her
self to be trampled by his footmen. I told her Ladyship,

1. That it was probable that God would give her whom he had made a combatant
with so long, and sharp an affliction at last to depart in peace.

2. That it was not probable, that her dying pangs would be more sharp and
violent, than what she had already endured, and was yet enduring.

3. That she had no reason to distrust that God who had strengthened her in so
many hours and nights, and days of torturing pain, for his assistance in the
last hour, which if it had more of weight and bitterness, yet would have less
in length.

4. That he in whom she had trusted, the Lord Jesus Christ had taken away the
bitterness of death, and paid a price for his Saints perseverance in it; so
that never any held out to the end, who at last was left, and failed in it.

5. I defired her Ladyship to digest that text, Heb. 2. 14, 15. For as much as
the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also took part with them of
the same, that through death be might destroy him that had the power of death,
even the Devil, and deliver them who through fear of death were all their
life-me subject to bondage.

Soon after this her distemperature yet heightened, her pains grew exceeding
great, and so continued for some days, till about 4 days before her death,
which yet it pleased God to enable her to endure with an admirable patience,
still she kept her hold fast in God, professing to me even in her highest fits
of distemper, that the Lord was her hope; and she had an hold on him, and would
not let it go, let God do what he pleased with her, and Satan suggest what he
could unto her.

Some sour days before her death, it pleased God that her pains were in some
degrees abated; and now by this experience of Gods supportation of her in her
last sad r^turn of pain, she grew confident that she should be able to stand in
the hour of death.

The day before she died, was to her a day of great reviving; she had not (of
many weeks before) been so cheerful and free from pain.

At noon coming in (as I was wont) to pray with her, I found her even ravished
with the apprehensions of Gods goodness to her, giving her some relaxation from
pain: and I hope I shall not forget how earnest she was in pressing me to
praise the Lord with her, and for her.

After prayer she continued very cheerful; yet on the sudden she laid hold on
my hand, and drew me to her, so as I perceived she would whisper something in
my car. I a little admired at her sudden joy, and what she had to say,
inclining my head to her: when she perceived her noble Sister had turned her
back, and was with the rest of the company out of hearing, she tells me, I
think I may tell it you, you will not speak of it, I believe I am very near my
Fathers house.

I resolved to keep her counsel, till I saw the issue, and the rather because
she seemed to us further from death, than at any time for some weeks before: in
this temper she continued the remaining part of that day: it was the day when I
was to preach my weekly Lecture; so that I returned not to her until the
evening; when I found her as before, very cheerful, and able to discourse with
me about a private business, as to which on the behalf of her friend, she had
improved her interest in a worthy Gentleman; she had that night received a
Latter from him, letting her know it was dispatched, and took her leave of me,
desiring me to draw up a Letter of thanks to him, which she would (as she told
me) the next day subscribe, that it might be sent by the next Post.

But it so pleased God, that by an inexpected turn of Providence, before
morning her spirits failed her, and she in a great measure lost her speech, and
after spoke very few words, only made signs to us to pray for her: Once she
said, I fear, and by and by, I hope, I hope; and so quietly, without suffering
any pain (so sar as we could discern) she yielded up her soul to God upon the
25th. day of March, 1652. about nine of the clock.

Thus she fought the good fight, and kept the faith, and has now put on the
Crown of Glory, being entered into the actual possession, and beatifical vision,
of those things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter into
the heart of man to conceive; even the things which God has prepared for them
that love him.

She was buried at Blicklin, in the County of Norfolk, March 27. 1652.

With this Epitaph upon her gravestone.

Here lies one nobly born, once blessed
With all the Riches of the East;
Then stripped of all, and in the place;
Received of God riches of grace:
These made her covetous to see,
The Mine whence came such Treasury:
Her soul for haste there to appear
Clogged with the body, dropped it here
Engaging to it, in the morn
Of the Resurrection to return,
And reassume its Union.
Reader! weigh this, and then pass on.
A Postscript.
THese Notes, with this memorial of this excellent Lady, were within some few
months after her death drawn up, and several Copies transcribed, and presented
to her noble relations; the same for substance (Reader) as thou have them here,
though they may be a little altered as to some words or phrases. Nor had I any
thoughts of making them public till Anno 1664. God taking away her noble
Sister (whom I had the honor eighteen years to wait upon) I thought it my duty
to raise her up a monument according to my ability (though her honorable name
needed no such little advantage as this.) Having taken up this resolution, I
resolved also to join these notes with them, and accordingly sent them to a
Stationer, in whose hands they were Anno 1665. when the Plague hindered the
printing of them; and Anno 1666. till the Dreadful Fire consumed them. I was
for some times after divided in my thoughts, whether to revive them or no; but
at last finding (accidentally) amongst my notes, an imperfect Copy of them; I
set to the work, and through Gods affistance, have once more brought it to an
issue; and I cannot but in it something confider the Providence of God
retarding my hand to an opportunity of doing a piece of service to the last
mentioned Lady, which I never thought her honorable name for Religion would
have stood in need of.

Within these six months last past (to justify if it were possible, the
tremendous Apostasy of another) I hear it commonly reported amongst the
Papists, that both this noble Lady and her Husband died Papists, and that her
only Son is also one.

For Mr. Courten, he was wholly unknown to me; I never saw his face; it was his
unhappiness to die in a Papish Country, which might give an advantage to such a
fiction. But his Son, William Courten, Esquire, yet living, is a sufficient
testimony against this fabulous report, who both visited the place since his
Fathers death, and received the testimony from a friend, which his dying Father
left of his perseverance in the communion of the Protestant Church, and
abhorrence of the visits and superstitious vanities with which those Votaries
use to trouble dying persons: as also had a real testimony from the unhallowed
burying place which alone the Papists would allow him. This, and much more, I
have had from his worthy Son, which I have forgot, as not thinking I should
ever have had any cause of such a repetition. But that worthy Gentleman yet
lives; and if any be unsatisfied, and will take the pains to inquire of him, he
can satisfy them both that his Father died no Papist, and that himself is none
(according to another part of their sabulous report, who are pleased in making
lies their refuge) he has seen too much of the exceeding fondness, the folly,
and superstitious vanities of that Pageantry in Religion, to be ever proselited
to it, and is I think satisfied that it is justly to be abhorred by a sober
person, were it only for the little influence it has upon the lives of those
where it is most practiced, and the dispensation it gives to all manner of
Luxury. But he is of age and abilities sufficient to speak for himself.

For this Excellent Lady; none living is a more competent witness than my self,
who had the opportunities of daily converse with her, till the moment of her
dissolution; nor can there be a better testimony, than these Papers, containing
the substance of her discourses with me to her very last gasp: They understand
little of the Popis^ Faith, that upon the reading of these discourses, will not
conclude, that her Ladyship was at a sufficient distance from it; and that
these were not discourses formed for such a design as her Vindication. There
are four or five Honorable Persons in England, her near relations, can
testify, who have had these notes fourteen years at least, if not fifteen or
sixteen by them; the same, as to the substance of them, though possibly (as I
said before) some phrases may be altered upon more mature deliberation. These
discourses do not sound like the language of one who believed the Doctrines of
Popery about remission of sins, assurance, merit, prayers to Saints and Augels,
etc.

But indeed a person is not ordinarily to be sound, upon whom that tribe could
with more disadvantage sasten such an imputation, than upon upon this Excellent
Lady. Who so wisely c^sts their eye upon those who in this noonday of the
Gospel, are in Protestant Countries, proselyted to that kind of devotion, will
find that their temptation to it has been advantaged.

1. From some carnal conceits of God, and his Worship, thinking him such a one
as themselves, to be pleased with music, and gay pompous shows of devotion; or
at least some Jewish conceits for the continuance of what the Apostle calls,
worldly Ordinances, and a carnal Sanctuary; not regarding that God is a Spirit,
and under the Gospel to be worshipped in spirit and in truth; but pleasing
themselves with what the Apostle calls the rudiments of the world, and such
Ordinances as touch not, taste not, handle not, which are things perishing with
the using after the Commandments, and Doctrines of men, which things Col. 2^
20, 21, 22, 23.
indeed have a show of wisdom, in will worship and humility, and neglecting of
the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh. Some such
temptation as this might easily help to Proselite, a Vane, a Crashaw, a
Nonnanton, etc.

2. Or else secondly, an ignorance in the things of God. Ignorance we know is
avowed the Mother of their devotion for Laics: and indeed an ignorant soul, as
to devotion, is White-Paper, upon which a Mahumetan, or a Papist may write any
thing: And of knowing persons, we rarely find any proselited, unless some rare
persons whom the Lord picks out to make examples of his vengeance, who (as the
Apostle speaks, 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12.) Having 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12.
received the truth, and not the love of the truth that they might be saved.
God gives up to strong delusions, that they should believe a lie: That they all
be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

3. Or else Thirdly, They are such persons, who are tempted to it, from their
dependancies (as servants to their Masters or Mistresses) or Relations: the
Wife to please her Husband, or an Husband to humor his Wife; or from their
hopes to gain such relations and carnal advantages, as their necessities, or
covetousness, or a^^^ition betrays them to thirst after, and pu^^hase, though
at the price of their immortal souls.

4. Or Lastly, Such, for whose loose and wanton feet, the ways of the Gospel
are too strait: They must have more sensual pleasure than a Gospel Rule will
allow them, and are no^ able to endure the rebukes of a conscience smiting them
for such vanities, and fain would have a pardon at a cheaper rate, than the
Gospel will afford it; and that with a license to sin again, and be upon the
same terms of peace again, upon the slight terms of a little money, or an
auricular confession, or a slight penance, or a short Pilgrimage, etc. Those
who wistly cast their eyes upon those few Proselites which the Papists have in
England will find, that some, or more of these things have been and are their
temptations.

Now, who so knew this eminent Lady, knew her far enough from the impressions
of such temptations. No person lived a more severe and strict conversation; nor
was more fearful of deceiving her self with false hopes; nor wary in giving her
self grounds of hope as to the remission of sins, and the favor of God. No
person living was more an enemy to a pompous, vain Pageantry in the Worship of
God; nor more affected to a simplicity, plainness, and spirituality in her
devotions: she was an exceeding knowing, judicious person in the ways of God,
and one who truly received the truth in a most ardent love of it; nor had she
any temptation from any dependancyor relation, from any carnal enjoyment, or
hope of any. Her fear for her dear Husband, lest the temptation of the place
where he was, (which was Italy) should have any influences on him as to
Religion, was a great affliction to her; her joy as much, when by Letters
received from him, she understood his constancy: she was earnest with every
Christian that came near her, to beg of God to keep him in that Country from
the Idolatries and superstitions of it. Her acquaintance and delight was not
only in and with Protestant Ministers; but with those of them, whose principles
were at greatest distance from any thing of Popery. I dare say, that in the two
last years of her life, she never saw the face of a Popish Priest. All which
things considered, I leave it to an indifferent Reader to determine, with what
disadvantage to their own honor and repuration, as well as impudence, as to
matter of justice and common honesty toward a noble person, who has now these
sixteen years been in Heaven, any persons evulge such impudent slanders; but
their boldness to rake in the ashes of a person dead, is the more evident, from
the imputation with which they are not ashamed to brand the only male-branch of
this excellent root, who (blessed be God) yet lives, and that not only rotted
in the Protestant Faith, but able to justify it against such as oppose it.

FINIS.

