Defensative Armor, Against Four of SATHAN'S MOST Fiery Darts: VIZ.
TEMPTATIONS TO Atheistical and Blasphemous Impressions and Thoughts,
Self-murder, Despair, and Presumption.

WHEREIN Is Discoursed the Nature of these Temptations, the several Tempters to
these Sins, the Arguments ordinarily used by the Tempters in the enforcing of
them; and some proper Advice is offered to those who are exercised with them.

By J. C. D. D.

Maxima pars fallitur quod non credunt has cogitationes esse tentationes
Sathanae: Illae ipsae sunt tela ista iguita nequissimarum nequitiarum
spiritualium in coelestibus. Luther.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Alsop, at the Angel and Bible over against the
Stocks-market, and Ewderd Giles Bookseller in Norwich, 1680.

TO THE Christian Reader.
Reader,
IT is my Experience (after more than thirty years service of God in the work
of the Ministry) that has brought forth these meditations to thy view, in
which time, I have been sent for to, and conversed with many, who have labored
under the three first of these horrid temptations, as to which this Discourse
offers something of Instruction and Counsel, upon some of which they have had
as sad issues as can well be imaginable; and to all (the first of them at
least) has been the most intolerable burden and affliction, that a
reasonable Soul is capable of bearing. This has put me upon frequent studies,
what to say or do for their relief. Who would not do his utmost, to lend an
helping hand to a soul, crying out, That it feels an Hell upon Earth! to help
a poor creature, whose sleep departs from him in the night, and in the day
time he can find no place to rest, but is uneasy in his or her greatest
circumstances of ease; whom he sees trembling, that he is not able to speak
and continue a sentence to him to its period. This I have seen, and mine Ears
have heard. I have known some lying under one or other of these Temptations,
months and years, and for a great part of the time under such a burden, that
they have passionately said, They would heartily forgive any that would take
away their lives, and (which is most tremendous) for want of such an
executioner, I have known some do it with their own hands. Under the greatest
circumstance: for content imaginably, blessed with a competent estate,
acceptable relations, and wanting nothing but a quiet mind. O that it might be
a warning to the Athiests and Blasphemers of this Generation. They know not how
soon those Atheistical and Blasphemous Thoughts and Expressions, with which
their hearts are filled, and which they make now the Ornaments of their Speech,
may reflect to this degree upon them. I have observed in these distresses,
persons nearly concerned in such as have been thus afflicted, at loss for some
Discourse, purposely wrote upon these Arguments, which if they could not
persuade their friends in these paroxismes to read, yet they might read to
them, or at least from which they might be furnished with matter of proper
discourse or counsel to them. This has made me spend some few hours upon this
Argument, which tho it be not the general concern of Christians (they being
through the Goodness of God, but few of many, that are encumbered with the three
first of the Temptations here spoken to) yet in another sense are the general
concern of all; none of us knowing which of us may not fall into these
Temptations common to men: nor what friend or neighbor of ours may next stand
in need of our help; and the most being at too great a loss, how properly to
apply themselves to Christians under these circumstances. Indeed the last
Temptation is of more general concern; we are all apt enough to receive
temptations to Presumption. These considerations, together with my observation,
that in these late years in which Atheism and Blasphemy have been so rampant,
and profanely triumphing almost at the end of every loose and ungoverned
Tongue; these Temptations have also been more frequent, has made me willing to
let these Meditations pass into a public view, that they may be of more than a
private use. I shall think my self abundantly rewarded for my pains, if but one
Soul may be forewarned or relieved by them, or any thing be said in these
sheets, which any private Christians may make use of for a word in season, to
any one Soul thus wearied. I weigh not the scoffs of those who mock at these
things; experience lets all that mind Religion know these Temptations are no
Chimaera's, and those who judge them mere Melancholic Delirations and the
Effects of them, know not what they say, but must say something, tho it be to
discover their ignorance of the ways of Divine Providence, and no acquaintance
with the Methods of Satan. Such as these Meditations are, they are not
intended for such as are scoffers at wounded and troubled spirits; but for a
relief for those who feel such wounds, and in whose hearts the infernal
Plowman has made such deep furrows: and for those who know no Temptation of
this nature has befallen others, but such as are common to men, and wherewith
they also may be Tempted. Having told thee my design (good Reader!) I commend
thee to God and these Sheets, and thee, to the Blessing of his Grace

Thy faithful Servant in the Gospel of our Lord, J. C.

AN Alphabetical Table, OF THE Principal Matters contained in this BOOK.
A Asolution by Priests, as held by Papists, a great means of Presumption. The
differing Notions of Papists and Protestants about it; a p. 297, ad p. 304.
What power Ministers have to pardon sin, Ibid. Acquaintance with the Covenant
of Grace, how useful against Despair, p. 191, 192. Right Apprehensions of the
Divine Being, how to be obtained, 41, 42. Not to be gained from Sense or
Reason, working on Natural Principles, but from Scripture Revelations, 44, 45.
Advantages from them, 46. Great means to prevent Temptations to Atheistical
Thoughts, 41 Arguments used by the Devil to persuade the Entertainment of
Blasphemous Thoughts, p. 14. No Arguments conclusive for Despair, 206, 207.
Assent not the justifying Act of Faith, 284, 285 Attending on Ordinances useful
against Atheistical and Blasphemous Thoughts, 48 Atheism what, how committed,
the variety of Atheistical Thoughts, distinctions of them, p. 4, 5. What kind
of Atheistical Thoughts are here spoken to, and whence they proceed, p. 6
Whether the Souls guilt or no, the Negative proved, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 37,
38. What may be done to prevent, or to repent them; and to support the Soul
under the burden of them, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, to p. 55. They are not to be
entertained for a moment, 49. Atheistical Persons or Books, to be avoided, p.
49, etc.
B.
BAptism, the supposed efficacy of it, various Opinions, 262 It is no ground
alone to presume Salvation on, proved 271, 272, 273. Its true efficacy 275
Blasphemy what it is, committed 3 ways p. 4.
C.
CAuses of violent Atheistical Thoughts, hard to assign 53 Company of Holy
Persons, how useful to those who are tempted by Atheistical Thoughts, 50
Communion with God, much and close, a great means against Despair and
Temptations to it, 197 Contentment a great preservative against Temptations to
Self-murder, p. 115, 116 The Covenant of Grace to be studied, and meditated
on, by Persons tempted to Self-murder, and to Despair, 144, 145, 191. How to
be meditated on, 147, 148 Gods Creation of us no ground to conclude, that he
will eternally save us, 264, 265, why, Ibid. Confession of Sin, the Popish
Doctrine about the manner and virtue, and efficacy of it, and the vanity of it,
301, 302. The Doctrine of Protestants about it, 305, 306.
D
DEspair, what it is, 165. How distinguished from Fear, 166. The usual Tempters
to it 167; What to be advised to Souls under Temptations to Despair, 200, 201,
202, 203, etc. The greatness of the Sin of Despair, 230, 231, 232, 233 234,
etc. The Devil, the principal Tempter to Atheistical Thoughts, 9 Diversion
Advisable for persons Tempted by Atheistical Thoughts or to Self-murder, 50,
51, 104, 105. Discontent to be avoided, as making way for Temptations to Self
Murder, 115, Difficulty of being Saved, to be Meditated on for prevention of
Temptations to Presumption 321. Some Doctrines of Truth charged as having a
tendancy to bring a Soul under Temptations to Despair, proved to have no such
tendancy, particularly. Those of Election of Persons, particular Redemption and
special Grace, 174, 175, 176.
E
Election of Persons, no advantage to Temptations to Self Murder or Despair,
91, 92. Eternal Life, how many ways one may be said not to have it, 61, 62.
Whether any who has it in the Seed can Murder him or her self? Whether any
who Murder themselves can be Saved? 67, 68, 69. Examination of our selves, how
useful against Despair, in what things, 194, 195.
F
Faith the several Notions of it, the True Notion of Saving Faith, 281, 282,
283. The increase of it of great use against Temptations, in what particulars,
121, 122, 123.
G
Seeming Good alluring the Soul in Temptations to Atheistical Thoughts, none;
p. 11, 12. What of that Nature is a Bait to Temptations of Self-murder, 88,
89, 90. To Despair, 169. Grace where it dwells in the Soul, whether it can
allow any to Murder themselves, 68, 69. Guilt of Sin the only bottom of
Despair, 172, 173.
H
Holiness, False Notions of it, grounds of Presumption, the true Notion of it,
287, 288, 289, 290, 291, 292. The best Preservative against Temptations to Self
Murder, 130, 131.
K
Killing a Man's Self, whether in any case lawful? The Negative proved, 63, 64,
65, 66. All Self Killing, not Self Murder, Ibid. Persons Killing themselves
not to be rashly judged, 75, 76. What to be judged of Persons Killing
themselves, being under the high prevailings of Melancholy, 71, 72. Knowledge
the usefulness of it, to prevent Despair, 180, 181.
L
Life Natural, in some Cases, may not to a Natural Man appear the greatest
Good, 90, 91, 92. Lusts, What Lusts, the greatest Tempters to Self-murder 83,
84 Luther's Advice to Souls Tempted by Atheistical and Blasphemous Thoughts,
38.
M
Means to be used to prevent or repel Temptations to Atheistical and
Blasphemous Thoughts, 37, 38, to 55. To Self Murder, 96, 97, to 193. To
Despair, 178, 179, to 240. To Presumption, 263, 264, to the end. Melancholy to
be taken beed of for prevention of Temptations to Self Murder, and Despair,
98, 99. What means to be used, Natural, Civil, Religious; 100, 101. Whether all
Melanchollick Persons Killing themselves, are to be judged Murderers of
themselves? Murder, how far it extends according to the Divine Law, 57. Who
not Guilty of it, 60. In what Sense no Murderer has Eternal Life, 61, 62.
Self Murder, Temptations to it, from what Causes; 79, 80, 81. Motives in
Temptations to it, to be enquired into, what they usually are, the Vanity of
them, 134, 135.
N
Notions laying Foundations for Presumption, 259, 260, 261. Narrow Notions of
the Sense of the Divine Law dangerous as to Presumption, 295, 296, 297.
P
Pictures of God or any Person in the Trinity, promove in us Atheistical
Thoughts, 41, 42. The Vanity of them, 42, 43. Parlying with Tempters dangerous
15. 8. Prayer and Fasting proper for Persons tempted to Atheistical and
Blasphemons Thoughts, 51. Power in Man truly to believe and repent, none; if
there were, it is no ground for Presumption; 278, 279. Presumption what it is,
249. The Tempters to it the Devil, our Lusts, the World, 251, 252, 253, 254,
255, 256. The Bait to it, 257, 258. How to be avoided, 263, 264, 265. It makes
way for Despair, 193. The greatness of the Sin, the danger of it, the
multitudes that miscarry by it, 312, 313, 314. Pride to be mortified, 109.
Several Considerations tendant to that end, 109, 110. Purgatory, the Popish
Notion of it, its tendancy to Presumption, 310, 311.
R
Revealing Temptations, how advisable to whom and why; 157, 158. Repentance,
The true Notion of it: The False Notion of it, how dangerous in order to
Presumption, 287, 288, 289.
S
Satisfaction as a part of Repentance, in what Cases necessary; the Popish
Notions of it, 304, 305, 306. Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, its virtue as to
Remission of Sins, 308. The Popish Notion of it, ibid. Not desired, by
understanding Christians, where it cannot be had in a communion, 308, 309, Sins
against Light, Inveterate Sinning, Flagitious and Prodigious Acts of Sin, Sins
bordering on the Sins against the Holy Ghost, great advantages to Temptations
to Despair, 181, 182, 183, 184. What those Sinnings are, Ibid. Sin against the
Holy Ghost, what it is, shortly discoursed, in order to the relief of such as
are under Temptations to think they have sinned it; 184, 185, 186, 187, 188,
189. Sins multitude and greatness, no grounds for Despair, 209, 210, 211, 212,
213, 214, 215, 216. Solitude to be avoided by Tempted Souls, 103. Temptations
distinguished, p. 8. Tempters to Atheistical Thoughts, Who? 9. To Self Murder.
Temptations to it discoursed, as to their efficient cause, the seeming good
enticing the probable means to prevent, or repel them, 78, 79, 80, 81.
Temptations to Despair Answered, 217, 218, 219 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225,
226, 227. To Presumption, 250, The Tempters to it, 251, 252, 253. How to be
prevented, or avoided, 263, 264, 265, etc.
Courteous Reader,
THe Author living at a great distance from the Press, begs of thee pardon for
lesser Errors, in misplacing Stops or Letters; and with thy Pen to correct the
following

ERRATA'S:
IN page 6. line 28, read think so; p. 15, l. 29, r. is it; p. 22 l. 7, 1.
scarce any; p. 25 l. 7, blot out [not;], p. 35, l. 2, blot out [it;] p. 64, l.
17, r. Filiucius; p. 66, l. 2, 1. washed away; p. 79 l. 3, r. causes; p. 9^, l.
12, r. has brought; p. 96 l. 4, r. and Praeterition; p. 97, l. 27, blot out
[that] p. 101, l. 28, for about; r. of; p. 113, l. 22, r. of all; p. 150, l.
27, r. of Conscience; p. 171, l. 2, r. the Grave and Hell; p. 176, l. 6, r. who
cannot understand; p. 177, l. 24, r. therefore plain that; p. 188, l. 7, r. the
Soul; p. 210, l. 5, r. so me thinks; p. 228, l. 23 r. such Souls; p. 234, l.
19, ^. our sins; p. 241, l. 14, r. violate them; p. 261, l. 11, r. as to; p
306, l. 26, r. in his heart.

Concerning TEMPTATIONS TO Atheistical and Blasphemous THOUGHTS.
CHAP. I.
The true Notion of Atheistical and Blasphemous Thoughts. Blasphemy committed
three ways. Atheistical Thoughts Transient and Volatile, or more Fixed and
Permanent. Those more Fixed, either studied by us, embraced, and improved, or
else such as are the Souls Burden, Trouble and great Affliction. The Discourse
restrained to the last.

DAvid tells us, The Fool has said in his heart, There Is no God; Psalm. 14.
v. 1. By the Fool is to be understood not the Natural Fool (hindered in the
exercise of his Reason) but the Spiritual Fool, the Wicked Man; nor is there
any, to whom the Notion of a Fool more properly agrees, than to the
Presumptuous bold Sinner, whether you by Fool understand one that wants
knowledge and wit, or him that wants wisdom to guide his knowledge in
exercise to the best ends of Humane Life: to discern, choose, and judge of
things according to truth and reality, and for the best advantage. This Fool
(says the Psalmist) says in his heart, that is, he thinks and believes there
is no God; whatsoever he professes with his lips, these are his inward
thoughts. The Philosopher distinguishes betwixt our inward and more external
Speech, we speak nothing with our lips, but what we have first said in our
hearts: though we say much in our hearts, which Shame, or Moral Prudence,
restrains us from speaking with our lips: Every wicked man does not speak it
with his lips, but he says in his heart, he thinks there is no God, and he
speaks it in his life; his actions speak it, he lives without a God in the
World. Now this being the Character of a wicked man, one that is a spiritual
Fool, the impressions of them upon honest souls, often proves a sad temptation
to them; ushering in temptations to Self-murder and Despair. This has made me
resolve shortly to handle this Argument, that I may by it give some relief to
Souls thus tormented; and likewise help others with something to say to Souls
under these miserable circumstances. I shall reduce the whole of my Discourse
to these few Heads;

1. I shall show you what I understand by Atheistical and Blasphemous Thoughts,
and discourse shortly of the kinds and differences of them.

2. We will inquire, what Tempters a Soul may have to them.

3. What Bait, or seeming good, the Tempter can imaginably propound to the Soul
to entice it to them.

4. What Arguments Tempters may use with any colorable reason, to bring over a
Soul to such a persuasion.

5. We will inquire, Whether all such kind of Thoughts be the Souls guilt, or
no, or what are, what are not.

6. Lastly, I shall offer my best advice both for Souls not as yet under these
circumstances, for the Prevention of them; and for Souls under this great
pressure, for the Arming and Supporting of them against and under them, and
procuring them Liberty from them.

1. Qu. What are those thoughts that deserve the name of Atheistical and
Blasphemous? The term Atheism is taken sometimes more strictly for a denial of
God: sometimes more largely for a denial of any of the Perfections of God. In
the first Sense, for a man to think, That there is no God, or that the Father,
the Son, or the Holy Ghost, is not God, is Atheism; when it is only a denial
in the Heart, it is an Atheistical Thought, when we deny it with our Lips they
are Athestical words: more largely for a man to deny Gods Wisdom, Power,
Knowledge, Mercy, or any other of his Perfections, is Atheism. Blasphemy is
committed three ways. 1. By denial of the Perfections that are in God. If any
shall deny God to be one in Essence, or the three Persons in the Godhead, or
that God is a Spirit Omnipotent, Omnisufficient, etc. is Blasphemy: It is an
evil and injurious speaking of God. 2. When the Divine Perfections are
attributed to the Creature, such I mean as belong to God only, as to think any
Creature Infinite, Omnipotent, Eternal, Omnisufficient, etc. 3. When the
Imporfections of Creatures are ascribed to God; as if any thinks in his
heart, That God is mortal, that he is the Author or Countenancer of Sin, or any
thing of like nature which agrees to the Creature, only in regard of the
imperfection of it. Thus you see there may be a great variety of Atheistical
and Blasphemous Thoughts, according to the variety of the Object, which may be
the Being of God, or the Perfections of God, etc.

Again, Such kind of Thoughts when they are fixed and permanent, are either
studied up by us, bugg'd, and embraced, and enlarged upon, so as the Soul
studies to feed them and maintain them; which are hardly found in any but
Atheistical Souls, that find it their interest to secure their lusts, by such
principles: Or else they are the Souls trouble and burden, and great
Afflictions; like a Viper sticking to their hands, and there 'twill stick. They
cry out and roar, and endeavor to shake these thoughts off, but they recurr,
and are like an ill sounding noise in their ears, and inconceivably afflict
them: They say, Get thee behind me Satan, but he will not be gone. They cry to
God, but he is pleased not to take the thorn out of their souls. These are
Temptations, and they are Atheistical and Blasphemous Thoughts, thus
circumstanced, that I now design to speak something to: So that I exclude out
of my Discourse,

1. More transient and volatile, Atheistical, and Blasphemous Thoughts. The
wise, the spiritually wise and good man, may have some of these; God is a
Spiritual Being, and so removed from the cognizance of our Senses. Who has
seen his shape at any time? And the Infiniteness of his Being and Perfections,
is so much beyond the span or fathom of our Reason, that the best of men have
their doubts sometimes about the Divine Being and Perfections; which indeed
taking their Notions of God from Scripture, they chide away, are humbled for
them, suffer them not to abide with them; and endeavor to establish their
souls against them, by testimonies of Scripture, which they firmly believe, and
make the only Rule of their Faith, and Director of their apprehensions
concerning God. 2. I also exclude from my Discourse such permanent fixed
thoughts of Atheism and Blasphemy, as breed in the Soul, and the Soul
delights in, is well pleased with, studies to fortify and make good by
Argument. For these are only found in Atheists, who are either such avowedly
and professedly, and are not ashamed by the words of their lips to declare that
superfluity of vileness that is in their hearts. Or else they are such, as in
heart thinks so, though in words they profess otherwise: Such as the Apostle
speaks of, Tit. 1. 16. Who profess that they know God, but do in works deny
him, being abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. I shall
very little concern my self as to either of these; only consider what may be
said as to those who have such impressions, but they are their intolerable
burden and affliction. Indeed they are rather to be called impressions, than
thoughts; and let us first inquire into this bitter stream, from what source
and fountain it flows.

CHAP. II.
From whence Atheistical and Blasphemous Thoughts may proceed; sometimes from
Lust, sometimes from the World; but these are usually embraced and nursed up in
the Soul. Those that are the Subject of the present Discourse, ordinarily
proceed from the Devil, as a Tempter and a Blasphemous Spirit.

THE Adversaries of a Christian, with whom the good fight is to be managed, are
usually reckoned to be, The Flesh, the World, and the Devil, their Opposition
to us, is by moving, enticing, and persuading us to sin, to the ruin of our
Souls. Hence Divines distinguishing Temptations, from their Efficient Cause or
Causes, say, There is Tentatio a Carne, a Temptation from the Flesh; which
agrees with St. James, Every man is tempted when he is drawn away by his own
LUST and enticed: but that must be understood of such Temptations by which a
man is conquered.

2. There is Tentatio ab host, a Temptation from the Enemy without, and this
is either from the World, that is the Things or Men of the World: Or from the
Devil. Any of these may be Tempters in this Case.

1. Lust may be a Tempter to Atheistical and Blasphemous Thoughts, though I
must confess I cannot understand how that should be a tempter to such Thoughts
as these, not by us chosen, studied, or delighted in by them. Debaucht
Wretches, that give up themselves to Drunkenness, Whoredom, Lying, Cursing,
Swearing, Neglect of all Duty to God and Man, are concerned, if they can, to
persuade themselves, That there is no God that sees them or d^^approveth them,
or that has a superior power to them, or will judge or condemn them; for did
they believe this, their Consciences would never let them be quiet. Now that
lust [that Sinful desire] which is in them to keep their lusts without regrets
of Conscience or any sour Reflections, after their Debaucheries, may be a
Tempter to them to say in their hearts, yea, and to embrace a persuasion in
their hearts, That there is no God; but this does not properly concern our
present Case.

2. The World also, [the men of the world] may be Tempters to such thoughts as
these. The discourses of others you know offer matter for our thoughts to run
upon, and as in other causes, so in this, there may be some who may argue
Atheism and Blasphemy with us, and who may endeavor to persuade us to such
Sentiments. Atheistical and Blasphemous Books may set our thoughts on work, but
these can have no great causation in such thoughts as are permanent,
afflictive, and troublesome to us. It is in the power of Christians to avoid
Atheistical and Blasphemous company; and to abstain from reading of such Books:
Though therefore men of the world may be Tempters to Atheism, yet they can
hardly be charged as Tempters in this Case.

3. The Devil (whom you know the Scriptures call the Tempter) the Enemy, the
Envious one) is doubtless the principal Efficient cause. He goes about, like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour; and he has many Arts, and Wiles, and
Depths, and Methods, which he uses to destroy Souls with; amongst which this
is one, to make impressions of Atheism and Blasphemy upon persons; by some they
are embraced as Notions that are suited to their Sensual Appetite, and which
will very well fit their Carnal Desires: By others they are disgusted, as
contrary to those Impressions which the Holy Spirit of God has made upon their
Souls, and their former Notions, Apprehensions, and Belief in God. Yea, so far
disgusted, that their Souls are frighted at the sight of these Strangers
coming to their House; and are amazed which way they should ever come in,
having to their knowledge never opened the least Window or Door to them, nor any
way invited them so much as for an hour or a moment; their Souls loath and
abhorthem, and yet they revive upon them. Temptations of this nature thus
circumstanced, can be from no other Tempter than the Devil.

CHAP. III.
No seeming good propounded to such Souls as are thus Tempted, to whom the
Temptations are Afflictive. Nor does the Tempter always use Arguments, not so
much hoping to prevail with such souls, as to trouble them to that degree, as
to put them upon destroying themselves. To others he uses Arguments, From the
No Evidence of the Divine Being to our Sense: The Incomprehensibleness of it,
and the Perfections of it by our Reason: The many Disorders which the Divine
Wisdom thinks fit to permit in the World. These are the usual Topics of
Tempters that tempt souls unto Atheism.

EVery Man when he is tempted is drawn away by his own Lust and enticed, says
St. James (1 Jam.) He is enticed by some glimmerings of good, and so he is
drawn away; but it is vain for us to enquire what seeming good enticeth a Soul,
who looks upon his motions and solicitations, and the things to which the
Soul is so solicited, as the greatest Evils in the world. St. James therefore
is there speaking not of Temptations in the general, but of such Temptations as
flow and proceed from our innate Lust: There must in all Temptations of that
nature, be a Bait upon which the Lust in our hearts may feed; and tho it be not
necessary that that Bait be a real Good, yet it must have some appearance of
good in it; for the principles of Humane Nature will not allow it to move into
the Embrace^ of any thing which it apprehends Evil; but this is not necessary
in Temptations which flow solely from the Devil: the eternal ruin of the Soul
is the Design of that Envious One, and it is all one whether he can affright or
entice the Soul into Hell, whether he can destroy it by Poison or by a more
certain Stabb. It may be more worthy our Enquiry, what Arguments the Devil can
possibly use with a Soul so far prejudiced against impr^ssions of this nature,
that he can hope should prevail with it to receive any such impressions: For
the Soul of Man being a rational being, is not like, without something of
Reason, or a show of it, to be brought over to agree to any such impression.

1. What if we should say that possibly the Tempter promises himself no such
success, what if his design be not to proselyte a Religious Soul to the
Proposition which is contrived in his Suggestion, but merely to weary the
Christian out of his life by the constant trouble of his importunity; and
indeed I believe that generally so it is, and that these are but preparative
Temptations to Self-murder and Despair, if he cannot by these Suggestions
persuade the Soul to blaspheme God, or to deny Gods Infinite Beng and
Perfections; yet if he can but stir up in the Soul such a degree of Impatience,
under this sore affliction, as will put the man upon determining his own life
deliberately, he has done his work. Hence it is that in all the Course of my
Ministry I never observed Man or Woman long under these Temptations, but they
fell into Temptations of the later Nature; which I the rather hint to you, that
you may watch upon, and pray for persons, who are brought under these most sad
and dismal circumstances. They are ordinary Praeludiums and Prologues to such
Tragedies, and in this case he is not much concerned to bring Arguments before
the Soul, it is to be destroyed another way.

2. But indeed as to other Souls, to whom these Temptations are not
Afflictions, but mere Diversions and Recreations, he must use Arguments, and he
may offer them even to Pious and Religious Souls, how little soever they avail.
The Arguments cannot be many which can be brought in such a Cause. They are
usually brought from one of these three Heads:

1. From the want of the Evidence of Sense to prove a Divine Being. Spiritual
Beings are in this distinguished from those that are bodily, that having no
Accidents, no Qualities, such as Color, or the like; they are not evident to
our External Senses. God is called the Invisible and who (says the Holy Ghost)
has seen God at any time? Indeed no Spiritual being can be seen, who ever saw
the Soul of a Man, or an Angel (unless in an assumed Shape) and I look upon the
questioning of any such beings, as Spirits, in our age, a fair Argument of the
Atheism that is in those Philosophers Hearts. Yet are we Creatures so much
made up of Flesh and Blood, that we are hard to believe any thing but what we
see; that is indeed to believe any thing at all: for seeing and believing are
two things very diverse one from another. Who ever saw God (faith the Devil) or
who at any time has heard his Voice, etc? But this is an Argument fit only for
Sensual Brutes, and not for any deliberate Soul to be catched by.

2. He will, therefore (Secondly) argue from Reason, which is not able by
searching to find out God unto perfection. It is usually said, Animal nihil
plus Animali sapit. That a living creature knows nothing beyond a living
creature of its own size and perfection. Upon this account it is reasonably
said, That if a brute Creature could describe a Man, it would describe him as a
Brute, not being able to conceive of a Creature beyond its degree of
Perfection. It is easy for a man, if he will but make use of his own reason,
to conclude that there must be a God, a First Being, and a First Cause; for
that nothing can give a being to, or be the first cause of it self, is a
principle so connatural unto us, as we cannot outface it, nor by our highest
debauchery is extinguished; but however the First Being should give a being to
it self, or the First Cause be its own cause, this is very hard to conceive,
until the Soul be assisted by a Divine Light. And the Divine Being being so far
transcendent in its perfections to all the perfections that are found in the
greatest and wisest of the Sons of Men, it is yet harder to conceive of it
aright and not to blaspheme it in our thoughts: We are Creatures that are
Limited by Time, Circumscribed by Air and Certain Measures, and it is very hard
to us to conceive that there should be a Being without these boundaries, The
Immensity, Omnipotence, Omniscience, Infiniteness of any Being, are things
transcending the reach of our Conceptions, and tho we can by Reason argue our
selves sometimes into an appearing necessity of these Assertions, yet we can
hardly give credit to the Eyes of our Minds, they are perfections beyond our
grasp. Hence the Great Wits of the World are generally Atheistical, and it
seems almost necessary that men should be fools, that they might be wise: Hence
is the Socinians denial of the Trinity, and others denial of Gods Omniscience,
etc. This gives the Devil a great advantage, putting the Soul upon reflections,
How can these things be? Luther says Non amo hos Curistas and Quaeristas (he
might have said Quomodistas too) Audi Verbum Dei and tace. I do not love these
Inquirers in Divine things. Why so, or Wherefore, or How are those things? Hear
the Word of God, and hold thy peace.

3. A Third Argument that Satan ordinarily uses in these Temptations, is from
the seeming disorders and confusions which the Wisdom of Divine Providence
permits in the World. Were there a God (says the Devil) and were he such a God
as thou fanciest, would he suffer his Enemies so to prosper, and his Servants
to be so trampled upon? This is an Argument which our own feeble Reason, in
compliance with our Lusts, does often trouble us with; even David, Jeremy, and
Habakkuk, were molested with it. As we are naturally prone to measure the
Almighty's Power by the strength of our created Arms, and his Omniscience by
the Fathom of our pitiful Comprehensions, and his Eternity by the Span of our
own Duration; so we are as prone to determine concerning his Wisdom by our
Policies. We cannot see to the bottom of his depths, nor look up to the top of
his heights, but judge of the Infinite Wise God, as if we were to determine
concerning a shallow Politician amongst men; so that whether the Argument be
conclusive or no (which doubtless it is not) yet it is good enough for the
Devil to trouble us with, to tell us, That if indeed there were a God, and such
a God as we have heard of, Abel should not have perished by the hands of a
bloody Cain, nor the Israelites been oppressed by such a one as Pharaoh; nor
Job put to scrape himself with a pot-sheard. The wicked should not walk on
every side, nor the vilest men be exalted. It should not happen to the
righteous after the manner of the wicked, nor yet to the wicked according to
the desert of the righteous; nothing but blind Fortune could shut its Eyes and
wink at such disorders. These now are the greatest advantages which I can fancy
the Devil to have upon any Soul, to induce it to think there is no God, or at
least no such God as the Scripture speaks of, and we ordinarily preach to you;
and persons solicited to such a belief, will find some such thoughts as these
ordinarily either praevious to or concomitant with the other. But as I said
before, in such cases as I am speaking to, he seldom uses much argument,
little hopeing to work over the Soul into such a belief, only designing to
give it trouble, in order to a further end: And this is enough to have spoken
to this Question, both concerning the want of a bait that should entice the
Soul into this Net, and the Arguments which the Tempter ordinarily uses with
Such Souls.

CHAP. IV.
Whether these Suggestions be the Souls guilt yea or no? Two Conclusions laid
down in the Case. The Negative is asserted. Five Arguments brought to prove
that they are not the Souls guilt. Two things which may stumble the Soul in
this thing. Some things offered for its relief under them both.

IT is yet a more valuable question, Whether these Thoughts or Impressions be
the Souls guilt yea or no? This is the more considerable, because if upon a due
inquiry they prove not so, this is the best Topic to relieve a Soul from. I
shall therefore a little enlarge my Discourse here. I shall in the first place
grant, That all temptations of this nature had their foundation in Man's Guilt:
And as to particular Souls now existent in Bodies; they may have had their
advantages from their particular Actual Guilt. I say first, All Temptations of
this Nature have their foundation in the Original Guilt of Humane Nature; as in
Adam all sinned. Had not the Serpent first beguiled Eve in the State of
Innocence, we had not possibly been exposed to such Suggestions, or at least
not to such Impressions from them; we might have had them, but they had not bin
so wounding to us: The Infernal Plowman might have plowed, but he had not made
such long Furrows: by these Suggestions in our Souls he had but led this Plough
upon a Rock, and attempted us with them as vainly as he did our Savior. While
our first Parents were in their Estate of Innocence, the Devil assaulted them
with a Temptation of this Nature; Genesis 3. 1, 2, 3. He did not attempt to
persuade the Woman, That there was no God, (Our first Parents were too lately
come out of their Creators hands, to be persuaded, That there was no Supreme
Being precedent to them) but he designed to beget in them blasphemous and most
unworthy thoughts of God. That he had deceived them, and not told them the
Truth, when he said to them, That in the day they did eat of the fruit of the
Tree of Good and Evil, they should die; and that by it he designed to deprive
them of a very great part of their happiness: which makes it evident that Man
even in his most perfect State, was capable of such Suggestions. How far the
posterity of Adam should have been troubled with this guest, had Eve at first
shut him out of doors; we cannot tell. Christ himself heard something of this
Noise in the Wilderness, Matthew 4. But with this difference, 1. That he had not
a Power to embrace such Motions, they could not be impressive upon him, who was
the Express Image of his Fathers Person, and God Equal with his Father over
all, blessed for Ever; nor could they any way torment him, or be afflictive to
him. He had a perfect power to repel them, without the least Affliction or
Disturbance unto himself. Adam had a Passive Capacity to receive these Fiery
Darts, to give credit to these Vile Suggestions, and to sin by occasion of
them; and the Children of Adam have not only a Passive Capacity to receive
such Impressions, but an Active Power and Capacity; yea, possibly more than so,
an Inclination and Propension to feed upon them, to their defilement: and
possibly there are scare any Souls in the World, which at one time or other
have not been defiled with them, either before or after Conversion, though in
very different degrees. In some they have been more transient and volatile, in
others more fixed and permanent. In some Souls they been entertained as Guests,
and as it were adopted into their Family, to others they have been but as
violent knockings and rappings at the doors, or like the throwing in of Stones
at the Windows, which the Master of the House could not help. Further yet, as
to particular Souls troubled with them, they may for ought I know have bin
occasioned by, or advantaged from, those Souls former guilt.

I say occasioned from it. God by his Righteous Judgment suffering the Devil to
stand at Peoples Right Hand in a just Punishment of them, for their not
studying to be Rooted, and Grounded in the Faith, for their Desultory Levity,
and Incertainty in the things of God; or some other Sins. They may be
Advantaged from some former Guilt, when Persons have formerly allowed
themselves to read Profane and Atheistical Books, to listen unto, and hear
profane and Atheistical Discourses, to Feed upon Atheistical Arguments, etc.
But this is not the Question.

Secondly therefore, I conclude: That such Motions and Impressions (or if you
will so call them) Thoughts, as are received with Horror and Trouble, and
Trembling, and are not delighted in, but rejected by the Soul, I say, Thoughts
thus circumstanced, let them have never so much Atheism and Blasphemy in them,
are not the Guilt of that Soul that feels the Load and Burden of them. Now
this being so great, if not the only thing, that can successfully be spoken
for the Relief of Souls under them; I shall endeavor to justify this
Conclusion by some following Arguments.

1. My first shall be from the Received Opinion of Divines: That the very first
Motions to Sins are not Sins. Every man may observe in his Soul a threefold
Motion toward a sinful Act: 1. There is a Motion which is called Primo Primus,
the very first; and indeed is not the Motion of the Soul, but a Motion to the
Soul, a Foreign not a Domestic intrinsic Motion, but from the Devil or the
Men of the World. The Second is attended with some inward Delight and Pleasure.
When there is not only a Motion made to the Soul to do something that is Evil,
but it causes some Ticklings and Pleasure in the Soul. Tho possibly the Soul
as yet resolves not on it, nor desires the producing of it into Act, yet it is
pleased with it, and the Motion is sweet to its Taste. This is what Divines
call Concupiscence, what the Scripture calls Lust, and is doubtless Sinful,
and forbiden in the Tenth Commandment; without which the Apostle says he had
not known it to be Sin: Romans 7. 7. The Third is, That Motion by which the Soul
moves toward the Actual Commission of it, resolving upon it, contriving how
to bring it about; etc. This is forbidden in every Commandment, which
according to our Saviors Interpretation of the Decalogue, does not only
restrain and prohibit the overt Act, but all the inward Motions of the Heart,
tendent and leading to such Act: but the first is prohibited in no Command.

2. Nor indeed is it reasonable for any to fancy that it should; for it is not
reasonable to imagine that God should forbid ^s Acts that are not our Acts.
Motions of this Nature are not our Actions, we are only the Objects of them,
not the Agents in them. When God forbids us Sin, he forbids us not to
omit something which he has Commanded us to do, or to forbear something which
he requires us not to avoid. He does not forbid us the Actions of others,
which we cannot prevent. Suggestions and Impressions of this Nature are the
mere Actions of others, to which we no way concur. What are not our Acts
cannot be our Sins.

3. Thirdly, I argue from the Words of our Savior, Matthew. 15. 11. Not that
which goes into a Man d^fileth a Man; but that which comes out of a Man, that
defiles a Man: and to the same purpose, Mar. 7. 20. Are you so without
Understanding also? Do you not perceive, that whatsoever from without enters
into a Man, it cannot defile him; because it enters not into his Heart: v. 20.
And he said, that which comes out of the Man, that defiles the Man; for from
within, out of the Heart of Man, proceed Evil Thoughts, Adulteries,
Fornications, Murders, Thefts, Covetous^ess, Wickedness, Deceit,
Las^^viousness, an Evil Eye, Blasphemy, Pride, Fo^lishness; all these Evil
things come from within, and defile the Man. I know our Savior is there
discoursing, relating to the Pharisaical Supersticious Conceit of Men's being
Defiled by Eating with unwashen hands. But this Discourse led him to lay down
some General Maxims of unquestionable Truth.

1. That that which merely enters into a Man from without, cannot defile him.

2. That what defiles a Man, must be something of his own, something which
comes out of himself. His Destruction must be from himself.

3. That amongst these things may be Evil Thoughts, for they proceed from the
Heart; v. 21.

4. That what proceeds not from the Heart, cannot Defile. Let me now a little
Apply this to the present purpose: Atheistical and Blasphemous Thoughts thus
Circumstanced, do merely Enter into us from without; we suppose the Soul not to
contrive and breed them, not to study and delight in them: They are in a Sense
within a Man, the Soul hears the Noise, feels the Impression of them, but they
Enter from without, from an Agent that is without the Man. Secondly, They are
not a Man's own, he does not Hugg or Embrace them, or Feed upon them; they are
but as Bastards laid at his Door, not born in his House, not bred of his own
Soul. Thirdly, Though they be Evil Thoughts, yet they proceed not from the
Heart. A Man's Imaginative Power relates to his Sensitive Part, his
Understanding is but the Out-room of his Soul: Thus far indeed these Evil
Thoughts enter into a Man, they make some Impressions upon his Power of
Imagination; that is an Open Faculty, to which a Man has no Lock or Bar, so
long as there are Sensible Objects, or Sinful Agents in the World, they will
have some Passage into this Entry of the Soul of Man. The Understanding, which
is the Porter to the Heart, takes some Cognizance of all Passengers into it, so
as a Man may have some Notions and take some Cognizance, and make some Judgment
of these Evil Thoughts; but yet they are not come into the Heart, which is the
Will of Man: here they come not, out of this they proceed not, they are not
willed, nor chosen, they are not loved nor delighted in, the Soul melts not in
any embraces of them, but is scared at the sight of them; abominateth,
rejects and abhors them. So as these things proceed not out of the Heart
nor indeed were ever admitted into the Heart.

4. Fourthly, If these were the Souls Guilt, how shall we excuse our Savior
from Guilt, or Eve before she yielded to the Tempter, or Joseph, though he
resisted the Motion of his Mistress. Our Savior was made like unto us in all
things (Sin only excepted) but how shall he be excused from Guilt, if Satan's
troublesome Motions to him were a Guilt? The Devil tempted him, though not to
things of this Nature, yet to sinful Acts, to distrust the Providence of God,
to destroy himself, etc. He received his Suggestions with detestation and
abhorrence, he said to him, Get thee behind me Satan. The Devil was Guilty by
his Motions, but no Guilt clave to our Savior, rejecting and abominating his
Motions. It is true, he did not receive them with that Passion, that Horror
and Trembling which Pious Men often do, but that only speaks him freed from that
Passion and Weakness under which we labor. Again, Who will say that Eve, our
First Parent, sinned, by hearing the Serpent speak to her, before she saw the
Tree was Good for Food, and that it was Pleasant to the Eyes, and a Tree to be
desired to make one Wise: And took of the Fruit thereof, and did Eat? Who will
say, That Joseph's Mistress, soliciting him to lie with her, was his Guilt? She
cast her Eyes upon him, she said, Lie with me. But he refused, as you read; he
said, How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? Neither was
this a single but repeated Motion: She was Importunate with him. The Text
says, Genesis 39. 10. That she spoke to him day by day, but the Text also says,
That he hearkened not unto her to lie by her, or to be with her; and not doing
this, Joseph doubtless was not Guilty. The case is much the same with thee, the
Tempter has said unto thee, Do not believe there is a God, or a Christ, or
that he ever was made Man, or died for the sins of man; or that God is such a
one, so Just, so Omniscient, etc. And thus he talks to thee day by day, but
thou hearkenest not to the Tempter, thou will not so much as parley with, or
deliberate upon them, much less give credit unto them; how art thou in this
more Guilty than Joseph? Tho thy Tempter deals with thee more secretly by
Impressions on thy Spirit, his, more externally by Audible Words; and thy
Temptation be to a more Spiritual, his to a more Fleshly Wickedness, yet this
Act is not more, if so much as his.

5. Lasty, I argue from that known Maxim in Divinity, Omne peccatum est
voluntarium. All sin must be voluntary: It is most certainly true of Actual
Sin: It is also true of Original Sin. The Sin of Adam, which was Peccatum
Originans, was voluntary, and we all in him voluntarily hearkened to the
Serpent, and had our Hands, all our Hands in Eves Hand, which she reached up to
pluck of the Fruit of that Tree. And for the Original Corruption and
depravation of our Natures, it was but consequent to that, and so contracted
voluntarily. But Actual Sin must apparently be voluntary, for an involuntary
Action is no humane Action. Now in this case here is nothing of the Will, the
poor Creature cries, Get thee behind me Satan: It would not hear such a Noise,
nor entertain such a Thought, it trembles at the fears of the returns of them.
I have seen one my self in such an Agony at but the fears of the return of
them, that I have thought every Limb of him shaked, and trembled: I have heard
another, that had recovered once from these violences, hearing me Discourse of
them, say, O Sir it is an Hell upon the Earth. (And these are but two Instances
of diverse I could name) so that apparently here is nothing of the Will
embracing and choosing these things, nothing of the Affections, desiring,
loving, delighting in such Thoughts: so as they cannot be the Souls defilement
and guilt, tho they indeed be its most insupportable Burden and Affliction.
This is to me so plain, that I can hardly conceive upon what mistake a Soul
under this intolerable Burden, should charge it self with Guilt, with
reference to these Thoughts: Yet two things it may possibly say,

1. That it is hard to conceive that the Tempter, following this poor Soul from
day to day, but that it should have so far deliberated upon, or consented unto
such Thoughts, as to be rendered Guilty before God.

2. That by giving Ear to some Atheistical Discourses, or by Reading some
Blasphemous and Atheistical Books, or it may be, Entertaining some such
Atheistical Thoughts formerly, and Arguing within it self for them, it is
become Guilty; and now God does but Righteously punish it with them.

To both which I shall oppose but two things,

1. That as to the first it must be determined by the Soul, that is under these
Impressions, they troubling it from day to day, month to month, and it may be
year to year; whether it has not at all, in any degree, deliberated upon them,
consented and agreed so far to them, as to make it Guilty in some degree; and
indeed it is hard to conceive, that in this thing the Soul should be wholly and
entirely Innocent: but admit it be not, yet surely these are no other Spots
then what may be found in the Faces of Gods dearest Children, no other then
Sins of Infirmity, and Humane Frailty; and such as in other cases, the best of
Men and Women daily incurr the Guilt of: which upon our daily Confession and
Repentance of, a Soul may warrantably expect Gods Pardon for, through the Blood
of Jesus Christ, and so ought not to ly so heavy upon the Soul.

2. Secondly, Admit that the Soul, before its turning unto God, may have given
too much occasion and advantage to the Tempter to offer those Impressions; and
that these are but youthful vanities repeated to us by the Tempter: yet
certainly the Souls present abhorrence and detestation of them, its present
trembling, and trouble, at the repetition of them, ought to be a far greater
comfort and relief to the Soul, than the repetition of them ought to be
trouble, or disturbance. Thou heretofore had such Thoughts, but then they
did not trouble thee, thou did entertain and cherish them: now the repetition
of them makes thee weary of thy Life, are the greatest burden that thou didd'st
ever feel: What is here to disturb thee? If thou indeed didd'st delight to roll
over those Follies, former Follies in thy Thoughts, if thy Soul allowed them
its close embraces and pleasure, this were something formidable; but while thy
Soul abhors, detesteth them, while with all thy might, thou repellest them;
it is a sign God has both pardoned thy former Guilt, as to them, and also
renewed and changed thy Heart; then which nothing can speak better for thee.

So that if we wistly consider it, we shall find, That admit a Christian under
these disturbances, can justly check himself, for too free an Admission of such
Thoughts formerly, yet his present Affliction for them, abhorrence, and
detestation of them, speaks comfort, not trouble to him; and from this
Discourse it may easily be concluded, That the great Torments and Disturbances
of Souls upon this account, are generally groundless. The Souls which shall
Account unto God another day for Atheistical and Blasphemous Thoughts, are
generally such as never made any complaint of them. A Man never feels the
Eternal Wrath of God in another Life, for those sins, the burden of which he
has felt in this Life, and the Guilt of which he has been truly afraid of,
and trembled at and studied to avoid: Much less for the sinful acts of another,
to which he has not consented. This is a thing so obvious, that one would
wonder that any thing of this nature should stick with an Intelligent
Christian, or with any Soul that is but indifferently acquainted with the
Covenant of Grace and the Promises of the Gospel. Have thou formerly been
Guilty of some Atheistical Blasphemous Thoughts, which for a time thou
entertainedst without any just regret? Or have thou not made so quick and ready
an Opposition to them as thou ought, yet thou have a Promise, Matthew. 12. 31.
All Sin and Blasphemy wherewith a man shall blaspheme, shall be forgiven unto
Men. To what men think thou? What to them that persist in them, and study to
maintain them, or to those that repent of them? Thou will certainly say to the
later, not to the former. Why are thou then thus unreasonably disturbed? Thou
hear that even for this Guilt, there is a Balm in Gilead, there is a
Physician there. Do thou say, Ah but I do not repent? What do thou
understand by Repentance? Is it not an hearty Trouble for them, an hearty
Loathing and Detestation of them, a Trembling at the very remote Thoughts of
them, an hearty desire to be rid of them; and to entertain them no more:
Repentance? What is Repentance then? With what Imaginable color of Reason or
Pretense of Scripture, can thou charge thy self with the Guilt of that Sin
which thou truly Loathest, Abhorrest, Tremblest at, Studiest to avoid. And
indeed this Temptation has apeared to me, sometimes conversing with Souls in
their Distress, one of the most Inaccountable Things in the World, as to the
causes of it; especially when this Disturbance has fallen upon Intelligent
Souls, acquainted with the Gospel and the Terms of the Covenant of Grace. For
whereas the Devil uses this ordinarily but as a praevious Temptation, to
enforce another to Self Murder or habituated Despair, one would wonder that
any such Suggestions as these, no better entertained, could possibly induce the
Soul to those other Sins: but so it is, upon Experience we find it, that these
are often times most unspeakable disturbances. It will be therefore worth our
while, in the last place to consider what may be done, by, or for our Souls,
yet at Liberty, to prevent these great encumbrances of our Peace; as also for
the Relief of those Souls, who (through the permission of a Wise God) are
fallen under such a tremendous Providence as this is: and this is my last Work.

CHAP. V.
Christians under these Temptations, advised, To fix upon this, That they are
not the Souls guilt. Luther's Advice in the Case. 2. To possess it self with
true Notions of God from Scripture, avoiding the taking such Notions from Sense
or Reason. Three advantages from that. This one, 3. Not to forbear Reading, and
Hearing the Word. 4. Avoiding the Company of Blasphemers and Atheists, or
reading their Books. 5. To take all lawful Diversions. 6. To be much in the
company of good Christians. 7. To give such Thoughts no entertainment. 8. To be
much in Fasting and Prayer.

HEre are two things: 1. What may be done for Prevention. 2. What for a present
Support and Relief; but they may both be spoken to with the same breath: for
the same Directions, which are proper for the prevention of them, when remote
from us, will also be found useful for the Support and Consolation of a
Christian groaning under the burden of them.

1. The first thing to be done, is for to persuade the Soul, or for the Soul to
prepossess or persuade it self, That these impressions lay it under no guilt
before God, and do not render it unlovely in the sight of God. Luther was an
eminent Servant of God, much himself exercised with temptations and much
conversing with those who were so exercised; It is said of him that he was wont
to say, That the three things which made a Divine, were Temptation, Meditation
and Prayer. In his Commentary upon Psalm. 90. he takes special notice of this
Tenptation to Atheistical and Blasphemous Thoughts, I cannot direct you better
than in the words of that great Man of God.

It often hapeneth (Luth. c. 4. p. 4. 34. Jen. in Psalm. 90. 1.) says he, and I
have seen it in many, that when they have discerned themselves exercised with
these thoughts, they have been as men without life: There is therefore a
necessity they should be governed; and the True Government of them is this, Ut
statuas te non ideo esse a Deo abjectum quod ista sentis, for you to determine
that you are not rejected of God because of them; for although there be some cause
of them in us, and they are the fruits of Original Sin, yet they are much
promoted and augmented by the Tempter the Devil. For it often happens that
the Soul sincerely and passionately desires to be delivered from them, but it
cannot: there, says he, this advice is to be followed, That the Soul do not,
because of them, despair. 2. That it oppose such thoughts what it can possibly,
and not approve, nor indulge them -- For, says he, these thoughts are not
therefore sent, for you to judge your self from them; but that you may oppose
and withstand them. -- When (says he) the Devil has Tempted us with these
Blasphemous Thoughts, he goes on -- See, says he, what an Heart you have, Are
you not now a grievous Sinner? This the Soul cannot deny. He grows upon this,
God is therefore, says he, very angry with thee: How can God but be angry with
such a Blasphemer? Here, says he, do but yield a little, and he sinketh you,
and I have known many thus undone. -- You must therefore govern these Thoughts,
you must oppose the Adversary, and fix your self upon this, That God is not
displeased with you for these Impressions and Thoughts, if you do not entertain
and indulge them. Thus far that great man. And indeed this is the first and
great thing to be learned by the Soul. The Sin of Atheism and Blasphemy will in
an Hour of Temptation (especially) appear so great, so heinous unto the Soul,
that unless you can deliver such a Soul from the apprehensions of such a guilt,
all that you can say to it will be of little avail. Ministers and private
Christians dealing and treating with Souls in these paroxysmes, ought to lay
the great Stress here, and to make this the Alpha and Omega of their
Discourses. What may be said to evince this to the Soul I have largely showed
you in the former Chapter: Let the thus troubled Soul meditate of those things,
and let Experienced Ministers and Christians add what they can of that nature,
and lay the great Stress here, and they will find all little enough to induce a
Soul thus circumstanced to be thus persuaded; and on the other side, if this be
done, the Cure is wrought, the Soul will then quickly understand that Faith and
Patience are its work: The more we can show the Soul of the Devil in the
Impression, the more it will be frighted from hearkening to, or complying with
him, and the more Valiant will the Christian be in this Spiritual Combat: Mind
therefore Christians under these circumstances, that Christ himself was not
without such kind of Sinful Impressions, yet without Sin: That our first
Parents in Innocence had them: That it is contrary to what our Savior has
Taught us to think, that any thing, That is from without, and enters into a
Man, defiles a Man; That there is no Law prohibits them. That there being
nothing of our own will in them, it is Impossible they should be our guilt,
etc. But these things I have further opened, and enlarged upon in the former
Chapter.

Secondly, Endeavor to possess your selves with the truest apprehensions of
God you can. This is good before the hour of Temptation, it will prepare you
for the Spiritual Combat; and if you have neglected this before, yet do not
neglect it in the hour of Temptation. Here I shall only give you this caution,
Take heed of taking your Notions of God from Sense, or merely from Reason. 1.
Not from Sense, Spiritual Beings fall under no cognizance of the External
Senses. None ever saw Gods Shape, none ever saw his Similitude; and here let me
caution you, against any Pictures of God, or any Person in the Godhead. We are
ready in our minds to form Idea's in our minds of any Beings according to the
representations, which Pictures and Images make of them. It is Impossible but
all Pictures, Images, or External representations, of the Divine Being, must be
Teachers of Lies. It is impossible that a Limner should draw the true
representation of a man whom he never saw. How is it possible he should draw
any representation of an Invisible God, a Being which he neither ever saw nor
can see? The fairest pretense is for the Picture of our Savior, who assumed
our nature, and was a man in all things. But all those Pictures must be
Teachers of lies too: For Christ was God-Man, and the representation of a Man
is no representation of the Person of the Mediator. Does any say that upon the
same Argument there should be no Pictures drawn, for a Picture does but
represent our Fleshly Part, the Soul cannot be expressed. I answer there yet
are these differences: 1. The Picture of our friend is the representation of a
being that we know is or was informed with a reasonable Soul, so as the other
essential part of the man, is on course understood; but it is not so as to
Christ. Tho the Picture of an humane Shape has this advantage, that we may
understand under it a reasonable Soul, of which every man is possessed, yet we
cannot under any such Shape understand the Divine Nature personally united to
the Humane Nature. 2. Again, Even the Picture of a man, if it has no
similitude of the man, is but a Teacher of a lie, and does but help our
thoughts with false notions and conceptions. And what Limner ever saw the Lord
in his Humane Shape, to draw a representation of him? What need any Pictures of
Christ, when every man we see, is as true a representation of him, as any
Limner can make, who never saw him in the flesh, nor a true Copy to draw him
by. I am apt to believe that this was one Reason of Gods so severe prohibition
of Images and the Likeness of any thing to represent God; because he knew that
those things would be of this pernicious use, to give us false notions and
Idea's of God: for you shall observe when you have seen the pretended Picture,
or resemblance of a Man, you will fancy him according to that Representation,
whether the Picture be any thing like the Person for whom it is made, yea or
no. 3. To which I might add, That admitting a Picture of a Man, or a Friend, be
not like the Person, and give our Fancies a false Notion of him, yet in this
there is no Sin, no Defilement, no Guilt upon the Soul by it; but to Conceive
amiss of God is a thing quite of another Nature and of further danger to the
Soul. This has made me sometimes wonder, that Luther, tho he abhorred Images,
and showed as great a detestation of them as any other, as they are used in
Popery, as they are means or objects of Adoration; yet allowed the use and
standing of them in Churches. Certainly it is a thing of very dangerous
consequence, whether in Churches or our own private Houses; for we shall find a
great proneness in us to form out Notions of God according to such
representations; and if those representations be lies, and false, such will our
Notions be: and if this be not a fair way to fill the Soul with Atheistical and
Blasphemous Thoughts concerning God and Christ, I do not know what is.

2. Secondly, Take heed of taking your Notions of God from Reason. Reason is a
power within us, by which we make Conclusions from some Principles. Now these
Principles are either Connatural to us, and bred in, and with us; or such as we
have from Revelation. Reason working upon Connate Natural Principles, will much
convince us, that there is a God, and show us also something what manner of
Being God must be. Nature will tell us that nothing is the cause of it self,
and will lead us to a Primum Mobile, a first Being, a first Cause, a first
Mover; and will teach us, That whosoever is the Cause of any Excellency or
Perfection in another by his Communication of it, if he loses nothing by that
Communication, must needs have that Perfection and Excellency in a more Eminent
Degree in himself. But alas the Divine Being is Infinitely above the Fathom and
Comprehension of Humane Reason, concluding only from Connate and Natural
Principles. There is an Excellent use of Reason to give us the true Notion of
God: That is by setting it on Work, to conclude from Principles of Revelation;
First firmly Believing whatever is revealed in Holy Writ, then using our Reason
both to compare Scripture with Scripture, to find out the true Revelation, the
true sense and meaning of Holy Writ; and to show us that what the Scripture
reveals concerning God, is but what Reason will allow may be.

3. But the Surest Way for Persons to come to a true Notion of God, is to
attend to what the Scripture says, to Believe concerning God, whatsoever we
find there. No man has seen God at any time, no Reason is able to Comprehend
an Infinite Being, and the Perfections of it, but the Son of God, and the Holy
Spirit of God. They have Revealed God, and thence we must take those Measures
of the Knowledge of God, which we are capable of, till we come to see him as he
is, and to know him as we are known. Let it be therefore the Care of every
Christian from those Sacred Writings to posess himself of due Notions and just
Apprehensions of the Divine Being. A Christian shall find these three Eminent
Advantages of this Knowledge according to the Measure we are Capable of.

1. There is no such Director of our Internal and External Homage to God, as a
just Notion of the Divine Being. According to our Apprehensions of his Majesty,
Power, Greatness, and Justice, so shall we Adore, Revere, and Fear him:
According to our Apprehensions of his Goodness and Mercy, so we shall Love him,
Breath after him, and Delight in him. According to our Apprehensions of his
Truth and Fidelity, so shall we Confide, and Trust in him. If we truly
Apprehend him as a Spirit, we shall Conclude he must be Worshipped with our
Spirits, and that all Noises and Exterior pretended Homages (if not expressly
commanded by him) are indeed no Homage to him, but some foolish Acts of
Voluntary Humility, and that all Lip Labor, all Bodily Homage, separated from
the Internal Homage, Attention, and Intention of the Soul, and its Stooping
before him, are of no avail; being no preportionable Homage to a Spiritual
Being in the Eye of Reason, nor required by him at all.

2. Secondly, There is no such Antidote as this against the P^^s^^ of Erroneous
Doctrines and Opinions. We have abroad many Erroneous Doctrines relating to the
great Truths of God, if they be searched to the bottom, you will find them
springing up out of a false Apprehension and Conception of the Nature of God.
It were easy to show you how a due Knowledge and Conception of God, will
fortify the Soul against many Errors. But,

3. Lastly, There is no such Weapon to repel these Fiery Darts, of which I am
speaking. A Soul is not soon dispossessed of such Notions of God, as it is once
well rooted in; and especially when it is rooted in them upon the Authority,
the Infallible Authority of a Divine Revelation. It is good therefore for
Christians, before any such Temptations come upon them, to be well Instructed
concerning the Nature and Attributes of God, and to entertain no Notions but
such as shall be confirmed unto him from Scriptures; nor is any thing of more
Advantage to a Soul in an hour of such great Temptations, than to Read, and
have Read to him, Discourses of this nature; such especialy as are most
Scriptural, and endeavor to Establish the Faith of Christians, not in or by
the wisdom of men, but the Power of God. Let this be a Second Direction.

3. Thirdly, Let no Soul under these Temptations, forbear Reading the
Scriptures and waiting upon God in the hearing of his Word. I have often
observed and lamented the great Conquest which the Devil ordinarily gets
over Souls under this as well as other great Temptations, in persuading them to
forbear Reading and Hearing the Word of God. Luther tells us, That it is the
Devils great Art, -- Ut nos abducat ab oratione et verbo ut sic nudos
aggrediatur ac vincat. To draw us off from the Word, that so he may set upon us
disarmed, and make a Conquest of us. The Word of God is the Sword of the
Spirit, if the Devil can get us off from that, he has taken our Sword from us;
the Preaching of the Word (I mean when it is Preached plainly and faithfully,
that Christians do not merely hear (...), the Words of Men puffed up with the
Idle Conceits of their own Rhethorick or Logic) is Gods great Ordinance, with
which he concurreth, and where he is present. And this I have observed in
Experience, when any Christians under these violences, have been persuaded to
go out and to hear the Word, they have ordinarily found those their freest
Hours; tho it may be the Temptation has afterward returned: I know Christians
under these Circumstances find a great strife with themselves, and go out with
some difficulty to hear Sermons; but I never but knew a good effect of their
going, either for a shorter, or a more lasting Relief.

4. Fourthly, Let Christians under these Circumstances, and not then only, but
at all times, avoid any communion or converse with Atheistical and Blasphemous
Persons, or Reading or looking upon any Atheistical and Blasphemous Books.
Thoughts you know engender in us by Reflection upon what we see or hear, or else
they are bred by the workings of our own Minds, without such Aids and
Assistances. Oh beware of these things as the Bane and Poison of thy Soul; do
what thou can, thy Mind will be revolving, thy Thoughts will be roling upon
what thou have seen, read, or heard. Avoid therefore Atheistical Persons,
Blasphemous Company. What know thou how far God will leave thee, when thou
have run thy self into a Temptation.

5. Fifthly, If any such Thoughts arise in thy Heart, give them no
entertainment. Chide them down, turn thy mind to some other Objects, do not
give them place for an hour, no if it be possible not for a moment; these
Cockatrices are best crushed in the Egg. Allow no parley with no study or
deliberation upon, or with a Thought derogatory to the Majesty on high, to the
Honor and Glory of the great God.

6. Sixthly, If thou be already under the pressure of these Thoughts, give
thy self all lawful Diversion thou can. There is a Religious Diversion, by
Reading, Hearing, Prayer, which besides the Diversion that is in them, are thy
Duties, Ordinances of God; but there are also Civil Diversions of Worldly
Business, Moderate Recreations. Some of the former I have already advised, and
shall by and by speak something to the other: But allow thy self also these
other Diversions, better it is for thee to be doing any thing that is lawful,
than sitting still and doing nothing but afflicting and tormenting thy self,
and yielding up thy self entirely to the Conduct and Governance, and
Suggestions of thy grand Adversary.

7. Seventhly, Be much in the company of Faithful Ministers and Good
Christians, such especially as are knowing and experienced; as the Lips of
Wicked Men talk of Mischief; Pro. 24. 2. and as the Preacher says, Swallow up
themselves and others also, so the Lips of Knowledge are a precious Jewel; Pro.
20. 15. they disperse Knowledge; Prove. 15. 7. They feed many; Prove. 10. 21. Yea
and they Heal many. It is a Saying of Luther (in the aforementioned place,
Ingens est pondus in verbo fratris quod tempore periculi ex Scriptura
pronuntiatur: There is a great Weight even in a private Christians Words
pronounced from Scripture. The healing is in the Divine Word, let it come to
thee through what Vehicle it will; sometimes it pleases God, that it should
come out of the Word as running through the Ministers Lips. He is Gods
Ordinance. Sometimes, as running out of the private Christians Lips: Private
Christians, are also a more private Ordinance of God, for the Admonition of
those that are running into danger, the restoring of such as are fallen, the
comforting of those that are sad, and the strengthening of those that are weak.

8. Lastly, Let all such as are under this Temptation be much in Fasting and
Prayer. Prayer is an Universal Remedy for all Evils: Our Savior has told us
there is a kind of Divils, that goes not out but by Fasting and Prayer; and
because for the most part Christians under these Circumstances are not so fit
for Solemn Prayers as others are, let them here call in the help of Ministers
and good Christians, whom they may reasonably think have an Interest in, and a
Power with God, and shall prevail; who can take hold of the Lords Strength, and
ask him with Success concerning the Works of his Hands; and will not let the
Lord go until he blesses them. The hand of Joab, the hand of the Devil is in
this thing, and the strong man keeps the house until a stronger than he
comes; and the Devil has no Superior but the Almighty. In this Case
therefore all Friends of such Persons are highly concerned to get Prayers for
them, Solemn Prayers; for the Affliction is exceeding heavy, none more
inaccountable, none more intolerable: My self have known it as to two issues,
in the destroying of themselves, not able to stand under the burden of it; tho
as to several I have known it have a better Issue. I only tell you this, to
mind you to be more careful, more concerned, and to neglect no Natural, Moral,
or Spiritual Means.

I must Confess the Regular Method of Curing Spiritual, as well as Natural
Distempers, is by removing the Cause; but as in some Natural Distempers it is
not easy to find out the true Cause, which makes the Cure difficult, so
neither is it easy to find out the true cause here: Melancholy is one Cause of
several Distempers of the Soul, disposing a person to more Thoughtfulness and
Seriousness, to more Fears and Jealousies, etc. and Direful and Black Thoughts
concerning our selves; whence it is not hard to conceive how Persons in whom
that prevails to a great Excess (if before they have ever minded their Souls
and their Eternal Interest) should by it be disposed to Excessive Fears and
Desperate Thoughts, as to their Eternal State, but it is hard to understand,
how the prevalence of that or any other peccant Bodily Humor should dispose
Persons to Atheistical, or Blasphemous Thoughts of, or against God; further
then that it may run Persons into a Deliration: so as being broke loose from
the Conduct and Government of Reason, they shall think and talk any thing. Nor
were it difficult to give some account of this Temptation, if we could find
that such alone fell under it, as formerly were Persons of Atheistical
Principles or Lives. God as to such might be reasonably thought to give them up
to a Reprobate Mind, and Understanding: but we upon Experience find, that they
are very often the grievences of Pious and Devout Souls, who have lived a life
in a daily Dread and Holy Reverence of God; and as to such, what Account
further to give of them, then, That they are heavy Trials, with which it
pleases the Wise God sometimes to Exercise his Dearest People, I cannot tell.

FINIS.
Concerning TEMPTATIONS TO Self-murder.
CHAP. I.
The Text 1 John 3. 15. opened shortly. How far the Sin of Murder extends,
beyond what is punishable by the Judge, To the Killer of himself, as well as to
the Killer of others. In what Sense. No Murderer has Eternal Life. Two things
understood by Eternal Life. Whether it be in no case lawful for one to kill
himself? That it is not, proved by Four Arguments. Whether no person, that has
Eternal Life in the Seed (being born of God) or shall have it in the Fruit, can
kill himself. Six Conclusions resolving that Case. One that kills himself
directly may have Eternal Life. One that murthereth himself cannot. The
difference of those two Expressions.

THe Apostle, 1 John. 3. 15. determines thus, Whosoever hates his Brother, is
a Murderer, and you know that no Murderer has Eternal Life abiding in him.
It is only the later part of that verse which I shall concern my self in, not
intending to consider the Sin of Murder, so far as it relates unto our
Brother, but as it relates to our selves; and the same Person may be both the
Murderer, and the Murdered, and the Apostle concluding generally (...), Every
Murderer has not; or no Murderer has Eternal Life in himself; (for they are
Equipollent Phrases) gives me this liberty. Though the Murderer he is speaking
of in this Text, is the Murderer of his Brother, and that but in his Heart, by
a rooted inveterate Hatred: The Proposition of this Text is plainly this, That
no Murderer has Eternal Life abiding in him; In the Explication of which here
are two Terms to be Opened. 1. Who is a Murderer. 2. In what Sense it is said,
That no Murderer has Eternal Life in himself. As to the first I shall
conclude,

1. That Murder according to the Law of God, extends much farther, then it
is or can be enquired, of, or punished by the Law of Man. This appears
evidently from the Apostle in this place, where he says that, He who hates
his Brother, is a Murderer; no Law of Man says so, nor proportioneth a
Punishment to the Secret Motions of the Heart, but the Law of God does: Hence
our Savior correcting the Pharisees in Interpretation of the Law of God, and
in justification of himself, that he came not to destroy it, but to fulfill it,
begins with the giving the Sense of this Commandment far different from what
the Pharisees had given, Matthew. 5. 20, 21. You have heard that it has been
said by them of old time, you shall not kill; and whosoever kills, shall be
guilty of the Judgment: But I say unto you that whosoever is angry with his
Brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the Judgment: and whosoever
shall say unto his Brother Raca, shall be in danger of the Council: But
whosoever shall say, Thou Fool, shall be in danger of Hellfire. From these two
Texts appears, that by the Law of God, not only he who actually sheddeth Man's
Blood without a just cause, and puts a period to his days; but he who
entertaineth in his heart any thoughts, purposes, or designs, any
deliberations, or gives consent to such a thing, he who takes a pleasure in any
such thoughts, or entertaineth any. Affection or Passion conducing to such an
end, or uses any means toward it, is a Murderer. Upon this account St. John
says, he that hates his Brother, is a Murderer. Now the Law of Man that
only judges of overt Acts, and determines him only a Murderer, that
wilfully, and without due Authority, does take away the life of another. The
Text in St. John must be necessarily extended further.

2. Secondly, According to the Laws of Men as well as the Laws of God, He who
wilfully, and without due Authority, puts an end to his own Life, is a
Murderer, as well as he who so takes away the Life of another. The Law says,
Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor; but it says, Thou
shall do no Murder, in timating that a Man may be guilty of Murder by
Murdering himself, as well as by taking away the Life of his Neighbor. And
the Laws of Men do so adjudge it, though the Punishment due to Murder cannot
be inflicted on one already dead, yet they order Shame and Ignominy, Forfeiture
of Goods, Ignominious Burial, to testify their Judgment of the Fact: And
indeed the Law. of the Second Table being against Violations of Charity, and
for the maintaining Charity, and preventing the Violations of, and Breaches
upon Humane Society, it is unreasonable to think, That this Charity should not
begin at our selves, and that we should not be under higher Obligations to
preserve our own Lives than the Lives of our Neighbors; as much obliged not to
deface the Image of God upon our selves, as upon others. Which is the reason
that God himself gives of his first Precept to Noah against Murder, Genesis 9.
6. Whosoever sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed; for in the Image
of God made he Man: So then the Murderer in Scripture Sense is, That Man or
Woman who wilfully, and without any just cause, or due Authority, puts an
end to his own Life, or the Life of another, or who nourishes in his Heart,
any Purpose, Design, or Deliberation, or Affection of that tendency, or
speaks any Words of that tendency, or does any Action tending to it, though
it be not perfective of it.

From this Notion of Murder, and Murderers, evidently appears that two
sorts of Persons are not to be charged with this great Guilt. 1. Such as are
Instruments of Death unto others in a just War, or in times of Peace, at the
command of the Magistrate in the Execution of Justice; when Men for their
Crimes are righteously adjudged to Death, and Persons are commanded to execute
the Sentence: Nor such who (intending no such thing) by accident, and against
their Wills, are occasion of Death either to themselves or others: This we
usually call Manslaughter, not Murder. Nor such who in their own just defense
are forced to kill others, suppose Robbers by the Highway, or breaking into
our Houses. God himself determined this, Exodus 22. 2. If a Thief be found
breaking up, and be smitten that he die, there shall no Blood be shed for him.
If the Sun be risen there shall be Blood shed. The Reason of that is, because
then help might have been called in, and he taken; and by the Law of God, he
was to make Restitution; or if he had nothing, he was to be sold for his Theft;
as you read there, v. 3. So that the killing of him was not necessary for the
defense of him that was robbed: But my design is not to handle the Cases
relating to Murder of another, nor indeed any of them, only to speak to
Self-murder: However the Text says, No Murderer has Eternal Life. We have
heard the Subject, let me open the Praedicate, and show in what Sense the
Proposition is true, That no Murderer has Eternal Life.

2. Eternal Life is to be considered, either, In the First Fruits of it, or the
fuller Harvest.

1. In the First Fruits, and so it must be considered here, or else we must
admit an Enallage of the Present Tense for the Future, (...) for (...); and not
only so, but also limit the Sense of it to the Future (for which I see no
reason at all.) For take Eternal Life as it signifies the happy State of Souls
after the Resurrection, in the Beatifical Vision of God; so no one alive has
Eternal Life. Eternal Life therefore in the first place signifies, That
special Effectual Grace of God, which will certainly bring the Soul to Eternal
Life. That which he before called the Seed of God abiding in the Soul. And that
will bring in a Question (to which I may possibly speak something by and by)
Whether an Elect Soul, that is called and sanctified, may not fall into this
Sin?

2. But 2dly. Eternal Life is also considerable in the full Harvest, as it
signifies the Blessed Estate of the Soul in the Beatifical Vision of God; and
so it is true no Murderer, none that dies under the Actual Guilt of Murder,
not repented of, not removed from him, shall see God; and to this purpose is
that, Rev. 21. 8. where Murderers are reckoned amongst those who shall have
their part in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the
Second Death; and that brings in a Second Question, Whether a Murderer cannot
be saved? But before I can speak any thing to these, it is reasonable, I should
speak something to a more Origiinal Question, with reference to this Sin.

Case. Whether it be not lawful for a Person in any Case to Kill him or her
self?
It is plain from the reading of Prophaner History, that diverse of the
Heathens, yea some of their Philosophers, did not think it unlawful for Men and
Women to kill themselves, but thought it in some Cases their Duty. In Case of
their Country, or Friends, under great Disturbances of Mind or Pressures of
Bodily Afflictions, etc. but even amongst them there were a wiser, and so
understanding part, who from their Light of Reason saw better things; for even
they would sometimes dispute, That it was no Indication of Valor or Fortitude,
but of a base, and impotent and cowardly Mind, that durst not encounte with a
little pain or trouble; and that we were set in this World by our great
Commander, the Lord of all, as Soldiers in a Rank and File, which we must not
break out of, but by order and direction from him; and that it was an injury to
the Kingdom or Commonwealth wherein we lived, and such like. But we have surer
Rule to guide us by; to wit, the holy Scriptures. And the Unlawfulness of it
upon any pretense whatsoever, is determined by all Divines, both Ancient and
Modern, that are of any value; and that for these Reasons:

1. Because the Law of God is express, Thou shall do no Murder, and that
Precept is not to be limited to the Murdering of others; for the Law of God
does not say, Thou shall not kill thy Neighbor: but, Thou shall not kill: it
must indeed be restrained to Men and Women, for God has given us a Liberty, as
to Beasts to Kill and Eat, nor is the Law concerning Brute and Irrational
Creatures, but such as are Rational, and that without distinction; Now he that
kills himself does kill: Again, the Law in the General Scope of it,
commands Charity; now we ought in the first place to be Charitable to our
selves; Murder, say Casuists, is the Killing of a Man without Authority. Now
this he does, who kills himself, for none is superior to himself, none has
Authority over himself.

2. Again (says Jiliucius one of the Popish Casuists (who yet though many of
them give strange liberty to Men to kill others, yet few or none give Men
liberty to kill themselves.) To kill a Person can be lawful but in two Causes:
1. For our own Defense, so a Person may kill one assaulting him, breaking into
his House, etc. Or, 2. For Execution of Righteous Sentence of Justice. But none
can kill himself in his own Defense, nor be a Magistrate to himself, to Judge,
Sentence, or Condemn himself; so that say they it can be lawful in no Case for
Men to put an end to their own Lives.

3. Again, They argue truly from a particular Enumeration of the supposed
Justificant Causes that should justify such a Fact, showing the Invalidity of
them. We read of one of the Heathens, who having got a dark Notion of an
Eternal State, would put an end to his Life, that he might the sooner be in
possession of it. But this is not the way to Eternal Life. St. John says, No
Murderer has Eternal Life. Eternal Life is the gift of God, and he gives it
according to his Revealed Will, and his Revealed Will is, Rev. 21. 8. That
Murderers should have their Portion in the Lake which burns with Fire and
Brimstone, and this is the Second Death. A Second Cause (which the Heathen
assigned as) justificant of Self-murder, was, To avoid the Violence of others;
suppose Persecutors or Mutherers. But this cannot justify, For what harm can
the injuries or violence of others do us? Says Augustine. A Third Cause some
assign, or pretend, is, To avoid Sin for the time to come. To prevent their
further dishonouring of God. But this were to do evil, that good might come of
it; and to prejudge our selves, and deny Gods Mercy to Back-sliders. A Fourth
Cause assigned, is, To take revenge upon our selves for past Sins. But who made
us Judges and Revengers in the Case? And surely past Sins are better washed by
the Blood of Christ, and the Water of true Repentance. The last and indeed most
general and true Cause, is, To avoid Shame and Ignominy, to deliver our selves
from horrors and terrors of Conscience, or other miseries. But the very Heathen
condemned this, as the Indication of an Impotent Cowardly Spirit, of an hasty
and impatient Spirit: Where is the Faith and Patience of Christians, if this
were lawful? But I shall have occasion in the sequel of this Discourse further
to show the exceeding vanity of these Pretenses for the justification of so
horrid a Fact.

4. Again, It is a Sin against the Light and Law of Nature. No man yet ever
hated his own Flesh. Nature it self, not debaucht nor disordered, says to
every one Spare thy Self. There cannot be a greater Violence offered to our
Nature surely, than to destroy it. To shut up this Discourse (there being few
that stand in need of this Conviction, who are in an ordinary way capable of
it.) Dr. Ames a Learned Casuist of our own, concludes it a Sin against Nature,
Piety, Justice, Charity. Of the first I have spoken. It appears to be against
Piety, as being against the Authority of God, who alone has Life and Death in
his Hand, and has the Power of our Lives. 2. Against the Goodness of God, from
Him, and of his Goodness we live, and the upholding our Souls in Life, ought to
be acknowledged to God as a great Piece of the Divine Goodness and Mercy to us.
3. Against the Providence of God in the Government of the World, disturbing
that Order which he has set. A Sin against Justice; which will not allow any
person to rob or spoil the Kingdom or Commonwealth in which he is a Member, at
his pleasure. Against Charity (says he) which ought to begin at our selves,
and by which we are first obliged to preserve our own lives; and then the lives
of others. From these and such like Arguments, Divines do reasonably conclude,
That Self-murder is in all Cases Sinful, in no Case Lawful, nor by any
Pretense Excusable.

The next question is, 2. Qu. Whether it be to that degree sinful, as that no
Soul that has received the Grace of God, can commit it? And 3. Qu. Whether no
Soul that does commit it, can have Eternal Life, can be saved? Both these seem
to make up the Apostle John's Sense, when he says, We know that no Murderer
has Eternal Life. I will speak to them both together in some few Conclusions.

1. Con. It is very hard to say, What Sin, one that belongs to the Election
of Grace, yea one who is called with an holy Calling, and in a State of Grace;
and who shall certainly be saved, may not commit. You know into what Sins, Lot,
Noah, David and Peter, fell in an hour of very high and great Temptation.

2. Con. In particular, Such a person may be the actual Murderer of another:
David was so. I mean by Actual, not that he immediately committed it, but as it
is contra-distinguished to murtherous habits in the Heart; in the Sense that
St. John says, He who hates his Brother is a Murderer. This is plain in the
Case of David.

3. Con. Such a Murderer cannot have the Seed of God (at that time) working
and abiding in him, nor upon such a fact, have a proximate Right to Eternal
Life. This is plain, for Murders are no fruits of the Spirit but of the Flesh;
Gal. 5. 21. And no person under the guilt of Sin, before Repentance and the
renewed exercise of Faith, can either have any Sight of his Grace, or any
Proximate Right to Eternal Life.

4. Con. It is possible, That such a great Sinner, as the Murthererer of
another, may be renewed by Repentance and Faith, and so may obtain Everlasting
Life. This appears both by the Promise, and also by those Presidents of Free
Grace which the Holy Scrtptures do furnish us with, that we may have
Consolation: For the Promise it is made to all Sin and Blasphemy; Matthew. 12.
31. David was a Murderer, so was Manasses, etc.

5. It is possible, That a man may be in a Justified and Sanctified Estate, and
may put an end to his own Life, and yet not be a Self-murtherer: That is, now
supposing him distracted, and in a fit of Frenzy, not understanding what he
does: This man is now not to be judged a Murderer of himself, his Act is not a
Rational Humane Act; and doubtless shall not be imputed to him. This may happen
in high Feavors, etc. But

6. Supposing a Sanctified Person to be in the use of his Reason, (though not
perfectly) in a great measure able to guide his actions by the conduct of it; he
cannot do any such action: The Grace of God working or stiring in him. Nor
obtain Eternal Life, without Repentance of it; for which he can have but very
little time, if any at all. And this I take to be the Apostle's Sense, when he
says, That no Murderer has Eternal Life abiding in him. 1. He has no true
Grace working or acting in him. 2. In that State of Guilt, without true
Repentance (for which he has little or no time) he dying, cannot be saved. 3.
He can have no proximate Right to Eternal Life. I shall add further, That I
find no great difficulty to determine, That a person in the use of his Reason,
killing himself outright and presently, cannot be saved. Men may offer such
violence to themselves, as they may not presently die by the Act they have done
in order to it; so as they may have time to repent and be received to Mercy
(that made me put in the word [outright, forthwith] and there is no Sin that is
upon a True Repentance unpardonable. They may do it in a Deliration or
Distraction, when they are not under the guidance and conduct of their Reason,
and then it is not an Humane Act. But supposing their Act to be an Humane,
Rational Act, and so effectually done, as it leaves no breathing time for
Repentance; I cannot see a possibility of Salvation in such a Case. I can
easily agree it, that every one who kills himself, does not murder himself.
Possibly a man does an Action, or makes some Omission, by the doing or the
omitting of which he dies; but he never designed, never intended it; but
possibly hoped for a quite contrary effect, of such Action or Omission. Such a
one may be said to have killed himself, but not to have murdered himself. Nay
although a person had no such intention contrary, but by his mistake, what he
designed for good to himself, issues in such an effect; yet he may be no
Self-murtherer: because not under the perfect guidance of his Reason. Suppose a
Child, or a Fool and Natural Idiot, which neither of them are guided by their
Reason, should do such Acts, I think they oughe not to be concluded Murderers.
The Case is the same of Frenetick and Distracted Persons. Suppose in a Violent
Feavour or a Frenzy, occasioned some other way, a person should destroy him or
her self; I would be very tender of concluding such a person under this guilt.
The difficultest Case seems to me to be in the Case of that partial
Deliration which we see often caused from Melancholy; and is commonly attended
with violent impulses from Satan. The Question is, Supposing persons under
these circumstances do destroy themselves, what is to be determined concerning
their Everlasting State? If they offer such violence to themselves, as does not
produce death presently, but gives them a time for Repentance, the
Determination will be best founded upon our sight of their Behavior, upon the
reprieve which the Providence of God gives them: Whether they heartily repent
of such attempts, and be serious in asking pardon at Gods hands, yea or no. If
the attempt has such a speedy issue in Death, as leaves no room or place for
this. That which is to be considered, is, How they before were, in what
possession of Reason, under what violence of Impulses; which may induce us to
believe the action not deliberate and voluntary. And truly where such an
unhappy issue shuts up a precedent Holy Life, spent in a fear and dread of
God, an hatred of Sin, a desire to walk in the Commandments of God, and that
for some good space of time; I should be apt to judge very charitably: That is,
that the persons final act of Self-killing was not his or her Act; but the
Effect of Melancholy to a great height (as a Natural Disease) working in him:
or of Satan, by his violent Impressions and Importunities; but using his or her
Natural Members or Powers, for the Production of so direful and sad an Effect.
It is true, the judgment is very hard, because in such Cases we cannot
determine; especially in Fits, to what degree the person is deprived of the use
of his or her Reason; and acts but like a brute Creature. And this makes such
issues, whatever they prove to the persons concerned immediately; yet to their
Friends very uncomfortable. So as although they do not mourn for them wholly
without hope. Yet of all Mourners for Relations, they mourn with the least
hope, and are hardest to be comforted. But this is all I shall speak to this
Doctrinally. What I principally intended in this Discourse, will fall into the
Application.

CHAP. II.
The former Discourse applied by way of Praemonition to all, not rashly to
judge persons that kill themselves, as to their Spiritual or their Eternal
State. Why persons should not so rashly judge. What is very sad and
uncomfortable in the Case of such as kill themselves. What may be hoped as to
them. The Judgment of them best made from the General course of their former
Life.

1. Con. FRom hence in the first place will easily be concluded our Duty, not
to be too hasty in judging the Spiritual or Eternal State of any, or at least
of many, who have killed themselves. It is indeed a most sad and miserable
Spectacle, or hearing; and which may occasion in us trouble, fear, and
trembling: but yet Secret Things belong unto God, Revealed Things to us and to
our Children. It is a Sad Reflection, that we have no Instances in Scripture of
any good Men, whom God suffered thus to fall. I count that Instance of Samson
none: He was but in his Calling, he was eminently called of God to adventure
his Life for the Israelites, in being revenged on the Philistines. It was the
whole Business of his Life, who will call a Soldier a Self-murtherer, who in
defense of his Country exposes himself (not indeed to a certainty of Death,
but) to an eminent probability: Nor was there an absolute certainty of Samsons
Death, the Providence of God might have ordered Timbers so, that he might have
survived (as we know has been in Blowing up of Houses) but Samson plainly
showed by his words spoke immediately before, that his end was not the delivery
of himself out of Misery, but being avenged on the Philistines; which was the
business of his Life, to which he was called of God. Besides that, had he not
had an extraordinary Assistance of Divine Power, his hands had never pulled
down the House; which testified Gods Approbation of the Fact. But for any
other, we have not so much as an appearance of any good Men that were the
Authors of their own Destruction voluntarily; but on the other side, it being
certain, or at least very probable, that no good man, mentis compos, in the
free exercise of his Reason, can do it, it is unreasonable for us to think that
in that Age of the World, there were none who through some Diseases, Feavors,
or Melancholy, were Distracted, and lost the use and exercise of their Reason;
nor is it reasonable to think that the way and manner of the deaths of persons
not dying in the use of their Reason, should be Recorded in Holy Writ. It is
indeed a sad and uncomfortable Death, both to those that are Near Relations,
and to those that are Neighbors and Spectators afar off; but in regard that it
is possible the Act was an irrational Act, done by one, who when he or she did
it, were not in the possession of their Reason, so as to exercise and use it. I
would have no judgment passed upon the Eternal State of such person Souls; and
indeed the best judgment that can be past by any in the Case, must be from our
Reflections upon the former course of their Lives. If Men or Women have
formerly so led their Lives, as we could not but judge that they lived in the
Fear of God, hating all Sin, walking with God closely in the Performance of
Duty; it will be hard for us to judge that God should leave them so far in
their last hour, that they should commit a Sin in which they should die,
without any place for, or possibility of Repentance. The truth is no such fact
can be done, but either by a profane person, or by one who has been an
Hypocrite; who, though he has mocked God, and deceived Men by a Profession,
yet the root of the matter has not been in him. When therefore we see any, who
to all appearance has lived in the Fear and Dread of God, come to such a sad
end, it is most charitable to judge that he or she was not themselves when they
did it.

2. Br. But (which indeed is the main thing I intended, and to which my
Discourse hitherto on this Argument has been but prefatory.) The terror of
that Text, No Murderer has Eternal Life, ought to lay a Law upon every one of
us to use all imaginable means both to prevent and to resist so great a
Temptation. Now in the handling of this Temptation or Motion to so great an
Evil, we will consider it,

1. In the Efficient Causes. Where we will consider what may be done to find
out the Principal Efficient Cause in this Temptation.

2. In the seeming or appearing good, which is usually by the Tempter made as a
Bait to draw a Soul into this deadly Snare.

3. We will consider, What is the most probable Means to be used either for the
preventing Temptations of this Nature, or for the repelling of them, if the
Soul be already under the forcible Impressions of them.

CHAP. III.
What Care we had need to take, for the prevention and resisting of Temptations
to Self-murder. From what Efficient Causes such Temptations may be our Lusts:
The World, the Devil; these sometimes acting jointly. What Lusts ordinarily
incline us to it. How to know if the Temptation be from a single or a mixed
Cause, and from what Cause it is.

YOu have heard from my former Discourse, That Temptations are Motions to Sin,
and that all such Motions proceed either from our own Lusts, or from the World,
or from our grand Adversary the Devil; and that these three Principal Causes,
sometimes act singly, sometimes jointly; and it is a matter of no small moment,
for a Christian under the power of a Temptation, rightly to understand, from
what hand his Temptation comes; Whether it be merely the Dictate of his own
Lust, or whether it comes from Men in the World, or whether it comes from the
Devil? From one of these Cases singly, or from two of them acting together
jointly; and so the Temptation be a mixed Temptation. Nor do I think it will be
very difficult to a diligent observing Christian to make a true judgment in the
Case. For the Men of the World, as Temptations of this Nature are not very
ordinary from them, we shall (in these days of Light) seldom or never hear
Reasonable Persons, serious and in earnest one with another, persuading them to
destroy themselves: So they can make no such Motions to us, but will be obvious
to our Sense. Job heard his Wife, when she said unto him, Curse God and die;
Job. 2. 9. It is true, the Men of the World, may by vexing and tormenting us,
be to us indirect Causes of such a Temptation; but that signifies nothing, the
principal Efficiency in those Temptations, must be from our own Lusts. So that
the only difficulty of Judgment in these Causes, will be to determine, Whether
such Motions or Impressions flow merely from our Lusts, or merely from Satan,
or partly from our Lusts, and partly from the Devil.

1. I am not difficult to believe that a Man or Woman may be Tempted to destroy
him, or her self, merely from his or her own Lust, drawn away and enticed. I
believe Saul was so, and Ahithophel was so. Saul saw he was like to come into
his Enemies hand, and his Lust of Impatience prevailed upon him, to prevent it
by a Self-murder. Ahithophel had a Lust of Ambition, and was not patient of
the shame of being outwitted, and defeated as to his Honor and Reputation: And
this I take to be the Case of Zimri; 1 Kings 16. 18. Now the Original Lust
which draws in these Cases, is, An over eager desire of a greater portion of
those which we count good things in this Life, then it will please God in the
Wisdom of his Providence to allot us: Whether they be Honor and Applause,
Riches or a Plentiful Estate, Ease or Personal Freedem from Misery and Torment,
etc. This prevailing in the Soul, when it sees it is crossed in these desires,
or is like to be crossed as to them; the Man or Woman, either through fear of
what is like to befall him or her, or in an height of discentent and
impatience for what has befallen them; destroys him or her self. But now
this cannot be in any Souls but such as are possessed of Atheistical
Principles, and rooted in a disbelief of the Scriptures and the whole Revealed
Will of God (if at the time they be in the exercise of their Reason.) The
Reason is this: Because if they believe that there is a God, and that the holy
Scriptures are the Word of God; which say, No Murderer has Eternal Life; they
must believe, that by that Act of Self-murder, they expose themselves to Ten
thousand times greater Evils of Shame, Misery, and Torment, and that for ever;
than they can possibly avoid by it. So as from hence is evident, that no Child
of God, no Believer, none that has any thing of the Grace of God in him, being
in the use of his Reason, can possibly be led away by his own Lust and enticed
to this Sin. Where this Temptation prevails and is the mere effect of Lust,
it must be in an Atheistical Heathenish Soul, wholly under the Ignorance or
Unbelief of the holy Scriptures, and what they Reveal concerning this Sin, and
concerning Eternal Life: Such were the Heathens; such was Ahithophel; Saul,
Zimri, Judas, etc. As to such, the Lusts of our Irascible Appetite (as the
Philosopher speaks) may be often times Temptations.

2. But Secondly, These Temptations or Motions to Sin, may, and doubtless very
often do proceed from Satan singly. Nature does not so ordinarily say Kill thy
self, as spare thy self, and truly when we consider, how Nature abhors its
own dissolution, how naturally we flee from every evil and unpleasant thing, we
may reasonably wonder, that ever any Man should from his own Lusts be moved and
solicited to destroy himself: and no question but Nature must be in some
disorder, and there must be a great conquest over it before it can be. It must
be a great Good showed us that must balance the Good of Life; and a great
Evil, that must balance the Evil of a Dissolution. But certainly these Motions
are very ordinary from the Devil, he was a Murderer from the beginning; John.
8. 44. Now where this Temptation flows singly from the Devil, it is easily
discerned, whether he appears in any visible Shape, and dissembleth an humane
voice, or works by a more secret Impression upon our Spirits; for if it
flows singly from him, the s^l^ effect of it is Horror, Terror, and Trouble,
to the Soul that is disturbed with it. The Soul admits it into no Council,
takes no Pleasure in the Thoughts of it; deliberateth not upon it, suffers it
not to lodge within it for a Night: says, Get thee behind me Satan; and though
it may be the Impression renews upon it again and again, yet still it meets
with no better Entertainment: if once the Soul has deliberated upon it, had
Thoughts to hearken to it, been pleased with it; it is no longer a Single
Temptation.

3. But indeed ordinarily Temptations of this Nature are mixed Temptations;
with this difference,

1. Sometimes Lust moves first, and Satan falls in with the Motions of that.
Sometimes the Lust of Discontent, sometimes a Lust of Impatience.

Men or Women are proud, and of high Spirits, aiming at high things, To be
before, and to excel others, to live at a geeat Rate, or in great degrees of
Honor and Applause; it may be they have lived so formerly, it has pleased the
Providence of God to humble them and bring them low, and out of esteem; to
Spoil their Reputation, lay their Henour in the Dust, divest them of their
Estates: they are not able to bear it, and entertain thoughts of putting an end
to their Lives. You shall find Temptations of this Nature so far influencing
the Servants of God, that although indeed they have not adventured upon such
wickedness, yet they have prayed to God to take away their Lives. Thus Jonah,
to avoid the obloquy of a false Prophet, Jonah. 4. 3. Therefore now, O Lord,
take I beseech thee, my Life from me; for it is better for me to die then to
live. 2. Sometimes a Lust of Impatience under present afflictions prevails
upon them, hence under great degrees of pains and misery, we shall find some
pressed with such sinful thoughts: and this again has so far prevailed with
Gods own Servants, that although we do not read that in the sense of them they
had thoughts to kill themselves, yet we do find that they have prayed God to
put an end to their Lives; you have two great instances in Scripture, that of
Job, who Chap. 3. Cursed the day of his Birth, and Job 6. 8, 9. Oh that I might
have my Request! and that God would grant me the thing that I long for! even
that it would please God to destroy me, that he would let loose his Hand and
cut me off. So Elijah, etc.

3. Sometimes the Lust of Servile slavish fear, when men and women have a
Prospect of some great Evils that are like to come upon them, and are not able
to bear the thoughts of them, nor to live in the view of them. In this case we
shall find Temptations also have prevailed upon Gods own People to desire
Death, though not to be the instruments of their own Death. This was the Case
of Elijah, 1 Kings 19. 4. Jezebel sending a message to him, had sworn by her
Gods that by the next day she would kill Elijah, as he had done by Baals
Priests. v. 3. v. 4. he goes into the Wilderness, he goes into the Wilderness
and sits under a Juniper Tree, and requesteth for himself that he might die;
and says, It is enough now, O Lord, take away my life; for I am not better
than my Fathers. Now where any of these Lusts predominate at any time, the
Devil does very ordinarily join his strength with it, and makes frequent and
violent impressions upon the Spirits of Christians; putting them upon the
murdering of themselves; and where he meets with men or women that are
ignorant or of base Atheistical hearts, who do not believe there is a God, or
that there is such a thing as Eternity, either an Heaven or Hell, a place of
Eternal happiness, or Eternal torment or misery, or an Immortal State of a
Soul; it is not at all to be wondered that he does very often prevail. For if
they can but look upon death coming upon them any way as a freedom from misery
and the grave, as a place where the wicked cease from troubling, where the
weary be at rest, where the prisoners rest together, and hear not the voice of
the oppressor; it is but natural to them to cry out, Wherefore is Light given
unto him that is in Misery, and Life to the bitter in Soul, which long for
death but it comes not; and dig for it as for hid Treasures; and rejoice
exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the Grave. But now it being
impossible that a Believer that knows the Scriptures and believes them, and
agrees to the Immortality of the Soul and the torments of Hell, the truth of
the Worm never dying, and the Fire that never goes out, and that all Murderers
shall have their portion in the Lake where this Worm this Fire is; should ever
look upon Death and the Grave in this dull notion. Satan can never prevail with
him. So that no such Soul, while he is possessed of any Liberty to use his
Reason, and to conclude from Principles, can possibly be prevailed upon.

2. Sometimes it may be, The Motion may be first from the Devil, who seeing a
Man or Woman, in great pain or misery, or in great fears and expectations of
misery, may come to it and say (as Job's Wife said to him) Do thou still
retain thy Integrity? Curse God and die. I mean make some such Impressions upon
a Man or Woman's Spirit. This possibly Men and Women at first discern and
receive with great abhorrence, cry, Get thee behind me Satan; tell their
Friends and Neighbors of it, beg of them to pray to God for them; but the
Devil renews his Motions and Impressions with great frequency, violence, and
importunity, until at length their own Lusts incline them to hearken; either
their over-eager desire to be out of their fears or out of their pain; and at
some more rest and quiet than they can possible arrive at and come to: so as
they yield.

CHAP. IV.
By what Seeming Good the Soul tempted to Self-murder, may be drawn away and
enticed. What good greater than Life. Eternal Life a greater good. This can
bait no Believer to such an Act why. Immunity from some great Evil felt, or
imminent, the only appearing Good in the Case. A Case arising from a Souls
being possessed of the Doctrine of Election. Whether that can give this
Temptation advantage? It is denied.

BUt it may possibly be worthy of our Inquiry, What can be a Bait fitting for
such a Trap? He who is tempted (says the Apostle) is drawn away by his own
lust and enticed: No Man is enticed, but by some appearing Good. None can be
drawn away from a Good, nor enticed out of the possession of it, but upon the
view of a greater Good, possible or probable to be obtained by parting with
that which is lesser. Now Life being in the Eye of Nature the greatest Good,
Skin for Skin (says the Devil) and all a man has, for his Life. One would
think the Devil could not show a Man or Woman any thing, for the obtaining of
which he should deliberately and voluntarily part with his Life.

To this I Answer two things,

1, Though Natural Life, in Pleasing Circumstances, be the greatest Natural
Good; yet Life Eternal is a more Excellent Good. So that if it be possible that
a man should be cheated by his own heart, or by the Devil, so as to believe
that the dispossession of himself of his Natural Life, shall bring him into the
possession of an Eternal Life; he may upon that account be rationally persuaded
to determine his own Life. Thus the Devil imposed upon some of the Heathens;
who had by the Light of Nature but a dim Prospect of that Life and Immortality
which the Apostle tells us is brought to Light by the Gospel: Dreaming that
an happy State of the Soul in another Life, was the common portion of all men,
or at least of all that lived up in any degree to the Rules of Moral Virtue;
and not understanding, that the Wages of Sin was Death, nor the right way to
Eternal Life; nor that of the Apostle, That no Murderer has Eternal Life
abiding for him, no more than abiding in him; they might easily be so cheated:
as Cleombrotus and others. But it is not possible that a Believer (one I mean,
who believes the Scriptures) should be thus enticed: for by Faith he knows,
That the Law is, Thou shall do no Murder, That no Murderer has Eternal Life.
That the Murderer is one of those Sinners that have their portion in the
Second Death: Rev. 21. 8. and therefore not in the Second Life.

2. Secondly, Though Natural Life, in pleasing Circumstances, may be the
greatest Natural Good; yet this Natural Life, as to particular persons, may be
so ill circumstanced, that a present freedom from some Evil, may to a Natural
Eye appear a much greater Good; in comparison of which even Life it self may be
an Evil undesirable and abhorred. Life is much rated by the happy or less happy
Circumstances of it. Even Nature it self would not desire a Life of Continual
and Extreme pain. And indeed, This Ease and Immunity from Evils, which either
at present oppress us, or hang over our heads, so that we have, or think we
have them in a certain Prospect, not probable to be avoided, is the only
appearing good that can entice us to determine our own Lives. For Death
depriving us of all Positive Sensible Good Things, such as Riches, Pleasures,
Profits, Honors, Relations, all kind of Sensual Satisfactions. And this Death
being no way or means, and such a thing as cannot possibly appear to any but
Heathens and Infidels, as any means to bring us to any Eternal Good; there
remains nothing of any umbrage or Color of Good in it, by which it is
possible we should be cheated, but only a Supersedeas from, or Determination
of those Evils, which we either think we have in a near and certain Prospect
hardly avoidable, or under the pressure of which we groan, being burdened, and
seek a Release from. And if (as I shall have occasion enough hereafter to show
you) Death thus brought upon our selves by our own hands, will not be a
productive of this Effect, but so far as we can possibly judge, bring us into a
far deeper Gulf of Misery than what we are already in; and make our Case a
thousand times more sad than it is already: We must conclude it is only an
Appearence of Good by which we are cheated.

Obj. But I hear some say, upon the Hypothesis of some, That there is an
Election of Grace, and that those who are chosen unto Eternal Life, cannot
perish; why may not Men and Women destroy themselves, that they may be in
Heaven: for if they be Elected, they shall he Saved. And if they be not
Elected, let them live as long as they can, they shall be damned.

Sol. This may be ignorantly spoken, by such as know not the Scriptures, nor
what they, who assert from the Scriptures the Doctrine of Election, do
maintain: but it cannot be said by any understanding persons, who knows any
thing of the Mind and Will of God in the Scriptures, or what they reveal as to
the Doctrine of Election.

1. For I beseech you to consider, 1. That nothing can be a Temptation to any,
to deprive himself of the greatest natural good, but an apprehension of a
certain enjoyment, of a greater good; though it be granted that Eternal Life be
certainly a greater good than a Natural Life, yet if I do not apprehend, that
by departing out of this present Life, I shall certainly be put into the
possession of that better Life; and by no other way so adequate I shall never
be persuaded upon that Speculation, to part with this Life; for good as good
does not move our appetite, but as so apprehended by us.

2. Secondly that it is impossible, that any one should apprehend, that by
depriving himself of his Natural Life, he should be possessed of an Eternal
Life; for I pray observe me; such an apprehension must be bottomed upon one of
these things, 1. Either that Eternal Life shall be the common Portion of all
Men after this Life, which indeed might be the apprehension of some Heathens,
but cannot possibly be fancied by any Intelligent Christian; for besides that,
the Notices we have of a State of Eternal Happiness are very Imperfect, besides
such as we have from the Gospel, which the Apostle says have brought Life and
Immortality to Light. I say besides this, the Scriptures plainly reveals, that
there is an Hell as well as an Heaven, a State of Misery as well as Happiness;
that some shall rise to Shame and Contempt, as others to Life and Glory. 2. Or
else Secondly, It must be founded upon this. That they know that they are
elected unto Life: For I appeal to the Reason of any person. Suppose that I
know and am assured, that God has chosen some from before the Foundation of
the World, to whom he will give Eternal Life; and admit again that I am equally
assured that no person so chosen of God unto Eternal Life, can Eternally
Perish; yet what pretense is here for me, unless I have also an assurance or
persuasion, that I am one of those whom God has from Eternity so chosen, and
therefore cannot perish; to throw away the greatest temporal good I have (viz.
my Life) to obtain that greater supernatural good of Life Eternal; whilst I am
in the certain possession of the former, and have no assurance of the latter.
Now it is impossible, that any one, that has deliberations in his heart to
commit so great an Evil, and so ripened as to resolve to do it; should have any
Assurance, or any certain apprehensions, that he is one of the Elect of God, or
that he was ever born of God: The Reason is this, because all such Assurance
must be from the Word of God, and the Spirit of God; setting home the Word of
God upon the Soul, and conforming the Soul to the Image of God. Now the Word of
God says, No Murderer has Eternal Life, it says Murderers shall have their
Portion in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone; which is the second
Death. So far is it from saying that any persons, that deliberate, and do such
things, are the Elect of God, and shall certainly have Everlasting Life: So as
the Notion of Election and its certainty, and of Effectual Grace, and its
abiding in the Soul, cannot possibly give any reasonable advantage to this
Temptation; proposing to the Soul that deliberateth, and is about to do any
such thing, any such Supereminent Good as Eternal Life, to be obtained, by
parting with this Life, without any direction from God, who is the Lord of it:
Nay it rather gives the greatest discouragement imaginable, by threatening
Eternal Death to those who do such things; and barring the Gates of Heaven
against them.

3. Nay, Thirdly, admitting that Proposition to be true. That if a Man be
Elected, he shall certainly be Saved; let him die when, and how he will: and if
he be not elected, he shall certainly Perish: Yet neither can this give the
least encouragement to so vile an Act, for so long as his heart is full of so
great a Wickedness, he can have no grounded Apprehension, that he is elected;
and so cannot be allured to the Action, by the apprehension of enjoying Eternal
Life; which is a far greater good than the life he parts with. So neither can
any be certain that he is not chosen unto Life, and if he could be certain of
that, yet no man's reason can dictate to him, that infinite Torments and Misery
are a lesser Evil than any of the Evils of this Life; which in obedience to
this Temptation, he would flee from, by putting a period to his days: Or that
it is eligible for him to throw himself into those Torments before the time. So
that it is impossible, That the Notions of Election and Pretension, or the
certain Determination of Man, as to his Eternal Estate, should give the least
aid, and assistance unto this Temptation. But the only appearing good that can
entice any to hearken to a Temptation of this Nature, must be a freedom from
some present Evil, or some imminent Evil.

CHAP. V.
What is to be done by Christians, to prevent such Impressions. The First
Direction, To take heed to our selves, as to the prevailings of Melancholy.
What means to be used in order thereto. Natural to be directed by Physicians.
The Reasonableness of the use of them in this Case Moral. Avoiding terrible
Objects to our Senses. Solitude. Employing and diverting our selves. Gods
Practice with Elijah. Religious Means, Reading the Word, Hearing, Prayer, the
Efficacy of these Means in order to this end.

I come now to what in this Discourse I did chiefly intend: viz. To show what
is to be done in the Case of this Temptation; either for the Preventing these
Impressions: Or, Secondly, for the Resisting of them, if we find they be come
to Temptations. I will discourse a little largely upon the First Head, for as
we say, Preventing Physic is the Best Physic. It does at least save the
Patient a great deal of Pain and Trouble. And what we say in another Case,
Turpius ejicitur quam non admittitur hospes. It is not so easy to cast an
Enemy out, who has once got possession, as to keep him out at first from such
possession; it is true here. And here also I shall speak to all. It is possible
but one of many that is fallen under the burden of this Temptation; but there
is none of us all, but for ought we know, may come under this Burden, which
others have found too heavy for them to bear. The Question therefore is,

Qu. What a Christian should do, that he may never be under this great
affliction; that he may never be tempted to this great Evil of Destroying
himself by his own Hands? A thing which it may be you startle at and are now
ready to say, as Hazael in another Case, Am I a dead Dog, that I should do such
things. Yet it may so fall out, that as Hazael did, what he professed so great
an abhorrence of; so you may do, or entertain thoughts to do, what now your
thoughts seem to you at furthest distance; even as to this horrid Temptation.
He that yet stands, had need take heed lest he falls. Nor will I promise
you to give you so perfect Directions, as the Practice of them shall give you
an infallible Security. It is impossible to tell you how far the Wisdom of God,
may, or may not, think fit to try any of you; and in order to it, to let loose
Satan against you: Nor how far Lust and Corruption may prevail in any of you. I
shall only advise the most probable means.

1. In the first place, Take heed as to your Bodily Health, with respect to
Melancholy: Experience tells us, That few Religious Souls are infested with
these Impressions, but such as are cloistered in Melancholic Bodies.
Melancholy prevailing, darkens our Reason, that we are not able to make true
Conclusions from Gospel Principles; and the same Experience also tells us, That
there are few, even Religious Persons, that fall into great Prevailings of
Melancholy, if it abides long upon them, but they have some or more
Impressions of this Nature, although indeed, in some they be weaker, in others
they be stronger. Some have them more often repeated, others more seldom. This
therefore is highly to be attended by every good Christian, who dreadeth the
thoughts of so dark an hour of Temptation as this is. For although (as I told
you in the former part of my Discourse) I do believe every Child of God has
the Seed of God so far abideing in him, as he shall never murder himself; yet
the prevailings of this Distemper may so far distract him (for ought I know)
that he may kill himself, as well as one in another Distraction, by a Feavour,
or the like, which takes away the use of his Reason. And this is very sad and
uncomfortable. Besides, if it should not rise so high, yet the best of
Christians may have a long trouble and disquietude given him from such motions
and solicitations, though finally they do not so far prevail against him. If
you therefore love your Souls, the peace, quiet; and comfort of them; if you
would avoid the trouble and disturbance of these Temptations and Impressions,
Take heed of the prevailings of this Humor. You will say to me, What can we do
in this Case? I answer, There are Natural and Moral, or Civil, and Religious
Means to be used, do not neglect them.

1. The Natural Means are such Medicines or Prescriptions as Learned Physicians
(who are doubtless Gods Ordinance in this Case) shall judge fit to direct and
prescribe. I have not without a great deal of trouble sometimes observed the
stubbornness of some (in other things) intelligent Christians, as to this
particular. O (they will tell you) Physicians can do them no good; God must
cure, God must heal them: and who denies but that, It is God must heal them?
But it is every whit as rational, to say you will eat no Meat, or drink no
Drink; it is God that must maintain your Souls in life; as to say, when you are
under greater and more dangerous Bodily Distempers, you will take no Physic,
use no Means, because it is God must heal you. Because God must heal us, must
he therefore work a Miracle in doing it for us? Or does not God do it
ordinarily by his Concurrence with Natural Means, in which he has created a
Natural Virtue, in order to that End. It is true sometimes Physicians prove of
no value in the Case; but it is as true that very often God does concur with,
and bless Natural Means; and I have often known, that the use of Natural Means,
in the beginning especially of these Distempers, where also this Temptation
has commenced with this Bodily Distemper, has both removed the Distemper and
the Temptation also. God will not please always to work certainly and
infallibly with Means, that we may know that our Healings are from him.

There are besides these, Moral and Rational Means to be used; which though
they do not as the other, purge out the peccant humor, yet hinder the Increase
and Effects of it. Let me name some of them:

1. Take heed about employing your Senses about terrible Objects; either seeing
Objects that are apt to affright and terrify, or hearing Relations or
Discourses of that Nature, or Reading Books upon Subjects apt to affright and
terrify. When Men and Women are under this Distemper, Objects very ordinarily
make very deep Impressions upon our Fancy; and as we ought at all times to
avoid Objects that may feed our thoughts inclinable to the obedience of other
Lusts, so under this Distemper we are equally concerned to divert our Senses
from any Objects which may feed our Imaginations, with what may cause excessive
and immoderate fears and terrors in us. Upon the same reason, that persons who
find in their hearts dispositions to Levity and Wantonness, and the Lusts of
the Flesh, ought with Job to make a Covenant with their Eyes, that they will
not look upon Objects, that may minister Fuel to their Lusts: Yea, and with
their Ears too, that they will not hear any Discourses of that Tendency: The
Melancholic Person, being naturally inclined to an excess of Fear and Sorrow,
ought to make a Covenant with his or her Exterior Senses, that they will not
fetch in, or receive any Objects that have an aptitude, or fitness in them, to
increase Fears and Excessive Sorrow and Sadness, etc.

2. Take heed of Solitude, and delighting too much to be alone. It is usually
said that every one who is alone (much alone) proves either a God or a Devil to
himself. There is nothing of more advantage to a Man or Woman, if they be in
health and under no disturbances of Mind and Spirit, than to be alone: It was
wont to be said by a great Roman, That he was never less alone, then when he
was alone. A Good Christian in clear Circumstances, is never more with God then
when he is alone, nor does ordinarily ever enjoy more of God. But the case is
quite contrary if one be under the prevailings of this Distemper, He is never
more exposed to Temptations, he is never mote baited by the Devil then when he
is alone: Solitude is by no means advisable in an hour of Temptation: I
observe, Matthew. 4. 1. That when Christ was to be tempted by the Devil, he was
by the Spirit carried into the Wilderness.

3. Divert thy self by Employment what thou can. The great Evils which hazard
the Soul under this Distemper, arise from the too much fixation of the thoughts
upon some particular terrible Objects. Hence whatsoever is proper to divert the
thoughts, that they pore not too much upon such terrible things which are most
obvious to them, is a very rational mean to be used in order, if not to the
rooting out of the Cause, yet to the preventing the sad Effects of this
Distemper. Hence you shall observe in that Story of Elijah, 1 Kings. 19. That
God would neither suffer him to be Alone; nor to be out of Employment; both
which he seemed to seek: v. 4. He goes a days Journey into the Wilderness, and
sits under a Juniper Tree; there he beggs of God to take away his Life, and
lies down and sleeps; v. 5. God sends an Angel, which comes and touches
him, and bids him, Arise and Eat; v. 7. He sends an Angel the second time, and
bids him Arise and Eat; and sends him to Horeb. Still he was in his
Melancholic Fit and goes into a Cave. God, v. 9. comes to him a third time,
and says to him, What do thou here Elijah? v. 13. he lingers still, and
stands in the Mouth of the Cave. There comes a Voice to him again, saying,
What do thou here Elijah? Methinks God himself in that Chapter prescribes
unto persons under these Distempers what to do, and to their friends and
relations what they should do, as to them and for them, by all means to avoid
Solitude and to drive them out from their pleasing Solititudes; and to employ
them and divert them: God sends Elijah a Journey, v. 15. to Damascus, to anoint
Hazael King of Syria; and to anoint Jehu King of Israel: Other directions of
this Nature I leave to Physicians.

3. Lastly, Religious Means is by no means to be neglected; for as the blessing
of all Means, by which Remedy is given us for any Diseases, even those which
are most obvious in their Causes, Effects and Cures, depend upon him, whose
name is, The Lord that heals us: So more especially as to this, the Causes of
which are so various, the Effects so uncertain, and the Cure so difficult; that
I doubt whether any yet have wrote satisfactorily (to more considerate persons)
in the Case. There seems to be much hidden even from the Wisest Naturalists;
and to be (...), something Divine; beyond what the Accutest Wits and Reasons
have discovered. I would therefore have such persons by no means omit Reading
and Hearing the Word of God. Sorrow makes an heart to stoop, (says Solomon)
but a good word makes it better. I have heard a Story of a Good Woman under a
great Temptation to destroy her self, and going about to drown her self, first
taking her Bible, and casually opening it, and casting her Eye on a Text
declaring the great Mercy of God to Sinners, she presently says, to her self,
Nay, if it be so, I will not drown my self yet.

And if there were nothing (as certainly there is very much) by persons to be
expected upon the Promise of God, to persons performing their Duty, in Reading
and Waiting upon God in his Ordinances; yet I know no Reason but the thoughts
of persons may be diverted by what they Read and Hear in Sacred and Holy
things, as well as other things which have not such a Stamp and Impress of God
upon them. Prayer is the general way of Application and Address unto God in all
Cases, if we know no due Means, Prayer obtains Wisdom and Direction from God;
if we use due Means, Prayer obtains a Blessing from God upon the use of them:
If something must be done for us beyond the Natural Force and Virtue of Means,
Prayer obtains that from God. But I shall add no more to this first
Direction, upon which I had not enlarged so far, but that I find it so hard to
persuade persons under this Temptation that it is advantaged by this Natural
Distemper; than which there is nothing more evident upon all Experience, that
both this and another Sore Temptation, as to which I shall speak something in
my following Discourse, are all highly advantaged and promoved by it; and
therefore a taking heed to our selves in this Case, is also very necessary to
prevent them: and I intend when I speak to them, to add little more upon this
Argument, but only refer to what I have said in this Chapter; which has made
me willing once for all to discourse it more largely. Now I proceed.

CHAP. V.
A Second Direction to prevent Temptations of this Nature. The Mortification of
Pride. The Influence which Pride has upon the Soul, in order to the raising or
promoving such thoughts in us; as it is the great Mother of Discontent, upon
Gods altering our External Circumstances. Considerations to be digested, in
order to the keeping of our Souls in a mean opinion of our Selves.

2. IN the Second place, Take heed of Pride, live in the Mortification of that
Lust. Solomon has three Wise Sentences in his Book of Proverbs, which we
should have at all times engraven in our hearts. Prove. 11. 2. When Pride
comes, then comes Shame. Prove. 16. 18. Pride goes before destruction: and an
haughty spirit before a fall. The last is, Prove. 29. 23. A man's pride shall
bring him low: I do not think that there are three other pieces of the revealed
Will of God, that are more verified in daily experience than these are. I do
not know any Soul that is more exposed to Temptations to Sin, nor oftener
falls into them, nor that is more exposed to Temptations for Sin, than the
Proud Soul. Pride is a corruption that swells a man in the opinion of a man's
own merit, worth, and excellency, and consequently breeds in him an
impatience of any thing that should lessen his estimation in the sight of
others. Ahithophel was a proud Man, and not able to bear his disgrace at Court,
but chooses rather to hang himself. Whenever any present shame, or fear of
future shame, any degradation, or loss of honor and repute in the World, gives
a rise to such motions as these in our hearts, to destroy our selves; or gives
the Devil any advantage to enforce such impressions upon us, Pride is the
bottom of it. It is therefore highly advisable for Christians, To be clothed
with Humility, to put on Humbleness of Mind, as the Apostle exhorts. An
humble Soul is hardly taken in this Snare of the Devil. Two or three things
will much contribute to this humbleness of Mind. 1: The consideration of what
we are, what we brought with us into the World, and from whom we had it. 2. The
Consideration of what we deserve. 3. The Consideration, how little a thing it
is to be great in the World. I say, 1. The Consideration of what we are, what
we brought with us into the world; and from whom we had our all that we have.
Lord what is Man, that he should be lifted up? He is made up of two essential
parts, The Soul and the Body. Our Philosophy teaches us, That all reasonable
Souls are equal, nor indeed is there any pretense in reason for any inequality
originally in them. And are not our Bodies so also; are they not all Dust, and
such as must return to Dust? Are they not all made of Clay? Have some Bodies a
more beautiful color, more symmetrical and proportionable parts than others?
Do some Souls discover more excellent Parts and Endowments, through the better
Constitution and Complexion of Bodies? Have some of us more Credit and
Reputation in the World, more Riches, and a greater portion of this Worlds
Goods than others? Is any thing of this from our selves? Have we then built our
own Bodies? Have we given them their Beauty or Symmetry? Have we so much as
made one Hair of our Heads White or Black? Or added so much as one Cubit to our
Stature in the World, in respect of Honor, Riches, and Reputation? Did we
bring any of these things into the World with us? Can we carry them out of the
World with us? If we have received them, why do we glory, why are we proud of
them, as if we had not received them? Let others honor and admire us for them,
we have no reason to admire our selves, nor to think highly of our selves; let
us look to the Rock from which we were hewn, and to the hole of the Pit out of
which we were dug. 2. But then (Secondly) let us consider what we have
deserved. The things upon which we value our selves, as thinking they make us
to stand upon the higher ground, were neither hereditary to us, nor have they
been purchased by us, by any Merit, of him who has been our Benefactor as to
them. The Apostle puts them together, Proud, knowing nothing; 1 Timothy 6. 4.
and truly so it is, the Man or Woman that is proud, is one that knows
nothing. Knows nothing? How can that be, when ordinarily a Man's Knowledge is
that which puffs him up (it being indeed of any common and indistinguishing
mercy, the noblest thing wherein a Man or Woman can differ from another) the
Apostle in another place expounds this, when he tells us, That he who
thinks that he knows any thing, knows nothing yet as he ought to know it;
1 Cor. 8. 2. But this is certainly true, that the Proud Man or Woman knows
nothing in things that are Spiritual. Or if he or she have some Notions of
Spiritual Things, they know nothing of them, as they ought to know them; they
have not digested that knowledge by any serious Meditations, they do not
believe it. Is it possible that any one should be lifted up in an Opinion of
himself above others, who looks to the Rock from which he is hewed, and to the
hole of the pit out of which he is dug, that he is the same Clay, the same
Dust with another; though it has pleased the Potter to order him to be a
Vessel of more External Honor, and his Neighbor a Vessel of more Dishonor in
the World: Or that any one should exalt himself above what is the Will of God
concerning him, thinking that God does not deal by him as he has deserved; who
knows, That he was a Child of wrath by Nature: That he has made himself much
more so, by his actual Disobediences: That he is punished seven times less than
he has deserved. 3. Then consider, How little a thing it is to be great in the
World. It signifies nothing as to our better part, but mischief for the most
part. The Soul of Man is not bettered by Riches or Honor, or any of those good
things which affect us, as to our outward Man. It signifies nothing, as to the
Eternal State, either of Soul or Body, and as to the outward Man in this Life,
which alone has any concern in these things. They are so uncertain, we are set
in such slippery places, while we stand upon these Mountains of Ice and Glass,
that no considerate Soul can justly value himself upon them; but pray, O pray
for an humble low Spirit. There is indeed a natural lowness and demission of
Mind, and that is a great happiness, where God does give it unto any. A
naturally high and haughty Spirit is exposed to greater Temptations than
another that is naturally of a low and mean Spirit; as the tall Cedar and Oak
is more exposed to boisterous Winds than the poor Shrub. There is also a Moral
Humility, a lowness of Mind and Spirit caused from Education, and the due
Digestion of Moral Principles, and this also does something. But there is also
an Habit of Humility, into which the Soul is wrought by the Holy Spirit of God;
making the Word of God to take hold of the Heart: when the Will of God is that
which makes the Heart to stoop, and brings it to a submission to its portion.
This is of all other the more excellent, the most Divine, the most Effectual.
Now there is nothing more effectual to arm a Soul against this Temptation than
this lowliness of Mind; nothing more exposing the Soul to this Temptation than
that habit which is contrary to it. Pride and height of Spirit, is the great
Mother of Discontent, when it cease to be with us, as it formerly was. Hence
it is that Men and Women conclude, they had better not be, than be poor and in
misery; it is better for them to put an end to their own days, than to be
exposed to shame, contempt, and obloquy. It is therefore of very high
concernment to all of us that would be out of the danger of these Fiery Darts,
to study humility, while we are in health, while we are in the highest
circumstances of prosperity, to be thinking of a lower state and condition, and
meditating of the vanity of the high things of the World, the incertainty and
slipperiness of them, the littleness of them under their greatest appearances;
to be thinking what poor Creatures we are, how little we brought into this
world with us, how little any of us have deserved at the hands of God, to feed
our selves continually with Meditation^ which may keep us in a low opinion of
our selves.

CHAP. VII.
A Third Direction for the preventing of this Temptation. The possessing of our
Souls with Patience under, and arming of our Souls against, all manner of
Discontent. The Mischief of Discontent, the Excellency of Contentment and the
usefulness of it.

3. IF we would keep our selves from the Assaults of this Temptation, we must
make it our business to learn in all estates to be content: To possess our
selves with Patience, and arm our selves against all manner of Discontent. No
Soul satisfied, and contented with his or her state, and condition; falls
into this Snare of the Devil; it is always the effect of Discontent: Now
Discontent is ordinarily bottomed in Pride, but possibly not always. St. Paul
tells us, Phil. 4. 11. I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to
be content. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound: every
where, and in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry,
both how to abound, and suffer need. There is no such Antidote as this against
the Poison of this Fiery Dart: The Temptation lies here, Better be out of the
World any way, then endure this Misery, then be exposed to this Shame, then
come into the hands of such Enemies. But the Soul that has possessed it self
with Patience, that has learned in every Estate to be Content, and has
brought it self into a willingness that God should choose its Lot, and carve its
Portion, for it is Armed as with a Coat of Male; no Dart of this Nature can
possibly penetrate such a a Soul. And suffer me to tell you, this will be a
Lesson hardly learned, if once the Evil be come upon you; when the Sense of the
present Evil naturally stirs up Passion in us: of so unspeakable a
Consequence is it to have our Wills subdued to the Will of God, to that degree
that it shall perfectly rule over us. In matters of Action we sometimes may be
at loss, doubting what the will of God is, and what we ought to do; but now in
any Case of Suffering, the Will of God is clear, there can be no dispute about
it: There can be no Evil of Punishment in a City, or in a Family, but God must
be the Author of it; it must be the Will of God that such or such a Person
should come to Poverty, come into Disgrace, be exposed to Shame and Contempt;
that this. or that Man or Woman should be Racked and Tormented with such a
Disease. Now our Business must be, to bring our Wills to the Will of God; nor
must this be studied with reference to a particular Case, for who can tell what
shall befall him; but to learn with Saint Paul, in all things to be content, to
have an Heart ready in all Essaies, in all Contingences of this Life, to comply
with the Divine Will: Not that it is possible, for a Christian so far to subdue
himself, that it shall not at all reluct, nor wish it it self to be in a better
Condition; but so far, that the Spirit shall get the Victory, and Conquer the
Motions of the Flesh, and the Heart shall prefer the Will of God to its own
Will; and this is a great business, to bring the Soul of a Man to this pass.
And in order to this, there is nothing so much to be studied as Humility and
the Mortification of Pride: For as Solomon says, Only by Pride comes
Contention. So give me leave to tell you, Only from Pride comes a Discontent
at the Condition wherein God has set us. For why is the Man or Woman
discontented? But because he or she thinks he or she is unworthily dealt
with, and has not according to what they have merited. It would be a far too
great undertaking for me in a branch of Application, to direct means in order
to this Contentment, and propound Rational, or Spiritual Considerations, which
duly digested, with the Blessing of God upon them, may work the heart into this
frame; there have been whole Volumns that have been written upon it by Divines
of all sorts. I should only commend one to you, written in our own Language:
It is Mr. Borroughs his Book called, The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment:
where enough is said upon this Argument, upon the due digestion of which there
will be found nothing wanting but Prayer on our side; for the great Work must
be the Lords: who alone can bow and change the Will of Man, and work it into a
compliance with the Will of God. Our Passions, since Man in the Fall lost the
Reins and Government of them, are grown too hard for our Reason: I shall only
tell you, That a Discontented Spirit is the Devils great Advantage in the
forcing of this Dreadful Temptation. No Man can possibly be under the power of
this Impression, but that Man only who is persuaded, That it is better not to
be, then to be so Miserable as he is in his present State and Condition.

And hence it is, that although Godly Men and Women may often fall under the
molestations of this Temptation, yet they seldom fall under it (I will not say
never, but I say seldom) because although their Wills are not fully subdued to
the Will of God, yet they are generally so far subdued to the Divine will, that
the Devil seldom gets this Advantage against them, so as they shall commit
such a Sin.

CHAP. VIII.
A Fourth Direction for the preventing of this Temptation. The Increase of
Faith, and Mortifying Unbelief. As to the Being of God, his Providence, his
Promises. What Unbelief advantageth this Temptation. What Faith prepares the
Soul against it. Three particulars instanced in. An Explication of them and of
the Forces of this Direction.

4. FOurthly, Endeavor to promove the habit and work of Faith in your Souls,
and to subdue Unbelief. It is the Apostles Exhortation, Heb. 3. 12. Take heed
Brethren, least there be in any of you an Evil Heart of Unbelief, in departing
from the Living God. To depart from the Living God, is to depart from the Law
of God; from the Rule which he has set us to guide our Conversation: Thou
shall do no Murder, or Thou shall not Kill, is a part of that Rule (you know.)
Now it is Unbelief which gives a Man any Encouragement to a departure from God,
in any thing, much more in this: Unbelief, signifies a not agreement to the
Propositions of the Word Revealing the Will of God: Or a Distrust in God for
the fulfilling of his Promises, whether relating to special Providence, or
special Grace, or Eternal Life. Study therefore to be Rooted and Grounded in the
Faith; that you may firmly Believe these things:

1. That there is a God, whose Right it is to Rule and Govern us, to Order us
and our Affairs and Conditions, and to dispose of us; and who will one day Judge
us, and deal with us according to what we have done. Whosoever it is that
lives not under this Conviction, must needs think himself in his own Power,
and that he may do with himself what he pleases; his Tongue is his own and he
may speak, his Hands are his own and he may do what he list, and his Life is
his own and he may deny himself in it, and throw it away as he pleases; for to
whom should he be accountable for it? O therefore set God always before your
Eyes, possess your selves that you are not your own, but Persons under
Authority, and upon whom a Superior Being has a Superintendancy; you will
fay, Are we dead Dogs, that we should think any thing contrary to this? Thus
we think: But the Truth is, we profess an assent and agreement to many
Propositions, which are not so fastened upon our Hearts, so rivetted in our
Souls, as they ought to be. For it must be a mighty inordinate Act, and
contrary to the Dictate of all Reason, for a Man to undertake the disposal of
that over which he has no Dominion, and for the disposal of which he must be
accountable unto a Superior. Indeed there is something of Atheism in every
Sin, but there must be abundance of Atheism in this Sin: It is impossible that
while a Man entertaineth Thoughts to destroy himself, he should fixedly
believe, that he is not at his own disposal as to this Life; but at the
disposal of God, and he such a God as is to be his Judge; and whom will one day
call him to Account, as well for what he has done with the Life which he gave
him, as with the Estate, Parts, etc. which he gave him. I would therefore never
have a man think that he sufficiently believes this first Principle of all
Duty and Religion, but be ever whetting it upon his Heart: That God is, and
what a God he is.

2. That every Man and Woman has a Spiritual Part, an Immortal Soul, that can
no more be extinguished with the Body, then Eat, or Drink, or Sleep with it,
but goes to an Eternal Existence when it is separated from the Body: Where the
Body raised up from the dust, shall one day meet it and be united to it, and
with it either suffer Eternal Torment, or enjoy Eternal Happiness, according to
what it has done in this Life. Certainly no Rational Being, no Man could
possibly entertain a Thought to Kill himself, if he were firmly persuaded, That
it is a thing impossible for him to determine his own Being. We cannot desire
nor attempt to go about what we are fully persuaded is an impossible
achievement. A thing impossible to be obtained, our Reason will not suffer our
Mind to run upon, or our Hearts to run out after things which we clearly
apprehend are not possible in Nature. Now admitting these Principles, That Man
is something more then Flesh and Blood animated, That he has a Spiritual Part,
that this it is Immortal, and cannot Perish with the Body; but when it parts
from the Body goes into Eternal Mansions, either in Happiness or in Misery:
That the Body after Death shall revive again in the Resurrection, and there
both the Soul and Body of every Man and Woman shall be again united and make
one Person; and shall both together enter an happy or miserable Eternity. I say
admitting this, it is impossible for a Man to determine his Being, all he can
possibly do is to determine his Being in this World. He can neither by such Act
determine his Being nor yet his Misery; he may determine indeed his Misery as
to this Life, but his Soul will then but enter into a state of Ten thousand
times more Misery in another World; and there will be a time after the
revolution of a few years, when his Body shall return to Ten thousand times
more Misery than it ever felt in this World. Now certainly no Person, under any
command or conduct of Reason, can possibly be induced to attempt a thing
impossible, to deliver himself from any Evil: Nor yet throw himself into an
infinitely worse state, to deliver himself from a present bad estate. All the
Entertainment therefore which such Temptations have in our Hearts, must be
advantaged from Unbelief of these great Principles; which indeed are the
Foundations and Principles of all Religion. Labor therefore, for as much as in
you lies to Root your selves in the belief of these things, that you may not
have the least doubt or haesitation of, in your Hearts with relation to them:
Live in the daily Meditation of them, suffer not your Souls to call them in
Question, be acquainted with those Portions of Holy Writ, where the Revelation
of these things is clearest to you. Take heed of Unbelief as to these things.

3. A Third thing, as to which the Soul should be fully persuaded, that will
avoid the dint of this Temptation, is as to the Truth of the Holy Scriptures in
the general, so of those Portions of them in particular; which reveals the Will
of God as to the preservation of our own Lives and the Lives of others, and the
Wrath of God against such as commit Sins of this Nature: Such as those Genesis 9.
6. Number. 35. 32. Thou shall not Kill, No Murderer has Eternal Life, and all
such as express the greatness of the Sin of Murder; for it is but an easy
Conclusion of Reason from these Principles, If I ought not to Kill another, I
ought much less to Kill my self: If I ought to preserve the Life of my
Neighbor, surely I ought to preserve my own Life: If I ought to preserve my
Chastity, to preserve my Vessel in Honor, surely I ought not to dash it in
pieces: If I ought not to maime or dismember my self, surely I ought not to
destroy my self. The truth is, no Soul can possibly be guilty of this Sin, who
either does not in whole disbelieve the Scriptures, or in whose Heart the
disbelief of them does not prevail to a very high degree at that time when he
is prevailed with by any Temptation to do such a thing.

But there is also another Unbelief which must be predominant in the Soul at
that time when it is prevailed upon by this Temptation, and that is a Distrust
in God for the fulfilling of his Promises; either with relation to special
Providence, or special Grace, or Eternal Life. Those who are in any Measure
acquainted with the Holy Scriptures, know that they are full of many great and
precious Promises, as to Eternal Life, and also as to this Life. As to Eternal
Life, made under such Conditions, and upon such Terms as his infinite Wisdom
thought fit to Prescribe and Limit. Those, as to this Life, are of various
sorts, many of them relating to an afflicted state; That he will put Strength
into us: That he will lay no more upon us then he will enable us to bear: That
he together with the Temptation, will also give an happy issue; and many more
of like import: as to which, the Soul that Trusts God, and in which the
Exercises of such Trust and Confidence in God, are lively, and vigorous, can
never be Guilty of this Sin; for how shall that Soul go about to deliver it out
of a Misery, which believes that God will in his own time deliver it, and in
the mean time Support, Uphold, and Comfort it, and make its Affliction issue in
Good, and for its advantage; working for it a far more Eternal and exceeding
Weight of Glory: Or how shall that Soul Trust in God for Pardon of Sin, and
Eternal Life, which knows that Repentance and Faith, are the ordinary means
prescribed by God for obtaining these things, and do the last Act of his Life
of such a Nature as leaves no room to be renewed by Repentance; and is such as
God has said, None that does it has Eternal Life. So that as it is apparent
that this Temptation is advantaged by nothing so much as Atheism and Unbelief,
so there is no such Antidote against it as vigorous Habits and Acts of Faith:
Nor is it possible that a believing Soul should be under the Power and
Prevailings of it, while it keeps under the Conduct and Command of Reason.

CHAP. IX.
An Holy Life and Conversation an excellent Preparative to this Spiritual
Combat. This opened. Terrors of Conscience for Sin, often times one great cause
of such Thoughts. These not ordinary, but for great Sinnings, some more
notorious Acts of Ungodliness, or of Unrighteousness, great Sinnings against
Light, etc.

5. FIfthly, There is no better Preparative for this Spiritual Combat, then an
Holy Life and Conversation. Although the Holiest Men alive are not exempted
from this Fiery Dart (even Christ himself heard the Devil say (Cast thy self
down) yet you shall observe these Temptations mostly fall upon Men of loose
Lives and Conversation, at least do most ordinarily prevail against such. The
ordinary Motive that prevails with Souls to do this thing, is the avoiding of
some great Evil which either they have in prospect, or feel the burden of. Now
this Evil is either more External, such as Slavery and falling into the hands
of Enemies, This made Saul fall upon his own Sword, and Cato kill himself: Or
horrible bodily Pains and Tortures; being exposed to some shameful Death, etc.
Or else they are more Internal, such as Horrors and Pangs of Conscience. They
are rare Instances, that either Holy or Civil History gives us of Persons
putting an end to their own Lives to avoid Imprisonment, Shame, or Tortures
from Men; and not many that we have of Persons, who in Terrible Bodily Pains,
have exposed to the Prevailings of this Temptation. Now these Terrors and
Pangs of Conscience arise from the Souls Reflections upon its Guilt in respect
of Sin. Thus the Scripture tells us Judas hanged himself, crying out, he had
betrayed Innocent Blood. Thus History tells us Pontius Pilate killed himself;
and thus we Read of many others in History. And although there be no Sin so
little, but if God sets it home upon the Conscience and supporteth not the
Soul with his Grace, it is able to drive the Soul to this desperate issue; yet
it is not ordinary for Sins of a more minute Nature, and such as the best of
Men commit, to be followed with such horrors as seize the Spirit of a Man, or
for Satan to take such an advantage from them. The reflections which produce
this effect, are usually upon some Sins of a more then ordinary Tincture; and
that have had some more eminent circumstances of Aggravation: From whence it
follows that a Godly and Righteous Conversation, Religious toward God, Just
and Righteous toward Men, is one of the best Preservatives from the violence
of this Temptation. A Pr^fane Atheistical Blasphemous Person is highly exposed
to the Impetus of it, so is any, who has bin guilty of more notorious Acts of
Unrighteousness, such as Murder, Persecution, high degrees of Violence and
Oppression: For though it be true that God is able to pardon many Sins as well
as few, great as well as small, and the Promise extends to all Sin and
Blasphemy, to Scarlet and Crimson Sins; yet we shall find it an harder thing to
be believe in Christ for the Remission of Sins of so high a Tincture: Besides
that, Courses of Sin of this Nature, have a very ill influence upon the Heart,
to blind, and to harden it; so that poor Creatures under the Guilt of them are
often more sensible of the Wrath of God due to those who commit such things,
then of the Evil and Filthiness of them. O therefore flee such things as these
are, you know not how far God for them may leave you to Satan's Buffetings of
this Nature; you know not what it is to Repent of them, nor how hardly the Soul
that is under the Guilt of them is brought to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,
or to hope in him for the free Pardon and Remission of them; or to arrive at
any sense of the Pardon of them: In short, take heed of all bold sinnings
against Light and Checks or Reverberations of Conscience. If we will not
hearken to the lighter Checks and Dictates of Conscience, we are often and but
justly repaid with the severer Terrors and Affrightments of it, for our doing
of such things contrary to its Dictates and lighter Admonitions: But the holy
Man that walks closely with God, that lives up to his Light and Revelations
of the Will of God, is very much out of this danger; and though he may have
some impressions of this Nature, yet they rarely are advantaged from an aching
Conscience in the sense of Guilt.

CHAP. X.
Directions for them who are already fallen under this Temptation. Melancholy
to be evacuated by Natural Means. 2. The Motive is to be considered, which
usually is a freedom from some present or imminent Evil. Two things to be
considered: 1. Whether it will free us, to destroy our selves? 2. Whether there
be not a more safe and certain way to be free?

I Have thus far only prepared you against a wrestling with this Temptation
and given you preventing Physic, (which indeed they say is best) and it is
better indeed to keep such an Enemy as Satan is, Armed with this Dart, at a
distance; then to trust to our own Strength in the hour of Combat: But
possibly as to some poor Souls this counsel may come too late, the Enemy may be
upon them: What shall be done in this Case? I shall conclude my Discourse,
referring to this Temptation with some Advice of this Nature.

1. And here my first Direction must be of the same Nature as before: The
Evacuating of those Peccant Natural Humors of which the Devil takes advantage;
and this at the first. Physicians will tell you, That there is a Melancholic
Deliration: Melancholy may so far prevail, as to put a Man or Woman out of the
Conduct and Guidance of his Reason; and who knows what a Man in those
Circumstances may do: and although it be true that Acts done in Distractions
are not Humane Acts, and possibly shall not be imputed to us, yet let me tell
you that these are sad issues of our Lives, and oftentimes Men and Women are so
rational by Times, and in some Acts, that it is a very hard judgment to be made
by standers by, whether such Miserable Creatures, doing such an Act, do it
under the Conduct of their Reason (for the avoiding of a great Misery as they
suppose, which they feel or fear) yea or no. This therefore is the first thing
to be done in this Case, for the Removal of those Rises and Advantages which
the Devil takes from this Temperature of Body. When this is done,

2. The next thing to be attended, Is a just Enquiry into the Motive which the
Devil urges to us to induce us to such an Act, that ordinarily is the removing
of our selves from the sense of some great Evil, which either is upon us, or
like some black cloud, hangs over our heads, and we apprehend is not
avoidable: for although we read of some amongst the Heathens, that had got some
imperfect Notions of the Immortality of the Soul, and an happy Estate, into
which it should enter after Death; out of have to be there, put an end to their
Lives: yet there are no Christians, but are better instructed, and know that
although the Souls of Men and Women be indeed Immortal, and that there is a
Blessed Eternity into which the Souls of some Men and Women shall enter; yet
there is also a Miserable Eternity, into which the Souls of others shall go.
And for the Blessed Eternity into which some shall enter, the way to it is
directed by Gods Word, and not by our own Fancy; and that it is no way to do it
to die in a sinful Act, which leaves hardly any room for Repentance, and
speaks the greatest Unbelief imaginable. So that, I say, the general Motive
prevailing with any to the least hearkening to this Temptation, is the removal
of our selves from the fear or present sense of some evils, which either press
or threaten us. This being found out, certainly there can be nothing imagined
more effectual to deliver us from the dint of this Temptation, then seriously
to consider with our selves. 1. Whether the destroying our selves will effect
that end, indeed delivering the Soul from such Evils? 2. Whether, supposing
that it would, deliverance might not be hoped for another way; far more certain
and more advantageous? As to the First, A Man or Woman must be more certain of
his or her happy state after this Life, then it is possible a Soul should be
that does entertain such thoughts, or he can never be assured, that the doing
of such an Act should deliver him from the Misery under which he groaneth. It
is indeed very possible that a Soul should be under the assurance of Eternal
Life (whatever the Papists say) but it is impossible that a Soul should be
under this Assurance at the same time, having it in his Heart, and resolving to
do that Act, as to which the Scripture has said, That he that does it, shall
not inherit Everlasting Life, or has not Eternal Life. Now admit the Soul not
to enter into Life, he certainly goes into the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone; where the Worm never dies, the Fire never goes out. For a Man or
Woman to leap out of the Miseries of this Life into the Pit of Hell, to deliver
himself from any degree of Misery, either felt or feared, is so wild and
irrational an Undertaking, as no Soul under the guidance of Reason can do it,
but one that believes no Hell; so that it is an Act agreeing only to an
Unbeliever, or a Madman, an Atheist, or a Man Distracted. 2. But Secondly,
Admit now that a Man or Woman, destroying him or her self, would bring him or
her a deliverance from Misery in the Grave; Job says, The wicked cease from
troubling, the weary be at rest. The Prisoners rest and hear not the Voice of
the Oppressor, the Servant is free from his Master. So then, if Men's Souls
expired with their Bodies, Death would deliver them; it freeth the Beast of the
Field, and all sensitive Creatures; admit it would so free a Man or Woman,
which it will not, yet certainly it is by no means elegible, unless we can be
freed no other way, and to no better advantage. Suppose a Man or Woman, under a
painful fit of the Gout, or under an extremity of Pain in some particular
Member or Joint, so as the cutting off an Hand or a Leg, or a Joint, will
certainly cure him, yet who almost (if it be but as to the pulling out of a
Tooth) will purchase his freedom from pain at that rate, till he or she sees
that no other way will do. Thou art under a great degree of Misery, great
bodily Pains or Torments, or in danger of some great Shame, Misery, or
Reproach: Thou have a Temptation to free thy self from the pressure of it, by
destroying thy self, and (which is the best thou can fancy if thou be an
Atheist) annihilating thy Being. But is there no other way than this for thy
Relief? Is there not a waiting upon God, an exercising of hope and confidence
in him? Is he not able to support and to bear thee up under these pressures? To
make thy burden light unto thee, and to take it off thy Shoulders when he
shall think good? Has he not promised that he will not lay upon us more than
he will enable us to bear, that he will be with us in the Fires, and in the
Waters, that the Waters shall not drown us, nor the Flames kindle upon us? If I
can be delivered from an Evil, of which I am afraid, or which I feel a more
certain and easy way, than that which I am pressed to use, which is both
uncertain and of greater disadvantage; does not all imaginable Reason dictate
to me the use of it? And certainly to a Soul possessed of the truth of what God
has revealed in his Word, and under the conduct of Reason, nothing need be
added to repel so unnatural a Temptation as this is; whereas therefore some are
shy that persons under the prevailing of Melancholy, should read Books of
^^rrible Arguments, or hear Sermons of the Wrath of God against Sinners, of
Hell and Judgment. I do not think any Books opening the Scriptures, or any
portions of Scriptures, fitter to be read, or any Sermons fitter to be heard,
by persons under these circumstances, then such Books, such Sermons, such
Portions of Holy Writ, as most express the Wrath of God against Sinners, most
livelily express the miserable estate of Souls in another World under the Wrath
of God: Together with such as contain or explain the Promises of God, for
Support, and Strength, and Help under, and Deliverance from, the greatest
Pressures of Affliction and Misery. By the reading and hearing of the one (the
Grace of God concurring) which is always requisite to make the Soul believe
what it reads and hears, a Soul shall be deterred from such an undertaking from
the rational consideration, That there is no way for it to get out of its
Misery; and by the other, it shall be persuaded that there is a far nearer and
more certain way of Relief for it, if it can but exercise a little Patience
from the good hand of God, who is able to relieve it, and who has promised,
and is faithful. Which two points are of very great import for a Soul to be
persuaded of, that it may stand against this fiery Dart, and of that Nature,
that it is impossible that any Soul in the full possession and belief of them,
should ever listen to this Temptation, so long as it pleases God to keep it in
the exercise of its Reason. Let therefore every Soul under this Temptation,
make it its business to give it self the fullest possession of these Truths;
for it is the Unbelief or faint Belief, of these things, that gives the least
advantage to the roaring Lion, thus seeking about to devour Souls. The more
rooted a Soul is in the Doctrine of Eternity, both that which relates to
damned Souls, and that which relates to such as shall be saved, the more
remote and difficult it will be, as to listening to any Temptation of this
nature.

CHAP. XI.
Further Directions for Souls thus tempted. The avoiding of Solitude. The Study
and Meditation of the Nature of the Covenant of Grace, in the Matter of it, the
freeness of it, the sureness of it, the well ordering of it in all things.

3. Dir. AVoid Solitudes and Solitary Places; I mentioned this before as a
means to prevent prevailings of Melancholy, but let me a little farther enlarge
upon that Argument. Indeed excesses of Solitude are by no means to be affected
by Christians, under the greatest freedom of Body and Mind, tho nothing more
conduces to a Souls Health and Freedom in communion with God, then some just
Measures and Proportions of it; yet nothing is more dangerous in this hour of
Temptation. I observe Elijah was alone when he prayed God in a fit of
Discontent, to take away his Life; and Jonah, chapter 4. 5, 8. was in a Booth
alone, out of the City, when he said, It is better for me to die than to live.
And our blessed Lord was alone when Matthew. 4. 6. the Tempter said unto him, set
upon the Pinnacle of the Temple, If thou be the Son of God cast thy self down.
Of Souls under these circumstances, it is eminently true that Solomon says,
Ecc. 4. 11. Two are better than one, and woe to him that is alone when he
falls, for he has none other to help him up. These Acts are committed
usually by Persons that are alone. It is therefore highly advisable to Persons
under these Impressions, to avoid giving this advantage to the Adversary, and
to those who are nearly concerned in, and about Persons under these Temptations
to be watchful, as to this thing, especially when they discern the Impressions
are most strong upon them. But having touched upon this before, I shall add no
more to it now.

4. Dir. Fourthly, There is nothing more proper for Souls under these
circumstances, Than to be much in the Study and Meditation of the Nature of the
Covenant of Grace. I told you before, that supposing a Man or Woman under the
conduct and government of Reason, it is very hard to imagine what Motive should
possibly prevail upon them, to put an end unto their Lives, but the freeing of
themselves from so eminent Evils, which they suffer to that degree, that they
conclude it is better for them to die than to live. Now these Evils I told you
were either External, Afflictions and Crosses; or such as are Internals,
Horrors of Mind, Terrors of Conscience. If the Motive be a freedom from Evils
of the first sort, I advised before what I judged proper, viz. The
Consideration, whether the determination of our Lives in that manner, would
indeed free us, or rather make our Condition much worse. And Secondly, Whether
there be not an easier and safer way to procure our selves such an Immunity.
But now, Suppose the Evils be of the second sort, viz. The Horrors and Terrors
of Conscience, from the guilt of sin. If this be the Motive, the force of it
lies in our Ignorance or Mistake about the Covenant of Grace, and look as
under a Temptation, to which External Misery is the great Motive. There is
nothing more proper than a just understanding of the state of the Damned, and
the misery of Impenitent and Unpardoned Souls in the World to come: So
supposing the Motive to be Horrors and Terrors of Conscience, upon our
Reflections upon Sin, there is nothing more proper for a Soul than rightly to
understand the Covenant of Grace, and the reading of such Books, and whetting
upon our Hearts such Portions of Gods revealed Will in his Word, as are most
fully expressive of it. Truly, to understand this, That there is no Sinner run
into such an arrear with Gods Justice, no Soul so guilty, but by virtue of a
gracious Covenant of Redemption and Grace, which God the Father has from
Eternity contracted with the Son of his Love; the Redeemers part in which
Covenant is also fulfilled by Jesus Christ: may find Mercy with God, repenting
of his Sin, and casting it self upon the free Mercy and Grace of God, in and
through the Merits and Satisfaction of Christ. Such is this Covenant of Grace,
that the most guilty Soul fulfilling his part in it, and accepting of it, may
be assured, that although its past sins, cannot be made never to have been, yet
they shall be as if they never had been. That is, they shall no more condemn
the Soul, then if they never had been; they shall not be mentioned, they shall
be sought for and not found; the Righteousness of Christ shall be reckoned unto
the Soul, as if it were its Righteousness. It is impossible that a Soul knowing
and believing this, and living in the view of this gracious Covenant, should
ever be frighted out of its Life, from the Horrors of Conscience by its
Reflections upon its guilt of Sin. Though an ignorant Person, that knows not
this, or an unbelieving Soul; which though it may have received the Notion of
it, yet cannot believe it may from this Motive be induced to a yielding to this
Temptation; yet to speak the truth, admiting a Soul sure of its Damnation, and
that its Sins were so great as they could never be forgiven; it should in
reason rather be an Argument to a Soul, if it were possible, by all means
imaginable to lengthen out its days to the years of Meth^s^lah, then to cut off
an inch of that time which God will allow him. For what reason can prompt any
Man to think the Horrors and Torments of a wounded Conscience more intolerable
than the Pains that are suffered by damned Souls? Or what Reason will guide any
Man to endeavor to be tormented before his time? How earnest do we find
condemned Malefactors, sometimes (tho out of all hope to be pardoned) but to be
reprieved for a time; but I say, by reason of the Covenant of Grace, this is
not the case of any one poor Soul, to advantage this Temptation. There is no
Soul that can in judgment say (though sometimes they say so in their Fits and
Passions) I know I shall be damned, and there is nothing can give a ^ise for
Satan in this Temptation, but Persons Ignorance, or Unbelief of the Covenant of
Grace. O therefore, let all Souls, but especially such as are thus tempted,
study this: Consider,

1. What it is that God has Covenanted for, for pardon of Sin: For power and
strength against Sin, for Eternal Life and Salvation, for strength against
Temptations. Every Spiritual Promise is a branch of the Covenant, and the
Promises are of those various Natures, that there is no Spiritual Evil of which
we can have any present sense, or any fear as to time to come, for which God
has not in one Promise or an other provided us an Antidote. Is it the guilt o^
Sin already committed? God has promised to pardon it. Is it the fear of guilt
not yet contracted, God has said, I will heal your Backslidings and love you
freely* He has said, Sin shall not have Dominion over your Mortal Bodies. So
as tho^ have no reason to destroy thy self, either because thou have sinned, or
because^ thou fear thou shall sin against God, to an irremissible degree.
Art thou afrai^ that Temptations shall prevail against thee^ He has assured
thee, that Christ wa^ therefore tempted, that he might be able t^ succor the
tempted; that with the temptation he will give thee an happy issue, that he
will bruise Satan under thy Feet shortly. In short, There is no Spiritual
Encumbrance, as to which there is not some provision made in the Covenant of
Grace, and declared in some Gospel Promise.

2. Consider again, the freeness of the Covenant. It is called a Covenant of
Grace, Grace signifies Free Love. I will (says God) heal your Backslidings,
and love you freely. There is nothing to be paid for thy Pardon, all that is,
is finished, the utmost Farthing that the Justice of God could exact, is
already paid by the Hand of Christ. There is nothing required of thee but an
acknowledgement of thy Guilt, an hatred of thy former Ways, a resolution joined
with an endeavor to forsake them, with an acceptance of the Lord Jesus Christ,
as thy Redeemer and Savior. Oh this, this is that, which could a Soul, under
Temptations of this Nature believe, these Temptations would certainly abate. We
in distresses of Conscience stick too much in a Righteousness of our own. Let
me here give you the Copy of a short Letter wrote by that Eminent Servant of
God Luther, to an Hermit, v. Luther. Ep. t. 1. I (says he) desire to know
what thy Soul does, whether at last being weary of its own Righteousness, it
has learned to breath after, and to trust in the Righteousness of Christ. For
in our Age a Temptation of Presumption too much prevails, and particularly in
them, who by all means study to approve themselves Righteous and good Men,
being ignorant of the Righteousness of God, plentifully and freely given unto
us, by and through Christ. They so long study to work well, until they arrive
at a confidence of standing before God, as it were, upon their own Legs, and by
their own Merits, which is a thing impossible. You and I have both been once of
that Opinion, or rather in that Error, but now I set my self against it, but
have not yet conquered my self as to it. Therefore (my dear Brother) learn
Christ, and him crucified; learn to sing Praise to him, and despairing of your
self, to say to him, Lord Jesus thou art my Righteousness, I am thy Sin: Thou
have taken upon thee what was mine, and given unto me what was thine. Thou have
taken what thou were not, and given unto me what I was not. Take heed (says
he) of aiming at such a degree of purity, as to appear to thy self no Sinner,
for Christ dwells in the Hearts of none but Sinners. He therefore came down
from Heaven when he dwelled in his Saints, that he might dwell in Sinners. O
meditate of his Love, and you will feel his most sweet Consolation. For to what
purpose has he died, if we could arrive at a tranquillity of Conscience by our
own Endeavors, and Tormenting of our selves? You will never therefore find
Peace, but by despairing of your Selves, and your own Works, and a fiducial
dependence on him. You will further learn by this, That as he took thy Nature,
and made thy Sins (as it were) his, so he has made his Righteousness thine. An
hour of Temptation, either of this Nature, or to despair of Gods Mercy, as to
the pardon of Sin, and the Eternal Salvation of the Soul, will discover the
value of those Physicians, who have found out another way to relieve afflicted
Consciences, in the sense of their own Unrighteousness, then by pressing the
great Doctrine of the Gospel of the Justification of the Soul, by the
Righteousness of Christ, reckoned to the believing Soul for Righteousness. And
certainly, Gods Absolution or Acquittance of a Soul from its Debts to Divine
Justice, by the Righteousness of the Son of God, reckoned, accounted, or (which
is the same) imputed to it, as if performed by it, is of no more difficult
Conception (whatever some pretend in the case) than a Creditors Discharge, and
giving Acquittance to a Debtor upon his Friend or Sureties payment of the Debt;
upon which the Principal is Discharged, as if he had personally paid it.
Believe it, other Notions may afford matter of Discourse in a calm time, but
nothing but the Notion of Free Grace and Christ's Righteousness reckoned to us,
will serve us in an hour of Temptation. Let us therefore rather choose to part
with the Sun in the Firmament, or with the Light of our Eyes, than to part with
this great Truth. Let some trust in Charriots, some in Horses. Let some trust
in the Works of others, some in their own Fancies; but let us remember the Name
of the Lord of God, and let us remember that his Name is the Lord our
Righteousness. When a Soul is under great Horror and Terrors of Conscience,
because of its Guiltiness, its former guilt of Sin, let the Sin be what, and of
what Nature it will. Oh let it remember that Christ was given for a Covenant
for the People; he was by his Father called in Righteousness, and his Hand was
held, and he was kept and given for a Covenant of the People, for a Light of
the Gentles, to open the blind Eyes, to to bring the Prisoners from the Prison,
and them that sit in Darkness, out of the Prison House; Isaiah 42. 6, 7. Let
him remember that he is to say, Isaiah 45. 24. Surely in the Lord I have
Righteousness and Strength. That if he had never committed those Sins, which
now so lie upon and load his Conscience, yet he could never have stood before
God in his own Works, and in a legal Righteousness; but what the Law could not
do because it was weak through our Flesh, that God himself has done, sending
his Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin condemning Sin in the
Flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us; Romans 8. 3.
And let him consider, that being he must be saved by Christ, and stand before
God, as found in him, not having his own Righteousness, though his Nakedness
has been more than the Nakedness of some other Men, yet that long white Robe
is large enough to cover it; for the Righteousness of Christ, his Merits, are
of vast and infinite Virtue; as the Schoolmen say of Gods Essence, that it
fills Heaven and Earth, and an infinite space beyond both. So the Merits of
Christ have expiated for the Sins of all that shall be saved, and have an
infinite Virtue beyond. Therefore there is no reason for a Soul to concluds its
Sins shall not be forgiven, or its Horrors of Conscience for them never cease:
those cease of course upon the sense of pardon, or a good hope through Grace.
It is but a Relic of Popery that tortureth Men's Consciences past cure, I mean
an Opinion lurking in us, that we must our selves satisfy the Justice of God;
and that upon the price paid, and satisfaction given by Christ, pardon does not
proceed freely; for all Sin, and all Blasphemy, to a Soul seeking for it, by
earnest Prayer, true Sorrow for Sin, and resolution against it, and a true
adherence to the Lord Jesus Christ.

3. Again, Study the Sureness of this Covenant. It is a Covenant of Salt, as
well as a Covenant of Peace. Gods Covenant with Day and Night, shall sooner
cease; it contains the sure Mercies of David. It cannot fail, God cannot
suffer his Faithfulness to fail, he cannot alter the thing that has gone out
of his Lips. The failure of Covenants amongst Men, is rooted in their
Variableness and Mutability, their want of Foresight and Knowledge of future
Contingencies, etc. no such thing can be as to this Covenant. He is the Lord
that changes not, his Name is, I am, he had a perfect and certain Prospect and
Foresight of all that could happen.

4. Finally, Meditate of it as a well ordered Covenant. It is true, The
Covenant of Grace has its Conditions to be fulfilled on our part. Such as are
the taking hold of it, mentioned Is. 56. 6. which cannot be without seeking the
Lord while he may be found, calling upon him while he is near; the wicked Man
forsaking his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and his returning to
the Lord; Isaiah 55. 6, 7. and perseverance in the ways of God, is another
condition to be performed. But as to those, it is in this well ordered. That
there are Branches in the same Covenant, wherein God has promised: 1. To work
those Conditions in us; that is, we doing what in us lies by Virtue of that
Common Grace, which he denies to none, or by Virtue of those special Habits,
which he will please to work in us, not to be wanting in those further Aids and
Assistances of his Grace, by which we shall be enabled to do whatsoever he has
required of us: in order to the obtaining the promised end of our Hopes in the
Salvation of our Souls. 2. That that those Failings which we shall be guilty of
through Humane Infirmity, though they may cause us sorrow in the Flesh, yet
they shall not frustrate the Promise and Covenant of God, he will yet heal our
Backslidings and love us freely. Now the Covenant of Grace being thus rightly
understood and apprehended, I would fain understand what room can possibly be
left in a Sinner for Satan to fasten this fiery Dart, with any effect upon the
Soul. I will suppose a Soul under the greatest Terror imaginable, for Sins of
the highest nature. Why should he destroy himself, if there be hope in the God
of Heaven, concerning such Sinners? If all Sin and Blasphemy, whereby a Man
shall Blaspheme, may be forgiven him? Is God a Righteous God that loves
Righteousness, and can by no means clear the guilty? Why yet should he do it,
if he has provided the Soul a Righteousness, whereby it may stand Righteous
before God, acquitted form all manner of Guilt, and out of all danger of
Condemnation? What if it has formerly been without Righteousness, and be yet
without Strength or Ability to any Act of Righteousness; if the Righteousness
wherein it must stand before God, be not any personal Righteousness of its own,
but the Righteousness of Christ reckoned to it for Righteousness? Is it
tormented through fear of future Sinnings, the prevailings of Temptations, or
its own Corruptions? Yet why should the poor Creature run himself out of the
World upon this fright, when the Covenant of Grace is so well ordered, as there
is in it a sufficient Provision made for it, both for Assistance against the
prevailings and dominion of Sin, to that degree, as to ruin the Soul to
Eternity, and as to that degree of Guilt, which every Soul through Ignorance,
Infirmity, pure or mixed, runs into, for the healings of its Backslidings. What
is here left for a sinful Soul to do, but to use the means of Grace, to apply
it self unto God by Fasting and Prayer, to consider its ways, and what in it
lies to turn to the Lord, to be sensible of its Sins, and to trust in the Lords
Mercies, taking heed to it self that it sin no more presumptuously; abstaining
from all appearances of Evil, studying to perfect Holiness in the fear of God;
and daily to renew its Repentance and Faith in Christ, as it discerns its
Sins are renewing every day. To what purpose does a Soul under such gracious
and hopeful Circumstances think of destroying it self, and asserting its own
Eternal Condemnation, or at least making its Salvation very uncertain, which it
should rather design to make sure, by an Holy Life and Conversation. So that, I
say, admit Horror of Conscience for Sin to be the Argument Satan makes use of
to enforce this Temptation, nothing can be more proper for a Soul exercised
under the Temptation, than to study, understand, lay hold on, make application
of, and improve the Covenant of Grace; and often to repeat to it self that of
St. Paul, Romans 8. 34, 35. Who is he that condemns? Or what sin is that which
can condemn me? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is
even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us, who shall
separate us from the Love of Christ? But this is enough to have spoken upon
this Argument.

CHAP. XII.
Further Directions. Not keeping the Devils Counsel, not deliberating or
parlying with Satan. Giving their Thoughts what lawful Diversions they can.
Whether they should shun Precipices, coming near Wells, or Ponds, and keeping
close to all Means of Grace, whether more public or Private.

5. FIthly, Let Christians under the Impetus of these Suggestions take heed of
keeping the Devils Counsel, or admitting any Parley or Deliberation with him
about this point of hearkening to the Motion. May it be the lot of any of our
Souls at any time to come under such Impressions? Oh let us never conceal them
from our Faithful Ministers, nor from our Christian Friends, nor from our
nearest Relations: Not from the first and second, because they are the
Ordinance of God unto us, to give us Spiritual Counsel and Assistance; to show
us the unreasonableness of the Motion, the danger of the Temptation; it is
their work to Pray with us and to Pray for us: It is the work of the Minister
to Interpret and Declare to us the Mind and Will of God. A Brother, a Spiritual
Friend, is born for an hour of Adversity: The Temptation, while discovered,
will press us harder, and we shall the less know what to say to the Tempter,
and how to Resist our great Adversary; nor should we conceal our selves from
our nearest Relations; for though they should not be so able as an Intelligent,
Godly Divine, or Knowing Christians; to fortify us with Reasons, and Arguments,
yet they will be concerned to Watch us, especially when they discern the
Impressions more violent, for sometimes Impressions of this nature are so
violent and strong, that they hurry poor Creatures to a present destroying of
themselves, and the Wicked Action is done in a Moment. And again, Christian, If
thou would be able to stand against this Fiery Dart; never admit a Parley or
Deliberation with the Tempter about it, That Soul is in a great degree
Conquered, that is prevailed with to deliberate upon an Action so apparently
contrary to the Revealed Will of God. Get thee behind me Satan, was Christ's
Answer to the Tempter; Luke 4. 8. When he Tempted him to Worship him: He would
not so much as once think upon the Motion.

6. Sixthly, Let Christians under these Assaults give their Thoughts as much
lawful Diversion as they can. I say lawful, for we must take heed of casting
out one Devil by another; but there is lawful Diversions enough, such are
visitings of good People, diligent Attendance upon our honest Labors in our
Callings, giving our selves any honest Employment, by our Exercise in which,
our Thoughts may be taken off from fixing upon the Impressions made upon them.
I have often seen it, that Persons under these Circumstances have been very
hardly persuaded to this; but it is Men and Women's duty in these Cases in a
thing which (as this is) is within their power, and only contrary to their
humor to force themselves, and if in this they be wanting it is a Presumptuous
Sinning.

7. Seventhly, I know not what I should say to that piece of Advice which some
give Souls under these Assaults. Not to shun the sight, or handling, or coming
near any Instruments, or Means which they may make use of to destroy
themselves, as Knives, Ropes, Wells, Precipices; etc. It is true, it is good
for us to go on in our ordinary way trusting in God, and not fearing the
Tempter; but in an hour when the Impression is very strong upon the Tempted
Soul: Whether it be advisable or no I cannot tell, for Christians thus Tempted,
to come too nigh Pricipices or Places of deep Waters, or such Instruments as
they may make a sudden use of, to do himself or herself Evil; at least not
without a close and narrow Watch upon them: for the truth is, in the heat and
violence of such Impressions, Men and Women often times have little use of their
Reason. As to this thing therefore I think Christians ought to Rule themselves
by the Circumstances of the present hour, and this cannot be fixed for a general
Direction: I will add but one thing more, and with that shut up this Discourse.

8. Let such Christians above all others, keep close to the use of all Means of
Grace, whether more Public or more Private. The Means of Grace are the Word,
the Sacraments, and Prayer. The Word is to be Read and Heard. We Read the pure
Word of God without any thing of Man's Invention: This has been mightily
Powerful. The Story of Agustine I have told you of, who under great Distress,
and Terror of Conscience, was Relieved by Obeying a Voice he thought he heard
out of the adjoining Room, Toll and Lege, Take up the Book and Read; upon
which he took up a Bible by him, and Read what God Blessed to his Relief. The
Word Preached has something of Man's Mixture, but if faithfully opened and
applied, is Gods Ordinance for the Staying and Comforting of People. The
Minister is Gods Interpreter, and he should be one of a Thousand. I look upon
it as the great Misery of Souls under these Temptations, they can seldom be
persuaded to Read, or to hear the Word; and verily where it is thus, the Devil
has prevailed a great way. I would that such Christians would seriously think
what they do in neglecting Means of Grace in their power to use, if they expect
any help from God. Nor would I have such a Christian neglect a Sacrament, if he
be one that has formerly declared his Right: These Temptations while yielded
to, are our Misery not our Sin; who knows whether God may not Bless the Sign
and Seal of a Dying Crucified Christ, for them to let them know there is no
Reason they should Kill or Crucify themselves. But above all, let them not
omit Constant Fervent Prayer, and that both Ordinarily and more Solemnly. Great
is the force of Prayer, it calls in the help of the Almighty; both for a
Deliverance from the Tempter in his own time, and for his Assistance and
upholding the Soul while it pleases him to keep the Soul, in this Spiritual
Combat.

FINIS.
Concerning TEMPTATIONS TO Despair.
CHAP. I.
The Text Genesis 4. 13. considered. The Nature of Despair. The Efficient Causes
in Temptations to Despair. Our own Lusts, the Devil. The Devil and our own
Lusts working jointly, etc.

OUr Translation Reads the Text, Genesis 4. 13. My Punishment is greater then I
can bear. In your larger Bibles you will find in the Margent it is Read, Mine
Iniquity is greater then that it may be forgiven. This Pareus thinks the most
proper Reading, That which favors our Translation, is what follows in the
next Words: Behold thou have driven me this day from the Face of the Earth,
etc. where he complains only of his Punishment. Either Reading is what the
Original will bear, either of them makes the words the Complaint of Cain after
he had killed his Brother Abel, and God had come down and doomed him for it;
telling him, He was Cursed from the Earth, which had epened her Mouth to
receive his Brothers Blood. When he tilled the ground, it should not yield unto
him her strength: A Fugitive, and a Vagabond shall thou be in the Earth. To
which Cain replyeth either thus: My Punishment is greater then I can bear. Or,
Mine Iniquity is greater then that it can be forgiven. Whether he complains
of his Sin or of his Punishment? That Is the only Question, nor needs it any
Decision. Both Readings express the Genius of a Reprobate, who either
complains of his Punishment, but not of his Sin, or if at any time, he
complains of Sin, it is despairing, and without hope of Mercy: Only I cannot
agree with Chrysostom and others, who Interpret these Words into a full
Confession of Sin, only they say it was too late (but true Repentance is never
too late) I shall in my Discourse consider the Words as you have them in the
Margents of your Bibles, designing only to make use of them to discourse as to
the great Temptation to Despair. In my Discourse upon which I shall first
Consider,

1. The Nature of the Temptation in it self. 2. The Tempters enforcing it. 3.
The means ordinarily made use of, in the enforcing of it. 4. The most probable
means to be used for getting a victory over it. As to the first,

I have already told you, That every Evil Temptation is a Motion or
Solicitation of the Soul to Sin, which when it is more Importune and Impetuous,
we usually call a Temptation; but let us more particularly inquire into the
Nature of this Sin of Desperation. Despair in the general Notion of it,
signifies a casting away of all hope, as to the obtaining of some good which
we desire; and so the Object of it may be any good thing of which we are not
possessed, but may be the Object of our Desires or Hope. Thus we may Despair of
Life, as St. Paul did, 2. Cor. 1. 8. of Health, of Success in Business, etc.
but in the Notion I am now speaking to, it must he limited to the greatest
Spiritual Good, such as Pardon of Sin, Living with God in Glory another day;
etc. And here again we must distinguish betwixt Fear and Despair, for although
there be no Despair without high degrees of Fear, yet there may be Fears, great
degrees of Fear (which may produce some Phrases of Despair, or Fits, or
Passions of it, where yet there is no fixed Despair: Despair (in the Notion of
it to which I am now speaking) Is a Souls total, fixed, permanent, Want and
Rejection of all Hope, as to the Pardon of Sins in this Life, or any happy
Estate in the Life to come. When (as the Apostle speaks) there remains
nothing in the Soul, but a certain dreadful locking for, of Judgment, and fiery
Indignation to devour them as the Adversaries of God, Heb. 10. 27. It is an
Hell began in the Soul in this Life: It is often attended with D^sperate
Impressions, Blasphemy against God, always with intolerable Horror and
Terror of Conscience: But we are not at present so much Considering it, in the
Effects and Issue of it, as in the Nature and first Rise and Beginning of it.
The next thing we have to consider is, the Efficient Causes in this great
Temptation.

I have showed you that every Temptation to Sin, is from our own Lust, the
Devil, or the World. The Men of the World have rarely any considerable
Efficiciency in this Temptation; it is not often we hear them telling us, That
we have sinned beyond hope of Mercy. They rather err on the other hand. The two
ordinary Efficient Causes in this Temptation, are our own Lust, and our grand
Adversary the Devil.

1. Our own Lust, Our depraved hearts are enough under some circumstances,
which we may be under, to suggest to us very unworthy thoughts of God, and
highly derogatory to his Honor and Glory. For though in a quiet calm state,
our Lust suggests ordinarily other things to us, yet all the Lust that is in
our Hearts does not discover it self at the same hour: We shall find Lusts
stirring in us in an hour of Prosperity, of which we shall hear nothing in an
hour of great Tribulation and Adversity: And so on the other side, we shall
find those Lusts stirring in us in a time of great Affliction and Adversity,
which we diseerned little of in the halcyon days of our Prosperity. When Men
come to be under great pressures of Afflictions, then those who in Health could
think of nothing but their Sensual Satisfactions or Worldly Business, begin to
be at leisure to think of Dying, and of the Eternal State of Souls; and tho
ordinarily our Lust enclineth us rather to presume, and groundlesly to prophecy
Good rather than Evil to our selves; yet I do not know but under some
circumstances, our Hearts, that of themselves are no better disposed to give
God the Glory of his Mercy, then of his Justice may (though the Devil stand by)
suggest to us black and hard thoughts of God, which may produce Desperation.

2. But where the Impressions are fixed strong, and abiding, and the Soul
(though out-reasoned) refuses to be comforted, or to entertain any better
thoughts of God, but rather is more stubborn and pertinacious; and blasphemeth
God, I should suspect a great praedominance of a Praeternatural Cause, and the
Soul under the Violence of Satan; for we are naturally inclined to hope well
for our selves, and to lay hold of every good word that looks that way.

3. Possibly, The Devil may also in this Temptation join with our own Lusts,
and the Temptation may be mixed; from one or both these Causes are these
Temptations, and this sinful Habit is begun and perfected in our Souls.

CHAP. II.
What seeming Good is the bait in this Temptation. To speak the truth of it
self. Possibly the serving our Malice upon God. An Examination Whether the
Doctrines of Election of Persons, particularly Redemption and Special Grace,
conduce to Despair? The contrary evinced.

THe greatest difficulty is to resolve with what Bait it is possible such an
Hook as this is, should be baited; for whereas the Apostle tells us (as I
have formerly opened to you) That every one is tempted when he is drawn away by
his own Lust and enticed, it might justly pose an ordinary Reason to imagine,
what seeming Good should entice a Soul to cast away all hopes of Happiness from
the Mercy of God, all hopes of Eternal Life and Salvation. To conclude it shall
go to Hell, and there is no hope for it to the contrary. Can there be so much
as the least umbrage and appearance of Good, that should have preference to
these hopes in a Soul, under the least conduct of Reason? I^ it true, for a
Sensual Despair there may, for that is rooted in A^h^isme and Unbelief of any
such thing, as the need of a Pardon for its Sins, or a future happy State, the
obtaining of which the Sensual Man seeing limited to the hard Condition (as he
thinks) of denying himself in all his Sensual Pleasures, he may jocularly
conclude, There is no hope for him (believing no reality in the pretended
Objects for his hope) that he may the more securely cry out with the Epicures,
Let us eat and drink, for to morrrow we shall die; or like them, Jer. 2. 25.
When God said to them, Withold thy Foot from being unshod, and thy Throat
from thirst; said, There is no hope, no, for I have loved Strangers, and after
them I will go. But now for a Sorrowful Despair, for a Soul having this Grace
and Hell in Prospect, it may look for a great Riddle. What appearing Good
should be a Motive to him to conclude there is no Mercy in God for him, no
possibility of Eternal Salvation.

1. What if we should say, That the appearing Good, that enticeth him to these
thoughts, is, To speak the truth of himself, and not to flatter himself with
idle and vain hopes, as he now thinks he has done too long. You know we are
naturally desirous to know our own Fate or Fortunes, as we call them: What
shall become of us or betide us in the latter end? And though we are willing
enough sometimes to flatter our selves, yet there is a time when we desire the
contrary.

2. Secondly, Is not the appearing Good in some a rooted Malice and Hatred
against God, and the Satisfaction of that by deregating from his Goodness and
Mercy? This is indeed of all the most dreadful Account that can be given: That
Soul is in the Suburbs of Hell it self, to whom it is a satisfaction, when it
can do no more, to Blaspheme and speak Evil of God. I had rather assign the
former, as the most ordinary appearance of Good, seducing the Soul into this
Guilt. It now pleases the Soul that thinks it has deceived the World so long,
by walking in a vain show, to know and speak the truth of it self, as it
thinks in its Heart, through the Seduction of Satan; but still it must be
enquired what the Devil can possibly suggest to a Soul to debauch it into such
a misapprehension of God, and sad Opinion of it self.

Now there being nothing in Nature that can alienate God from the Soul, but
Sin, the guilt of the Soul and its state before God, by reason of Sin, must
needs be that and that only, which the Devil can mount this great Gun upon;
and this is that which Cain says, Mine Iniquity is greater then it can be
forgiven. But before I come to speak of that, let me a little take notice of
some other Propositions, which many grave Divines take to be most certain
truths, and others think serve the Devil in great stead, in order to his
enforcing this great Temptation. Let me digress a little, to judge whether
indeed the guilt of those Propositions be according to the cry by which they
are accused. They are those concerning the Doctrine of Predestination,
Redemption, and the necessity of Special Grace, in order to Salvation. I intend
not to argue the truth of the Propositions on either side (that were too large
a Work) but only to consider whether the Devil can use, what by some eminent
Divines (as to them) is asserted, as advantages for this fiery Dart. I remember
Scultetus in his Annals, tells us a Story of an honest studious Young Man in
Cambridge (whom it is believed the Papists made away) That he was found hanged
in his Study, with his Finger laid upon a Bible, opened before him, upon a Text
usually brought to confirm Predestination. But the Fiction obtained not that
credit for which it was devised, to induce the World to believe, that his
embracing the Doctrine of Predestination put him upon that desperate Practice.
But to the Matter.

1. It is true many great and eminent Divines have thought, That God has
passed an Eternal Decree concerning the future state of all Men and Women,
choosing some to Eternal Life, passing by others. Suppose we should put it to
the highest pitch, Determining others to Eternal Death. I intend not, as I said
before, to dispute what is truth in this; certain it is, God from oll Eternity
fore-knew the Eternal Issues of all, if some can conceive how God should
foreknow this without willing it, or be willing not to determine how he
fore-knew it, and what that was or could be but the Will of God, which should
make a Futurity certain. And others cannot conceive any first cause but God,
nor any way of Divine Foreknowledge, but from his Will and Purpose. It is not
my Business to intermingle my self in their Quarrel, but suppose the one
Opinion or the other, I would gladly understand what advantage the Devil can
take from the one or the other, as to this Temptation. Some Divines indeed do
say, That God ordained some to Eternal Life, out of his own good pleasure, in
and through Christ, without any consideration of their Faith and good Works
foreseen, as moving him so to predestinate them; but with all he predestined
them to obtain this Eternal Salvation, in the Exercises of Faith and Holiness,
without which they were never to see the Lord. But do any Divines say, That God
ordained any to Eternal Death, or passed over any in his Eternal Counsel, who
should be damned, otherwise then upon the just demerits of their preceding
sins? Yes, it may be (will some ignorant Persons say) they that hold an
absolute Decree, hold Election of Persons, and Reprobation of Persons. They do
indeed hold an Election of Persons, in the sense I before opened, that the
foreseen Faith and Holiness of none moved God to ordain them to Life. They do
also believe that God has a Jus Absolutum, a Sovereign Power over his
Creatures, as the Potter over the Clay. But they say that God does not in the
Condemnation of any Sinner use this, but only uses a Jus Ordinatum, and
proceeds according to his Law. The Soul that sins shall Die: Which now
being supposed, I would gladly know what Argument Satan draws from hence to
persuade any to Despair? He can Suggest to the Soul, That it is a Reprobate;
and cannot the Soul Answer, That it is more then the Devil knows: That there is
no Soul but that which sins shall Die; so that notwithstanding all said upon
rhis Argument. The Guilt of Sin is all that remains to the Devil to object,
to drive unto Despair.

It is true, that concerning the Extent of the Death of Christ, as to Persons,
there are various Opinions, some think he equally died f^r all (a sad Doctrine
which gives Judas as much comfort as Peter.) Others think he purchased a
certainty of Salvation for the Elect, but a possibility for all. Others believe
he died only for the Elect. But admitting the last to be true, which some
think, to make Redemption conform to the Decree of Election, and not understand
how Christ should purchase an impossible possibility, which must be as to some,
if there were any that were passed over in the Eternal Purpose, or any to whom
God resolved not to give those effectual Aids of his special Grace, necessary
in order to those Exercises of Faith and Holiness, by which Salvation must be
obtained. But what Market can the Devil make of this? He can tell them they are
not Elected, and so Christ died not f^r them. But the Soul can reply, He was a
Lier from the Beginning, and none of Gods Privy Counselors; and that its
Non-election can only appear from its prodigious sinnings, continued in to the
end without Repentance and Faith in Christ. And the others telling them, Christ
died for all, will not relieve them, for Judas notwithstanding that, proved a
Son of Perdition, and went to his own place, when he had hanged himself.

It is also true, that many great Divines do think, none can be saved without
the special Grace of God, working together with the Word in their Hearts, and
effectually renewing, turning, changing, and sanctifying; and that this is not
in a Man's own Power but the work of God. What advantage now can the Devil make
of this Doctrine, to persw^^e the Soul to cast away all hopes of the Mercy of
God through Christ, for the pardon of its Sins, and for the obtaining of
Eternal Life and Salvation? He can suggest to the Soul, That God never bestowed
upon it this effectual Grace, nor ever will. If he does not add the later, he
says nothing; for what Ground have I to cast away all hope if yet there be
hope, that although I have not yet repented and believed, yet God will give me
his Grace (though at the Eleventh hour) that I shall repent, believe, and be
saved. Now suppose him to suggest so, How shall he evidence this to me, but
from the guilt of my sin or my abiding in it? It is therefore, that whatever
bluster some Sciclists make in the World, to load the Opinions of some great
and eminent Divines, with Envy and Obloquy; yet in very deed, the Devil can
urge Despair of the Pardon of Sin, and obtaining Eternal Life, with any
colorable reason, upon no Soul but from Sin; nor indeed do we in our
Experience find any thing else stick with Souls in an hour of Temptation. Now
here he must either say, Thy Sins are so many they cannot be forgiven; or, Thou
have sinned so long a time that thou can not be forgiven; Thy hour is over,
thy time is past; or, Thou have sinned some particular sins, which are of so
heinous a nature, or so deep a die, that God will never forgive them. What the
Soul may answer to all these, we shall, God willing, by and by consider.

CHAP. III.
Means to prevent Despair. Clear and distinct Knowledge. Taking heed of
inveterate Sinnings. Prodigious Sinnings. All Sinnings against Light. Such Sins
especially, as come nearest the unpardonable Sin.

YOu have heard the Nature of this Temptation, you have also heard from whence
Temptations of this nature come, what seeming good enticeth the Soul to listen
to them, and also what Arguments the Tempters have alone to use to enforce
them. Let me now come to show you what is to be done by Christians in order to
the repelling and resisting of them. And because, as I told you in my Discourse
referring to the former; Prevention is the best way, let me first advise what
is proper to all of us, upon whom this hour of Temptation is not come, that we
may never fall into this snare of the Devil.

1. And here let me first commend to you all, a sound and distinct Knowledge of
the Truths of God. The Devil in an hour of Temptation, has a great advantage
upon an ignorant Person, above what he has upon a knowing Christian. Solomon
tells us true, That a Soul should be without Knowledge is not good. He that
has a sound and distinct Knowledge of the Nature of God, the Doctrine of
Faith, the Covenant of Grace, and the Promises of the Word of God, seldom falls
into, or lies long under this Temptation. How easy a thing it is for the
Devil to fright ignorant Souls, with telling them, They are not Elected, that
Christ did not die for them, that their Sins are too many or too great, or have
been too long continued in to be pardoned; or that they have not truly repented
or believed, or that they have sinned the unpardonable Sin; or an hundred such
things. O do not slight Knowledge, no not a notional Knowledge of the things of
God. You are not able to prophecy of what use it will be to your Souls in an
hour of Temptation. A knowing Christian may be tempted, and it may be some time
before he can get his Hand upon the Sword of the Spirit (which is the Word of
God) to draw it out for his purpose; but if he has it by his side, if he be
mighty in the Scriptures, he will have no long work with an Enemy of this kind.
I pity such as cannot read, or if they can, yet have lost their time, and not
improved it to learn the Scriptures, be acquainted with Catechisms, which
should ground them in the Doctrine of Faith. Thou that despisest Knowledge,
neglectest, yea, despisest thy own Soul, and all its Peace and Comfort, and
seem to presume upon a Miracle, to be showed for thee in an hour of
Temptation.

2. Secondly, Take heed of going on in a course of Sinning, especially against
thy Light and Checks of Conscience. Inveterate Sinning, and prodigious
Sinnings, and Sinnings against Light, and Checks of Conscience, and
particularly some Sins, and such especially as come nearest to the Sin unto
Death, give the Devil very high and great advantages, as to this Temptation.

1. I say first, Inveterate Sinning. When Sin has grown up with a Man from his
youth, he has lived and walked, and wallowed in it many years, it makes the
Devil a great Market. We find it hard to believe that God, who can have from us
but the homage of a few days or hours, will forgive us the Sins of so many
years. It is rare that old Sinners are brought to Repentance and Converted, you
shall most generally observe, that if God changes a Man or Woman's Heart, it is
either in their Youth, or middle Age, seldom in Childhood, and seldom in Old
Age; and if in Old Age, they are ordinarily infested with great Temptations.
Take heed of Sin growing Old in thy Soul: An old habit is hardly put off. How
can you that are accustomed to do Evil, do Well? An old Ulcer is hardly Cured;
beware of growing Old in any Sin.

Secondly, Take heed of any kind of prodigious Sinning. There are degrees in
Sin, all Sin is not of the same die or magnitude. There are some Sins that more
waste Conscience than others; now observe this, The greater Violence is done to
our Conscience by any Sins, the more Advantage the Devil has from the guilt of
them to raise a Temptation to Despair. For although it is as easy with God to
Pardon the greatest Sins as the smallest, yet we shall not find it so easy to
believe that God will forgive the greatest Sins as the smallest, and so the
Devil has the greater advantage from the Reflection upon them, to run us out
of a Hope of the Divine Mercy. Fear all Sin, but above all take heed of
notorious Acts of Impiety against God, or Unrighteousness toward Men.

3. Thirdly, Take heed of all Sinning against Light; indeed against any Light,
whether it be that of Nature or Revelation. Take heed of Sinning against those
common Notions of Piety and Righteousness, which are Planted in all by Nature;
against the Common Illuminations of the Holy Spirit, by the Preaching of the
Word of God; against the Admonitions of Parents or Governors, against the
reflex Light of your own Conscience. Sins against the direct or reflex Light of
Conscience, do often Cause a very great Darkness, which is felt in the Soul;
for though in the heat and madness of our Pasnons in our Youth, we sometimes
run down Conscience, and it keeps silence a while; yet it often recoileth,
and reproves the Sense, and sets its Sins in order before it; and shows
them to it, to a very great disadvantage, and these are a kind of Sins which
the Tempter often hangs much upon, in order to promove Despair, and putting the
Soul out of Hope of Mercy.

4. Particularly take heed of such Sinnings as border nearest upon the Sin unto
Death; you know that Christ has told us, That all Sin and Blasphemy, shall be
forgiven, only the Sin against the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven: And the
Apostle has told us; That there is a Sin unto Death, for which he did not
direct the Christians to Pray, that it might be forgiven their Brethren. Now
Divines have much exercised themselves in the finding out what this
Unpardonable Sin is, nor is it to this day well determined, nor shall I
undertake to determine what it is, or whether it be any single Sin yea or no.
We find in experience, that the Tempter often makes use of this Suggestion to
drive a Soul to Despair, telling it, that it has sinned this Sin, and
therefore there is no hope for it: The vanity of which appears from the Souls
thus tempted, usual Ignorance: What the Sin against the Holy Ghost is (as to
which indeed the most Judicious Divines have been much at lo^s to determine) or
what comes nearest to it, upon the Light we have from Scripture to help us to
make a determination of it; but though we cannot punctually determine in the
Case, and it be much more easy to determine what it is not, then what it is;
yet we have Light enough from Scripture, to show us what sinning comes nearest
to it, and it is ill treading upon the brink of such a Pit. That Text, Heb. 6.
v. 4, 5, 6. instructs us thus far. That it must be the Sin of an Enlightened
Soul, one upon whom the Light of the Gospel has Shined, and who has tasted
something of the Heavenly Gift, and been in some Measure made Partaker of the
Holy Ghost, and Tasted the good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to
come, and after this falls away. From whence these things follow, That
Heathens who never heard of God nor Christ, cannot be Guilty of this Sin, no
nor titular Christians, who never made any profession of Religion or Godliness,
nor had any degrees of Godliness: They must be such as have been Enlightened,
Tasted of the good Word, the Heavenly Gift, and the Powers of the World to
come, and after this shall fall away: Yet it is plain, that all sinning against
Gospel Light and Spiritual Illumination, all degrees of falling away from the
profession of this Truth, is not this Sin. The Apostle Heb. 10. 26. and 29. v.
seems as to this Sin, to instruct us further; for he is there speaking of
some, for whom there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin, but a certain fearful
looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation, which shall devour the
Adversaries: Now who are these? v. 26. Such as Sin wilfully, after they have
received the Knowledge of the Truth, v. 29. Such as tread under foot the Son of
God, and count the Blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was Sanctified, an
unholy thing, and do despite to the Spirit of Grace. And this also agrees with
that Phrase, Heb. 6. v. 6. Where the Apostle giving a Reason why they cannot be
renewed by Repentance, assigns this, Seeing they Crucify to themselves the
Son of God afresh, and put him to open shame; so that it should seem that to
make up this Sin, to Apostasy after Illumination, or at least having received
sufficient Means of Illumiation and making some Profession, there must be
added, some eminent Affront done to, or Abuse of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Spirit of Grace, either by Word or Deed; and therefore our Savior calls it
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost: Consonant to this is what the Gospel tells us
of this Sin, you have the first mention of it, Matthew. 12. 31. If you look into
v. 24. you shall find, That Christ having healed one that was possessed with
the Devil, who was both Blind and Dumb, and People upon that recognizing him as
the true Messiah; saying, v. 23. Is not this the Son of David? the Pharisees
said, This Fellow does cast out Devils, by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils.
Christ confuteth them, and vindicateth himself by this Argument, easily to be
diserned and made up from v. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. I either cast out
Devils (as you say) by the Prince of Devils, or by the Power of God. I will
make it out that I do it not by the Prince of Devils, 1. For this were a Ruin
to Satan's Kingdom; if one Devil could be employed or would be employed in
casting out another, the Devils Kingdom would be quickly at an end, it could
not stand. 2. Again (says he) not I only, but your Children in my name cast
them out (for there were some Exorcists amongst the Jews, who were the Children
(that is the Disciples of the Pharisees) who though they followed not Christ,
yet used his Name to cast out Devils; as you shall find, Mar. 9. 38. where John
tells Christ, Master, we saw one casting out Devils in thy Name, and he
follows not us, and we forbade him, because he follows not us; and as you
shall read, v. 39. Christ allowed it, the like you find, Luke 9. 48, 49. So did
the Sons of Sceva, Acts 19. 12. Now the Jews did not accuse those of acting by
the Devil, but from the Power of God; from hence he concludes, That he did not
cast out Devils, as they maliciously charged him, by the help of the Devil, and
that they were themselves otherwise convinced in their own Consciences;
therefore he did it by the Spirit of God, and by that they could not but know
that the Kingdom of God was come amongst them; and so they spoke Evil of God,
and the Spirit of God, and that out of Malice, contrary to the Conviction of
their own Consciences: Now says he, Take heed what you do, this is a kind of
Sin which God will never forgive, though all other Sin and Blasphemy shall be
forgiven; yet for you knowing that what I do I do as God, and by the Power and
Spirit of God, to Persecute me, and to Repraoch me, and that you may the better
do it to ascribe that to the Devil, which is, the Work of God done by me; this
is a Sin which shall never be forgiven: So that according to our Saviors
Words, this seems to be the Sin, That the Pharisees knowing well enough that
Christ was God, Eternal God, and having sufficient means to convince them of
it, and that from his Casting out of Devils, and several other Miraculous
Operations which it was in the Power of God only to do: Notwithstanding yea
against this Conviction, Maliciously Persecuted the Lord Jesus Christ, and
denied these mighty Operations to be from the Spirit of God, but said they were
from Beelzebub the Master Devil. From hence will appear, though not distinctly,
what the Specifical Sin against the Holy Ghost is, yea what Sins border upon it
and come nearest to it.

1. All Sinning against Light and Convictions.

2. Apostasy from a former Profession and owning of the Gospel, and the Holy
Ways of God.

3. A Malicious Pursuing and Persecuting of such as our Consciences tells us
are Righteous Persons.

4. An Ascribing to the Devil what we are Convinced of to be the Works of God,
and so reproaching the Operations of the Spirit of God, whatsoever the
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost be. These things or the most of them, must be
ingredients into it; and truly if Persons have been enlightened with the
Knowledge of the Truths and Ways of God, and have made some Profession of them,
and have had some Savor of them, if they fall away from that Profession, and
that to such a degree, as not only to disown what themselves formerly owned,
but to hate those Truths and Ways of God, and to Persecute such as still
Profess them, and adhere to them, and charge those Impressions and Operations
which are from the Holy Spirit of God, to be from the Devil; so Blaspheming the
Holy Spirit of God; if there be such an unpardonable Sin to be committed, surely
these are under the guilt of it; nor can I see any thing can possibly free them
from the dreadful Consequence of it, but a timely Repentance; remembering their
first professed Love, and turning unto God; which whosoever can do, or shall
obtain Grace from God to do, undoubtedly has not sinned beyond Pardon; for he
that confesses his Sins and forsakes them, shall have Mercy: But (as I said
before) these Sins comes nearest this Guilt, and where any Soul has been, or
shall be in this kind, and to this degree guilty; the Devil has a very fair
Advantage against him, to move him to Despair, upon a Suggestion that he has
committed that Sin, which according to the Revealed Will of God in Holy Writ,
shall never be forgiven; nor will he find any way to get out of this Snare, nor
any thing to answer the Tempter, pressing hard upon him with a Temptation of
this Nature, until he can say, I have indeed done this, but God has given me
an Heart to Repent of it, to remember from whence I fell, and to do my first
Works; and he will find it as hard for him to recover any just hopes of Pardon,
and Eternal Life and Salvation, as he will find it to be renewed by Repentance;
if the latter be found impossible to a Soul under these Circumstances, so will
the former also be found. O therefore to prevent Temptations of this nature,
take heed of all sinning of any continuance, and going on in a course of Sin,
especially of any sinnings against Light and Convictions, or against former
Professions; and especially of any Malice and Hatred to the ways of God, which
you either have formerly owned and acknowledged, or which your Consciences tell
you are the right ways of the Lord.

3. Thirdly, Let me again commend to you an Acquaintance, a through
Acquaintance with the Covenant of Grace, and the Dispensation of Salvation
revealed to us in the Gospel. The Despairing Soul has ordinarily a Legal
Spirit, and sticks in the Covenant of Works. Remember that we are not under the
Law b^t under Grace; in some sense, not only true Believers, but even the
whole World, or at least that part of it, to which the glad Tidings of
Salvation, through the Gospel, is published, is not under the Law but under
Grace, not under a Legal Dispensation, So as none can be saved without a
personal perfect Obedience to the Law of God; but under a gracious
Dispensation, wherein (as the Apostle says, Romans 1. 17. The Righteousness of
God is revealed from Faith to Faith, that is, wherein it is revealed; that the
Righteousness wherein a Man must stand, Just and Righteous before God, is not
his own Righteousness made up of his Obedience to the Commandments contained
in the Divine Law, but the perfect Righteousness of Christ, by God reckoned
unto every Soul that repents and believes in the Lord Jesus Christ, who
walks not after the Flesh but after the Spirit, minding and savouring the
things of the Spirit; which Righteousness of Christ is reckoned to the Soul as
soon as it comes to own, receive, and lay hold upon Christ in the Gospel,
exhibited and tendered unto it. The Soul well possessed of the Doctrine of Free
Grace, and Gospel Justification, though it may see frequent Causes for
Heart-sorrow, and Humiliation, as well for its former as for its renewing Sins,
yet cannot easily see the umbrage of any ground to Despair, and cast away its
hope as to Divine Mercy and Forgiveness, or Eternal Life and Salvation. But I
have elsewhere enlarged upon this Argument.

4. Fourthly, If you would avoid Temptations to Despair, take heed of
presuming. You shall observe in the Tempers of those with whom you converse in
the World, That those whose hopes are most quickly up, find them also soonest
down: The reason is, because they are persons that usually have no great depth
of judgment, and do not build their hopes upon good and sufficient bottoms. So
that as it is with some little Rivolets, whose Channel is but a small
continent, and which want depth, every good shower of Rain raises them, and
causes them to overflow the Banks; but then, the same degree of Rain not
continuing, they are as quickly down: So it is with these Men, a little thing
raises their hopes, and a little thing again sinketh them. Thus it is in the
great business of Hope, as to the Pardon of Sin, and obtaining Eternal
Salvation. Some Persons build up Hopes upon very light and unjustifiable
Grounds; their Hope is indeed but a Presumption, like the Grass that grows
upon the House Tops, which a little Heat of the Sun kills. But other Souls
build up their Hopes upon more sure and wary Foundations, which are not so soon
shaked. We use to say, that we are certain of nothing more than what we have
sometimes been uncertain of. We are commanded to work out our Salvation with
fear and trembling, and to rejoice with trembling. Those Souls that have gained
their Hope by the Conquest of many Doubts and Fears, and Jealousies, do not
easily lose it; whereas those who have hatched it up with more ease, seldom
keep it in an hour of Temptation.

5. I know not what more to advise besides Frequent Self-Examination, clos^
walking with God, and diligent and constant Prayer. Let me enlarge a little
upon these: I say First, Frequent Self-Examination. It is the Apostles
Precepts, Examine your selves, prove your selves, whether you be in the Faith
or no; 2 Cor. 13. 5. Whether we live by Hope or Sight, (I mean Assurance) this
is highly necessary for that Soul, that would maintain the one or the other.
Two things I would have Christians much Examine themselves upon: 1. The Grounds
and Reasons of their Hope. 2. The Abatements and Discouragements of them.

1. As to the Grounds of their Hope, which (if good) must always be bottomed in
some Piece of Divine Revelation; for Pardon of Sin, and Eternal Life, being
both of them the free Gift of God; it is unreasonable to hope for either, but
upon the Revelation of the will of him in whose Gift they are. In examining
therefore the Truth and Ground of your Hope, trust to nothing but some portions
of the Word of God, which though it does not tell you by name whose Sins are
pardoned, and whose are not, who shall be saved and who shall perish, it does
tell you, what must be wrought in the Hearts of those whose Sins are Pardoned,
and how they must live that shall ever see the Face of God in Heaven; there is
no trusting to your Interest in God, as he that made you, nor yet to Christ
dying for all Men; no nor yet to any Merits or Works of your own. God has no
where said, that he will save all those whom he has Created, nor all those who
believe Christ died for all Men; no, nor yet all those that do some things,
that are as to the Matter of them good, and such, as if Men do not, they cannot
see God. I shall not here run into particulars, but in the general I shall tell
you, that there is nothing but the Revelation of the Will of God in his Word,
and the experimental finding that God has wrought those things in your Souls,
which he in his Word has made necessary, in order to obtaining Pardon and
Eternal Salvation, that is in this Case to be trusted to. Often therefore
examine your selves upon these Points, 1. What God in his Word has made
necessary to the obtaining of Pardon and Salvation. 2. The Work of God upon
your Hearts, Creating and Working, and Maintaining, these Habits and Exercises
in your Souls. Nay, do not only this, but examine your selves also about the
holding or abating of your Hopes; the Increase or Decrease, and Discouragements
of them in your Souls. A faint decaying, weakening Hope, if not looked to, will
grow more and more faint and weak every day than other, till it putrisieth into
Despair. Now the force of this lies here, The decays and abatements of our
Hope, are caused either from some Relapses into Sin, or from some eminent
with-drawings of the Holy Spirit of God, which uphold and maintains it in a
Soul. And a daily examination or frequent examination of our selves how it is
with us, as to our Spiritual hope, will put the Soul both upon frequent Acts of
Repentance, as it discerns that its hope is abated by the prevailings of its
Lusts, and also upon frequent Prayers, begging the revivings and upholdings of
it from the Spirit of God.

2. Live in close Communion with God. I propounded to you before the avoiding
of Sin, all Sin, but some especially, to prevent Temptations to Despair. But
this is something more, we are at first begotten to a lively Hope, by the Word
upon fervent Prayer, etc. and this Hope is maintained in the Soul, by the same
means by which it is first begotten and bred in the Soul. I told you before
that we must find the ground and bottom of our Hope in the Word of God. Now
Preaching (where it is done sincerely and faithfully) is nothing else but an
Explication and Application of the Word of God, an Interpretation of the Word
to our Souls, and a whetting of it upon our Souls; and therefore in reason a
conscientious Attendance upon it, must necessarily be a means to confirm and
strengthen our Hopes, and to antidote Despair: Nor certainly can often
Communion in the Lords Supper be useless, but contrariwise of very great use;
for the Lord in that Ordinance having added a Sign to his Word for the
confirmation of our Faith, it must needs be a proper means to strengthen and
increase our Hope. In short, All Communion with God, whether it be more
Internal by Meditation, and the secret Exercises of the Power of our Souls upon
God, or more External, in such Duties as God has prescribed us to perform an
Homage to him by, must be of great use to our Souls in this case. For the more
Freedom and Acquaintance we have with God, the more we be with him; the truer
and more just Apprehensions we shall have of him, and the more we shall
understand the loving Kindness of God. Now all Despair flows from unjust and
unkind Apprehensions and Impressions of God, and from a too great an
estrangement from him. It is true, those that know the Lords Name, will trust
in him, and hope in his Mercy.

But above all, be much in Prayer, that obtains all Grace, all Mercy from
God; the beginnings of it, the growth and increase of it, etc. But I shall add
no more upon this Subject, directing you to what I judge most proper to prevent
in the Soul Fits, or more settled Habits of Despair; and certainly, it is most
advisable to keep Satan at a distance, and more easy to oppose the first
Assaults, or avoid giving him advantages to it, than to grapple with it.

CHAP. IV.
What Despairing Souls should do. They ought to consult the Physician, if no
Bodily Distemper gives a rise to such dark Thoughts. What Business they have
with God: No Argument sufficient to warrant Despair. Sometimes none pleaded.
The usual Arguments pleaded, From our many Sins. The greatness of them. Our
Inveterateness in them. Our Sinning against the Holy Ghost. None of these
sufficient. The greatness of the Sin of Despair shown, in what it implies;
what it is attended with, and produces. 4. Other Directions for Souls thus
tempted.

THus far I have discoursed you, in order to the prevention of these Assaults.
Possibly as to some this Counsel may come too late; they may already find in
their Souls Thoughts tending to Despair. The next Question is, What shall these
do? Or indeed rather, what shall be said to, or done for those, for their
Support, Relief, or Deliverance? I know but three things that can be done for
such a Soul: 1. The First is, With the Physician of the Body, who is Gods
Ordinance; the Means he has appointed by which he heals our Bodies. 2. The
Second is with God, who alone has a Power paramount to Satan, and alone can
find, a way to our Hearts, and make powerful Impressions upon them. 3. The
Third is with the Party Tempted, to persuade him or her, of the
unreasonableness of the Temptation; the contrary Revelation of the Will of God
in Scripture, and the use of Means, Natural, Moral, and Religious, for the
support of him or her self; and the bringing him or her self out of this
horrible Pit. Under these three Heads I shall bring my whole remaining
Discourse upon this Argument. 1. The first thing, I say, is to be done in this
Case, relates to the Physician. It is a thing that we find very difficult, to
persuade Souls under these circumstances to believe; nay, many others too, less
knowing Christians, that there is any thing of Bodily Distemper in the case:
But there is nothing more true, nothing that is more ordinarily experimented.
God forbid that we should think that all Despairing Thoughts and Expressions,
are the Effects of a Natural Cause, a disordered Body or Head. The contrary is
evident, but that in many they are so; I was about to say, that in the most
they are so; and that where they are not simply and singly the Effects of those
Causes, they are yet highly advantaged and improved by the Concurrence of such
Bodily Distempers, is most evident, to those who have any Experience in these
things, either from what they have found in themselves, or observed from their
converse with, and ministering unto, those that have lien under these great
Burdens. And there can be no greater Argument for this, then the frequent
Experiences we have of Persons, that in the beginning of these Distempers have
had them removed, by the use of Natural Means: Not that God is to be neglected,
for admitting these Fits of Despair, to be but the products of a Natural Cause,
by the ill influence that some disordered peccant Humors of the Body have upon
the Mind; disposing it to Fears and Jealousies, Suspicious Diffidence, and
Distrust. Yet it is God that must heal us, by his giving a Blessing upon Means;
but the Question is not about the Principal Efficient Cause in the Cure, which
must be God; but concerning the Means to be used, and in the use of which God
is to be sought, and his Assistance expected. Therefore, I say, the first thing
to be done in these Cases, is consulting with the Physician, about the Health
of our Bodies, and that with an Able and Experienced Physician; for it is an
exceeding weighty Case, with reference to our Good and well Being. Nor ought
any Means to be neglected, which such a one shall direct for bringing our
Bodies into a right Order; not yet to be used without solemn Applications to
God; begging both his Direction of them, and his Blessing upon them. Nor ought
this to be delayed, for none knows the Effects of such Disorders as these,
and how quick a growth such Beginning Distempers often times have. But this is
one of the first things I should advise in such a Cause as this is.

2. Secondly, Such a Soul has also a greal deal of business to do with God:
The Nature of which must be determined, according to what it finds to have
given the first rise and cause to these Thoughts: If it finds that some
Bodily Distempers has given the first rise and cause to these dark and ill
concluding Thoughts: Our business with God lies, 1. In begging Gods Direction
of us unto the Use, and Blessing upon us in the use of such Means, as are
proper, and he will Bless unto the Healing of us, and the Deliverance of us
from so great a Burden; that he who ministers unto us, may not have a
miscarrying hand. 2. That he would please to command the Means used to exert
and put forth that Virtue which he has created in them for the producing that
Effect we desire, and for the obtaining of which we make use of them. 3. That
in the mean time he would please so to influence and to support our Souls, that
our Bodily Distempers may have no such ill Influence upon our Minds, as to be
occasions to us of dishonouring God, by entertaining any unworthy Thoughts of
the Divine Majesty, Mercy, and Goodness. If we find that these black and dark
Thoughts arise in us, or in any others, from any other Cause, whether our own
Reflections upon our former Sinful Courses, or some particular guilt of Sin upon
us: Our Business is still with God by Prayer, for it is he alone, that can
Pardon Sin, that can give Eternal Life and Salvation, and that can beget in the
Soul a lively Hope, as to such Pardon, and obtaining Eternal Life and
Salvation; that can Bless any Spiritual Means to be used in order to the
obtaining of any of these; but here the matter of Prayer and of our Petitions
to God, must be of another Nature. That which the Soul in this Cause has to do
with God, is 1. To confess its Sin unto God, and to beg of God a broken and
contrite Heart, that it may confess and bewail its Sin as it ought to do: When
says David, Psalm. 32. v. 3, 4. I kept silence, my Bones waxed old, through my
roaring all the day long; for day and night thine hand was heavy upon me: my
moisture is turned into the drought of Summer. I acknowledged my Sin unto thee,
and mine Iniquity I have not hid; I said I will confess my Transgressions unto
the Lord, and thou forgavest the Iniquity of my Sin. 2. He has a further Work
with God; viz. To beg of him the Pardon of his Sin, and the begetting in his
Soul a lively Hope in his Mercy and Godness. It is God, 1 Pet. 1. 3. The Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant Mercy, begets the
Soul to a lively Hope, by the Resurection of Jesus Christ from the Dead, to an
Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
the Heavens for us. 3. Thirdly to beg of God a Blessing upon all Means in
order to this end, whether the reading, or the hearing of the Word, or any
Spiritual Conference with Ministers, or knowing and experienced Christians, who
are able to speak a word in season for the Relief of Souls that are weary and
heavy laden with the sense of their Sins.

3. A third Work to be done for the Relief of Souls under this fore Temptation,
is with the Persons themselves that are Tempted; and that is, to persuade them,
or for such poor Souls to persuade themselves, of the unreasonableness of those
conclusions which they make against themselves. Now upon this suffer me to
enlarge a little in an endeavor to demonstrate the little force that can be in
any Argument, that such a Soul can bring against it self in this Case; and in
shew-you the exceeding sinfulness of this Sining of Despair, in the first place
let me desire such a Soul to Consider; 1. That there is no Argument sufficient
to warrant it to cast away all Hope in God, as to the pardon of its Sin, and
the obtaining Eternal Life and Salvation through Christ. The one of these
depends upon the other. For if there be no Argument sufficient to convince
such a Soul, that its Sins shall never be forgiven, there can be no Argument
sufficient to convince it, that it shall certainly be Damned; or that it is a
Reprobate: for Psalm. 32. 1. Blessed is he whose Iniquities are forgiven, and
whose Sins are covered, and to whom the Lord imputes not Transgression. A
Pardoned Sinner cannot Perish, that is certain: If therefore no Reason can be
brought sufficient to prove that God will never Pardon me; none can be brought
sufficient for me to conclude from it, That God will not Save me.

1. Sometimes Souls under these Circumstances, will plead no Argument at all,
only they have such a fixed Impression and Persuasion upon their Hearts they
know it, they are sure of it, etc. and this is all you can get from it. But as
the Apostle says in another Case, Gal 5. 8. This persuasion comes not from
him that calls you. Impressions upon our Spirits are no Oracles, nor must be
taken for Arguments: Impressions or Persuasions are either from the Holy Spirit
of God, or Persuasions hatched up in our Souls by their own Powers; or they are
from the Evil Spirit: Impressions indeed from the Spirit of God cannot deceive,
they are infallible, but so are not these: Can (think you) this Persuasion be
from him that every where in his Word calls upon Men, to Sinners, to all
sorts and degrees of Sinners, to Repent and Believe, to wash themselves and
make themselves Clean; telling them that if their Sins were as Scarlet, they
shall be as Snow; if as Crimson, they shall be as white as Wool; that he will
have Mercy upon them, and abundantly Pardon them? Jsaiah 55. 6, 7. Can he that
calls Sinners, all Sinners that are weary and heavy laden, to come unto him,
Promising them Rest for their Souls? I say can they possibly think that he has
persuaded them that they shall never obtain Pardon? It must therefore remain,
that these Persuasions in whatsoever Souls they are found, must either be bred
in the Soul from its own Corruption, or brought into the Soul by Satan. Let
them be from which of these two Causes they will, they are very far from being
certain and infallible. The Heart of Man is deceitful above all things, and the
Devil was a Liar from the Beginning. Time was, it is possible, when the Devil
drove a quite contrary Design, and sang a quite other Song, to encourage the
Soul in a course of Sin; suggesting to it, that Pardon was an easy thing, and
might be obtained without difficulty; however he has changed his Note now, he
is pursuing but the same Design, that is, the Ruin of the Soul, though it be by
a quite contrary Method. But it is not always that a Soul under this Temptation
talks at this irrational rate, ordinarily it has something to say, though
nothing sufficient to build such a Conclusion upon; and as I hinted to you
before, all that the Devil, or a Man's own Heart can say in the case, is either,
1. That our Sins are too many to be forgiven. Or, 2. That they have been
aggravated with some circumstances, to that degree, that they cannot be
forgiven. Or, 3. That the time is past, we have gone on in them too long to be
forgiven. Or, 4. That we have committed some particular Sins of too deep a die
to be washed out. If we can but drive out the Devil from these Refuges, we
shall leave him nothing to say to a Soul to advantage this Temptation.

1. As to the First, That our Sins are too many to be forgiven. This Suggestion
either has no bottom at all, or if it has any, it must be this: That the
Promises of Grace, and the Forgiveness of Sins, are limited to a certain number
of Sins; for if they be not, upon what colorable pretense does the Devil
endeavor to baffle the Hope of any Soul, by whispering to it, That its Sins
are too many to be forgiven; if God has no where said, he will not pardon a
multitude of Sins, to what purpose, or upon what pretense shall a Soul Despair,
because of the multitude of its Iniquities? But where in the whole Book of God
shall a troubled Soul find any line to this purpose: A Souls hope for Pardon
depends upon the Word of God, and in reason must not the Limitations (if any
be of that hope) be found in the Word of God too; or are they not in all reason
to be rejected, as the Fictions of our own Hearts, or Figments of our grand
Adversary the Devil? Where the Word of God limiteth not the Will of God, upon
what grounds do we limit it? Methinks in this case the whole Trinity speaks
unto us, in the Language that St. Paul spoke to the Corinthians, in another
Cause; 2 Cor. 6. 11, 12. Oye, Corinthians (says he) our Mouth is opened unto
you, our Heart is enlarged: You are not straightened in us, you are straightened in
your own Bowels. Some thinks the Holy Trinity speaks to us in the whole tenor
of the Sacred Writing, O you troubled Sinners, you Despairing Souls, our Mouth
is opened to you, to call those that have abundantly sinned to our abounding
Mercies. Our Heart is enlarged, you are not straightened in me (says the Father
of Mercies) I have infinite Mercies, Mercies as the Sands which is on the
Seashore. You are not straightened in me (says the Son) I have an infinite Value
and Virtue in my Blood; it is sufficient in it self for the Expiation of the
Sins of the whole World, and every individual Man and Woman in the World. You
are not straightened in me (says the Holy Spirit) I after a multitude of
Sinnings, stand yet at the door of your Hearts and knock, and cry, if any Man
will open, he shall come in and s^p with me; yea, let them do what in them
lies, I am ready to add my Efficacy, to give Faith, and to give Repentance,
and this after a multitude of Sins. You are not straightened in me, where then are
Sinners straightened? Oh they are straightened in their own Bowels. They cannot find
in their Hearts to consider their ways, to humble their Soul for their sins, to
leave them, and to turn unto God: Thus are they straightened in their own Bowels,
and they will not come to Christ that they might have Life.

2. Secondly, To this Suggestion doubtless we are to oppose what the Scripture
speaks of, the multitude and abundance of Divine Mercies, Psalm. 134. 18. If I
should count them (says Holy David) they are more in number than the Sand. So
Isaiah 55. v. 6, 7. Let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon
him, unto his God, for he will abundantly pardon. Thus you often read in
Scripture, of a multitude of Mercies, tender Mercies in God; Psalm. 5. 7. I will
come into thy House in the multitude of thy Mercies. So Psalm. 51. 1. Have Mercy
upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness; according to the multitude of
thy tender Mercies, blot out my Transgressions. So Psalm. 69. 13. Mercy in God
is but one thing, it is the Goodness of God looking upon one in Misery, and
helping and relieving him: what do we read of a multitude of Mercies, certainly
it either signifies Gods multiplied Acts of Goodness, which are several
Branches springing out of the same Root of Goodness and Mercy; or else the term
is used, to signify unto us, that there is a Goodness in God proportionated to
the multitudes of Sin and Misery that are in us. To what end do we read of
multitudes of Mercies in God, if it were not to relieve us groaning under
multitudes of Sins.

3. Again consider, It is the same thing with God to pardon multitudes of Sins
as few; yea, he never pardons the Sins of any one Soul, but he pardons a
multitude. God must vail his Justice, and deny himself in his Vindicative
Justice to pardon one Sin. There is no one Sin, but has a kind of infiniteness
in it, or rather contracts an infinite Guilt; for every Sin which we commit, is
against an infinite God, against infinite Justice and Goodness; and nothing but
infinite Goodness can remit it and pass it by. And an infinite Remission as
easily extends to a multitude of Sins as to a few; so that as that good
Prince said unto God in the recognition of his Power, It is easy with thee to
save by many as by few. So we may say in the case before us, It is as easy
with God to save from many, from the guilt of many, many thousands of Sins, as
from the guilt of a few; especially (which I should have put in) considering
there is also an infiniteness in the (...), in the Redemption Price that is
paid; if indeed that had been scant, something might have been colourably
objected; but that is commensurate to the Goodness that is in God. The Person
that died for our Sins, was God-man, an infinite Person; his Blood was of
infinite Virtue, as to Satisfaction. Indeed the Papists strain a great deal too
far, to say, That the least Drop of Christ's Blood was sufficient to ransom a
World. That is an idle Monkish Hyberbole, for there must be a pouring out of
his Life, so much of his Blood shed, as should have determined his Life: But
that there is a Nuda Sufficientia (we are not speaking now of the Sufficientia
Ordinata, how far Christ ordained it to be sufficient) but that, I say, there
was a bare and naked Sufficiency in the Death of Christ; for more than it shall
ever be applied to. This must be granted by all, who will acknowledge an
infiniteness in Christ's Person. Nor yet shall the Papists from hence augment
their Churches Treasury to the value of a Farthing. Christ never left the
Redundancy of the Virtue of his Death to humane Disposal: the Virtue of his
Blood (as to all those who shall by it have any Benefit) was ordered and
disposed of from before the Foundation of the World; even from the time that
the L^mb was first slain in Gods Eternal Counsels. Let them look to answer the
Papists in this Point, who maintain Universal Redemption in the latitude of it.
But I add farther under this Head, That God never pardons Sin to any Soul but
he pardons a multitude. It is true, there is not a parity in Men and Women's
Sins, either as to the quality or quantity; but, I say, God never pardons any
but multitudes of Sins: The Righteous falls seven times in a day. Sin is in
every Soul, and it may say, Our Name is L^gion, for we are many. If multitudes
of Sins could not be pardoned, no Sinner could be pardoned.

2. Temptation. But then, says the Tempter, or the tempted Soul (if you will)
Ah, but my Sins have received very high and great Aggravations: I have sinned
against Light, against Love; I knew I ought not to do what I did; I was warned
by Ministers, checked by my own Conscience, otherwise moved by the Spirit of
God. I had Mercies above thousands of others; I sinned against all, etc. To
which I answer.

1. This is indeed a very sad circumstance, a load of this nature does often
lie very heavy upon the Conscience; and a guilt of this nature, requires a
further and deeper Humiliation, Confession, Contrition; but the Question is,
Whether such Sins be capable of a Pardon, yea or no? If they be capable of
Forgiveness from a gracious God, all this is no ground for thee to Despair, and
cast away Hope; refusing to be comforted.

2. If they be not capable of Pardon, it must be so determined in Scripture.
Now the Revelation of God in his Holy Word, has no where determined, that no
Person that has sinned against his Light shall be forgiven: and we ought not
to conclude to our own Prejudice and Discouragement, as to an Act of God, what
he has no where in his Word revealed.

3. Thirdly, There is no Sinner pardoned, but has sinned against his Light and
against Love; so that the Question seems not to be about the Thing, but about
the Degree: not whether one who has sinned against Light and Love can be
Pardoned, but whether one who has sinned against so much Light, and so much
Love, can be forgiven; and it will be very hard for thee to as^ign Sinnings
against such Degrees of Light and Love, as none ever sinned against and were
saved. There are in Scripture great instances of Pardoned Sinners, who yet
sinned against great Degrees of Light and Love too. Take but the instances of
David and Peter; David was a Man of much Light, he was, you know, one of the
Penmen of Holy Writ; he was a Man much beloved of God, he is styled, The Man
according to Gods own Heart: God minds him of how much he had done for him,
taking him from the Sheep-folds, and making him King over Israel and Judah;
giving his Masters Crowns, Houses and Wives; yea, and (as he tells him) was
ready to have done greater things for him; against all this he sinned in the
matter of Bathsheba, and in the matter of Uriah: It is true, this cost him many
Tears, many Prayers, yet he obtained Mercy. Peter was a Man of great Light, and
had been made the Object of great Love; Christ had said to him, Thou art Peter,
and upon this Rock will I build my Church; yet this Peter cursed and swear, and
denied his Master, and after this, when he had gone out and wept betterly,
Christ remembered him; and I doubt not but you believe Peter is in Heaven. Thou
can not say, that thou have sinned against greater Light, or greater Love,
than these two eminent Saints in Glory sinned against. To have sinned out our
Light indeed, that is, to such a degree as we have no more Checks, no more
Rebukes of Conscience, this is very sad, and the Interpretations of it be to
the Enemies of God. To be past Feeling, that is sad, but by thy Trouble and
Complaining it appears that is not thy Case: but it is plain that many have
sinned against Light much Light, and against much Love too, whom God has from
the infiniteness of his Mercy forgiven and rereceived up to Glory.

3. Temptation. But will such a Soul say, It is true, had I in time turned unto
God there might have been hope, but alas, time is past; time is past with me:
had I turned to God in my Youth, but I am in the declining part of my Life; God
has said, His Spirit shall not always strive with Man. The Fig Tree was Cursed
after Three years in vain expecting Fruit. God has a long time been looking
for Fruit of my Soul, and has found none: I have sinned wilfully, after I had
received the Knowledge of the Truth, there remains now (I fear) no more
Sacrifice of Sin, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery
Indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries; Heb. 10. 26, 27. To which, I
say,

1. This is indeed a very sad and bitter Reflection, and I desire that such
Complaints as these, when we hear them, may be sanctified, to all that have
time before them, to take heed how they mispend it and trifle it away; but
where this Counsel is too late, the Question that we have in hand, is, Whether
there be a sufficient Warrant for a Souls Despair.

2. The sadness (Secondly) of this Case is aggravated, from the appearances of
Scripture for this Temptation. It is generally held by Divines, That as
Countries and Nations have their Periods of Grace, so particular Persons have
their Days of Grace too, and Periods, beyond which Gods Spirit shall not strive
with them; and it appears by that Text, Heb. 10. That there is a wilful
Sinning after the Knowledge of the Truth, after which there will remain no
Sacrifice for Sin. But what that degree of wilful Sinning is, and how it must
be circumstanced, that is another Question? But to speak more directly to the
Temptation.

1. In the first place, I would have thee scriously consider, Whether the
Freeness of Divine Grace in the Remission of Sins, be duly thought of by thee,
who objectest thus against thy self. Take heed thou have not some Thoughts
within thee, that thou should recompense God by thy future Holiness, for thy
past Provocations; and whether that which discourageth thy hoping in God, and
looking up unto him for Mercy, be not a prospect that thou art not like to have
time enough to make this Recompense: If thou have any such Thoughts as these,
thou do not well attend to the Promise of Pardon, which runs thus: I will
blot out thy Transgressions for mine own Name sake, and we have Redemption,
even Forgiveness of Sins, through his Blood. The end which God aims at in the
Forgiveness of any Souls Sin, is his own Glory, the glorifying of the riches of
his Grace, not receiving the Homage of an Holy Life, though that be thy Duty,
and what God requires of thee, yet, I say, that is not Gods great and ultimate
end. He will have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and extend, Compassion to
whom he will extend Compassion. The Consideration upon which God does it, is
the Price paid, and Satisfaction given by the Blood of his Son. It is not for
our sake, nor for our future Works sake, but for his own Name sake, and for his
dear S^n's sake; that he grants unto any, Pardon and Forgiveness of Sin. Now
although the time of thy Life yet to come, in probability will not be
commensurate to the time of Life, which is past and spent in Sinning and
Dishonouring God; yet why may not the great God glorify the Riches of his
Grace, in the free Forgiveness of thee? Why may he not exalt the Blood of his
Son, in washing thy Soul?

2. Secondly, It is not for us to know times and seasons, which are in Gods
Power only. It is true, God seems to have revealed, that every Soul has a
set time, beyond which be will show it no favor; and that this is not only
the end of our Life, but may be sometime before our dying day; but we know not
what time that is, and therefore it is rashness, for any Soul to conclude my
time is past. Where have we any Directions from the Word of God to fix any such
time, or to conclude it as to any period of time? We know the Master of the
Vineyard called to some to come and Work in his Vineyard at the 11th. hour, and
we know also that the Thief upon the Cross was told in the last hour of his
Life, that he should that Night be with Christ in Paradise. Secret things
belong unto God, Revealed things only to us and to our Children. Unless we had
some certain Rule to determine the Time to us, we have no Reason to determine
it our selves, to discourage us from what his Word commands us as our certain
Duty.

3. Thirdly, Supposing there be an heart found in us to be sorry for our Sins,
humbled for them, and to turn from them to God, and to accept of the Lord Jesus
Christ and his Salvation tendered unto us in the Gospel; it is certain our time
is not yet past: The Reason is, because the promise of Pardon and Salvation is
made unto such. So that no Soul has reason to conclude there is no hope for
him in God; but that Soul that labors under impenitency, and hardness of
heart, and finds in it self a resolution yet to go on in its sinful courses:
And therefore you shall observe in that dreadful Text, Heb. 6. the Apostle
says of them that have been once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly
Gift, and the Powers of the World to come, and have been made partakers of the
Holy Ghost, etc. if they fall away, it is impossible they should be renewed
again by Repentance; if they could Repent, it were not impossible they should
be Pardoned or obtain Eternal Life and Salvation; but it pleases not God to
renew them by Repentance: if thou find an heart to Repent, to bleed for Sin
and turn from it, there is no Reason for thee to Despair, or to conclude it is
too late for thee It is a true saying, That True Repentance. is never too late;
for it always has the Promise of Pardon and Forgiveness annexed.

4. Fourthly, as to that Text Heb. 10. 26. If we sin wilfully after we have
received the Knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for
Sins. It is not to be understood strictly as the words seem to sound, as if it
concerned all Persons that sin against their Light and Knowledge, but only of
some degrees of wilful sinning; for all the Sons and Daughters of Men would be
in a sad state, if there were no Sacrifice for sin remaining for any, that
after the receiving and owning of the Truth, did in any degrees knowingly and
wilfully sin against God: But this also appears by the Con^ext, and the Text,
Heb. 6. to which this is apparently parallel; 1. It speaks of Adversaries v.
27. 2. Of such as trod under foot the Son of God, and counted the Blood of the
Covenant, with which he was sanctified, an unholy thing. It is apparent he
spoke of Christians that made a total open Defection from the Doctrine of the
Gospel to Judaism. This is that which v. 26. He called the forsaking the
assembling themselves together; forsaking the Communion of all Christians; and
a malicious contempt and despising of Christ, and of his Blood; counting it an
unholy thing. The Truth which he here speaks of, is undoubtedly the Truth
which he had before opened in this Epistle; wherein he had enlarged in a
Discourse to prove, that Christ was truly God, and truly Man, and the true
Messiah shadowed out by the Jewish High Priest. Now says he, if a man sin
wilfully, that is, having owned and acknowledged and professed this Truth,
afterward reject it, deny it, apostatise from the profession of it, leaving
the Assemblies of Christians, shall join himself to the Assemblies of those who
are the Adversaries of Christ, and continue and maliciously go on in that
apostasy and defection: What ever Remedy he may dream of finding in the Jewish
Sacrifices, he will indeed find that there is none of their Sacrifices will do
him good, nor will Christ expiate for him; so there will be no Sacrifice for
his Sin. This I take to be much of the sense and import of that Text, according
to which it will not much concern one in thy Circumstances.

4. Temptation But will some Soul say, There is a Sin that shall never be
forgiven (our Savior has told us so, Math. 12. 31. Mar. 3. 28.) Saint John
calls it a Sin unto death: The Apostle (admiting those two Texts, Heb. 6. 6, 7.
and Heb. 10. 26, 27, 28. be to be restrained to that) says of it, that those
who are guilty of it, cannot be renewed by Repentance, and that there remains
no more Sacrifice for it. I have committed that Sin, and therefore I know there
is no hope for me, I have nothing to do but to look for that fiery Indignation
which is to devour the Adversaries. Thus speaks the Tempter: Thus after him
does the poor Soul speak that is Tempted. To which I Answer,

1. It is very unreasonable for thee to conclude that thou have sinned the Sin
against the Holy Ghost, the unpardonable Sin, till thou can tell what the Sin
against the Holy Ghost is; if thou can not tell what it is, how can thou
tell that thou have committed it: Now it is not like that thou should be
able to determine a Question which has exercised so long the greatest Divines,
and yet remains not determined by them, at least not agreed in by any
considerable consent. Some make it a Sin of which we are not now capable, the
d^nial of the Divine Nature of Christ, after they had seen his miraculous
Operations, which God alone could do; and Reviling, Reproaching, and
Persecuting him; notwithstanding all they had seen in him or heard from him.
And it is plain, this is that which Christ in those Texts of the Gospel does
primarily and immediately speak of: But those Texts in the Epistle to the
Hebrews cannot be thus interpreted; yet what this specifical sin is, is not
agreed amongst the best Divines.

2. Secondly, Many of those from whom we hear these complaints, apparently have
not Light enough, I mean not knowledge enough, to be under the guilt of this
Sin; for that is apparent from Heb. 6. that whatever this sin be, it must be
the sin of knowing enlightened Persons, such as have been once enlightened; as
have tasted of the Heavenly Gift: So that ignorant Persons cannot be under this
Guilt they must be knowing Persons, and such as have made a Profession.

3. Thirdly, It is also thus far agreed, That there must be a Total and Final
Falling away from the Profession of Faith, which Men have made, and this must
^e conjoined with Malice expressed in Words, or Deeds, or both; such as may ^e
interpreted, a doing despite to the spirit of Grace, a trampling under-foot
the blood of the Covenant, an accounting it an unholy thing, a Crucifying
Christ a-fresh.

4. Fourthly, There must be a Perseverance in this Apostasy and Blasphemy, to
the end without Repentance, or it cannot be this Sin: for the Apostle says of
such as commit this Sin, that it is impossible they should be renewed again by
Repentance: and Christ says, That it shall never be forgiven. Now it is
certain any Sin that is repented of, may and shall be forgiven. I must confess,
when I consider what woeful Apostacies some in the days wherein we live, have
made from the Doctrine of Godliness, and what Blasphemies come from their
Tongues and Pens, against the Operations of the Spirit; imputing that to
Melancholic Fancies and Dreams, and to Impressions from the Devil, which are
from the Holy Spirit of God, and its Impressions* Teachings and Operations; and
when I also consider with what an heat, and passion of Madness, many are
carried out i^ Persecuting the Servants of God, and th^^ in an age so ferrtile
of means, that they either have known, do know, or may know other things: My
Heart aches and trembles for many poor Souls, and I cannot but fear, many more
than we are aware of, are under this tremenduo^ Guilt; nor know I how they can
evince the contrary, but by a timely sense of their Sins, Repentance, and
Sorrow of Heart for them, and taking a new course; but yet I say final
Impenitency must go to make up this Sin; which unless thou find, thou have
no Reason, as to it, peremptorily to conclude against thy self: The Evidence of
this truth often puts the Tempter to his last shift, and we hear often the poor
Tempted Soul saying thus,

5. Temptation. Ah! This, this is my case, I know I have not so sinned, but if
I could Repent, if I could Believe in Christ, I might be Pardoned, I might be
Saved, but I have not Repented, I do not Repent; my Heart is harder than the
nether Millstone; I weep and howl indeed for my Plagues, I see I am a poor
undone Creature, that makes me complain, and wring my hands, but I see nothing
of the evil of my Sin, I shed not a tear upon that account, nor cannot,
therefore there is no hope.

1. It must be acknowledged that both Repentance and Faith is the Gift of God,
and naturally no Man has a Power to the one or to the other; Acts 11. 18. 2 Timothy 2. 25. and Faith is not of our selves, it is the Gift of God; Ephesians. 2. 8.
Phil. 1. 29. The Question is not therefore (taking Repentance in a full and
proPer sense) whether thou can Repent or Believe, but whether God has
wrought, or will yet work in thee a power truly to Repent and Believe: And how
do thou know, that God will not do that? For thou can not conclude,
supposing God has not done it yet, that he will not do it before thy dying
hour.

2. Possibly thou may be mistaken in thy determining that God has not done
it, from a mistake concerning the true Nature of Repentance; a sense and sorrow
for Sin are but the outworks of it: True Repentance lies in the Souls
displicence to Sin, and hatred of it, and readiness to take a Revenge upon it
self for it, and Resolution and endeavor against it for the time to come. I
know it is not impossible that a Soul under such Horrors as these, may not
have any true sense of Sin or Hatred of it, but even Blaspheme God, because of
its Horrors, Terrors, and Affrightments; but let me tell you, the Instances
of Souls are very rare, that are under great Terrors and Affrightments for
Sin; so a^ to conclude there is no hope: and yet at the same time Love,
Delight, in such Sins, take pleasure in them, and desire but occasions to
commit them. I would ask thee seriously under these Terrors for some Sins thou
have committed, do thou not from thine heart wish thou had not committed
them? Could thou not even tear thy flesh, that ever thou should be so far
betrayed by the Lusts and Passions of thy depraved Heart? Would thou now do
the like again? What does this speak but Repentance, so far as it can be judged
of under thy present Circumstances? Indeed it is possible all this may be, and
yet a Soul recovered out of these sad Circumstances, may again return with the
Dog to its vomit and the Swine to the wallowing in the mire again; but this is
not what at present thou can conclude, to hinder thy Souls Hope and
Confidence in the Mercy and Free Grace of God.

3. But admit thou can not satisfy thy self that thou have Repented or
Believed, yet may not God yet give thee an Heart to Repent and Believe? What
hinders? Or if he may, what hinders thy hope in the Mercy of God? Nay if thou
do what in thee lies, I dare assure thee that God will not be wanting in
the Aids and Assistances of his Grace: But I have said enough to evince the
first thing that I propo^ed, That there is no sufficient Reason, considering
the Covenant of Grace, and Gods Revelation of his Mind in the Gospel, for any
Soul to Despair. The Issue of which is this, That a Soul thus sinning,
Transgresses without a Cause, and a Reasonable Soul in this acts not
according to Principles of Reason, or any just Conclusion drawn from Gospel
Promises, or Principles. This is the first thing.

2. A Second thing which I would offer to such a Souls Reflection, is the
greatness of the Sin of Despair. Presumption is a Sin, but yet Despair seems
to be a far greater Sin: To Evidence which, I shall desire you to consider, 1.
What it Implies. 2. What must Accompany it. 3. What better Consequents it has.

1. It Implies and carries along with it, a denial either of the Power of
God; Or of the Goodness and Mercy of God; or, thirdly of his Truth and
Faithfulness. 1. Of the Power of God, It was laid to the charge of the
Israelites, That they limited the Holy One of Israel; Psalm. 78. 41. They said,
Can God bring us Water out of the Rock? And Can God give us Meat in the
Wilderness? Thou say, Can God Pardon such a Sinner as I have been? Can God
give Repentance? Can God give me Faith in Jesus Christ? What is this, but to
limit the Almighty? The unbelieving Noble Man, of whom you read in the Book of
Kings, when the Prophet foretold that Food should by the next day be at so
cheap a Rate; said, If God would make Windows in Heaven, the thing could not
be: The Prophet told him it should be, he should see it, but he should not Eat
of it; and the Chapter tells you he saw it verified, he saw it the next day,
but he was trodden to Death by the Multitude. Sarah laughed (it was a laughter
of unbelief) when the Angel told her she should have a Son: God punished it
gently in her, but more severely in Zachary, that would not believe that his
barren Wife should have a Son; he was struck Dumb: What do thou do less than
Question the Power of God? If God can forgive Sins, why may thou not hope?
If he can, even in the last hour give Repentance unto Life; why should a living
Man not hope? Ah! but says this Soul, No, no, I do not doubt but God can do
it, but he will not do it.

2. Secondly, Is not this to deny the Lords Goodness and Mercy? God has
exalted his Mercy above all his Name; when God proclaimed his Name to Moses,
Exo. 34. you shall find there 8 or 9 Expressions, all but one (which will by no
means clear the Guilty) signifying the Goodness, and Mercy of God (which has
made a very Learned Interpreter (v. De Dieu ad Loc.) doubt whether we have
truly Translated that Phrase:) God triumphs more in this than in any other
part of his Name; he has chosen to be exalted in his Arttribute of Mercy, he
has exalted it above all his Name: Now this is that Artribute, the Glory of
which Despair Robs God of. Presumption denies him the honor of his Truth,
of his Justice, and Judgment, which indeed he styles his Work, but his strange
Work, as that which flows not from himself; but is as it were forced from him
by a meritorious Cause in the Creature. Mercy is the proper and natural Work of
God, flowing merely from himself without any Cause in the Creature. This is
that, the Honor of which Despair denies unto God, nor is it to be freed from
a questioning the Power of God also; for although (as thou pretendest) thou
do not Universally question the Prerogative and Power of God to Forgive
Sins, yet thou deniest his Power to Forgive thy Sins, yea the Sins of any who
are in the like Circumstances of sinning with thee: for unless thou can
charge him (with whom there is no respect of Persons, with a particular Malice,
or Ill Will to thee) in saying God cannot, nor will not, Pardon thy Sins; or
there is no hope for thee: thou deniest not only the Power of God as to the
Pardon of thy Sins, but the Sins also of any other whose Circumstances of
sinning are as great as thine are: Now seems it to thee a light thing, O
Christian, to deny the Divine Goodness, and to set Limits to Infinite Mercy.

3. Thirdly, This Sin always carries with it also A denial of Gods Truth, and
Faithfulness. He has told thee, Mat. 12. 31. That all Sin and Blasphemy,
wherewith any shall Blaspheme the Son of Man, shall be Forgiven: That if thy
Sins were as Scarlet, they shall be as Wool; if as Crimson, they shall be as
White as Snow: No, say thou, I have Sinned, I have Blasphemed, and it shall
not be Forgiven: I have Scarlet Sins, and God will not make them as Snow. I
have Crimson Sins, and God will not make them as Wool. What is this, but to
put the lie upon God, to deny his Truth and Faithfulness, to say he has said
it, and he will not do it; he has spoken it, but it shall not come to pass?
But some will say it to me after this rate of Arguing, God should save all Men
and Women breathing: These words are no more spoken to me than to any other. I
Answer, I do not urge these great and precious Revelations of the Divine Will,
as grounds for Sinners to conclude that they shall be Saved, Pardoned, and
Saved, without any more a-do; but only as general grounds of Hope that there
may perhaps be Mercy found with God for us; and as Assurances on the part of a
gracious God, that if we miss of Pardon, and Eternal Life and Salvation, the
fault shall not be justly charged on God, he is ready to forgive; but in our
selves, who will not Repent, nor leave our Sins and turn unto God; who will not
come unto Christ that we might have Life; still it remains the duty of us
that would obtain this Pardon, to confess its Sins and forsake them, and to
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ: but the Despairing Soul throws all the blame
of its miscarriage upon God, and ordinarily, does not say, I do not Repent, I
cannot Repent; therefore there is no hope, but there is no Mercy in God: God
cannot, or God will not Pardon me now, I say. This is an Impeachment, as of the
Power of God, to forgive to the utmost, and of Christ to save to the utmost, so
of that Goodness, and Grace, and Mercy of God, yea, and of the Truth, and
Faithfulness of God. Besides, What a Comparison does the Soul make here,
betwixt finite and infinite; betwixt which two there is no proportion: Let thy
Sins be what they will or can, they can be but finite, The Mercies of God are
infinite. The Sea is but a finite Creature, yet what can you imagine so great
that the Sea will not swallow up and cover, that it shall not be seen any more.
It is a Similitude which God himself does sometimes make use of, by it to
express the plenty of his Forgiving Mercy. See that excellent Text, Micah 7.
18, 19. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons Iniquity, and passes by
the Transgression of the Remnant of his Heritage; he retains not his Anger
for ever, because he delights in Mercy: He will turn again, he will have
Compassion upon us, he will subdue our Iniquities, and thou will cast all their
Sins into the depths of the Sea. Now Despairing Conclusions, That there is no
Hope in God, that our Iniquities are too many, or too great, to be forgiven;
give God the Lie as to this. It is no more than the Scripture says, 1 John 5.
10. He that believes not God, makes God a Liar, because he believes not the
Record that God gave of his Son; and this is the Record, that God has given to
us Eternal Life; and this Life is in his Son.

2. Secondly, This Sin, as it implies these things, so it is always attended
with Unbelief in Gods Promises, and with very hard and unworthy Thoughts of
God. By Unbelief, here I understand, the Negation of a Trust and Confidence in
God, and the Promises he has made of those good things concerning which the
Soul Despaireth. So that what ever can be said in aggravation of the Sin of
Unbelief, is highly applicable in the aggravation of this Sin; for Despair
speaks the highest degree of Unbelief imaginable. It is one thing for a Soul
not to trust in God, another thing to conclude, That he is not to be trusted in
as to my Soul, that there is no hope for me in God. This speaks the highest
degree of Unbelief that we can imagine.

2. Besides, it necessarily carries along with it, very hard and unworthy
Thoughts of God. The Soul cannot think reverently and worthily of God, when it
is rooted in such Thoughts as these, that although he be a God that Pardons
Iniquities, Transgressions and Sins, yea, abundantly Pardons, yet he will
show it no Favor, but adjudge it to an Everlasting Misery and Torment; nay, it
is hard to conceive how such a Soul should forbear wishing that there were no
God, that the Being of God were annihilated.

3. Then in the last place, The Effects of this Sin of Despair, must needs be
very sad; for as a Lively Hope of obtaining any Good, quickens the Soul to
the use of all those Means which Reason dictateth, as probable Means for the
obtaining what we desire; so the Despair of obtaining any such Good, quite
deadneth the Heart, and takes it off all Thoughts of using Means to obtain
that which it concludes with it self impossible to be obtained. This is
manifest upon the Experience of all such Souls as at any time are under any
Fits of Despair: They cannot be persuaded to hear Sermons, to Pray, to Read; in
short, not to use any Means of Grace and Salvation. So that a greater Sin can
hardly be imagined than this Sin of Despair is. Oh that those would think of
this, who find in their Souls any Motions, Temptations, or Inclinations toward
it. That they would think how much Dishonor God has from this Sin above
others.

3. Again, Certainly it must be advantage to such a Soul, to reflect upon those
great Presidents of Free Grace, which we have upon Record in Holy Writ. Let
them remember the instance of St. Paul, who says of himself, That he was a
Persecutor, he was a Blasphemer and Injurious, but yet he obtained Mercy; 1 Timothy 1. 13. The instance of David restored again to the joy of Gods Salvation,
after the guilt of Adultery and Murder. Of Peter, who received kind Looks from
Christ, after he had thrice denied his Master, and that with the addition of
Cursing and Swearing, that he did not know him. Of Mary Magdalen, out of whom
the Lord had cast out Seven Devils. Let such a Soul think of these great
instances, and of those who Crucified the Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 2. 36, 37,
38. yet at Peter's Sermon were pricked at the Heart, encouraged by the great
Apostle to Repent and be Baptized, in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the
Remission of their Sins; and had the Promise of receiving the Gift of the Holy
Ghost.

4. O let no such Soul neglect the Reading or Hearing of the Word of God, that
is the Proximate Object of our Hope. God is indeed the primary and proper
Object, none can give Remission of Sin or Eternal Life but God; but by the
Word, and from the Revelation of the good will of God in his Word, we come to
Hope in God. I look therefore upon that as a great Conquest, which the Devil
has gotten over a Soul Despairing, when he has persuaded it not to hear, not
to read the Word; that is indeed to omit the Means by which its Darkness should
be dispelled, and a true and lively Hope should be begotten in it.

5. To all these should be added Fasting and Prayer, the Efficacy of which
depends on this, That it is Gods Work to beget the Soul to a lively Hope,
through the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ; 1 Pet. 1. 3. It is true, a
Soul in these Fits is not very fit for Prayer; how shall it Pray in Faith? But
yet I would not have it wholly to neglect Prayer. But let it call in the Help
of godly Ministers and Christians; let it send for the Elders of the Church,
and let them pray for it.

6. I should have added before, I shall now close this Discourse with it, Let
such a Soul be often whetting upon it self, and let others be suggesting to it,
the most liberal Promises of Free Grace and Pardon, and the greatest Presidents
of Forgiving Mercy, which the Scripture affords. And let there be frequent
Repetitions of them upon and to the Soul; possibly though at the first or
second offer, they may not stick to the Soul, nor the Soul take any Comfort
from them, yet at last they may. But so much shall serve to have spoken to this
Black and exceeding Dangerous Temptation.

FINIS.
Concerning TEMPTATIONS TO Presumption.
CHAP. I.
The Text, Deuteronomy. 29. 18, 19, 20. opened. The fitness of it to the intended
Discourse. The Proposition founded in it. The Method of handling it proposed.
What it is to presume. The Nature of Presumption opened.

MOses (the Servant of God) when he had a second time repeated the Law of God
to the Israelites, as you shall find in that Book, which from that Second
Repetition has its Name Deuteronomy, commands the People, that having passed
over Jordan, into the Land of Canaan, they should set up Stones, and Plaster
them with Plaster, and write the Law upon them; and set up these Stones in
Mount Ebal; Deuteronomy. 27. 4. and six of the Tribes were to stand upon Mount Ebal,
six upon Mount Gerizzim; v. 12, 13. who were to say Amen, to the Levites
pronouncing the Blessings or Cursings following, after Chap. 27. 28. promised
to those that observed the Laws, or denounced against those that presumed to
violate it; after this Moses exhorts them to Obedience, from the great Works
of God which they had seen him doing for them; Chap. 29. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 7, 8, 9.
and from thence to the 15 verse, he ingageth them in a Covenant with God, for
the observation of his Law. And v. 16, 17. shortly again minds them of what
God had done for them, both in bringing them out of Egypt, and through the
Nations of their Enemies. After all this, that great Man of God, from the
general Corruption of Humane Nature, foresaw there would be some b^ld pr^fane
Persons, that would venture obsequiousness to their Sensual Appetite, to break
this Holy Law; and notwithstanding all the Blessings annexed to the Observation
of it, and all the Curses entailed to the Violation of it, would adventure upon
their Sensual Satisfactions, and yet promise to themselves, not only Impunity
and Freedom, from the threatened Evils, but also the obtaining those good
Things, for the obtaining of which, the Observation of the Divine Law, was made
a Condition; he therefore adds v. 18, 19, 20, 21. L^st there should be amongst
you, Man, or Woman, or Family, or Tribe, whose Heart turns away from the Lord
his God, to go and serve the Gods of these Nations; lest there should be
amongst you a Root that bears Gall and Wormwood, v. 19. and when he hears
the words of this Curse, that he blesses himself in his Heart, saying, I shall
have Peace though I walk in the Imagination of mine Heart, and add Drunkenness
to Thirst; v. 20. The Lord will not spare him, but then the Anger of the Lord
and his Jealousy, shall smoke against that Man; and all the Curses of this
Book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his Name from under
Heaven. v. 21. And the Lord shall separate him to Evil, out of all the Tribes
of Israel, according to all the Curses of the Covenant, that are written in
this Book of the Law. It is true, these Words are in the Old Testament, but
Augustine said true, That the Old Testament is Occultatio Novi, The New
Testament in a Mystery; the New Testament Revelatio Veteris, the Old Testament
explained: both of them the Revealed Will of God, the later only the more
clear Revelation of it: And it is as true, That as Face answers Face in a
Glass, so the Hearts of Men in one Age and Period in the World, answer the
Hearts of Men in another Period of it. Moses in the Text aforementioned,
describes to you, 1. A Sinner, one who turns away his Heart from the Lord
his God, that walks according to the imagination of his own Heart, that
adds Drunkenness to Thirst; and all this after he has heard the Words of the
Law, and the Blessing to them that keep the Law, and the Curse to them that
violate this Law. 2. The bold Presumption of this Sinner, when he has heard
the Law, the Bl^ssings promised to them that observe it, and the Curses
denounced against them that violate it; yet he will flatter himself, he shall
have Peace, though he walks according to the imagination of his Heart, and
adds Sin to Sin, Drunkenness to Thirst. 3. The Fate of such a Sinner, or the
Issue of that Presumption, The Lord will not spare him, but the Anger of the
Lord and his Jealousy shall smoke against that Man, and all the Curses in
Scripture shall lie upon bim, and the Lord shall blot out his Name from under
Heaven. The Lord shall separate him to Evil, out of all the Tribes of Israel,
according to all the Curses of the Covenant, that are written in the Book of
the Law. God has also made a Covenant with People under the New Testament,
even the same for Substance as with the Jews: He then gave them a Law, A Law
for Worship, called the Ceremonial Law: A Law for ordering their Polity or
Commonwealth, called the Judicial Law: A Law for the Ordering their
Conversation, called the Moral Law. It is true, the two first concern not us,
nor are any part of Gods Covenant with us Gentiles. Christ has set up a New
Worship, and taken away the Law contained in Ordinances; Ordinances concerning
a Worldly Sanctuary. We may now every where worship the Father; John 4. 23, 24.
Carnal Ordinances and Typical Ordinances, that Law is abolished; Christ the
Antitype being come. The Substance is come, the Shadows are fled away; we are
not concerned in the Judicial Law, any further than in the Equity of it: it was
the Revealed Will of God, with respect to that particular People, and the
Complexion of them. But we are all concerned in the Moral Law, that is the same
in the Covenant with us as with the Jews, and the Blessings promised to the
Observer of it, and the Curses denounced against the Breakers of the same.
Only as to the Law-part, the Law of Faith is more fully and clearly revealed;
you read not so much of Christ and Believing in Christ, and in his Name under
the Old Testament, as in the New; yet even then Abraham saw Christ's day and
rejoiced: and there is enough to prove, that Faith in Christ was then a term of
Salvation. And for the Blessings and Curses, they are much more Plain,
Spirutual and Comfortable, or Dreadful, under the New Testament than under the
Old. All things happening to the Jews in a Figure. The Blessings under the New
Testament promised, are Pardon of Sin and Eternal Life, more eminently the
Curses eminently threatened, are dying in Sins and being Eternally Condemned.
Now look as it was amongst the Jews, when God had plainly given them his Law,
and threatened the Disobedience of it, with all manner of Curses and Judgments;
and promised to the Obesrvance of it, all manner of Good; yet there was a
Generation that were mad of their Lusts, and yet not willing to think they
should be Cursed in that manner and undone, therefore promised themselves, that
though they walked according to their own Lusts and Imaginations, and went
boldly on in Courses of Sin, yet they should have Peace, Outward Peace, Inward
Peace, Eternal Peace. So there are a multitude of People still that do the
like, as to whom the Lord says, He will not spare them, but make them eminent
instances of his Wrath and Vengeance.

I have hitherto been discoursing of the vehement Temptations, That to
Atheistical Thoughts, that to Self-murder, and that to Despair; I come now to
speak to a Fourth, that of Presumption. What the Women said of Saul, may be
said of the other three; but what they sung of David may be applied to this,
Atheistical and Blasphemous Thoughts, Self-murder, may have slain their
Thousands; but Presumption has slain, and I fear goes on yet, to slay its Ten
Thousands. Suffer me therefore to enlarge a little upon this so necessary an
Argument: you may (if you please) take this Proposition as a bottom to my
Discourse.

Prop. That it is very ordinary for Persons enamoured and resolved upon their
Lusts, notwithstanding the clear Revelations of the Divine Will, and the
Conditions upon which Blessings are promised; as also as to the Threatings
denounced against the Violators of the Divine Law; yet to presume upon their
receiving the promised Blessings, though they live directly contrary to the
terms on which God has promised them. In speaking to this Temptation (of all
others most common and ordinary, and as pernicious, tho not so troublesome) I
will first enquire into the Nature of Presumption, and when a Man or Woman may
be said to Presume in a Theological Sense. 2. What Tempters those are that move
to this Sin. 3. What that seeming Good is, which they propound to the Soul, to
entice the Soul to presume. 4. Upon what Grounds (ordinarily) Souls are tempted
to presume. 5. What may be advised or done, in order to the avoiding this Rock.

Presumption and to presume, are terms very variously taken, as they are used
by Lawyers or Divines, or in our ordinary Discourse and way of Speaking. I
shall neither trouble my self nor you with the Amphibology, and various usage
of the Terms. I am speaking to it only as a Divine. In the general Notion of
it, it signifies, To take a thing too quickly before it be given: A Proof taken
for granted, before it be fully made according to Rules of Law, when the thing
is made by it no more than very probable or suspicious, is called a
Presumption. In Divinity an Hope or Confidence taken up without just and
sufficient grounds to warrant it, is called Presumption; and without any more
Discourse, that is the sense in which I am speaking of it, the Objects of it
(as I am speaking to it) are the Favor of God, as to the Pardon of Sin and
Eternal Life and Salvation. Those are the Objects of the good Hope of a true
Christian, and of the vain Hope of a presumptuous Hypocrite. In short, It is an
unwarrantable Hope and Confidence, respecting the Favor of God, as to the
Pardon of Sin, and the obtaining Eternal Life; when Men and Women will be
unreasonably confident of their Spiritual Estate, that they are in the Favor
of God, that their Sins are Pardoned, and they shall be Eternally Saved; like
the foolish Virgins, that when they wanted Oil, came and cried, Lord open to
us, when the Door was shut against them; Matthew. 25. 10, 11. or those Matthew. 7.
22. that our Savior tells us of, who should say to him (and I pray observe, he
says there will be Many under those circumstances) that will say, Lord, Lord,
have we not Prayed in thy Name, and Prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name
cast out Devils; to whom our Lord tells us he will profess, I never knew you,
depart from me ye workers of Iniquity. This is that which I call the Sin of
Presumption, and a great Sin it is, it would not else have been so severely
threatened as it is; Deuteronomy. 29. 20, 21. and Motions to it are Temptations. Let me
in the next place find out our great Adversaries in this case.

CHAP. II.
The Tempters in this Temptation, The Devil, our own Lusts, the World. How they
severally work in the enforcement of this Temptation. The Men of the World,
especially Teachers of Falsehood, have a very great Causation in these
Temptations.

I Have heretofore told you, That every Motion to Sin (come it from whom it
will, and in what degree it will) is a Temptation, tho according to our common
way of speaking, we only call such motions Temptations when they are Violent
and Impetuous. Now in regard we may be moved to Sin, from the Devil, or from
the World, or from our own Lusts; there are three Principal Tempters against
whom the good Fight is to be managed. The World, The Flesh, and the Devil. As
to this particular Temptation, it may be from all three, or any of them.

1. Such a Temptation may be, and often is from the Devil; he is the Destroyer,
and he goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: He Tempts
to Atheistical and Blasphemous Thoughts, to Self-murder, to Despair; but these
are his Back-Game, which he seldom or never plays with the Soul until he
sees his Fore-Game lost. So long as he can persuade a Soul to go on in a
course of Sin, and yet flatter it self with Peace and Hope of its Salvation, or
confidence as to it, he will never persuade it to Despair or Self-murder; the
other Temptation does his business with far less noise, and the effect of it
will be every whit as certain, if not more: Who would fight his Enemy if he can
kill him with a sleeping Potion? Now if you ask me how the Devil works here?
I Answer either more Immediately or more Mediately. More Immediately, by
Impressing Notions in our Minds, which believed, will raise up such confidences
in us: Mediately, making use of others to suggest such Notions to us and to
persuade us to embrace them. If once the Devil can Imprint such Notions upon
our Souls as these, That God will save all his Creatures, or all these that are
Baptized, or all that are absolved and take the Sacrament when they die, etc.
or an hundred such like; and either by the force of his Impressions, or by the
Swasions and Suggestions of others, induce Men to believe them, he has done
his Work.

2. Such a Temptation may be from our own Lust: Lust in the general notion of
it, is nothing else but inordinate desire, whether it be the desire of a thing
which God has forbidden us (such was Eves desire of the forbiden Fruit) or an
unlawlawful irregular desire of something which under due Circumstances or in a
lawful manner we might have our Appetite carried out after. The Peace and Quiet
of our Spirits is a good thing, and the true object of a good Christians
desire; but when a Man or Woman desires to obtain it any way and by any means,
this is Lust. Now by this Lust Men are tempted and enticed to Presumption, to
hatch up a confidence, a groundless confidence in their Hearts, that they are
in Favor with God, and when they die, shall go to Heaven; etc. tho they have
no just ground for any such hope or confidence: Every Man Naturally wishes
well to himself, and has no inclination to prophecy evil unto himself: No Man
loves to live under a constant awe and fear of such a thing as having his
portion for ever in a Lake, burning with Fire and Brimstone, and from his eager
desire to be free from such a Torment conjoined. 2. With a desire not to deny
himself in sensual satisfactions, proceeds this Temptation to lay hold upon
any thing that may give him any colorable pretense to hope for a better
Portion; and thus this Temptation may be from our Lust, as St. James says,
Every Man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own Lust and enticed. The
poor Sinner has a desire to wallow in his Lusts and to enjoy himself in the
gratifying of his Senses, and withal he has no desire to be in the midst of
his Cupps frighted as Belshazzar, with a Mean, Mean; nor troubled with the
sour reflections of a Guilty and Condemning Conscience: Hence he is enticed to
Persume to lay hold upon some Hope, and to possess himself with some
confidence, that what ever Ministers say, he may walk in the Imaginations of
his Heart, and add Drunkenness to Thirst, and yet have Peace.

3. Such a Temptation, may be from the World, the Things of the World, or the
Men of the World: The Things of the World, they are but Mute inoperative
Tempters. They are gay and glistering to a sensual Eye: Fistula dulce canit:
Like Eves forbidden Fruit. When the Woman saw that the Tree was good for Food,
and that it was pleasant to the Eye; she took of the Fruit. The unsanctified
heart looks upon these things, and says, shall I leave all my satisfaction in
Pleasure, unlawful gain, etc. in hope of an unseen reward? But indeed here Lust
is the Tempter; of which I spoke before. The Men of the World have a greater
Causation, both the false Prophet, and the false Friend or Brother persuading
Souls to trust in Lies, to drink in Notions which are false, and otherwise
representing the Will of God to People as to Pardon of Sin, and Eternal Life
and Salvation, then indeed it is. Such a generation there was of old, Ahab's
Three hundred false Prophets, bad him go up to Ramoth Gilead and prosper
Hananiah persuaded the Kings and Princes of Israel, that God would break the
Yoke of the King of Babylon; Jer. 28. 11. You read of others, Jer. 29. 31.
Shemajah Prophesied and caused the People to trust in a Lie. There were
Prophets in Samaria, That caused Israel to Err, Jerem. 23. 13. that made People
vain, spoke Visions out of their own Heart and not out of the Mouth of the
Lord, That said to those that despised the Lord, The Lord has said you shall
have Peace: and to every one that walked after the Imaginations of his own
Heart, No Evil shall come unto you: That daubed with untempered Mortar, Ezekiel.
22. 28. That cried Peace, Peace, when there was no Peace. There were such in
Christ's and in the Apostles times, that taught another way of Salvation, then
what they taught: This has been the great Art of the Papists, to Interpret the
Law and Will of God, with reference to Man's Salvation, into such a sense, as it
might consist with a satisfaction of Men's Lusts; so as Men might keep their
Lusts, and yet go to Heaven by a few external good Works; parting with a little
money, or the like. The false Teacher has an eminent Causation in these
Temptations, he causes People to trust in a lie: So that in Temptations of
this Nature all our three Spiritual Enemies have great Parts.

CHAP. III.
The Seeming Good enticing is Temptations of this Nature, the enjoyment of
unlawful Sensual Satisfactions, without regrets, or disturbances from
Conscience. Several false Notions instanced in, which the Tempters instill into
Men and Women; upon which they build up Presumptuous Hopes.

THe seeming Good, which is the Bait that covers this Hook, is evident enough
from the former Discourse: It is The Enjoyment of unlawful sensual
Satisfactions without Regrets or Disturbances from Conscience. There are many
Trees of forbidden Fruit, in the midst of the World wherein we live: As there
are many other Trees, the Fruit of which we may eat of, under due
Circumstances, and yet live with God; many lawful Pleasures which we may take
and use moderately, many Actions which may tend to our Profit and Advantage, in
order to our comfortable Subsistence, and a living in the World with Honor and
Reputation; so that God has not scanted us, and we need not Steal for the
Satisfaction of our just Hunger: So I say there are many Trees of forbidden
Fruit, which we may not eat the Fruit of, least we die. God has not said to
any, Thou shall not Marry: But he has said, Thou shall not commit Adultery. He
has not said, Thou shall not enjoy Silver, or Gold, Houses, or Lands: But he
has said, Thou shall not Covet thy Neighbors House nor Lands. He has said,
Thou shall not Steal. He has not said, Thou shall not spend any day, but in
the solemn Worship of God. But he has said, Remember to keep holy the Sabbath
day. Now our Lusts incline us to forbidden things, Nitimur in vetitum; and
these desires of unlawful things, or lawful things in an immoderate, undue, and
unlawful manner, are what we call Lusts; yet Men living under the Revelations
of Divine Truth, and of the Divine Will, and hearing of an immortal State of
Souls, and of an Eternity which waits for all Men after this Life, and that
either in Bliss or Misery, we knowing that we must all die, and after come to
Judgment, and receive an Eternal Reward, or an Eternal Punishment, cannot but
desire an Eternal Happiness; and our business (I mean the business of a Natural
Man, resolved upon the Satisfaction of his Lust, and yet desirous to show
himself one that believes the Scriptures, and to cherish in himself an hope of
an Eternal Happiness) is to close with such Notions and false Representations
of the Divine Will, as may serve to cherish his hopes for a Living with God for
ever; he in the mean time enjoying those Lusts and sensual Satisfactions to
which he is most biassed and inclined: Hence it is that he Presumes, that is
he builds up unto himself Hopes and Confidences of Gods Favor to him as well
as others, and that he shall when he dies go to Heaven, whatever Ministers
say; who would put a Yoke upon Peoples Necks, that no Flesh is able to bear.
Now it may be worth an enquiry, what false Notion: those are, upon which Men
build up these Presumptions, and which the Devil, the World, or our own Lusts,
suggest and build upon, as upon a sandy Foundation. I shall name some, and
only in this place show you, that if these Notions were true, they might give
a foundation for such Confidences (at least some of them, others not) I shall
reserve my demonstration of the falsehood of them, until I come to the
Applicatory part of my Discourse.

1. That God will not Eternally Condemn any Man or Woman that he has made,
especially not any within the bosom of the Church: This has not been the
avowed Opinion of many who have published their Sentiments to the World; We
Read of Huberus and Paccius and some two or three more, who have adventured to
publish such Sentiments to the World, but by the lives of too many it is
proclaimed; that there are too many such Atheists in the World; for they wallow
in such prodigious Filthiness as it is impossible but that they must conclude,
that if there be an Hell; and it be not to stand empty, they are like to go to
it; for none can live more prodigiously lewd and profane lives than they do.
Now indeed if this Notion were true, if Men could but persuade themselves that
they are Gods Creatures, it were enough for them to be confident of Gods Favor
and their going at last to Heaven.

2. A Second Notion which some have taken up, is That Christ has dyed for all,
and all those for whom he dyed shall be Saved. The latter part of this, is held
by no learned Man that I know (though if I could admit the former; I should not
be very difficult as to the latter.) There are (as I have formerly told you)
three Opinions concerning Redemption, as to the Objects of it: Some saying he
died equally for all, as much for Judas as Peter: (Thus say the Arminians)
others that he died for all, but not equally: He purchased a certainty of
Salvation for some a possibility for all. (Thus the Methedists, or those that
are for the middle way.) Others say he died for no more than the Elect. I
intend not to meddle with this great Question; only I say, no judicious and
learned Man, that has held either of the two first Opinions, has said, or
will say, That all those for whom Christ died, shall be Saved. All agree in the
Negative of that; but I fear, abundance of less judicious People are of that
Mind, and here build up their Presumptuous Hopes.

3. A Third Notion is, That Sin is washed away in Baptism. There are some
learned and great Men indeed, who have thought, that the Guilt of Adams Sin,
yea all Original Sin, is washed away in Baptism, and Men Justified in it; but
they add, If by Actual Sins they put not a bar, so as all the Relief that
Opinion affords (if it be true) as to Persons dying in their Infancy, as to
whom they are as gentle, as Augustine was judged an hard Father; but I shall
not enlarge on this, for there can be no other Pretense for this as to grown
Persons, than their Admission into the Catholic Church by that Ordinance, and
so it in part falls in with the first Notion I named.

4. A Fourth Notion is, That Men and Women have their lives in their own hands,
a Power in themselves to believe and do whatsoever God has required of them in
order to their Salvation; so as they shall not need look after their Salvation,
till they come within sight of the Grave: Upon this they build up Presumptuous
Hopes all their Life, hoping to have time before their Death to bethink
themselves, and to turn unto God.

5. Under a fifth Head may come Men's false Notions of Faith, Repentance, and
Holiness. They are told by Papists, that Faith is nothing else, but an
Agreement to the proposition of the Word (and that they think they do.) That
Repentance is nothing else, but some sorrow for Sin, and a turning from some
flagitious Courses unto God: That Holiness is nothing but a performance of some
good Works Commanded in Gods Word, or a Resolution to do them, if they have
time; so as if they do upon their Deathbed profess they die in the Faith, and
declare they are sorry for their misspent Life; and their Resolution, if God
spare their lives, to live a better Life: This is enough to carry them to
Heaven.

6. A Sixth is this, That if they do but receive the Sacrament, and receive
Absolution from a Minister before they Die: This is enough to secure their
Eternal Salvation: For whose Sins they Remitt are Remitted.

7. A Seventh is (and that is perfectly Popish) That if they happen to die
under the Guilt of Sin (if it be not one of the seven Mortal Sins, and that
without Repentance) it is but lying some years in Purgatory, and they shall
come out and go to Heaven; nor would those Teachers of Presumption put that
necessity upon them, if it were not to get money for Masses to be said for
their Souls, or to get Indulgences for them, to help them out of the Imaginary
Fire.

There are some of those Notions, which drank in, and embraced by any, are the
grounds of this Presumption, as to which I am now Discoursing.

The only Question remaining, is what Christians should do to avoid dashing
upon this desperate Rock.

CHAP. IV.
What to be done by Christians, to avoid dashing upon this Rock of Presumption.
The first means to possess our selves of the falsehood of those Notious upon
which these Presumptions are bottomed. Three of them instanced in several
Arguments, to prove That Gods Creation of us, Christ's dying for all, And the
Efficacy of Baptism, cannot be, without any thing more sufficient grounds, for
any upon which to hope for Pardon of Sins, or Eternal Life and Salvation.

1. THe first thing to be done, is for Christians to possess themselves of the
falsehood of those Notions, which are the foundations upon which their
Presumptuous Hopes are raised, and the Truths of God in opposition to them; and
here suffer me to run over all the Notions, I before instanced in; and to show
you the egregious Vanity of them. I begin with the first of them, That God will
damn none of the Sons and Daughters of Men which he has made. This I persuade
my self, is in the heart of a great many more than will speak it out; let me
therefore show you the exceeding folly and vanity of it in some particulars:

1. In the first place, if I could say no more, yet this were sufficient, That
there is no such Revelation of the Will of God, in any line of Scripture. Where
has God said, any where in Scripture, The he will save all Men? Now the
strength of this lies here, That Eternal Life, being a Gift, a free Gift of God
and Christ's, that to which none is born, Romans 6. 23. John 17. 2. given by
Christ to those whom the Father has given him; not to all, but to those whom
the Father has given him: it is the highest folly imaginable, for any to hope
God will give it him, who is under no Circumstances, such as God has said, he
will give this great Gift to those that are under. You would think that Man
mad, that should nourish an hope that you would give him your Estate, when you
never told him, or any one else, that you would give him a Groat; and why are
you then so secure for your Souls, whose Interest is so infinitely more
valuable? Why should you think that God favors you, and will save you, when
he never told you so, either implicitly or explicitly? Do you trust to the
Goodness and Graciousness of the Divine Nature? Or to his Relation, to you, as
you are Gods Creatures, he your Creator? You may as reasonably think that all
the Devils in Hell should be saved Why should not the Goodness of Gods Nature,
as well extend to them, as you? They are your elder Brethren, the first of the
Creation; more excellent Beings by Creation, than Man was: Where is your
confidence then, because God made you; if you can neither conclude it, from the
Goodness of the Divine Nature, nor from your Relation to God, as he is your
Creator, nor from any letter of his Revealed Will: Whence can you lay the
stress of your Souls upon this, That God will save all.

2. Yet something might be hoped from hence, with more Reason; If God had not
expressly Revealed his Will to the contrary. Surely you would think that Man, or
Woman, much worse than mad, that should hope you would leave him, or her, your
whole Estate, when you shall have said, and sworn, that you would not give him
a Groat. There is no clearer piece of the Revealed Will of God in Scripture,
than that some of the Sons and Daughters of Men shall perish Eternally; Dan.
12. 2. Those that sleep in the dust shall awake, some to Everlasting Life, and
some to Everlasting Shame and Contempt. There shall be some to whom Christ will
say, Depart from me, I know you not, you workers of Iniquity; Math. 7. 23, 24.
Some to whom he will say, Depart from me you Cursed, into Everlasting Fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25. 41. Some foolish Virgins
against whom the Gates of Heaven will be shut; v. 10. Some against whom he will
come in Flaming Fire to take Vengance, who shall be punished with everlasting
Destruction; 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. Some that shall never enter into the Kingdom of
God; 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. some that shall have their portion in the Lake, that
burns with Fire and Brimstone; Rev. 21. 8. Isa. 27. 11. Yet certainly, God made
these Persons: He did not make them to damn them, but by their Impenitency and
Unbelief, they damn themselves. As he did not make them to damn them, so he did
not make all with an Intention or Resolution to save them; let them live how
they pleased: Now for us to build up hopes upon a foolish Notion, expressly
contrary to the Revealed Will of God, is a most unquestionable Folly.

3. If God would save all those that he has made, To what purpose think
thou, has he given out a Law to direct Men's Conversations; fortifying it with
Promises not only of good things in this Life, but of another Life, and with
threatenings not only of Misery in this Life, but of Eternal Misery in the Life
to come, to those that Presumptuously violate it? The truth is, this is a
principle that none can possibly entertain, unless he be turned Atheist, and
believes no Scriptures, no Hell at all: For was Hell prepared for none think
thou? Settle thy self therefore upon this, That God will most certainly turn
into Hell, some, and those not a few, of those Men and Women which he has made.

2. A Second false Notion that some presume upon, is the Redemption purchased
by Christ. Christ they say has died for All, and by the term All, they
understand every Man and Woman. Now to avoid this Rock, I shall offer these few
things to a Christians serious Consideration:

1. That although it be true in the Scripture Phrase and way of Speaking, that
Christ died for All, and for the World; yet the Scripture no where says, that
Christ died for every Man: And the term All does very ordinarily signify Many,
or All under such and such Circumstances, of such or such a kind. It is said,
Matthew. 3. 5. that Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Region round about
Jordan, went out to John, that is, very many, or some of all sorts; for none
can imagine that every Man, Woman, and Child, went out. There is but one Text
that foundeth like a Proof that Christ died for every Man; it is that, Heb. 2.
9. where we translate it; That he by the Grace of God should taste Death for
every Man; but it must be restrained by the next verse, where he speaks of many
Sons being brought to Glory, and therefore he, the Captain of their Salvation,
was made perfect through Sufferings. And in the Greek there is no more than
(...), for every; the Substantive is either (...), and then the sense is, he
tasted of every Death, or (which it may be is more probable) it must be
supplied from the next verse, for every Son who was to be brought unto Glory.
But not to enter into that Discourse, only to caution you from laying too
great stress upon Particles in Scripture.

2. Consider (what I before hinted) That none of those who hold the utmost
Extension of the Death of Christ, as to the Objects, ever said, That all those
for whom Christ died should be saved. Those indeed who believe Christ died only
for the Elect, assert this; but those who hold Christ died equally for all, no
more for Judas than for Peter; and those that say Christ by his Death purchased
a certainty of Salvation for some, and a possibility of Salvation for all, yet
neither of them will say, That all shall be saved for whom Christ died; which
has made me often admire at Men's heats for these Opinions, which if they could
prove to be true, have no more Significancy. Indeed they seem to be calculated
for nothing, but the Assertion of a Power in the will of Man, to choose and do
what God requires, in order to Salvation, and so to be his own Savior. Now if
this be all that any understanding Man pretends to in his asserting that Christ
died for all, how is it possible that any particular Soul can from his Belief
of it, conclude he shall be saved?

3. Besides, this Notion is pressed with the same absurdities, as that which I
first mentioned; for he that believes, That Christ died for all and every Man,
and therefore for him, must needs hold Universal Salvation, though not upon the
account of Creation, yet upon the account of Christ's Redemption; and this is
not only to hold, what God no where has revealed in his Word, but that which
is directly contrary to the Revelation of the Word; and that which is contrary
to a multitude of Promises and Threatenings; and will make them to be merely
superfluous and insignificant. The conclusion is, That thou have no ground from
any such Notion (be it true or false) to conclude any such thing, as that thou
art actually reconciled to God, and shall be saved; nor did ever any judicious
Person so conclude: but I fear thousands of ignorant ordinary Persons build
their Hopes here, and my self have by some been told so.

3. A third Notion upon which some may be tempted to presume, is, The Virtue
and Efficacy of Baptism. The Jews, you know, rested much upon their
Circumcision; and I fear too many amongst Christians, rest as much upon their
Baptism, and their being in it Regenerated and Born again. To arm you against
this Temptation, I shall, as to the other, offer you some few things to be
considered.

1. None can be confident upon this account, but they must consider Baptism,
either as it is the Door into the Church. From thence it must follow, That all
those that are Members of the Church of God shall be saved. Or Secondly, As an
Ordinance of God, with which God does constantly concur, in washing away the
guilt of Sin by Virtue of the Blood of Christ. I shall shortly show you that
which of these two ways soever Men look upon their Baptism, they can make no
such conclusion from it.

1. There is nothing in Scripture to justify such a Conceit, That all those
who are by Baptism admitted, into the Catholic visible Church shall be saved;
for I pray observe in this Notion of Baptism,

1. It does no more than Circumcision did under the Old Testament, to which it
succeeded. Circumcision was the Door into the Church of the Jews, as Baptism is
the Door into the Gospel Church. Now there is nothing clearer in all the
Scripture, than that all those that were Circumcised were not saved. Judas was
Circumcised, yet a Devil, a Son of Perdition. The Scribes and Pharisees, Lawyers
and Hypocrites, against whom our Savior (in the Gospel) denounced so many
Woes, they were all Circumcised. The Apostle expressly tells us, that
Circumcision avails nothing, nor yet Uncircumcision, but a New Creature. That
Circumcision verily profits Persons, if they keep the Law, but if they were
Breakers of the Law; their Circumcision is made Uncircumcision; Romans 2. 25.
That he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision
which is outward in the Flesh; but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and
Circumcision is that of the Heart and the Spirit, and not in the Letter; whose
Praise is of God, not of Men; v. 28. 29. What is more plain than that of our
Savior, Publicans and Harlots shall enter into the Kingdom of God, and the
Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out; Luke 13. 26, 27, 28. v. 25. he is
speaking to the Jews, who were all circumcised, all Members of the only
Church, God (at that day) had in the World; When once the Master of the House
is risen up, and has shut the Door, and you begin to stand without, and to
knock at the Door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us, and he shall answer unto
them, I know you not whence you are^: Then shall you begin to say, We have
Eaten and Drank in thy Name, and thou have taught in our Streets. I hope all
these were Sons of the Church, and no ordinary Members of it, but v. 27. He
shall say I know you not whence you are, depart from me all ye workers of
Iniquity; there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth; when you shall see
Abraham and Isaac; and Jacob, and all the Prophets, in the Kingdom of God, and
you your selves thrust out. And they shall come from the East, and the West,
and the North, and the South, and shall sit down in the Kingdom of God. And
behold there are last which shall be first, and first which shall be last. So
as this alone is no ground of Hope or Confidence to any Soul.

2. This appears further from hence, That many Persons be Baptized, and
Members of Churches, in whom Faith and Repentance, which the Word of God every
where makes necessary to Salvation, are most certainly wanting. Many Persons
are Members of the Church by Baptism, who yet are Drunkards, Whoremongers,
Liars, Unbelievers; such as the Scripture has expressly said shall have their
Portion in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone. Baptism therefore in
this Notion affords not the least ground of Confidence to any thinking and
considerate Soul.

2. Suppose we take Baptism in the Second Notion, as it is an Ordinance of God,
instituted for something. It is true, the effect of Baptism, what it is, and
how far it extends, has been a great Question amongst Divines: Some
ascribing to it the Justification of the Soul, and the Remission of Sins to
all; but then they restrain it to Original Sin, and so it only (as I before
said) gives us Comfort as to Children dying in their Infancy; others maintain,
The Regeneration of Elect Infants by Baptism. I shall freely tell you what I
judge is all in this Cause.

The most of those Baptized, in the time of the Apostles, were Persons grown
up, who had first made a visible Profession of their Repentance and Faith in
Christ; to these Baptism was a Seal of the Forgiveness of Sins, and an
Engagement to an Holy Conversation; as you read, Romans 6. 4; etc. To Infants it
is a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, as exhibited to Mankind. That in case they
do Repent and Believe, their Sins shall be washed away with the Blood of
Christ. To these it is an Ordinance of Admission into the Church. To these it
is an Engagement to be the Lords; an Avouchment of God for their God, and
Christ for their Savior. To these, if when they grow up, they shall Repent and
Believe, it shall be as a Fountain of Living Water, springing up in the Soul to
Eternal Life; they shall (as the Apostle instructs the Romans) Romans 6. 4, 5,
6. fetch Arguments, obliging them to die unto Sin and to live unto God. Whether
it has any such immediate Effect, as to all, to justify them from the guilt
of Original Sin, or to Regenerate them, that is, to make a change in their
Heart, I shall not dispute, but cannot prove it, nor do understand how possibly
it should have any further effect of this Nature, than Circumcision had to the
Jews: I am sure the Holy Scripture makes Pardon of Sin and Justification, not
the necessary or ordinary Effect of Baptism, but of Confession of Sin, True
Repentance, and forsaking of Sin, and True Believing in the Lord Jesus Christ.
Flatter not your selves therefore, if there be any Soul that lives in any
known course of Sin, that never confessed his Sins and forsook them, nor knew
what godly Sorrow for Sin meant, nor what it was to receive the Lord Jesus
Christ, and to believe in him; only knows he was Baptized, and he lives in
the Church, and is called a Christian, and here he rests, not doubting, but
being confident that he shall be saved. Let me tell him or her, he presumes,
and trusts his Soul upon a Lie; and that which no weighed Divine, of any
Persuasion, would ever say was a sufficient bottom to rest his Soul upon. None
ever said that Baptism washed away Sins past and to come; and those that do
ascribe Justification to Baptism, make it such a state as may be lost, and is
lost by a course of Actual Sinning.

CHAP. V.
The Notion of a Power in Man to Repent and Believe, agreed by few, if true, no
ground of hopes for Eternal Life. Why Mistakes about the Nature of
Regeneration, Conversion, Saving Repentance, Faith, Holiness, great Occasions
of Presumption. The Truth as to those Notions enquired and proved. What
Regeneration, Repentance, Conversion, Faith, Holiness, is necessary to
Salvation, and to the raising any Hopes in us with Relation to it.

4. A Fourth Notion which I instanced in as a cause of Presumption, was this,
That every Man and Woman has his Life in his hands, I mean a power in and of
himself (supposing the Common Grace of God denied to none) to do all that God
requires of him in order to Salvation, is a power to Repent, to Believe, to
Love God, etc. Hence many think that there is no haste for Men to deny
themselves, or to take up the Cross, or to follow Christ; they may stay till
they are old, and their Eyes can be no longer pleased with Seeing, nor their
Ears with Hearing; if then they do but Repent and Believe, all is well enough.
As to which give me leave to speak two or three things.

1. As brisk as this Opinion seems to be in the World, I could never yet meet
with any so hardy as to affirm, That these things were within the Power of Man,
without the Assistance of Special Grace. I have met with many that have talked
high for the Power of Man's Will, but when they have been brought to a close
Discourse, they would assert it no farther than either as to Moral Actions, or
Acts of Moral Discipline. They would affirm indeed, that a Man has a power to
go to Church, instead of going to the Tavern, to turn away his Foot from the
House of an Harlot, to do Justly, and an hundred such things: to read, to hear
the Word, to pray, to consider his Sins. Now these are things which none
denies, only we say, his power as to these is much weakened by the fall. So
as we doubt whether by Common Grace, and all the Natural Power Man has, he can
do these materially good Actions, when he is pressed with a vehement
Temptation: But I say I could never yet meet with any that would say, It is in
the power of Man to Believe, to Repent savingly, to Love God, etc.

2. If any does say so, He says what is contradicted by a multitude of
Scriptures. But it is not my work to enlarge here on that Discourse.

3. In the next place, Those Divines that do hold the greatest Natural Power in
the Will of Man, yet do say, Time may be past, that a Man may have sinned away
this Natural Power, and have his Heart so hardened in a Course of Sinning, that
he may have lost this Power, and so be concluded to an Eternal Misery, which
alone (to considerate Souls) is enough to spoil its Presumption from this Head.
For how shall I, who go on in a Course of Sin, knowingly presume, because I
have a power in my self to turn when I will, if it be possible, that I may by a
Course of Sinning have so provoked God, as he may have given me up to a
judicial blindness of Mind and hardness of Heart.

4. Admitting thou have such a Power, if it still remains established, that
this Power must be produced into Act; and that before thou can enter into
Heaven, thou must actually Repent and Believe; how do thou know thou shall
have time for it? May not God take away thy Soul with a stroke? May he not come
upon thee on the sudden, and say, This Night thy Soul shall be taken from thee;
and then what does thy Power signify? Do thou not see Men and Women die
suddenly? So that a pretense of such a Power in thee signifies nothing, but
that thou art more inexcusable by it, if indeed thou had such a Power, that
thou did not use it for the end for which thou had it.

5. I proceed now to the great grounds of Men's Presumption, viz. Mistakes as to
the Nature of Regeneration, Faith, and Holiness. The Scripture makes all these
so necessary to Salvation, that although some ignorant Persons may build up to
themselves, idle and presumptuous Hopes; because God made them, and Christ died
for all Men, and they are Christians and Baptized; etc. yet considerate Persons
plainly must see, That unless a Man be born again, of Water and the Spirit, he
can never enter into the Kingdom of God; they are the indisputable words of our
Savior, John 3. 3. And St. Paul plainly says that, Neither Circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new Creature: Our Savior says:
He that believes not, is condemned already, he shall never see Life, etc. The
Apostle says, without Faith and Holiness, no Man shall see the Lord: No
considering Man therefore can possibly raise up to himself any hopes of the
Pardon of Sin, or Eternal Life, but he must satisfy himself, that he is
Regenerated; that he does Believe; and that he does so far Obey, as God will
accept it. To this purpose nothing can serve the Devils turn so effectually, as
for the Soul to be deceived in the Notions of Faith and Holiness: Nothing can
be more the concernment of the Soul, than to take care it be not deceived.
There have been several Notions of Faith that have striven for Mastery in the
World.

1. The first is the Popish Notion, who make Faith to be the Souls Assent to
the Proposition of the Word, which may be without any Practical Obedience; for
many a Man assenteth to the truth of the Proposition, which yet he allows not
an influence upon his Life; and indeed this is such a Faith, as the Apostle
tells us, the Devils are possessed of, They Believe and Tremble.

2. The Second is their Notion, who make Justifying Faith to be what our
Savior tells us it is, John 1. 12. A Receiving of the Lord Jesus Christ, a
closing, an hearty closing with him as offered in the Gospel, hoping, trusting
in him, and him alone for Salvation. No Soul can possibly do this, that does
not first Assent to the Proposition of the Gospel, and agree to what that
Reveals concerning Christ; both as to his Person, and as to his willingness
to Save: But it is possible that a Soul may Assent to those Propositions, and
yet not Receive Christ upon the Terms he propounds. This Receiving Christ and
Trusting in him as their Savior, they say necessarily draws on Holiness and
Obedience (though Faith and Love are two things) for the rational Nature of Man
will not suffer him to hope or trust in another for any kindness, which he has
promised upon Terms, without the fulfilling of those Terms upon which it is
promised; but this they say may be without any certain Assurance of the Souls
Acceptance, which a man cannot have until he be Justified.

3. A Third, is the Notion of them who make it a full Assurance of the Love of
God; but yet such a one as obliges the Soul to all manner of Duty: and this
seems to have been the Notion of some Eminent Divines upon our first
Reformation, but is rejected by latter Divines, as it being not possible that
that should be an Instrument in our Justification, which it is not possible
that any Soul should have till it be Justified: besides that many a Pious
Devout Soul has not arrived at this.

4. Others make it to be a confident Persuasion, that Christ died for them;
whether they find themselves obliged to Live to him yea or no.

5. Others make it to be a Practical Assent to the Gospel.

The danger of a Souls Presuming, is from the first and the fourth of these
principally. If Men and Women think they do Believe because they do agree to
the Proposition of the Gospel, they may easily run away with a vain
Imagination, that all the Promises of the Gospel are their Portion, when indeed
not one of them belongs to them; because this Believing is not that Believing
which the Scriptures make necessary to Salvation: for the evidence of which,
suffer me to offer these few things to your Consideration.

1. Because this Assent may be without any Holiness or Conformity to the Will
of God: Murderers, Traitors, Thieves do agree to the Proposition of Humane
Laws, though they prodigiously violate them. There may be an Assent of the
Understanding to a Proposition, to which Men's Lusts and Passions suffer them
not to live up to; but we know that without Holiness none can see God, and
therefore this cannot be that Believing to which the Promises of seeing God and
living with him are annexed.

2. Because as I said before, the Devils thus Believe; yea I believe better
than the most of Men do. For our Assent to a Doctrine according to the workings
of our Reasonable Natures, is more or less, according to our Evidence of it.
Now the Devils have seen the Propositions of the Gospel, That Christ is the
Eternal Son of God: That he was made Man, and died for our Sins. These are
Propositions, which the Devils having been in the World ever since the
Creation, must needs see in a better Light than any Man can do, who only sees
the truth of them by the light of Reason, or the Revelation of Scripture, not
imprinted upon his Soul by the Demonstration of the Spirit, Revealing
perticularly to the Soul what is generally Revealed in the Word.

3. Thirdly Consider, That every where in Scripture, A Person, the Person of
Christ, is made the object of that Faith; to which the Promises of Life are
made: It is made a believing in Christ; on his Name, a Receiving of him, a
comeing to him. Now a Proposition, not a Person, is the object of Assent: We
indeed sometimes say, We Assent to such, or such a Person; But the meaning is,
we agree to such a Proposition, which he has delivered by word of Mouth, or by
Writing. The Object of Justifying Faith, the Scripture makes to be the Person
of the Mediator: I therefore beg of you, to take heed that you deceive not
your Souls, by this Notion of Faith.

And take as much heed of their wild Notion, who make Faith to be nothing else
but an assumed confidence that Christ died for them, let them live as they
list. This separateth Faith and Holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord; and is indeed nothing better in it self, than a most bold and
unwarrantable presumption, exclusive of that fear and trembling with which we
are commanded to work out our Salvation.

Their Notion is far better, who make Faith to be a practical Assent, but still
(I pray observe) the Act of the Soul, is made to be Assent, and the Object of
Assent can be no other than a Proposition, and for my own part, I cannot think
this the Act of that Faith that Justifies; for the Object of that Act as I
said before, is in Scripture constantly made the Mediator himself, not a mere
Proposition: I am afraid of this Notion, as calculated to justle Christ out of
the place of a Mediator, wherein God has set him; which was not only to treat
with his Father about the Terms of Man's Salvation, but to stand as the middle
Person between God and Man, to merit Salvation for us, by his Active and
Passive Obedience, by a gracious Act of God to be reckoned to us, upon our
Acceptance of him, and trusting the Weight of our Souls upon him; which cannot
be without our Assent to the Propositions of the Word: for upon the Credit of
that only it is, that the Soul applies it self to Christ, and goes to him and
receives him: Nor can it possibly be without practicial Holiness, and a Regard
to all Gods Commandments, and a sincere endeavor to observe them; for as I
said before, he must talk like a madman, that should pretend to hope in, or
trust to another, for a great benefit, which that other has promised, upon
such or such Conditions, whilst in the mean time, he neither does nor regard
to perform those Conditions; and let him talk what he will, he cannot heartily
and truly hope for such benefits: But yet Believing is not a mere Assent, nor
is it practicial Holiness, but a closing with and receiving of Christ as the
Mediator and Savior of Man upon the Terms of his Revealed Will. And I do very
much fear that he who hops for Pardon of Sin, or Eternal Lise and Salvation,
without this believing, will never see the Face of God.

2. But as false Notions of Faith are to be taken heed of, as exceeding
contributory to Presumption: So must false Notions of Repentance and Holiness,
be equally taken heed of. The Popish Divines, have infinitely contributed to
deceive the World here. Repentance in its true Notion, is an hearty sorrow for
Sin, bringing forth an hatred and detestation of it, and utmost endeavors for
the forsaking of it. The Papists make it to ly in some Attrition, Auricular
Confession, Satisfaction, doing some good Works, or some Acts of External
Discipline and Penance, and saying they are sorry, etc. It is manifest, that
the Will of God makes Repentance necessary to Remission of Sins and Eternal
Life, Acts 2. 38. Repent every of you in the Name of Christ, for the Remission
of Sins; 3. 19. Repent therefore and be converted, that your Sins may be
blotted out. God commands all Men to Repent, Acts 17. 30. We must Repent and
turn to God, Acts 26. 20. Now admitting that Repentance comprehends not only,
a sense of Sin and sorrow for it, but an hatred of it, and a turning from all
Sin to God; and Men be possessed that it is no more than to own our selves
Siners, to confess our Sins, let it be in the Ears of the Priest, or in the
Congregation; and profess a sorrow for them, whether we forsake them or no: It
is an easy thing for Men and Women upon these slighty and little performances,
to presume and promise to themselves Remission of Sins and Eternal Life; for
Repentance has the promise of both annexed to it. But Christians do not
mistake, to your own destruction, Men may go to God a thousand times, and own
to him, and that with Tears, that they have Sinned; they may reckon all
particular Sins; they may confess them as Papists do, in the Ears of the
Priest; they may confess them as Protestants do, in their Closets, in their
Families, in the Congregation; if this be all, it is far enough from
Repentance. Judas repented and went and hanged himself, Mat. 27. 3. He that
confesses his Sins and forsakes them, shall have Mercy, Pro. 28. 13. And
whosoever hops for Mercy and Forgiveness from God, and Eternal Life, upon any
other Repentance, will find he does but Presume; and this Repentance must
proceed from, and is a part of Regeneration, which is a change of the Heart,
and of the whole Man: Repentance signifies no less; it is (...), a change of
the Mind; and (...), a change of Man's Counsels and Designs; it does not lie in
the dropping of a few Tears, nor in a little formal acknowledgment of Guilt,
but in such a sense of Sin as produces an hatred and detestatian of it, and a
leaving and forsaking of it: Now if Men take Baptism for Regeneration, and
Confession and some Acts of Discipline for Repentance; and turning from some
particular flagitious courses for Conversion, it is an easy thing for them to
deceive their own Souls by Presumption, and to snatch at the promises, and take
up hasty and groundless hopes of the Pardon of Sin, and of Eter^al Life and
Salvation. Nor is there any Armor of proof against this Fiery Dart, but the
possessing your Souls with the true Notion of these things. Consult the Holy
Scriptures, see in what they make true Repentance, Saving Faith, Regeneration,
and Conversation to lie. The Holy Scriptures alone can make you wise in these
things, and whatsoever Notions of these things you take up, if they be not
justified from holy Writ, there is no truth in them: Faith in Christ,
Repentance for Sin against God, Regeneration, Conversion, are things we should
never have thought of, at least not as things necessary to Eternal Life and
Salvation, if the Scripture had not revealed them to us as such; and from the
Holy Scriptures alone we must take the measures of them. That alone is saving
Faith, that alone is Regeneration, Repentance unto Life, Conversion, which the
Scripture makes so. Let who will give you their Notions of these things, bring
them to the Light, to the Holy Word of God; and withal remember to compare
Scripture with Scripture, for in the Scriptures all these Terms are taken in
several Senses. St. James says, the Devils Believe. Simon Magus Believed and
was Baptized, Judas Repented, yet none of these were saved. Consult therefore
the Scriptures, where they speak of these things, as the Conditions of Pardon,
and Eternal Life and Salvation, to which the Promises are annexed.

But yet again there are also false Notions of other parts of Holiness taken
up, as conducive as any other to this Presumption. The Scripture you know makes
Holiness necessary to Salvation: It tells us, that without it we shall never
see God. Take heed of false Notions of this, that Holiness lies in an
Obedience to Gods Commands, none can deny, and that as well in the avoiding and
taking heed of whatever the Law of God forbids, as doing what the Law of God
commands; only let me mind you,

1. That the Law of God does not only respect the outward, but the inward Man,
Jer. 31. 33. Psalm. 51. 6. Psalm. 5. 9. Math. 5. To. 2. 29. This our Savior
sufficiently justifies in that better Interpretation of the Law which he gave,
than that which was given by the Scribes and Pharisees, who made the violation
or observation of the Law, to be only in the External over Acts: The Law
forbidding Men to Kill, forbids them any inward Motions of their Hearts, any
Passions tending thereunto.

2. That the Law of God; Commanding the end, or forbidding the end, does also
command or forbid all means tendent to such an end.

3. That the performance or forbearance of these things commanded in the Law of
God, is not Holiness, unless it be out of a Principle of Love and Obedience to
God: A man may do what God has commanded, and yet not eying the Command of
God, be carried out to it from other Motives. Now this is no Obedience, no
keeping of the Commandments of God.

4. That no Obedience is true, but what is Universal: I do not say perfect (for
who lives and sins not?) but Universal. There is an equal respect to the
whole Law of God, Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed (says David) when
I have respect to all thy Commandments: The Reason is plain, because who so
does or avoideth an Action purely upon this Reason, because God has commanded,
or God has forbidden it, will find himself under the same Obligation to do
whatever God has commanded, and to avoid whatsoever God has forbidden; yet is
not a Christian to measure his Obedience from his performance, but from the
regard which he has in his Heart to the whole Law of God; conjoined with a
proportionable endeavor, tho our Corruption will sometimes be too hard for us.

5. If a Man or Woman has built up his Hopes, as to the remission of Sins (of
which he as yet has no Assurance) and (...) Eternal Life upon this, that God
having in the Gospel made a Revelation of the Lord Jesus Christ, as he upon
whom he has laid the Salvation of Men; and having wrought in his Heart a firm
and steady Assent, to what God has there revealed, and enabled him to accept
of this Salvation, and to close with Gods way of Salvation, casting all the
Concerns of his Soul for Pardon and Salvation upon Jesus Christ; and that he
has by his Spirit made a change in his Heart; that he now hates all Sin, and
loves God and the Commandments of God, and has a regard to them all, desiring
to do whatsoever God has commanded, and to avoid whatsoover he has forbidden,
and that because he has commanded the one and forbidden the other; and
accordingly endeavors in his whole Conversation, though he be many times
over born with Temptations, and finds a Law in his Members, rebelling against
and prevailing against the Law of his Mind, and bringing him into Captivity to
the Law of Sin. This Man now builds his Hopes not presumptuously, but upon the
clear Revelation of the Will of God in his Word. But less than this is no
better than Presumption from false Notions, taken up of Regeneration,
Conversion, Repentance, Saving Faith, and True Holiness. Yet further, In order
to the avoiding of this Temptation, take heed of taking up scanty and narrow
Notions of the Law of God. It is indeed a snare unto a Soul so to interpret the
Divine Law, so as to doubt and fear Actions that are lawful, as if they were
forbidden. But it is a more dangerous Rock for a Man to dash upon, so to
interpret Gods Law, as to make those things lawful which God has forbidden; or
to undeestand those things as unlawful, or at least indifferent, which God has
commandeded; but I hinted it before to you and I now tell it you again. There
is none that is but moderately acquainted with the Srriptnres, and with the
Writings of the Popish Casuists, but will plainly see that it has been the
great Design of their Divines for a long time, to interterpret the Law of God
so, as Men might keep their Lusts, and yet keep the Commandments of God,
according to the sense they have put upon them. In short, Obedience to the
Church, is almost with them The whole Duty of Man. There are some others that
came too near them, making strange loose Interpretations of the Law of God. The
precept for not taking Gods Name in vain, they say is only to be understood
against Perjury. The 4th. Commandment, only commands the keeping such days
holy, as the Church appoints. These and such like Interpretations serve for
nothing, but to help a Soul to presume: And indeed this loose Interpretation of
the Law of God, is necessary to all such, as maintain the Justification of the
Soul, not by the Righteousness of Christ, but by a Righteousness of our own:
And that Man has a Power in himself, to do all that God requires of him: I
say it is necessary, for those Men to interpret Gods Law, into a consistancy
with Man's Power: But let all good Christians that value their Souls, take heed
of those Interpretations. Let them but Interpret the Commandments, so as by
them shall be commanded and forbidden whatsoever is commanded and forbidden in
the Word of God, and then they will easily discern these fallacies; and so they
must interpret them, or they cannot conclude, that the Ten Commandments
contain the sum of all that God has commanded us to do and avoid; for it is
most certain that the whole Scripture, is as much the Revealed Will of God as
the Ten Commandments, and has equal Authority with us. Be acquainted therefore
with the Scriptures, and call that Obedience and Holiness, which that calls
so; and be assured that let Men tell you what they will, without that Holiness,
that Obedience, no Man shall see God. I have dwelt a little the longer upon
this head, because indeed the great mistakes of Men are upon these points, that
Men fancy that their case is good, that they believe enough, and are holy
enough to go to Heaven; nay to plead their Holiness as a Righteousness in which
they shall adventure to appear before God.

6. A Sixth Notion which I instanced in of this mischievous tendency: Is the
Power of a Priest or Minister to give Absolution: So as if while they live the
Minister has absolved them, or if when they come to die, they can but Receive
the Sacrement, be absolved, they conclude their Case is good enough. The
Opinion is in its Original perfectly Popish, but founded on that Text, Whose
Sins soever you remit they are remitted, and whose Sins soever you retain, they
are retained; John 20. 23. The words are spoken to Christ's Disciples, upon whom
he breathed, v. 22. and said, Receive you the Holy Ghost: then he adds, Whose
Sins soever you remit, they are remitted, and whose Sins soever you retain,
they are retained. And this Power, says the Papist, every Priest has, he
deriveth from the Apostles, and has the same Power given to him which Christ
gave them: And there is a Tincture of this Doctrine, upon the Spirits of some
that are no professed Papists; and I persuade my self, that many less knowing
People peniciously rest upon it: I shall therefore a little enlarge upon it.

1. In the first place. That God only can forgive Sins, is a Principle so
consonant to Reason; and so abundantly Confirmed in Holy Writ, that certainly
none can make the least doubt of it. Sin is a debt, a debt to the Justice of
God; Christ has taught us to pray with Reference to it: Forgive us our debts,
as we forgive our debtors. Now Reason tells us, that none can discharge a debt,
but he only to whom it is owing; it is an injury done to God, and who can
forgive it, but the Person that has received it: So that all the Question can
be, Whether God has not commissionated Mininisters to do it in his Name, and
will not ratify what they do.

2. Secondly, It is so great a Prerogative of God, so great a piece of his
Glory, that it is a verry unreasonable thing for any to think, that God should
trust it out of his hands: Christ indeed (who thought it no Robbery to be Equal
with the Father, and who had all Power in Heaven and Earth committed to him,
had Authority on Earth to forgive Sins, but no Creature had ever such a power:
It is a piece of the Lords Name, I, even I, am he that blotteth out
Transgressions for my Names sake: It is his Glory, which he will not give unto
another.

3. Thirdly, It cannot be imagined but that our Lord knew well enough, That if
a Power of Forgiving Sins should be entrusted to every Minister, many Men's Sins
would be remitted expressly contrary to the whole Tenor of the Gospel. They
know not who Believe, nor who truly Repent; they can judge but according to the
outward appearance. Now Thousands may appear to us true Believers, and truly
Penitent, that are not so; and so consequently many Unbelievers, many
Hypocrites and hard hearted Sinners, should have their Sins remitted: Besides
Ministers are no better then Elijah, Men subject to like passions with other
Men; and out of Passion or Prejudice, might refuse to Remit their Sins who did
truly Believe and truly Repent; and can any Man think that our Lord should
commit such a power to those who are so Fallible, who are no competent Judges
of Persons whom God indeed will Pardon; but might through Ignorance, or through
Passion and Corruption, pronounce a Forgiveness of Sin, or a not Forgiveness,
directly contrary to the Will of God? Or will any be so mad as to think that
every Minister is Infallible? Or that God will in Heaven confirm what they do
upon Earth, directly contrary to the Will of God? The Papists indeed contend
the Pope is Infallible, but is every Priest so too? Or can they think that God
will confirm his Errors contrary to his own Revealed Will, as to those Terms
upon which alone he will forgive the Sins of any.

4. It must therefore be understood only of a Declarative Forgiveness, Whose
Sins soever you shall according to my Will declare Remitted, they shall be
Remitted; and whose Sins soever you shall according to my Revealed Will declare
not to be Forgiven, they shall not be Forgiven. Now this Declaration may be
either General or Particular: Generally, every Minister that Preaches the
Gospel, Declares. That he who confesses his Sins and forsakes them, shall
have Mercy: That he who Believes shall be Saved more particularly. If any
Christian in any distress, shall ask the Judgment of any Minister, having
declared the state of his Soul to him, so as to give him a probable Hope, that
he heartily has repented, and does truly believe; the Minister may Declare, If
these things be true which thou have told me, if indeed thou truly repentest,
and truly believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; God has Forgiven thine
Iniquities. But the truth of the latter, depends on the truth of the former,
and it is impossible that any Minister should have any other Power to Forgive
any ones Sins, or Authority to declare them to be Forgiven; for he must not
pronounce contrary to the Scripture: and therefore our Liturgy says no more,
Then that God has given Power and Authority to his Ministers, to declare
Remission of Sins to those that truly repent and believe his Holy Gospel.

5. The Apostles had, I cannot say any further Authority, but a further
Advantage, for this, than ordinary Ministers; having a more extraordinary
Revelation, a more extraordinary ability to dicsern Spirits. Without doubt the
Apostles themselves were not authorized by Christ, to declare to any
Impenitent, any Unbelieving Soul, that his or her Sins were forgiven; for this
had been for our Lord to have contradicted himself. Indeed the Apostles might
and did see further into Men than any can now do, by reason of the
extraordinary Gift of the Holy Ghost; and therefore it immediately is said
before, He breathed upon them, and said, Receive the Holy Ghost. I know none
now to whom Christ so breaths upon, and to whom he says, Receive the Holy
Ghost; yet as the Hebrew Docters say, Spiritus Sanctus non semper tangit corda
Prophetarum: The Spirit of God did not always touch the the Hearts of the
Prophets; the Prophets could not always Prophecy, but only when the Spirit of
Prophecy came upon them. So though the Apostles could sometimes by virtue of
that extraordinary Gift of discerning Spirits, discern Spirits, yet I do not
think they could allways; for if they could, the Apostles would never have
Baptized Simon Magnus whom he by and by told, That he was in the gall of
bitterness, and bands of iniquity.

6. This being all can be affirmed of any Ministers, with any Sense or Modesty,
the Papists in the Council of Trent, had no ground to Curse all those that
held, That the Words of Christ, Whose Sins you remitt, are remitted; are to be
understood of an Authority to Preach the Gospel, or that the Priests Absolution
is not a Judicial but a Ministerial Act. Yet this new Doctrine passed not those
that were assembled in that Popish Council without Contradiction. Council. Trid.
Sess. 14. cap. 3. and cap. 9. The Franciscan Divines, told them, That it was
the Opinion of Hierom and P. Lombard and Bonaventure, and almost all the
Schoolmen, That the Absolution in the Sacrament of Penance (as they called it)
is but a Declaration that his Sins are remitted, and Pelargus told them, That
that Text, Whose Sins you remit, are remitted; by the Ancients, is not (as to
their Sense) limited to the Sacrament of Penance; nay perhaps not by any one of
them so understood: Because this Doctrine of the Priests or Ministers
Absolution, savours much of the Popish Doctrine; I will a little show you what
their Doctrine is in the Case. 1. They hold that Original Sin is washed away in
Baptism; then Children are regenerated and justified. 2. But in regard that
after Baptism, Men sin many times a day, they have therefore devised a
Sacrament of Penance (as they call it) The matter of which they make to be
Contrition, Confession and Satisfaction; the Minister of it to be a Priest good
or bad; for they determine that a Priest guilty of Mortal Sin, may administer
this Sacrament; the virtue of which they say, does not depend upon the quality
of the Priest, but the Character of his Ordination. Contrition, indeed, they
make an hearty sorrow for Sin: Confession they say is not only necessary in
private to God, but in the Ears of the Priest; for, say they, how can he
absolve and remit Sins, if he does not know them; and that in their
Circumstances: So that their Doctrine of the necessity of Auricular Confession
(upon which account they all have their Confessors) depends upon this Doctrine
of the Priests Absolution, all the pretended necessity of it is in order to the
receiving that benefit. Then they further say, That God does only Pardon the
Eternal guilt of Sin; and Christ has only satisfied for that: So that for the
removal of Temporary Punishments, there must be also Satisfaction. Hence their
Priests have power to appoint People Pilgrimages, Building of Churches, Paying
sums of Money for Satisfaction. This Penance being undergone, they do declare
that any Priest (being appointed thereto by the Church) may in ordinary Causes,
not only Declaratively, but Judicially, Pardon and Absolve the Sinner: but if
an higher Priest, a Bishop, or the Pope, has reserved some Cases in which he
or they alone will have power to Absolve, and to appoint to Penances and
Satisfactions, in those, they only can do it the more private, Priests cannot:
This is their Doctrine. Protestants now say, that God alone can forgive Sins,
but by his Ministers, in the Preaching of the Gospel, he does declare a Man's
Sins are forgiven, who have a true Contrition, who truly repent, and believe in
the Lord Jesus Christ, fully forgive them; so that he expects no further
Satisfaction for the Sinner, than that which was long since given by the Blood
of Christ, who has Trod the Wine Press of his Fathers Wrath alone, and
finished all that Work: They say indeed, that Confession of Sins in most causes
is sufficient to God alone: It is he alone that can forgive them. In some
Causes indeed a more open Confession is necessary: 1. When the Church has been
publicly Scandilized, not that this is necessary in order to Gods Pardon, but
as an Act of Obedience to Gods Will; and for a more Comfortable Brotherly
Communion, and the Churches Satisfaction; that the Person ought not to be
longer kept out of its Communion. 2. They say further, That in the case of
great Horrors of Conscience and Terrors upon Peoples Spirits, it may be of
great advantage to particular Christians under such Terrors, to confess some
particular Sins unto their Judicious Brethren, or unto their Faithful
Ministers, but not in order to their Pardon of them, but in order to their
Prayer to God for them, and offering words in season unto them that are weary;
and being more knowing and mighty in the Scriptures than they are, from the
Scriptures, declaring the Will of God in their case, comforting them, if their
case will bear comfort from the Word of God, or otherwise advising them, what
to do according to the Will of God, that they may receive true and solid
comfort and Peace.

They do also further say, that Satisfaction where any has wronged another, is
necessary, if in our Power, as in Cases of Theft, etc. but for any necessity of
any other Confession, or Satissaction, in order to Gods Forgiveness of the Sin;
they do not understand it, nor believe it: And for Judicial Absolution, they
say it is Gods alone Act, and that all that the Minister can do, is to declare
the Will of God to People in case they do truly Repent and Believe, that God
has, does, and will, forgive them freely for Christ's sake: In the mean time
they do not deny but God may concur with the Minister, as his Ordinance,
giving a sense of the Remission of Sins, (which Remission was before given them
upon their Repentance and believing in Truth) to them, while the Minister
faithfully declares the Will of God, for the pardoning such as truly Repent
and Believe; but if any person be Absolved by a Minister, has cheated him, and
pretended Repentance and true Faith, having no such thing his heart: Or if any
Minister has either through Ignorance or Passion, declared a Persons Sins
forgiven, whose Sins (while he is in those Circumstances) God has said he will
not forgive, he may have cheated his own Soul, or the Minister may have cheated
him, but God is not mocked, his sins remain, notwithstanding his pretended
Absolution. God dispenses out the Grace of forgiveness, not according to the
Ignorance and Passions of Men, but according to the Rules of Holy Scripture,
which is the Revelation of his Divine Will. 2. Trust not therefore to any such
vain Imaginations, no nor to the Receiving of the Sacrament, either in thy life
time or at thy death: That the Lords Supper is an Ordinance of God, by which
God does signify and seal the Remission of Sins and Eternal Life, by the
commemoration of Christ's death to such as truly repent, and believe, is out of
question, but that God in that Ordinance does give Remission of Sins, or has
appointed it, so signify, seal, or convey, the pardon of Sin to any
unbelieving Impenitent Soul, is a very great Error. Such Persons may Eat and
Drink there, but it can be nothing but Judgment and Condemnation. This has
made me frequently admire at some persons fondness of that Holy Ordinance, when
they apprehend themselves in danger of Death, who never made Conscience of it
in the time of their Health and Life; especially considering that it cannot be
administered in a right order, viz. In the Communion of the Church, where many
who are joined in one body, eat of that one bread: Upon which all Protestant
Churches reject private Administrations of that Institution and upon just
grounds. Christ first gave it to the 12, (at least to 11 of them) we never read
the Apostles Examples or Directions, to or of any such Administrations upon
this Account, unless some particular Persons that have had long and lingering
Sicknesses, and of that nature as have not influenced their head, nor so
indisposed them, but their minds could attend to the Action; some of which I
have known desiring a competent number of the Church with them, privately to
partake in the Ordinance, from the public Participation of which they have
been long hindered. I do not know that I ever knew any judicious Christian so
much as desire such an Administration, but many others I have; which makes me
think some more Ignorant People rest upon it, and trust to it: We know the
Popish Notion of it, and what a stir they make with the Host, carrying it about
in great state to dying Persons: And I fear a tang of their Doctrine, yet
sticks in the minds of many who are professed Protestants. We know what a trade
the Papist make of their Doctrines of Auricular Confession; Satisfactions, and
Private Masses, Celebrated for the living and the dead: and were it not for the
gain came into their Purses by them, they could not be so fond of such absurd
Opinions and Practices. But Christians take heed of these Notions, which tend
to nothing, but to nourish Presumptions in your Souls; and that you may take
heed of them, let me mind you of 2 Passages of our Saviors, Mark 4. 24. Take
heed what you hear, and Luke 8. 18. Take heed how you hear, Take heed how you
hear; hear as those noble Bereans, Acts 17. 10, 11. They received the Word with
readiness of Mind, and searched the Scriptures whether th^se things were so,
yet St. Paul himself was the Preacher; and good Reason, for the same Paul has
commanded, That if he, or an Angel from Heaven, should bring any other Doctrine
then what they had received, what was according to the Gospel, they should be
Accursed, Gal 1. 8. in doing this you will take heed what you hear, and whom
you hear too. The Influence of Notions upon the Mind is very great; our Hopes
will be built upon the Notions which we receive: Takeheed therefore what
Notions you receive, see them solidly founded in and proved by the Word of God;
be assured else there is no light in them.

7. A Seventh Notion I shall but name (for it is perfectly Popish) concerning a
Satisfaction for Sin after this life by Purgatory, out of which too men may get
by the Prayers of the Saints, or by Masses said for them, or by an Indulgence
or Pardon. This is that which they say, That if any die in Venial Sin, or under
the debt of Punishment when the guilt is acquitted; that is when the Priest
has Absolved them, but they have not performed the Penance and given the
Satisfaction which the Priest has enjoined; all such go not into Heaven, but
go into a place they know not where, which they call Purgatory; where till they
come out (which also shall be they know not when, for they are not agreed in
the time of Souls lying there) they shall be Tormented (they know not how) some
say by a material Fire, some say by a metaphorical Fire, some say by Water and
Fire too; but by giving so much money for so many Masses, or by a Pardon from
the Pope, or many other ways, they may get out sooner. And this Doctrine
doubtless destroys thousands of Souls amongst them; they love their Lusts
better than their Moneys, and venture to live and die in their sinful Courses,
and then bequeath a good part of their Estates for saying Masses, etc. to get
them out of Purgatory, when alas poor wretches! they are in the bottomless Pit
from which is no Redemption for ever. But it is enough to have named these
horrible things; this Ridiculous Fire serves now for nothing but to keep the
Popes Kitchen warm, and the Priests pot boiling, and to damn poor silly Papists
by Presumption; it hardly hurts a very ordinary Protestants Conscience. But I
shall enlarge no further upon this first Direction, for avoiding a Temptation
to Presumption, by taking heed of Notions which lead the Soul right on upon it,
and indeed serve for little else. I proceed to a Second Direction.

CHAP. VI.
Further Directions for the avoiding Presumption, considering the greatness of
the guilt, of the danger, how many miscary by it. To be possessed of the
difficulty of being Saved, the pa^city of those who shall be saved. Self
Examination, Rules for it. Taking heed of Sinning against Light. Prayer to God
Working out our Salvation with Fear.

2. POssess your Souls Secondly (if you would avoid this great Temptation) with
the greatness of Sin, and danger of Presumption, and the great multitudes which
split eternally on this Rock. Here are three things offered to your
Consideration,

1. The greatness of the Sin of Presumption. This will be understood partly by
considering the Nature of it, partly by considering the Revelation of Gods
wraih against it, as to the Nature of it. 1. It Robs God of the Glory of his
Justice, it indeed seems to give God the honor of his Goodness and Mercy,
but it makes him an Idol of Mercy, and despoileth him of his Justice, and
Purity, and Holiness: God indeed is Gracious and Merciful; but he is also a God
of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity: a God before whom Sinners shall not
stand in Judgment; a God that cannot clear the Guilty. Now that Soul that goes
on in its sinful Courses, and yet hopes to find Favor with God, and to go to
Heaven at last, does think that God is not so holy and pure a God as indeed he
is, or that he is not so Just as he is; either that he has not Power to be
Revenged upon Sinners, or not so just a Will and steady a resolution to be
revenged upon such as go on in their Courses of Ungodliness, as indeed he has.
Now consider with they self how great a sin it must be, either to deny the
Purity and Holiness of God, or the Power and Justice of God: The Presumptuous
Sinner says, God is not of so pure Eyes, but he can abide Iniquity; a Sinner
may dwell in his sight: whereas God could not be God if he could not be Just,
or not be Holy and Pure: Holiness is a piece of Gods Glory, he is not only
Glorious in Majesty, but he is also Glorious in Holiness. 2. And as the Justice
and Purity of God is Impeached by Presumption, so his Truth is also Impeached:
The Presumptuous Sinner does in effect say, The Scripture is a Lie and a
Romance: for the language of his heart is directly contrary to the language of
Scripture, that says, such and such Sinners shall never enter into the Kingdom
of God, but shall have their portion in the Lake which burns with Fire and
Brimstone: He says I am such a one, yet I shall enter into the Kingdom of God,
I shall not have my portion in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone.
What is this but either to deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, or to
deny that which is contained in them to be truth; and so to make God a liar;
who is a God that cannot lie? Judge you how great an Iniquity this must be. And
if the Impeachment of a Man's truth be counted such a violation of his honor,
that he knows not how to put it up, but is ready to revenge it with a Stab;
what shall God do, who cannot lie? So that three eminent Attributes of God,
Purity, Justice, and Truth, are all of them questioned, impeached, or denied,
by the Presumption of a Sinner. And Presumption is not only a Transgression of
the Law of God, but contains in it a secret Impugning of the Divine Nature;
and transformeth God into a being that is not Pure and Holy, at least not so
Pure and Holy, but it can abide Sin well enough, that either cannot or will not
be revenged upon Sinners; that can declare one thing and do another.

2. Secondly, The magnitude of any Sin is well taken and judged, from the
Revelation of Divine Wrath against it. And it is but just and equal to judge
that the greatest Sin, against which God does most severely reveal his Wrath.
As to this we shall need look no further then the Text, which I have made the
foundation of this Discourse, Deuteronomy. 29. It is the Presumptuous Sinner that is
spoken of, v. 19. That hears the words of the Law, and the words of the Curse
annexed to the violation of the Law, and yet blesses himself in his heart, and
says, I shall have peace, though I walk in the Imagination of my Heart, and
add drunkenness to thirst. Now what shall the Righteous God do to such a Man?
v. 20. The Lord will not spare him, but then the Anger of the Lord and his
Jealousy shall smoke against that Man* and all the Curses that are written in
this Book shall be upon him; and the Lord shall blot out his name from under
Heaven, v. 21. And the Lord shall separate him to Evil out of all the Tribes of
Israel, according to all the Curses of the Covenant that are written in this
Book of the Law. What is possible to be added to that Commination? What can be
more severely spoken? So as if we may judge of the greatness of a Sin, by the
greatness of the Curses that are annexed to him that commits it, we have all
the reason imaginable to judge Presumption one of the greatest degrees of
sinning, by which it is possible that a Sinner should provoke God.

2. A Second thing which I offered to your consideration was, the danger of
Presumption, as to these things; Presumptions (as your reason will tell you in
other things) are very dangerous in three Cases; and such all wise Men will
take heed of.

1. Where the Good expected, or the Evil we expect an immunity from, are of a
very high and important Nature: A Man may venture to Presume of a Victory in a
Case at Law, where if he be overthrown he may lose 40, 50, 100 l. in such Cases
he will say he knows the worst of it, if he be mistaken it is but a money
matter, it is but the loss of such and such a sum of money; but a man will not
do so where his life is in danger; he will there look for sufficient grounds to
hope he shall escape his Enemies charge: Christian, the concern we are speaking
of, is not the concern of thy Estate, it is not the concern of thy Life, it is
the concern of thy Body and Soul to all Eternity; it becomes thee as thou art a
Reasonable Creature here, to beware of presuming, or building upon the sand of
insufficient grounds. Thy Soul, thy Eternal well or ill Being, is the concern
of thy hopes here, if they be w^ll bottomed thou art happy for ever, if they be
ill bottomed thou art undone for ever: It is not triffling, nor flattering thy
self here, Eternity depends upon it; thou art a Creature ordained to an
Eternity of Bliss or Misery; it is about this thy hopes is exercised: O
Consider of what import this good or evil is.

2. Presumptions are very pernicious, when a due care might in time be taken to
prevent the Evil, or obtain the Good: Only Presumption of the needlessness of
care hinders. In Law Presumptions are never admitted for proof, if more
positive proof can be had; a man in pleading might speak for a Sinner, building
upon Presumptuous Hopes, if he could come to no other; but this is not the Case
of any Soul: We indeed cannot come to one Soul in our Congregations, and say to
him, or to her, Thou art Elected and shall certainly be saved; but neither can
we come to any one Soul and say, Thou art a Reprobate and shall certainly be
damned: Any Soul for ought we know, lies fair for Heaven (especially such I
mean as are within the bosom of the Church, and in whose streets Christ is
Preached. We indeed, considering the courses of Sin in which many live, can
come to them, and tell them, In this state wherein you live at present, and
according to that course of life which you at present follow, you can have no
good hope that God has forgiven your Sins, or that you shall ever come into
the Kingdom of God: But what you may do, what change may be made in your
hearts, what alteration or reformation in your life, that we cannot tell: Now
Men and Women's Presumptions hinder the use of those means, by which they might
make their Calling and Election sure; they say, They have their life in their
hands, therefore they are not grieved (as the Prophet speaks) though in
another case, Isaiah 57. 10. They say with the Church of Laodicea, Rev. 3. 17.
That they have need of nothing, when in the mean time they are Wretched, and
Miserable, and Poor, and Blind, and Naked; and therefore it is, they look no
further after the Eternal Concerns of their Souls: they do not buy of Christ
Gold tried in the fire, that they may be rich, and white Raiment, that they may
be Clothed, and that the shame of their Nakedness may not appear.

3. Thirdly, those presumptions are dangerous, which lead into a destructive
error, which cannot be amended when discovered. If a man hopes without ground
that he may get an Estate by some way, by which it is not to be got; he may by
his presumption be a loser of time, and a loser in some part of his Estate: but
yet when he sees his error he may correct it, he may redeem his time, he may
recover his Estate. But to presume for a good, as to which, if our expectations
fail, they fail for ever; and of a deliverance or immunity from some evil,
wherein if our expectations fail, we shall be irrecoverably immerced in that
evil. This no Wise Man will do. It is true in our present case it is not so:
While there is life there is hope, That man or Woman that has hatched up
presumptuous hopes that he is in favor with God, that his Sins are pardoned,
and he Eternally saved, may examine the grounds of his hopes; if he finds them
insufficient, he may acquit them, and use means to obtain a good hope through
Grace. But dying presumptions, they are desperate; for says Solomon, Eccles.
9. 10. There is no device, no work, no knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave,
whither we are going. Psalm. 49. 8. For the Redemption of the Soul is precious,
and it cease for ever. As the Soul leaves the Body, so it shall be with it as
to Eternity. It was a desperate presumption of the foolish Virgins to come
knocking and crying, Lord open to us, when the door was shut, Matthew. 25. and
for those mentioned, Matthew. 7. 12. that will in the Great Day say unto him,
Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name have cast our
Devil, and in thy Name done many wonderful work^? To whom he will say, v. 13. I
never kn^w you, depart from me you workers of Iniquity. Take heed of carrying
on presumptuous hopes to a dying hour.

3. The Third Thing which I under this Head offered to your Consideration, was
the multitude of those Souls that (so far as we can judge) split upon this
Rock. It is a great piece of Wisdom to take warning by the harms of others. The
Scripture tells us, that, Without Faith and Holiness none shall see God. Heb.
12. 14. It tells us 21. Rev. 8. That the fearful, and the unbelieving, and
the abominable, the murderers, and the whoremongers: and sorcerers, and
idolaters; and all liars, shall have their part in the Lake which burns with
fire and Brimstone; which is the second Death. It says, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Know you
not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Be not
deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolators, nor adulterers, nor effeminate
persons, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall ever enter into the Kingdom of
God. We own these Scriptures to be the Word of God, we see, we hear of persons
dying daily, who we know lived in these, some of these Sins, and never gave any
visible Signs of Repentance and Reformation. What did they die without hope? No
they hoped to be Saved, and it may be died with Confidence they should be
Saved. What was, what could be the ground of their hope, but either God made
them, and they hope he will not destroy them: Or Christ dyed for all. Or though
they had their failngs, yet they have done such or such good works. Or they
were Members of the Church: Or they have asked God Pardon. Or they say they are
sorry for their Sins, and have been absolved, and received the Sacrament, or
some such things as these? O dreadful! Is Eternity to be adventured in this
Manner? Presumption (Sirs) slays its Ten thousands. Oh that it might not slay
any Soul that hears me this day. Let this be a Second piece of Advice, in
order to the avoiding this Rock.

3. Thirdly, Possess your Souls of the Difficulty of getting to Heaven, and the
small number of those that shall be Saved. I say first the Difficulty of
getting into Heaven. You have it confirmed to you from him who came from
Heaven, from the Bosom of his Father, on purpose to reveal his Fathers Will in
the Case; Matthew. 7. 14. Strait is the Gate and narrow is the way that leads
to Eternal Life, and few there be that find it. Oh what an easy thing do
Papists make it to get to Heaven? What an easy thing do some others make it
too? But whoever makes it easy, makes God a Liar. Christ has said, Strait is
the Gate, and narrow is the way. If being Baptized, If Confessing Sins in the
Ears of the Priest, and taking Absolution from him, if living all your Life in
Sensual Satifactions, then crying, Lord Receive my Soul, when you die, and
Receiving the Sacrament, will bring men to Heaven, Oh what an easy thing it is
to be Saved? But if a man must Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, if he must
deny himself, and take up the Cross and follow Christ, if he must keep under
his body and bring it in subjection to his Spirit; and also bring his Spirit in
subjection to the Will of God. If he must forget what is behind (as St. Paul
did) and press on to what is before, unto the price of the high Calling; if he
must Watch and Pray, and Strive and Fight, and give all diligence to make his
Calling and Election sure, then Sirs it is no easy thing. Christ judged it no
easy thing, St. Paul judged not so, and is it not ridiculous for any to think
that God should send his own Son to die an accursed Death, to purchase
atonement and reconciliation with God; that he should sweat drops of Blood and
power out his Blood on the Cross, and be put to cry out, My God, My God, Why
have thou forsaken me? and after this a Sinner living in the Church, and
knowing and hearing of this, should think it so easy a thing to get into
favor with God, and obtain the Application of this Blood for the pardon of
Sin, and so great a mercy as Eternal Life. Brethren let none deceive you, it is
either no easy thing to get to Heaven, or the Scriptures are not to be
believed, nor Christ to be believed, that Christ in whom we alone hope for
Salvation; those Scriptures which we own as the Revelation of the Will of God
to us concerning our Salvation, and all those holy servants of God before us,
who spent their time in Fastings, Watchings, Prayers, Mortifying their Members,
and in all Examples of an Holy Life, and in the constant owning and profession
of the Truth unto death; were deceived and mistaken, and lived and died as
fools. Let men write and talk what they will, possess your Souls of the
Difficulty of being Saved, you will find them to be at last in possession of a
great and useful Truth.

2. Yea and Secondly, Possess your selves of the Truth of that which you have
upon the same credit, That there are but few that shall be Saved; Matthew. 7. 14.
One pronounced that Question to our Savior, Luke 13. 23. Lord are there few
that shall be saved? He replied unto them, v. 24. Strive to enter in at the
Strait Gate, for many I say unto you will seck to enter in, and shall not be
able. It is a Truth that there are but few will be saved, and he who observes
what conditions of Salvation the Scripture has made, and considers the lives
of most, will see it must be true. But our Savior in that answer teaches us
the true use we ought to make of that Notion: Not to conclude that we shall
not. For who has ascended into Heaven, to bring us news from thence whose
Names are or are not written in the Book of Life? Or who can tell who will
repent and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ? 2. Not to deaden us to Duty; and
make us say then it is in vain for us to do any thing, for we shall not be
saved, do we what we will (no Scripture says so) but to quicken us, if we be
in a state of Ignorance, Unbelief and Impenitency, to Strive to enter in, to
give diligence to make our Calling and Election sure. For tho it be true, That
in light matters that are of no great concernment, Difficulty discourageth
endeavors, yet in things that we cannot be without and be happy, where our
well being is highly concerned, Difficulties (especially not appearing to us
insuperable) instead of deadening, quicken us to the use of utmost Endeavors.
Live therefore in the daily view and apprehension of the Difficulty of getting
to Heaven, and under the daily thoughts of what God has revealed, That there
are but few that shall be saved.

4. Fourthly, Be frequent in the Examination of the grounds of your hope, and
in the Examination have a care that your grounds have a Scripture Foundation;
and that as to your Grounds from Holiness, you conclude rather from your
affections than your actions; and if at all from your actions, from the course
of them, not from any single acts; and lay more stress upon the Covenant of
Grace, and the application of your souls unto it, than either upon your
affections or actions. Here is a great deal put together in this one Direction,
Let me shortly discourse the several parts of it: 1. I say first be much in
Examining the grounds of your hopes. Indeed I should have first said, Be much
in whetting upon your Souls the belief of your Eternal Existence: It is our
want of belief of this, or attendance to the thoughts of this, which makes Men
and Women so careless as to the looking after it: We had need have it rung in
our Ears every Morning and Evening, Sir, Remember you are going to Eternity. If
Men and Women could be brought to that pass, that like that Ancient we read of,
wherever they are, whatever they are doing, they should think they hear the
Sound of the Last Trumpet and the Voice, Arise you dead and come to Judgment,
they would be oftener entering into and communing with their own Hearts about the
Grounds and Reason of their Hopes to live with God in a Blessed Eternity, when
they shall no longer live in the World. But O we do not think of Eternity, we
do not believe Eternity so fixedly and steadily as we should. God commanded
under the Law by Moses, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. That the words which the Lord did
command them, should be in their hearts, that they should diligently teath them
to their Children, that they should talk of them when they sat in the house,
and when they walked by the way, when they lay down, and when they rose up;
that they should bind them as a sign upon their hand, and they should be as
frontlets betwixt their eyes, and they should be written upon their Posts and
upon their Gates. What God commanded as to his Law, I would have done as to
every one of our Eternal State. I would have it written upon our Hearts, that
we are going to Eternity, I would have you teach it to your Children, talk of
it when you sit by your Fire-sides, when you go out, when you come in, when you
lie down, when you rise up. I would have, Remember Eternity, wrote upon the
walls of your Parlours and of your Bed-Chambers. I would have it always before
your eyes; surely then your hearts would be often saying, To what Eternity am I
going? Am I going to Eternnal Happiness or to Eternal Torments? To the place
where I shall Weep, and grieve, and vex no more, or to the place where will be
nothing else, but Weeping, and Wailing, and gnashing of Teeth, and that for
evermore? And you would not rest in every slighty return your deceitful hearts
should make, flattering you with hopes of Heaven; but you would say, My Soul do
not thou deceive me, upon what grounds do thou tell me it shall be well with
me for ever? We never think that we are sure enough of a Debt or a little
Estate; why should we trust in slighty seeming security for an Eternal
Interest? And be assured of this, no grounds of Hope are worth any thing, but
such as plain Scripture justifies: Eternal Life is the Gift of God, the
Scripture tells so, and we should never have thought of Eternity but for the
Revelation of it in Scripture; it is therefore given according to Scripture
Revelation and no otherwise. It is given by Christ to those that the Father
has given him, Joh. 17. 2. We cannot search the Book of God to see the Names
of those the Father has given him, but he has told us who are given him; John
10. 27. My Sheep hear my voice, and follow me, and I give unto them Eternal
Life, and they shall never perish. Thou have no ground to hope for Eternal
Life, but from thy bearing (hearing and obeying) the voice of Christ, and thy
following of him; but so many are our failings, such are our short and
imperfect walkings, that here a good Christian may have his doubts and fears,
whether he hears Christ's voice and so follows him, that he may cherish
hopes in himself, that he is one to whom Christ will give Eternal Life: To
guide you therefore, I say,

1. Do not take up your hopes from single Actions, but from a continued Course
of Actions. The Philosopher tells us, That single Acts will never denominate a
Man Virtuous, nor yet Vicious: He is not a Drunkard, that is once overtaken
with drink, but he that makes a trade of it; he is not a just Man that now and
then does a just Action, but he that in his whole Course gives to every one
his due; nor is he an holy Man, that sometimes does good Actions, Hears,
Prays; but that Man that has Regard to all Gods Commandments, and that at
all times, in all Places, Companies, etc. There is none so good but does some
things ill (who lives and sins not?) Nor are there many to be found so bad,
but do somthings good: Herod heard John the Baptist gladly, and he did many
things, Mark 6. 20. That is the holy Man, that in the whole Course of his Life,
applies himself to the Pleasing of God, enquiring what the good Will of God
is, and setting himself to do it, and not turning aside therefrom, though by
some Passions, Corruptions, Temptations, etc. he may sometimes be turned out of
his way.

2. Secondly, Lay more stress upon your Affections than upon your Actions,
indeed they must Justify and Legitimate your Actions. Ends and Affections make
up the form of Holiness, and distinguish it from the good Works of the
Heathens; which Augustine rightly called Gay and Splendid Sinnings. The Law is,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart: Let a Man do what he will,
if it be not out of love to God, out of a desire to please him, and a fear to
offend him, it is no holiness, it is but Ostentation, or Self-seeking, or mere
Moral Virtue. Let a Man fail in his Action, whether through Infirmity, or
Temptation, yet if his desire has been toward God, if his Hearts Affections
have been right, he is accepted of God; do not therefore in your Examination of
this ground of your Hope, so much trust to what you find you have done for God
and in Obedience to his Will, as from what Principle it has been done, to what
end, with what Affection, etc. Say to your Souls, I have been an Hearer of
Sermons, one that has used to Read, to Pray; but what has been my Principle in
it? Has it been the fear of God? The love of God? Obeying the Will of God?
Has my end in it been the glorifying of God? This will ^^y your Hopes from
your Holiness, whether they be well grounded or no.

3. I added Thirdly, When you have done all, you will see reason to lay more
stress upon the Covenant of Redemption and Grace, than either upon your
Aff^^tions, or Actions; yet not separated from the one, or the other, but in
conjunction with them. I will put the Case, that you, or I, were in secret
examining our selves, What hope we have that God had Pardoned our Sins, and
that when we die we should go to Heaven? We reflect upon our lives, suppose the
better part of our lives, and we find that although in many things we have
failed, yet in the general course of our Actions, we have endeavored to do in
all Circumstances what God has commanded us; well but yet our Hearts tells us,
nay the Scriptures tells us, that if what we have done, has not been done out
of love to God, out of a desire to obey him, it is all nothing. It may be we
have asked our hearts this question, and they reply to us, that it has been
the command of God, and a will and a desire to please God, that has carry dus
out generally to our Actions; but yet we shall find so much mixture of
self-seeking, so much want of Affection at sometimes; that when we have done
all, if it were not for a Covenant of Grace and Redemption, we were undone. I
can never enough mind you of the last words of David, 2 Samuel 23. 4, 5. v. 3. he
tells you what God had said to him, The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel
spoke unto me: He that Rules over Men must be just, Ruling in the Fear of God,
as the light of the Morning when the Sun rises, a Morning without Clouds, as
the tender Grass, springing out of the Earth by clear shining after Rain: So
far he considers now his Rule, now he reflects on himself, and finds that
he had come short of this, he had not been just in the matters of Uriah and
Bathsheba, nor in many other things; Where is then this good Man's hope? mark v.
5. Although my House be not so with God, yet he has made me an everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my Salvation, and
all my desire, although he makes it not to grow. The God of Heaven has said
to every one of us, the Rock of our Salvation, He that believes, is not
condemned; he has said, My Sheep hear my Voice, and follow me, and I give them
Eternal Life. But I have been full of unbelief, I have been deaf to many a
voice of Christ, in many things I have sinned, and come short of the Glory of
God: I have trodden many a step a-wry, I hope my general aim has been right;
but I have halted and trodon short, and come infinitely short of my Rule; My
Heart, my ways have not bin so with God. Where Is a good Christians hope then?
but in this, The Lord has made with the Son of his love an Everlasting
Covenant, well ordered and sure in all things; a Covenant that in consideration
of the Satisfaction which he has paid to his Fathers Justice, the price which
he has paid, his Righteousness shall be reckoned for Righteousness to every
Soul, that upon the offer of the Gospel shall receive him, close with him,
accept him, and in sincerity of Heart shall give up himself to the Obedience of
his Will; for this is every good Man's Salvation: and when we have done all
here, the stress of our Hopes must lie. Yet here is no ground for Hope without
Action, true Affections toward God, conjoined with sincere Actions. The
Covenant of Grace will not relieve one ill principled and loose walking
Christian, tho it be the only relief for a Sincere Christian, that is sensible
of his imperfect walking with God.

5. Fifthly, If you would take heed of Presumption, you must take heed of
wilful sinning against Light; doing any thing which your Conscience tells
you, you ought not to do. The Nature of Man is biassed to prophecy and promise
good to himself; none but an Atheistical, Sleepy, Secure Soul, that never
thinks of Heaven or Hell, or what shall become of him after this Life, but
maintains some secret hopes in one degree or another, that he is in the
Favor of God, that his sins are Pardoned, and that he shall be Eternally
Saved. Now these hopes in the heart of a wilful sinner, that goes on in a
course of known Sin, can be but Presumptions; and therefore every Soul that
thus lives and walks, must either be a Presumptuous Person, or one that
despaireth; for he must either have some Hope, or no Hope: if he has no Hope
at all, it is either because he is under Despair, or because he is an Athist,
and never minds and regards any thing but what he should Eat or Drink and
Put on, and how his Posterity shall live when he is dead: If he has any Hope,
it can be no other then a Presumptuous Hope; for he has not one line in
Scripture to justify it. There is no peace to the Wicked (says God) so that
without cleansing our ways, and taking heed thereto, according to the Word of
God, there is no avoiding the guilt of Atheism, Despair, or Presumption; and
this is a very dreadful Meditation, but such as nothing can be truer. We see
there are but few, very few that despair; so that as Solomon says, Prosperity
slays the Fool: so it is either Atheism and a Carelessness, as to any
consideration of another life, or else Presumption, that slays the most of
those poor Souls which go down into the Pit.

6. Sixthly, Be much in Prayer to God to guide you in the examining of your
state, and to keep you from taking up with vain Confidences; take the Example
of the Man according to Gods own Heart, Psalm. 129. 23. Search me O God, and
know mine Heart, try me, and know my Thoughts, and see if there be any wicked
way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. Beg of God to give you that good
hope, through grace, which he mentions, to beget you to a lively hope, and
not to suffer you to please your selves with a Presumptuous Hope; that as to
your hopes for Eternity, it may not be to you as the Prophet speaks, Isaiah
29. 8. As when an hungry Man dreameth, and behold he eats; but he awakes and
his Soul is empty; and behold he drinks, but he awaketh and behold he is
faint, and his Soul has Appetite.

7. Finally, Be in the Fear of the Lord all the day long; the wise Man says,
Blessed is he that fears always; Prove. 28. 14. and we are you know, commanded
to work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling; Phil. 2. 12. It is true,
there is a state of Love, that casts out Fear; perfect Love casts our Fear
(says the Apostle) and Paul tells us Romans 8. We have not received the spirit
of bondage again to fear; but a fear least we should offend God, a fear least
we should deceive our own Souls, is an excellent guard and protection to a
Soul: if it rises indeed to cause a distrust in God, or a despair of his
Goodness, then it is putrified, then it dishonors God; and such a fear ought
not to be endured in a believers Soul: but there is a Cautious, Wary,
Ingenious, Well-regulated Fear, that well becomes even the best Souls, while
they are in their state of Corruption and Mortality, and where they are daily
encompassed with Temptations.

FINIS.

