A brief DISCOVERY OF THE Corruption of the Ministry of the Church of England:
OR, Three clear and evident grounds from which it will appear that they are no
Ministers of CHRIST.

I. A Parrallel between them and the Jewish Priests.

II. A Parrallel between them and Simon the Sorcerer.

III. A Parrallel between them and the artificial marchandizing tradesmen,

Published for the Information of all By THOMAS COLYER.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Galvert, and are to be sold at the black
spread-Eagle at the west end of Paul's.

To the Reader.
READER, the reason why I have brought forth this small Treatise to public
view, is for thy information, who have been a long time deluded with a Ministry
of Antichrist, under the name and notion of a Ministry of Christ.

2. Because the Lord has said it, that we should show no pity to Babilons
inhabitants, much less then to the ringleaders of that mystical confusion,
that at this day the world lies in, under the name of Church, Ministry,
Ordinances, etc. Some perchance may suppose that the end of this discovery, is
to make them contemptible in their persons, names, etc. flowing from a private
spirit of revenge. But truly friends it is not so, I can say truly, the Lord
has taught me another lesson, to do good to enemies, pray for them, seek
their conversion; and I can say truly, that it would be a great joy to me, to
see any of them enlightened, renewed, changed; but when I behold the great
confusion that is among the men of the earth, principally occasioned by the
Ministers of the earth; thousands, and ten thousands, lying not only dead in
trespasses and sins, but in professions and Ordinances, etc. I say not only for
Zions sake, but for the sake of the poor deluded Soul, who live below and
without truth; under the profession of something like the external part of
truth. I cannot hold my peace, till all these falsehoods and delusions fall to
the ground, and the glory of Zion be more known and lived in: read, and judge
with an impartial spirit, and I trust you shall not find one word of a
malicious spirit; not like Mr. Edwards, reckoning up personal infirmities, for
then I could say much more; but clearer and true discoveries of deceivers under
the name and notion of Christ.

Thus much by way of information, as likewise by way of prevention of thy
misunderstanding of that which follows: by him who remains thy friend, and
the truths servant.

Thomas Colyer.

The first Parrallel. BETWEEN The JEWISH Priests and Levites: And those of our
times.
The Jewish Priests and Levites, and those of our times are as like, as if they
had indeed been all the Sons of one Father, the Tribe of Levi; they say the Lot
of Gods own Inheritance, although in truth, there is no such thing.

1. THe Jewish Priests were to offer Sacrifice, to make Peace and
Reconciliation for the sins of the People; and herein they were a Type of
Christ, Levit. 9. with Hebr. 9. This has been one principal work of the
Priests of these latter times to offer Sacrifice, to make peace and
reconciliation for sin; this has been their end in praying, and pressing
others to pray, that so they might make peace and reconciliation for
transgression, although not positively, yet circumstantially, there it ends,
though Christ be often mentioned, yet not without prayers, tears, reformation,
etc. to fit the Soul for Christ.

2. Hence it is, that sinners are so often pressed to weeping and mourning, that
so they might weep and mourn out sin, and never tell of believing, till sin
be wept forth, and then believe; nay, that there is no ground of believing till
then: a mere delusion, a very lie. Hence it is likewise that prayers, days of
Humiliation, have been so much exalted, as peacemakers, and the glory of both
of internal consolation as of external deliverances has been given unto it,
and the Priests must have the greatest share of that honor. Why? Because they
pray most, and best, they do it by office; it is their trade to offer
Sacrifices, to make peace: others may pray well, and do much, but they can pray
better, because they do it by office; this I have heard ascerted by them,
therefore affirm it; and thus they have not only been peacemakers themselves
in their own apprehensions, but have directed others to the same work, to the
same way: what is the conversion taught by them but only a legal conversion
from sin to duty. If thou can forsake thy sins, pray, hear Sermons, walk
holily, my soul for thine thou shall be saved; thus setting up
self-reformation, duties, etc. in the room of Christ, making peace.

Oh wonderful and horrible delusion! And People, look well unto your selves,
if you build upon this foundation, and so live and die, you are like to be
undone for ever; If the blind lead the blind, both are like to fall into the
pit.

2. The Jewish Priests were to interpret the Law, Nehem. 8. 7, 8. Hence it is
that Christ calls them Lawyers, woe be unto you Lawyers, etc. and this has been
the work of the second Tribe a long time, to interpret the Law, to set people a
working for life, Preaching the Law, and threatening judgment, to drive to
Christ, and not to draw with the cords of love, which is suitable unto the
Gospel. True it is of late, that many of them have learned to say something of
the external part of the Gospel, because else they cannot be esteemed, neither
will their wares go off any longer, people having received some farther light;
but this they do with much confusion, some times almost loosing themselves;
and sometimes thwarting, and contradicting themselves often in a Sermon
Although it be well known that not many years since, it was a matter of fact,
and deserved censure, to preach Christ freely, justifying sinners without
themselves, duties, prayers, tears, reformations, to fetch in love,
consolation, etc. not acting to God from the enjoyment of life, peace, love,
power, etc. so that they might enjoy Communion with God, and receive from him
what is their own in him.

3. The Jewish Priests were to purify their women, Levit. 12. They were to be
accounted unclean, until the time of their purification: this is likewise the
work of the Priests of these times, to purify the women, until which time they
are accounted as formerly, unclean. I wonder what is become of the Lamb and the
Pigeon, commanded for a burnt and a sin offering, verse. 6, 7. It Is like, the
Priests-prayer must pass in stead of it; only note, in one thing they pass
the Priests then, though they come short in the Pigeon and Lamb, (that is) they
provide a purifying Sacrifice, and sell it unto the women instead of a Lamb, a
prayer or two for four pence, although skarce worth it.

4. The Jewish Priests were to live by Tithes and offerings, they had no
portion given them in the land of Canaan; and this has the Priests of our
times appropriated to themselves, they are Priests of the Tribe of Levi, as
themselves say, and they do the work of Priests, and therefore they must have
the maintenance of Priests: to wit, Tithes and Offerings, and this they plead
for by Divine* Right, from the Old Testament, because set a part for the
Priests then under the Law. It is true, some of them plead for it from humane
right, because the Parliament (say they) have given it unto them: but it seems
it matters not much with them, whether it be of Divine, or Humane right, so
they have it, they desire not much to dispute the business; take him Jailer is
the strongest syllogism they desire to make use of, for confirmation of this,
as of all other their Divine Humane rights.

I shall a little examine the business about Tithes, before I pass this
particular, Numb. 18. 21. You shall find that Tithes were given to the Tribe
of Levi; And behold I had given the Children of Levi all the tenth in Israel
for an inheritance, for the service which they serve, even the service of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, etc. Where you may take notice:

First, That Tithes were set a part by God, Levit. 27. 3.

Secondly, Commanded only of the Jews, and none else.

Thirdly, To be paid in the Land of Canaan, and no other Land mentioned in
Scripture; the Jews were not commanded to pay it, till they came into that
Land, where the rest of the Tribes had inheritances given them, and the Tribe
of Levi none, for the tenth was reserved for their Inheritance.

Fourthly, It was to be paid to that Tribe, ( viz.) the Tribe of Levi and none
else, if any other Tribe or person had appropriated it to themselves, they had
been Thieves and Robbers; Mal. 3. 8.

How this illigitimate Tribe, that now appropriates Tithes to themselves, can
free themselves from the like, I leave it to all men to judge.

5. The end of the payment of Tithes, was for the livelihood of those who
served at the Altar. 2 Cor. 9. They were under a Legal administration,
therefore they were to live of the Law; but those who are under the Gospels
dispensations, they live of the Gospel: that is, free, for Gospel* people are a
free people; and Ministers who live in a free Covenant of Grace, can trust God
for their maintenance, and be content with a little: as Christ and his
Apostles, who could say truly, that though they had nothing, yet they possessed
all things.

Object. It is said, Genesis 14. That Abraham paid Tithes to Melchisedeck, which
was not in the Land of Canaan, neither yet to the Tribe of Levi.

Answ. True, yet note:

First, Abraham gave the tenth voluntarily, and freely, not by compulsion, as
now the Priests demand it.

Secondly, Abraham paid the tenth of the spoil which he had taken in war from
the enemy, and none else, which is no warrant for the taking of the tenth of
all; therefore all that can be expected thence, is but the tenth of spoil taken
in war, if the Soldiers are free to give it.

Thirdly, This tenth of the spoil was given to Melchisedeck, and not to them;
therefore unless they prove themselves to be Melchisedeck, this Scripture will
do them no good at all, which I think they will not assume; for he was an
imediate Type of Christ: Hebr. 7. as were the Priests and Levites, to whom
Tithes were due, and that by an Ordinance not of man, but of God.

4. The Tribe of Levi in Abraham paid Tithes to this Melchisedeck; therefore no
ground for our second Tribe to demand Tithes, but rather to pay Tithes, if
Melchisedeck come to demand them.

Object. If Tithes were not paid, how should Ministers be maintained, for it is
meet that those that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel; but we know
by experience that many places would skarce maintain their Ministers bread, if
they were not compelled by a Law; therefore it is convenient that Tithes should
be paid.

Answ. First it is an evident ground, that they are no Ministers of Christ,
that will not trust him for their maintenance, and a principal note of
infidelity; a wonderful dishonor to Jesus Christ, to pretend to be his
Servants, and yet will not trust him, but will be caring and providing for
themselves. It is, as if a servant conditioning with his master to serve him,
should not only indent with him for maintenance, but would be caring and
providing for himself: nay, not only caring and providing for himself, but
conditioning with another man to care for him, and to give him wages; this is
the dealings of the Priests with Jesus Christ, they will not trust him:
Questionless it is because they are none of his Servants, they do not his
work, if they did, they would be content with his wages, which is free gift, as
well Temporally as Spiritually.

Secondly, Those who cannot preach without Tithes, or any other stinted
maintenance, it is an argument they seek more their own bellies, then the
honor of Jesus Christ, like unto your day-labourers, that will be sure to know
their pay, or else they will not work: such belly-gods are they, that if any
put not into their mouths, they even prepare war against them.

Quest. Did ever Christ and his Apostles practice the like?

Answ. They never set forth an holy Ordinance for Tithes, they never vexed men
at Law in all their lives; nor ever were they Wolves unto the Sheep, but rather
as meek Lambs, in sufferings deep.

It is very just that they should be pined for want, and that for these Reasons:

First, Because they would not trust Jesus Christ, but forsake him, and trust
to the power of Magistracy to maintain them; the civil Sword is the
fundamental of their livelihood; now can they blame Christ, if he care not for
those that will not trust him? Did he ever engage himself by promise to such a
people, if ever their Masters that set them a work, from whence they expect
power to fetch in maintenance, leave them? As such a time will come: Who then
will care for them, when their mountains will not cover them any longer?

2. Because they thrust such a people upon Jesus Christ as he never owned, no
wonder if such a people starve their Teachers; and just it is it should be so,
for they starve, delude, and undo their Souls, telling them they are
Christians, a Church, when they are not: was ever such a thing as this heard
of, that a Minister of Christ should be in doubt of starving, unless he
provide for himself by a Law? A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in
the Land, The Prophets prophecy lies, and the Priests bear rule by that means,
and the people love to have it so, and what will you do in the end thereof?

3. Because the Lord has said it, The Lions shall lack and suffer hunger, but
they that fear the Lord and wait upon him, shall want nothing that is good.

Quere. Are the Priests of England Lions?

Answ. Yea, For first, Lions get their prey by violence, so do they; witness
their holy Ordinance for Tithes, witness their taking by violence from those
to whom they might better give; witness their greedy desire to devour with
open mouth, the Lambs of Jesus Christ, would the Parliament once grant their
unsatiable desire; Witness their Petition to the Parliament to have them burnt
with the letter B. to have them prosecuted as felons for their lives: this was
the good will of the Priests to the poor Lambs of Jesus Christ: but when their
Lion, the Lord Jesus shall roar out of ZION, all the Beasts of the Forest
shall tremble, which will be ere long.

Thus are they like to be a Generation that must suffer want, at least in their
Souls, in the time of drought, when the Towers fall. Isaiah, 65. 11, 12, 13.
Yea, (to wit) The Saints shall eat, but they shall be hungry, yea, shall
drink, but they shall be thirsty, etc.

5. The Priests were the greatest enemies to Jesus Christ in those times; they
it were, who hired Judas to betray him; who cried out, crucify him, crucify
him, a way with such a sellow from the earth; they it was who gave large moneys
to the Soldiers to belie him, and to say his Disciples stole him away by
night, etc.

This has been, and is the practice of the Priests in our days, under the
notion of Heretics and Seducers, to destroy the Saints: And why? Because the
Saints discovering truth, will destroy their error and falsehood; we desire not
the Magistrate to destroy them, but liberty to profess and practice truth,
before which they are not able to stand, no more then a morning dew before the
Sun.

6. The Priests under the Law, they loved the uppermost rooms at feasts, and
the chief places in Synagogues, and greetings in the markets, and to be called
of men Rabbi, Mat. 23. 6, 7.

Quaere. Were the Scribes and Pharisees Priests?

Answ. Yea, See Nehem. 8. 9. Ezra the Priest, the Scribe, etc. And this is the
expectation of the Priests now, there need no Scripture to prove it, they love
the uppermost rooms at Feasts, and usually have it; and the Chief Seats in the
Synagogues, that was in their places of meeting, now (not for want of
ignorance) commonly called Churches, who have the Chief Holy high place, where
none may come but themselves, with their consent, with reverence be it spoken:
and greetings in the markets, the cap and knee is much expected, and to be
called of men Rabbi, that is, Master; although there be no master in a Town
besides, yet this Priest must be a master: this is one of Solomon's evils that
he had seen under the Sun, Servants on Horse* back, and Masters walking on foot
as servants, on the ground; they are the peoples Servants, they expect their
wages from them. Oh horrid pride! Was ever such a thing as this heard of? What,
Servants become their Masters Master. Servants on horseback, riding, ruling,
and their Masters on foot, made slaves unto them.

7. They built the Tombs of the Prophets, and garnished their Sepulchers,
Matthew. 23. 29. but they persecuted Christ and his Apostles: so do our Priestly
Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, pretend to have high thoughts of Christ and
his Apostles, but are as ready to persecure and kill the disciples and followers
of Christ as ever the Priests of old; they build their Tombs, and garnish
them; they spend all their time, and study to find out the mind of Christ and
his Disciples in their writings, and yet come infinitely short of it: Christ a
Carpenter, Paul a Tent-maker, Peter a Fisherman, all of them poor tradesmen:
yet these men of Arts and parts, spend all their time, and make use of their
Authors, to understand what they write: but if God raise up any Fisherman,
Carpenter, Cobbler, or the like, in him, and by him, to reveal his truth; O away
with such a fellow from the earth! he is a Mechanic fellow, one of no
breeding, he knows not the Original, etc. I warrant you if Christ and his
Apostles were on the earth again, they should find as hard measure from them,
as ever from the Priests of old:

What do these but Justisie the proceedings of all persecutors that have gone
before them, and so bring upon themselves all the righteous bloodshed, even
from the blood of Abel, until this time?

8. And finally the end of all was, that they might hold up their Religion, and
in that their honor and profits: they knew, if they should let Christ alone,
he would destroy their religion, and so lay them open unto contempt. This is
likewise the ground of our Priests opposing and persecuting the Saints, to
uphold their National Church, Religion, Worships, etc. And therein their
Honor, viz. the Cap and Knee of the Vulgar; their profits, Tithes, their great
DIANA; This they can do, but by the exaltation of their humanity, Arts and
parts gotten by their industry at the Universities; and this is their greatest
Goddess DIANA; by which they uphold all, and hope to keep in their credit,
with the ignorant still; but this Diana learning in the things of God, will
fall and break its neck ere long, as Dagon before the Ark, it begins to tremble
already, it dares not look truth in the face, without the power of Parliament
to assist, etc.

Second Parrallel. BETWEEN Them: and Simon the Sorcerer, Acts 8.
SImon Magus his sin is looked upon by those who know not what it was, as very
horrid and wicked, and it is true, Peter said that he declared himself by it, to
be in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity; the Priests give a very
high and learned interpretation of it, (that is,) to buy a Parsonage; and this
they call Simony, who so buys a Personage as Simon Magus: But I believe if we
come to examine what was Simons sin, we shall find more Sir Simons, then
many are aware of.

Simons sin, it was First, to buy the gifts of the holy Spirit.

2. As it is generally understood, to that end he might sell them again, and
its likely to be true, for it would have gotten him much credit as well as
profit; he should have made a good exchange, for the loss of the spirit and
power of divination and sorcery, to have gotten the Spirit of God, by which, he
thought quickly to enrich himself.

So then, here was Simons sin, he would have bought the gifts of the Spirit, to
that end he might have sold them, that so he might enrich himself by it. See
then how the Priests of our time run parrallel with him.

I argue it thus, Those who buy their gifts, of purpose to sell them, are
guilty of Simon the Sorcerers sin. But the Priests of England buy their gifts
of purpose to sell them, and get gain; Ergo, the Priests of England are guilty
of Simon the Sorcerers sin. That this was Simons sin, is cleared; that who so
does the like, are guilty of Simons sin, is unquestionable; that only which
remains to be proved, is, That the Priests of England, buy their gifts of
purpose to sell them. First that they buy them it will appear, these things
considered.

First, What gifts and abilities they have, are humane, such as they have
attained in the Schools, which cost them much money, as well as industry for
the gaining of them.

Secondly, Their appropriating all abilities of Preaching, to themselves,
accounting it altogether impossible for any other to have any gift at all, who
have not bought it like themselves; so that they do not only buy themselves,
but deny any other way of attaining gifts, to any else; pretending Philosophy
to be the Mother of Theology; Ah horrible blasphemy against the Spirit, who is
freely given, and freely opperates as it pleases.

Thirdly, Their own confession when they come to sell, that their gifts cost
them much money; and therefore they sell them at the dearest rate.

2. That they buy of purpose to sell, appears:

First, It was the great end for which they were by their Parents dedicated and
set a part a purpose to get a living, even as they bind their children
Apprentices, etc.

Secondly, It appears by their practice, which is, to sell all, and that at the
dearest rate too; witness their looking after the greatest and fattest
livings, where there are most*Calves, Lambs, and Tyth-pigs, Corn, Hay, and
Gleb-land, thither usually is their call; witness their often removing from a
lesser living to a greater, ten pounds more per annum is a sufficient call from
one Parsonage to another; witness their first quere, what it is worth per
annum, and if that pleases them, then they go, never querying what Saints be
there: nay, so far are they from that, if they hear that Christ and Saints be
there, then they dare not come there, for fear that light will discover their
darkness; witness their indenting for thus much by the week, in case they
supply any place that wants, which is so much clear gain unto them, for their
own pay goes on nevertheless at home; witness, their Petitioning the
Parliament for increase of maintenance, where they judge it is too little,
although some of them have 40. pound, some 80. li. some 100. li. some 140. li.
and besides a great wrong to the Parliament, or at the least to the Subject;
witness the common practice of Towns and populous places, who beholding their
temper, dare not attempt the getting of a Minister, as they desire to be
called, until they first make up, either by petition to the Parliament for the
states money which poor Soulders want, or some other way, a round sum of money;
which being effected, puts courage into poor simple Country men to adventure
into their presence with all lowly submission.

Sir, we have maintenance for an honest man, perhaps 100 li. per annum, if that
be too little, wait a while, and perhaps 200. or 300. appears, which will serve
to make up the bargain: just as a servant who puts forth himself for a year
will make the most of his service; although it is true, the conditions are
contrary.

Conditions.
INprimis, I will be your Minister (which signifies a Servant) or rather your
Lord, on condition that you will engage to give me thus much by the year in
money, or Tithes, as the condition is. Ergo, the Priests of England preach for
hire. 2. I will be your Minister in name, provided I may be your Lord; for so
they are indeed, and rule over you, and you will become subjects and slaves
unto me, bow down before me, and call me your Master. Ergo, the Priests of
England are the peoples Lords. 3. I will be your Minister, provided you will
not contradict me in what I preach and teach you, if you will believe as I
believe, and teach you; or rather then this Article shall make a breach, they
will get an Ordinance from the House of Lords, which will serve their turn to
prevent any from objecting against their Orthodox Divinity, although never so
humane: O horrible impiety! Men may now preach lies by a Law. 4. And finally, I
will be your Minister, provided that I may have my liberty to remove again when
I see a call: which is like to be the next Parsonage tendered, wherein 10. or 20
li. per annum be augmented to his yearly maintenance: as the hired servant
keeps himself at liberty for his own advantage, at the end of every year.
Thus the bargain is made, and the condition is drawn, the Priests now with
much comfort and alacrety, falls a preaching, for he knows to a penny what he
has coming in for every Sermon he makes. One thing by the way I cannot omit,
which I have known: in case any one be so simple as to limit himself for thus
much by the year, while he live, unto a people, they have a way to fetch him
off again with credit as thus: refer it into the hands of a Jury of Divines (as
they call them) although indeed but humane, the simple people agree unto it;
judging these men, if any, will be honest.

This Jury of humanes quaeries into the business, find that their brother
has engaged himself for life, perhaps for some 70 li. per annum, the more
simple man he: Now within a year after, some 6 or 7 score is tendered, the
conclusion it delivered in, he may lawfully suspend with his promise, and
former engagement, being called unto another place.

1. There is more maintenance, the great Lord that draws; he is by the
Scripture to provide for his own, or else he is worse then an Infidel.

2. There are perhaps more Souls, and so more need of a Preaching Ministry,
etc. And thus the man may lawfully remove, his brethren so determine it: And
why? It possibly may be their own turn next; that this is truth: witness
Master Swayn at Tradbrook in Suffolk, (with others) thus the minor appears,
that the Priests of England buy, that they may sell for advantage; therefore
guilty of the sin of Simon Magus: so that the truth is, we have many Sir Simons
amongst us, though under fair pretenses and colors: only note one word by the
way, wherein it will appear, that they exceed Simon in wickedness.

1. Simon would have bought the gifts of the spirit, that so he might have done
something for his money: but these men buy humane gifts instead of the spirit,
and set up, and sell that, as if it were spirit.

2. Simon had good thoughts of the spirit, he would have bought it: but these
cry down the spirit, calling it a spirit of giddiness, and its like they know
no other spirit, but that which comes from Oxferd, or Cambridge: Horrible
blasphemy against the spirit! Mat. 12.

3. Simon did only desire the spirit himself, not to limit it to himself, as
those who know not what the spirit is, who would have none to have it but
themselves: no Fisherman, as Peter; or Tent-maker, as Paul, etc.

4. And finally, Simon was made sensible of his sin, might repent for ought
that any one knows; he desired the Apostle to pray for him: but the Simonists
of our times are so far from repenting, that they still justify themselves
in their wickedness, and I am afraid, it will be a very hard thing to recover
many of them to repentance, unless when too late.

A Third Parrallel. BETWEEN Them, and the Artificial Merchandising Tradesman.
THe oneness between the Artificial Tradesman and the Priests, will appear,
these few things considered.

The tradesman, before he attains his craft, or calling, must first be an
Apprentice seven years, that so he may get understanding and art in his
calling, for there is some mystery in every calling; therefore time is required
for the understanding of it, which by the Law is not judged less than seven
years.

So it is with the Priest; he must, before he can be his crafts-master, spend
many years in the Schools, perhaps twice seven before he comes to maturity, at
least, he had need be one seven years in the University, commonly called the
schools of the Prophets, the nursery of piety, or rather of impiety and
wickedness, the wellhead of Divinity, or rather humanity; and then by this
time he has gotten a pretty good head and hand, he is, its likely, able to
make a sermon now and then, or else he must needs be a very dunce, for he has
a very dull head that cannot learn his trade in seven years; yet so it comes to
pass among these men very often, as well as other tradesmen* some are more
ready and handy in it then others, one can make two Sermons perhaps, while
another can scarce make one: so it is with your Shoomakers, Taylers, or any
other handicrafts-man: and so like other tradesmen, they prove differently;
some pretty honest in their way, others knaves, some drunkards, others sober,
some whore-masters, others chaste, some more wise and crafty, others simple and
foolish, and thus now their Apprentiship being expired, they are become Masters
of Art. The second thing to be expected, is their freedom to set up their
trade: so it is with the handicrafts-man especially in the City of London, or
other privilege places, for a small matter they are declared freemen of
London. So it is with the priests, after they have served their Apprentiships,
gained the Art of making a Sermon, and before two, some of them; they now must
get their freedom, which is the approbation and ordination of some principle
men of the same Art; thus it is with the tradesman, and thus it is with the
Priests, that is, either the hands of the Prelat, or some other Prelaticall,
Episcopal creatures, newly Anabaptizeed into the name of Presbyters, or CL
Asses.

3. The tradesman having obtained his freedom, he now opens shop-windows, and
sets himself to work: so likewise those Priests, they have their shops, ( viz.)
their studies full of good old books, Authors, Fathers, all expositures of
Scripture, and they set themselves to work, search one Author, and another
Author, and for the most part these are the fountains from whence they draw
all: come to ask their judgment upon any text of Scripture, you must tarry
till they have looked their expositers, and then they will tell you what their
expositers say, whether it be true or false; for you must note, they are not
infalliable, nor Apostolical. 4. The tradesmen must have a time to make their
wares, he cannot make them with his word, nor blow them together with the
wind: the shoemaker must have his time to make his shoes, the Tailor to make
a garment, etc. and when its made, its made, and not before. So must these
tradsmen of another nature have their times to make a Sermon, some a month,
some two weeks, some one, some two or three in a week, when like to have good
sale, but a time they must have to make it up, they cannot preach by the
spirit, alas! they know not what it is, they are strangers unto it, they oppose
it, this is that will throw down these Sermon-makers in conclusion; when poor
tradesmen, Cobblers, Taylers, Tinkers, Plow men Carpenters, all sorts of men
shall preach the everlasting Gospel, with so much light, life, and power, that
will darken all the light of these Sermon-makers; and then none will buy their
wares any more.

5. When the tradesmans ware is made, it is then fit for sale, and he has his
free market in his own town, he steps forth sometimes into other markets, that
so he may vend his wares at the dearest rates, it is his liberty, and
doubtless he may lawfully do it; and sometimes when he wants ware, he buies
of another to fit his customers, that so he may keep his calling going: so it
is likewise with our spiritual merchandizers when their Sermons are made, they
have their market days to set them at sale, their Sunday or their Sabbath, the
first day of the week: well might they, as I have heard them formerly, stir up
people to come to their spiritual markets; for they sell all, and that at an
excessive, excised rate too, and they have their change of markets, if it make
for their advantage; they can sell one year perhaps for twenty shillings a
Sermon, the next they have found a new market place, where they can sell it may
be for 40 shillings or three pound a Sermon, then Sermon-making is worth
something, a goodly trade: many Gentlemen of note and quality bring up their
children to this craft; and they can besides this, break forth now and then a
day into a new market, which ads unto the old store, for this they are sure,
their own goes on at home, although themselves keep market in another place;
and sometimes when necessity, or idleness drives them to it, they buy of other
men, viz. Preach a Sermon of another man's, if the people know it not, it goes
for current, though sometimes they can read along with them as they preach, but
I must confess this is something base. Thus it appears, that our spiritual
Merchants run parrallel with the temporal, and that Preaching is become a mere
art amongst men; and truly they have their shops full of godly wares; by which
they delude and deceive souls, John in Revel. 18. 11, 12. Opens their shops, or
rather their pack, where he gives them the term of Merchants; and abundance of
good ware there is, and they sell all, and the souls of men too.

Quere. How may they be said to sell the souls of men?

Answ. In that they own those to be Christians, which are no Christians, and
those to be Churches, which are no Churches, for this very end, that they may
enrich themselves; thus they sell souls, that is, delude and undo souls under
the name of Christians for money; witness their readiness to sprinkle and
cozen Infants, if their parents pay them Tithes, else not: they sell the souls
of men, for five or ten pound, they will forsake their cure of souls, as they
call it, sell them for gain, be a shepherd to them this year, sell his Interest
in them the next, go whither they will, he cares not, if he can get advantage:
a very hireling, that do not only fly from his flock when danger comes, but
sels his interest in them for gain, come what will come of them, he cares not;
although it is confessed, it is better where they are not, then where they are, for
there is some hopes of undeluding poor souls.

Thus it evidently appears, that the artificial tradesman, and the Masters of
Arts the Priests, run parrallel together, as much spiritualnesse in the one as
in the other; I mean in relation to their calling; although its confessed that
the first is lawful, the second, altogether earthly, sensual and devilish;
only take notice of a word by the way, wherein it will appear, that the Art and
trade of making and selling of Sermons, far exceeds all other arts and trades
besides, and that in these following particulars.

1. In their Gentility, they are masters before ever they open their shops, or
set up their trades.

2. In their sale, they usually have the highest markets, they often sell their
Sermons (when cheapest) for an Angel; when one might buy as good in a
booksellers shop, and it may be a better for three pence, so that their ware
comes usually to a good market, especially of late, except some poor ones, or
Cavaliers, they its like would be content with a reasonable market sometimes,
but its like ere long that this trade of Sermon-selling will be very dead and
low, so low; that they will stand weeping and crying alas! alas! for no man
buies their wares any more; and how will their honor, housekeeping and
hospitality go forwards then?

3. They have one great advantage more, they do not only meet with the dearest
markets, but they can sell one Sermon diverse times, they can sell a Sermon,
and yet keep him to make and sell twenty pair of sermons, and yet have never
the less. Let any handicrafts man come forth and do the like, if they could,
they might well enrich themselves: but was ever such a thing as this heard of?
What, sell a thing, and keep a thing, and sell it again? Yea, and again too
perhaps. Should I know a shoemaker sell shoes, and yet keep them, and sell
them again, I would brand him for an arch cozoner, or the like of any other
calling.

4. Advantage, They can sell that which is not money nor ware, as the proverb
is; so it be something it passes: a tradesman must sell that which is good, or
else he shall be counted dishonest, and the buyer has so much liberty as to
try it, to look into the goodness of it, if he like it, he buys it, if not,
he leaves it; but these Merchants have gotten an Ordinance to compel men to
receive what they bring them, be it good or bad: Oh horrid wickedness! What,
must we have it whether we will or no? You Merchants of London, stir up your
selves, get you such an Ordinance if you can, it must needs enrich you: What,
sell all manner of stinking wares by a Law? And none durst question it?

5. They are Monopolizers too, they have gotten their Pattentees to Monopolize
all to themselves, none must sell, nay, none may give, when they sell; a
wonderful way to enrich themselves, Was there ever such a thing as this heard
of? What, to Monopolize the gift of Preaching!

Quere. Is not this against the liberty of the Subject?

Answ. Yea, questionless.

Quere. Have not the Parliament declared against it?

Answ. Yea.

Quere. Was it not one end of the Parliaments war to free the Subject from it?

Answ. Yea, it was so pretended, and I suppose it was really intended.

Quere. Are not Monopolizes and Monopolizers much more dangerous and
dishonorable, in spiritual things then in temporal?

Answ. Yea, For first, Herein the free operation of the spirit is as much as
lies in man prevented by it.

Secondly, Poor ignorant English men are much aabused by it, who know not their
liberty.

Thirdly, the spiritual Merchants of the man of sin, the kingdom of
Antichrist, are enriched by it.

Quere. Did the Parliament think they had made a Patentee, and the Priests
Monopolizers, when they gave them that Ordinance, that none should preach but
themselves?

Answ. I suppose they did not, if they had, they could not have walked in a way
so directly against their own principles, their own Declarations, and the
Subjects liberty.

Quere. May we not expect that the Parliament will call in this Patentee again?

Answ. Yea, questionless, when they see the evil of it, and it is the subjects
liberty to expect it; it is that for which they have adventured their lives,
suffered the loss of their estates; and therefore it cannot but be a great
bondage and burden unto the subjects, to see and feel the heavy yoke and
bondage of Monopolizers yet remaining.

However, God will take their Patentee from them, for the Saints must speak
those things they have seen and heard; notwithstanding their engrossing all
into their own hands: Thus have I briefly, and plainly discovered the
carelesnes and corruption of the Priests of England, notwithstanding their fair
pretenses, not scandalizing their persons, but discovering their evil
conditions, to that end that Englishmen might not be enslaved, especially in
their spirits, unto such a generation, who alone seek themselves.

Three Quaeries Answered.
QUaere 1. Was not the Jewish Priests and Levites typical: And did not they
type forth the Ministry of the Gospel?

Answ. Its true, they were typical, but they typed forth Christ, the great
High Priest of Saints, Hebr. 9. Not the Priests of these times.

2. They were a type of all the Saints in Christ, for Christ and the Saints are
one, and all the Saints are the Lords portion, an holy Priesthood unto the
Lord, 1 Pet. 2. no Priesthood by office, but all the Saints are Priests.

Quere. 2.

Is it not necessary, seeing the gifts of the Spirit are lost, that there
should be a getting of those gifts again by humane industry, as Tongues, Arts,
etc.

Answ. 1. It is all one, as if a man should be so simple, as having lost a
pearl, should instead thereof, buy a clod of dirt, a good satisfaction for such
a loss; the gift of the Spirit being lost, get a little of the wisdom of man,
which is but as dung, and dross in comparison of it; the wisdom of the flesh
is death, Romans 1. 6.

2. Its the Anointings of Antichrist, the Spirit being lost, Antichrist sets
up the wisdom of the flesh in room of it, for in all things Antichrist seeks
to imitate Christ, as well in the flesh, as in the spirit.

3. The Saints are made pertakers of the same Spirit the Apostles were; for if
the spirit of Christ be not in you, ye are none of his; Christ is in you, else
you are reprobates, if so, then no need of all this Humanity.

4. This Spirit of God manifest in the Saints, will discover and destroy this
Humane spirit of Antichrist; by things that are not in the worlds eyes, will he
bring to naught things that are.

Quere. 3.

If Ministers of the Gospel may not lawfully indent for maintenance for their
Preaching, seeing the labourer is worthy of his hire, and he that provides not
for his own is worse then an Infidel?

Answ.

1. If Christ and his Apostles, or either of them did so, then they may, else
not, Gal. 6.

2. If it stands with the fidelity of a servant to his master, else not: freely
ye have received, freely give.

3. Christ has undertaken to care for those that trust him, Luke 10. Matthew. 6.

Sixteen Queries of concernment, Propounded, with a desire of an Answer from
those who can, or please.
1. IF ever the Lord made use of any as Ministers of his mind, unto the
people, that were bread idle at Schools and Universities all the days of their
lives, without a calling, as the Priests of England, but rather the contrary,
as Moses a shepherd, Elisha a Ploughman, David a shepherd, Amos a Herds-man;
Christ himself a Carpenter, Paul a Tent-maker, Peter a fisherman? etc.

2. If ever Christ and his Apostles did get a Patentee, viz. an Ordinance from
man to Monopolize the gift of Preaching to themselves?

3. If ever Universities and Schools of humane learning were in Scripture,
called the fountains, or well-heads of Divinity?

4. Whether ever Christ and his Apostles did Indent with their hearers, what to
have for preaching before they preached unto them?

5. Whether ever Christ and his Apostles built their Churches by humane
Authority?

6. Whether Christ and his Apostles did at any time gather the profane carnal
men of the world into the Church, excluding the Saints, who out of tenderness
and light, follow him?

7. Whether ever Christ and his Apostles deterred any from Preaching the
Gospel, by the powers of the earth?

8. Whether ever Christ and his Apostles made use of these two great bug-bears,
so common in use with the Priests of England, to prevent the Saints from
preaching the Gospel, and the world from hearing them, viz. 1. The approbation
and ordination of the men of the earth. 2. Humane learning, the language of the
Beast, without which men are in their account altogether unmeet to meddle in the
things of God?

9. Whether ever Christ and his Apostles first baptized, and then twenty or
forty years after taught them faith?

10. Whether ever Christ and his Apostles deluded the World, viz. the ignorant
and profane, with the name of Christians; when there was no such thing
appeared?

11. If ever Christ or his Apostles had a hundred or two hundred pounds per
annum for Preaching?

12. If ever Christ and his Apostles appropriated Tithes to themselves for
preaching?

13. If ever Christ and his Apostles did remove from one Parsonage to another?

14. If ever Christ and his Apostles did confirm the truth they delivered by
the power of the Magistracy, Authors, Fathers, etc.

15. Whether the Spirit teaching be not sufficient in the things of God?

16. Whether it be not the work of Christ, and that which is to be expected in
these later days, to overturn, overturn, overturn, all these things acted by
men, contrary to his own mind?

FINIS.

