AN ELEGY Upon the Honorable (the most Ingenious) HENRY GORGE, Son and Heir to
the right Honorable the Lord GORGE;
Who dyed of a Consumption, after a former Recovery.
O Emptines of expectations Here,
When kindest to our thoughts, then most severe!
O guilty Hopes, condemned as soon as born,
Short beams of comfort from the blushing Morn!
Our ripest Joys, all Natures best recruit
But fair delusive Blossoms without fruit:
Till death (uncertain too) does all invade,
Wrapped up in one black undistinguisht shade.
In vain our fancys measure Time or Place,
Or any Motions of our mortal Rae;
Imperfect Circles, always wheeling round
Have no fixed Center, no unerring Bound.
In vain our thoughts postpone or antidate:
No fixedness in any thing but Fate.
Hope lately rode triumphant 'ore Despair,
Like the days Chariot through the cloudless Air;
Kind Health anatomized by long decay
Had gained a (...) C(...).
Death seems resolved (despairing of his End)
To quit the Field, and march away a friend.
Accomplished now with Latin, Greek, and French,
Religion, Prudence, Wit with Innocence;
Our noble Youth (since reason well refined
By Conversation had prepared his Mind)
Must to the Western Aca^em^ go
And there his new life on the Arts bestow.
All judged Oxford's Philosophy and Air
Might both his Body and his Mind repair.
Ind^ed 't was time our new-made Man should try
His nerves and locomotive Faculty.
1. Theater.
At first that glorious Fabric to his view
Presents Time's various Treasures old and new
Great S^^el^^^s wife munificence, to raise
A Scene of Fame, and Monument of praise.
2. Underground
Below the busy press, which Prudence well
For spreading mischiefs has condemned to Hell.
Next visit was the Muses great 3. Library
Divan,
Remote from Rome, but nigh the Vatican,
Where 4. Seldom against Tithes.
( Decimals summed up) now kindly meet
Great Lawd and Seldom, and old Bodley greet.
Though well advanced in health he did not need
Shrub, Root, or Herb, or some more soverain weed;
He must the Physic Garden walk, to see
That Field of Art, and nature's Heraldry.
His curious Soul did asters Wonders pant,
Which made him view That of the Vitall-plant;
Saw it in coyness or in rage retreat,
Impatient of defilement or defeat:
Nature designed this Vegetive to be
A special Emblem of His Ingenie.
The Schools, the Colleges, the Chapels There,
Gave him kind prospects of the heavenly Sphere.
Nature Him Logic and the Physics taught,
By Conversation to pure Ethics brought:
If any Science could malignant be
'T was (5) That abhors Metaphysics,
Materiality.
This by abstractive Engines might withdraw
His nobler part, and cancel nature's Law
But O unfortunate Relapse! He dies
Before our former Joys had cleared our eyes.
Now his brisk Soul (once circumscribed) is free
IN th College of a Boundless Trinity. Of that College.
Trinity.
But Friends with fruitless tears lament his death
Or hope to winnow back his precious breath;
Nor love nor wisdom can this Saint retrive
As to Externals here but half alive:
Whose Body to so fine thread was spun,
His life had end, before his death begun,
O 't was an Orient Jewel, but alas
Lodged in too fine a Cabinet of glass;
Where in you might mirac'lously have seen
A Spirit move without corporeal screen.
Doubtless good Angels, when thy visits make
To Saints below, such refind Bodies take.
A Christian Stoic only rich within,
Had mortal weakness, but no mortal sin;
Was Man too soon, for Heaven too early sit
Both mortal and immortal by his Wit.
A Youth in years, but full of age in merit,
Took Heaven, and left us Worms the Earth t'inherit,
Heaven's Heir can lack no Time, nor can there be
Pupils or Nonage in Eternity.
Farwell thou little Man, but Giant Saint,
Now worthy of our triumph not complaint:
We Will weep no more, but save our useless tears
To mourn our selves hung betwixt hopes and fears.
Blessed Saint, in kindness pity Us, That we
(Heaven knows how long) must want both Heaven and Thee.
By J.C.
Printed in the year MDCLXXIV. 79.


