A DEFENSE OF THE Short View OF THE Profaneness and Immorality OF THE English
STAGE, etc. Being a REPLY To Mr. Congreve's Amendments, etc. And to the
Vindication of the Author of the Relapse.

By Jeremy Collier, M. A.

Fortem animum praestant rebus quas turpiter audent Juven. Sat. 6. LONDON:
Printed for S. Keble at the Turks-head in Fleetstreet, R. Sare at
Grays-Inn-gate, and H. Hindmarsh against the Exchange in Cornhil, 1699.

To the READER.
SInce the publishing my late View, etc. I have been plentifully railed on in
Print: This gives me some reason to suspect the Answerers and the Cause, are
not altogether unlike. Had there been nothing but plain Argument to encounter,
I think I might have ventured my Book with them: But being charged with
miscitations and unfair Dealing, 'twas requisite to say something: For Honesty
is a tender point, and ought not to be neglected.

Mr. Congreve and the Author of the Relapse, being the most eager Complainants,
and Principals in the Dispute, I have made it my choice to satisfy them. As
for the Volunteers, they will find themselves affected with the Fortune of
their Friends; and besides, I may probably have an opportunity of speaking
farther with them hereafter.

Notwithstanding the singular Management of the Poets and Playhouse, I have
had the satisfaction to perceive, the Interest of Virtue is not altogether
Sunk, but that Conscience and Modesty have still some Footing among us. This
consideration makes me hope a little farther Discovery of the Stage may not be
unacceptable. The Reader then may please to take notice, that The Plot and no
Plot swears at length, and is scandalously Smutty and Profane. The Fool in
Fashion for the first four Acts is liable to the same Imputation: Something in
Swearing abated, Caesar Borgia, and Love in a Nunnery, are no better
Complexion'd than the former. And lastly, Limberham, and the Soldier's Fortune,
are mere prodigies of Lewdness and Irreligion. If this general Accusation
appears too hard, I am ready to make it good. 'Twere easy to proceed to many
other Plays, but possibly this Place may not be so proper to enlarge upon the
Subject.

Some of the Stage-Advocates pretend my Remarks on their Poetry are foreign to
the Business. On the contrary, I conceive it very defensible to disarm an
Adversary, if it may be, and disable him from doing Mischief.

To expose that which would expose Religion, is a warrantable way of Reprizals.
Those who Paint for Debauchery, should have the Fucus pulled off, and the
Coarseness underneath discovered. The Poets are the Aggressors, let them lay
down their Arms first. We have suffered under Silence a great while; If we are
in any fault, it is because we began with them no sooner

ERRATA.
PAge 7 l. 15. after represented add, excepting Plautius's Amphitryon, which he
calls a Tragecomedy, p. 19. l. 4. r. summed up, p. 25. l. 28. r. animos* p. 28.
l. 24. after this dele the Comma, p. ^1. l. 20. after Indecencies add a
Semicolon, l 21. after dealing add a Comma, p. 49. l. 21. r. in, p. 59. l. 10.
r. Mr. Congreve p. 64. l. 29. r. Style, p. 106. l. 14. for between God and the
Devil, r. between his Respects to God and the Devil, p. 114. l. 26. r. (...).

AN ANSWER TO Mr. CONGREVE's Amendments, etc.
MR. Congreve being a Person of no great Ceremony, I shall not salute him with any
Introduction; but fall to the Business without more Ado. This Gentleman
pretends to turn some of my Expressions upon me. If these Passages, says he,
produced by Mr. Collier are obscene and profane, Amend. p. 5.
why are they raked in and disturbed, unless it be to conjure up Vice, and
revive Impurities, etc. I cannot think Mr. Congreve so injudicious as to believe
this Citation a jot to his purpose. But I plainly perceive he Presumes all
along upon the weakness, or partiality of his Reader: Which by the way, is no
great Compliment. However, to say something directly. Had these obnoxious
Passages lain hid in a Learned Language, and been locked up in Latin, like
Iuvenal, I would no more have let them loose in a Translation, than unchain'd
the Tiger at Bartholomew Fair: But since the Mischief works in English, 't^s
time to think of an English Remedy. B^^^des, as to the Smut, I have endeavored
not to disoblige the Paper with any of it. But to show the Accusation just, I
made a general Reference to Play, and Character: And sometimes upon a special
Occasion; have marked the Page. Indeed to have transcribed it at length, would
not only have been an improper, but a tedious Employment.

I was sensible the Poets would try to make their Advantage, of this Necessary
Reserv'dness, that They would deny the Fact, because the Proof was not
particular, and spoken out. But since the Reader is directed to the Evidence,
he may disappoint them in this Evasion, if he pleases. The profane Part, though
Bolder, and more Black, will bear the Light better, and therefore when 'twas
clear of Obscenity, I have set it to the Bar. Upon the whole; I was willing to
Guard the Virtue, and awaken the Caution of the Reader: And by the safest
Methods I could think of, to give check to the Complicated Infection.

He affirms I call the Stage-Poets, Amend. p. 6.
Buffoons and Slaves; for this he Quotes 81, 63, and 175 Pages of the View,
etc. Let us examine his Proof: The place in the 63 Page is a Censure of a
Profane and Smutty Passage in the Old Batchelour: In which I have said that
Fondlewife's making Sport with Adultery, in the manner described, was a Fit of
Buffoonry and Profaneness. Now to say this of a Character in the Play, is I
suppose pretty Different from calling the Poet Buffoon. In the 81 Page, after I
had produced a large Roll of Blasphemy, and Scripture-Abuse against the Stage;
I thought I had reason to be somewhat concerned; to see the Christian Religion
thus horribly outraged, made the Diversion of the Town, and the scorn of
Buffoons: I Am mistaken if this Occasion would not justify a little severity of
Language: And till Mr. Congreve can disprove the Charge, he had much better
Repent, than Complain: However there is no necessity he should take that Word to
himself, unless he thinks he deserves it* For it may be applied to the Actors,
or some few Libertines in the Audience, and then his Objection is spoiled. His

3 d. Instance stands in Page 175 th of the View, etc. Here upon their
unpresidented Familiarity with the Lords; I desired to know whether our Stage
had a particular Privilege? Was their Charter enlarged; and were they on the
same Foot of Freedom with the Slaves in the Saturnalia? Here Mr. Congreve is
positive I call the Poets Slaves: It Is well when his Hand was in; He did not
charge me with calling them Saturnalia: But which way do I call them Slaves?
Why because I said, They were very Free. Is Liberty then always fastened to a
Chain; and Familiarity a proof of Servitude? The Resemblance in the Question
respects Behavior more than Condition, and implies nothing farther than
general Inequality. Now I hope it is no affront to the Stage, to suppose them
Inferior to the House of Lords. His remaining Instance from my Preface, is much
like This; and requires no farther Answer.

Thus Mr. Congreve may perceive I have called him no Names hitherto; But now he
may be assured I should have distinguished his Character a little, and paid him
some proper Acknowledgments, but that I have no Inclination for his way of
Disputing: Railing is a mean, and unchristian Talent, and oftentimes a sign of
a desperate Cause, and a desperate Conscience.

As to the bad Imputations these Stage-Advocates would throw upon me, I am not
in the least disturbed at Them. I thank God, they are not only without Truth,
but without Color. Could They have made the Slander passable, we should have
heard farther from them. This is an admirable way of answering Books! All that
I shall say to it is, that I pity the Men, and despite the Malice. To proceed.
Mr. Congreve is now making Outworks to fortify the Garrison. He lays down four
Rules as the Test of Criticism and Comedy. p. 7. P. 12.
These He calls Postulata, as if they were Principles of Science, and carried
the Evidence of an Axiom. And after he has spent some Pages in setting down
these Demonstrative Things, he frankly tells us, they seem at first Sight to
comprehend a Latitude. Ibid.
Do they so? Then they are not Self-evident; They are unqualifyed for the Post
he has put them in; and prove nothing but Sophistry and Legerdemain. Well! What
though these Rul^s are false in themselves, Mr. Congreve promises to make them
True before he has done with them. Ibid.
For they shall be so limited, and restrained, and used with such Discretion;
that the Reader shall be perfectly indemnifyed. However, I cannot help
suspecting these fair Words: For if He intends to deal clearly, why does he
make the Touchstone faulty, and the Standard uncertain? For these reasons, I
must examine for my Self; And since he owns his Propositions not evidently
true, I Will try if I cannot prove the greatest part of them evidently false.

To begin with him. His Latitude of Comedy upon Aristotle's Definition; P. 7.
as he Explains it, wont pass without Limitation. For

1 st. His Construction of (...) is very questionable. These Words may as
properly be Translated the Common, as the worst Sort of People. And thus
Hesychius interprets (...) by (...).

2 ly. Comedy is distinguished from Tragedy by the Quality of the Persons, as
well as by other Circumstances. Lib. de Poet. cap. 4.
Aristotle informs us that the Appearance, Characters, or Persons are greater
in Tragedy, than in Comedy. (...). And to this Sense Petitus interprets the
Words (...), In not. ad Lib. Arist. de Poet. cap. ^.
affirming they ought to relate to Quality, as well as Manners.

Now as the Business of Tragedy is to repre^ent Princes and Persons of Quality;
so by the Laws of Distinction, Comedy ought to be confined to the ordinary.
Rank of Mankind. Scali^ Poet. Lib. 1. c. 6.
And that Aristotle ought to be thus interpreted appears from the Form of New
Comedy, set up in the Time of this Philosopher. And though we have none of these
Comedies extant, it is agreed by the Critics that they did not meddle with
Government and Great People; The Old Comedy being put down upon this Score. And
though Menander and the rest of that Set are lost, we may guess at their Conduct
from the Plays of Plautus and Terence, in all which there is not so much as one
Person of Quality represented.

Farther, Mr. Congreve's Reason why Aristotle should be interpreted by Manners,
and not Quality is inconclusive. His remark on (...) will serve as well the
other way. Lets try it a little: Aristotle shall say then that Comedy is an
imitation of the ordinary, and middle sort of People, but not (...), in every
branch and aggravation of Vice; Amend. p. 8.
for as Mr. Congreve observes, there are Crimes too daring and too horrid for
Comedy. Now I desire to know, if this Sense is not clear and unembarrass'd, if
it does not distinguish Comedy from Tragedy, and bring down the Definition to
Matter of Fact?

But granting Mr. Congreve his Definition; all Blemishes and Instances of
Scandal are not fit to make sport with. Covetousness, and Profusion; Cowardice,
Spleen, and Singularity, well managed, might possibly do. But some Vices Mr.
Congreve confesses are too daring for Comedy. Yes and for Tragedy too. And
among these I Will venture to say Profaneness is one. This Liberty even Aristotle
durst not allow: He knew the Government of Athens would not endure it. And that
some of the Poets had been called to account upon this Score. Vit. Eurip. Ed.
Cant.


2 ly. Immodesty and lewd Talking, is another part of Vice which ought not to
appear in Comedy. Aristotle blames the Old Comedians for this sort of
Mismanagement; and adds, that intemperate Rallying ought to lie under public
Restraint. See View, etc. p. 159.160.
And therefore Mr. Congreve is mistaken in his Consequence if he makes it
general. For the looser sort of Livers, as to the Foulness of Conversation,
Amend. p. 8.
are no proper Subject of Comedy.

But supposing Aristotle more liberal to Mr. Congreve, what service would it do
him? Does not Christianity refine the Pleasures, and abridge the Liberties of
Heathenism? Ephesians. 5.3, 4.
St. Paul bids us put away all filthyness and foolish talking, and that such
things ought not so much as to be named amongst Christians. Colos. 3.8.
And when Revelation says one thing, and Paganism another, how are we to
determine? Is not an Apostle's Testimony more cogent than that of a
Philosopher, and the New Testament above all the Rules of Aristotle and Horace?

Thus we see his first Postulatum is far from being true in the Generality
stated by him.

Before I part with him on this Head, I cannot but take notice of his saying, P.
8.
that the Business of Comedy is to delight, as well as instruct: If he means as
much, by as well, View, etc. cap. 4.
he is mistaken. For Delight is but the secondary End of Comedy, as I have
proved at large. And to satisfy him farther, I Will give him one Testimony more
of Mr. Dryden's. It Is in his Preface to Fresnoy's Art of Painting. P. XX.
Here he informs us that as to Delight the parallel of the (two) Arts holds
true; with this difference; That the principal End of Painting is to please,
and the chief design of Poetry is to instruct.

Thus Mr. Congreve's first Rule signifies little; And therefore his Second
being, but a consequence of it, must fall of Course. Pleasure, especially the
Pleasure of Libertines, is not the Supreme Law of Comedy. Vice must be under
Discipline and Discountenance, and Folly shown with great Caution and Reserve.
Lussious Descriptions, and Common Places of Lewdness are unpardonable. They
affront the virtuous, and debauch the unwary, and are a scandal to the Country
where they are suffered. The pretense of Nature, and Imitation, is a lamentable
Plea. Without doubt there is a great deal of Nature in the most brutal
Practices. The infamous Stews it is likely talk in their own way, and keep up to
their Character. But what Person of probity would visit them for their
Propriety, or take Poison because it is true in its kind? All Characters of
Immodesty (if there must be any such) should only be hinted in remote Language,
and thrown off in Generals.

If there must be Strumpets, let Bridewell be the Scene. Let them come not to
Prate, but to be Punished. To give Success, and Reputation to a Stage
Libertine, is a sign either of Ignorance, of Lewdness, or Atheism, or
altogether. Even those Instances which will bear the relating ought to be
punished. But as for Smut and Profaneness, it is every way Criminal and
Infectious, and no Discipline can atone for the Representation: Amend. p. 11.
When a Poet will venture on these Liberties, his Persuasion must suffer, and
his private Sentiments fall under Censure. For as Mr. Dryden rightly observes,
vita proba est, is no excuse: For 'twill scarcely be admitted that either a
Poet or a Painter can be chaste, Pref. to ^resnoy. p. XXI.
who give us the contrary Examples in their Writings, and their Pictures. I
agree with Mr. Congreve it would be very hard a Painter should be believed to
resemble all the ugly Faces he draws. But if he suffers his Pencil to grow
Licentious, if he gives us Obscenities, the Merits of Raphael will not excuse him:
No, To do an ill Thing well, doubles the Fault. The Mischief rises with the
Art, and the Man ought to smart in proportion to his Excellency: Pref. p. XX.
Book. p. 56.
It Is one of the Rules in Painting according to Mr. Dryden and Fresnoy; To
avoid every Thing that is immoral and filthy, unseemly, impudent, and obscene.
Ibid. p. XXI.
And Mr. Dryden continues, that a Poet is bound up to the same Restraint, and
ought neither to Design, or Color an offensive Piece.

Mr. Congreve's 4 th Proposition relates to the Holy Scriptures; And here he
endeavors to Fence against the Censure of Profaneness. He desires the
following Distinction may be admitted, viz. when Words are applied to sacred
Things, they ought to be understood accordingly: Amend. p. 11.
But when they are otherwise applied, the Diversity of the Subject gives a
Diversity of Signification: By his favor this Distinction is loose, and
nothing to the Purpose. The inspired Text is appropriated to Sacred Things, and
never to be used but upon serious Occasions. The Weight of the Matter, and the
Dignity of the Author, challenge our utmost regard. It Is only for the Service
of the Sanctuary, and Privileged from common Use. But Mr. Congreve says when
they (the Words of Scripture) are otherwise applied, the Diversity of the
Subject gives a Diversity of Signification. This is strange Stuff! Has
Application so transforming a Quality, and does bare use enter so far into the
Nature of Things? If a Man applies his Money to an ill Purpose, does this
transmute the Metal, and make it none of the Kings Coin? To wrest an Author,
and turn his Words into Jest, is it seems to have nothing to do with him. The
mere Ridicule destroys the Quotation; and makes it belong to another Person.
Thus it is impossible to Traverstie a Book, and Virgil was never burlesqu'd by
Ausonius or Mr. Cotton! Not at all! They only made use of the 24 Letters, and
happened to chop exactly upon Virgil's Subject, his Words and Versification.
But it is plain they never intended to quote him: For Virgil is always grave,
and serious, but these Gentlemen apply, or translate the Words in the most
different manner imaginable: And run always upon Buffoonry and Drolling. This
is Mr. Congreve's Logic, and to abuse an Author is to have nothing to do with
him. The Injury it seems destroys the Relation, and makes the Action perfectly
foreign. And by this Reasoning one would think my Book had never been cited by
Mr. Congreve.

To illustrate the Matter a little farther. Suppose the most solemn Acts of
Government played the Fool with at Bartholomew Fair; The Judges Charge made up
into a Farce, and the Poppets repeating an Act of Parliament: Would it be a
good excuse to allege they meant nothing but a little Laughing. That the Bench
and the Bear-Garden, Punchinello and the 2 Houses, had the same Alphabet in
Common? That they ought to have the Privilege of Speech, and put their Words
together as they had a mind to: Would not the Reason, and the Hardiness of such
a Plea, be very extraordinary? The Case before us is much the same, only a
great deal worse. For what can be more outrageously Wicked, Old Batch. p. 39.49.
than to expose Religion to the Scorn of Atheism, to give up the Bible to Rakes
and Strumpets, Love for Love. p. 59.61. Double Dealer. p. 18, etc.
and to make Impudence and Inspiration speak the same Language? Thus the Wisdom
of God is burlesqu'd, his Omnipotence played with, and Heaven's the Diversion
of Hell. To reply, that though the Words are Scripture, the Subject and
Application are different, is to confess the Indictment, and give up the Cause.
For pray what is it to burlesque a grave Author? Is it not to wrest his
Meaning, and alter his Matter; to turn him into Jest and Levity, and put him
under Circumstances of Contempt?

Thus we see his 4 th Proposition is all Sophistry, and false Reasoning:

I shall now go back to his 3 d, which I think would have stood as well in the
last place. He desires the impartial Reader, not to consider any Expression or
Passage, cited from any Play, as it appears in my Book; P. 9.10.
nor to pass any Sentence upon it out of its proper Scene, etc. For it must not
be meddled with when it is alienated from its Character. Well! Let the Reader
compare his Plays with the View, etc. as much as he pleases. However, there is
no necessity of passing through all his Forms, and Methods of prescribing. For
if the Passage be truly cited, if the Sentence be full, and determined, why
may not we understand it where'ere it is met with? Why must we read a Page for a
Period? Cannot a Plant be known without the History of the Garden? Besides, He
may remember I have frequently hinted his Characters, touched upon their
Quality and Fortune, and made them an Aggravation of his Fault.

But to silence this Plea, I had told him before that no pretense of Character,
or Punishment, could justify Profaneness on the Stage. View. p. 96.
I gave him my Reasons for it too, which he is not pleased to take notice of. To
enlarge on them a little:

And here I desire to know what Service does Blasphemy, and Profaneness upon
the Stage? Is it to please, or to improve the Audience? Surely not the first:
For what Pleasure can it be to see the greatest Being contemned, the best
Friend ill treated, and the strongest Enemy provoked? The Jews used to rend
their Clothes at the hearing of Blasphemy, and is it now become the
Entertainment of Christians? To see Men defy the Almighty, and play with
Thunder, one would think should be far from Diversion. Are the Charms of
Profaneness so strangely inviting, is there such Music in an Oath, and are the
Damned to be courted for their Company? The Stage is oftentimes a lively Emblem
of Hell; There Is the Language, and the Lewdness; There are the Devils too, and
almost every thing but the Darkness and Despair. These hideous Characters are
generally Persons of Figure, often rewarded, seldom punished, and when they
are, the Correction is strangely gentle and disproportioned. It Is just as if a
Man should be set in the Stocks for Murder, and shamed a little for firing a
Town.

To say a Man has been Profane in general, and then to punish him is somewhat
Intelligible; To make him an Example without Instance, and Particularity, is a
safe way of Dramatick Justice: But when he is suffered to Act his Distraction,
and practice before the Company, the Punishment comes too late. Such
Malefactors are infectious, and kill at their very Execution. It Is much safer
not to hear them talk, than to see them suffer. A bad Age is too apt to learn;
and the Punishment in jest, brings on the Crime in earnest. Some Vices wont
bear the naming: They are acted in some measure when they are spoken, and
approved when they are hearkn'd to. Thus the Playhouse often spreads those
Vices it represents, and the Humor of the Town is learned by showing it. So
that if Instruction is intended, nothing can be more Ignorant, if Diversion
nothing more Wi^^e^^. To proceed. Profaneness by b^ing often heard, is less
abhorred. The av^rsion cools upon Custom, and the frightfulness of the Idea is
abated. Famil^arity reconc^les us to ill Sigh^s, and wea^s off the Deformity of
a Monster. T^us by Cursing and Swearing, the Abuse of Scripture and Profane
Jests, which are so frequent on the Stage, the Bold^ess of the Crime grows less
remarkable, and the Terrors of Conscience are laid asleep: And if there happens
to be Wit in the Ca^e, it is a Vehicle to the Poison, and m^kes it go down with
Pleasure. Thus young People are furnished with Profane Jests, and Atheism is
kept in Countenance* The Majesty of Religion is weakened, and the Passions of
Humane Nature misplaced: People laugh when they should tremble, and despise
what they ought to adore. Had we a due regard for the Honor of God, and were
Death and Judgment laid before us, that is, were we Christians in good earnest;
these wretched Liberties would be all Pain, and Penance to us: They Would wound
the Sense, and chill the Blood, and make us sweat with Antipathy and Disgust:
We should be seized with a ^i^ of Horror, and almost frightened into Agony and
Convulsion.

From what I have said 'twill follow, that provided Mr. Congreve is fairly
cited for Smut, or Profaneness, Sentence may be passed without having recourse
to Scene, or Character. I say it may be passed so far as to condemn him of a
Fault; Though I confess the degrees, and aggravation of it, will in some measure
depend on the Characters, and the Fortune of them.

I have done with Mr. Congreve's Preliminaries, and shown the unreasonableness
of them. If he demands them as a Right, his Title is defeated, if he begs them
as a Favor, he should have petitioned in another Form. He should not have been
so short with the Reader as to desire him to proceed no farther, Amend. ^ 7.
but return to my View, etc. if he thought in his Conscience his few things too
much to be granted. But why should this Gentleman put this hardship upon
People, which he does not allow of himself? I suppose Mr. Congreve's Conscience
may be large enough for any Reader, why then does he require any more? The
Author thinks his few things, too much to be granted, and yet the Courteous
Reader must think otherwise! P. 12.
I say Mr. Congreve thinks them too much, why else does he engage to use them
with such Caution, to muzzle, and bind them up to their good Behavior?

Mr. Congreve proceeds to acquaint us how careful the Stage is for the
Instruction of the Audience. P. 12, 13.
That the Moral of the whole is generally summed in the concluding Lines of the
Poem, and put into Rhyme that it may be easy and engaging to the Memory. To
this I answer,

1 st. That this Expedient is not always made use of. And not to trouble the
Reader with many Instances, we have nothing of it in Love in a Nunnery, and the
Relapse, both which Plays are in my Opinion not a little dangerous.

2 ly. Sometimes these Comprehensive Lines do more harm than good: They do so
in the Soldiers Fortune: They do so likewise in the Old Batchelour; which
instructs us to admirable purpose in these Words; But oh --
What rugged ways attend the Noon of Life?
(Our sun declines) and with what anxious strife,
What pain we tug that galling Load a Wife?


This Moral is uncourtly, and vicious, it encourages Lewdness, and agrees
extremely well with the Fable. Love for Love may have somewhat a better
Farewell, but would do a Man little Service should he remember it to his dying
Day. Here Angelica after a fit of Profane Vanity in Prose, takes her Leave as
follows; The Miracle to Day is that we find
A Lover true: Not that a Woman's kind.


This last Word is somewhat ambiguous, and with a little help may strike off
into a light Sense. But take it at the best, it is not overloaden with Weight
and Apothegme. A Ballad is every jot as sententious.

3 dly. Supposing the Moral grave, and unexceptionable, it amounts to little in
the present Case. Alas! The Doctor comes too late for the Disease, and the
Antidote is much too weak for the Poison. When a Poet has flourished on an ill
Subject for some Hours: When he has Larded his Scenes with Smut, and played his
Jests on Religion; and exhausted himself upon Vice; what can a dry Line or two
of good Counsel signify? The Tincture is taken, the Fancy is preingaged, and
the Man is gone off into another Interest. Profane Wit, Luscious Expressions,
and the handsome Appearance of a Libertine* solicit strongly for Debauchery.
These Things are mighty Recruits to Folly, and make the Will too hard for the
Understanding. A taste of Philosophy has a very flat relish, after so full an
Entertainment. An agreeable Impression is not easily defaced by a single
Stroke, especially when it is worn deep by Force, and Repetition. And as the
Aud^ence are not secured, so neither are the Poets this way. A Moral Sentence
at the Close of a Lewd Play, is much like a pious Expression in the Mouth of a
dying Man, who has been Wicked all his Life time. This some ignorant People
call making a good End, as if one wise Word would atone for an Age of Folly.
To return to the Stage. I suppose other parts of a Discourse besides the
Conclusion, ought to be free from Infection. If a Man was Sound only at his
Fingers Ends, he would have little comfort in his Constitution. Bonum fi^ ex
integra causa; A good Action must have nothing bad. The Quality must be
uniform, and reach to every Circumstance. In short. This Expedient of Mr.
Congrev^'s as it is insignificant to the purpose it is brought, so it looks very
like a piece of formal Hypocricy: And seems to be made use of to conceal the
Immorality of the Play, and cover the Poet from Censure.

Mr. Congreve in the Double Dealer makes three of his Ladies Strumpets; This, I
thought an odd Compliment to Quality. But my Reflection it seems is over
severe. However, by his favor, the Characters in a Play ought to be drawn by
Nature: To write otherwise is to make a Farce. The Stage therefore must be
supposed an Image of the World, and Quality in Fiction resemble Quality in
Life. This Resemblance should likewise hold in Number, as well as in other
Respects, though not to a Mathematical Strictness. Thus in Plautus and Terence,
the Slaves are generally represented false, and the Old Men easy and over
credulous. Now if the Majority in these Divisions should not answer to the
World; If the Drama should cross upon Conversation, the Poets would be to
blame, as I believe they are in the later Instance. Thus when the greatest part
of Quality are debauched on the Stage, it is a broad Innuendo they are no better
in the Boxes.

This Argument he pretends proves too much, and would make us believe that by
this way of reasoning, if four Women were shown upon the Stage, and three of
them were Vicious, it is as much as to say that three parts in four of the
whole Sex are stark naught. I answer, P. 16.
the Case is not parallel. The Representation in his Play turns more upon
Condition than Sex. It Is the Quality which makes the Appearance, marks the
Character, and points out to the Comparison Abroad.

His Precedents from Virgil are unserviceable upon two Accounts.

1 st. The Fact is misreported. The Catalogue of ill Women in that Poem, is not
so numerous as is pretended. Mr. Congreve exempts four of them from this
Charge, and I Will help him to four more. For Creusa and Lavinia are perfectly
passive; and overruled. Then as for Camilla, why is she Thrown into the black
List, and ranged with Alecto and the Harpyes? What Decrees of the Gods does she
despise? She stood by Latinus it is true, neither does the Poet oblige her to
quit his Interest. So that for any thing that appears, the Lady was a good
Woman in her way. To these if we add Anna, Dido's Sister, a very innocent
Princess, I believe we may venture to Poll with Juno, and all her Party.

2 ly. His Matter of Fact as stated by himself, makes against him. For if
Virgil did well in making most of his Female Characters faulty and
exceptionable, Congr. p. 17
because as Aristotle has ventured to affirm, there are more bad than good
Women in the World, then there ought to be a proportion between Life and
poetic Imitation; A Proportion even to Computation* though not just to equality
and telling of Nos^^. And thus his Illustration destroys his Argument, even by
the Authority of Aristotle and Bossu; and which is worst of all, by his own,
who cites them with Approbation.

There Is one unlucky thing behind: And that is his concurring with Aristotle in
a very unceremonious Paradox. Ibid.
This Philosopher has ventured to affirm that there are more bad* than good
Women in the World. Very likely? If he had said there are more bad Men than
good ones, the Discovery might have been altogether as considerable. But we are
not yet at the end of the Indictment. Ibid.
For as he goes on, The Women (take them altogether) do more harm than good.
Well. Aristotle was a bold Man: However, this is to be said for him; he was no
Stage Poet. Had his concerns been with the Pit or Boxes, it is likely you had
seen him better polished. But that Mr. Congreve should Countenance an Author in
his Misbehaviour, and make his Court thus awkardly to the Ladies, is somewhat
surprising. Is this the way to oblige the Women, to tell them they do more harm
than good in the World; that their Sex is a Public Nuisance, and an Error in
Creation?

I had charged our Modern Dramatists, and particularly Mr. Congreve with being
too free in exposing the Nobility under Characters of Lewdness and Contempt.
View. p. 12, 175
This I observed was no Custom of the Roman Stage; And that Plautus and
Terence, were much more courtly and reserved. This Remark he endeavors to
disprove from Persius and Iuvenal. Amend. p. 19.
As how? Did these Authors write either Comedy or Tragedy, or have their
Citations any Reference to the Drama? Not at all: Why then are they alleged?
To what End is a foreign Character and Business haled in to determine upon the
Stage? Well. But these Poets were Satyrists, and played their Invectives upon
Quality, and is not this somewhat to the purpose? But very little. For,

1 st. The Satyr of a Comedian and an other Poet, have a different Effect upon
Reputation. A Character of Disadvantage upon the Stage, makes a stronger
Impression than elsewhere. Reading is but Hearing at the second Hand: Now
Hearing at the best, is a more languid Conveyance than Sight. For as Horace
observes, Segnius irritant animios demissa per aurem, De. Art. Poet.

Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus. --
The Eye is much more affecting, and strikes deeper into the Memory than the
Ear. Besides, Upon the Stage both the Senses are in Conjunction. The Life of
the Action fortifies the Object, and awakens the Mind to take hold of it. Thus
a dramatick Abuse is rivetted in the Audience, a Jest is improved into an
Argument, and rallying grows up into Reason: Thus a Character of Scandal
becomes almost indelible, a Man goes for a Blockhead upon Content; and he
that is made a Fool in a Play, is often made one for his Lifetime. It Is true he
passes for such only amongst the prejudiced and unthinking; but these are no
inconsiderable Division of Mankind. For these Reasons, I humbly conceive the
Stage stands in need of a great deal of Discipline and Restraint: To give them
an unlimited Range, is in effect to make them Masters of all Moral
Distinctions, and to lay Honor and Religion at their Mercy. To show Greatness
ridiculous, is the way to lose the use, and abate the value of the Quality.
Things made little in jest, will soon be so in earnest: For Laughing and
Esteem, are seldom bestowed on the same Object.

2 ly. The Censures of Iuvenal and Persius, are very moderate, and remote in
Mr. Congreve's Citations. ^. ^^.
Iuvenal comes somewhat the closest. He Rallies the Flattery and Partiality of
the Times; and tells us that Gaming and Debauchery were Scandalous to little
People; But when these Vices dwelt in great Houses, they changed Complexion,
and grew Modish and Gentile. Thus we see the Poet keeps within the Terms of
Respect, slides over the Quality, and points rather upon the Fortune of the
Libertine. Now had Iuvenal written a Comedy, Double Dealer.
laid the Scene in his own Country, Created a Lord a Coxcomb, and shown him
such for three hours together, his case had been somewhat hard. But this branch
of Satyr was left for Mr. Congreve's refining; who to do him right, has treated
the Character with much Delicacy of fine Raillery, Amend. p. 27.
and Excellency of Good Manners, as he Phra^es it.

His Testimony from Rapin does not come up to his Point. View, and^. p. 175.
For as I observed, Moliere Ridicules no Quality higher than a Marquis: Now,
notwithstanding Mr. Dennis's Exclamation, a Marquis in France is much less than
a Marquis in England, or a Baron either. This I take it is pretty plain from
Moliere himself, for in his Play called, L'Impromtu de Versailles, Brecourt one
of the Minor Nobless, P. 22.29.
treats a Marquis with great Familiarity. He calls him Mon puavre Marquis, and
Ie te promet Marquis; now this way of speaking is not Manners, unless to
Equals, or Inferiors.

And in another Play, the Chevalier D^rante Converses with a Marquis upon Terms
of Equality, Critique de Escole des Femmes. p. 286, 287.
and Climene a Lady, salutes him only by the Title of Monsieur, whereas
Monseigneur belongs to the Quality of an English Lord. The Ord^rs of the Bishop
of Arras run in this Style; And so likewise does the Address of two French
Letters to the present Ld. Bishop of London, View, etc. p. 245.
printed at the end of a Book called the Vnreason^bleness of Separation.
Farther, Rapin seems to Cite L' Impromptu abovementioned. Here M^li^r^ informs
us, that whereas Comedy formerly played the Fool with none but Slaves and
^erving-men, now the Case was altered, and there was no sport without a
ridiculous Marquis. But as for making bold with People of Quality and the
Court, this is all added by Rapin. However, granting this, the meaning and
practice of Moliere, it is easily reconciled with the Sense I am contending for.
For a Person of Quality does not sound so high in French as in English; the
lower Nobless being often comprehended in this Distinction. Thus Moliere's
Brecourt is called a Man of Quality in the List of the Characters, L'Impromptu.
etc.
but in the Play he is only Chevalier, or a Knight, at the best. And in his
Play, called, p. 15.31. and alib.
L' Bourgeois Gentil-Homme, a Person of Quality often means no more than a
Gentleman. And to proceed, thus we may fairly understand the remainder of Rapin
in Mr. Congreve's Citation. He tells us the other Po^ts Played only upon Common
and Country Conversation, in their Comedies, Et Moliere a joue tout Paris et la
Cour. La Cour, yes; but not toute la Cour. Here Rapin opposes, La vie
Bourgeoise, Country Conversation, to the Court. Now un Bourgeoise signifies a
Person of the Third Est^te, Furetiere.
as distinguished from the Nobless, or Gentry. So that the meaning of the
Passage seems to be no more, than that Moliere took some of his Fools from the
Gentry, which was more than the Stage had done before. But after all, if Rapin
has mis-reported Moliere, and given him more Liberty than he took, it makes
nothing to Mr. Congreve's purpose; for the force of the Testimony does not lie
in what Rapin has said, but in what Moliere has written.

Mr. Congreve is so hardy as to affirm that I am in plain terms for having
Complements passed on Persons of Quality, and neither will allow their Follies,
nor their Vices to be exposed. This I confess is to be over-Ceremonious. But
the best on it is, there is nothing like it in the whole Book. The very place
quoted by Mr. Congrieve is a proof of the Calumny: The Passage stands in the
Form of a question thus. View, etc. p. 175.
And cannot they lash the Vice, without pointing upon the Quality? Which way of
speaking, supposes it a very practicable business; unless this Gentleman will
affirm that Folly, and Peerage, are Inseparable. I would gladly know what
over-straining of Ceremony, What Flatery is there in all this? I confess, I am
of Opinion that all Satyr ought to have regard to Quality and Condition, and
that Decency and Reproof should go together. I cannot think it any Excellence of
good Manners, to expose the Nobility in their Robes, to put Contempt among
their Titles, and to represent them in such a Manner, as if the Lord and the
Fool, like Horse and Man, in a Centaur, grew naturally together.

Double Dealer p. 79. Amend. p. 22.
Mr. Congreve proceeds in his Defense, and endeavors to wipe off the Imputation
of Smut and Pedantry from Ld. Touchwood; But here he Cites more than is
necessary: I had nothing to do with his Verses, as the Reader may easily
Imagine. 'Twas the Prose part of Ld. Touchwood to which I Objected. And that I
say still is foul in the Image, Embarrass'd with trifling Epithites, and ill
suited to the Character. But thus by producing the Innocent with the Guilty, he
hoped to make the Charge appear unreasonable.

We are now come to the Mourning-Bride, and Mr. Congreve seems so well assured
of the Decency of this Play, that he casts the whole Cause upon it. Amend. p.
23.
If there be Immodesty in this Tragedy (says he) I must confess my self
incapa^le of ever writing any thing with Modesty. It may be so: An ill Custom
is very hard to Conquer, with some People. But setting this matter aside; I
still charge Mr. Congreve with Immodesty; M. Bride, p. 36.
it is in Osmin's last Speech in the Page abovementioned. Indeed I did not Cite
the words because I am not willing to furnish the Reader with a Collection of
Indecencies, to show I design nothing but fair dealing: I always refer to the
Play, and generally to the Character, and Page, where such Entertainment is to
be met with. This is pressing the Charge as far as the Case will bear; But
because the Passages are unfit to be shown, Mr. Congreve and his Brethren deny
the Fact: A great Instance of their Modesty in another Sense. Is it Innocence
then to be guilty of things too bad to be named? What sort of Faults must those
be, which will not endure the Light, tho only to punish them.

This Gentleman quarrels with me because I would have had Almeria and Osmin
parted Civilly; Amend. p. 24.
as if it was not proper for Lovers to do so: Ibid.
But Civility, and Incivility have nothing to do with Passion* I deny that,
Incivility and Passion, ar^ often concerned together; And I suppose his
Amendments may make an Instance*

By Civilly, I mean^ only decently, as any one might easily imagine. And as for
Tenderness, when it grows Rank, and Nauseous, it is Rudeness, I take it.

Mr. Congreve would excuse Osm^n's Rant, by saying, That most of the Incidents
of the Poem of this Scene and the former, were laid to prepare for the Violence
of these Expressions. If it be so, I think the Play was not worth the Candle.
It Is much as Wife as it would be for a Man to make a long Preparation to get
out of his Wits, and quali^ie himself for Bedl^^. For nothing can be more
distracted than Osmin. He is for riving his clotted Hair, Smearing the Walls
with his Blood, and dashing his disfigured Face against something. M. Bride p.
36.
And a great deal more such stuff, as a Man may go to all the Mad-Houses in
Town, and scarcely hear of. Was it worth Osmin's while to be thus Crazy, and
are all Lovers to take a Pattern from this Hero? I am sorry Mr. Congreve was at
all this trouble for a Profane Allusion; but he is positive there is nothing
either of Profaneness or Immodesty in the Expression. Amend. P. 25.
With Immodesty I did not Charge it: But is there nothing of Profaneness in
bringing the most solemn Things in Religion upon the Stage; In making a Madman
Rave about Heaven, and in comparing the disappointments of Love, with
Damnation? The Lines shall appear once again.

O my Almeria;
What do the Damned endure but to despair;
But knowing Heaven to know it lost for ever!
Mr. Congreve does not know how these Verses are a Similitude drawn from the
Creed* P. 26.
I cannot help it. I thought the Eternal Punishment of the Damned had been part
of of the Creed. Athan^s. Creed.
I shall not untie such knots as these are for the future. He tells me I had but
an ill hold of Profaneness in his Play, and was reduced to catch at the Poetry;
And then makes a miserable jest about Corruption and Generation. Ibid.
I had but ill hold of Profaneness! As ill as 'twas, he has not yet wrested it
from me. 'Twas in my Power besides to have taken better, and since he complains
of gentle usage, I shall do it.

M. Bride p. 8, 9, 29, 41, 48.
In the first place, here is frequent Swearing by Heaven; I suppose the Poets
think this nothing, their Plays are so much landed with it. But our Savior has
given us an other Notion of this Liberty; He charges us not to Swear at all.
And tells us expressly, St. Mat. 5.34. xxiii. 22.
that He that swears by Heaven, swears by the Throne of God, and by him that
sits thereon.

To go on to another Branch of his Irreligion. The Scene of this Play lies in
Christendom, as is evident from the History, or Fable; P. 36.
and to mention nothing more from Osmin's Rant: Let us see then how Osmin
accosts Almeria, when he found her safe on Shore: Truly I think their Meeting
is as extravagant, as their Parting, tho Mr. Congreve will not allow it should be
so. Amend. P. 24.
The Ceremony runs thus.

Mourn. B. P 19.
Thou Excellence, thou Joy, thou Heaven of Love.
Thus the little successes of a pair of Lovers, are equaled with the Glories
of Heaven; And a Paultry Passion strained up to the Beatisick Vision. I say
Paltry, for so it is upon the Comparison. To go on. Almeria having somewhat of
the Playhouse Breeding, is resolved not to be wanting in the return of these
Civilities. She therefore makes him a Glorified Saint for the first piece of
Gratitude, and then gives him a sort of Power Paramount to Omnipotence, and
tells him that God Almighty could not make her happy without him.

I prayed to thee as to a Saint.
And thou have heard my Prayer, for thou art come P. 20.

To my Distress, to my Despair; which Heaven
Without thee could not Cure.
Almeria has another Flight, and shows the Rankness of her Wing every jot as
much as in the former.

It Is more than Recompense to see thy Face,
If Heaven is greater Joy, it is no Happiness.
This is Mrs. Brides Complement, which both for the Religion and Decency is
somewhat Extraordinary.

Manuel, a Christian Prince, upon the news of a Rival, Swaggers at a most
Impious rate, Paganism was never bolder with Idols, nor Jupiter more braved by
the Giants. It runs thus.

Better for him to tempt the Rage of Heaven, Mourn. B. P. 26.

And wrench the Bolt red hissing from the Hand
Of him that Thunders, than but think such Insolence,
It Is daring for a God.
And to make the matter worse, Mr. Congreve does not seem to think this
Atheistical Sally a fault in Manuel. Amend. P. 30.
He lets us know he has punished him for his Tyranny, but not a word of his
Profaneness.

Once more and I have done. Osmin's Caresses of Almeria are an Original in
their kind.

P. 35.
My all of Bliss, my everlasting Life,
Soul of my Soul, and End of all my Wishes.
Here Is Ceremony to Adoration; He makes her his Supreme Happiness, and gives
her Sovereign Worship: In short, This Respect is the Prerogative of Heaven.
It Is flaming Wickedness to speak it to any thing less than God Almighty: And to
set the Profaneness in the better Light, it runs all in devout Language, and
Christian Transport.

I come now to the Vindication of his Poetry: Where in the first place, he
Complains extremely; Amend. P. 27.
because I Misquoted Wasting Air, for Wasting Air. Now to my Mind, the
restoring of the Text is a very poor relief. For this later Epithete is
perfectly expletive and foreign to the matter in hand; there is neither
Antithesis nor Perspicuity in it. It neither clears the Sense, nor gives Spirit
to the Expression: Besides, the word is almost worn out of use, and were it
otherwise, 'twould rather belong to the Water; For to waft a Fleet of Merchants
is to Convoy them, but not, I suppose, through the Air: So that the Poet at
best, seems to have mistaken his Element. However, I ask his Pardon for
Transcribing an s, for and f, and expect he should ask mine; for putting
Superstition upon me, and commenting upon his own Blunder, Amend. P. 44.
when 'twas Printed Supposition in all the three Editions of my Book.

Mr. Congreve is now Cruizing for Reprisals, and bears down boldly upon a whole
Period. View, and p. 34. Amend. 29.
This litter of Epithets, etc. He says this Comparison of mine is handsome.
Why, so it may be for all his Disproof: Unless the standing of it in his Book
is enough to make it ridiculous. I confess there may be something in that, for
bad Company is often a disadvantage; besides, I was Illustrating his fine
Sentences, and showing his Buckram to the Reader: Upon this occasion a little
singularity in the Expression was not unseasonable: However I was sensible of
it, and introduced it with Qualifying, and Caution.

Mr. Congreve in defense of some Lines of his Cited by me, View, etc. P. 33,
34. Amend. P. 30, 31.
Answers, that the Diction of Poetry consists of Figures, and the frequent use
of Epithets. I agree with him, but then the Figures should be unforced, drawn
with Proportion, Aristotle's Rhet. L. 3. C. 2.
and allied to the matter in hand. The Epithets likewise must be Smooth,
Natural and Significant. But when they are lean, and remote from the business,
when they look hard and stiff, when they clog and incumber the Sense, they are
no great Ornaments. Whether Mr. Congreve's are of this later kind, or not, I
shall leave it to the Reader to determine!

After a hideous Collection of Profaneness, I expressed my self with somewhat
more than ordinary Concern, as was both very natural and proper; Amongst other
Expressions, I said, Nature made the Firment and rising of the Blood for such
Occasions. By Nature I grant him, I meant nothing less than God Almighty. That
our Mechanism was contrived so as to make our Passions serviceable; Our
Constitution adjusted to our Mind, and our Blood so disposed as to reinforce
the operations of our Reason. And pray what is there exceptionable in all this?
And where lies the Mistake, in Religion, or natural Philosophy? I can hardly
forgive my self the taking notice of such Objections as these. But Mr. Congreve
was resolved to make his Logic and Drollery of a piece, and I must be produced
in Ferment and Figure, as he calls it. But this Expression I shall leave with
the Reader, and give him some time to make Sense on it. Amend. P. 34.
He wonders after all, why I should use so much Vehemence? Vehemence against
what? Against Profaneness and Blasphemy. Are these then such harmle^s
Practices, that they must be gently treated? Is the Honor of God, the Interest
of Religion, and the Welfare of Humane Society so very insignificant? Are these
things beneath our Passions, and not worth the contending for? And will not they
justify a little warmth and expostulation in their behalf? Christianity is
Mild, it is true, but not in such cases as this. (...) 1. Pet. 2.2. Ibid.
The Cretians did not Droll upon their Bible like the Modern Poets, and yet St.
Paul bids Titus Rebuke them sharply. St. Peter likewise and St. Jude Lash the
Lewdness of the Gnostics with great Severity of Language. But he asks me why
all this Vehemence in a written Argument? as if Paper would bear Sense, no more
than 'twill Ink sometimes, or that People were obliged to write with greater
Negligence than they talk. This was a shrewd question! But questions are easily
started.

Mr. Congreve is now come forward to the Vindication of his Comedys. He
complains that in my Chapter of Profaneness, I have represented him falsely,
Amend. p. 36.
or by halves.

That I have quoted him falsely I deny; neither has he been able to prove it in
the least Instance: That he is sometimes represented imperfectly I grant. His
Immodesty forced me upon this Method. He is often too offensive to appear. To
have shown him to the Reader in this Condition, had neither been Civil, nor
Safe. Why then does he find fault with this Reservedness? Is he sorry his
Indecencies are concealed, and grown proud of his Misbehaviour?

We are now with the Old Batchelour, and Mr. Congreve pretends I Am unfair in
not citing Bellmour more at length. He says I conclude with a dash, as if both
the Sense and the Words of the whole Sentence were at an end. Just the
contrary. I made a dash -- to show there was something more spoken: But though
the Sentence was not at an end, the Sense was; as appears from the Words, the
Pointing, and the Capital Letter which follows. Let Us see a little farther, if
this Gentleman has received any harm. Bellmour is now talking to Vainlove.

Bell. Could thou be content to Marry Araminta?


Vainlove replies in a very pious question:

Vain. Could you be content to go to Heaven?


Bell. Hum, not immediately in my Conscience, not heartily: -- I Would do a little
more good in my generation first in order to deserve it.


He would do a little more good first, i. e. He would gladly be a Libertine
somewhat longer, and merit Heaven by a more finished course of Debauchery. Thus
we are taught to interpret Bellmour by the Old Batchelour and the Amendments,
etc. He is very lewd in the progress of the Play, Amend. p. 38.
and Mr. Congreve grants, he represents the Character of a wild Debauchee of
the Town; and that the expression is light, and suited accordingly.

This is a good hearty Confession, and a sufficient proof, that if I had quoted
more Words, I had quoted more Profaneness; and therefore Mr. Congreve has
reason to thank me for being Brief.

Mr. Congreve drops the Defense of Fondlewife, and makes Merry with the
Entertainment. Ibid. p. 39.
His excuse is, he was very much a Boy when this Comedy was written. Not
unlikely. He and his Muse might probably be Minors; but the Libertines there
are full grown. But why should the Man laugh at the Mischief of the Boy, why
should he publish the Disorders of his Nonage? and make them his own by an
after Approbation? He wrote it, it seems, to amuse himself in a slow Recovery
from a Fit of Sickness. Ibid.
What his Disease was I am not to enquire; but it must be a very ill one, to be
worse than the Remedy. The Writing of that Play is a very dangerous Amusement
either for Sickness, or Health, or I Am much mistaken.

He pleads Guilty to the next Article of Impeachment; p. 40.
but then he is somewhat profane in his very Acknowledgment, and cannot find in
his heart to give up an old fault, without making a new one.

His next Attempt is to bring off Bellmour, who Kisses the Strumpet Laetitia,
and tells her, Eternity was in that Moment. Mr. Congreve's Answer is very
surprising He tells us, To say Eternity is in a Moment, is neither good nor
bad, for it is stark Nonsense. P. 40, 41.


By his favor, the matter is quite otherwise. If Mr. Congreve will have
patience, he shall speak Nonsense by and by; and to make it the less a fault,
he shall do it unwillingly.

Whether this Gentleman borrowed this Sentence, or made it, I cannot tell; but
there is just such another in Love Triumphant; where upon such an occasion, p.
34.
Alphonso tells Victoria: That Moment were Eternity in little.

Now if Mr. Congreve has not a mind to speak Sense, I hope Mr. Dryden may have
leave to do so. However, we'll prove our Right, and not stand to his Courtesy.
Now to say of an Advantage that Eternity was in that Moment, is by common
Interpretation meant, the Pleasure of Eternity. The Satisfaction is supposed to
be so great, that what is lost in the Duration, is made up in the Quality. This
in the present Application is hideously Profane; but the sense and spirit of
the Fxpression is intelligible enough.

Mr. Congreve in the close of this Paragragh is somewhat extraordinary. He
pronounces the Citation stark Nonsense, and frankly declares, he had not cared
though I had discovered it. p. 41.
I think I have discovered it somewhat worse. However, I wonder at his being so
Resigned. What not care to have stark Nonsense found upon him; Not in a Printed
Play, and in the Mouth of the fine Gentleman! This is strange indeed, and I
could hardly believe it at first Sight: But the more I read of his Amendments,
etc. the better I am assured of the Sincerity of his Confession.

Laetitia has another lewd and very profane Sentence given her, O. Batch. p.
39. View, etc. p. 63.
which I had taken notice of. To this Mr. Congreve answers, It Is the expression
of a wanton and vicious Character, and that she is discovered in her Lewdness.
Amend. p. 41.
I reply in the first place, That my disproof of his second Postulate, or
Proposition, cuts off his retreat to this excuse.

Secondly. She is not discovered in her Lewdness, nor makes a dishonorable
Exit; and Mr. Congreve contradicts his own Play by affirming the contrary. For
there is a Color found out which passes upon the Credulity of Fondlewife, who
declares himself satisfied with her Innocence. Upon which Bellmour concludes
the Fourth Act thus: O. Batch. p. 39, 40.
No Husband by his Wife can be deceived,
She still is Virtuous, if she is so believed.


Sharper says to Vainlove, I have been a kind of Godfather to you yonder, I
have promised and vowed some things in your Name, which I think you are bound
to perform. Mr. Congreve's answer is. Old Batch. p. 49.
That he meant no ill by this Allegory, nor perceives any in it now. Amend. p.
42.
No ill in it, that is Strange! Not in applying the solemn Engagements of Baptism
to a ridiculous Subject, not in Burlesquing the Church Catechism? If these are
no ill Things, there is no harm in Profaneness; and then I confess he has
justified himself to purpose.

Before we part with the Old Batchelour, O. Batch. p. 48.
I Will give Mr. Congreve another Citation unmention'd before.

Heartwell speaking of Marriage, cries out, O cursed State! How wide we err
When apprehensive of the Load of Life
-- We hope to find
That help which Nature meant in Womankind
It seems then Nature was as much mistaken in the provision, as Men are in the
Experiment. Yes, for as the Poet goes on: And Adam sure would with more ease
abide
The Bone when broken, Ib. p. 48.
than when made a Bride.
This is an admirable Comment on the Old and New Testament, and the Office of
Matrimony in the Common Prayer. The Thought looks like an Improvem^nt of a Line
in Absalom and Achitophel: where the subject of the Poem is dated from the
times of Polygamy, Absal. and Achit. p. 1.
E're one to one was cursedly Confined.



The Provoked Wife has a Sentence not much short of this.

p. 27.
Sure (says Sir John Brute) If Woman had been ready Created, the Devil instead
of being kicked down into Hell, had been Married.

We are now with the Double Dealer; where, View, etc. p. 64.
as I remarked, Lady Plyant cries out Jesus, and talks Smut in the same
Sentence. Here again he pleads Guilty: He had condemned it long since, and
resolved to strike it out in the next Impression. Amend. p. 42.
Well! Repentance is a very commendable thing, and I heartily wish Mr. Congreve
may go Through with it. But I Am afraid this good Resolution of his went off in
a little time: My reason is, because the Double Dealer was published in 1694.
and stands still in the First Edition; But the Old Batchelour has been
Reprinted long since, the Sixth Impression of this Play bearing date 1697. And
yet here in this last Edition we have the exclamation Jesus, used in a jesting
way, Old Batch. p. 48.
by the fulsome Belinda. If Mr. Congreve was displeased with the Profaneness in
his Double Dealer, why did he not expunge it in his Old Batchelour? He cannot
deny but that Opportunity presented fair a great while together. But here
instead of asking Pardon of God and the World, and showing himself concerned
for so scandalous an Expression, He tells you a pleasant Story (as he fancies)
of a Letter of Advice from an Old Gentlewoman, and a Widow, who as she said,
was very well to pass. I suppose she subscribed her self Old Gentlewoman, as
Widows generally do, otherwise, as far as appears, he had been at a loss for
her Age. But to return. Either this Story is pretended or real. If it is a
feigned case, it is nothing to his point. If it is matter of Fact, it makes
against him* For then he makes a Jest of his own Reformation, Drolls upon good
Counsel, and returns the Gentlewoman an Affront in Public, for her Charitable
Admonitions in Private. As for the Smut, he tells me, if there is any, Amend.
p. 43.
I may even take it for my pains. Very generously argued! Since he is thus
Noble, I Will omit the Scrutiny, and only refer to the Page. Double D. p. 34


And here the Reader may please to take notice, that the word Jesus is thrice
made bold with, in despite of Religion and the Statute 3 Iac. 1. cap. 21. D.
Dealer. p. 7, 16, 78.


Sir Paul Plyant among the rest of his Follies, is mighty fond of the word
Providence, and repeats it on several occasions. From hence I drew this
natural, or rather necessary Inference; That the meaning was to show, that
Sense and Religion agreed ill together, and that none but Fools were fit to
talk piously. Mr. Congreve instead of defending himself, endeavors to make me
speak Nonsense, but that lies all in his own misquotation; as I have shown
already.

He pretends there is no profane Allusion in his little Drollery about Iehu's
being a Hackney Coachman; And seems confident no other Text can be burlesqu'd
excepting Lady Froth's Poem. Amend. p. 44, 45.
He says Lady Froth calls the Coachman our Jehu, and why might he not have that
as well as any Jewish or Christian Name? I Will tell him for once. 'Twas never
the Custom of Jews or Christians to take any Scripture Names from exceptionable
Persons. Neither Jeroboam nor Iehu, nor many others, were Religious enough for
this purpose. No Man I believe ever heard of more than two Iehu's, one in the
Kings, 2 Kings 9.20.
and the other in the Double Dealer. That Prince in the Kings is said to drive
his Chariot furiously. From hence the Coachman's Character was Equipped. Both
the Name and the Office, have a plain reference to the Holy Text. Farther, Lady
Froth does not call her Coachman by any Name in her Poem; by consequence the
Asterism for direction, can never lead us to the meaning of her Verses. For if
Iehu is unmention'd in the Poetic Text, how can the Lady be explained by his
Standing in the Margin? In short, the worthy Mystery cannot be cleared up
without recourse to the Scriptures; And therefore without doubt we are much
obliged to the Poet for this necessity. Thus it is plain the Bible is made Bold
with, and the Turn of his expression seems to reach the Commentators too.
However, if his meaning is overstrain'd on this later particular, it will do
him very little Service; and I ask his excuse. I Am sorry to spend so many words
about such Stuff as this is; but Mr. Congreve must have Justice done him.

Sir Paul Plyant will afford us something worse than the former; This Wittoll
of the Poet's making, tells his Lady he finds Passion coming upon him by
Inspiration. This I had reason to Charge upon Mr. Congreve as a very profane
Expression: In answer to this, He first Rails a Sentence or two in his little
way, and then very Magisterially tells us, Amend. P. 45.
That the word Inspiration, when it has Divine prefixed to it, bears a
particular and known signification: But otherwise to inspire is no more than to
Breath into; and a Trumpet, etc. may be said without profaneness to deliver a
Musical Sound by the help of Inspiration. By his favor, All People that talk
English know, that Inspiration, when it stands without Epithets and Addition,
is always taken in a Religious signification. Inspiration, and to be Inspired,
have a solemn and august meaning in Christianity. These words imply Divine
Impulse, and supernatural Assistance, and are opposed to suggestion of Fancy,
and humane Reasoning. To speak by Inspiration is to speak by the Holy Ghost, as
every Body can tell him: To be saved and Salvation, signified at first no more
than Safety, and Escape: But if a Man should say, As he hoped to saved, and
explain himself, that he intended no more, then that he hoped to get Cover
before a Shower reached him; would he not be looked upon as impertinently
profane? If he called a lucky Leap of a Ditch Salvation, and pretended to
justify himself, that the word originally imports no more than Common
Deliverance, what Place would he be thought fit for? Thus when Words are made
Enclosure, when they are restrained by Common Usage, and tied up to a
particular Sense: In this Case, to run up to Etymology, and Construe them by
Dictionary and Praeposition, is wretchedly Ridiculous and Pedantick. De Art.
Poet.
Horace can tell him, That Custom overrules Syllables, and gives Law to
Language. Quem penes arbitrium est, and jus and norma loquendi.

Mr. Congreve perceiving himself pressed retires with all Speed to his Fourth
Proposition. But that I have disabled already. If he is poisoned with his
Profaneness, and finds himself Sick, he must take what follows; for his
Antidote is gone. To return to Sir Paul.

I find Passion (says he) coming upon me by Inspiration, D. D^aler p. 19.
and I cannot submit as formerly.

You see what an admirable reason he urges in Defense of his Folly, from the
extraordinary Circumstances of it! No Prophet could have justified his
Resentments from a higher pretense.

The fine Lady Cynthia out of her pious Education acquaints us, That though
Marriage makes Man and Wife one Flesh, it leaves them still two Fools. But the
little word STILL is left out in the Quotation; which like the Fly on the
Coach-Wheel, raises a mighty Dust. I grant I have by Chance omitted the word
STILL; and if he had done so too, the Sense had been perfectly the same, only
better expressed. For Still is plainly useless, and comprehended in the Verb
Leaves. For if Marriage leaves 'em two Fools, they are Fools after Marriage,
and then they are Fools Still, I think; Nothing can be clearer than this. But
besides, Cynthia her self will not allow of Mr. Congreve's excuse. For after she
has delivered that remarkable Sentence of leaving 'em two Fools, etc. Mellifont
answers, That Is only when two Fools meet, which is exactly Mr. Congreve in his
Amendments. P. 47.
This Cynthia denies to be her meaning. Cynth. Nay (says she) I have known two
Wits meet, and by the opposition of their Wits render themselves as ridiculous
as Fools. And therefore after she has given Matrimony an odd Name, she advises
him to Court no farther, D. Dealer. p. 18.
to draw Stakes, and give over in time. So that besides Burlesquing the Bible,
the Satyr is pointed against Marriage. And the Folly is made to lie in the
State, as well as in the Persons. Upon the whole, we see the Double Dealer, and
the Amendments cannot agree; and thus two Blemishes, as well as two Beauties,
are sometimes unlike to each other. Mr. Congreve says, Ben. Johnson is much
bolder in the first Scene of his Bartholomew Fair. Suppose all that. Is it an
excuse to follow an ill Example, and continue an Atheistical practice? I
thought Mr. Congreve in his penetration might have seen through this Question.
Ben. Johnson (as he goes on) makes Littlewit say, Amend. P. 47.
Man and Wife make one Fool. I h^ve said nothing comparable to that. Nothing
comparable! Truly in the usual sense of that Phrase, Mr. Congreve, it is
possible, has said nothing comparable to Ben. Johnson, nor it may be never
will: But in his new Propriety he has said something more than comparable, that
is a great deal worse. For though Littlewit's Allusion is profane, the words of
the Bible are spared. He does not Droll directly upon Genesis, or St. Matthew;
Upon God the Son, or God the Holy Ghost: Whereas Mr. Congreve has done that
which amounts to both. And since he endeavors to excuse himself upon the
Authority of Ben. Johnson, I shall just mention what Thoughts this Poet had of
his profane Liberties, at a time when we have reason to believe him most in
earnest. Now Mr. Wood reports from the Testimony of a great Prelate then
present. That when Ben. Johnson was in his last Sickness, Athen Oxoniens. Vol.
1. p. 519.
he was often heard to repent of his profaning the Scriptures in his Plays, and
that with Horror.

Now as far as I can perceive, the Smut and Profaneness of Mr. Congreve's Four
Plays out-swell the Bulk of Ben. Iohnson's Folio. I heartily wish this Relation
may be serviceable to Mr. Congreve, and that as his Faults are greater, his
Repentance may come sooner.

S. Ambro.
Quem secutus es peccantem, sequere poenitentem.

The Double Dealer is now done with, and Mr. Congreve concludes his Vindication
in his usual Strain of Triumph and Assurance.

Love for Love comes at last upon the Board. In this Play I blamed him for
making a Martyr of a Whoremaster: Upon this, he flies immediately for Succor
to Scapula, and the Greek Grammar. He very learnedly tells us, that Martyr is a
Greek word, and signifies in plain English no more than a Witness. Right! these
two words are the same; and when a Cause comes on in Westminster Hall, the
Martyrs are called immediately! But Martyr is but bare Witness in the Greek.
Not always: Christian Writers often use it in a sense appropriated. And were it
otherwise, there is no arguing from one Language to another. Tyrant was once an
Honorable Name in Greek, but always a Reproach in English. But to dilate upon
these Cavils, is throwing away time. If the Reader desires more, he may please
to look back on my Answer to his Objection about Inspiration.

This Poet's way of understanding English, puts me in mind of a late Misfortune
which happened to a Country Apothecary. The Dr. had prescribed a Lady Physic
to be taken in something Liquid, which the Bill according to Custom called a
Vehicle. The Apothecary being at a Stand about the word, applies, as Mr.
Congreve might have done, to Littleton's Dictionary. And there he finds
Vehiculum signified several considerable Things. He makes up the Bill, and away
he goes to the Lady, where upon the Question, how the Physic was to be taken?
He answers very innocently; Madam, says he, You may take it in a Cart, or a
Wagon, but not to give your Ladyship too much trouble, I think a Wheelbarrow
may do; for the word Vehicle in the Bill, will carry that sense. In short, This
Direction was complied with, and the Footman drove the Wheelbarrow about the
Chamber. To return to Mr. Congreve. I had said that this Libertine Application
of his, was dignifying Adultery with the Style of Martyrdom; Ibid.
As if (says Mr. Congreve) any word could dignifie Vice. And pray why not? Does
not the Varnish hide the Coarseness underneath, and the Pill go down the better
for the Guilding? Whether he knows it or not, there is a great deal of Charm and
Imposture in Words; and an ill practice is often complied with upon the
Strength of a Fashionable Name.

P. 49.
He asks, who told me Jeremy Fetch was bred at the University? Why Jeremy says
so himself pretty plainly, and Tattle says so, and I suppose Mr. Congreve says
as much as that comes to in his Reflection immediately following. Love for L.
p. 75. Amend. p. 50.
But this notable question was put to introduce another Business of greater
Consequence. For upon this occasion, out of his excellence of good Manners, he
is pleased to observe, That I should not have been suspected of an University
Education any more than his Jeremy in the Play, if I had not Printed M. A. on
the Title Page. Here the Poor Man has shown his Will, and his Weakness
sufficiently! I Am almost sorry it is so low with him. When a Poet is so
extremely well inclined to be Witty, it is pity he has no more in his power. Mr.
Congreve goes on Manfully in his Defense and says, Amend. p. 50.
For the word Whoreson, I had it from Shakespeare and Johnson. Not unlikely.
People are apt to learn what they should not. Mr. Congreve's Memory, or his
Invention, is very considerable this way. Indeed one would almost think by his
Writings, that he had digested ill Language into a Common Place. But it was not
only Whoreson, but Ieremy's saying He was Born with Whoreson Appetites, which I
complained of; and which I take to be Blaspheming the Creation.

He pretends I have vvrong'd him strangely in a Rant of Sir Sampson's: And
would make the Reader believe I charge him literally with Paraphrasing the 139
th Psalm. Amend. p. 51.
I Am sorry I Am forced to explain my self in so clear a case.

We may observe then, that the Psalmist in Contemplation of the astonishing
Beauty and Serviceableness of Humane Bodies, breaks out in a Rapture of
Gratitude, I will give thanks unto thee, Psalm. 139. v. 13.
for I am fearfully and wonderfully made, mavelous are thy works, and that my
Soul knows right well. Let us now hear Sir Sampson. This Gentleman after having
railed a Lecture over Ieremy's Body, for being born with Necessities too big
for his Condition; he cries, These things are unacountable, and unreasonable;
Love for L. P. 25.
Why was not I a Bear? -- Nature has been provident only to Bears and Spiders:
Thus we see what a Harmony of Thought there is between David and our Author.
The one Adores while the other Reproaches. The one Admires, the other
Burlesques the wonders of Providence. And this was all the Paraphrasing I
meant, as any one might easily Imagine.

The Dialogue of Scandal and Foresight lies next in our way, P. 44.
I shall once more Transcribe it from Love for Love.

Fore. Alas Mr. Scandal, Humanum est errare.


Scand. You say true, Man will err; mere Man will err -- but you are something
more -- There have been wise Men, but they were such as you -- Men who
consulted the Stars, and were observers of Omens -- Solomon was wise, but ho^?
By his Judgment in Astrology, -- So says Pineda in his Third Book and eighth
Chap. But (says Mr. Congreve) the Quotation of the Authority is omitted by Mr.
Collier, either because he would represent it as my own Observation to ridicule
the Wisdom of Solomon or else because he was indeed Ignorant that it belonged
to any body else. Amend. p. 52.
To this I answer,

1. That Mr. Congreve yields Solomon's Wisdom ridiculed by this Observation,
therefore by his own confession, if it is none of his Authors, he must Answer
for it himself. Now Pineda gives us a quite different account of the Cause of
Solomon's Wisdom, and which is perfectly inconsistent with Congreve's Banter.
Pineda affirms that Solomon's Wisdom was given him by God in a supernatural
Dream, 1. Kings 3. 5, 12.
mentioned in Scripture. And that after the Dream, Pined. Lib. 3. Cap. 8. P.
142, 147. Ed. Mogunt.
he found an unsual Light in his Understanding; his Ideas were brightened, and
the extent of his Knowledge strangly enlarged. It Is true, Pineda believed that
Solomon understood Astronomy in Perfection, Lib. 3. C. 18.
and that he had skill in Prognostics which he calls Astronomia judiciaria. He
continues, that he could in a great measure reach the Inclinations and
Reasonings of Men, Ibid.
where they did not depend purely upon choice, and the turn of the Will. But
then he does not say that Solomon's Skill in Prognostics was that which made
him wise. No: This Tallent was only a Branch, but not the Cause of his Wisdom.
For as Pineda speaks elsewhere, Lib. 3 C. 10.
Solomon had a Universal Knowledge of Nature, but then this Excellency was no
result of Natural parts, or Humane Industry; 'Twas an immediate Bounty from
Heaven; And both the Thing, and the Conveyance, were extraordinary.

Mr. Congreve agrees with Pineda at least in a jesting way, Solomon was wise,
but how? By his Judgment in Astrology. That is, his distinguishing Seize
were gained this way. There was nothing in the case, but that he had looked
into a Star somewhat farther than other people: He Learned his Wisdom it seems
from the Caldeans, or Egyptians, or from some such Book as Lillies Almanac.
This is Scandal's Solution of the Mystery; and the best that I can make on it.
For it is one thing to say that a Man is wise by Astrology, and another that
Astrology or Astronomy was only a part of his Wisdom. The one Implies the
Cause, and the other but a Branch of the Effect. The one excludes the Miracle,
and the other affirms it. Upon the whole matter, Mr. Congreve, and Pineda, are
not to be reconciled, so that by his own confession he has ridiculed the Wisdom
of Solomon, and falsified his Author into the Bargain.

2 ly. Supposing Pineda had been fairly reported by Mr. Congreve, the Poet had
been much to blame; For then the Case had stood thus; Pineda as Mr. Congreve
observes had ridiculed Solomon, and himself had done no less, by Citing him
without Censure, and upon a Drolling Occasion. For this reason I waved the
consulting of Pineda, as well knowing that should the Testimony have been
right, the Play was certainly in the wrong. Besides, it is somewhat to be
suspected Mr. Congreve never saw Pineda; My reason is, because he falls twice
into the same Mistake, he Quotes the Eighteenth Chapter for the Eighth, Lov.
for L. P. 44. Amend. p. 52.
and to make it appear the more gross, it is done in words of Length, and not in
Figures. I hope for the future Mr. Congreve wont bring in Solomon to divert the
Playhouse, nor compare him with Fools and Fortunetellers.

Scandal's telling Foresight he was more than mere Man, and secure from Mistake
upon that Score, is likewise a profane expression. To affirm this of any
person, is as much as to say, he is either our Savior, or a Prophet, or under
some Miraculous Influence.

Scandal goes on with Foresight, and says the Wise Men of the East owed their
Instruction to a Star, Lov for L. P 44.
which is rightly observed by Gregory the Great in favor of Astrology.

Mr. Congreve vindicates this passage by saying, that Scandal Banters
Foresight, but not the Audience. Not Banter the Audience! He Affronts the
Audience I Am sure, if they have any Christianity in them, by drolling upon a
Miracle at our Savior's Birth: He banters St. Matthew too, who has recorded
the Miracle, and Gregory the Great, who discourses upon it.

Mr. Congreve is pleased to say that I am very angry that Sir Sampson has not
another Name, Amend. 54.
because Sampson is a Name in the Old Testament. This is false in every
sylable, as the Reader may see by consulting my Book. Judges 16.30. Love for
Love, p. 74. Ed. 3 d.
But this I say, that Mr. Congreve has burlesqu'd the History of Sampson, and
wrested the Scripture into Smut.

There are two other profane Passages Censured by me in the same Page: These he
leaves as it were to shift for themselves, and has not as yet, made them worse
by defending them: Excepting that he comes up with his old Cavil about the Word
Martyr, which I have answered already.

The next Place Mr. Congreve leads us to is Bedlam: And here he gives us three
Reasons for Valentine's pretended Madness. The two later are somewhat
extraordinary. He makes him Mad it seems for a variation of the Character.
Amend. P. 55.
A shrewd Contrivance, to put a Man out of his Wits for the sake of Variety?
For without doubt, Raving and Incoherence are wonderfully taking. Amend. P. 41.
I suppose Mr. Congreve made Bellmour talk Nonsense for this wise reason. For
it is a dull thing for a Man to be always tied up to Sense, Amend. p. 56.
and confined to his Understanding. His third reason for taking away Reason, is
because Madness gives a liberty to Satyr, and authorizes a Bluntness, etc.
which would otherwise have been a Breach of Manners in the Character. That is,
it gives Valentine a Commission to talk Smut, Love for Love, p. 57, 58, 63.
and abuse his Father. But Mr. Congreve needed not to have given himself this
trouble about Valentine; For Valentine when he was in his Wits, and under the
Character of a fine Gentleman, Love for L. p* 7.23, 24, 83. Ed. 3d.
had Breeding enough to be Smutty, and Undutiful. Mr. Congreve would persuade
the Reader that I interpret him with too much Rigor, for making Valentine in
his Lunacy say, I am Truth, etc. If this Point needs any farther Disputing, we
may take notice that our Blessed Savior mentions the word Truth in a solemn
and peculiar manner. Ioh. 4.6, 17, viii. 32 xvii. 17, 18 xviii. 18, 31.
He sometimes applies it to Himself, sometimes to the Holy Ghost, and sometimes
to the Revelation of the Gospel. In short, it is as it were appropriated to the
greatest Persons, and Things, marked as the Prerogative of God; and used in a
sense of Emphasis and Distinction. Let us compare St. John, and Mr. Congreve a
little, and then we may easily judge where the Fault lies.

St. Thomas answers our Blessed Savior, Lord we know now not whither thou
go, and how can we know the way? Joh. 14.6.
Jesus says unto him, I am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life. Sir Sampson
is at a loss, Swears, and cries out, I know not which way to go. Love for L p.
57. Ed. 3
Valentine enquires, Who Is that, that is out of his Way? I am Truth, and can set
him right.

Our Savior assures his Disciples, That he will send them the Comforter. And
that when he the Spirit of Truth is come, Joh. 16.13
he will guide you into all Truth, and he will show you things to come.

The execrable Valentine says, Interrupt me not -- I Will whisper Prediction to
thee, and thou shall Prophecy. P. 62.55. L. for Lo. 2d. and 3d.
I am Truth, and can teach thy Tongue a new Trick: I am Truth, and come to give
the World the Lie.

And is not this horrible Stuff? What can be more intolerable Boldness, than
thus to usurp the Regal Sitile, to prostitute the Language of Heaven, and apply
it to Drollery and Distraction?

Mr. Congreve is advanced to my 3 d Chapter, concerning the Abuse of the
Clergy. As for the Dissenting Ministers, Amend. p. 57.
he says I charge him with nothing more than Setter's, procuring their Habit
for Bellmour. Under favor, this is a great Mistake. The Pimp reads a Lecture
of Abuse upon the Habit, View, etc. p. 102. Old Batch. p. 19, 20.
exposes Spintext from Head to Foot, makes him both a Knave and a Libertine,
and his Wife a Whore into the bargain. The View, View etc. p. 102.
etc. has remarked, that Barnaby calls another of that Character Mr. Prig. He
does so. And Fondlewife represents him lewd in a luscious Description. Amend.
P. 58.
Mr. Congreve replies, What if his Name were Mr. Prig, or what if it were not?
Now it is possible he will not like it, if I don't consider these weighty
Questions. I say then, If his Name was so, he has misbehaved himself by putting
him in his Play. If 'twere not so, He has used the Dissenting Ministers ill, by
representing one of their Order in a contemptuous Manner. For as he himself
confesses, Amend. p. 76.
a Mr. Prig, and a Mr. Smirk, are Names implying Characters worthy of Aversion
and Contempt. Now for a Man not to understand his own ill Language, and
contradict himself in a few Pages, is, in his own decent expression, furiously
simple.

Mr. Congreve pretends that a Reflection on a Lord's Chaplain is no Reflection
on a Parson of the Church of England. That Is somewhat strange. The Roman
Catholic Lords have no Chaplains; the Law does not allow it. And as for the
Dissenters, there are very few Lords of their Persuasion. I desire therefore to
know upon what Party the Abuse must stick? In earnest, I Am almost tired with
answering these things. To strike the Air, does but make a Man's Arm ache.

There is a pretty long Instance produced from the Double Dealer, to show the
Misbehaviour of the Stage toward the Clergy; these Passages he leaves to take
their Fortune; for they have nothing in them it seems, p* 59.
which needs a Defense. This is a discreet way of answering; and I think, if he
had made more use on it, it might have done as well.

To show the Unreasonableness of the Stage in representing the Clergy under
Characters of Disadvantage and Contempt, I endeavored to vindicate the
Reputation of that Order from three Topics. 1 st. From their Relation to the
Deity. 2 ly. From the Importance of their Office. 3 ly. Because they had
general Custom, and Prescription for their Privilege.


Under the First Head, I had said that the Credit of the Service always rises
in Proportion to the Quality and Greatness of the Master. View* etc. p. 127.
This Position, he says, is sophistical; and yet he is so Civil as to grant it
in the next Line but one. Amend. P. 61.
However, he makes a Stand at the Inference, Ibid.
and asserts, That though the Credit of the Service rises in proportion to the
Quality of the Master, yet the Credit of the Servant, does not rise in
proportion to the Credit of the Service. Not rise in proportion to the Credit
of the Service; that is strange! I thought Office and Authority had been a just
ground for Regard; and that Honorable Charges had made Honorable Men. And if
so, I suppose the Esteem of the Person must improve with the Credit of the
Employment. I would gladly know in what Circumstance the Dignity of an
Ambassador consists? Does it not lie in his Commission and Credentials, in the
Advantage and Significancy of his Character? What makes such a Person treated
with greater Regard, than a Factor, or private Agent? Is it not the Honor of
the Representation, and the Weight of the Business? Now he that executes for
another, or represents him by way of Authority, is without doubt in his
Service: From whence it follows, That if the Credit of the Servant rises by the
Quality of the Business, and Authority, it must by consequence rise in
proportion to the Credit of the Service; for these are only different words to
signify the same thing: Amend. p. 61.
Mr. Congreve's saying, That an ill Servant both discredits his Service, and is
discredited by it; is partly foreign, and partly false. To say he is
discredited by it, is untrue. For it is the Misbehaviour, not the Office, which
gives the Discredit. And then to say that an ill Servant discredits his
Service, is nothing to his point. For the purpose. Suppose the Ministers of
State or Justice, in any Government, should fail in their Conduct: Are they
presently to be insulted by the Common People, exposed in the Badges of their
Character, and made the Diversion of the Town? What if a Man is an ill Servant,
his Commission ought to be his protection from private Indignities. As for his
Mismanaging, he must account to his Master; Equals or Inferiors, have nothing
to do to punish. Amend. p. 62.
Mr. Congreve adds, that if a Servant is punished by the Law, the Honor of the
Service is not by that means violated. As much Law as he pleases; Let Justice
have its Course, and I Am contented. But what is this to the Stage? Have they a
Patent of Jurisdiction over the Clergy? Are they authorized to pronounce upon
their Faults, and their Punishment? To give them little Behavior, and
contemptuous Usage; To make them Fools, and then treat them as such?

But now it is Mr. Congreve's turn to ask Questions: Amend. p. 63.
He would know of me, Whether a Man after he has received Holy Orders, is
become incapable of either playing the Knave or the Fool? Why truly,
considering he has the same Humane Nature with a Poet, I cannot think him
utterly incapable of either. And now I may have answered his question as
civilly as he asked it.

But if a Clergyman plays the Fool, Ibid.
he is equally with a Lay-Fool, the subject of Laughter and Contempt. Not in
the same way neither. Circumstances alter any Case. Different Things require
different Considerations. There are Laws, Discipline, and Ordinaries, to take
care of greater Miscarriages in the Church. And as for lesser Misfortunes, they
should rather be lamented, than exposed. The Clergy are a sort of Spiritual
Parents. St. Paul's reasoning supposes it: And the Church Catechism gives them
an inference of Privilege from the Fifth Commandment. To banter a Relation of
this kind, has neither Decency, nor Religion in it. And we know Ham got no
Blessing by his Discovery. To stigmatize a solemn Character, to play the
Buffoon in a Gown and Cassock, and show the Church for a Monster, is, one would
think, an odd diversion in Christendom. The Heathens treated the Primitive
Christians much at this rate: They wrapped them in Bear-skins, and then set the
Dogs on them.

But Mr. Congreve urges, That by improper Behavior the Man becomes alienated
from the Priest, Ibid.
and so the Folly is exposed, not the Function. For example, if the Man be
knocked on the Head, the Priest is not a jot the worse for it. This is much like
the old Distinction of Politic, and Personal Capacity, applied to another
Case. To give this Gentleman an Answer more at large, he may please to take
notice:

1 st. Though the Function and the Person are separable in Notion, they are
joined in Life and Business. It Is true, the Office and the Person are two
Things; but yet it is the Person which executes the Office: This makes them
share a disadvantage in Common; and a Censure frequently slides from the one to
the other. If you make the Man a Knave, the Priest must suffer under the
Imputation: And a Fool in his Person, will never be thought discreet in his
Function. Upon this account Persons in Authority, whether Spiritual or Civil,
ought to be privileged from Abuse. To make the Ministers of Church or State,
the subject of Laughter and Contempt, disables their Authority, and renders
their Commission insignificant. The Heathen Dramatists seem sensible of this
reasoning, See View, p. 122.
and practice accordingly.

2 ly. If the Poets design was no more than to expose and reprehend Folly and
Vice in general, why are not the Failings of the Clergy represented in a
Lay-Appearance? Why must the Satyr be pointed at the Coat, and run out into
Reference and Distinction? Why must the Profession be dressed up, and the Folly
keep all within the Function? Is not this plainly to confound the Order and the
Miscarriage, to go off from the Man to the Priest, and render them both
ridiculous?

3 ly. Employments are oftentimes a shelter to Persons; and Characters a
Protection from Insult: Public Reason will not endure Authority to be exposed,
or the Magistrates to be made a May Game. To talk in Mr. Congreve's Language, a
Lay-Fool is not always to be saluted by his Folly. This would be great rudeness
in Conversation; and the Government might suffer by it. Condition is a Cover
for Failings. And Authority must not be a Jest. In this case a Man should be
viewed on the side of Advantage, and treated by his best Distinction. Now if we
consider the Author, and the Ends of Church Authority, we shall find it
deserves a Guard, no less than that of the State.

The Church-Article quoted by Mr. Congreve, does him no Service. If it has any
reference to the matter in hand, it makes against him. The Article affirms,
That Evil Ministers Act by Christ's Authority and Commission; That the Word and
Sacraments are significant and effectual in their Hands; and that the
Indisposition of the Agent, does not weaken the Institution. Now since even a
vicious Priest represents our Savior, since he is God's Ambassador, and is a
Conveyance of the Blessings of Heaven: These Credentials, these Benefits, one
would think, might guard him from Contempt, and make his Character inviolable.
It Is true, the Article says, They may be accused, and being found guilty, by
just Judgment deposed. But what of all this? Are the Poets their Judges? And is
the Stage grown Doctors Commons, Amend. p. 67.
or Westminster Hall? Well: But the Article supposes a Distinction between the
Man, and the Priest. Yes: And it supposes too, that the Man ought to fare the
better for this double Capacity. Amend. p. 64.
Mr. Congreve in citing this Quotation, has mistaken the Chronology, and
confounded the Articles and Canons, but this I shall pass over.

But Mr. Congreve falls into a worse Mistake than the former. He makes St.
Cyprian affirm that the Validity of the Sacraments depends on the Probity of
the Priest, and that the Article was partly established to take off the
Authority of this Father. Ib. p 66.


Now to say this, is to misreport St. Cyprian. It Is true, this worthy Prelate
believed that a Priests Authority was suspended by Heresy and Schism; but that
bare Immorality could recall his Commission, he does no where suppose. The Case
of Basilides and Martialis, if Mr. Congreve had produced it, would not come up
to the Point: For this Instance concerns Sacrificing to Idols; which is an Act
of Apostasy: It implies a renouncing of Christianity. From whence it will
follow, that those who are not so much as Members of the Church, cannot have
the Power of Church Governors.

Mr. Congreve seems displeased with that little Justice I endeavored to do the
Clergy; And calls the Testimonies of the best Poets, P. 71.
Orators, Historians, etc. Vain Stuff. I take it (says Mr. Congreve) he would
give us to understand, that in all Ages the Function of a Priest was held to be
a very Honorable Function; Ibid.
Did Mr. Collier ever meet with any body Fool enough to engage him to assert
that? Many a one, I can assure you, that have been either Fool or Knave enough,
I cannot tell which. If the Post is Honorable, the Persons should be considered
accordingly: They should not be exposed in a wretched Appearance; And have
neither Sense nor Spirit, nor fair usage allowed them. See View, etc. Chapter 3.
The Heathen Poets, as I proved at large, never served their Priests so.

Mr. Congreve urges, that Kings have been in all Ages Exposed and Punished on
the Stage, Amend. p. 71.72.
yet never any King complained of the Theater or the Poets. From hence he
argues, that if Kings may be exposed on the Stage; Why not Priests? To this I
answer,

1 st. Mr. Congreve's Argument supposes that Poets have the leave of Princes
for this Freedom. Kings it seems are willing to be brought, and Disciplined on
the Stage. Very well. But does the Hierarchy desire to be represented? Does the
Church give the Playhouse this Permission? By no means. She Complains of the
Practice, and would have it otherwise. Now what Consequence is there from
Permission to Remonstrance, and from Pleasure to Aversion? The Church does not
desire to be so Public. Why should she be haled in, against her Inclination,
and gazed on like a Malefactor?

2 ly. Stage Princes are used agreeably to their Station: The Honor of their
Function shines out in their Appearance. Their very Misfortunes are Majestic,
and their Ruin Glorious. They are never represented Insignificant, treated with
Contempt, and Played the Fool with in Comedy. If they were thus used, I
question not but that the Poets and Players would quickly hear on it.

3 ly. If Princes were used as Ill as Priests upon the Stage, they would not
suffer so much by it. Princes are well guarded against Dramatick Outrage. They
have Power to Punish and to oblige. The Magnificence of their Courts, the Pomp
and Parade of their Figure, brighten their Authority, and preserve a Regard.
These Circumstances glitter upon the sense, and strike an awe upon the Spirits
of the People. They refresh their Character, and make them understood. They
prevent the spreading of Fiction into Life, and keep a Play-House-Abuse from
being Acted in the Streets. In fine; Wealth and Power tho much short of
Princes, breaks the force of Insolence, and is a Sovereign Remedy against
Neglect. But the Clergy have no great share of these Advantages; I mean
generally speaking, and with Us especially. Their Provision is often slender,
their Censures relate to another World, and they have nothing of Luster to
affect the Imagination. A Condition thus unfortified, thus unornamented, lies
open to Ill usage. The greater part of the Clergy are not so well provided to
disprove an unfair Representation. They cannot so easily confute a Calumny by
their Equipage, nor make their Fortune put a Lie out of Countenance. To be
taken notice of, Things must shine as well as be solid; a Coarse outside keeps
the Richness within from being regarded. Spiritual Privilege, and invisible
Advantage signify little with Ignorance, or Atheism. When a Man can scarce
hold his Head above Water, there needs no great Weight to sink him. Misfortune
in such an Age as this, is almost a Jest of it self. A little Buffooning is
sufficient to make Indigence look ridiculous; for when a Man's Coat is
threadbare, it is an easy matter to pick a hole in it.

vid. St. August. De. Civ. Dei. Plin. pan Dio. Jul. Capitol. Hist. August. p.
27. Tacit. Annal. Vid. Serres Hist. Gosson.
4 ly His pretense of Matter of Fact is not True. Princes have complained of the
Theater. The great Scipio pulled it down; Trajan and Antoninus Philosophus
discouraged Plays, and Tiberius Banished the Stage. To come nearer Home, Lewis
the Godly would not endure a Playhouse, and Queen Elizabeth often checked this
sort of Diversion. Now these were most of them Great Princes, and which is more
to the purpose, most of them good ones too.

Mr. Congreve seems now fallen into a fit of Levelling. Quality and Secular
advantage, are grown Bells and Baubles. In his Logic, Honor and Estate, are
Inconsistent with Humility and other Christian Virtues. P. 73.
Such Temporal Pride he pretends agrees very ill with the Person and Character
of a truly Pious and Exemplary Divine. Ibid.
Had this Gentleman the Direction of Affairs, it is likely the World would be
well mended, the Church Reformed into Apostolical Poverty, And all these
Antichristian Things of Fortune and Convenience, taken from the Exemplary
Divines, and given to the Exemplary Poets.

Mr. Congreve comes on again reinforced with Mr. Hales, Amend. P. 74.
who proves from Scripture that all claim to superiority by Title of
Christianity is most certainly cut off. With submission to Mr. Hales, this is
not universally true For the Church being a Society, must by consequence have
Governors, and these by the same Necessity, must in that respect be superior
to the Governed. For this reason, the Apostle, speaking to private Christians,
Enjoins them in these words, Obey them that have the Rule over you, Heb. 13.17.
and and submit your selves; for they watch for your Souls, etc. This Text we
see plainly contains a branch of Duty to Ecclesiastical Governors. Now those
who have the Rule over others, are certainly so far their Superiors; And those
who are to submit themselves, are bound to acknowledge them as such. To go on
with Mr. Congreve's Citation. Nature and Religion agree in this, that neither
of them has a hand in this Heraldry of secundum sub and supra; all this comes
from Composition and Agreement of Men among themselves. Ibid.
Here Mr. Hales is mistaken again; For Parents have by Nature a Right of
Superiority over their Children. I grant Mr. Hales's Principle holds true in
the Main; but nothing can be more extravagant than Mr. Congreve's Inference.
Does this Gentleman mean that there is no such thing as Superiority amongst
Christians? Is subordination destroyed by Baptism? Does Christianity confound
all Degrees, and melt down all Distinction in the State; This Doctrine is
calculated for the Meridian of Munster, Sleidan. Comment.
for the Boars of Germany, for John of Leyden and Knipper-dolling: Jack Straw
and Wat Tyler, Cade and Ket would have been wonderfully obliged at such a
Discovery as this. But if Civil Privileges are consistent with Christianity, I
hope the Clergy may plead their Right in Common, and take the Advantage of the
Constitution like other People.

I had said, The Addition of Clerk is at least equal to that of Gentleman;
View* etc. P. 13^.
were it otherwise, the Profession would in many cases be a kind of punishment.
I say so still. For if a Gentleman was made less, and degraded by going into
Orders, would it not be a kind of Punishment? Can any thing be plainer than
this? I cannot imagine how Mr. Congreve could misinterpret this Period. But
since he has done it, he would do well to call in his exclamation, P. 75.
and wonder at his own Ignorance or Insincerity.

I observed, that Monsieur Racine, contrary to the practice of foreign
Countries, represented Priests in his Athalia. I observed farther, That this
Play was a very Religious Poem. View, etc. P. 124.
And if it were not designed for the Theater, I have nothing to object. My
meaning is, if it were designed for the Theater, I thought the Form and
Argument too solemn for the Place. But that it was designed for the Theater, is
more than I know; and I rather believe it was not. It being not uncommon in
France and elsewhere, to act serious and inoffensive Plays in Religious Houses.
Had Mr. Congreve understood this, or indeed the plain English of the Words, all
his Cavilling and awkard Jests had been at an end. The Short View, etc. takes
notice that Shakespeare, though to blame, was a Genteeler Enemy than the
Relapser; P. 125.
Why so? Because he gives Sir John, Parson of Wrotham, some Advantage in his
Character, he represents him Lewd, but not Little. Here Mr. Congreve is
extremely diverting. The BUT (says he) is coming again. Amend. P. 74.
I had a glimpse of him just now. Best of all; It Is more than he has of
himself, sometimes. Lewd but not Little, there is a Paradox for ye! Well, I
grant some People are both. However, there is room enough between these
Qualities for a Distinction. For I suppose a Man may be Lewd in his Practice,
without being Little in his Figure and Behavior. Does every Libertine wear a
Livery, or is Lewdness a forfeiture of Condition? In a sense of Philosophy and
Religion, there is nothing meaner than Vice: But then the Advantage of
Appearance is some Cover for the Deformity, and gives it another Air to Common
View.

Mr. Congreve allows, That when Men neither Sneak, nor do any thing unbecoming
their Office in the World, P. 77.
they ought not to be represented otherwise on the Stage. Were the Heathen
Priests then so absolutely unexceptionable? Were there no Prevarications
amongst them? and did they never Live out of their Character? Mr. Congreve
cannot think this: View, etc. P. 122.
And yet as I observed, they were always well treated by the Heathen Poets. But
besides, what occurs in this Answer, I have given him my reasons elsewhere, why
the Clergy ought in no case to come upon the Stage. View, etc.


Mr. Congreve is so kind as to inform me, that I talk in the Pedantical Cant of
Fable, Intreague, P* 82.
Discovery, of Unities of Time, etc. He means the Pedantical Cant of Aristotle
and Horace, of Bossu and Corneille, of Rapin, and Mr. Dryden; that is of the
best Critics, both Ancient and Modern, upon the Subject. This is somewhat
strange! But I perceive the Man is wildred in his Spleen: He lost himself in a
mist of his own making, And when people cannot see, they are apt to fall foul
upon their Friends.

He finds fault with some more expressions of mine, P. 84.
how reasonably, I shall consider by and by.

Mr. Congreve having spent some Pages in Trifling and Scurrility, advances to
my 4 th. Chapter. This Chapter charges the Stage with Immorality for rewarding
their loose Characters, and giving their Libertines such advantage in Figure,
Sense and Success. Mr. Congreve knew the Old Batchelour and Double Dealer
concerned under this Head, View, etc. P. 142.
but takes no notice of it. It Is true, he makes an attempt to disengage
Valentine in Love for Love. Amend* p. 88.
He would gladly Blanch this foul Character; But alas, it is to no purpose to
wash and rub: The Spots are not Dirt but Complexion. He says Valentine had
honesty enough to close with a bad Bargain, rather then not pay his Debts. Thus
Mr. Congreve. But if we will take Valentine's word for it, we shall find the
matter otherwise. 'Twas his Necessity, his disrelish of Confinement, his
Passion for Angelica, which put him upon this Compliance. Let him speak for
himself.


Val. This Condition was once proposed before and I refused it, Lo. for Lo. P.
8.16.
but the present impatience of my Creditors for their Money, and my own
impatience of Confinement, and absence from Angelica, force me to consent.

So much for his Honesty. And that he is Debauched, View, etc. P. 142.
Profane and Smutty, Unnatural to his Son, and Undutiful to his Father, I still
affirm and appeal for Evidence to the Pages of the Citation.

P. 41, 35. Amend. p. 90, 92.
Mr. Congreve endeavors to justify Bellmour and Sharper, in the Old
Batchelour, against my exceptions. But here according to his usual fair dealing
he misreports the Case. P. 92.
He tells the Reader I produced these Passages to prove him guilty of
encouraging Immorality. But this is quite mistaking the Matter. These Passages
among others were produced to show how roughly the Women were treated by the
Stage: See View, etc. P. 1^5, 170, 171, 172.
That their fine Characters were unceremonious, and failed in the Decencies, of
a Cavalier.

Amend. P. 91.
He is glad I can prevail with my self to write the Hellish Syllable [POX] at
length; I could not do so in Page 82 of my Book. Right. And I had some reason
for my Scruple. For I conceive, there is some difference between the naming a
Blasphemous Curse, and the Foul Disease. The Word was used the former way when
I declined to transcribe it.

I have assaulted the Town, P. 103.
it seems, in the seat of their principal and most reasonable Pleasure. I am
sorry to hear the encouraging of Vice, the Liberties of Smut, and Profaneness,
the Exposing of Holy Things and Persons, are such lively satisfactions. The
Palate must be strangely vitiated to relish such Entertainment as this. I would
gladly believe the Stage has not yet subdued the Understandings of the
Audience, nor debauched their Reason to this degree. I hope the Town is
misreported in some measure, and that as to the choice and value of Pleasure,
the Psamist's Authority may be better than Mr. Congreves, Psalm. 1.1, 2.
Blessed is the man that stands not in the way of Sinners, nor sits in the Seat
of the Scornful. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord.

Mr. Congreve pretends the Invectives of the Fathers were levelled at the
Cruelty of the Gladiators, and the Obscenity of the Pantomimes. If some of
them, continues he, have confounded the Drama with such Spectacles, it was an
oversight of Zeal very alowable in those Days; and in the Infancy of
Christianity, when the Religion of the Heathens was Intermingled with their
Poetry and Theatral Representations. P. 105.
The Fathers Censure of the Stage, of which I gave many Instances, was an
oversight of Zeal! Their Heat ran away with their Judgment, and to make them
s^fe, we must read them with Mr- Congreve's Comment. And yet this oversight of
Zeal is forgotten, and their Conduct justified by our Author immediately after.
For as the case then stood, he says the best of the Heathen Plays might very
well be forbidden. Ibid.
But these Restraints, it seems were put upon the Infancy of Christianity.
Under favor, Christianity was no gradual Religion. 'Twas like Adam at its full
growth at first. If weakness, if obstinacy, and perverseness, are signs of
Infancy, we are much more in the state of the Cradle now. As for the Concern of
the Heathen Religion, that was not the only Objection the Fathers had to the
Stage. They likewise Declaimed against the Lewdness and Immorality of those
Diversions. This I have shown sufficiently in the Testimonies Cited from them:
View, etc. P. 276. d^inc.
And likewise proved the Censure of the Fathers applicable to the English
Theater.

Amend. p. 105.
Mr. Congreve would gladly throw his own Talent of unfair Citing and Misapplying
upon me. But has not been able to prove it in one Instance, P. 106, 1^7
excepting that mistake of Wasting for Wafting mentioned before.

His Story out of Polybius will do him no kindness; for, as I have observed
already, there is no Arguing from Heathenism to Christianity. Ignorance when
not affected, goes a great way in an excuse. Polybius was a wise Man, but he
was a Pagan, and lived too early to know any thing of our Religion. In short,
either the Theatral Performances of the Cynethians were innocent, or they were
not. If they were not, to what purpose are they mentioned: If they were, our
Stage is no parallel to them. There being very few modern Plays in which there
is not something exceptionable: Either Cursing or Swearing, vain invocation of
the Name of God, Ribaldry, or Profaneness; or else some foolish and destructive
Passion made Creditable and Charming. And as for the Bulk of his Author
Polybius, I suppose Scipio Nasica, Scaevola, and St. Augustine, were all of them
as great Men as He. I shall give him counter-Evidence from them. This Father
informs us, St. Aug. de Civ. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 31.
that Scaevola who was Pontifex Maximus, and one of the Senate, dissuaded
that Noble Assembly from going on with the Building of a Theater. He told them
in a set Speech, That this Diversion would bring in Foreign Vice; and the
Debaucheries of Greece among them. That the old Roman Virtue would be lost, and
the Spirits of the People emasculated. This Harangue governed the Senate, and
stopped the Progress of the Stage for that time. This Testimony St. Augustine
mentions with Approbation. And in the next Chapter but one, cap* 33.
He calls these Theatral Performances, animorum labem and pestem, probitatis
and honestatis eversionem, i. e. The Blemishes of Humane Nature, the Plague of
Reason, and the Ruin of Virtue: And adds, That Scipio foreseeing these mortal
consequences, hindered the building of Play Houses. He did not think the
Government could subsist upon the strength of Brick and Stone. But that
Discipline and good Manners were to be taken care of no less than the
Fortification of the City.

To the Authority of this Father I shall Subjoyn that of Horace, who in his
Book de Art Poetica, Mentioning the Roman Theater before his own Time, has
these words.

Quo sane populus numerabilis ut pote parvus. Et frugi, castusque verecundusque
coibat.

It Is very remarkable says Monsieur Dacier, that Horace should commend the old
Romans for not frequenting the Theater. Dacier Remarq. sur L' Art Poetique Vol.
10. P. 238.
He gives four Reasons for the little Inclination they had for these
Diversions. They were not very Numerous; They were Wise; They were
Religious; And they were Modest.

The three last Reasons are strongly to our point, and the stronger for coming
from a Poet. This was so plain, and so Considerable an acknovvledgment, that
Mr. Dacier makes the follovving Marginal Note upon it. Ibid. Vo^. ^0. P. 37.
The Theater Condemned as inconsistent with Prudence and Religion.

As for innocent Diversions, I have nothing to say against them. But I think
People should take care not to relieve their Spirits at the expense of their
Virtue, not to Cure Melancholy with Madness, and shake off their Spleen, and
their Reason together. Mr. Gosson a Stage Poet in Queen Elizabeth's time says
much the same thing, only the expression is somewhat stronger. In his Address
to the Gentlewomen of London, he has these words: See Goss.'s School of Abuse.
Being pensive at Home, if you go to the Theaters to drive away Fancies, it is
as good Physic, as for the Ache of your Head, to knock out your Brains; or
when you are Stung with a Wasp, to rub the Sore with a Nettle.

The same Author is so Frank as to declare, That Ease and Idleness bring
Destruction; and that Pleasure and Sport are the Devil's Baits: That honest
Recreation quickens the Spirits, but Plays are venomous Arrows to the Mind.
When Comedy comes upon the Stage, Cupid sets up a Spring for Woodcocks, which
are entangled e're they discern the Line, and caught before they mistrust the
Snare. And a little before, Apol. of the School of Abuse, p. 88, 89.
We call that a Slaughter House where brute Beasts are killed, and hold that a
Pastime which is the very Butchery of Christian Souls.

Mr. Congreve argues at last from the disadvantage of the Globe, p 108.
and the uncertainty of our Climate. Now I Am afraid these Geographical Reasons
are no better than the rest. I doubt this Expedient of a Playhouse will not make
the Latitude one jot the better. 'Twill never fix the floating of our Humors,
nor bring us to the steddiness of the Continent. To speak softly: What is there
more likely to awaken our Passions than these Diversions, and to fill us with
Freaks and Fancies, and extravagant Amusement? Now when Passions runs high,
Disappointment rises with them, and good Humor grows more precarious. For the
more we are disappointed, the more dark, and Saturnine, and Melancholic we
shall certainly be. The Resignation of Christians, and the Pleasures of Reason,
and the Satisfaction of living to some purpose, are by much, the best Remedies
against Melancholy. p. 10^.
But are not we of all People the most unfit to be alone? The French Proverb
shall answer this: Better be Alone, than in ill Company. Mr. Congreve goes on
in his Panegyric upon his Country: Are there not more Self-Murtherers, and
Melancholic Lunaticks in England, Ibid.
heard of in one year, than in a great part of Europe besides. Though I somewhat
question the Truth, as well as the Civility of this Reflection; but if it is
true, it is probable the Playhouse may in some measure account for the Fact. If
there are more Self-Murthers and Lunacies in England than elsewhere, it is
probably, because there are more bad Plays in England than in a great part of
Europe besides: I believe I may say, than in all Europe besides. When Passions
are raised, and Principles destroyed, some People can neither keep their Wits,
nor their Lives long together. They grow impatient of this World, and Foolish
enough to rush blindly upon the Other. Love and Pride are observed to stock
Bedlam. Now these two Passions are worked up to the highest Excess in Plays. A
Spark is scarce thought Civil to his Mistress, unless he is ready to run Mad for
her. And as for Pride, it is no less strongly recommended under the Notion of
Glory, Greatness, and Revenge. Indeed the Playhouse is a sort of Nursery to a
Mad House: It Is not long since one of them was sent thither; and I rather
wonder they are not oftener transplanted. I am sorry for any Man's Misfortune;
and it is only Mr. Congreve's Argument which draws the Instance from me. He is
now come to his last Questions. p. 109.
From whence are all our Sects, Schisms, and innumerable Subdivisions in
Religion? Let them come from whence they will, we had better have them than
some Peoples Remedies. It Is much safer to be of different Opinions, than agree
in believing nothing. Atheism is an ill Cure of Heresy and Schism: I admire
Uniformity in Doctrine extremely; but still I must crave leave to believe, That
a mistaken Conscience is more serviceable, than no Conscience at all.

Ibid.
Mr. Congreve concludes his Book with an unfair Quotation about Music. He
understands the Art of Misrepresenting, and leaves out a significant word, very
handsomely for that purpose. But I shall pass it over; and come to his
Criticisms upon some of my Expressions.

p. 84.
The Ladies fancy Slip-stocking high, with which he quarrels, Echard's Reasons
of the Con. of the Clergy.
is an Allusion to a known Story, in a Book very well known. To deal freely, I
made bold with it to prevent its falling into the Enemies hand. A whole Kennel
of Beaus after a Woman, Ibid.
is no Language of mine: It Is a Quotation from the Relapse; See View, etc p.
225. Relapse, p. 64. View, etc. p. 27.
as Mr. Congreve might easily have seen. Running Riot upon Smut, is misquoted.
My words are these: The Double Dealer runs Riot upon such an occasion as this,
and gives Lord Touchwood a mixture of Smut, etc. The upper End of the
Government, is a defensible Expression; And his exception to the Litter of
Epithets, etc. I have answered already. His Objections at Big-Allyances, is
somewhat unfairly transcribed, and the Page mismark'd. View, etc. p. 130.
The Passage is this: Iehoida was thought an Alliance big enough for the Royal
Family. He Cavils at two other little words, which I think may pass: But I
shall say nothing in their behalf. To defend such trifles, would be almost as
idle, as to object against them.

Now though I have examined Mr. Congreve's Writings but loosely upon this Head,
yet in return to his Civilities, I shall present the Reader with some
Proprieties of His in Phraseology and Sense. P. 11.
In his Amendments we have, To Savor of Utterance, etc. And in the Mourning
Bride, p. 3.79.
we have all the Delicacies of Language and Rhetoric, and the very Spring it
self upon Paper. Here Is Respiring Lips, M. Bride, p. 24, 64, 61, 57, 14. P. 8.
ample Roof, and ample Knowledge, the Noon of Night, feared, for frighted, the
pageantry of Souls, Eyes rain Blood, and what not. To go on a little with the
Mourning Bride, with reference to Sense and Character.

King Manuell asks his Daughter Almeria, why she wears Mourning at his Triumph.
She tells him, She mourns for her deliverance from a Wreck. This was a wise
Answer, and a very natural way of expressing her Gratitude for coming safe on
Shore.

Gonsalez relates Manuall's Victorious Entry after his Success against the
Moors. The Cavalcade is wonderfully Splendid and Pompous: But the Story goes
off somewhat unluckily. The swarming Populace spread every Wall, p. 7.

And cling as if with Claws they did enforce
Their Hold through clifted Stones stretching and staring.


Here he Struts to purpose in Sophocles's Buskins! Cling and Claws are
extremely magnificent in solemn Description, and strangely proper for Tragedy
and Triumph. To give him his due, I think these two Lines are the best Image of
a parcel of Cats running up a Wall, that I have met with. That which follows is
worth the remembering. Ibid.
As they were all of Eyes, and every Limb,
Would feed his Faculty of Admiration.
A Limb of an Eye, I confess, is a great Curiosity; And one would think if the
Poet had any of these Limbs in his Head, he might have discovered it. We must
not forget Osmin's Talent in Arithmetic, who let us understand that p. 21.
Heaven can continue to bestow,
When scanty Numbers shall be spent in telling.
As Scanty as they are, I fancy Telling will be spent much sooner than Numbers:
But Sense in a Tragedy is cold and unaffecting. To go on. Zarah makes Osmin a
high Compliment upon his Air and Complexion: She tells him when she first saw
him, p. 23, 24.
Pale and expiring, drenched in briny Waves,


That he was God-like even then.



Death and Paleness are strong Resemblances of a Deity! But I perceive, to some
People, a Seraphim, and a drowned Rat, are just alike. King Manuell is giving
Sentence upon the Rebels: Let us see how he supports his Character: Bear to the
Dungeon those Rebellious Slaves, p. 4^.

The ignoble Curs that Yelp to fill the Cry,
And spend their Mouths in barking Tyranny.
And a little after, he calls the Noble Osmin, that foreign Dog. Here Is
Majestic Passion, Royal Vengeance, and magnificent Railing for ye! A Common
Hunt could not have done it better! Amend. p. 28.
This, as Mr. Congreve has it, is Dog-Language with a Witness; and never made
for a Monarch's Mouth.

Zara has another Flight very remarkable, and with that I shall conclude. This
Princess, we must know, was strangely smitten with Osmin, and finding her Amor
crossed, was resolved, out of stark Love and Kindness, to Poison him: It Is
true, she intended to be so just, as to dispose of her self the same way. Now
coming to the Prison she spies a Body without a Head, and imagining it Osmin's,
grows distracted upon it. And why so? Was it because she was prevented, and had
not the satisfaction of dispatching her Spark her self? Or was it because she
had a mind to convince Osmin of the strength of her Affection by murdering
him? That Is somewhat odd. Was it then to show how willing she was to dye with
him? She says so; but presently rejects this reason as frivolous and
unnecessary. For if you will believe her, Osmin was capable of knowing her
Passion, without so barbarous an Expedient. P. 63.
His Soul still sees, and knows each purpose,
And fixed event of my persisting Faith.


Well, Let the reason of her Disorder be what it will, for we cannot agree about
it, she falls into a most terrible Fit of Fustian, upon the sight of the Body.
Ha! P. 62.
prostrate! bloody! headless! O, -- start Eyes*
Split heart, burst every Vein at this dire object;
At once dissolve and flow; meet Blood with Blood,
Dash your encountering Streams with mutual Violence,
Till Surges roll, and foaming Billows rise,
And curle their Crimson Heads to kiss the Clouds!
One would think by this Rant, that Zara had Blood enough in her Veins to fill
the Bay of Biscay, or the Gulf of Lions. At this rate a Man may let the Thames
out of his little Finger! This is monstrous Impropriety of Thought! Never were
Things and Words, joined more unluckily. Call you this Poetry! The Figures and
Flights of Poetry are Bold; but then the Fancy should be Natural, the Figures
Just, and the Effects holds some proportion with the Ca^se. Zara rises in her
Rumbling, if it is possible, rails bitterly on the King, in Astronomy; And, as
far as I can discover, she goes somewhat upon the System of Copernicus. Rain,
P. 62.
rain, ye Stars spout from your burning Orbs,
Precipitated Fires, and pour in Sheets,
The blazing Torrent on the Tyrant's Head.


Well. Tho this Lady has not much Wit in her Anger, she has a great deal of
Learning: I must own, this is a very Scholar-like piece of Distraction. If Mr.
Congreve replies, the Occasion was extraordinary; and that the sight of Osmin's
Murder must mightily affect her. Granting all this, the old Saying will hold
good against him: Curae leves loquntur, ingentes stupent: Here Almeria's Fit of
Fainting, p. 37.
and a good Swoon at the end on it, would have looked like Business, and been
very Natural upon the occasion. I could have been somewhat larger upon the
Mourning Bride, but this may suffice at present.

I charged Mr. Congreve with two very Lewd and Scandalous Songs; but these he
passes over unmention'd. View, etc. P. 24, 25. L. for L. Lov. Triumph. p. 73.
This is somewhat unfortunate: One would have thought, if he had neither
Modesty to make them, nor Reason to defend them, he might, at least, have had a
little Conscience to have given them up.


A REPLY TO THE Short Vindication OF THE Relapse and the Provok'd-Wife.
THIS Author pretends I had little to charge him with upon the Subject of
Immodesty, that I come to no particulars, Vindic. P. 7.
but only mention Miss Hoyden with others for an Immodest Character. By his
favor, I am particular in the matter objected, View, etc. P. 221. Relapse p.
60, 62, 63*
and since he calls for it, I shall direct the Reader to some more Decencies of
this young Lady. To deny Matter of Fact in the beginning of a Vindication is a
little unlucky!

This Gentleman is at a loss what I mean by Immodesty, he knows of no smut
talked by Miss Hoyden; And makes the Fault mine to understand him in that
sense. Here Is a flight of Innocence for ye! One would think his Capacity was
bound up to Virtue in an extraordinary manner; And that the bare Notion of Ill
could not get into his Head. By the way, I am sorry to find him thus
Undistinguishing. This Ignorance in a Stage-Poet does not look well. Customary
Swearing takes away the sense of doing it, and I am afraid it may be applicable
to other matters. The Vindicator and his Brethren have an admirable way of
defending themselves from Indecencies. If you detect them, they tell you it is
your own Construction, and you may take it for your pains. As if the Knowledge
of Good and Evil, was Criminal; and to show one Fault, was to make another. It
seems then the Deformity of Matters lies in the Organ, not in the Object, in
the Idea not in the Thing. A Man had much better go into a Puddle than discover
it. He that sees an Ulcer, or perceives an offensive Smell, is extremely to
blame in his Senses! The Vindicator imposes on the Reader by affirming himself
concerned only in one Quotation more in my Chapter of Immodesty. Ibid.
For

View, etc. P. 219, 220.
1. The general Reference may imply more. And besides, if it did not, I have
given more Instances in Loveless and Berinthia, on the same Head, Relapse, p.
47, 51, 73, 74.
tho not in the same Chapter. There are likewise more lewd Passages in his two
Plaeys heightened with Irreligion; but these shall be Postpon'd a little.

I shall now examine his Defense of a quotation from the Provok'd-Wife. P. 41.
The Dialogue lies between Lady Brute and Belinda. Belinda says, Why don't some
Reformer or other beat the Poet for Smuttiness?

L. Brute, Because he is not so sure of our Private Approbation; as of our
Public Thanks. Well; sure there is not upon Earth, so Impertinent a thing as
Women's Modesty.


Belind. Yes, Men's Fantasque that obliges us to it. If we quit our Modesty,
they say we lose our Charms. (There Is his Defense.) And yet they know that very
Modesty is Affectation, and rail at our Hypocrisy. Here Is admirable
encouragement for Virtue! The Ladies make a Grievance of Modesty, and declare
it the most impertinent thing in Nature. Ay, but what do the Men say? Why they
say it is all Affectation and Hypocrisy. And are not these Charming Qualities
upon the Discovery? A pretense seen through is wonderfully engaging! The
Vindicator confesses as much. He says the Men rail at the Women for their
Modesty. I cannot see how they should do otherwise, if they believe it nothing
but Grimace. Here Is a handsome Complement upon the Women. They are brought in
guilty by both Sexes, They cannot be Sincere it seems without appearing Vicious,
nor deal clearly without Impudence, nor be Honest without playing the Whore!
But over and above the Poets Courtship; these are Powerful Motives to Modesty!
What Woman would not be in Love with it upon this Description? The Credit of
Affectation is strangely transporting, who would not take pains to be counted a
Hypocrite? There Is nothing of Complexion in Modesty: It Is only a little Paint
laid on with a Trowel. It neither sits easy, nor looks natural: It Is foolish
to themselves, and formal to other People: And now what Woman would not strive
hard for such an Accomplishment as this? But on the other side, this is a
comfortable Scheme for the Town Sparks* To speak in our Author's Military way.
What Libertine would not press the Siege, and be at the trouble of a little
Storming, when he has Intelligence of a Party within; when he believes the
Bloody-Colours false, and that there is Friendship in the very Defiance? Now had
I not upon this Occasion some reason to observe that M^desty was out of Fashion
with our Stage, and the B^nk much sunk since the time of Euripides, I say since
the time of Euripides; For his Ladies always converse with all the Decency and
Reservedness imaginable. They declare against intemperate Talk, and love Virtue
both in the Thing and in the Appearance.

I had ranged the Profaneness of the Stage under two Heads. 1. Their Cursing
and Swearing. 2. Their Abuse of Religion and Holy Scriptures.


Upon the Head of Swearing, I observed the Relapse and the Provok'd-Wife, were
particularly Rampant and Scandalous. Vind. P. 11
This, the Vindicator says, was done with a great deal of Honesty and Charity.
So 'twas. To report fairly, and tell People of their Faults, is very consistent
with both those Qualities. He goes on, and jests a little about Bullys and
Hackney-Co^eh-men, and by the Gayety of his Humor, you would think him
extremely Innocent. But after all this unconcernedness, (...) his Crime should
not be little, I am afraid his Conscience will appear so. However he complains
he is mightily overcharged; and that all the stretch of the Profaneness lies
in Ld. Foppington 's Gad, Vind. p. 11
and Miss Hoyden's I-Cod. Now Hoyden's Expression I take to be rank Swearing,
neither does he deny it. And as for Ld. Foppington, he adds By, to Gad; which
in his particular way of Pronouncing o, like a, is broad and downright. This
Gentleman would excuse himself by the Liberties of Conversation, and gives
several Instances of disguised Oaths. What means he by insisting so much upon
Precedent? Does Custom justify a Fault? Is Sin Improved into Privelege? View,
etc. P. 96. An. Cong. vid. 3d. Post.
and can a Man Swear by Common Law? Besides all the Instances mentioned
excepting Par Die, are less Criminal than his own. And were it otherwise, no
sort of Profaneness is fit for Representation; as I have proved sufficiently
already. P. 10.
This Author complains, my Accusations against him almost always run in general
Terms, etc. Well. If a List of Particulars will oblige him, he shall have it. I
did not take this Method for want of Evidence, I can assure him. The petty
Oaths and Curses (as I suppose the Poets think them) together with the vain
Invocation of the Name of God, I shall omit; To transcribe or point to them,
would be tedious. But as for those of a blacker Complexion, tho they must not
be produced, the Reader may see them if he pleases: And then he may judge if I
have done the Vindicator any wrong by pronouncing them Rampant and Scandalous.

Relapse P. 7, 9, 11, 13, 28, 32, 33, 43, 44, 55, 61, 62, 65, 66, 74, 75, 77,
78, 81, 87, 101, 102, 103, 105. Pro. Wife. P. 20, 27, 36, 37, 39, 76.
In the Relapse this Horrible Rhetoric is spoken by Ld. Foppington, Young
Fashion, Seringe, Coupler, and Miss Hoyden. To these we must add Justice
Tunbelly, who to make himself the better Magistrate, Swears like a Bully with
open Mouth. The Provok'd-Wife is little better. Sir John and the Colonel Swear
with a great deal of Relish and Noise; and Constant is not over stanch. Some of
these Pages have double Charges, and so have some in the Relapse. Cursing and
Fiends Language, is likewise very frequent in the Provok'd-Wife. Now, tho Oaths
are not, Curses may be Blasphemy, Fashion's is so in a horrible manner. This
fine Gentleman does not stick to Curse the Author of his Being, Relapse p. 44.
for making him younger than his Brother. But this is not all the Blasphemy the
Relapser has to account for. And now at the close of the Article I must own my
self surpised at the Courage of the Vindicator. That a Man thus Ill prepared,
should cast the Cause upon so bold an Issue, press for a second Hearing, and
call for a Charge in Particulars!

The second Branch of the Stage's Profaneness, is the Abuse of Religion and
Holy Scripture. How does the Vindicator excuse himself here? He says, Before he
fell upon me for an Abuser of Holy Scripture, he should first clearly have
proved, That no Story, Phrase or Expression whatsoever in the Scripture, should
be either repeated, or so much as alluded to upon the Stage. P. 13.
In return to this, I must say, I have hinted this pretty strongly already,
View, etc. Chapter 2.
and proved it by plain Implication. To argue the point more at length, I did
not then think necessary. For what can be more evidently Impious than to throw
the most Solemn and the most Trifling things into the same Composition; to make
Religion part of our Sport, and the Bible furnish out the Stage? I thought no
Person professing Christianity, could have wanted Information in this Case. But
since I find the Poets disposed to Cavil, See 4th. Postul.
I have satisfied this Objection more at large in my Reply to Mr. Congreve. The
Vindicator's next attempt is very remarkable.

The Scripture, says he, is made up of History, Prophecy, and Precept; which
are things in their own Nature capable of no other Burlesque than what calls in
question either their Reality, P. 14.
or their Sense. To this I Answer,

1 st. That the Vindicator is out in his Notion of Burlesque. To Burlesque a
Book, is to turn it into Ridicule. Now this may be done without questioning the
History, or mistaking the Text. To apply the Case: To doubt the Meaning of some
part of the Bible may be done without a Fault. I confess, to question any Facts
in Scripture would be to renounce Christianity. But then to make Diversion with
them is still worse; And adds Contempt, to Infidelity. Indeed, to take these
Freedoms with Religion is a sign of a slender Belief. We don't see Comedy
Garnished with Parliament-House-Speeches. No. Where people are sure to be
punished, they are careful not to provoke.

2 ly. To believe the Scripture God's Word, and to play with it, heightens the
Presumption. It Is a horrid Reflection on the Divine Wisdom; It supposes the
Concerns of the other World over flourished, that a Pompo^s outside is given
to Things Insignificant, and that the weight of the Cause holds no proportion
with the Solemnity of the Court. Now that this Gentleman has several times
brought the Bible to jest for him, is clear beyond all Contradiction.

3 ly. The Vindicator is cast upon his own state of the Case. For his Play not
only questions the Truth of the Scripture, but denies it; and gives an Instance
to prove the Assertion; and to give the more Credit to it, it comes from the
best Character in the Poem. It Is done in a Soliloquy too, where according to
our Author, the person who speaks is always supposed to deliver his real
thoughts to the Audience. Amanda is the person; Vind. p. 76
Lets hear her. What slippery Stuff are Men Composed of?
Relapse P. 97.
Sure the Account of their Creation's false,
And 'twas the Woman's Rib that they were formed of.


This Lady it seems spoke this for the good of the Public; Her business, like
Worthy's, was to Instruct the Audience. Yes, the design of a Soliloquy, is to
prevent misconstruction, to direct the Understanding, and secure the Interest
of Virtue. It Is possible the Account of Man's Creation might have been thought
true, and the meaning of the Relapse misunderstood, if Amanda had not been
drawn out single for this Service. Well. But the Gentleman who writ this Speech
is gone to Muscovy. P. 21.
I hope not to tell them the History of the Creation is false; well let him go,
I think this Town may spare him. But tho the Man is gone to Muscovy, the Play
is here, and so is the Author too, who took the pious Muse into his Protection
and made her Free of his Poem. Suppose this new Lawre^^ should write a
Treasonable Copy of Verses upon the Czar, and sheer off from Mosco when he had
done. Suppose a Brother Poet of the Place should borrow them for his proper
use, and Act and Publish them for his own. Would it be a sufficient excuse for
the Latter to allege that they were only borrowed, that his Friend was gone
into a remote Country; but That to his Knowledge he had too much Veneration for
the Government to question its Authority, or sink its Credit? I am afraid such
a Speech as this, would do but little Service at Mosco. It may not be amiss for
the Vindicator to consider the Application, and the next time he has any
Exercise made for him, to look a little better into the Contents.

We are now drawing toward Particulars. The History of Adam's Fall is
wretchedly made use of in the Provok'd-Wife. P. 77. View, etc. P. 77.
How the Scripture is affronted by this, the Vindicator cannot tell; P. 14, 15
here is nothing that reflects upon the Truth of the Story. No. Is the
Ridiculous R^sor no disadvantage to the Story? Does it not suffer by being
mixed up with Smut and ^anter, and applied to a scandalous purpose. If these
Liberties don't reflect upon the Truth of the Story, I am sure they reflect
upon the Significancy on it, and by consequence upon the Honor of the Author.
But by the Vindicator's Favor, I doubt it does Reflect upon the Truth of the
Story. For who that looked on this Account as delivered by the Holy Ghost would
treat it thus disrespectfully? Who that believed himself akin to Adam would use
his Memory thus Coursely, Vind. P. 15
Ridicule his Folly upon the Stage, and make a jest of his Misfortunes? The
Vindicator concludes the Page with a Memorable Sentence, and gives us to
understand, That he shall always make a very great Distinction between his
Respects to God and the Devil. Ibid.
His Respects to God, is somewhat Familiar. But he mends the Matter. He makes a
very great Distinction between God and the Devil! Then it seems he has some
Regard for both of them, some Respects for the Devil. Truly one would almost
think so, by his way of Writing, and if we may argue from the Interest he
promotes, I am afraid the Bulk of the Distinction will lie the wrong way.

The Vindicator takes it Ill of me for Censuring the Liberties given to Ld.
Foppington. And here (he says) I Am as angry with him for being for Religion, P.
16.
as before for being against it. Not altogether. However here is a frank
Confession, that he was against Religion before. Now by his managing, one would
guess he had not changed his side. For whatever his Meaning might be, his
Method is somewhat untoward. For does not Ld. Foppington Droll upon the
Prayers, upon Sundays, and Sermons? Does he not do it in Earnest? The
Vindicator grants all this. Is he checked then by the Ladies, or exposed upon
the Account? Very slenderly, if at all. Berinthia rather prompts him, and
Amanda only asks him if there was good Preaching at St. James's; Relapse. P.
32, 33.
And that she was the worst Company in the world at Church, being apt to mind
the Prayers and Sermon. This is a poor Rebuke for such Rampant Profaneness. And
as the World goes, View, etc. P. 78.
may easily be interpreted to Singularity, and Female Superstition. Ay, But
Foppington's manner of speaking; together with the Character he represents
plainly instructs the Audience, P. 16, 17.
that what he says of his Church Behavior is designed for their Contempt and
not for their Imitation. It Is designed for their Diversion, if he pleases,
which I Am mistaken if the Subject will allow of. Let Ld. Foppington speak.

Ld. Fop. Madam, Sunday is a vile day, I must confess; I intend to move for
leave to bring in a Bill that the Players may work upon it. -- A Man must have
little to do there, that can give an account of the Sermon. -- But if I cannot
give an account of the Ladies, I deserve to be excommunicated. -- There Is my
Lady Tattle, Relapse P. 32, 33.
etc. are the prettiest Company in the World. -- One is strangely apt at Church
to mind what one should not do, meaning the Prayers and the Sermon.

Now who can miscarry under such Instruction as This? A Man must be of a very
low Form in his Understanding, not to see the Drift of the Author. This is
Seraphick Satyr, all Light and Heat. Virtue must needs be refreshed, and
Conscience alarmed strongly, by such Admonitions! Instead of giving a frightful
Idea of Profaneness, the Matter is all turned into a Jest; and the Audience
desired to laugh at those Practices, which will Damn them. These are admirable
Sentences to Rally Religion with, to furnish a young Libertine, and keep
Atheism in Countenance! So much for the Manner of Speaking. And as for Lord
Foppington's Character, that will not excuse him. As the Poet has managed the
business, this Lord is not so contemptible. For some of the best Raillery in
the Play falls to his Share, View, etc. P. 223.
as I have shown already. And were it otherwise, no pretense of Character can
justifi^ such profane Sallies. View p. 96 Answ. to Congoeve.
But these Poets, if they can get a Fool, a Bully, or a Libertine, to fly out
into Smut, or Irreligion, they are safe enough. Thus they can Please and Fence,
at the same time; and the Character, as they fancy, is a Cover for the Trick.
But there is much more of Art than Fair-dealing, in this Expedient. I wish they
would consider, it is the Poet that speaks in the Persons of the Stage; And that
he who makes a Man Mad, must answer for his Distraction.

P. 17.
The Vindicator can find no reason for my Quarr^l to Young Fashion, unless 'twas
because I took him for his Friend. Then I was much to blame. But the worst is,
this Gentleman contradicts himself in the next Sentence; and says, I accused
his younger Brother, for kicking his Conscience down Stairs. Well. That Is
something; but not all the Quarrel. View, etc. p. 210, 211.
I complained of him likewise for a finished Debauchee; and exhibited a long
Bill against him. This the Vindicator is pleased to slide over: And instead of
defending his Libertine, P. 18.
finds fault with my calling him his Favorite. And why so? Has he not provided
him a Plot, a Fortune, and a creditable Figure? And are not all these signs of
good Will and Inclination? Ibid.
Well; but his Wife is likely to make his Heart ache. Indeed so says the
Vindicator. But Young Fashion tells another Story. He is in no Fright about the
matter. Upon observing some Signs of Extravagance in Hoyden, he says to
himself, (and then you may be sure he delivers his real Thoughts to the
Audience) It Is no matter. Relapse, p. 64.
She brings an Estate will aefford me a separate Maintenance. We see here is no
danger of Mortification. This Soliloquy is extremely Moral! It teaches the Art
of Marrying the Estate without the Woman, and makes a Noble Settlement upon
Lewdness.

The Vindicator complains because I wont take his word in the business of
Pimping. p. 18, 19.
Under favor, he does me wrong; I never questioned his Experience in these
matters. Since he puts me upon it, I am willing to believe him a good Authority
in the Case: And that he is well qualified to pronounce upon the Growth and
Improvement of this Mystery. What if the Profession soars somewhat higher than
formerly, I hope it is not grown creditable? If it is infamous in a Peasant, it is
more so in a Person of Figure? Why then is it not Lashed and Stigmatized? Why
have not we some of Plautus's and Terence's Discipline upon it? Why is the Poet's
Fine Gentleman put upon this Drudgery? See Pref. Relapse.
To use the Profession thus gently, and pay it so fair a Respect, is the way to
make it soar still higher, and bring it more into Fashion. But the Vindicator's
Civilities to Pimping were not the only Thing which I objected: I observed that
Worthy and Berinthia made it an Act of Christian Charity, View, etc. p. 79, 219.
and rallied profanely upon the Office. But it is not this Gentleman's Method,
to spea^ to the Difficulty.

He tells me it is a dull Thing, to expect any thing not dull from a Nurse. p.
19.
And why so? As slender People are entertaining sometimes. Why may not the Woman
be a little Witty if she was Born so, especially when she is to divert the
Company? All Nurses are not Fools, any more than all Poets are Wits. Besides, I
did not expect any great matters from her in this kind. But though she has not
Wit, she ought to have Humor? So that when she is out of Character in her
Profaneness, and speaks contrary to Custom and Probability, when the Race and
Spirit of her Discourse, lies only in the Abuse of Two or Three solemn
Expressions of Scripture, Relapse, p. 96.
I say when this happens, it is pretty plain the Poet's Design, is to treat the
Audience at the Expense of Religion.

The Vindicator sets down some more of Nurses fine Speech which I had omitted.
She calls Bull Priest of Baal, and tells him, her Conscience flies in her Face
for taking his Advice; P. 20.
and that his Ahsolution is not worth an old Cassock. Now all these fine
Sentences are only for Diversion. It Is nothing but Cracking a Jest upon a
Chaplain; And he should be very sorry to see the Day when such a Liberty where
it has no Allusion to Religion) should be brought within the Verge of
Profaneness. Ibid.
And how does he prove a Jest on a Chaplain such a warrantable piece of
Raillery? Has not a Chaplain the same Commission and Business with another
Clergyman? And if so, why should his Treatment be more Course? If there is no
Distinction in the Office, why should there be any in the Usage? But it may be
the Vindicator may think his Authority sunk upon the Score of Obligation: And
that Eating and Drinking, are better than Prayers and Sacraments. But this
passage of Nurses has no Allusion to Religion. Ibid.
That Is strange! Is Sporting in Scripture Phrase, so foreign to that Subject?
Has the Drolling on the Priests Blessing, upon the Power of the Keys, and the
Institution of our Savior, no Allusion to Religion? If this Gentleman had the
Stating of Profaneness, 'twould shrink into a narrow Compass. It would be no
easy matter to talk amiss; and the Laity would have as little Sin left them, as
the Clergy would have fair Quarter.

Worthy's Address to the fine Procuress Berinthia, must now be inquired into.
Upon her promise of a Lewd Assistance, his Gratitude is wonderfully raised,
Vind. p 22 View, etc. P. 80.
and Devout. Thou Angel of Light, let me fall down and adore thee. He says, if
I had quoted her Answer, I had given a better Character of him; p. 23.
and he thinks, of my self. Truly, I would gladly oblige both of us, but I Am
afraid 'twon't do this time: However, let us hear Berinthia's Answer. Relapse,
p. 91.
Ber. Thou Minister of Darkness get up again; for I hate to see the Devil at
his Devotions. This is to make amends for the other. I cannot perceive how. One
Man injures his Neighbor, and another blames him for it; does this cancel the
guilt, and make the Fact nothing. One Man speaks Blasphemy, and another
reproves him; does this justify the Boldness, or make the Words unspoken? But
by this Answer the Audience are put in mind, Vind. p. 23
she is ^ot supposed to deserve that Compliment. I cannot (...) that neither.
Berinthia's Answer looks (...) like a design of carrying on the Profan^ne^s,
and continuing the Religious Banter. ^^r Character is loose throughout the
Play, and she never says ought that is good, unless ^o abuse it. The Poet might
easily see, that I^struction in her Mouth was most likely to be misunderstood
and miscarry. There Is no occasion for much quoting, the next Lines will show us
how significant her Advice must needs be.

Well, (says Worthy) my inc^mparable Berinthia, how shall I requite you?


Ber. Relapse. Ibid.
O never trouble your self about that: Virtue (alias Pimping) is its own
Reward. There Is a Pleasure in doing good, which sufficiently pays it self.
Here Is a Lecture of Philosophy well applied! This is an Admirable Lady to
correct ill Sentences, and give Aim to the Audience! And yet the jest on it is,
the Man's not pleased because I did not commend him for his Care. Truly he must
excuse me, I am not so full of Panegyric as this comes to.

I cited L. Brute for saying the Part of a downright Wife is to Cuckold her
Husband. The addition of setting it down as a Precept, is all his own, and so
consequently is the Foul Play too, as will appear by the Ladies words.

Pro.-Wife P. 3. View, etc. P. 83.
Belinda -- I could almost resolve to play the downright Wife, and Cuckold him.
Is not to play the Knave, and to play the part of a Knave the same thing? This,
tho it does not imply Duty and Precept, it supposes general Practice, Truth in
Notion, and propriety of Character: And as a Man cannot be said to be a Knave,
without playing Knavish Tricks; so by the Poets Reasoning, a Woman cannot be
said to play the downright Wife, unless she Injures her Husband. This is a
great Compliment to the Ladies! And whether the Vindicator has reason to ask
their Pardons for Lying, Vind. p. 23
in jest or in earnest, the Reader must judge.

He owns Lady Brute in her next Reply, says, p. 24.
that which at first View seems much more liable to exception. This Confessiion
is more than ordinary; Let the Lady speak.


L. Brute, Why, after all there is more to be said for it (for Adultery) than
you would imagine Child. I know according to the strict Statute Law of Religion, I
should do wrong; but if there were a Court of Chancery in Heaven, I should be
sure to cast him.


Belind. If there were a House of Lords you might.


L. Brute, In either I should Infallibly carry my Cause. Why he is the first
Aggressor. (It had been worse if he had been the second.) Not I.


Belind. Ay, Pro. Wife. P. 4. View, etc. P. 83.
but you know, we must return good for evil.


L. Brute, That may be a mistake in the Translation.


Thus the Justice of God, the Court of Heaven, and the Precepts of our Savior
are Ridiculed! S. Mat. 5.
And what can make satisfaction for these horrible outrages? Not all the Blood
in a Man's Veins. The Mercy that Pardons such Boldness, had need be infinite!
But the Vindicator has taken care that her Raillery should not be mistaken for
her serious Opinion. Ibid.
She tells Belinda, Pro. Wife. p. 4.
I shall play the fool, and je^^ (...) till I make you begin to think, I am in
earnest. This is an admirable defense! The Woman Blasphemes in jest, and
diverts the Company with the Bible, Ibid.
and therefore all is well; and the Poet must be commended for his Caution! I
perceive God and Religion are very Significant Things with some People!

Relapse P. 1^. View, etc. P. 84.
To disengage Young Fashion from his very Profane Application of Providence. He
says, every body knows the word Providence in common Discourse goes for
Fortune. A Man that is sinking will catch at a Weed. I am sorry I must spend my
time about words, especially in so plain a Signification. But since the
business must be undertaken, I shall endeavor at a brief satisfaction. Cic.
De. Not. Deor. Lib. 1. P. 4670, 4671 Lib. 2. P. 4732, 4764. Ed. Du. Pays.
We may observe then that Tully in his Philosophical Tracts distinguishes
Providence from the Epicurean System of Chance and Fortune. Providence and
Divine Administration, are with him the same Thing. The Emperor Marcus
Antonius Philosophus has this Religious Expostolation. (...) Who would live in
a World uninhabited by the Gods, and Providence? Now for a little English
Authority' Sir Roger L' Estrange in his Aesop's Fables, P. 68, 78. and alib.
uses the Word Providence frequently for the Government of the World by the
Deity; but no otherwise that I Remember. And more particularly in the 187, and
211. Pages, he makes the Notion of Fortune and Providence distinct, and opposes
the one to the other.

This Gentleman is well known to be a Master of Style, and therefore I choose to
instance in him. Mr. Dryden another good Judge in Language, Don Seba. P. 51.
Mock Ast. P. 36.
uses, Providence in the same Sense tho not upon so good an Occasion. To
Conclude. The Relapser himself shall come in Evidence, and Attack the
Vindicator for once. Enter Bull. Relapse P. 97.


Bull, What Providence orders, I submit to.


Nurse, And so do I, with all Humility.


Coupler, Why that now was spoke like good People.


Thus we see from Bull's Religious Character, from Nurses solemn acquiescence,
and from Coupler's Reflection, the Relapser takes Providence for Divine
Appointment, and the Pleasure of the first Being.

Berinthia comes again; and here the Relapser has shown us what speed we may
expect from him when he strikes out. This Lady was Worthy's Procuress. To
succeed in her business she tells Amanda, He (Mr. Worthy) used you like a Text,
he took you all to pieces, but spoke so Learnedly -- One might see the spirit
of the Church was in him. Now why does the Vindicator deny his own Words, and
affirm the Woman is not liken'd to a Text in general; Vind. P. 26
or any other way? He had much better drop the Cause, than plead it thus
untowardly. To return to the Relapse. Berinthia goes on in Pulpit-phrase, and
pursues her Employment very intelligibly. Relapse P. 69.
At last she mentions. Use and Application, and brings them up to the point of
Debauchery. By her talking you would think there was little Difference between
Lewdness and Religion. And that Whoring and Preaching, a Church and a
Bawdy House might be treated alike. This fine Discourse the Vindicator, out of
his great Modesty, calls an inoffensive Simile, Vind. P. 26
and says it abuses no body.

Berinthia concludes in Blasphemy, and joins the Atheist and the Procuress
together. Now consider (says she) what has been said, and Heaven give you Grace
to put it in Practice; Relapse Ibid. View, etc. P. 84.
that is to take Berinthias lewd Counsel, to prostitute her Virtue, and turn
Whore. These words would be always Profane upon the Stage, but the Application
of them here, is flamingly Blasphemous. The Vindicator's Defense is remarkable.
He grants these words are often used at the close of a Sermon, P. 27.
and therefore perhaps might as well have been let alone. It seems the Case is
somewhat doubtful, he is not sure but that a Man may as well Blaspheme as let
it alone! One had need of Patience to read this* But St. Michael did not rail
upon the Devil, St. Jude.
and therefore I shall pass it over. His lame excuse from the Character, and
Manner, I have disproved already. Relapse P. 49.
This Berinthia has a very Scandalous Soliloquy; She thanks heaven for her
Impudence, and is nauseously Bold, and Profane: which, besides the Irreligion,
is an odd way of treating her Sex, and Figure.

We are now come to the Abuse of the Clergy. And here the Vind^cato^'s method
of purging himself is extraordinary. He runs a great length of Satyr upon the
Rights and Privileges of the Clergy. I perceive the little Justice I
endeavored to do that Order, will not down with him. By his Reasoning one would
think the World strangely Priest Ridden, and all Ages, Countries, and Religions,
extremely to blame! If you will take his word for it, Riches, Plenty and Power, p.
30.
are very Improper things for a Churchman. And yet this Gentleman owns the
Institution of the Clergy to be the most Effectual means of promoting our
Happiness in thi^ World, Ibid.
and the other. Say you so? Then sure they ought to have a share in the Common
Advantages. Acknowledgment should always bear some Proportion to Obligation.
Where Is the Gratitude, or even the Justice of acting otherwise? If Riches and
Power are things desirable, why should not the Clergy come in with the rest; If
they are not, why are they grudged them? To put the Priesthood under a
Disadvantage in the State, only for having God's Commission, is an odd way of
showing our Religion. It Is somewhat hard a Man should be barred the
Conveniences of this Life, for helping his Neighbors to a better. To proceed.
Are not the Clergy of the same Humane Nature with other People? Have they not
the same Necessities for this World, and the same Conscience and Discretion to
use it? Generally speaking, Poverty does as ill with a Priest, as with a Poet.
It Is apt to Sink the Spirits, to make the Mind grow Anxious, and Feeble in the
discharge of Function. If Riches are so invincibly dangerous, why don't the
Christian Laity part with them, and like Crates, throw their Gold into the Sea?
But does not this Plea for the Churches Temporals, reflect on the Author of
Christianity; or as the Vindicator too lightly expresses it, Vind. P. 30, 31.
do^s it not suppose that Christ and his Apostles* took the thing by the wrong
handle? By no means* The case is not the same. The Apostles had a Power of
working Miracles, Acts 3.8. and 5.5, 10. and 28.8. 1 Cor. 5* 5.
to hold up their Character, and make way for their Doctrine. They could Cure
Diseases, and Inflict them* Kill and make Alive, Punish and Oblige in the
highest manner. They had Nature at their beck, and Omnipotence about them. Such
Credentials needed no other Recommendation. Such Illustrious Poverty out-shines
Imperial Grandeur, and makes a Cottage look Nobler than a Court. But this
Glorious Assistance was le^^ but for a few Ages. When Christianity was once
Established, and Princes Converted to the Faith, the end of Miracles went off,
and the Power was recalled. From this time the Church was left in some measure
to Humane Prudence, and Civil Policy. When the Heavens were thus shut in; and
the other World withdrew, there was more occasion of recourse to This. Now,
Temporal Advantage, and Secular Support, grew much more seasonable, and the
Church was obliged to preserve her Authority by some of the methods of Civil
Governors. But the Vindicator says, P 39.
Religion is not a Cheat, and therefore has no need of Trappings. A Judge is no
Cheat neither. It Is well known he has a good Commission. To what purpose then
are all these Formalities of the Cour^; All this Expense in Solemnity and
Retinue? Cannot the Old Gentleman come like an Vtopian Syphogranta, Moor's Utop.
with a wisp of Grass upon a Pole. Away, cries the Vindicator, with all this
unnecessary State. Why must the Charge be given in Furs and Scarlet, when the
Law will operate every jot as well in Leat^^^? However, this Gentleman will
have it that an Ambassador who comes with advantageous Proposals, Ibid.
stands in no need of Equipage to procure him Respect. This Project would save
a great deal of Money? But there are few Princes of his mind. What does the
Vindicator mean by all this good Husbandry? would he have an Ambassador Travel
like a Carrier with a Port-Mant^au behind him? Such Equipage would Represent
strongly, and give a noble Idea of his business. In short, as things stand,
Government of all kinds, requires somewhat of Figure. Appearance goes a great
way in the Expediting of Affairs. Naked Reason will not always do. The generality
must have their Senses struck, and their Imagination affected. Thus Authority
is best refreshed, and the Ends of the Institution secured. For this purpose
Miracles were wrought; and when they cease, it is proper to apply to the usual
Expedients.

And now I shall venture to confront the first A^rticle of his Heresy, Vind. P.
31
as he calls it, with this Truth, viz. That the Shepherd who has least Meat at
home in his House, has most Business: For Indigence has a very working Head;
and a Man is always most full of Care, when he does not know how to live: And
for the same Reason, he that has the best Fortune, may be most at leisure,
because he has others to manage his Affairs.

The Vindicator in his 2 d. Article discourses of Sauce and Sops, p. 32.
etc. But he has cooked the Allegory so oddly, that I know not well what to
make on it. If he reasons from the Kitchen upon these subjects, he must talk by
himself. His 3 d. Article I have spoken to already, and am now to consider it
farther. For

P. 38, 39.
The Vindicator pretends, That Piety, Learning, Charity and Humility, would
secure the Clergy from Neglect, much better than Power, and Revenue. Upon a
View of the whole, one and the other will be found to do very well together. For
1 st. If Piety and Power are not to be reconciled, and a Man must either throw
up his Fortune or his Creed, the Laity will be obliged to the same Resignation.
The Enclosures of Property and Privilege must be broken down, and all Things
laid in Common. But if it is possible for a Man to be Pious with a Penny in his
Pocket, the Clergy I suppose may be so, with as little difficulty as their
Neighbors. Then as for Learning, Poverty, and this Advantage are inconsistent.
As the World goes, there is little Knowledge to be had without Money. A Man may
get Honesty for nothing; but if he will have any Sense to it more than ordinary,
he must pay for it. There are some few Exceptions to this Rule, but generally
speaking, it holds true. To go on. Charity is much better exercised with
Revenue, than without it. It Is true, a Beggar may have as large a Soul as a
Prince. But Will without Power, is neither so clear nor so serviceable. He that
can go no farther than a good Wish, is oftentimes only kind in his Conscience,
and a Benefactor to himself. For where the Heart is invisible, the Obligation
must be so too. But Power brings secret Goodness into Light, and makes it
appear unquestionable. And to come closer to the subject, I believe if the
Preacher could Dine all the Poor of the Parish every Sunday, his Sermon would
be more significant. His Table would assist his Pulpit, and his Charity
reinforce his Reasoning. They Would first come to him for the Loaves, and then for
the Doctrine. And lastly, as for Humility, I agree with the Vindicator; I think
it most necessary; and that no Man can be a Christian without it. But whether I
have the same Notion of this Virtue with our Author or not, I cannot tell. To be
humble, a Man is bound not to be full of himself, or grow stiff upon any
Advantage, but give all the Glory to God. He must be fair in Conversation, not
despise the least Mortal, but rather stoop to oblige those upon lower Ground.
Thus far without doubt all Clergymen, and all Christians are concerned to be
Humble. But to be servile and sheepish to humor Pride, and blow up Conceit,
this is quite another thing. There Is neither Humility, Discretion, nor so much
as Honesty, in such Management. It Is little Knavery, and parasitical Meanness;
and Church Men, of all People, should stand clear of so uncreditable an
Imputation. Congr. Amend.
Now it is this sort of Humility the Stage would put upon them. The Vindicator
and Mr. Congreve, are wonderfully for an humble Clergy: And so are some of the
proudest Men I ever met with. If it is said the Clergy are bound to be
Exemplary, I willingly grant it. But Example supposes other Persons concerned
besides those who Set it. If the Clergy are to be Examples, it is because the
^^ity are bound to follow them: And in Humility too, as well as in other
Duties. For if the Teachers are bound to be Humble, the He^^er^ without
question are under the same Obligation. The Argument might be pressed farther,
but I rather choose to leave it with the Reader. And since we are on the subject
of Humility, the Vindicator and Mr. Congreve would do well to think on it. If as
this Gentleman observes, He who teaches Piety and Morality to the World, is a
great Benefactor to Mankind: Then by the rule of Contraries, he who teaches
Immorality, must be as great a Nuisance. He who makes it his business to
exterminate Virtue, and Conscience, and debauch both Practice and Principle,
must needs be a Misfortune to the Age. Unless they can clear themselves of this
Imputation, they ought to be wonderfully modest and unpretending. To be the
Author of irreparable Mischief* to destroy the Innocence of Life, the
Securities of Government, and the Expectations of the World to come, are
powerful Reasons for Humility. Those who in any measure lie under this Charge,
can hardly bend too low, or think themselves lesser than really they are.

Prove. Wif. p. 45, 46, 51, 52. View, etc. 180.
The Vindicator would make us believe, that Sir John Brute's debauching in a
Gown, was no Abuse of the Clergy. That Is Strange! I take it the Company were
merry with the Disguise. 'Twas the Habit and Function which made the Scene
diverting. The Oaths and Lewdness would not have made half the Music in a
Lay-Character: And the Constable's Je^^s would have been but heavy upon another
occasion. Besides. Sir John is made to abuse his pretended Brethren, and the
Justice falls in general upon the Order. Pro. Wife, 45, 51.
And is it no Disservice to be thus executed in Effigy, and made a Mad man by
Representation? If a Lewd Person could steal his Neighbor's Shape, and then
play all his Pranks in it, I suppose he would have no Thanks for his pains. When
the Badge of a Man's Office which should give him Credit, is shown ridiculous,
I fancy, he has reason to complain. If the Vindicator is of another mind, let
him practice the same Liberty upon a Judge, or a Lord Mayor, and see how the
Jest will take.

I observed upon the Relapse, View, etc. 109. Relap. 74.
that Bull the Chaplain, wished the married Couple Joy, in Language horribly
Smutty and Profane. I confess, I could not go on with it. And what says the
Vindicator to this? Page 35.
Why he plucks up his Spirits, and lays it all upon the Board; no body could
have transcribed a foul passage more honestly. And now who would suspect the
Man to be otherwise than Innocent? Thus some People when they are going to put
a Trick upon you, strip their Arm bare, and pretend strongly to fair Dealing.
But here the matter was too gross for a cleanly Conveyance. To argue this Point
any farther, would be an ill Compliment to the Reader, and therefore I shall
pass it over. View, etc. 109, 110, 232.
I charged the Relapse, Preface and Play, with a great deal more scandalous
Abuse of the Clergy; but this the Vindicator is pleased to overlook. And as to
the irreligious Part, Page 35.
he only says, it is just as profane as the rest; which though it may not come
up to the Merits of some passages, is Character bad enough in all Conscience.

We are now advanced to a new Chapter. And here the Vindicator would fain know
which way I make it appear, Page 44.
That Constant is his Model for a Fine Gentleman; and that he is brought upon
the Stage for Imitation. This demand is easily satisfied. That he stands for a
fine Gentleman, is evident from his Sense, his Breeding, and his Figure? Now
these Circumstances, with the fair Treatment he meets with, make him a Model
for Imitation. This consequence follows naturally from the Advantage of his
Character. For most young People of any pretenses, love to be counted fine
Gentlemen. And when Vice has Credit, as well as Pleasure annexed, the Temptation
is dangerously fortified.

Page 45.
The Vindicator tells the Reader, That this honest Dr. does not understand the
Nature of Comedy, tho he made it his Study so long. For the business of Comedy
is to show People what they should do, by representing them doing what they
should not do. Nor is there any Necessity to explain the Moral to the Audience.
For all this Liveliness, I Am afraid this honest Poet, neither understands
Comedy, nor himself, and that is somewhat worse. Not himself, because he
contradicts what he wrote before. Vind. p. 9.
For in the beginning of his V^ndication he acquaints us how careful he was to
explain the Moral, for fear of misconstruction. Yes; for fear the Boxes and Pit
should misinterpret him. Page 45.
But now the Tale is quite turned, and there is no need of a Philosopher to
unriddle the Mystery.

2 ly. He mistakes the Nature of Comedy. This we may learn from Ben. Johnson,
who acquaints the University, Fox Ep. Ded.
That he has imitated the Conduct of the Ancients: In whose Comedies the Bawds,
etc. yea and oft-times the Masters too, are multed, and that fitly, it being
the Office of a Comic Poet to imitate Justice, and instruct to Life. Is it the
Office of a Comic Poet to imitate Justice, etc. then certainly Rewards and
Punishments ought to be rightly applied: Then a Libertine ought to have some
Mark of Disfavour set upon him, and be brought under Discipline and Disgrace.
See View, etc. 151, 153, 164.
To say the Business of Comedy is to show People what they should do, by
representing them doing what they should not, is a pleasant way of arguing!
What is the Stage to be read Backwards, and construed by Contradiction? When
they talk Smut must we understand them in a Sense of Modesty; and take all
their Profaneness for Pious Expression? Then by the same Rule, when they say
any thing that is good, we must conclude they have a Lewd Meaning. This is an
admirable Compass to Sail by; such Piloting must needs discover all the Rocks
and Quicksands in the Voyage! This undistinguishing Method at the best, would
be like pulling up the Buoys, quitting the Helm, and leaving the Passengers to
Steer at their Discretion. But as the Poets manage the matter, it is still more
dangerous. For to show a Religious Person ridiculous; to give Figure and
Success to an ill Character, and make Lewdness Modi^^ and Entertaining, is the
way to mi^mark the Nature of Good and Evil, and confound the Understandings of
the Audience* It Is the way to hide the Flaws in Behavior, Vind. p. 46
to Varnish the Deformity, and make the Blemishes look Shining. The Vindicator
insists, That Constant says nothing to justify the life he leads, except, etc.
What needs he? He is sufficiently justified in his Character and Usage, and in
not being punished. Page 47.
Let Us have the rest. He does not justify the Life he leads, except where he is
pleading with Lady Brute to debauch her, and s^re no body will suppose him
there to be speaking much of his mind. Why not? Does a Man who argues against
Conscience, and talks like an Athe^st, never speak his Mind? If a Libertine
pleads in his own Defense, why must he not be supposed to be in earnest?
Besides, how could Constant expect to carry the Cause, unless the Colors
looked fair, and the Reasoning probable? To give this Spark his due, he makes
the most of his Matters. He endeavors to inform the Lady, Pro. Wife, Page 34.
That Virtue consists in Goodness and P^^y, not in snarling straitlaced
Chastity. That Honor is a phantome, and that the Importance of ^t lies in the
Custom of the Country, not in the Nat^^e of the Thing; and pretends precedents
for a contrary Practice. In short, Hobs and Spinos^ could scarcely have said
more for him. This is admirable instruction! Ibid.
And Lady Brut^ for all the shrewdness of her Answers, confesses her self
puzzled, and suffers the Intrigue to go on. In a word, Pro. Wife, 35.
if the Young Ladies (the Vindicator takes such care of) have nothing but this
D^^logue for their Security, I should think them in a dangerous Condition.
Vind. p. 47
And here I cannot but take notice how the Vindicator contradicts himself again.
Vind. p. 45 47.
He makes the Lady turn P^ilosopher, and gives an Interpreter to the
Poppet-Show.

I taxed his Bellinda for confessing her Inclination to a Gallant. View, etc.
146.
For this he calls me an unfair Adversary, Page 47. Vind. p. 48
as if I had misreported him, adding withal, that Bellinda only says, If her
Pride should make her Marry a Man she hated, her Virtue would be in danger from
the Man she loved. His Play will soon decide this Controversy, and show on
which side the Unfairness lies. Bellinda's words are these:

Bellind. to Lady Brute. Prove. Wif. q. 64.
OF my Conscience were it not for your Affair in the Balance, I should go n^ar
to pick up some odious Man of Quality yet, and only take poor Heartfree for a
Gallant. This very Bellinda a little before advises Lady Brute to surrender her
Virtue to Constant. Prove. Wif. p. 45.
The Lady requites her in a suitable encouragement.


Lady Br. If you did commit Fornication Child, Ibid.
'twou'd be but a good friendly part, if 'twere only to keep me in Countenance
whilst I commit -- So it seems, she must turn Whore out of good Breeding. These
two Ladies, in a private Dialogue, where we must suppose their Hearts are open,
are extremely instructive and civil to their Sex! Lady Brute informs her Niece,
that the Men are most of them Atheists, and believe the Women to be no better;
that by a Woman of Reputation, is meant no more than a Woman of Discretion. To
this Accusation the Lady pleads Guilty, and confesses, That want o^ Inclination
seldom protects any of her Sex. And as for Fear, it is too weak a Restraint to
hold them long. And were it not for their Cowardice, they would likewise
venture upon all the Masculine Vices of Fighting, Prove. Wif. p. 65.
Swearing, Blaspheming, etc. Here you have the Secrets of the Cabinet, and
Truth and Ceremony in abundance. This Author in his Vindication Courts the Sex
in his own Person. Vind. p. 44 45.
With all due Respects (says he) to the Ladies, a Bishopric may prove as
Weighty a Reward, as a Wife, or a Mistress either. It seems then in the Scale
of this Civil Gradation, a Mistress, that is a Strumpet, is a weightier Reward
than a Wife. Truly I think the Vindicator pays his Respects to the Ladies in
this place, almost as untowardly as he did to the Devil before.

To conclude with the Provoked Wife. The Men of Figure in this Play, (excepting
the Justice, who makes but a short Enter) are professed Libertines, and pass
off without Censure or Disappointment. Prove. Wif. P. 76, 77.
I grant Sir John's Character has some Strokes of Discouragement, but he is made
pretty easy at last, and brought to no Penance. The Women have some of the
same Inclinations; and the same good Luck with them. It Is true Lady Fancifull
miscarries in her Design; has her Disguise pulled off, and falls under some
Confusion. But then we are to take notice, that this Lady was the most Modest
of the Company. What e're her Thoughts were, she has the Discretion to keep
them in Reserve. This Squeamishn^ss, it is possible, drew down the Severity of
the Poet. Had she been as bad as the rest, she might have fared better. But it
seems, a pretense to Virtue is an unsufferable Boldness; and she must be
punished in Terrorem to her Sex.

This sort of Management puts me in mind of Mr. Dennis's Ingenuity. He frankly
Confesses Lewdness promoted by the Stage. This is clear dealing: And I suppose,
the main Reason of his saying that the Playhouse Contributes so much to the
Happiness of the Nation.

We are now come forward to the Remarks upon the Relapse. And here the
Vindicator does as good as confess he has made many foolish Mistakes in his
Play. Vind. P. 56 57.
And by a peculiar happiness in his Understanding, seems both sensible, and
satisfied with it.

The Vindicator pretends much to Morals and Instruction about Loveless and
Amanda; but cannot forbear running upon the old Haunt. For after having made
himself Merry with a Venison Pasty and a Tankerd of Ale; P. 61.
he falls a quoting the Lords-Prayer about his Play, and in different
Characters, to make us sensible of his Devotion.

He goes on in the Relation of his Fable, quotes Lead us not into Temptation
once again; and says, Loveless had no farther occasion for that Petition. P. 65.
I wish the Poet is not of Loveless's Opinion. His making bold with so Solemn a
Sentence upon so light a Subject, is somewhat to be suspected.

He informs us that Loveless and Amanda's Virtue was built upon a Rock, P. 65,
69.
and raised upon the utmost strength of Foundation, and had Religion, etc.
Rel^pse P. 2, 3.
to defend it. And yet this Pious Couple are for Mahomets Paradise, and wish
for Immortal Sensualities.

He would make Loveless and Amanda the chief Characters by the Importance of
the Design. P. 71.
The Importance of his Play is Diversion; And to gain This he has broke through
the Rules of the Drama. Vind. P. 60
But let his Private Design be what it will, I still say, Young Fashion, Lord
Foppington, and their Party, make the principal Figure in the Play: The Plot,
the Fortune, and the Conclusion, the greatest part of the Play, and of the
Persons too is on their side. As for poor Loveless he sinks in the middle of
the Fourth Act, and you may go look him. Here the Vindicat^r could not find in
his heart to quote fair; however, he makes a shift to say that if the Play had
sunk in the Fourth Act too, p. 72.
it had been better than it is by just Twenty per Cent. If he does not mean
Pounds, I agree with him, so far as to own that if it had sunk in the Third Act
it had been more Valuable. For some Entertainments like Dirty way, are always
the better for being short. However, does not this Confession prove the Truth
of my Remarks, and that Loveless was a Character of inferior Consideration?
Does the main Concern use to die so long before the Epilogue, and the Chief
Person go off when about a Third of the Play is remaining?

The Vindicator gives a Home Thrust at Parting, but his Weapon like
Scaramouchy's is made of a Rush. He complains mightily of unfair Dealing, and
pretends I have Ridiculed the Morality of the Scene between Worthy and Amanda.
P. 73, 74.
Thus he endeavors to cast a Mist before the Reader, but a Man must have bad
Eyes not to see through it: For in this Reflection upon Worthy, I was not
examining the Moral, but the Dramatick Virtues of his Play. View etc P. 2^8,
226, 2^7.
This was so plain that 'twas impossible for the Vindicator to overlook it. I
say my Remarks in this place were only upon the Manners in a Poetic Sense. My
business here was to show the Inconsistency of Worthy's Character, and the
unlikelyhood of his Reformation, indeed what can be more improbable than so
sudden a change in behavior? This Spark immediately before his Lecture of
Philosophy had told Amanda that Sin no more was a Task too hard for Mortals.
Relapse p. 100. Joh. 8.11.
This by the way, is a bold Contradiction of our Savior, it is Impious in the
Assertion, and Lewd in the Appliplication; So few words can hardly be charged
with more Profaneness. Here the Relapser calls the Sense of the Scripture in
question, Vind. P. 14
charges the Text with Untruth, and does that which by his own Confession
amounts to Burlesque.

To return to Worthy, what can be more improbable than that so Profane and
finished a Debauchee, so weak in Principle, and so violent in Passion, should
run from one extreme to another? Should break through Custom, and metamorphose
Desire at so short a warning? To Solicit to Rudeness, and talk Sentences and
Morality, to be Pious and Profane in the same Breath must be very
extraordinary. To be all Pleasure and Mortification so just together, a Madman
one Minute and a Hermit the next, is one would think somewhat forced, and
unnatural: It looks at best but like the Grimace of a Disappointment, the Foxes
virtue when the Grapes were above his Reach. To make a Libertine talk like
Plato, or Socrates, is Philosophy misplaced, it is good advice, but out of
Character; The Soil and the Plant, the Man and the Morals will not agree.

P. 73, 74.
Thus it appears the Blot he makes so much a noise with, lies in his own Tables;
whether I have hit it, or not, the Reader must judge. I am glad to hear him
talk of his Grave: P. 78.
'Twas a seasonable Thought, and I heartily wish it its due improvement; Such a
Consequence would be of great service, both to himself and the Public. For
then, I am well assured, he would neither Write Plays, nor Defend them, at the
rate he has done.

I have nothing farther with the Vindicator; but before I Conclude, I shall
speak to one Objection proposed by the Defender of Dramatick Poetry, and Mr.
Dennis. These Authors endeavor to justify the Theater from the Silence of the
Scriptures. The Word of God (say they) has no where condemned Plays, Defense of
Dramat. Poetry P. 40, 43, 55, 56. The Usefulness of the Stage, P. 138, 139. etc.
the Apostles who were particular in other Cases, have given the Stage no
Reprimand, nor Christians any warning against it: And which is more, St. Paul
makes no Difficulty in citing Menander a Comic Poet, which he would not have
done unless he had approved both the Author and his business too. This is the
sum of what they offer. Now the Plea of St. Paul's citing Menander, is
extremely slender. Every foreign Sentence in Scripture is not commended by the
bare mention. The Devil's Maxim of Skin for Skin, Job 2.4.
etc. is set down, but not for our Imitation. I grant this Verse of Menander is
Moral, and Sententious; And without doubt St. Paul cited it to put the
Christians upon their Guard, and that they might be ashamed to fall short of
the Instructions of the Heathens. But to infer that St. Paul approved all that
Menander had written, and that the Apostle recommended Plays to the
Corinthians: To conclude all this from one single Line of Quotation, is
Prodigious consequence. This Latitude would justify the Stage to purpose, and
make the Lewdest Authors pass Muster. There being few Books so entirely Vicious
as not to afford an inoffensive and significant period. I don't speak this with
application to Menander, for as Plutrarch observes, he was with respect to
Aristophanes, a very Modest Poet. Besides this very quotation that evil
communication corrupts good Manners, disserves the purpose 'twas brought for.
It Is a sharp Rebuke of the Licentiousness of our Stage, and a plain
Discountenance of so scandalous a Diversion.

To proceed with the Objection. I affirm that Plays are plainly condemned in
Scripture upon two accounts. I say they are clearly condemned, tho not by
express Prohibition; yet by Principle and Consequence, which is the same thing.

1. They are condemned upon the score of Idolatry; They were parts of Pagan
Worship, and under that notion unlawful to Christians. But this Reason expiring
in a great measure with the Heathen Religion, I shall insist on it no farther.
However it proves thus much, that the Unlawfulness of every Liberty is not
particularly Marked in Scripture. P. 140, 142.
For in the Apostles time, Mr. Dennis allows Plays were Idolatrous and
unlawful; and yet we see the Holy Text does not declare against the Theater by
Name.

2. The Stage, (particularly the English one) is condemned in Scripture upon
the score of Smut and Profaneness; upon the Account of the Danger and Indecency
of such Liberties. St. Mat. 5. James 5. Ephesians. 5. Collos. 3. Heb. 12. 1 Pet. 1.
1 Pet. 5. 1 These. 5. Romans 1.32 Ephesians. 5.11.
We are strictly commanded in Scripture not to Swear at all, to put away all
Blasphemy and filthy Communication out of our Mouth; To serve God with
Reverence, to be Sober and Vigilant. To pass the time of our sojourning here in
fear, and abstain from all appearance of Evil. And in a word, To have no
pleasure in Scandalous Practices, no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
Darkness, but rather reprove them. Here Is Evidence enough in all reason, these
Admonitions are full against our Stage. Not one Play in forty can stand the
Test of so much as one single Text. Bring the Theater but to the Bible, 1 Samuel
5.3.
and the Idol is presently discovered, and falls like Dagon before the Ark.

This Argument from the silence of our Savior and his Apostles is answered at
large by the Bishop of Meaux in his late Book against the Stage. Which being so
much to the Purpose, I shall Translate it for the Reader.

Maxims and Reflections sur la Comedy P. 71, etc.
Those (says he) who would draw any Advantage from this Silence may by the same
reason defend the Barbarities of the Gladiators, and other abominable
Spectacles, which are all unmentioned in Scripture, no less than Plays. The
Holy Fathers who have dealt with this Objection, will furnish us with Matter
for a Reply, we say then, That all engaging Representations which excite, and
fortify unlawful Desires, are condemned in Scripture, together with the Vices
they tend to. For the purpose, Lewd Pictures are censured by all those Passages
which declare in general against Immodesty; And the same may be said of
Dramatick Representations. St. John has comprehended the whole of this Subject
in the following Injunction. 1 Jo. 2.15.
Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world: If any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world,
is the Lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of Life,
which Lust or Concupiscence, is not of the Father, but of the World. Now if
these Things, and Inclinations, are not of God, the moving Representations, and
Charming Images of them* are not of Him neither, but of the World; and by
consequence Christians have nothing to do with them.

St. Paul likewise has summed up the Argument in these words. Finally my
Brethren, whatsoever things are true, Phil. 4.8.
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things
are pure, (or according to the Greek whatsoever things are chaste) whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any
virtue, or if there be any praise, think on these things. As if he had said,
whatever hinders you from thinking on these things, and possesses you with
contrary Amusements, ought not to be entertained as a Pleasure, but suspected
as dangerous. In this beautiful collection of Thoughts which St. Paul
recommends to a Christian, there is no finding a Place for the Modern Theaater,
how much soever it may be in the favor of some Secular People.

Farther, The Silence of our Savior upon the Argument of Plays, puts me in
mind that he had no occasion to mention them to the House of Israel, to which
he was sent, these Diversions being never admitted in that Nation. The Jews had
no Shows to entertain them but their Feasts, their Sacrifices, and their Holy
Ceremonies. They were formed by their Constitution to a plain and natural way
of Living; They knew nothing of these Fancies and Inventions of Greece: So that
to the praises which Balaam gives them, Numb. xxiii. 23.
that there is no Ench^ntment in Jacob, nor Divination in Israel; We may
likewise add, there was no Theater among them; nothing of these dangerous
Amusements to be met with. This innocent undeba^ch'd People, took their
Recreations at Home, and made their Children their Diversion. Thus after their
Labors in the Fields, and the Fatigues of their Domestic Affairs; they
relieved their Spirits, as their Patriarchs had done before them. Indeed if we
consider the matter rightly, there is no need of making a Business of Pleasure:
Nature is easily refreshed without this Expense and Curiosity.

The Apostle's saying nothing expressly on this Subject may possibly be resolved
into the reason abovementioned. These Holy Men being bred to the plain Gust of
their Forefathers, might not think themselves concerned to write directly
against those practices with which their Nation was unacquainted: 'Twas
sufficient for them to lay down Principles by which such Liberties were
discountenanced: The Christians were well satisfied their Religion was founded
on the Jewish, and that the Church never allowed of those Diversions which were
banished the Synagogue. But let the matter be how it will, this Precedent of
the Jews reaches home to the Professors of Christianity. It being a Shame that
the Spiritual Israel should indulge their Senses in those Pleasures, which the
Carnal People knew nothing of.

Before I dismiss the Reader, I Will just give him a taste of Mr. Dennis's Skill
and Modesty in answering a Testimony.

I cited Plutarch to show the Opinion of the Athenians concerning Plays: Plut.
de Glo. Atheniens. View, etc. P. 240.
This People (says he) thought Comedy so unreputable a performance, that they
made a Law that no Judge of the Areopagus should make one. Here Mr. Dennis
replies very roundly, Dennis, p. 85.
This Citation is absolutely false. Right! It Is false in the Latin, but it is
true in the Greek. (...). De Glor. Athen. p. 348.

Besides, the Latin makes more against him. For by that the Law says, Dennis,
p. 86.
That no Man whatsoever should write any Comedys; which is a higher Censure
than the other. I hope, for the future Mr. Dennis will not confide so much in a
Translation; especially when it sits harder than the Original.

His Remark from Aristotle's Treatise of Poetry is another Mistake; and I think
not at all to his Advantage: But to set him in his way, this Philosopher does
not say that Comedy was very much discouraged at first, nor very little
neither. This point was not argued: Arist. lib. de Poet. cap. 5.
He only affirms, That it was a great while before the Chorus was furnished out
by the Government.

I should now go on with Mr. Dennis, and ^^ew his Attempt on my other
Authorities as unsuccessful as this upon Plutarch; but having some Business at
present, I shall wave it till a farther Opportunity.

One word with the Vindicator of the Stage, and I have done.

This Gentleman appeared early in the Cause, and has given me very little
trouble, and therefore 'twould hardly be Civil not to dispatch him at the first
Hearing.

Vindic. P. 22, 23.
He pretends I mistake in Translating Saecularia Spectacula, Stage Plays.

To this I Answer, First, That I only affirmed the Stage was manifestly
comprehended under Saecularia Spectacula: View, etc. p. 250.
And that it is so, will follow from his own Assertion. For if the Ludi
Saeculares, and Saecularia Spectacula were the same, it is well known that Stage
Plays were part of the Ludi Saeculares; Rosin. Schott. p. 757.
all the Theaters being frequented at those public Solemnities.

Secondly, The third Council of Carthage by me cited, cannot possibly mean the
Secular Plays by Saecularia Spectacula: For this Council was held anno 397.
fourscore years and better after the Conversion of Constantine. Now these Ludi
Saeculares were Idolatrous, both in the Practice and Institution, and never
celebrated after the Empire became Christian: The last time we hear of them was
in the Reign of the Emperor Philip, Enseb. in Chron.
anno 248. which was 149 years before the convening of this Council.

Thirdly, Saeculum and Saecularis, in the Language of the Fathers, relates to
the unconverted World, in contradistinction to the Church. Thus Typhus
Saecularis in the Life of Arnobius, signifies Heathen Pride* (...) Council
interprets it self by calling these Saec^laria Spectacula, View, p. 250.
Pagan Entertainments. I almost wonder the Stage-Vindicator could cite the
words and mistake the sense.

What this Author may have farther, requiring consideration, he may find in my
Reply to Mr. Congr^ve, and the Relapser, and thither I refer him.


FINIS.
A Short View of the Profaneness and Immorality of the English Stage, etc.
Essays upon several Moral Subj^^^^^

Both by Mr. Celller.

