Utrum Horum: OR, THE Nine and Thirty Articles OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND, At
large recited; And compared with the DOCTRINES of those commonly called
PRESBYTERIANS On the one side; And the Tenets of the Church of Rome On the
other.

Both faithfully quoted from their own most approved Authors.

By Hen. Care.

Rituum varietas Eccles^e unitatem non tollit; Modo Fideles secundum candem
Doctrinae Regulam ambulent. D. Elis. in Libro cui Titulus, Defensio Fidei, p.
130. LONDON: Printed for R. Janeway, in Queens-Head-Alley, in Paternoster-Row,
1682.



TO THE READER.
IT IS obvious, That the Popish Interest has of late years regained much
Ground, and is not a little enlarged and strengthened in the World; as well by
the Indefatigable Industry of their Priests and Jesuits, the unnecessary feuds
amongst the Reformed, and the unhappy Wars between Protestant Princes and
States, as more especially by the growing greatness of the French Monarch (who
now at last would color his Insatiate aims at Glory and Empire by pretentions
of propagating the Roman Religion; and hopes thereby not only to engage all the
Pontificial Clergy in favor of his Designs, but also to Atone for all the
Blood and Desolation, wherein he has involved Christendom; If the extirpation
of what they call HERESY, may but be one of the Consequents attending the
Success of his Arms) In particular, it is no less notorious, That these Kingdoms
of Great Britain and Ireland, labor at present under a Popish Conspiracy,
which by Supreme Authority has more than once (and sure not inconsiderately, or
in Jest) been declared HORRID and DAMNABLE; a main Branch and Master-wheel of
which, has been sufficiently proved to be a Design of dividing and embroiling
us amongst our selves.

To effect which, observing that the Body of the people of England, though
generally agreeing in all necessary points of Christian Doctrine; do yet
consist (in another respect) of two Sorts.

1. Those that have a Veneration for the Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies
retained by our first Reformers, rather perhaps for prudential Reasons suitable
to that Juncture, than for any Apprehensions they had that the same were always
obliging; as the Apostles (in the first, and possibly only unerring Council
that ever was held) thought fit to caution their new Converts for avoiding of
scandal to the Jews, and hindrance of propagating the Gospel, to abstain from
Blood and things strangled, which yet few Christians at this day, or for many
hundred years past, have thought necessary to observe.

2. Those that commending and blessing God for the happy Labors of those our
pious Ancestors, who in their day went so far, do yet in this Age of Light
(and when Compliances with Ceremonies, that may but seem suspicious or
unwarrantable, are neither advantageous nor Convenient for advancing the great
Ends of Christianity, but rather the contrary) decline to join therein, and
cannot (as they allege) with a safe Conscience embrace them, especially when
imposed as Necessaries to Church Communion.

The crafty Romish Incendiaries hence take an opportunity to heat the one of
these against the other, that with greater ease they may destroy them both. And
so far prevail, That some Churchmen, instead of abating any thing do rather
seek to screw up their Ceremonies higher, and appropriating to themselves the
Title of The Church of England, do not only exclude all others that cannot keep
pace with them, though otherwise Orthodox in Faith, pious toward God, Loyal to
the King, and peaceable with their Neighbors, but likewise Brand them with the
odious Titles of Whigs, Fanatics, Enemies to the Church, Disloyal to His
Majesty, Disturbers of the Government, Factious; and in a word, represent them
in such hideous Characters, as if they were altogether insufferable, a People
that ought to be utterly extirpated, as being no less Opposite to our Religion,
and as dangerous as Papists (even the worst of them, the Jusuites) themselves,
and therefore do both seek to turn the edge of those Penal Laws originally
intended against Popish Recusants on these Non-Ceremony-Conforming Protestants,
but also are not ashamed to own they have more kindness for the former than the
latter, and a greater aversion to Presbyterians than to Papists; or, if they do
not say so in Words, yet the same is too apparent from their deportment; For
how many are there who call themselves of the Church of England, That upon the
Discovery of the Popish Plot (though the KING and several Parliaments had
declared it) were yet mighty unwilling to believe it, and ready to disesteem
the Evidence, and excuse the Persons accused, or at least to lay it only on the
Jesuits, and shift off the Odium from the rest of the Papists? etc. Whereas on
the contrary the very same Men on the first Buz of a Presbyterian Plot (though
no such thing has to this minute been proved, but on the contrary several
wicked Forgeries and Shammings of pretended Plots upon them, wonderfully
detected) show themselves not only most ready and willing to credit it, and
busy to spread the Rumor, but triumph and are tickled with any Story, though
never so false and foolish, that looks that way; and in their drunken
Confusions, and horrid Curses, load all Dissenters in general with the Guilt of
this imaginary Conspiracy.

Now is it not plain to every Considerate man, That all this tends to nothing
more than to embroil us in uncharitable, implacable and endless Animosities at
Home, and dis joint us from all affectionate Alliances with, and assistance
toward the Reformed Churches abroad? They being generally of the same Stamp,
as to Discipline (the great matter in Controversy) with our Dissenters.

What remains then in such a Juncture, but that we should truly inform our
selves of the real differences between the Established Doctrines of the Church
of England, and the Opinions of these Protestant-Dissenters, so much clamoured
against, on the one side; and the Tenets of the Church of Rome on the other;
That so we may upon an Impartial Survey, judge which is most opposite and at
greatest distance, and accordingly Treat them with more or less Condescension
and Affection: And if upon a just scrutiny, we shall find, that there is none,
or very little Essential difference between our Church, and those called
Presbyterians, or Calvinists (either at home, or abroad) That then we may lay
by our Fury and Rancour, and embrace one another as Brethren, and cordially
Join against the common Enemy.

To facilitate this happy and desired Union, if this small Work may be of any
use, I shall think my pains in collecting it, abundantly rewarded: However
there were several Reasons, which to me seemed important, that swayed me
thereunto. As,

1. I had observed, That abundance of People, who account themselves of, and
talk loudest about the Church of England, never seriously perused, nay, have
not so much as read or seen her Articles of Faith (published by Authority). Now
I conceive it may be no unuseful Service to such Persons, to recommend to them
those Articles, That no longer they may remain in an Implicit Faith; but read,
Consider, and with understanding embrace what they before out of Compliance or
Custom, rather than Judgment, seemed to own and adhere to.

2. There are many too, That in words detest Popery, yet not being thoroughly
grounded in the Doctrines of the Church of England, nor acquainted with those
of the Church of Rome, may be in danger of mistaking the one for the other, and
by Jacob's voice be deluded into Esau's hands, and imbibe Poison unawares,
unless fortified against it by some such discriminating Antithesis.

3. Hereby will appear the malice and falsehood of these suggestions, That the
Dissenters stand at as great a distance from, and are as much opposite to the
legally Established Church of England, as the Papists; a mischievous conceit
promoted by the Jesuits and other Factors for the Sea of Rome, on purpose to
divide and weaken us, and consequently thereby to accomplish at last their own
ends, which are utterly to subvert and destroy all the Professors of the
Reformed Religion, whether Episcopal, Presbyterial, or under what ever other
Denomination.

4. I know not what could better tend to uniting us (at least in affection)
amongst our selves, than this demonstration, That in the main and all essential
Doctrinal points, we are already agreed, and since the other matters in
Controversy are acknowledged to be indifferent, what occasion is there for all
this heat and violence, unless the lesser our differences are, the greater
still must be our Animosities and Contentions about them?

5. I do not despair but this small Treatise may be profitable to weak
Capacities for instructing them in Fundamentals of Christian Religion, since it
contains a general Systeme of Faith, rendered the more intelligible, by the
variety of Expressions, though concurrent Sense, of the Churchmen and
Protestant-Dissenters on the one side, and the apparent Contradictions of the
Papists on the other, For Contraria juxta se posita magis Elucescunt,
contraries aptly compared, illustrate each other.

Thus much for the End and general Intention of this Work -- As to the manner
how it is performed, I could indeed have wished it might have come from some
abler Hand, whose Skill might have rendered it more useful, and his Name more
acceptable to the public. But rather a Mite than no Offering at all for the
Churches Peace, I have done what my small Reading and interrupted Leisure would
permit, and need only Advertise the Reader, that here he shall find,

1. The Nine and Thirty Articles of the Church of England, agreed upon and
Established Anno 1562. and never since altered, but required by Law to be
subscribed unto by all Ministers of our Church; faithfully recited Verbatim,
and Printed in a different Letter. 2. The Doctrines of those commonly called
Presbyterians (comprehending the Body of our Dissenters) produced from the
Confession of Faith, agreed upon by the Assembly of Divines in the late Times,
and their Catechism, and the Institutions of Mr. John Calvin. 3. The Tenets of
the Church of Rome, delivered either in the Words of the Council of Trent, or
those of their great Champion, Cardinal Bellarmine, and the Annotations of
their College of Rhemes on the New Testament: Other of their Authors
sometimes, but sparingly are Cited, and never any but what are allowed by them,
and known to speak according to the common Dictates of that Church.
I knew not where to seek more Authentic Testimonies of each Parties
Sentiments, and can without Injury to Truth aver, That I have not wilfully
balked, added to, detracted from, or in any kind perverted the Sense of either
side; but fairly stated their Doctrines in their own words. And generally
without Reflections, or Animadversions, unless only where the matter is such,
that it could not justly be omitted.

Some may expect to have had added, in a Fourth Comparison, certain Notions
advanced of late years by some Divines amongst us, that seem to thwart these
Articles of their Mother Church, which at their Ordination they solemnly
subscribed; But as the same have in part been already noted by others, ( As Mr.
Jenkins's Celeusma, The 4th. part of the Naked Truth, etc.
) so my desire is rather to bring Balm than Vinegar to the too gaping wounds of
the Church, and without giving any such Exasperation, shall hope, That those
Gentlemen will see and repent of such their Mistakes; At least since Rectum est
Index sui and Obliqui, A straight Line is the measure both of it self, and of
that too which is crooked. I cannot despair but when once People are brought
thoroughly to understand the Doctrines of the Church of England, grounded on the
Holy Scriptures (without, or contrary to which, no Church in the World has any
power to impose any Articles of Faith) They will easily be able to discover
such Aberrations, and refuse them with a just Abhorrence, though never so
speciously obtruded.

But because there is such a noise raised, and such heaps of Dirt continually
thrown on the memory of poor Mr. Calvin, and those called Presbyterians
(whereby they would inflame us both to hardships toward dissenting Protestants
at home, and set us at odds with most of the Reformed Churches abroad) I shall
for the Information of the Vulgar Reader, give a brief account here what esteem
our Ancestors of the Church of England heretofore had, both of John Calvin, and
those Neighboring Churches, and the Testimonies I shall avouch shall be of
undoubted Authority, both for Dignity and Learning.

The Reverend and Pious Dr. George Carleton Bishop of Chichester, in a Book
Entitled, An Examination of those things, wherein the Author of the late
APPEAL holds the Doctrines of the Pelagians and Arminians to be the Doctrines
of the Church of England, Printed anno 1626, and Dedicated to King Charles the
First, p. 217, has these Words -- Though the Church of England be the best
Reformed Church, yet it is not the only Reformed Church, and it might seem no
good Providence in us to stand so by our selves, as to reject and disdain the
Consent of other Churches, though they do not agree with us in Discipline. It
is observed by Eusebius, That Polycrates and Irenaeus did both reprove Victor,
because for matters of Ceremonies he was too much offended with other Churches,
which otherwise agreed with him in Doctrine; Irenaeus does admonish him, That
the ancient Bishops of Rome before Victor, did keep Unity and Consent with the
Eastern Bishops, though in Ceremonies there was difference between them, Omnes
isti cum in Observantia vararierent inter semetipsos and nobiscum semper
pacifici fuerant. Eusebius. l. 5. cap. 24. [ All those that varied in Observances,
yet were always peaceable both amongst themselves and with us.] He says there
also, That the Dissonance in Ceremonies, need not break the Consonance in Faith
with those Churches, which do not agree with us in Ceremonies, if we seek the
peace of the Churches that profess the same Doctrine. (...) or struggling, as
more like one sleeping than dying; leaving, with that noble Roman Aemilius,
Poverty with Honor to his Friends, his Library and all his Goods rated at the
highest, not making three hundred Guilders, as he was wont to say of himself,
if Men doubt of my Poverty, my Death shall persuade them. The twenty seventh of
May, at Even, this Sun set upon our Horizon, presently the Rumor filled the
City with Lamentation, in wanting the wisest Citizen, the Church a most
faithful Pastor, the College a most Learned Doctor, all under God a common
Father and Comforter. Much a do to keep People from him after his Death, they
could not be satisfied with the sight of him, nor scarce pulled away. Very
Strangers that had come far and near to see and hear him, were most importunate
to have but a sight of him, amongst the rest, the English Ambassador; till at
length to avoid Superstition, and the Tongues of Papists, it was denied; so he
was Buried without any great outward pomp (for so was his Will as aforesaid)
but with the most Lamentation, Tears, and Affection, accompanied with all the
Professors, Ministers, Senators, and even the whole City.

Thus far Doctor Hoyl; wherewith agrees the before recited Doctor Hakewell in
his Answer to Carier, p. 164, who also Witnesses, That his Works were so well
esteemed, That his Catechism being written by himself in Latin and French, was
afterward, at the request of Strangers, Translated into High Dutch, Low Dutch,
English, Spanish; and by Immanuel Tremelius into Hebrew, and by Henry Stephnes
into Greek, and touching his Institutions, that Dystick is well known.

Preter Apostolicas, post Christi Tempora, Chartas
Huic peperere Libro saecula nulla parem.
Except the Apostles Writings, since Christ's days,
No Age a Book of equal worth did raise.
To which I may add, That Epitaph bestowed on him by the Learned and Ingenious
Beza, which he was as able, as (upon that sad Occasion) unwilling to afford;
and the other (out of his Deserts) as worthy, as (out of his Modesty the Crown
of all his other Virtues) unwilling to receive.

Romae ruentis Terror ille Maximus
Quem mortuum Lugent Boni, Horrescunt Mali
Ipsa a quo potuit virtutem discere virtus
Cur adeo Exiguo, Igno^oque in Cespite Clausus?
Calvinus lateat, Rogas?
Calvinum assidue Comitata Modestia vivum
Hoc Tumulo manibus Condidit Ipsa suis
O te Beatum Cespitem tanto Hospite!
Cui invidere cuncta possint Marmora.
Which I shall endeavor thus to spoil into English.

If any ask why Reverend Calvin (whom
We justly style the dread of falling Rome,
Whose Death, each good man did with Tears bewail,
And who even dead, makes envious Foes look pale,
In whose fair Life no blot you could discern,
But Virtue her self might thence more Virtue learn)
Lies Buried in so mean and poor a Grave,
(Whilst wretched Sinners Glorious Tombstones have)?
Know ye, That Modesty which was Allied,
Always to Calvin living, when he died
With her own Hands this Mansion did provide.
O happy Turf! enriched with such a Guest.
As proudest Marbles envy, not possess.
This, dear Countrymen, is that very Calvin, and such esteem the Reverend
Fathers of our Church of England, as well as other Learned Protestants beyond
the Seas had of him heretofore, whom yet too many pert, little, raw
Sermon-Readers now adays, can scarce mention without Contempt, and stinking
Flowers of railing Rhetoric, endeavoring (as far as the short Talent of their
Pedantick wit can reach) to expose him, as if he had been one of the most
errand Heretics, and vilest of Men.

Whilst in the mean time, The wily Jesuit laughs and Triumphs in our needless
heats, which himself first kindled and still foments, claps in with the most
thriving party, and exasperates what he can, and at the same Instant secretly
insinuates a favorable Opinion of the Church of Rome, as less dissonant from
and dangerous to the Church of England, and the Civil Government, and as more
at Unity, etc.

To Obviate which Romish designs, and Reconcile in Affection all True-hearted
Protestants, by showing them both the near Alliance, they are already at, (if
they would but have the patience to see it) amongst themselves, and the extreme
and destructive Opposition of the Church of Rome to us all, is the Design of
this poor Treatise, and shall ever be both the Endeavors and the Prayers, of

The unworthy Compiler, Henry Care.
Old Bailey, Febr. 6th 1681/2.
The ARTICLES of the Church of England, compared with the Doctrines of the
Presbyterians and Papists, etc.
The first Article of the Church of England.
Of Faith in the Holy Trinity.
THERE is but one Living and True God Everlasting, without Body, Parts, or
Passions; of Infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness; the Maker and Preserver of
all things, both Visible and Invisible: And in Unity of this Godhead there be
three Persons, of one Substance, Power, and Eternity, the Father, the Son, and
Holy Ghost.

Touching this Article there is no Dispute: The Presbyterians ( Ass. Conf. Cap.
2.
) Believe it. And the Papists ( Counc. Trent. Sess. tho 3d.
) Profess to do so too; yet Austin Steuchus, a famous Popish Doctor, in his
Cosmopaeia, on the beginning of Genesis, has written, That the Imperial Heaven
is Coeternal with God; and if so, there must be two Gods: For whatsoever has
no Beginning is God. Nor have their Expurgatory Indexes, which have been so
busy to deface many sound Godly Opinions, Corrected him for this Blasphemous
Heresy.

The second Article of the Church of England.
Of the Word, or Son of God, which was made very Man.
THE Son, which is the Word of the Father, Begotten from Everlasting of the
Father, the Very and Eternal God, of one Substance with the Father, took Man's
Nature in the Womb of the Blessed Virgin, of her Substance; so that two whole
and perfect Natures, that is to say, The Godhead and Manhood, were joined
together in one Person, never to be divided; whereof is one Christ, Very God,
and Very Man, who truly Suffered, was Crucified, Dead, and Buried, to Reconcile
his Father to us, and to be a Sacrifice, not only for Original Guilt, but also
for Actual Sins of Men.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Conf. Cap. 8. Sect. 2.
The Son of God, the Second Person in the Trinity, being Very and Eternal God,
of one Substance, and equal with the Father, did, when the fullness of time was
come, take upon him Man's Nature, with all the Essential Properties and Common
Infirmities thereof* yet without Sin; being Conceived by the Power of the Holy
Ghost, in the Womb of the Virgin Mary, of her Substance; so that two whole
perfect and distinct Natures, the Godhead and Manhood, were inseparably
joined together in one Person, without Conversion, Composition, or Confusion;
which Person is Very God, and Very Man, yet one Christ, the only Mediator
between God and Man.

Ibid. Sect. 5.
The Lord Jesus, by his perfect Obedience and Sacrifice of himself; which he,
through the Eternal Spirit, once offered up unto God, has fully satisfied the
Justice of his Father, and purchased not only Reconciliation, but an
Everlasting Inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven, for all those whom the Father
has given unto him.

The Papists.
The Papists agree to the first Part of this Article -- But as to the latter
Part, whereas the Church of England, and Presbyterians, do declare the Passion
of Christ to have been a sufficient Sacrifice, both for Original and Actual
Sins. They on the Contrary, First, by their Doctrine of the Sacrifice of the
Mass, Prayers unto Saints, Popes Pardons, and Purgatory, do make void the
Passion of our Blessed Savior, or that it puts away but Original Sin only. See
for this, Article 31. Secondly, They Teach, Although our Savior have Suffered
for all Men in general, yet both each man must suffer for himself in
particular, [ Rhem. Annotations on Romans 8. 17.] and that the Works of one Man
may satisfy the Wrath of God for another. [Same Annotations on Coloss. 2. 24.]

The third Article of the Church of England.
Of the going down of Christ into Hell.
AS Christ dyed for us, and was Buried: So also is it to be believed, That he
went down into Hell.

The Presbyterians.
Calv. Instit. l. 2. cap. 16.
Although by the Writings of the Ancients it appears, That this Clause in the
Creed was not so usual of Old Time in the Churches; yet in delivering a Summary
of Doctrine it is necessary: As that which contains an useful and not to be
slighted Mystery -- And so he proceeds to explain it, of the Anguish and
Internal Sufferings of Christ, under a Sense of the Wrath of God for the Sins
of Mankind, when the Chastisement of our Peace (as the Prophet speaks) was upon
him. And Doctor Fulk on the Rhem. Testament, Matthew. 27. Sect. 3. expressly
clears Calvin in this point.

The Assembly, in their larger Catechism, thus express their Sense, -- Christ's
Humiliation after his Death, consisted in his being Buried, and continuing in
the State of the Dead, and under the power of Death till the Third Day, which
has been otherwise expressed in these Words -- He descended into Hell.

So that the Article is agreed both by them and Calvin; nor has the Church of
England thought fit particularly to explain it, but left it free to be
understood in any such sound Sense as is not contrary to Scripture, or the
Analogy of Faith. Indeed there has been great Diversity of Opinions between
Men, both Good and Learned, about it: Many there are, that by Hell here
understand the Grave; and I think none will deny but the Word is capable of
such a Sense; but then the Sense must run thus -- He was Crucified, Dead and
Buried, and Descended into the Grave, which is a vain Repetition; for if he
were Buried, he must be in a Grave: And such a Tautology is not to be supposed
in so brief a Summary of Faith. But in my private Thoughts I have happened upon
a Notion which avoids that Absurdity, and that is this -- When our Blessed Lord
was Crucified, and Dead, and his Body Buried, his Humane Soul returned to God,
(in which Sense he says to the Thief, This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise) and afterward, when it came to re-enliven, and be united to the Body
in the Grave, at his Resurrection, why may not that be the Descent here
intended? And so the Sense be thus -- He was Crucified, Dead and Buried, He
(that is his Humane Soul at the time appointed) descended into Hell, (that is
the Grave, and then) the Third day he rose again, etc. Nor do I perceive that
this Interpretation (how new soever it may seem) does in any kind Contradict
the Analogy of Faith. However I submit it to the Censure of the Learned Pious
Reader. -- But,

The Papists
Teach a quite contrary Doctrine to all this, viz. That the Souls of the
Patriarchs and Holy Men, that departed this Life before our Saviors
Crucifixion, were kept (as in Prison, but without pain) in a certain Apartment
of Hell, which they call Limbus Patrum; And that Christ, that is, the Soul of
Christ, did really go down into the Local Hell, and delivered the said Captive
Souls out of this Confinement, and at his Ascension they accompanied him to
Heaven, Bellarm. de Christo. li. 4. cap.11, 12, and 13.

Rhem. Annot. on ^^k. 16. Sect. 7.
The Bosom of Abraham is the resting place of all them that died in perfect
State of Grace, before Christ's time, Heaven before being shut from Men. It is
called in Zachary, a Lake without Water, and sometimes a Prison, but most
commonly of Divines Limbus Patrum, for that it is thought to have been the
Higher part or Brim of Hell, the places of Punishment being far lower than the
same, which therefore be called Infernum Inferius, the lower Hell. Where this
Mansion of the Fathers stood, or whether it be any part of Hell, St. Augustine
doubts; but that there was such a place, he nor no Catholic man ever
doubted: And the Fathers make it most certain, That our Savior descending into
Hell, went thither specially, and delivered the said Fathers out of that
Mansion; which Truth, though of all the Ancient Writers Confessed, and Proved
by Scripture, yet the Adversaries [they mean Protestants] deny it, as they do
Purgatory most Impudently.

The fourth Article of the Church of England.
Of the Resurrection of Christ.
CHRIST did truly Rise again from Death, and took again his Body with Flesh,
Bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of Man's Nature, wherewith
he Ascended into Heaven, and there sits until he Return to Judge all Men at
the last Day.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. C^nf. cap. 8. Sect. 4.
On the Third Day he Arose from the Dead, with the same Body in which he
Suffered, with which also he Ascended into Heaven, and there sits at the
Right Hand of his Father, making Intercession, and shall return to Judge Men
and Angels at the end of the World.

The Papists
Con. Trid. Sess. 13. Can. 1.
Seem in Words to own this Article, but really deny it, or Contradict
themselves; for they hold, That the true Carnal Body of Christ is every day
(wherein Masses are said) on Earth, and at a thousand places at once: Now, if
it be thus daily here, how does it remain in Heaven, and sit there till he
return to Judge all Men at the last Day? And if it be thus at so many places at
an Instant, must it not be a Fantastic Body? And consequently do they not deny
the Truth of Christ's Resurrection, or that he has the same Body now, which was
Crucified, Dead and Buried?

The fifth Article of the Church of England.
THE Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, is of one Substance,
Majesty and Glory, with the Father and the Son, Very and Eternal God.

Touching this Article, there is no Dispute on either side.

The sixth Article of the Church of England.
Of the sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures for Salvation.
HOLY Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation; so that
whatsoever is not read therein, or may be proved thereby, is not to be required
of any Man, That it should be Believed as an Article of the Faith, or be
thought requisite or necessary to Salvation. In the name of the Holy Scripture
we understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament, of whose
Authority was never any doubt in the Church, viz. Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus,
Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, 1 Samuel, 2 Samuel, 1 Kings, 2
Kings, 1 Chronicles, 2 Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Job, Psalms,
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Solomon's Song, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lamentations, Ezekiel,
Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah,
Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi. And the other Books (as Hierom says) the Church
does Read for Example of Life, and Instruction of Manners: All the Books of the
New Testament, as they are commonly Received, we do Receive and Account them
Canonical.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Conf. ca. 1.
Under the Name of Holy Scripture, or the Word of God Written, are now Contained
all the Books of the Old and New Testament, which are these, Genesis, etc.
[just as the Church of England reckons them] All which are given by Inspiration
to be the Rule of Faith and Life. The Books commonly called Apocrypha, not
being of Divine Inspiration, are no part of the Canon of the Scripture, and
therefore are of no Authority in the Church of God, nor to be any otherwise
approved or made use of, than other Humane Writings.

The Authority of the Holy Scripture, for which it ought to be Believed and
Obeyed, depends not upon the Testimony of any Man, or Church, but wholly upon
God (who is Truth it self) the Author thereof, and therefore it is to be
Received because it is the Word of God.

We may be moved and induced by the Testimony of the Church, to an High and
Reverend esteem of the Holy Scriptures. And the Heavenliness of the Matter, the
Efficacy of the Doctrine, the Majesty of the Style, the Consent of all the
Parts, the Scope of the whole (which is to give all Glory to God) the full
Discovery it makes of the only way of Man's Salvation; the many other
incomparable Excellencies, and the entire Perfection thereof, are Arguments
whereby it does abundantly Evidence it to be the Word of God; yet
notwithstanding our full Persuasion and Assurance of the Infallible Truth, and
Divine Authority thereof, is from the Inward Work of the Holy Spirit, bearing
Witness by and with the Word in our Hearts.

The whole Council of God, concerning all things necessary for his own Glory,
Man's Salvation, Faith, and Life, is either expressly set down in Scripture, or
by good and necessary Consequence may be deduced from Scripture; unto which
nothing at any time is to be added, whether by New Revelations of the Spirit,
or Tradition of Men; nevertheless we do acknowledge the Inward Illumination of
the Spirit of God, to be necessary for the saving understanding of such things
as are Revealed in the Word, and that there are some Circumstances concerning
the Worship of God, and Government of the Church, Common to Humane Actions and
Societies, which are to be ordered by the Light of Nature and Christian
prudence, according to the general Rules of the Word, which are always to be
observed.

The Old Testament in Hebrew (which was the Native Language of the People of
God of old) and the New Testament in Greek (which at the time of the Writing of
it was most generally known to the Nations) being immediately inspired by God,
and by his singular Care and Providence kept pure in all Ages, are therefore
Authentical; so as in all Controversies of Religion, the Church is finally to
Appeal to Them.

But, because these Original Tongues are not known to all the People of God,
who have Right unto, and Interest in the Scriptures, and are Commanded in the
Fear of God to Read and Search them; Therefore they are to be Translated into
the Vulgar Language of every Nation, unto which they come, that the Word of God
dwelling plentifully in all, they may Worship him in an acceptable manner, and
through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures may have hope.

The Infallible Rule of the Interpretation of Scripture, is the Scripture it
self; and therefore when there is a question about the true and full Sense of
any Scripture, (which is manifold; but one) it must be searched and known by
other places that speak more clearly.

The Supreme Judge by which all Controversies of Religion are to be Determined,
and all Decrees of Councils, Opinions of Ancient Writers, Doctrines of Men and
Private Spirits, are to be examined, and in whose Sentence we are to rest, can
be no other but the Holy Spirit speaking in the Scripture.

The Papists.
The Decree of the Council of Trent, touching the Canonical Scriptures, Session
the Fourth.

The Holy Ecumenical and General Tridentine Council, lawfully Congregated in
the Holy Spirit, the three Legates of the Apostolic See presiding therein,
considering, That the Purity of the Gospel, as to Truth and Discipline, is
contained in Books Written, and in Traditions not Written, (which received by
the Apostles from the Mouth of Christ himself, or by the Apostles by the
Dictates of the Holy Ghost, delivered as from Hand to Hand, have come down even
unto us) following the Example of the Fathers, does with an equal Affection of
Piety, and like Reverence, receive and regard as well all the Books of the Old
and New Testament, (since one God is Author of both) as such Traditions,
pertaining either to Faith or Manners, the same being dictated either Orally by
Christ, or by the Holy Spirit, and Conserved by a continual Succession in the
Catholic Church; and as touching the Books of Holy Scripture, that none may
doubt which they are, which by this Sacred Synod are received, an Index of them
is annexed, and they are as follows, Of the Old Testament, five Books of Moses,
that is, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges,
Ruth, Four Books of Kings, [under that name they include the two Books of
Samuel] two of Chronicles, the first of Esdras, and the Second which is called
Nehemias, Tobias, Judith, Esther, Job, David's Psalter of 150 Psalms, Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, the Canticles, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Isaiah, Jeremiah, with
Baruch, Ezekiel, Daniel, Twelve lesser Prophets, viz. Hosea, Joel, Amos,
Obadiah, Jonas, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechary, and
Malachi, and the First and Second of the Maccabees. Of the New Testament, the
Four Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, etc. [as we reckon them] And if any Person
shall not receive all the said whole Books, with all their Parts, as they have
wont to be read in the Catholic Church, and as they are in the old Vulgar
Latin Edition, for Sacred and Canonical; or knowingly shall contemn the
aforesaid Traditions, Let him be Anathema, [or Accursed] -- And the said Sacred
Council does also Appoint and Declare, That the said old Vulgar Latin Edition,
which has by the long use of so many Ages been approved of in the Church,
shall in all public Readings, Disputations, Preachings, and Expositions be
esteemed Authentic: And that none on any pretense whatsoever shall dare or
presume to Reject the same: And for the restraining of wanton Wits, does
likewise Decree, That no one Person leaning on his own Prudence, shall in
matters of Faith and Manners, pertaining to Edification of the Christian
Doctrine, wresting the Scripture to his own Senses, dare to interpret the Holy
Scripture contrary to the Sense which Holy Mother Church (whose Right it is to
Judge of the true Sense of Sacred Scriptures) has held, or does hold, or
against the unanimous Consent of the Fathers; though even such Interpretations
be never intended to be Published. Rhem. Test. 1 Thessalonians. 4 8.
Thus the very Words of that pretended Council; wherewith agrees Bellarmine de
Verbo Dei. lib. 1. cap. 7, 8, and 9. whereby it plainly appears, That the
Church of Rome not only Adds to Gods Word Six whole Books (besides several
parts of Books, As the Epistle of Jeremiah, the 13 and 14 Chapters of Daniel,
The Song of the three Children, added to the 3d. of Daniel, and an Appendix to
the Third Chapter of Hester, beginning v. 10. all which are in the Vulgar
Latin) more than the Church of England receives, and holds her Accursed for not
receiving them; but also prefers the Vulgar Latin Edition (the most Corrupt and
Imperfect Edition extant) before the original Texts in Hebrew and Greek. And
binds up all Christians to interpret Scripture in her own Sense, and according
to her Pleasure.

Nor is it any wonder, That they should thus treat these Sacred Oracles, if we
Consider what Esteem they have of them: This very Council, you see, accounts
them Imperfect, and not a sufficient Rule of Faith and Manners, without
Traditions, and equals Traditions with them, declaring, They are to be received
[pari pietatis affectu and reverentia] with the very same Reverence and Pious
Affection -- But the Council was subtlely modest; For their Doctors cannot
forbear to load the Word of God with Reproaches -- Scripturae sunt muti
judices, sunt veluti nasus quidam Cereus: The Scriptures are dumb Judges, and
but like a Nose of Wax, says Pighius de Ecclesia, page 89, 90. And Eccius calls
them a Black Gospel, and Inky Divinity. Nor is Cardinal Bellarmine less hold,
For he maintains, Scripturas sine Traditionibus nec simpliciter necessarias,
nec sufficienter, Finem proprium and praecipuum non fuisse, ut esset Regula
Fidei, De Verbo Dei. l. 4. cap. 4. and 12. That the Scriptures are not simply
necessary, nor sufficient without Traditions; and that their proper and chief
end was not, That they should be a Rule of Faith. And Eccius in his Enchiridion
is very positive, That the Scripture is not Authentic, but by the Authority of
the Church; wherewith agrees Azorius, Instit. Mor. Part 2. l. 5. cap. 24.
Scriptura Canonica non Agnoscitur, aut habetur, nisi Ecclesiae Authoritate
probetur. The Scripture is not owned or esteemed Canonical, unless it be
approved by the Authority of the Church. In a Word, nothing is more Common in
the Works of Popish Authors, than such Titles as these -- Of the Insufficiency,
of the Obscurity, and of the Uncertainty of the Scripture, etc.

History of the Bohemian Persecution, p. 329 and 348.
Nor have their Practices been unsuitable; For in the Bohemian Persecutions,
between the Years 1620 and 1630, the Papists were wont to say, The Scriptures
were the Fountain of Heresy, and thereupon Nick-nam'd the Bible Wiblia, which
in the Bohemian Language signifies Vomit. A thousand Bibles they burnt and
destroyed, some at the Market place, as was done at Fulneck, others brought
them in Carts without the Walls, as was done at Zalicum and Frutnovia, others
brought them in heaps to the Gallows, as at Hadritium, and so in great heaps
burnt them; The like was done in the Irish Massacre in 41. A plague on it, that
damned Book has done all the Mischief, said some of those Bloody Tories. Nor do
our English Papists want any thing but an Opportunity to Act the like
Villainies, For their Principle and Malice is the same, as appears by one of
their English Pamphlets, Entitled, The Reconciler of Religions, Printed Anno
1663, and Dedicated to one Mr. Lawrence Dibusty, Merchant of London, in p. 26.
we have these Words The Protestants and Sectaries, [saith he, you see he makes
no differencen the Case between the Church of England and Dissenters] dash out
for Apocrypha whole Books, as Tobias, Judith, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom,
Maccabees, Baruch, etc. whole Chapters, as the 13 and 14 of Daniel, from the 10
to the 16 of Esther. Whole Histories, as that of Susanna and the Elders, of
Bell and the Dragon, etc. All which the Universal Church of God receives for
Authentical, Holy, and Canonical. And thereupon, p. 41. he concludes thus, As
the Protestant Bible is, it is no more the Word of God, than is the Alchoran, or
Aesops Fables; yea, it is worse than Aesops Fables, it is a Diabolical
Invention, and an Heretical Labor, and a Sacrilegious Instrument, to Deceive
and Damn all such poor Souls as Believe it, and therefore worthy to be burnt
with Fire in the middle of the Market at Noon, and let all the People say,
Amen. So be it. -- I give you exactly his Words, wherein you have the true
Spirit of Popery: others may politickly mince the Matter; but this is their
general Sentiment, and accordingly they practice beyond the Seas, where to have
a Bible in the Vulgar Tongue is Capital. And where is now the Man that has the
least Spark of Grace or Modesty, that would rather be a Papist than a
Presbyterian?

The seventh Article of the Church of England.
Of the Old Testament.
THE Old Testament is not contrary to the New; For both in the Old and New
Testament, Everlasting Life is offered to Mankind by Christ, who is the only
Mediator between God and Man, being both God and Man; wherefore they are not
to be heard, which feign that the Old Fathers did look only for Transitory
Promises; Although the Law given from God by Moses, as touching Ceremonies and
Kites, do not bind Christian Men, nor the Civil precepts thereof ought for
necessity to be received in any Commonwealth, yet notwithstanding no Christian
Man whatsoever is free from the Obedience of the Commandments which are called
Moral.

The Presbyterians.
The Substance of this Article is Asserted and at large Explained and Proved by
Calvin, in the Second Book of his Institutions, cap. 7. 9, 10, and 11. too
tedious here to Recite.

The Papists.
Two Clauses of this Article are Contradicted by the Papists. First, That of
Christ's being the only Mediator between God and Man; For they Assign Angels
and Saints to be also Mediators, and especially the Virgin Mary, and pray to
them accordingly: But of this see more Article the 18 and 31. Secondly, Whereas
it is said no Christian Man is free from the Obedience of the Commandments
which are called Moral, we know the Pope pretends he can dispense with the
Moral-Law, etc. For we find in his Canon Law, Cause. 15. q. 6. cap. 2.
Auctoritatum, in the Gloss, are these Words, Contra jus Natural potest
dispensare and contra Apostolum, The Pope can dispense against the Law of
Nature, and against the Apostles.

The eighth Article of the Church of England.
Of the three Creeds.
THE three Creeds, Nice ( I Believe in one God the Father Almighty, maker of
Heaven and Earth, and of all things Visible and Invisible, etc.
) Creed, Athanasius ( Whoever will be saved, before all things it is necessary
that he hold the Catholic Faith, etc.
) Creed, and that which is commonly called the Apostles ( I Believe in God the
Father Almighty, maker ^^ Heaven and Earth, etc.
) Creed, ought thoroughly to be Received and Believed, for they may be proved by
most certain Warrants of Holy Scripture.

The Presbyterians
Say the very same thing: For in the Confession of Faith of the French Reformed
Church (who are well known to be Calvinists) Article the Fifth, these are the
Words. -- Suivant Cela nous Advouans les Trois Symboles, Ossavoir des Apostres,
de Nice, and d'Athanase, pource qu'ils sont Conformes a la Parole de Dieu. We
avow the three Symbols, viz. That of the Apostles, that of Nice, and that of
Athanasius, because they are agreeable to the Word of God.

The Papists
Profess likewise to Believe these three Creeds, but not upon the same Grounds*
which the Church of England and the Presbyterians do; For they Believe and
Embrace those Summaries of Faith, because they are agreeable to, and may be
proved by Holy Scripture; Whereas the Papists Believe them for the Authority of
Tradition, or of those Councils that made or Confirmed them.

Rhemish Annot. in the Argument of the Epistles.
And touching that called The Apostles Creed, They tell this Story. The Apostles
before they departed one from another (the time whereof is not certainly known)
all Twelve Assembled together, and full of the Holy Ghost, each laying down his
Sentence, agreed upon 12 principal Articles of the Christian Faith, and
appointed them for a Rule to all Believers, which is therefore called, and is,
The Apostles Creed, not written in Paper, as the Scripture, but from the
Apostles delivered by Tradition.

The ninth Article of the Church of England.
Of Original Sin.
ORiginal Sin stands not in the following of Adam, (as the Pelagians do
vainly talk) but it is the Fault and Corruption of the Nature of every Man,
that naturally is Engendered of the Offspring of Adam, whereby Man is very far
gone from Original Righteousness, and is of his own Nature inclined to Evil; so
that the Flesh lusts always contrary to the Spirit, and therefore in every
Person born into this World it deserves Gods Wrath and Damnation, and this
Infection of Nature does Remain, yea in them that are Regenerated, whereby the
Lusts of the Flesh, called in Greek (...), which some do expound the Wisdom,
some the Sensuality, some the Affection, some the desire of the Flesh, is not
subject to the Law of God. And although there is no Condemnation for them that
Believe and are Baptized, yet the Apostle does Confess, that Concupiscence and
Lust has of it self the Nature of Sin.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Conf. cap. 6.
Our first Parents being seduced by the Subtilty and Temptation of Satan, sinned
in eating the forbidden Fruit: This their Sin God was pleased according to his
Wife and Holy Counsel to permit, having purpose to order his own Glory.

By this Sin they fell from their Orignal Righteousness and Communion with God,
and so became dead in Sin, and wholly defiled in all their Duties, Faculties,
and Parts of Soul and Body.

They being the root of all Mankind; the Guilt of this Sin was imputed, and the
same death in Sin and Corrupted Nature conveyed to all their Posterity,
descended from them by ordinary Generation.

From this Original Corruption, whereby we are utterly indisposed, disabled,
and made opposite to all Good, and wholly inclined to all Evil, do proceed all
Actual Transgressions.

This Corruption of Nature, during this Life, does Remain in those that are
Regenerated; and although it be through Christ Pardoned, and Mortified, yet
both it self, and all the Motions thereof, are truly and properly Sin.

The Papists.
Coune. Trent. Sess. 5. Decr. 5.
If any one shall deny that the Guilt of Crignial Sin is remitted by the Grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is Conferred in Baptism; or shall Assert, That
the whole thereof, which has any true and proper Nature of Sin, is not thereby
taken away, but shall say, That the same is only Pruned [or weakned] or not
Imputed, Let him be Accursed. Yet this Holy Synod Consesses and Believes, That
even after Baptism, Concupiscence, radix peccati, the Root of Corruption does
remain; but it being left for Trial or Exercise, does not any way hurt those
that Consent not thereunto; This Concupiscence, the Apostle sometimes calls
Sin, Romans 6. 6. and 7. 5. But this Holy Synod does declare, That the Catholic
Church never understood it to be called Sin, because it is truly and properly
Sin in the Regenerate, but because ex peccato est, It is of Sin, and inclines
to Sin; And whoever shall think otherwise, Let him be Anathema.

So that once more the Church of England (nay, the Apostle too himself) is not
only Diametrically contradicted, but expressly Cursed.

The tenth Article of the Church of England.
Of Free Will
THE Condition of Man after the fall of Adam is such, that he cannot turn and
prepare himself by his own Natural Strength and good Works to Faith and calling
upon God: Wherefore we have no power to do good Works pleasant and acceptable
to God, without the Grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we may have a
good will and working with us, when we have that good will.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Conf. cap. 9.
Man in his state of Innocence had freedom and power to will and to do that
which was good and well pleasing to God, but yet mutably, so that he might fall
from it.

Man by his fall into a state of Sin, has wholly lost all Ability of Will to
any Spiritual Good accompanying Salvation: So as a natural Man being altogether
averse from that good, and dead in Sin, is not able by his own strength to
Convert himself, or to prepare himself thereunto.

When God converts a Sinner, and translates him into the state of Grace, he
freeth him from his natural bondage under Sin, and by his Grace alone, inables
him freely to will and to do that which is Spiritually good; yet so, as that by
reason of his remaining Corruption, he does not perfectly, nor only will that
which is Good, but does also that which is evil.

The Will of Man is made perfectly and immediately free to Good alone, in the
state of Glory.

The Papists.
Counc. Trent. Sess, 6. Can. 4.
If any one shall say, That the Free Will of Man, moved and excited by God, does
not Cooperate, by assenting to God exciting and calling, whereby it prepares
and disposes it self to obtain the Grace of Justification, Let him be Accursed.

The eleventh Article of the Church of England.
Of the Justification of Man.
WE are accounted Righteous before God only for the merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, and not for our own works and deservings:
Wherefore that we are justified by Faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine, and
very full of Comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Homtly of
Justification.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Conf. cap. 11.
Those whom God effectually Calls, he also freely Justifies, not by insusing
Righteousness into them, but by pardoning their Sins, and by accounting and
accepting their Persons as Righteous, not for any thing wrought in them, or
done by them, but for Christ's sake alone; not by imputing Faith it self, the
Act of Believing, or any Evangelical Obedience to them, as their Righteousness;
but by imputing the Obedience and Satisfaction of Christ unto them, they
receiving and resting on him and his Righteousness by Faith, which Faith they
have not of themselves, it is the Gift of God.

Faith, thus receiving and resting on Christ and his Righteousness, is the
alone Instrument of Justification; and yet it is not alone in the Person
justified, but is ever accompanied with all other saving Graces, and is no dead
Faith, but works by Love.

Christ, by his Obedience and Death, did fully discharge the Debt of all those
who are thus justified, and did make a proper, real, and full satisfaction to
his Fathers Justice in their behalf: yet inasmuch as he was given by the Father
for them, and his obedience and satisfaction accepted in their stead, and both
freely, not for any thing in them; their Justification is only of free Grace,
that both the exact Justice, and rich Grace of God, might be glorified in the
Justification of Sinners.

The Papists.
Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 9.
Whosoever shall say, That the wicked are justified by Faith only, understanding
that nothing else is required to cooperate for the obtaining the Grace of
Justification, or that it is not necessary for a Man to be prepared and
disposed by the motion of his Will, Let him be Anathema.

Ibid. can. 11.
Whosoever shall say, That a Man is justified either by the only imputation of
the Righteousness of Christ, or by the only Remission of Sins; or, That the
Grace whereby we are justified, is the only Favor of God, Let him be Accursed.

The twelfth Article of the Church of England.
Of Good Works
ALbeit Good Works, which are the Fruits of Faith, and follow after
Justification, cannot put away our Sins, and endure the severity of Gods
Judgments, yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God and Christ, and do
spring out necessarily of a true and lively Faith, insomuch, that by them a
lively Faith may be as evidently known, as a Tree discerned by the Fruit.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Conf. cap. 16.
Good Works are only such as God has commanded in his Holy Word, and not such
as without the Warrant thereof are devised by Men out of Blind Zeal, or upon
any pretense of good Intentions.

These Good Works done in Obedience to Gods Commandments, are the Fruits and
Evidences of a true and lively Faith; and thereby Believers manifest their
Thankfulness, strengthen their Assurance, edify their Brethren, adorn the
Profession of the Gospel, stop the Mouths of Adversaries, and Glorify God,
whose Workmanship they are, created in Christ Jesus thereunto, that having
their Fruit unto Holiness, they may have the end Eternal Life.

Their Ability to do good Works, is not at all of themselves, but wholly from
the Spirit of Christ. And that they may be enabled thereunto, besides the
Graces they have already received, there is required an Actual influence of the
same Holy Spirit to work in them to will and to do of his good pleasure; yet
are they not hereupon to grow negligent, as if they were not bound to perform
any Duty, unless upon a special Motion of the Spirit; but they ought to be
diligent in stirring up the Grace of God that is in them.

Yet notwithstanding the Persons of Believers being accepted through Christ,
their Good Works also are accepted in him, not as though they were in this Life
wholly unblamable, and unreprovable in Gods sight, but that he looking upon
them in his Son, is pleased to accept and reward that which is sincere,
although accompanied with many Weaknesses and Imperfections.

The Papists.
Coune. Trent Sess. 6. cap. 10.
We are to Believe, That nothing is wanting to them that are justified; but are
to think, they have fully by these Works, which are done in God, and according
to the state of this Life, satisfied the Law of God, and truly to have deserved
Eternal Life in due time to be obtained, provided they depart hence in Grace.

Ibid cap. 9.
No Man can know by the certainty of Faith, under which there can be no
falsehood, that he has obtained the Grace of God.

The thirteenth Article of the Church of England.
Of Works before Justification.
WOrks done before the Grace of Christ and the Inspiration of his Spirit, are
not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ,
neither do they make Men meet to receive Grace, or (as the School-Authors say)
deserve Grace of Congruity: Yea, rather for that they are not done as God has
willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the Nature of
Sin.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Conf. cap. 16. Sect. 7.
Works done by Unregenerate Men, although for the matter of them, they may be
things which God commands, and of good use, both to themselves and others; yet
because they proceed not from an Heart purified by Faith, nor are done in a
right manner according to the Word, nor to a right End, the Glory of God, they
are therefore sinful, and cannot please God, or make a Man meet to receive
Grace from God; and yet their neglect of them is more sinful and displeasing to
God.

Calv. Inst. l. 27. cap. 1^. Sect. 1.
They have found out I know not what Moral good Works, whereby Men are made
acceptable to God, before they are ingrafted into Christ: As if the Scripture
lied when it said -- They are all in Death who have not the Son; If they be in
Death, how can they beget matter of Life? As if it were of no force --
Whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin; as if evil Trees could bring forth good
Fruit.

The Papists.
Counc. Trent. Sess. 6. Can. 7.
Whosoever shall say, That all Works done before Justification, howsoever they
be done, are truly Sins, or deserve the hatred of God, Let him be Anathema.

The fourteenth Article of the Church of England.
Of Works of Supererogation.
UOluntary works besides, over and above Gods Commandments, which they call
Works of Supererogation, cannot be taught without Arogancy and Impiety; for by
them men do declare, that they do not only render unto God as much as they are
bound to do, but that they do more for his sake than of bounden duty is
required; whereas Christ says plainly. When you have done all that are
commanded to you, say, you are unprofitable Servants.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Conf. cap. 16. Sect. 4, 5.
They who in their Obedience attain to the greatest height which is possible in
this Life, are so far from being able to Supererogate and do more than God
requires, as that they fall short of much which in Duty they are bound to do.

We cannot by our best Works merit pardon of Sin, or Eternal Life, at the hand
of God, by reason of the great disproportion that is between them and the Glory
to come, and the infinite distance that is between us and God, whom by them we
can neither profit nor satisfy for the debt of our former sins, but when we
have done all we can, we have done but our Duty, and are unprofitable Servants:
And because as they are good, they proceed from his Spirit, and as they are
wrought by us, they are defiled and mixed with so much Weakness and
Imperfection, that they cannot endure the severity of Gods Judgment.

The Papists
Rhem. Annot. on Luke 10. Sect. 3.
The Works which we do more than Precept, be called works of Supererogation;
And' it is evident against the Protestants, that there be such Works.

Ibid. 1 Cor. 9. Sect. 6.
A reward of Supererogation is given to them that of abundant Charity do more in
the Service of God than they be commanded.

Ibid. 2 Cor. 8. Sect. 3.
It Is plain, that the fastings and satisfactory deeds of one Man are available
to others; yea, and that Holy Saints, or other virtuous Persons, may in measure
and proportion of other Men's Necessities and Deservings, allot unto them, as
well the Supererogation of their Spiritual Works, as those that abound in
Worldly Goods may give Alms of their Superfluities to them which are in
necessity.

The fifteenth Article of the Church of England.
Of Christ alone without Sin.
CHrist in the Truth of our Nature was made like unto us in all things (Sin
only except) from which he was clearly void, both in his Flesh and in his
Spirit; He came to be a Lamb without Spot, who by the Sacrifice of himfelf once
made, should take away the Sins of the World: And Sin (as St. John says) was
not in him. But all we, the rest, (although Baptized and Born again in Christ)
yet offend in many things; And if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the Truth is not in us.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. larger Catech. Q. 37.
Christ the Son of God became Man by taking to himself a true Body and
reasonable Soul, being Conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, in the Womb of
the Virgin Mary, of her substance, and born of her, yet without Sin.

Abid. Q. 22.
The Covenant being made with Adam as a public Person, not for himself only,
but for his Posterity, all Mankind descending from him by ordinary Generation
sinned in him, and fell with him in that first Transgression.

The Papists
For the most part hold and maintain, That not only our Lord Jesus, but also
that the Virgin Mary was without Sin, both Original and Actual; touching which,
the Council of Trent thus expresses it self.

Co^^^. Trent. Sess. 5.
This Holy Synod does declare, That in this Decree, wherein Original Sin is
handled, it does not intend to comprehend the Blessed and Immaculate Virgin
Mary, the Mother of God; but that the Constitutions of Pope Sixtus the Fourth,
of happy memory, shall be observed, under the Penalties therein expressed.

The better to understand this, The Reader must know, that about the year 1200,
Peter Lombard the Schoolman being very much at leisure, began to dispute,
whether when the Virgin Mary by the Holy Ghost conceived Christ, it might not
come to pass, that she her self might then be cleansed and freed from all Sin,
and even Original Corruption. Observe now how dangerous it is, and into what
Absurdities they run, that without Scripture will with show of good Intention,
advance their own Conceits. This which Lombard only disputed, some of his
Successors in the Schools went further, and in short time pressed it as an
Article of Faith to be believed of all Christians, That the Virgin Mary was
Conceived without Sin: And of this Opinion the Franciscans were stout
Asserters, which was so far countenanced by the Pope, that by a Bull he caused
a Feast to be Celebrated in Honor of such the Virgins Conception. But the
Dominicans no less vigorously opposed this new Doctrine, and so all Christendom
came into a slame about it, each Party charging the other with Heresy. To
appease which, not daring to disoblige either Party, he did by another Bull
leave it indifferent, making either side that should brand the others Notion as
Heretical, to be liable to Excommunication. Which two Orders are the
Constitutions here referred unto, and for the Readers satisfaction, that he may
see what kind of things they are, that must be so observed, we shall here
insert so much of them as is material, faithfully translated, as follows.

Pope Sixtus's first Bull.
WHen with the search of a devout Consideration, we inquire into and revolve in
the secrets of our Breast, those high and lofty Titles of Merits, wherewith the
Queen of Heaven, the glorious Virgin Mother of God, preferred above the
Etherial Seats; shines as the morning Star, far more bright than any of the
rest of the Celestial Constellations; That she being the Way of Mercy, the
Mother of Grace, and the Friend of Piety, the Comfortress of Humane kind, the
diligent and watchful Oratress that with the King whom she brought forth,
continually intercedes for the Salvation of the Faithful, who are oppressed
with the burden of Sins: We cannot but think it fit, nay, our Duty, That all
the Faithful of Christ should give Thanks and Praises for the wonderful
Conception of the said Immaculate Virgin, to Almighty God, (whose Providence
from Eternity regarding that Virgins Humility, for the reconciling Mankind,
obnoxious to Death, by the fall of their first Parent, again to its Author,
constituted her by the preparation of the Holy Spirit, the Habitation of his
only begotten Son, who of her assumed the Flesh of our Mortality, for the
Redemption of his People, and yet she after her Delivery an Immaculate Virgin)
to invite them by Indulgences and Remission of Sins, to say, and to be present
at the Masses and other Divine Services appointed in the Church of God, That so
by the Merits and Intercession of the said Virgin, they may be rendered more apt
and fit for Divine Grace; wherefore induced by this Consideration, confiding in
the Authority of the same Almighty God, and of the Blessed Apostles, Peter and
Paul: We do by our Apostolical Authority, and this our Constitution, for ever
to be in force; Appoint and Ordain, That all and singular Christians, of either
Sex, who shall devoutly Celehrate, or say Mass and the Office of the Conception
of the said glorious Virgin, according to the Pious Devout and laudable Form
and Institution of our beloved Son, Mr. Leonard de Nogarolis, Clerk of Verona,
our Notary, and which is published by our Authority, or shall be present at the
Canonical Hours on the day of the Feast of the said Virgin Mary's Conception,
and its Octaves; as often as they so do, shall altogether obtain the very same
Indulgence and Remission of Sins, as those do, who according to the
Constitutions of Urban the 4th, approved in the Council of Vienna, and Martin
the 5th, and others our Predecessors, Popes of Rome, Celebrate the Mass and
Canonical hours on the Feast of the Body and Blood of our Lord, from the first
Vespers, and during its Octaves. These Presents to be observed for ever.

Dated at St. Peter's at Rome the third Calends of March, in the year of our
Lord 1476, and of our Popedom the 6th.
The second Constitution.
IT IS always very grievous and troublesome to us, when ill things are related to
us of Persons Ecclesiastic. But so much the more sensibly are we provoked with
the excesses committed in Preaching, by those who are deputed to Evangelize the
Word of God; by how much it is more dangerous to suffer them to remain
uncorrected, since those Errors are not easily to be blotted out, which by such
public Preaching are more spreadingly and daranably imprinted in the Hearts of
Men. Whereas the Holy Roman Church does publicly and solemnly Celebrate the
Festival of the Conception of the unspotted Mary, always a Virgin, and has
ordained a proper Office for the same; There are yet, as we hear, some
Preachers of several Orders, that in their Sermons to the People, publicly, in
several Cities and Countries, have not blushed to affirm, and yet cease not
daily to Preach, That all those that hold or assert the said Glorious and
Immaculate Mother of God, to have been conceived without any spot of Original
Sin, do mortally sin, or that those are Heretics who Celebrate the Office of
her Immaculate Conception: And that those sin grievously, who frequent their
Sermons, who affirm her to be conceived without Sin. And not content with such
Preachings, they have also published Books to that purpose, whereby no small
scandals are risen in the minds of the Faithful, and greater are every day
feared. We therefore, willing as much as is granted us from on high, to obviate
such rash boldness, and perverse and scandalous Assertions, which may thence
arise in the Church of God, by our own motion, and not at the instance of any,
but of our mere deliberation and certain Science, do by Apostolical Authority,
and by the Tenor of these presents, Reprobate and Damn, as false, erroneous,
and altogether void of Truth, the said such Assertions of Preachers, and all
others who presume to affirm, That those that Believe, or hold the said Mother
of God to have been preserved in her Conception from the stain of Original Sin,
are thereby polluted with any Heresy, or that thereby they Sin, or that those
that Celebrate the said Office of her Conception, or hear the Sermons of those
of that Opinion, do thereby incur any guilt of Sin; And all Books containing
any such Assertions: And we do Command and Ordain, That the Preachers, or
others, of whatever State, Degree, Order, or Condition soever, that shall
henceforwards presume in Sermons, or in any other way, to maintain, That the
Assertions by Us so Condemned are true, or read any of these Books, shall ipso
facto incur the sentence of Excommunication, from which they shall not be
Absolved by any but the Bishop of Rome, except at the point of Death. And by
the like Authority, we do likewise subject to the same Censure and Penalty, all
that shall assert the contrary Opinion, viz. That those that assert, That the
Glorious Virgin Mary was conceived with Original Sin, do thereby incur the
Crime of Heresy, or mortal Sin, since the same is not yet decided by the Roman
Church and Apostolical See. Let it therefore not be lawful to any to infringe
or act contrary to this our Act of Reprobation, Damnation, Statute, Ordinance,
Will, and Decree: If any one shall presume so to do, Let him know, that he
shall incur the Indignation of Almighty God, and of the Blessed Peter and Paul
his Apostles.

Given at Rome at St. Peter's, in the Year of our Lords Incarnation 1483, and of
our Popedom the 13th, Pridie Nonas Septembris.
Now, who would have thought, but the Pope, who pretends, or at least this
Council, whom all Papists boast to have power to determine infallibly all
Controversies, would rather have put an end to this dispute, than thus to
continue the quarrel, and leave it still doubtful? But here lies the mystery,
The Trent Fathers resolved not to part with this Figment of the Schoolmen,
which could not be casheir'd without reflecting upon Pope Sixtus, that thus
ordained a Feast in memory of it; And yet in this Age of Light, were ashamed to
define a thing so palpably contrary to Scripture, and the apprehension of all
Antiquity, to be received as an Article of Faith, and so politickly left it
undetermined, yet show us which way they incline, by continuing the Celebration
of that Festival to this day.

The sixteenth Article of the Church of England.
Of Sin after Baptism.
NOT every deadly sin willingly committed after Baptism is Sin against the Holy
Ghost, and unpardonable; wherefore the grant of Repentance is not to be denied
to such as fall into Sin after Baptism. After we have received the Holy Ghost,
we may depart from Grace given, and fall into Sin, and by the Grace of God we
may arise again, and amend our Lives: And therefore they are to be Condemned,
which say, they can no more Sin as long as they live here, to deny the place of
forgiveness to such as truly Repent.

St. Augustine, in his Book de Heresibus, cap. 38. tells us of Heretics called
Cathari, or Novatiani, that made every Sin after Baptism to be unpardonable,
and denied to receive any upon Repentance: And cap. 82. he mentions certain
Heretics called Jovinianists, from their first Author, Jovinianus a Monk, who
held, That after Baptism a man could not Sin. This Article seems principally
intended against these Errors; and both Presbyterians and Papists agree it.

The seventeenth Article of the Church of England.
Of Predestination and Election.
PRedestination to Life, is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the
Foundations of the World were laid) he has constantly decreed by his Counsel,
secret to us, to deliver from Curse and Damnation, those whom he has chosen in
Christ out of Mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting Salvation, as
Vessels made to Honor; wherefore they that be endued with so excellent a
Benefit of God, be called according to Gods purpose by his Spirit working in
due season: They through grace obey the calling: they be justified freely: they
be made Sons of God by Adoption: they be made like the image of his only
begotten Son Jesus Christ: they walk Religiously in good Works, and at length
by Gods mercy they attain to everlasting Felicity.

As the Godly Consideration of Predestination and our Election in Christ is
full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to Godly Persons, and such as
feel in themselves the working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the works of
the Flesh and their Earthly Members, and drawing up their minds to high and
heavenly things, as well because it does greatly establish and confirm their
Faith of Eternal Salvation to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does
frequently kindle their love toward God; so for curious and carnal Persons,
lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before their Eyes the
Sentence of Gods Predestination, is a most dangerous downfall, whereby the Devil
does thrust them into Desperation, or into Wretchlesness of most unclean
living, no less perilous than Desperation.

Furthermore, we must receive Gods Promises in such wise as they be generally
set forth in Holy Scripture: and in our doings, that Will of God is to be
followed, which we have expressly declared unto us in the Word of God.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Conf. cap. 3. Sect. 3, 4, 5, 6. and 8.
By the Decree of God, for the manifestation of his own Glory, some Men and
Angels were predestined unto everlasting Life, and others foreordained to
everlasting Death.

These Angels and Men predestined and fore-ordain'd, are particularly and
unchangeably designed, and their number so certain and definite, that it cannot
be either increased or diminished.

Those of Mankind that are predestined unto Life, God, before the Foundation
of the World was laid, according to his Eternal and Immutable purpose, and the
secret Counsel and good pleasure of his Will, has chosen in Christ unto
everlasting Glory, out of his mere free Grace and Love, without any foresight
of Faith, or Good Works, or perseverance in either of them, or any other thing
in the Creature, as Conditions and Causes moving him thereunto, and all to the
praise of his Glorious Grace.

As God has appointed the Elect unto Glory, so has he by the Eternal and most
free purpose of his Will, foreordain'd all the means thereunto. Wherefore they
who are Elected, being fallen in Adam, are redeemed by Christ, are effectually
called unto Faith in Christ, by his Spirit working in due season, are
Justified, Adopted, Sanctified, and kept by his Power, through Faith unto
Salvation. Neither are any other Redeemed by Christ, effectually Called,
Justified, Adopted, Sanctified and Saved, but the Elect only.

The Doctrine of this high Mystery of Predestination is to be handled with
special Prudence and Care, that Men attending the Will of God revealed in his
Word, and yielding Obedience thereunto, may from the certainty of their
effectual Vocation be assured of their Eternal Election; so shall this Doctrine
afford matter of Praise, Reverence, and Admiration of God, and of Humility,
Diligence, and abundant Consolation to all that sincerely obey the Gospel.

The Papists.
Though they own the Word Predestination sometimes, yet they teach, That the
Cause thereof is not the mere good pleasure of God, but that a Man does make
himself Eligible by his own good Works and Merits. Thus they say, The Kingdom
of Heaven is prepared for them that are worthy of it, and deserve it by their
well doing. -- Rhem. Annot. on Mat. 20. 23.
Although from Gods Eternal Predestination Glory flows to the Elect, yet for
all that, it springs not but from their own good Works, Stella on Luke, cap.
10. fol. 35. True Faith and Righteousness may be lost, and the Faithful utterly
fall from the Faith, Bellarm. de Just. l. 3. cap. 4. which is the same thing,
as if we should say, That the Elect may become Reprobates, and Election not to
be immutable.

Counc. Trent. Sess. 6. can. 17.
If any shall say, That the Grace of Justification happens not to any but such
as are Predestinate, but that all the rest who are called, are indeed called,
but receive not Grace, as being by Divine Power Predestined to Evil, Let him
be Accursed.

Ibid. Can. 15.
If any one shall say, a Man Regenerated and Justified is bound to believe that
he is certainly of the number of the Elect, Let him be Anathema.

The eighteenth Article of the Church of England.
Of obtaining Eternal Salvation only by the Name of Christ.
THEY also are to be had Accursed that presume to say, That every Man shall be
saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame
his Life according to that Law, and the Light of Nature: For Holy Scripture
does set out unto us only the Name of Jesus Christ, whereby Men must be saved.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Conf. cap. 10.
Persons not Elected, although they may be called by the Ministry of the Word,
and may have some common Operations of the Spirit, yet they never truly come
unto Christ, and therefore cannot be saved: Much less can men not professing
the Christian Religion be saved in any other way whatsoever, be they never so
diligent to frame their Lives according to the Light of Nature, and the Law of
that Religion they profess. And to assert that they may, is very pernicious and
detestable.

The Papists
Own the Words of this Article, but in effect deny the latter part thereof, by
trusting in the Mediation and Intercession of the Virgin Mary, and other Saints
and Angels, and praying unto and worshipping them, etc.

The nineteenth Article of the Church of England.
Of the Church.
THE Visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of Faithful Men, in the which
the pure Word of God is Preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered
according to Christ's Ordinance in all those things that of necessity are
requisite to the same.

As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch have erred, so also the
Church of Rome has erred, not only in their Living and manner of Ceremonies,
but also in matters of Faith.

The Presbyterians.
Wherever we see the Word of God sincerely Preached and Heard, and the
Sacraments administered according to Christ's Institution, there is a Church of
God; For these two we assign as Marks, whereby the Church may be known.

The Visible Church, which is also Catholic [ or Vniversal] under the Gospel
(not confined to one Nation as before under the Law) consists of all those
throughout the World, that profess the true Religion; and particular Churches,
which are Members thereof, are more or less pure, according as the Doctrine of
the Gospel is taught and embraced, Ordinances administered, and public Worship
performed more or less pure in them.

The purest Churches under Heaven are subject both to mixture and error, and
some have so degenerated, as to become no Churches of Christ, but Synagogues of
Satan. Nevertheless there shall always be a Church on Earth to worship God
according to his Will.

The Pope of Rome cannot in any sense be Head of the Church, but is that
Antichrist, that Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition, that exalts himself in the
Church against Christ and all that is called God.

The Papists.
As to the first part of the Article, they deny the Preaching the Word and due
Administration of the Sacraments to be the marks of Christ's Visible Church: See
Bellarm. de notis Ecclesiae, cap. 1. And instead thereof assign others, which
by the same Cardinal are there reckoned to be the fifteen following. 1. The
Name of the Catholic Church and Christians. 2. Antiquity. 3. Duration. 4.
Multitude. 5. Succession of Bishops and Ordination. 6. Agreement with the
ancient Church. 7. Union of the Members together amongst themselves and with
their Head. 8. Holiness of Doctrine. 9. Efficacy of Doctrine. 10. Holiness of
Life. 11. Miracles. 12. Prophesies. 13. Confession of Adversaries. 14. The
unhappy ends of those that have opposed it. 15. The Temporal felicity of those
that have desended it.

And as to the latter part of the Artiticle, they with all Confidence assert
the clean contrary; other Churches have erred, but the Church of Rome cannot,
Id Constanter Negamus, we constantly deny ( says Costerus the Jesuit) that
Christ's Vicar, Peter's Successors, the Bishops of Rome, have either taught
Heresies or propounded Errors. God preserves the Truth of Christian Religion
in the Apostolic See of Rome, and it is not possible that Church can err, or
has erred at any time in any point. Rhem. Annot. on Mat. 23. 2.

The twentieth Article of the Church of England.
Of the Authority of the Church.
THE Church has Power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority in
Controversies of Faith: And yet it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any
thing, that is contrary to Gods Word written, neither may it so expound one
place of Scripture that it be repugnant to another; wherefore although the
Church be a Witness and a Keeper of Holy Writ, yet as it ought not to decree
any thing against the same, so besides the same ought it not to enforce any
thing to be believed for necessity of Salvation.

The Presbyterians.
Calv. Inst l 4. cap. 8 Sect. 9.
The Church has no Power to make any new Articles of Faith, but ought simply to
adhere to the Doctrine to which God has subjected all without exception.

Ass. Conf. cap. 31. 3. Sect.
It belongs to Synods and Councils, Ministerially to determine Controversies
of Faith, and Cases of Conscience, to set down Rules and Directions for the
better ordering of the public Worship of God and Government of his Church: To
Receive complaints in Cases of male administration, and Authoritatively to
determine the same; which Decrees and Determinations, if consonant to the Word
of God, are to be received with Reverence and Submission, not only for their
Agreement with the Word, but also for the power wherewith they are made, as
being an Ordinance of God appointed thereunto in his Word.

The Papists
Hold that the Church has Power to change the Sacraments ordained even by
Christ himself, as appears by this Decree of the Council of Trent. Sess. 1.
cap. 2.


This Holy Synod declares, That the Church has always had Power in dispensing
the Sacraments (their Substance being safe) to appoint or change according to
the variety of times and places, such things as may most tend to the profit of
the Receivers, and greater Veneration of the Sacraments themselves; and
therefore, though from the beginning of the Christian Religion the use of the
receiving the Sacrament in both kinds was not unfrequent, yet for certain grave
and just Causes, has approved the receiving only in one kind, and decreed the
same to be a Law.

Pighius in Controv. de Ecclesia
The Church is to judge the Scriptures, and not the Scriptures the Church.

The one and twentieth Article of the Church of England.
Of the Authority of general Councils.
GEneral Councils ought not to be gathered together without the Commandment
and Will of Princes, That is when the Princes, where they are Assembled are
Christians, else this Article will condemn the First and most Holy Council that
ever was in the World, Acts 15.
and when they be gathered together (forasmuch as they be an Assembly of Men,
where of all be not governed with the Spirit and Word of God) they may err, and
sometime have erred even in things pertaining to God, wherefore things ordained
by them as necessary to Salvation, have neither Strength, nor Authority, unless
it may be declared, that they be taken out of Holy Scripture.

The Presbyterians.
For the better Government and further Edification of the Church there ought to
be such Assemblies as are commonly called Synods or Councils.

As Magistrates may lawfully call a Synod of Ministers, and other fit Persons,
to consult and advise with about matters of Religion; so if Magistrates be Piz.
Pagans.
open Enemies to the Church, the Ministers of Christ of themselves by virtue of
their Office, or they with other fit Persons upon Delegation from their
Churches, may meet together in such Assemblies.

All Synods or Councils since the Apostles times, whether general or particular
may err, and many have erred. Therefore they are not to be made the Rule of
Faith or Practice, but to be used as an help in both.

Synods and Councils are to handle or conclude nothing, but that which is
Ecclesiastical, and are not to intermeddle with Civil Affairs, which concern
the Commonwealth, unless by way of humble Petition in cases extraordinary, or
by way of advice for satisfaction of Conscience, if they be thereunto required
by the Civil Magistrate.

The Papists.
To the Popes it belongs to Appoint and* direct general Councils: Bulla Julii
3. Resumptionis Conc. Trid.

Bellarm. de Conc. cap. 12.
A Diocesan Council is to be called by the Bishop; a Provincial by the
Archbishop; a National one by a Patriarch or Primate, but a general one the
Pope can only call, not the Emperor, or any without the Popes Consent and
approbation.

Rhem. Annot. on Mat. 16.
The Popes of Rome (and not Christian Princes) have the Authority and Power of
making Laws Ecclesiastical, and of calling Councils.

Rhem. Annot. on John 16. 13.
General Councils confirmed by the Pope cannot err.

The two and twentieth Article of the Church of England.
Of Purgatory.
THE Romish Doctrine concerning Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping and Adoration,
as well of Images as of Relics, and also Invocation of Saints, is a fond
thing, vainly invented and grounded upon no warrantry of Scripture, but rather
Repugnant to the Word of God.

The Presbyterians.
Calv. Inst. l. 3. cap. 5. Sect. 6.
Purgatory is a mischievous Invention of Satan, making void the Cross of Christ,
intollerably contumelious unto the Mercy of God, and which shakes and
overthrows our Faith.

Ass. Conf. cap. 32. Sect. 1.
The Bodies of Men after Death return to Dust and see Corruption, but their
Souls (which neither dye nor sleep) having an immortal subsistence, return to
God immediately who gave them; the Souls of the Righteous, being then made
perfect in Holiness, are received into the highest Heavens, where they behold
the Face of God in Light and Glory, waiting for the full Redemption of their
Bodies; and the Souls of the Wicked are cast into Hell, where they remain in
Torments and utter Darkness, reserved for the Judgment of the last day. Besides
these two places for Souls separated from their Bodies, the Scripture
acknowledges none.

The Papists.
Counc. Trent. Sess. 25.
Whereas the Catholic Church, guided by the Holy Ghost out of the Holy
Scriptures, the ancient Tradition of the Fathers; and lately in this Universal
Synod has taught that there is a Purgatory, and the Souls there detained, are
helped by the Suffrages of the Faithful, especially by the acceptable Sacrifice
of the Altar: Therefore this Synod commands Bishops that they diligently study
and use their endeavors that the sound Doctrine of Purgatory, delivered from
the Holy Fathers and Sacred Councils, be believed and heard of the Faithful of
Christ, and every where Taught and Preached. And that the Suffrages of the
Faithful living, viz. Sacrifices of the Mass, Prayers, Alms, and other works of
Piety, which are wont to be made by the Faithful for other Faithful People
Deceased, be piously and devoutly performed, according to the Institution of
the Church; And that what is due for the same by any Persons Wills or otherwise
shall not perfunctorily, but diligently and accurately be paid and performed by
the Priests and Ministers of the Church, who are bound to do the same.

Seeing the power of bestowing Indulgences is by Christ bestowed on the Church,
and she even in the most ancient times has used such Power given to her of
God, The most Holy Synod teaches and commands, that the use of Indulgences
so wholesome for Christian People, and approved by the Authority of Sacred
Councils, be retained in the Church, and accurseth those who either avouch them
to be unprofitable, or deny that there is any power in the Church to grant them.

Sess. 9.
Let them teach that the Images of Christ, the Virgin Mother of God, and other
Saints, are chiefly in Churches to be had and retained, and that due Honor and
Worship is to be given to them.

Ibid.
They who deny, That the Saints enjoying Eternal happiness in Heaven, are to be
called upon, or who affirm, either that they pray not for us Men, or that
Invocation of them to pray for us, is Idolatry, or contrary to the Word of God,
and repugnant to the Honor of the only Mediator between God and Men Jesus
Christ, or that it is folly either by Word and Thought to make supplications to
them that reign in Heaven, are of an impious Opinion.

The three and twentieth Article of the Church of England.
Of Ministering in the Congregation.
IT is not lawful for any Man to take upon him the Offfce of public Preaching
or Ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be lawfully called
and sent to execute the same: And those we ought to judge lawfully called and
sent, which be chosen and called to this work by Men, who have public
Authority given unto them in the Congregation to call and send Ministers into
the Lords Vineyard.

The Presbyterians.
Calv. Inst. l. 4. cap. 3. Sect. 10.
No Man ought to thrust himself to teach or govern in the Church, unless he be
carefully called thereunto.

The Papists.
Whoever shall say, That those which are not rightly Ordained by Ecclesiastical
and Canonical Power, but come from elsewhere, are lawful Ministers of the Word
and Sacraments, Let him be Accursed.

The four and twentieth Article of the Church of England.
Of speaking in the Congregation in such a Tongue as the People understands.
IT is a thing plainly repugnant to the Word of God, and the Custom of the
Primitive Church, to have public Prayers in the Church, or to Minister the
Sacraments in a Tongue, not understood of the People.

The Presbyterians.
Calv. Inst. l. 3. cap. 20. Sect. 33.
Public Prayers are to be made in the Vulgar Tongue, not in Latin amongst the
French and English, but so as they may be understood by the whole Assembly;
forasmuch as it ought to be done to the Edification of the whole Church, unto
whom by a sound not understood, no profit can in any fort Redound.

Ass. Conf. cap. 21. Sect. 3.
Prayer with Thansgiving being one special part of Religious Worship, is by God
required of all Men, and that it may be accepted, it is to be made in the name
of the Son, by the help of his Spirit, according to his Will, with
Understanding, Reverence, Humility, Fervency, Faith, Love and Perseverance, and
if Vocal, in a known Tongue.

The Papists.
Conc. Trid. Sess. 22. cap. 8.
Although the Mass contain great Instruction of Faithful People, yet it seemed
not expedient to the Fathers, that it should every where be said in the Vulgar
Tongue.

Ibid. Can. 9.
If any one shall say, That the Rite of the Church of Rome, by which part of the
Canon and words of Consecration are pronounced with a lower voice, is to be
Condemned, or that the Mass ought to be Celebrated only in the Vulgar Tongue,
Let him be Accursed.

Rhem. Annot. p. 463.
It is not necessary, that we understand our Prayers.

Rhem. Annot. on Mat. 21. 6.
Prayers not understood of the People are acceptable to God.

The Five and twentieth Article of the Church of England.
Of the Sacraments.
SAcraments Ordained of Christ be not only Badges, or Tokens of Christianmens
profession, but rather they be certain Witnesses and effectual Signs of Grace,
and Gods good Will toward us: By the which he works invisibly in us* and does
not only quicken, but strengthen and confirm our Faith in him.

There are two Sacraments ordained by Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is to
say, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

Those five commonly called Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation, Penance,
Orders, Matrimony, extreme Unction, are not to be counted for Sacraments of the
Gospel, being such as have grown partly of the Corrupt following of the
Apostles, partly as states of Life allowed in the Scripture, but yet have not
like Nature of Sacraments with Baptism and the Lords Supper, for that they have
not any visible Sign or Ceremony ordained of God.

The Sacraments were not ordained of God to be gazed upon, or to be carried
about, but that we should duly use them. And in such only as worthily receive
the same, they have a wholesome Effect or Operation, but they that receive them
unworthility, purchase unto themselves Damnation, as St. Paul says.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Cons. cap. 27. Sect. 4.
There be only two Sacraments ordained by Christ our Lord, Baptism, and the
Lords Supper, neither of which can be dispensed by any, but by a Minister of
the Word, lawfully Ordained.

Private Masses, or receiving the Sacrament by a Priest, or any other alone, as
likewise the denial of the Cup to the People, worshipping the Elements, the
lifting them up, or carrying them about for Adoration, and the reserving them
for any pretended Religious use, are all contrary to the Nature of this
Sacrament, and to the Institution of Christ.

The Papists.
Conc. Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 1*
If any one shall say, That the Sacraments of the new Law, were not all
substituted by Christ, or that they are more or fewer than seven, viz. Baptism,
Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Holy Orders, and Matrimony,
or that any of these is not truly and properly a Sacrament, Let him be Accursed.

Conc. Trid. Sess. 13. Can. 6, 7.
If any one shall say, That'tis not lawful to reserve the Holy Eucharist, but
that the same is presently to be distributed; or that it is not to be Adored
even with the outward Worship; or that it ought not solemnly to be carried
about in Processions, or shown publicly, to be adored, to the People; or that
it is not lawful to hear it Honorably to the Sick, Let him be Accursed.

Conc. Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 8.
If any one shall say, That by the Sacraments themselves of the New Testament,
ex opere operato, merely by the thing done, Grace is not conferred, but that
the Faith of the Divine Promise suffices to obtain Grace, Let him be Accursed.

Ibid. C(...)
If any one shall say, That in Ministers, whilst they make, and confer the
Sacraments there is not required an Intention at least of doing that which the
Church does, Let him be Accursed.

The six and twentieth Article of the Church of England.
Of the unworthiness of the Ministers, which hinder not the Effect of the
Sacraments.
ALthough in the visible Church the Evil be ever mingled with the Good, and
sometime the Evil have chief Authority in the Ministration of the Word and
Sacraments, yet forasmuch as they do not the same in their own Name, but
Christ's, and do Minister by his Commission and Authority, we may use their
Ministry both in hearing of the Word of God, and in the receiving the of
Sacraments, neither is the effect of Christ's Ordinance taken away by their
Wickedness, nor the Grace of Gods Gifts diminished from such as by Faith and
rightly do receive the Sacraments Ministered unto them, which be effectual,
because of Christ's Institution and Promise, although they be Ministered by Evil
Men.

Nevertheless it appeartaineth to the Discipline of the Church, that enquiry be
made of Evil Ministers, and that they be accused by those that have knowledge
of their offenses, and finally being found guilty, by just Judgment be deposed.

The Presbyterians.
The Grace which is exhibited in or by the Sacraments rightly used, is not
conferred by any Power in them, neither does the Efficacy of a Sacrament depend
upon the Piety or Intention of him that does Administer it, but upon the work
of the Spirit and the Word of Institution, which contains together with a
Precept authorizing the use thereof, a Promise of benefit to worthy Receivers.

The Papists.
Rhem. Annot. on Tit. 3. 10 an^d Mark 3. 13.
The Sermons of Heretics [so they term all Protestant Ministers] must not be
heard, though they Preach the Truth. Their Prayers and Sacraments are not
acceptable to God, but are the howlings of Wolves.

The seven and twentieth Article of the Church of England.
Of Baptism.
BAptism is not only a sign of Profession, and mark of difference, whereby
Christian-Men are discerned from others that be not Christened: but it is also a
sign of Regeneration, or new Birth, whereby as by an Instrument, they that
receive Baptism rightly, are grafted into the Church: the promise of the
forgiveness of Sins, and of our Adoption to be the Sons of God by the Holy
Ghost, are vtsibly signed and sealed: Faith is confirmed and Grace increased by
virtue of Prayer unto God. The Baptism of young Children is in any wise to be
retained in the Church, as most agreeable with the Institution of Christ.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Cons^ cap. 28. Sect. 1. 4.
Baptism is a Sacrament of the New Testament, ordained by Jesus Christ, not only
for the solemn Admission of the party Baptized into the visible Church, but
also to be unto him a Sign and Seal of the Covenant of Grace, of his ingrafting
into Christ, of Regeneration, of Remission of Sins, and of his giving up unto
God through Jesus Christ, to walk in newness of Life; which Sacrament is, by
Christ's appointment, to be continued in his Church, until the end of the World.

Not only those that do Actually pro fess, Faith in and obedience unto, Christ,
but also the Infants of one or both believing Parents, are to be Baptized.

The Papists
Maintain,

1. As to the Effects of Baptism, That it takes away all Sin. Rhem. Annot. on
Acts 22. 17.
The Sacrament of Baptism does it self wash away Sins, and therefore does not
only signify, (as the Heretics affirm) That our Sins be forgiven before, or
otherwise by Faith only remitted, whereby the Churches Doctrine is proved to be
fully agreeable to the Scriptures, That the Sacraments give Grace ex opere
operato, that is by the force and Virtue of the Work and Word done and said in
the Sacrament.

Conc. Trid. Sess. 5. decret. 5^ Bellarm. de Baptism. l. 1. cap. 13.
Not only is all Sin so taken away by Baptism as not to be imputed, but it
leaves no Sin Inherent, nothing that can be imputed, as a Sin to those Baptized.

2. That Children dying without it are Damned. Ibid. Can. 4.
The Church has always Believed that Children perish, if they depart this Life
without Baptism.

Rhem. Annot. on John 3.
As no Man can enter into this World, nor have his Life and being in the same,
except he be born of his Carnal Parents, no more can a man enter into the Life
and State of Grace, which is in Christ, or attain to Life Everlasting, unless
he be born and Baptized of Water and the Holy Ghost; whereby we see, First,
This Sacrament to be called our Regeneration or second Birth, in respect of our
Natural and Carnal, which was before. Secondly, That this Sacrament consists
of an external Element of Water, and internal virtue of the Holy Spirit,
wherein it excels John's Baptism, which had the external Element, but not
the Spiritual Grace. Thirdly, That no Man can enter into the Kingdom of God,
nor into the Fellowship of Holy Church without it, whereby the Pelagians, and
Calvinists be Condemned, that promise Life everlasting to young Children that
die without Baptism.

3. As to the Minister of Baptism, any Person may do it. Bellarm. Ibid. Can. 7.
Therefore in case of necessity, any Person, Man or Woman, may Baptize lawfully,
one may do it be he Jew, or Pagan, let but the matter and form be right, with a
due Intention.

4. They add and practice several Ceremonies, besides the Institution, in and
about Baptism. As, That the Priest must Exorcise or conjure the Devil out of
the Party to be Baptized, and Exsufflation (as they call it) that is a puffing
hard upon the Party to le Baptized, in token of outing the Evil Spirit, and
breathing in the Good in the room thereof, putting Holy Salt into his Mouth,
anointing his Ears and Nostrils, and pronouncing the word, Epheta, thatis, be
opened, Anointing him upon the Crown with Holy Crism of the Bishops own making,
putting a lighted Taper into the Child's hand, and a white Garment on its back,
to show that he is translated out of Darkness into Light, and denote the purity
of his Soul, with Several other the like Ceremonies, to the Number of one or
two and twenty, reckoned up by Bellarmine particularly, in his First Book of
Baptism, Can. 25, 26, and 27.

All which (though they have not the leastWarrant from Scripture) they require
to be punctually and necessarily observed, For so their Council of Trent, Sess.
7. Can. 13. does Decree. -- If any one shall, say, That the received and
approved Rites used in the solemn Administration of the Sacraments may be
contemned, or at pleasure omitted by the Administrators without Sin, or changed
into any new ones by any Pastor of the Churches, Let him be Anathema.

5. Not yet herewith content, They further have profaned this Ordinance, by
applying it to Bells which they Baptize, thereby giving them (as they imagine)
a virtue of cleansing the Air from Devils, preventing the mischiefs of
Lightning, and saving from other Calamities that arise from Tempests, of which
Holy Christening, Pope John the 14th has the Honor of being first Author (Sec
Centuriatores Magdeburgenses, Cent. 10. Cap. 6.) It Is true, Bellarmine de Romans
Pontiff. l. 4. cap. 12. being half ashamed of this Practice, and no way able to
find any color to defend it, would shuffle it off by alleging -- That not the
Popes, but common People apply the name of Baptism Metaphorically to the
Benediction of the Bells with Holy naming of them, and Prayers also, all which
he does acknowledge still in use: But that there is, or at least formerly was
more in the Case, appears by the hundred grievances of the Germans, exhibited
to the Popes Legate no longer ago than since Luthers time, by the Princes of
Germany at the Diet of Norimberg, where the one and fiftieth grievance is this,
That the Suffragans have invented, that only themselves and none other Priest
shall Baptize Bells for the Laity, and the ruder People do believe by the
Affirmation of the Suffragans, that Bells so Baptized will drive away Devils
and Tempests. Wherefore Multitudes, for the most part, of Godfathers are
appointed; they especially that are Rich, at the time of Baptism, take hold of
the Rope, and as the Suffragan sings before (as is wont to be done in Baptizing
of Children) they all make the Responses, and after name the Bell, which (as
Christians use to be) is then dressed in new Garments. And after they have a
sumptuous Feast, and the Suffragan is rewarded liberally. This is sure
something more than a Metaphorical Baptism.


I shall only add one more strange Doctrine of the Church of Rome, touching
Baptism, and that is, That a Child may be Baptized in its Mothers Womb by a
Pipe. This I find Asserted in a Treatise Entitled, Compendium Dianae. The
Words page 201 are these -- Pueri si moriantur in utero matris, nihil obstat,
quo minus possint Baptizari, si Actio Ministri possit ad ipsum puerumetiam in
utero matris existentem pervenire, ut si fistula possit pertingere ad ipsum
Infantis Corpusculum, vel propter Matris Cicatricem aspersio aquae possit ad
illum pertingere, and hoc etiam si acceleretur matris mors (dummodo sit certo
moritura) tunc enim etiam ipsa matter tenetur permittere, ut proles Baptizetur,
Res. 12. In English thus -- If Children dye in their Mothers Womb, nothing
hinders but that they may nevertheless be Baptized, if the action of the
Minister may extend to the Child it self, although remaining in its Mothers
Belly, as if a Pipe may reach the Infants Body, or by or through the Cicatrix
of the Mother [I must leave the Reader here to guess at his meaning] the
sprinkling of the Water may reach thereunto. And this, although thereby the
Death of the Mother be hastened (provided she must certainly dye) for then even
the Mother her self is bound to permit that her Child be Baptized.

But I suppose the Reader (as well as my self) is nauseated with such fulsome
Poposh Divinity -- Lets therefore hasten to another Article.

The eight and twentieth Article of the Church of England.
Of the Lords Supper.
THE Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of the Love that Christians ought to
have amongst themselves one to another, but rather it is a Sacrament of our
Redemption by Christ's Death. Insomuch that to such as rightly, worthily, and
with Faith receive the same, the Bread which we break is a partaking of the
Body of Christ, and likewise the Cup of Blessing, is a partaking of the Blood
of Christ.

Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of Bread and Wine) in the
Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by Holy Writ, but it is repugnant to the
plain Words of Scripture. overthrows the Nature of a Sacrament, and has
given occasion to many Superstitions.

The Body of Christ is given, taken and eaten in the Supper of the Lord, only
after an Heavenly and Spiritual manner. And the mean, whereby the Body of
Christ is received and eaten in the Supper, is Faith.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not by Christ's ordinance reserved,
carried about, lifted up, and worshipped.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Cons. cap. 29. Sect. 6.
That Doctrine which maintains a Change of the substance of the Bread and Wine
into the substance of Christ's Body and Blood (commonly called
Transubstantiation) by Consecration of a Priest, or by any other way, is
repugnant not to Scripture alone, but even to common Sense and Reason,
overthrows the Nature of the Sacrament, and has been and is the cause of
manifold Superstitions, yea, of gross Idolatries.

Ibid. Sect. 2.
In this Sacrament Christ is not offered up to his Father, nor any real
Sacrifice made at all for Remission of Sins of the quick or dead, but only a
Commemoration of that one offering up of himself by himself upon the Cross once
for all: And a Spiritual Oblation of all possible Praise unto God, for the
same: So that the Popish Sacrifice of the Mass (as they call it) is most
abominably injurious to Christ's one only Sacrifice, the alone propitiation for
all the Sins of the Elect.

The Papists.
Conc. Trid^ Sess. 1. 3. Can. 1. 2.
If any one shall deny, That in the Sacrament of the most Holy Eucharist, is
contained truly, really, and substantially the Body and Blood together of our
Lord, and so whole Christ; but shall say, That he is in it only as in a Sign or
Figure, or by his Virtue; or shall say, that the substance of Bread and Wine
remains; or shall deny that wonderful and singular Conversion of the whole
substance of the Bread into the Body, and of the whole substance of the Wine
into the Blood (the species only of Bread and Wine remaining) which Conversion
the Catholic Church most aptly calls Transubstantiation, Let him be Anathema.

Can. 8.
If any one shall say, That Christ exhibited in the Eucharist, is eaten only
Spiritually, Let him be Accursed.

The nine and twentieth Article of the Church of England.
Of the Wicked which eat not the Body of Christ in the use of the Lords Supper.
THE Wicked, and such as be void of a lively Faith, although they do carnally
and visibly press with the Teeth (as S. Augustine says) the Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of Christ: yet in no wise are they partakers of Christ, but
rather to their Condemnation do eat and drink the Sign and Sacrament of so
great a thing.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Conf. cap. 29. Sect. 8.
Although ignorant and wicked Men receive the outward Elements in this
Sacrament, yet they receive not the thing signified thereby, but by their
unworthy coming thereunto, are guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord to
their own Damnation.

The Papists.
Rhem. Annot. on 1 Cor. 11. 27.
All Communicants do eat the Very and Natural Body of Christ Jesus. If an
Infidel receive the Sacramental Species, he eats Christ's Body under the
Sacrament. Thom. Aquinas, p. 3. A. 3. ad. 2. The Body of Christ, says Claudius
de Saints, Repet. 2. cap. 6. is as truly and really received of Unworthy, as
of Godly Communicants. And Bonaventure, in 4. d. 9. A. 2. q. 1. calls it the
common Opinion of the Doctors, Certitudinaliter verum, a most certain Truth.
Nor is this all, but they hold, That the very Body of Christ, may be received
by Beasts and Vermin. If a Dog or a Mouse (says Aquinas in the place just now
cited, ad Tertium) eat the Sanctified Host, the substance of Christ's Body
cease not to be there, as long as the Species do remain. Nay, Durandus adds,
That the Devil himself may eat Christ. His Words are these -- Competit Bruto
and Angelo cuicunque vel Bono vel MALO species Sacramentales sumere. A Brute,
or any Angel Good or BAD, may receive the Sacrament, Durand. in 4. did. 9. q.
3. number. 6. ad primum. It Is true, some of their ancient Schoolmen were not
arrived to such irreverent conceits, Peter Lombard, l. 4. d. 13. A. puts the
Question -- What does the Mouse eat, when she gets part of a Consecrated Host?
And Answers modestly, Deus novit, God knows. And Bonaventure in 4. d. 13. a. 2.
q. 1. could not endure to hear, That Christ's Body should be in a Mouses Belly,
or in a Privy. But most of their Followers count them too precise: And Vasques,
in 3. q. 77. a. 8. disp. 195. cap. 5. concludes, Vera and Constans opinio sit,
etc. The true and constant Opinion is, That Christ is so long under the Species
in any place whatsoever, though never so base and filthy, as the outward forms
would conserve the nature of Bread, if it were there. Nor matters it (says he)
that by this means we must grant that Christ's Body may descend into a filthy
and unclean place, nor ought Godly Catholics thereat be scandalized. Now since
Christ's Sacred Body may be in the Body of any Beast or Vermin, and that it is
to be Worshipped and Adored with no less than divine Honor, wherever it be, a
Question arises, Whether he be to be Worshipped, for Example, in the Belly of
a Sow? (pardon Christian Reader the Instance, for it is the Papists own) For
Biel on the Canon of the Mass, lect. 84. starting the same question, returns
this Answer, Ubicunque, five in ventre SUIS, sive in ore viri vel mulieris, ibi
esse venerandum and adorandum intus in Anima, licet, non exterius in opere:
Wherever he is believed to be, either in the Belly of a SOW, or in the Mouth of
a Man or Woman, there he is to be Worshipped inwardly in the Soul, though not
externally in Work. Another scruple likewise they have, since the outward forms
may happen (especially by the Sick) to be Vomited up again, what must be done
in the Case? To which Albertus, in his Compend. Theol. verit. l. 6. cap. 19.
answers -- Si Infirmus Corpus domini Rejiciat, suscipiatur, etc. If the Sick
Spew up Christ's Body, he must take it again as well as he can, or (if he be not
able himself) the Priest must do it for him, or some discreet or cleanly Boy.
And Biel in the place late cited, gives this Counsel -- Si Ejiciatur per
Vomitum, etc. If Christ's Body be cast up by Vomit, so that you can but yet
discern the outward signs and appearance of Bread from the other Garbage, and
your Stomach will serve you to do it, without loathsomness and danger of
re-spuing, you must take it again; but if the Party be nauseous, then it must
be laid up honorably, with the other Relics. But others say, it must be
burnt, and the Ashes reverently laid up by the Altar. And Paladanus, in 4. d.
9. q. 1. a. 3. moving the Question, what was to be done, if a Beast should eat
the Sacrament? says he, 'twas to be killed, and the Host to be taken out of the
Maw, and if a Man had so much zeal as to endure to eat it, he were much to be
commended, provided he do it fasting. And thereupon tells a Story out of Hugo
Cluniacensis, how one Goderane took a parcel of the Eucharist, which had been
vomitted up by a Leper. The same Author advises, That the Sacrament be not
given to those that have a Scowring, or the Flux, lest the Body of Christ
should pass away through his Belly into the Draught, etc. I have recited these
Horrid Blasphemies in their own Words, That my Countrymen may detest a
Religion Composed of such impious Phrensies, and I beg the Readers excuse for
ossending his Ears with such stuff. For Popish impudence has this advantage,
they write such things as Christian Doctrine, which a modest Man can scarce
endure to Rehearse.

The thirtieth Article of the Church of England.
Of both kinds.
THE Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the Lay People: For both the parts
of the Lords Sacrament by Christ's Ordinance and Commandment, ought to be
Ministered to all Christian men alike.

The Presbyterians.
Calv. Inst. l. 4. cap. 17. Sect. 47.
They [ speaking of the Papists] have stolen, or snatched away one half of the
Lords Supper from the greater part of the People of God, and only allow the Cup
to a small parcel of shaveling Priests.

Ass. Conf. cap. 19. Sect. 3.
The Ministers are to take and Break the Bread, to take the Cup, and to give
both to the Communicants.

Ibid. Sect. 4.
Private Masses, or receiving this Sacrament by a Priest, or any other, alone;
as likewise the denial of the Cup to the People, are contrary to the Nature of
this Sacrament, and to the Institution of Christ.

The Papists.
Con. Trid. Sess. 21. cap. 2.
This Holy Synod Declares and Teaches, That Laics and Clerks not Consecrated,
are by no Divine precept bound to receive the Sacrament under both kinds, and
that it may in no sort be doubted, without prejudice to Faith, but that the
Communion of one kind is sufficient to Salvation.

Ibid. Can. 1. 2.
If any one shall say, That by Gods Command all the Faithful of Christ ought to
receive in both kinds; or shall deny, That the Church was moved with just
Causes and Reasons, to order the Laity to Communicate but in one kind, or shall
say she erred therein, Let him be Accursed.

The one and thirtieth Article of the Church of England.
Of the one Oblation of Christ finished upon the Cross.
THE Offering of Christ once made, is that perfect Redemption, Propitiation,
and Satisfaction for all the Sins of the whole World, both Original and Actual,
and there is none other Satisfaction for Sin, but that alone. Wherefore the
Sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was commonly said, that the Priest did
offer Christ for the Quick and the Dead, to have Remission of pain or guilt,
were Blasphemous Fables and dangerous Deceits.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Conf. cap. 29. Sect. 2.
In this Sacrament Christ is not offered up to his Father, nor any real
Sacrifice made at all for Remission of the Sins of the Quick or Dead, but only
a Commemoration of that one offering up of himself, by himself, upon the Cross
once for all, and a Spiritual Oblation of all possible Praise unto God for the
same: So that the Popish Sacrifice of the Mass (as they call it) is most
abominably injurious to Christ's one only Sacrifice, the alone Propitiation for
all the Sins of the Elect.

The Papists.
Conc. Tr^^. Sess. 22. Can. ^.
In this Divine Sacrifice of the Mass, the same Christ is contained and
unbloodily Sacrificed, who once offered himself bloodily on the Altar of the
Cross, This Holy Synod therefore Teaches, That this Sacrifice is truly
Propitiatory. And that thereby, if with a true Heart, and right Faith, in Fear
and Reverence, we being contrite, come to God, we do obtain Mercy, and find
Grace in a seasonable help: For by the oblation hereof God being pacified,
granting the Grace and Gift of Penance, does forgive Crimes and Sins, even the
greatest and most heinous. It is one and the same Host, Christ who then offered
himself on the Cross, now offering the same by the Ministry of the Priests; the
manner of offering being only different. The Fruits of which Oblation, viz. The
Bloody one, are most plentifully received and conveyed by this, so far is That
from being any ways derogated from by This, for which reason it is offered, not
only for the Sins, Punnishments, Satisfactions, and other Necessities of the
Living, but also for those that are departed in Christ, who are not yet fully
purged.

Ibid. Can. 4.
Whoever says, That by the Sacrifice of the Mass, the most Holy Sacrifice of
Christ finished on the Cross is Blasphemed, or that it derogateth from it, Let
him be Anathema.

The two and thirtieth Article of the Church of England.
Of the Marriage of Priests.
BIshops, Priests, and Deacons are not commanded by Gods Law, either to vow the
Estate of single life, or to abstain from Marriage: Therefore it is Lawful for
them also, as for all other Christian Men, to Marry at their own discretion, as
they shall judge the same to serve better to Godliness.

The Presbyterians.
Calv. Inst. l. 4. cap. 12. Sect. 23.
Certainly the forbidding Marriage to Priests, is an ungodly Tyranny, not only
against Gods Word, but also against all Equity.

Ibid. Can. 13. Sect. 21.
If an impossible Vow be the certain destruction of the Soul, which God would
have to be Saved, not lost, it follows, That we are not to persist therein; but
the Vow of Continency, to those who have not a special Gift, is impossible.

The Papists.
Conc. Trid. Sess. 24. Can. 9.
Whosoever shall say, That Clerks entered into Holy Orders or Regulars [ that is
Monks, Friars, and Nuns,] having solemnly professed Chastity, may contract
Matrimony, or that being contracted, it is good, any Law Ecclesiastic, or Vow
notwithstanding; or, that all who feel not that they have the Gift of Chastity
may (although they have vowed it) Marry, Let him be Anathema.

The three and thirtieth Article of the Church of England.
Of Excommunicated Persons, how they are to be avoided.
THat Person which by open Denunciation of the Church, is rightly cut off from
the Unity of the Church, and Excommunicated, ought to be taken of the whole
multitude of the Faithful, as an Heathen and Publican, until he be openly
reconciled by Penance, and received into the Church by a Judge that has
Authority thereunto.

The Presbyterians.
A^^. Cons. cap. 30. Sect. 3, 4.
Church Censures are necessary for the reclaiming and gaining of offending
Brethren, for the deterring of others from the like offenses, for the purging
out of that Leaven, which might infect the whole lump, for vindicating the
Honor of Christ, and the Holy profession of the Gospel, and for preventing the
wrath of God, which might justly fall upon the Church, if they should suffer
his Covenant and the Seals thereof to be profaned by notorious and obstinate
offenders.

For the better obtaining of these ends, the Officers of the Church are to
proceed by Admonition, Suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper for a
season, and by Excommunication from the Church, according to the nature of the
Crime, and demerit of the Person.

The Papists
Do not in Terms contradict this Article, but are guilty of many Errors and
vile Superstitions about Excommunication. As,

1. In the form of it, For thus Gratian in the Decrees (Cause. 11. q. 3. cap.
106. debent) reports the manner of it in that Church -- Twelve Priests ought to
stand round about the Bishop, with lighted Tapers in their hands, which at the
end of the Curse, or Excommunication, they ought to throw upon the ground, and
tread upon with their Feet, and then a Letter is to be sent throughout the
Parishes, with the Names of those Excommunicated, and the Causes of it. Others
relate the Ceremony more largely thus, That it is done with three Candles or
Tapers, and that they Curse the Parties, Soul and Body to the Devil, and say,
Let us quench their Souls in Hell Fire, (if they be Dead) as this Candle is put
out (and therewith one of the lights is presently extinguished.) If they be
alive, Let us pray, that their Eyes may be put out at this Candle (and so out
goes the Second.) And that all their Senses may fail them as this Candle loses
its light, (and so the Third is gone.) All which is performed with ringing of a
Bell, as the Magdeburgenses, Cent. 13. cap. 6. relate, whence arises our
Proverb of Cursing With Bell, Book and Candle.

2. In the Causes of it; gross Sins escape. For their ungodly Law says, -- He
that has not a Wife, but instead of a Wife a Concubine, Let him not be
debarred from the Communion: They are the very Words of Gratian, decret. did.
34. cap. 4. Is qui non habet Uxorem and pro Uxore Concubinam a Communione non
repellatur, and yet they Trifle with this Tremendous Censure in most trivial
Cases. The Arch Bishop of Canterbury, in King Henry the 4ths time, laid an
Interdict on the Churches of London for not Ringing their Bells when he went
through the City; D'Auroult, himself a Jesuit, in his Book Entitled, Flores
Exemplorum, Tom. 1. Tit. 63. ex. 9. Licensed by the Provincial of that Order,
not 70 years ago, complains thus -- We are fallen now (says he) into such
times, That if a Person has but lost his Rakes, or Mattocks, or his Fork, he
thinks he cannot find them by any more convenient means, than by the Sentence
of Excommunication, viz. upon the Stealers, if they do not Restore them. It Is
true, the Council of Trent. Sess. 25. cap. 3. inter Decret. Reform. Ordains,
That no Excommunications for discovery, as they are called, of lost, or stolen
Goods should pass by any other Person than the Bishop himself; and then with
great Circumspection. Which shows that such abuses had been commonly practiced,
and that they held the same not unlawful; Provided the Bishop granted the
Sentence.

3. In the Subjects, -- They extend it to the Dead: Their grand Council of
Constance, Cursed Wickliffe more than forty Years after he was Dead -- And
D'Auroult, in his Book last cited, Tom. 1. Tit. 62. Ex. 1. gravely gives the
Reason of it, Although (says he) the Dead cannot properly be Excommunicated,
or Absolved; yet in as much as they are in respect of their Bodies, either in
the Bowels of the Earth, or upon it, the Church for terrors sake
Excommunicateth and Absolveth some. Nay, they thunder it out against Insects
and Inanimate things; For St. Bernerd, they tell us, Excommunicated the Flies
that troubled him, when he went about to Consecrate an Oratory at Fusniack, and
in the Morning they were all found dead, if you will believe the Life of that
Saint, l. 1. cap. 12. Sparrows used to foul St. Vincents Church; The Bishop of
the Place Excommunicated them, and they never came there more; nay, if any
caught a Sparrow and thrust it into the Church, 'twould presently dye, de
Tempore Sermon. 69. A Priest saying Mass to the Young Men, they would be running
out to gather Fruit in an adjoining Orchard, and he Excommunicated it, and it
ever after was barren; Promptuar. Sermon. did. Exempl. 41. To conclude, the
Devil himself has not escaped them; A Woman was six years plagued with an
Incubus Devil, soliciting her to naughtiness, she complains to St. Bernard, he
Excommunicates the Devil, and Interdicts his Access to her, or any other, St.
Antonines Chronicle, part. 2. tir. 17. cap. 5. Sect. 9. -- What a graceless
Religion is this, to tell such ridiculous lies, and sport thus with an
Institution so full of Terror.

The four and thirtieth Article of the Church of England.
Of the Traditions of the Church.
IT is not necessary, that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one, or
utterly like; for at all times they have been diverse, and may be changed
according to the Diversity of Countries, times and Men's manners, so that
nothing be ordained against Gods Word. Whosoever through his private Judgment
willingly and purposely does openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the
Church, which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be ordained and approved
by common Authority, ought to be Rebuked openly (that others may fear to do the
like) as he that offends against the common order of the Church, and hurts
the Authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the Consciences of the weak
Brethren.

Every particular and National Church has Authority to Ordain, Change and
Abolish Ceremonies, or Rites of the Church ordained only by Man's Authority, so
that all things be done to edifying.

The sense of this Article is explained by the Learned and Painful Mr. Rogers
in his Comment on his 39 Articles, [Publisht in King James time, and Attested
in the Title Page to have been perused, and by the Lawful Authority of the
Church of England allowed to be Publick] page 198. in the Words following.

Of Ceremonies and Traditions repugnant to the Word of God, there be two sorts,
whereof some are of things merely Impious and Wicked; such was the Israelites
Calf, and Nebuchadnezzars Idol, and be the Papistical Images, Relics, Agnus
Dei's, and Crosses, to which they give Divine Adoration; These and such like be
all flatly forbidden; Others are of things, by God in his Word, neicommanded
nor forbidden, as of eating and not eating Flesh; of wearing and not wearing
some Apparel; of keeping and not keeping some days. Holy by abstinence from
Bodily labor, etc. The which are not to be observed of any Christian, when for
sound Doctrine it is delivered, that such Works do either merit Remission of
Sins; or be the acceptable Service of God; or do more please than the
observation of the Laws prescribed by God himself; or necessarily to be done,
insomuch as they are damned who do them not.

We must therefore have always in mind, that we are bought with a price, and
therefore may not be the Servants of Men; and that no humane Constitution in
the Church does bind any Man to break the least Commandment of God.

The Presbyterians.
Calv. Inst. l. 4. cap. 10. Sect. 1.
Use has obtained, that those things be called Humane Traditions, which are
Established by Men for the Worship of God, not grounded on any Warrant from his
Word; against these it is that we contend, and not against Holy and Useful
Constitutions of the Church, which tend to preserve either Discipline, or
Honesty, or Peace.

Ibid. Sect. 30.
Our Lord has so faithfully comprehended, and so plainly told the whole sum of
true Righteousness, and all the parts of his Worship, that in those things he
alone is to be heard; but because he would not particularly prescribe every
thing that we are to observe in external Discipline and Ceremonies, (since he
foresaw the same would depend upon the condition of times, nor did judge that
one form would agree with all Ages) we therefore ought to have recourse to the
General Rules by him laid down, that by the same, all things, which the
necessity of the Church should require, be exacted; and therefore herein he did
not expressly deliver any thing, both because neither are those things necessary
to Salvation, and that they may variously be accommodated, according to the
manner of Nation and Age, for the edification of the Church, and as the profit
of the Church requires: We may as well change and abrogate those that have been
used, and institute new ones, though we ought not frequently and on slight
Causes recur to Innovation, but what is prejudicial; what is tending to
Edification, Charity will best judge, which if in such Cases we suffer to be
Moderatrix, all will be safe.

Calv. Ibid.
And whatsoever things shall be instituted according to this Rule, it is the
Duty of Christian people, with a Conscience still free and without
superstition, but yet with a pious and ready inclination to Obedience and
Peace, to observe, not to contemn or with supine negligence omit, much less
ought they with Pride and Obstinacy openly to violate them.

Thus Calvin, whose whole 10 Chapters on this Subject, in the 4th Book of his
Institutes, (whence these few sentences are briefly drawn) is well worthy
perusual, and I conceive enough to satisfy any unprejudiced Reader, That he
entirely agrees with the true sense of the Church of England in this Article.

Ass. Conf. cap. 20. Sect. 2, 3, 4.
God alone is Lord of the Conscience, and has left it free from the Doctrines
and Commandments of Men, which are in any thing contrary to his Word, or
beside it, in matters of Faith and Worship; so that to believe such Doctrines,
or to obey such Commands out of Conscience, is to betray true liberty of
Conscience; and the requiring of an implicit Faith, and an absolute and blind
obedience, is to destroy Liberty of Conscience, and Reason also.

They, who upon pretense of Christian Liberty, do practice any Sin, or cherish
any Lust, do thereby destroy the end of Christian Liberty, which is, that being
delivered out of the hands of our Enemies, we may serve the Lord without Fear,
in Holiness and Righteousness before him, all the days of our Life.

And because the Power which God has Ordained, and the Liberty which Christ
has purchased, are not intended by God to destroy, but mutually to uphold and
preserve one another: They who, upon pretense of Christian Liberty, shall
oppose any Lawful Power, or the Lawful exercise of it, whether it be Civil, or
Ecclesiastical, resist the Ordinance of God, and for their publishing such
practices as are contrary to the light of Nature, or to the known Principles of
Christianity, whether concerning Faith, Worship, or Conversation, or to the
power of Godliness: or such erroneous Opinions or Practices, as either in their
own Nature, or in the manner of publishing or maintaining them, are destructive
to the external Peace and Order which Christ has Established in the Church,
they may lawfully be called to account, and proceeded against by the Censures
of the Church, and by the Power of the Civil Magistrate.

The Papists.
Conc. Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 13.
If any one shall say, That the received and approved Rites of the Church
Catholic may be contemned, or at pleasure omitted by the Ministers without
Sin, or that they may by any Pastor of Churches be changed into any new ones,
Let him be Accursed.

Now that the Church of Rome prescribes and observes a vast multitude of Rites
and Ceremonies (too tedious here to be specified) not only besides, but
contrary to Gods Word, and without any real profit to the Church of Christ is
notorious, yet Durandus, Rationale, Liber Ceremoniarum, and such like Popish
Authors, expressly obtrude their Trumpery, as both necessary and unalterable.

The five and thirtieth Article of the Church of England.
Of Homilies.
THE Second Book of Homilies, the several Titles whereof we have joined under
this Article, does contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine, and necessary for
these times, as does the former Book of Homilies, which were set forth in the
time of Edward the Sixth, and therefore we judge to be read in Churches, by the
Ministers, diligently and distinctly, as they may be understood by the People.

Of the Names of the Homilies.
Of the right use of the Church.
Against peril of Idolatry, etc.
The Presbyterians
Do generally own the Truth of these Homilies, nor do utterly disallow their
being read in public Assemblies, provided it tend not to occasion Sloth and
neglect of Gifts, and the Divine assistance in Ministers, nor hinder the
greater Edification, which the People might reap by the Word Preached unto them.

The Papists
Do utterly Condemn a very great part of the Doctrine contained in these
Homilies, too tedious here to enumerate; But the same will appear to any one
that reads them, and is at all acquainted with Popish Tenets.

The six and thirtieth Article of the Church of England.
Of Consecration of Bishops and Ministers.
THE Book of Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, and ordering of Priests
and Deacons, lately set forth in the time of Edward the Sixth, and confirmed at
the same time by Authority of Parliament, does contain all things necessary to
such Consecration and ordering: neither has it any thing that of it self is
Superstitious and Ungodly* And therefore whoever are Consecrated or Ordered
according to the Rites of that Book, since the second year of the aforementioned
King Edward, unto this time, or hereafter shall be Consecrated, or Ordered
according to the same Rites; we Decree all such to be rightly, lawfully, and
orderly Consecrated and Ordered.

The Presbyterians
Do not deny the Ordination of the Church of England to be in it self lawful,
so as to esteem all those so Ordained not to be lawful Ministers of Christ.

The Papists.
Whoever takes upon him to Preach, to Administer the Sacraments, etc. and is
not ordered by a true Catholic Bishop to be a Curate of Souls, Parson, Bishop,
etc. is a Thief and Murderer of Souls, Rhem. Annot. on John 10. 1.

Reconciler of Religions, p. 50.
1. Protestant Ministers and Preachers have no due mission: For all their
mission from the beginning of their Reformation, was either the Inspiration of
a Spirit they know not what, or the Commission of a Child, Edward the Sixth,
whom they called Supreme Head of the Church, and from whose Kingly Power, all
Jurisdiction, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, they affirmed did flow, (See
Fox, Tom. 2. anno. 1546, in King Edward the Sixth) Or the Letters Patents of a
Woman, Queen Elizabeth, to whom they were pleased to Attribute the like
Superiority and Power, See Statut. anno primo Elizab. cap. 1. or the Illicite
and Invalid ordination or mission of or by one Story an Apostate Monk, who
Ordained their first Bishops at the Nags-head in Cheapside in Q. Eliz. time.
See Christopherus de Sacro Bosco, (if they have any better, let them prove it,
in the mean time let them know, we value not a Straw Masons old new Records
produced in the year 1613, which was a matter of 50 years after the thing now
mentioned, was Sacrilegiously and Invalidly done, and most disgracefully and
shamefully cried down) but those could not give them any Spiritual Authority,
Power, or right to Preach. For according to that received Maxim of the Law, no
Man can give more Right, than he himself has, Cook, l. 1. Therefore, etc.

2. Moreover a Bishop is to be Ordained by two or three Bishops, Counc.
Apostol. Can. 1. And a Priest and likewise a Deacon, and the rest of the Clergy
by a Bishop. Ibid. Can. 2. Conc. Trid. Sess. 23. Can. 7. But this Apostolical
and needful manner of ordination or mission they never yet had; For they
rejected it quite, and brought in an Heretical fashion in its stead, in Edward
the Sixths time. Neither if they were willing, could they have: For, as I said
before, their Bishops from the beginning of their Reformation, had no other
Ordination, Consecration, or Mission, than the Commission of the King or Queens
Pleasure: For the Sacrilegious, Illicite, and invalid Ordination of or by
Story, (which was the first pretended Holy mission of Protestants in England,
and from whence they hitherto derive their orders) it was not worth a straw,
witness the fore* mentioned Canons of the Apostolica Council, etc. And
consequently their pretended Holy Orders thence derived are not worth a Pins
Head. Therefore they are not true Preachers, what are they then? Forsooth
Intruders, Wolves and Murderers, Sons of Belial, false Prophets and Priests of
Baal, which is their Heresy, Rebellion and Stubbornness against the Church --

Thus that railing Rabshekah; but the falsity of all such clamours, was long
since demonstrated by the Learned Mason, in his Treatise of the Ordination of
Bishops and Priests in the Church of England.

The seven and thirtieth Article of the Church of England.
Of the Civil Magistrate.
THE Kings Majesty has the chief Power in this Realm of England, and other his
Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm whether
they be Civil or Ecclesiastical, in all Causes does appertain, nor is not nor
ought to be Subject to any Foreign Jurisdiction; where we attribute to the
Kings Majesty the chief Government, by which Titles we understand the minds of
some dangerous Folks to be offended: He give not to our Princes the Ministering
of Gods Word, or of the Sacraments, the which thing the In junctions also
lately set forth by Eliz. our Queen, do most plainly testify: But that only
Prerogative which we les to have been goven always to all Godly Princes in Holy
Scriptures, by God himself, that is that they should rule all Estates and
Degrees committed to their Charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword the stubborn and Evil doers.

The Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

The Laws of the Realm may punish Christian Men with Death for heinous and
grievous Offenses.

It is lawful for Christian Men, at the Commandment of the Magistrate, to wear
Weapons, and serve in the Wars.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Conf. cap. 23. Sect. 1. 3 and 4.
God the Supreme Lord and King of all the World, has Ordained Civil Magistrates
to be under him over the People for his own Glory, and the public good, and to
this end has armed them with the power of the Sword for the defense and
encouragement of them that are good, and for the punishment of Evil doers.

The Civil Magistrate may not assume to himself the Administration of the Word
and Sacraments or the power of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, yet he has
Authority, and it is his duty to take order that Unity and Peace be preserved
in the Church, and that the Truth of God be kept pure and entire, that all
Blasphemies and Heresies be suppressed, all Corruptions and Abuses in Worship
and Discipline prevented, or reformed: and all the Ordinances of God, duly
settled, administered and observed: For the better effecting whereof, he has
Power to call Synods, to be present at them, and to provide that whatsoever is
transacted in them, be according to the mind of God.

It is the duty of People to pray for Magistrates, to honor their Persons, to
pay them Tribute, and other dues: to obey their Lawful Commands, and to be
subject to their Authority for Conscience sake: Infidelity, or Indifference in
Religion does not make void the Magistrates Just and Legal Authority, nor free
the People from their due Obedience to him: from which Ecclesiastical Persons
are not exempted, much less has the Pope any Power or Jurisdiction over them
in their Dominions, or over any of their People; and least of all to deprive
them of their Dominions or Lives, if he shall judge them to be Heretics, or
upon any other pretense whatsoever.

Calv. Inst. l. 4. cap. 20. Sect. 24. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
If we look into the Word of God, it enjoins us not only to be Subject to those
Princes who rule Righteonsly, and, as they ought, do discharge their Office
toward us, But also to all those in whom the Supreme Power is vested, Though
they perform nothing less, than that which truly is their Duty: For as God has
Established Magistracy as a principal gift of his Beneficence for the Commodity
of Mankind, and prescribes to Rulers their Duties, so like wise he declares,
That whatsoever they are, they still have their Dominion from him, making those
who Rule for the public good, true Examples of his Goodness, and those who
exercise their Authority unjustly and wickedly, his Instruments to punish the
Iniquities of his People; but both of them still endowed with that Majesty
wherewith he has armed all Authority; on which score it is, that if the
public Power happen to fall into the hands of a Wicked Man, and one that in
himself appears altogether unworthy of Honor, yet we must acknowledge the same
Eminent and Divine Power to reside in him, which the Lord has conferred by his
Word on the Ministers of his Justice, and the same Reverence and Honor is to
be paid him by his Subjects as to outward Obedience, as they ought to pay to
the best of Kings, If they were so happy as to enjoy him -- And having proved
this by several Instances from Holy Writ, especially from that of Jeremy 27. He
Concludes thus -- Let us therefore never entertain such Seditious Thoughts as
these, that a King ought to be treated, according to his Personal Merits or
Demerits, or that we need not be obedient Subjects to a King that does not
again justly discharge his Office toward us? -- Wherefore if by a cruel Prince
we are grievously afflicted, if by a Covetous or luxurious one we are fleeced
to the Skin and abused, If by a slothful voluptuous one the grand Interests of
the public be neglected; Nay, more, if merely for Righteousness sake, by an
Ungodly Sacrilegious Tyrant, we are persecuted and slaughtered, it ought first
to put us in mind of our Sins, which by such scourges of God are undoubtedly
punished. In the next place let Humility restrain our Impatience: And in the
last place, Let us consider, that it is not our part to Redress these Evils,
all that we can do is to implore the help of God, in whose hands are the Hearts
of Kings, and the Revolutions of Empires. -- Thus far Calvin -- And we appeal
to Envy it self, whether the Doctrine of Loyalty and Obedience can be more
expressly or fully delivered by any?

The Papists
Exempt all Clergymen from obeying the Laws, or submitting to the Jndgments of
Temporal Magistrates, or to pay them Tribute. The Canon Law has utterly
exempted them from it, says Bellarmine, de Cler. cap. 1.

That the Civil Magistrate has no Cognizance over the Clergy, is Decreed by
several Councils, as Conc. Later. 3. cap. 14. and Conc. Later. 2. Can. 15.
Because some Laymen constrain Ecclesiastics, yea and Bishops themselves to
appear before them, and to stand to their Judgments, Those that henceforth
shall presume to do so, we Decree, That they shall be Excommunicated.

Pope Gregory the 7th in a Synod at Rome, made this Decree, We, observing the
Decrees of our Holy Predecessors, by our Aposlolical Authority, do Absolve
these from their Oath, who are bound by their Fealty and Oath to persons
Excommunicated, and we forbid them by all means, That they yield them Obedience.

The Jurisdiction of the Pope is Universal, even over the whole World, Rhem.
Annot. Him upon pain of Damnation all Christians are to obey, Bonif. 8th in
Extrav.

The eight and thirtieth Article of the Church of England.
Of Christian Men's Goods which are not Common.
THE Riches and Goods of Christians are not Common, as touching the Right,
Title, and Profession of the same, as certain Anabaptists do falsely boast:
Notwithstanding every Man ought of such as he possesses, liberally to give
Alms to the Poor according to his Ability.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Cons. cap. 26. Sect. 3.
The Communion which Christians have one with another, as Saints, does not take
away or infringe the Title or Propreity, which each Man has in his Goods and
Possessions.

The Papists
Do not deny this Article, yet conceit their Monasticks, who have all things in
Common, to be in a State of greater perfection than other Christians.

The nine and thirtieth Article of the Church of England.
Of a Christian Man's Oath.
AS we confess, That vain and rash swearing is forbidden Christian Men by our
Lord Jesus Christ, and James his Apostle: so we Judge that Christian Religion
does not prohibit, but that a man may swear, when the Magistrate requires in
a cause of Faith and Charity, so it be done according to the Prophets teaching,
in Justice, Judgment and Truth.

The Presbyterians.
Ass. Cons. 22. Sect. 1, 2. 3, 4, 7.
A Lawful Oaths is a part of Religious Worship, wherein upon just occasion the
Person swearing, solemnly calls God to Witness what he asserteth or
promises, and to judge him according to the Truth or Falsehood of what he
swears.

The name of God only is that by which Men ought to swear, and therein is to be
used with all Holy Fear and Reverence. Therefore to swear vainly and rashly by
that glorious and dreadful Name; or by any other thing, is sinful and to be
abhorred: Yet as in matters of weight and Moment, an Oath is Warranted by the
Word of God under the New Testament, as well as under the Old; so that a Lawful
Oath being imposed by Lawful Authority, in such matters ought to be taken.

Whosoever takes an Oath, ought duly to consider the weightiness of so solemn
an Act, and therein to avouch nothing, but what he is fully persuaded is Truth.
Neither may any Man bind himself by Oath to any thing but what is good and
Just, and what he believes so to be, and what he is able and resolved to
perform; yet it is a Sin to refuse an Oath, touching any thing that is Good and
Just, being imposed by lawful Anthority.

An Oath is to be taken in the plain and common sense of the Words, without
Equivocation and Mental Reservation. It cannot oblige to Sin: but in any thing
not sinful, being taken, it binds to performance, although to Man's hurt, nor is
it to be violated, though made to Heretics or Infidels.

No Man may vow to do any thing forbidden in the Word of God; or what would
hinder any Duty therein Commanded, or which is not in his own Power, and for
the performance whereof, he has not promise of Ability from God, in which
respects Popish Monastical Vows of perpetual single Life, professed Poverty and
Regular Obedience, are so far from being degrees of higher perfection, that
they are Superstitious and sinful Snares, in which no Christian may entangle
himself.

The Papists
Do not in Terms deny this Article. But First, they maintain, That the Pope
has a Power to dispense with, or Absolve any Man from the Obligation of any
lawful Oath. And Secondly, They allow the Doctrine of Equivocation, so that a
Man may lawfully take any Oath, provided that by a secret Reservation in his
mind, he make, or form to himself a tolerable lawful Sense. Thirdly, They
teach that if any Prince become an Heretic, all his Subjects are immediately
Absolved from their Oaths of Subjection and Allegiance. Fourthly, They declare
That no Faith is to be kept with Heretics, and this is a Vote even of one of
their Councils, to wit, That of Constance, who on that very score burnt John
Hus, though they before had given Letters of safe Conduct, by all which They
render all Oaths (the highest Security mortal Creatures are able to give to
each other) either insignificant, or but Shares to deceive the Credulous. And
in a word, destroy (as much as in them lies) all Faith and Honesty, Confidence
and fair dealing amongst Humane Society.

FINIS.

