AN ELEGY, Upon the Death of the most Incomparable, Mrs. KATHARINE PHILIPS,
The Glory of Her SEX.
BUT stay refined Soul! oh! Why so fast?
Stop her you Clouds; the Worl'ds in no such haste
To be undone: It Is hardly break of day,
And will She set so soon; so soon away?
You bright Intelligences, does she stay
To hear your rolling Music by the Way
Set to her charming numbers; Wherein she
Distilled the Quintessence of Poesy?
Or does she bayte at the Chrystalline Sky?
We Will on the Wings of adoration fly
And follow her, and leave this gloomy shade
Which does our sad Horizon thus invade;
Now She has snatched with her all Virtue's light,
And left the World invol'vd in endless Night.
She, who in Tragique buskins dressed the Stage,
Taught Honor, Love, and Friendship to this Age;
Is gone to act her Part in bright attire,
With Scenes of Glory, in the Angelique Quire.
She Taught the World the sweet and peaceful Arts
Of blending Souls, and of compounding hearts;
Without th'ingredients of reserved intents,
Hypocritics, and windy complements.
She taught a Way, and that a glorious one,
Not how to gain, but be above a Throne:
Self-conquest is more glory, than to ride
In Roman Triumphs, with Aemilian Pride.
Her inward Pomp, through her Fleshy Shroud
Did like the Sun often glitter thorough a Cloud.
Her Virtues were in Conversation drawn,
And show like Arras, through transparent Laun.
But ah! her Friend, that in her Bosom came,
Lay wrapped in Spices, in a purer Flame
Than that the Phaenix dies in. Now she is gone!
Here, Plato! here is thy wished for Vision!
When she put off her Clay, thou might have seen
Virtue undrest, just like a Naked Queen.
Thou would not then contemplate any more
Thy Dusky vain Idea, nor would pore
On such fictitious Bliss; but here should ply
The sum of thy Divine Philosophy.
But is she gone, said I? It cannot be;
She who espoused all Immortality:
But read her Lines, you would think that such a Soul
Could her Imperious Destiny control:
That so Sublime, so brave a Mind, could soon
Vault over that Fate, that rules below the Moon.
Ah! t'must not be! Death vizards Humane Glory,
And writes a period to the finest Story.
This Prodigy of Nature now is gone,
And left Us wrapped in Admiration
That she could dye; as we 're before to see
That such Perfection in her Sex could be.
As for her Name, let that b' inshrin'd above
In some Bright Temple, of Caelestial Love;
Whither our Winged Thoughts may often stray,
As Soaring Pilgrims Adoration pay.
And whilst her Sparkling Soul is Orb'd in Light,
And reads her old Ideas in more bright
And fair Impressions, in the Aetherial Mind,
Than those brief Copies that she left behind:
We will commit her ever Sacred Dust
Not to the Marble's, but Apollo's Trust.
And Poets Ghosts shall from Elysium come,
To hear Bright Angels warble in her Tomb
Her highborn Songs; which hence shall Envy fan,
And Soaring Fame shall be her Guardian.
Instead of Tapers, where shall ever burn
Th'inflamed Hearts of Lovers in her Urn.
And since our short-wing'd Prayers are come too late,
And she must bow to the Tyranny of Fate;
Her Noble Thoughts, that fixed on bravest Theams,
Shall vapor forth in Sublimated Streams
Of Honor; Which Heroique Breasts shall draw,
Whose Swords and Pens must give the World a Law.
Her Sacred Dust, calcined by Time, shall be
The Richest Filings of high Poesy.
And from her Brain, and Muses Tears, shall spring,
Posies for each chaste Lovers Wedding Ring.
Her all dispersed, at last shall meet in one,
And shine a Glorious Constellation.
By J. C.
Her EPITAPH.
A Sparkling Angel was of late
Toying with the Bands of Fate;
He left the Quire, and came below,
And strove to walk Incognito.
To write, and live, like us he tried;
But when he saw that he was spied,
He made the World believe he died;
And hid himself behind this Tomb,
Which is Death's shady Dining Room.
Another.
ALL that the World could boast of, here is found
Under this Tomb, so Mines run under Ground;
Love, Honor, Friendship, and Sublimest Wit,
Are here leapt off the Stage into the Pit.
Fine Shows and Scenes they are, but vanish all
When, from Dark Clouds, Fate lets a Curtain fall.
The Play is ended, and the Musique's done,
The Curtain's here let fall, and she is gone.
Let Us often think of Death, which thus we see
Can cloze up Natures rarest Harmony:
Let Us strive the Great spectator most to please,
And Angels then will give Us Plaudite's.

