A Second general Epistle TO ALL THE SAINTS. Wherein is unfolded the Covenant
of grace, as its a Law in the spirit, of light, liberty, righteousness,
holiness, power and glory. As likewise as it is a Law of peace, love and
edification. Published for the good of those who love peace and holiness.
Written by T. Collier.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the Black
Spread-Eagle at the West end of Paul's, near Ludgate, M. DC. XLIX.

A Preface to the ensuing Epistle.
Dear Christian,
THE occasion of my presenting this Epistle to your consideration, at present,
was principally a sensiblenesse of the great miscarriages that I see daily, not
only amongst the carnal and profane ones of the world; but many amongst
those who have seemingly been purged from their former filthiness, yet seem
to be returning, if not returned, with the dog to his vomit, and the sow that
was washed, to their wallowing again in the mire: This being a temptation that
befalls not only, a Judas, a Demas, but sometimes meets with Christ himself,
with true Christians, it being covered over with a pretense of holiness. I
could not at present be altogether silent concerning this thing; not that my
writing can in any case prevent your miscarriages, its the anointing in you
that must and will teach you all things; but if the same anointing speaking in
and through me, speak in and to you, it may be through the power of the same
anointing speaking in both, establish and confirm us both in the same truth.

The subject I have treated on, and at present commend to your consideration,
is the Covenant of grace, that law in the spirit which God promised in the
Prophets, and now makes good in the Saints, because the knowledge of this in
power is that will keep Saints upright with God, prevent them running into
those extravagancies and unheard of opinions and practices, which men,
pretending godliness, run into now adays; there is no law but this law that
I know, can deliver souls from this danger; for prevention of mistakes, or
miscensuring, I desire you to observe these ensuing rules.

1. Without partiality, or a heart biassed to any side, dealing faithfully with
your own souls, look to God, see if he speaks not the same truth in you.

2. When I mention so often the law in the spirit, I mind by it only the
Covenant of grace, Jesus Christ, who is all for, and in the spiritual
Christian.

3. The reason why I so often mind the falsehood and delusions of natural and
carnal ones as well as of those who are or would be accounted more then
ordinary Christians, is because I intend the general good, my soul earnestly
longing, not only after a steadfastness and unmoveablenesse in those who are
already come in, but likewise earnestly longing after the coming in of more to
the knowledge of this Covenant, which is a soul-converting, establishing and
glorifying Covenant.

Qu. In what respect may Christ be said to be the Covenant?

Answ. Christ is the Covenant of grace as he was given forth by the Father,
therein to demonstrate and declare grace; The Father to make forth that
fullness of grace that was and is in himself for sinners, gives forth his
Son as the Covenant; There is my Son, my only beloved, take him for a
Covenant, that your souls may be satisfied in the knowledge of my grace, Isa.
42. 6. I will give the for a Covenant to the people, for a light to the
Gentiles: He is called the minister or messenger of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 1.
Because the Father by him and through him declares this grace unto the sons
of men, and communicates his to whom he pleases.

2. As the Father thus gives forth Christ a Covenant, in whom he declares
grace, doing all in him, for us, without us, so he comes into souls by the
same spirit that he was in Christ; so that Christ comes not only as a Covenant
to us, but in us, and the same law of spirit and life takes possession of us;
and this is the law written in the heart, which will occasion souls in whom it
is, never to depart from God.

Qu. Why is this Covenant called a new Covenant, is it not the same that was in
the Old Testament?

Answ. 1. Its true those that were saved, were saved in and by the same
Covenant.

Yet, 2. This Covenant, to speak in the language of Scripture, was not then
made, but the Covenant then made verbally, in word, was another Covenant, and
that of works, which was broken. Now because this seems to be a doubt and
scruple, I shall give you several clear demonstrations for the confirmation
of it.

First, The Scripture calls it, Two Covenants, an old and a new, I will make a
new Covenant, not such a Covenant as I made with your Fathers, etc. Jer. 31.

Object. But some will say, that its called an old and a new, but therein to
declare the clearness of grace under the Gospel, yet the same Covenant, as
there is the old and new Moon, when all is but one and the same.

Answ. 1. It is not called a new Covenant in respect of the clearness, but in
respect of the nature of it; its not the same, I will make a Covenant, but not
such a Covenant as I made with your Fathers: The difference of the nature of
these Covenants will appear if we consider,

1. That was a Covenant written and engraven in Tables of stone, this is a
Covenant written and engraven in the heart.

2. That was a Covenant that could not give life nor cause to walk, because of
its weakness, Heb. 7. 18. But this Covenant is a Covenant of life.

3. That was a Covenant that directly tended to bondage, Gal. 4. 23, 24. But
this unto grace and spiritual liberty.

4. That Covenant was but a type, a shadow, this the substance, therefore not
the same, no more then the Jewish Ordinances, who were all typical and
shadows, was the substance or thing shadowed; no more the same then those
creatures sacrificed was Christ; no more then the blood of the Paschall Lamb
sprinkled on the door posts, was the blood of Christ; or the land of Canaan the
spiritual rest of Christians; but all was typical, and the substance was
shadowed forth in those types, and Saints found grace couched under this old
Covenant: The mistake of this occasions much miscarriage amongst many, looking
upon the Covenant to be the same now as formerly, will have a Covenant without
now as then; and hence set up fleshly Ordinances of their own invention,
suitable to such a Covenant, by which thousands are deluded; whereas the truth
is, that then there was a Covenant in the flesh which gendred to bondage, which
only those in the spirit were delivered from, by the mystery couched under
that Covenant, which none after the flesh could see into; but we are only
under this Covenant in the spirit, which is a Covenant of liberty, a Covenant
of grace and much glory, and none are owned in this Covenant, but those who are
in it, that is, those in whose hearts it is written. Its true, men may be in
the profession of this Covenant who are not in it, nor never knew it, but they
ought not to be there; and there shall not a man pass for current, that has
not on this wedding garment; with, Friend, how came thou in hither? take him
and bind him hand and foot, cast him into utter darkness, etc. Thus this
Covenant being rightly known, we shall be able to see and say, that its a
Covenant of grace indeed, a Covenant of peace and love indeed, in which our
souls shall be abundantly refreshed, and powerfully upheld in and under all
temptations and conditions.

5. That was a Covenant that might be broken, that was broken, Jer. 31. this a
Covenant that shall never be broken, its an everlasting Covenant possessing
souls with everlasting grace and love, everlasting joy and praises, Isa. 35.
last. This Covenant in the spirit is the everlasting, never-erring light and
rule of Saints experienced; it is that anointing which teaches all things; and
so I commend it to you.

THE CONTENTS.
1. OF the light of the Law in the spirit. 2. Of nine false lights flowing from
the Law in the flesh. 3. Of the liberty of the Law in the spirit. 4. Of false
Liberty. 5. Of the righteousness of the Law in the spirit. 6. Of the
unrighteous Law. 7. Of the Law of true holiness. 8. Of false or fleshly
holiness. 9. Of the power of the Law in the spirit. 10. Of the power of this
Law in the flesh. 11. Of the glory of this Law in the spirit. 12. Of the Law in
the spirit, a Law of peace. 13. As it is likewise a Law of peace. 14. Of the
Law of Love. 15. Its a Law of Edification.
A Second GENERAL EPISTLE To all the Saints.
Chap. I. Showing the Light of the Law in the Spirit.
GOD is light, and in him there is no darkness at all: All though its true,
God is with his People under dark dispensations, upholding them in it, though
many times they are ignorant of it; and although it is true, souls once
gathered up, by the power of light; into its own fullness, where it beholds the
purity, sweetness, and glory of the invisible God; being in some measure,
through that fight, made conformable unto him, and partaker of that self same
glory; the discovery of true light in Saints, being the right way of true
enjoyment.

Now Saints when they have not only drunk of the bitter cup with Christ, (viz.)
The cup of sufferings, and so have been made conformable to him in his death;
but likewise have drunk new wine with him in his Fathers Kingdom, even that
wine of the Spirit, which makes glad the heart of the City of God; hence the
soul, being thus embraced into the bosom of love, and at present come in the
Kingdom of his dear Son, concludes with the Prophet, Thou have made my
mountain so strong I shall never be moved; but immediately the Father
withholding those manifestations and sweet imbracements in the bosom of Love,
the soul is troubled; Thou did but hide thy face, and I was troubled: This
was Paul's condition, who was caught up into the third heaven, saw and heard
things unutterable, yet the Father lets him down again under a cloud of flesh;
which seems at present to eclipse and darken his former glory, which was his
trouble and his burden, desiring to be rid of it; but he was answered, My
grace is sufficient for thee, my strength shall be perfected in thy weakness;
this being the experienced condition of many a precious soul who, although they
are sometimes taken up into the third heavens, and so have a taste given them of
the heavenly glory, yet they are let down again under a cloud of flesh living
upon grace, looking after, and hasting unto the glorious appearing of the great
God; knowing, That when Christ who is our life shall appear, we shall appear
with him in Glory; that as we suffer with him, we shall reign with him.

Now there being false Light, which is indeed darkness it felfe, in the world,
and a mystery of iniquity under the pretense of truth, by which many are
deceived: I shall therefore in this ensuing Treatise, according to the measure
received, give a brief touch of the true Light, Liberty, Righteousness,
Holiness, Power and Glory of the Law in the Spirit, the Covenant of grace
written in the heart, in opposition too and discovering of that law of darkness,
sin and flesh, the one being the law of the new, the other the Law of the old
man.

This Law in the Spirit, is the Spirit it self conforming souls to it self;
and its first a Spirit, a law of light, even that true light, that lights
every soul that comes to the Father; He is light, and in him there is no
darkness at all.

This Law of light, where it works powerfully, where it works savingly, it
enlightens the understanding, in these ten particulars following.

First, It enlightneth the understanding, by which it comes to see the evil of
sin, the evil nature of it, the evil consequences of it.

1. The evil nature of it, the evil fountain from whence it flows, even the
fountain of flesh and devil, a bitter, and filthy root, which produces fruit
suitable unto such a tree, which is Death, the consequent or fruit of sin, The
wages of sin is death; the soul is now taught to see the evil nature of sin,
the contrariety of it unto the divine nature; the soul can see and say truly,
that although sin is nothing to God, although sin reaches not God, yet it is
absolutely contrary to those divine and heavenly discoveries of God made forth
in the spirits of Christians; if you search the Scripture you shall find this
a manifest truth in the Spirits working; See Act. 2. 37. chap, 9. 3, 4, 5, 6.
If you search your own experience, you shall find it suitable; never any soul
made partaker of grace, but first made sensible of the want of grace, by the
enlightening power of the Spirit of grace in the discovery of a man's self unto
himself, and so of the evil nature, of the evil consequence of sin, which is
a sensiblenesse of an internal and spiritual death under darkness, and a lake
of fire; and this work of discovery by this Law of light is effected, not only
in souls at their first conversion; but all along while flesh and sin
remains, till death is swallowed up in life, and mortality has put on
immortality, till Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we appear
with him in glory.

Que. What is sin? Ans. Sin, is a transgression of, or turning aside from a
righteous Law; if we judge of sin by a letter, a law without us, then it is
a transgression of that Law, a turning aside from the Law; but if we judge of
sin according to the light of the Law in the Spirit, then all turnings aside
from, all motions and actings contrary unto that Spirit of life and light, are
sin; and indeed souls living in the light of this law are able to judge
between the motions and actings of flesh and spirit, they are made able to
judge truly of good and evil, and that not by eating of the forbidden fruit,
but by being made partakers of the fruit of the Tree of Life.

So that now the Christians discovery of sin is not so much after the law of
the old, as after the law of the new man, that law of spirit and life in
Christ, which is a sin discovering law where it enlightens; so that a
Christian in the light of this law, sces every motion to evil, every lust and
corruption, the whole body of flesh, to be contrary to that divine and
spiritual law, to that divine nature received; and hence is maintained a
continual war against it, until that warfare be accomplished in the ending
of it.

2. This law in the Spirit is not only a light discovering sin, but likewise
a light discovering Love and deliverance from sin.

First it discovers Love notwithstanding the Creatures sin; nay, not only so,
but it is Love in that Law that discovers sin, and it self, who is Love unto
Creatures while they sin; herein is the riches and freeness of grace
unfolded in the discovery of Love and grace unto Creatures, who are in
themselves unlovely; he opens a fountain of Love, notwithstanding sin; a
fountain of blood and Spirit to wash away both the guilt and power of sin, a
fountain of living waters, even those waters of life, that revives and comforts
the weary soul in a barren and dry land; thus this Spirit of light, leads
poor, empty, hungring and longing souls out of a barren and dry land, that
land of Egypt, a land of blackness and darkness, of oppression and hardship,
through and out of the wilderness and solitary condition into the sweet
imbracements of the Fathers Love, both into the freeness and fullness of it,
notwithstanding the Creatures sensiblenesse of its own unworthiness, and now
the soul being thus lighted to, and possessed with this everlasting Love and
grace; it is likewise brought in sight of a lovely and gracious deliverance, a
deliverance from the guilt, a deliverance from the power of the Law in flesh;
that although the Christian, through the powerful working of corruption can
say, many times with the Apostle, Ob wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from this body of sin? Yet it can say, by faith triumphingly, Thanks be
unto God who gives a victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ; flesh oft-times
acts in Saints for their trial; and they are to pass through many
tribulations to the Kingdom; through a Sea of Glass mingled with fire; yet in
conclusion they shall stand on top or above them all (with the harps of God in
their hands) the Spirit making sweet melody in their hearts singing the song of
Moses, Praise be to him that sits upon the Throne and to the Lamb for ever;
thus this Law of the Spirit in righteous souls, not only of sin and misery,
but likewise of love and deliverance; it leads the soul not only into the
beholding of darkness and sorrow; but it leads the soul out again into the
beholding of light, love and deliverance; and so it shall be truly said of
them, These are they that are come out of great tribulation, and have washed
themselves white in the blood of the Lamb; these are they that have gone
through many tribulations to the Kingdom, etc.

3. This Law in the Spirit discovers not only a deliverance from flesh and
sin, by which the soul is kept below its glory; but it likewise discovers a
glorious deliverance into that spiritual and eternal Kingdom, where is
nothing less then peace, purity and perfection; it has an entrance given,
into that everlasting Kingdom of his dear Son.

First, It has a light given, by and in which it sees into that Kingdom; In
thy light we see light; and that Kingdom is within us; in this light the soul
sees into the several dimensions and glory of it; it sees it to be a Kingdom
altogether lovely, altogether delightful of desire, he sees it to be a Kingdom
of righteousness, holiness, peace, joy, and full of spiritual glory; he now
sees that no unclean thing can enter into this Kingdom; all flesh and
filthiness, filthiness, all hypocrites and hypocrisy, all things that love and
make a lie must be without, cast out into utter darkness where is weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

Secondly, As there is a sight, so there is an entering into that everlasting
Kingdom, with a full expectation upon sure ground of being eternally
completed in that Kingdom; hence it is the Psalmist says, Psalm 145. 10, 11,
12. Thy Saints shall bless thee, they shall speak of the glory of thy
Kingdom, and talk of thy power, to make known to men his mighty acts and the
glorious majesty of his Kingdom; mark you here, the Saints shall speak of
the majesty of his Kingdom, and shall make known the glory of it to the sons
of men, and why so? Because they are a ble to give a true relation of it; they
have been in the Kingdom, and can speak experimentally of that Kingdom: note
by the way, who are the likeliest men to make known the Kingdom of God to
others, University men, or Saints; the Scripture says, the Saints shall do
it, for to them it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom; they have
been in the Kingdom, others parhaps have heard of the Kingdom, and so can
speak something by hearsay; but the Saints they have been in the Kingdom, and
the Kingdom in them, and they can speak experimentally of the grace and peace
of it, and of the glory of it too in a measure; a wonderful delusion, that
poor ignorant creatures should imagine that humane arts, the wisdom of the
flesh, should be able to unfold the Kingdom of God unto them, or to preach the
everlasting Gospel, which is called the word of the Kingdom; no, no, it is
proper to Saints only to do it, who alone have by the light of this Law in
the Spirit, been delivered into this Kingdom of righteousness peace, and joy;
others may speak and talk rudely of it, but alas they know not what it is,
they never did so much as see into the glory of it, never had so much as a
pee-phole opened to see one glimpse of that light, of that grace, of that
glory; John 3. 3. Except a man be born from above. he cannot so much as see
into the Kingdom of God; but Saints are delivered into this Kingdom in a
measure by this law in the Spirit: beloved it is the property of this light of
God, to gather up souls into it self: The Kingdom of Heaven is a Kingdom of
light, and in the light of Heaven, which is God, who is light, we shall see
light and enjoy that light: the light of this Law is a transforming light, I
(says Christ) am come a light into the world, he that believes on me shall
not abide in darkness, John 12. 46. and we all with one face beholding as in a
glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, or likeness:
that as we have borne the image of the earthly, so now we shall bear the image
of the heavenly, being delivered out of that Kingdom of darkness, into the
Kingdom of his dear Son, which is a Kingdom of light, light being sown for
the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart.

4. Souls delivered into, or participating of this law of light, are able in
this light to judge of things that differ; Light is that which makes true
discoveries of things in their colors; darkness either wholly hides the
appearance of a thing, or else presents it at the best as in a false glass;
but light is that which makes all things manifest; so this light in the Spirit,
expels that darkness within, by which the understanding was either wholly
blinded, or else had things presented in another shape then what they are in
themselves; but now the new man in this light is able to judge according to the
measure of light received; it now no longer calls evil good, and good evil; it
puts not light for darkness, and darkness for light; it calls not every thing
good, though it sees God working good out of every things, it sees and is able
to say, that that which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born
of the Spirit is Spirit, it justifies not the wicked thing, nor takes away
the righteousness of the righteous from him; in a word, the soul in whom this
glorious light of God is manifest, is able in a measure, to judge between flesh
and spirit, fancy and reality, shadow and substance, form and power, notions
and true discoveries, delusions and true enjoyments; The SPIRITVALL MAN judges
all things, yet he himself is judged of no man: that is according to the
measure of light received he judges; not but that it is possible for a
spiritual man, who is in part renewed, to be under a temptation; a cloud of
darkness for a time, although the Sun be there, yet that dark and black cloud
prevents the shining of it, But unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of
righteousness arise with healing in his wings; the wind of the Spirit shall
disperse those clouds and mists, of thick darkness, and the glorious light
shall again appear, to the chearing and comforting of the weary soul, causing
the shadows to fly away in his holy mountain, and then the soul comes again
clearly to see wherein it was mistaken, and then he can say with the Prophet,
so foolish was I and ignorant, I was even a beast before thee: thus light
appearing they no more justify flesh and darkness, but justify God in every
thing; they no more lay their temptations to lust and fleshlynesse, upon God,
but upon themselves; having a true discovery made within themselves by the
light of this Law of the righteousness, holiness, and glory of the Father, they
cannot but cry out, Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, Heaven and Earth is
filled with thy glory; and now they are abased with Jobe, I have heard of thee
by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eyes have seen thee, wherefore I
abhor my self in dust and ashes: Oh, my beloved ones, when once the soul
has seen the Lord, then it lays down the justification of flesh, then, and
never till then, it truly, it savingly abhors it self, lays it self low, and
the Lord alone is exalted in that soul: when the Prophet Isayah had seen the
Lord, Chap. 6. Then, Woe is me, I am undone, I am a man of poluted lips, for
mine eyes have seen the King, even the Lord of hosts; this glorious and pure
vision of the Almighty within us, will be not only a light discovering, but a
fire burning up all things below and contrary to it self.

5. This Light of the Spirit causes the soul to see more excellency in God in
Heaven, in spiritual things, then in all other things in the world besides;
nay, it now sees all other things below to be but dung and dross in comparison
of of Christ; when men of the earth are taken up with earthly excellencies,
this soul can say, Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon me, that' s
light will fill me with more joy, then those whose corn and wine and oil
abounds; the soul sees a goodness, a lovelines in God, in Christ, in the
Spirit, by way of excellency; it does not only say that God is good, but he is
most good, his love is better then wine, better then life; his countenance
causes more joy then corn and wine and oil; Oh this is sweet, when
experimentally enjoyed! then the soul can say, Thy word is sweet unto my
mouth, yea, sweeter then honey to my taste, sweeter then honey and the honey comb,
better then thousands of gold and silver; now the soul eyes to worldly and
fleshly excellencies, as it is gathered up more and more into the glorious
excellency of the Spirit; it has a propriety in God by way of excellency, and
hence it comes to pass that no propriety below this, without this, is of any
value to a renewed, a changed mind.

6. This Law of light, causes those, inwhom it is according the measure of its
manifestation, to see God in every thing, to see him and enjoy communion with
him in all conditions, and this is a sweet discovery, a heavenly light, which
produces a heavenly life; when the soul sees and enjoyes God in all things;
when it sees God to lie, as it were, at the bottom of every creature, of every
mercy, sees him to be the life, the fountain, the glory of all; streaming
light, love and communion to the soul through al: now it can say, God is to me
the life, the power, the excellency of creatures, by which I live, and so I
live not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of
God; it sees a stream of life and power from the Father in the use of them; it
now in that light, sees God in wicked men's actings to them, sees him in every
dispensation, whether more pleasing, or more frowning, to a fleshly
apprehension, whether it be in prosperity or adversity, in prison or liberty,
poverty or riches, in light or darkness, it can say truly, God is good to
Israel, to such as are upright in heart; and all things shall work together for
good to such as love God.

7. This Law of light, causes the soul not only to see God in all things; but
it presents matter of rejoicing in all conditions; souls thus enlightened, can
sing in prison, enjoying communion with God; there they can see it to be good,
being where their Father will have them to be; much more where they enjoy the
presence of their Father manifesting love and grace to them and in them.

8. They living in this light, seeing al conditions to be good, through the
appearance of the good God in it, can now see and say, thar it is not the least
part of their happiness while they are here, to live fully and completely in
the will of their Father; Oh, says the soul, that I could attain to this, but
to live satisfiedly and contentedly in the will of God, what a transcendent
excellency does the enlightened soul see in this one thing! how would this quiet
and silence all fleshly and carnal risings, dislikings, and quarrelings
against the divine providence; it can say, Good is the Word of the Lord, and
good is the will of the Lord, and good is this condition to me, because its my
Fathers good pleasure so to have it, who knows best what is good for me; an
excellent discovery, but more excellent, when living in the power, in the glory
of it.

9. This Law of light discovers the vanity and folly of all fleshly wisdom in
the things of God; this Law of light makes that soul truly sensible in whom its
manifest, of the difference between the wisdom of the first and second Adam,
and so that word is fulfilled in him; if any man will be wise, let him be a
fool that he may be wise; he shall be a fool (that is) made truly sensible of
the folly of all fleshly wisdom; the insufficiency of the light of nature and
wisdom of the flesh to attain the knowledge of God, or the things of God, For
in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and its a gift of
the Spirit, to those whose eyes are enlightened to see into this mystery; To you
its given to know the mystery, or secrets; of the Kingdom, when its hid from
others; they are strangers to it, though never so much endued with fleshly
wisdom.

10. And finally, This Law of life is a light and lamp unto the feet and paths
of those in whom its manifest, to lead and direct them into its ways; it is
that voice behind them saying, This is the way walk in it; when they turn to
the right or left hand, it is that light which guides them into all their
undertakings whether civil or spiritual; it is their great comforter, without
whose direction they cannot comfortably act in any of their undertakings; in a
word, it is that Spirit of light and life that occasions motion and action
suitable to its own nature, and sets the soul upon that work which is higher
then it self; that way which is a way of light and truth.

Thus the Law in the Spirit, is a Law of light, giving understanding unto the
simple, enlightening the mind, it is the true light that lighteneth the
darkness of every Sun and daughter of Sion.

Chap. II. Showing nine false Lights, flowing from the Law in the flesh.
BUT there is a false Light, as well as a true Light; there is a Law in the
flesh, as well as in the Spirit; although its true that all false Light is
indeed darkness, though men call it light, If the light that is in thee be
darkness, how great is that darkness! therefore I shall speak something by way
of discovery of this principle, this power of darkness, under the nominall
term of light; this false Christ, or rather this Antichrist; which if it were
possible, would deceive the very elect.

Now this false light, or rather delusion of this law in the flesh, may be
considered under these following considerations.

First false light.
1. It presents low, carnal and fleshly excellencies unto the creature, as its
chiefest good; it gives a false representation of things; it calls evil good,
and good evil; it puts light for darkness, and darkness for light; it judges
sweetness to be bitter, and bitter to be sweet, and thus it represents the worst
things with the greatest excellency; in more particular.

First, it discovers not sin and fleshly motions, and fleshly actings as the
greatest evil, but as the greatest good; thus the soul is deluded with a false
light, when it looks upon the deeds of darkness as deeds of pleasure, and the
ways and paths of darkness, to be ways and paths of pleasantnes and peace, and
thus it becomes a pleasure and pastime to a fool to commit folly; this is the
universal spirit of Satan, and law of darkness that rules in the world, even in
the hearts of the children of disobedience; so that in a word, the worlds way
is a way of darkness, and they delight to have it so.

Its true, sometimes they hear of Christ and grace by the hearing of the ear:
but the use they make of it, through the deceivablenes of this false and dark
light, is to sin the more freely, to give up themselves to the service of the
flesh, with the less trouble: thus are the most, the greatest part of the world
blinded to their own ruin, and yet think they see.

Second false light.
Secondly, this Law in the flesh presents the world as an excellent thing, as
the chiefest good to many a soul, who will show us any good, says the worldly
creature, who thinks the world best; hence it is so many, and that under the
form and notion of godliness to, hunt so earnestly after worldly honors,
profits, pleasures; do not such through that false glass that thus represents
things, apprehend the chiefest good, the chiefest exellency to be in the world;
when alas, those poor deluded souls see no excellency, no preciousnes in God
the fountain, it forsakes him and runs to streams; not but that every creature
of God is good, the soul beholding and enjoying the good God in it: but
without God there is nothing good, no man good, no creature good, nothing good,
God is the goodness of all things unto an enlightened, renewed mind; now this
love of the world, and being taken up with, and living in the worlds
excellency, the worlds glory, is, not only the sin, and will be the shame of
men of the earth, who have their portion in this life; but its a temptation
that lights many times very heavy upon those who are Christians, Saints indeed;
Christ himself was set upon by this temptation; and I believe Christians, who
have experience within themselves of that new birth which is from above,
walking the way of true holiness, can bear witness to this truth; amongst all
their fiery tryalsand temptations this is one, to embrace this present evil
world, not evil in it self, but evil to him, who has an evil heart to depart
from the living God, making the world its dead Idol; this is that with which
the world is overcome: mad they are in the embracing the honors, profits, and
pleasures of this present world; this is that which overcomes the heart of many
a Judas; what will ye give me; of many a Demas, who after much profession,
forsake the Lord, embracing this present world; be ye therefore watchful, for
your adversary the Devil goes about night and day, like a roaring Lion,
seeking who^ he may devour; and one of his greatest temptations and delusions
is the presenting to your understandings the glory of this world; although its
true, he falsely represents it too, for he presents it glorious in it self, to
the deceiving of the soul, but never presents God, who is the quintessence,
the excellency and the glory of all things, without whom there is nothing
glorious, nothing excellent, nothing truly satisfactory or lovely; this is the
second false or deceivable light, presenting things which are indeed good
without him, who is the goodness of them.

Third false light.
Thirdly, If God make some discoveries of sin to the natural conscience, it
being convinced of sin, waded under the apprehensions of it; this false law in
the flesh, the spirit of Satan and darkness, if possible he can, ensnares the
soul under one of these mis-presentations.

Either 1. That notwithstanding there is such a discovery made of sin, yet it
is not so bad as is presented at present, and there he presents the fleshly
sweetness and pleasure of it, hurryes on the creature into the most
delightful motions and actings of it; that so by the sweetness and pleasure
of sin to flesh, the troubled thoughts of sin might be expeld.

But 2. If this will not do, the breath of the Lord kindles, not only new
discoveries, but fiery flames, then the best way is, with Adam, to hide
himself, if not with Judas, to hang it self; an unlikely way to be delivered
from fiery flames, though many souls are thus deluded by that lying spirit
withinthem.

3. But if this will not prevail, then it will set the creature on work, with
Adam, to make clothes to cover it self withal, although it be but fig
leaves; that is, it will present unto the soul some creature righteousness
and reformation, some form of godliness without the power, as light and life
enough to deliver the soul out of this condition; it cloths the creature with
a righteousness of its own setting up reformations, humiliations, prayers,
tears, preaching, hearing in the room of Christ, and the spirit; like unto
Ephraim and Judah, Hos. 5. 13. when they saw their sickness, sin and wound,
then they went to the Assyrian for help, but he could not help them; and if
they are healed, that is falsely and unsoundly cured, it proves their ruin; for
they become seven times more the children of hell and darkness then before:
thus this law of flesh will through its deceivablenes, gather up the soul into
fleshly forms, things suitable to it self, mistaking Christ and the spirit of
truth; saying, this is Christ, thus transforming himself into an Angel of
light, to deceive souls; but those who are indeed risen with Christ, seek
things above, of a higher nature: and if they at any time act in forms, it is
not the form that satisfyeth them, but Christ who is the substance.

Fourth false light.
But Fourthly, When the soul comes to see that there is yet something above
all forms and fleshly grounds of comfort; When it comes to be truly informed,
or at least to get a notion that there is a law in the spirit, an internal, an
invisible law which is indeed the true light and guide of all the Christians
actings: This law in the flesh, or this spirit of darkness, which is
Antichrist, working in the highest mystery of iniquity and unrighteousness,
will be here working to the purpose too, and he has here several deceits
under the pretense of light.

First, In the throwing down of all works of holiness and visible
demonstrations of piety, under the pretense of a more spiritual enjoyment:
Whereas before it lived in these, now it throws off all these as a thing of
naught, as watchings over and reprovings for sin, righteous and in-offensive
walkings, love to the brethren, spiritual communications of what the soul
enjoyes, meekness, patience, prayer, etc. which are all fruits of the spirit:
this is now all destroyed as a thing of naught, by this law in the flesh; and
this false light is that with which the Saints themselves are sometimes
tempted: but the light of God, the law in the spirit, discovers it and expels
it, and it lets the soul to see that holiness is becoming the House of the
Lord for ever.

Secondly, This spirit of delusion works the mind into an earthly, carnal,
distempered temper, filling it with pride, high-conceitednesse of its own
excellency, passion and peevishness of spirit, carnal and earthly
mindedness, with a contentedness in this condition, because the creature is
informed, that its suitable to this high discovery of God, which is indeed but a
false suggestion of the spirit of delusion; to this purpose James minds this
excellent word, James 3. 14. But if ye have bitter envyings and strife in your
hearts, glory not, lie not against the truth. This wisdom comes not from
above, but is earthly, sensual and devilish; that wisdom which leads men
into a spiritual carnalnesse, looseness and liberty, into pride, passion and
peevishness, is not from above, but from the bottomless pit: this likewise
fills the conversation with an external appearance of lightness and vanity,
unprofitablenesse and pride, sleighting all others who are not in the same
temper with them.

Thirdly, This spirit of delusion, this mystery of iniquity, never leaves, if
possibly he can accomplish it, till he works the poor creature to and into its
first station, not only to the owning in judgment, but to the practice of all
looseness and licenciousnesse, and that too under pretense of being taught by
the spirit: the spirit it is indeed, but its the spirit of darkness and not of
light. Now the soul comes, as it says, in this dark and destroying light, to
see that all things are alike to God, that there is no sin, but all actings
are Gods, or in his power, therefore all is good. There now in the esteem of
such, to lie, steal, be drunk, commit adultery, and the like, is all good to
such a creature, and that God is now throwing his people out of all forms of
righteousness, as well as out of forms of worship.

Thus this man of sin working, deceiving, ruining, lays all upon God, and
the holy and pure spirit must bear all the blame and shame of this filthy
spirits working, when the truth is, God can as soon throw down himself, as
throw righteousness and holiness out of his people; and this those who are
taught of God, in whom the light of the spirit is manifest, can bear witness
unto: although its true, there is none of all these temptations, but the Saints
have had some experience, some trials from the Prince and power of darkness,
by which means they are the better enabled to speak and write in the discovery
of it.

I deny not in any case the glorious dispensation of that law in the spirit;
its a more full discovery of that law I wait for, that so there might be a more
full conformity both within and without unto it.

Yet it is that I have said often, and must now speak it again, that its such
a law, such a discovery, as in it all carnal ones and hypocrites shall be left
behind in it; the one below it, still opposing, living upon something of
flesh; the other in the notion of it only, running beyond it, and so with the
dog, returning to his vomit, and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing
again in the mire: This is indeed the narrow and strait gate and way of life,
few there be that find it.

But some perhaps may hereby object, and say; Sir, What you say seems to
savor of the flesh, of a low, darkened and enslaved spirit, and is indeed
Barbarism to a soul: In lightness we know that all things are good, and that
which you call sin is good, and all motions and works are alike good: from
whence comes sin? does not it come from God? is there any power besides God, or
that which is ordained by him? and therefore are not all things and actions
alike good?

I answer, First, It is true, there is no power but is of God, yet there are
those who in that power act things which the Most High has sentenced with
death; and not only the things, but those who practice them: and that not only
in Scripture; where we find this truth in the Saints experience; I protest,
says Paul, by my rejoicing in Christ Jesus our Lord I dye daily; and this
spiritual death, which many are ignorant of, was, and is one great part of the
mystery of the Cross of Christ within us: this likewise is the experience of
those who live in light; they have received the sentence of death within them;
I mean, the death of sin and flesh; and for this they wait till it be
accomplished.

Again, although all things had their first rise and being from him, and still
subsist by him, yet the corruption of those things flows from it self, and not
from him: and besides, God has set up two creations, two Adams, the one after
the flesh, the other after the spirit; the one being but a figure of the other;
the one is of the earth, earthly; the second is the Lord from heaven; In the
one, to declare himself a just God, in sentencing and condemning all sin and
flesh, because in that first creation after the flesh, sin and flesh works:
In the second, declaring himself not only a God sentencing sin and flesh, but
likewise a God of purity and holiness; such a one with whom the throne of
iniquity can have no fellowship: and this I am sure is the Saints experience;
nothing eclypses the glorious enjoyment but wars and fightings within them from
lusts.

What need we make so much of sin? God is good, and be sees no iniquity in
his people?

Its true, God sees, that is, suffers no travel against, nor iniquity in
his people to hurt them, to separate them from him: but it is as true, that
those who have this testimony within themselves, cannot see sin and flesh
working in themselves with delight and pleasure; Shall we sin because grace
abounds? God forbid! How shall we, who are dead to sin, continue any longer
therein?

Fifth false Light.
Fifthly, I might come to visions and revelations too, for here will
Antichrist, this mystery of iniquity, appear likewise, for he must come with
signs and lying wonders, God giving up men by strong delusions to believe a
lie: Not that I am against visions or revelations from God, but the working of
Satan will be in lying visions and wonders, filling the fancy with toys and
fleshly exaltations: The discoveries and revelations of God are revelations
full of light, power and truth, tending to the dethroning of flesh, and the
exalting of God, draws up the soul into a more spiritual conformity to, and
communion with God; it does not occasion fleshly exaltations, like unto the man
of sin, who exalts himself above all that is called God, saying, I am
Christ, and so deceives many; but I pass this at present.

Sixth false Light.
Sixthly, I shall descend downwards again to some further discoveries, though
more fleshly; this false light presents a universal will and power in all men,
to accept and receive grace from God, that one man might obtain mercy as well
as another, all having alike power, or at least power enough to receive grace;
that faith is but an act of reason, and they are unreasonable men that do not
believe; not knowing that it is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows mercy; not knowing that its he that works to
will and to do of his good pleasure; not experiencing that mighty power of God
in those who believe, so giving all glory to God; but rather laying the stresse
of all upon the creature, gives all to the creature; whereas souls rightly
taught by that spirit of light, see al, not only love and grace, but will and
power, flowing from that fountain. And hence it is, that as streams flowing
from the fountain, return thither again, so those who truly live in grace,
return al to that fountain of grace; I am nothing, I can do nothing, al
flows from that fountain: Thus the Lord alone is exalted in that soul.

Seventh false Light.
Seventhly, This false light presents God to the understanding to be but a
piece of reason, and so, that there is indeed no God, but reason rules al
things, and upholds al things; questioning, if not denying the naming of GOD;
though I shall not question, but that some may do it through curiosity, finding
some new or nise term for singularities sake through some temptation, yet
minding the same thing; whereas the discoveries of God are plain and familiar
to his creatures: Hence the wisdom of the Gospel is called the simplicity of
the Gospel, though a mystery in it self, and indeed far above the reach of
reason, I mean the reason of the natural man, of the first Adam, which is of
the earth, earthly: Thus from the notion of high mystery, we fall down under
the lowest part of the creation of the invisible God, by our reason in the
creation, to judge of God to be but reason, who is indeed the fountain, the
Creator of reason, and of the whole Creation.

Eighth false Light.
Eighthly, From hence creatures come to conclude at last, that the whole
creation is God; that God is al things, and that al things is God; that the
creation is but God brought forth into form, and that this form or body of
Gods shall again become invisible, and as at first; so at last there shall be
nothing but God, no Saints, no happiness, no glory, no misery, but all things
returning into that one thing, God, not seeing God by his power bringing forth
a creation, that is, not himself to serve his pleasure, an old creation on
which he will manifest his justice; a new creation on which he will make known
his grace and glory, glorifying some with himself which are not himself,
though one with himself, and so as himself partakers of the same light, life
and glory; so that although God created all things, yet he is nothing of all
those things, yet the life and glory of them; he is the Creator, they but the
creatures. Ninth false Light.

Ninthly, And in conclusion, some in this false light come to conclude, that
there is no God at all, nothing but the God of nature, or nature which is God;
that all things come by nature, and are upheld by nature; and so at last turn
Atheists, and here ends all religion; and thus the fool has said in his
heart, nay, he is not now ashamed to say with his tongue, that there is no God,
no heaven, no hell, no good, no bad, but all is of nature: now nature may take
its will, its fill of pleasure, for what it lusts it may have, there being no
God, no law unto it or above it, nothing but that law of nature which acts it
self in its own power, in its own liberty.

Thus (dear Christian) have I, though with some difficulty, tract, and with
much brevity discovered this false and deceivable man of sin, that is now
acting, now deceiving, if it were possible, the very elect; not doubting but
that those anointings which are in you, will teach you in whom it is in truth;
and keep you until the day of his appearing.

Chap. III. Of the liberty of the law in the spirit.
AS the law in the spirit is a law of light, so likewise is the law of liberty
a law which produces much freedom of spirit where it is in truth: this the
Prophet David knew by experience, when he prayed, Psalm. 50. Restore to me the
joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free spirit: Its a free spirit:
For,

1. Its freely given.

2. Its a spirit working freedom and liberty where it is received: This spirit
of freedom, as its a law of liberty, delivers those in whom it is, from al
their enemies, from al their bondage and captivity.

First, It sets them at liberty from sin and Satan; I join them together,
because sin is Satan's work, and al natural men are servants and slaves to
both; servants to Satan, enslaved to his will; servants to sin, willingly
doing his work; for his servants you are whom you obey, whether it be of sin
unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness.

Now this law in the spirit, which is Christ in you the hope of glory, delivers
souls from this captivity; from that captivity to sin in the conscience, which
flows from the enlightening power of this law, which does not only make souls
sensible of sin, but works likewise a deliverance from sin, and so sets
the soul at liberty from that bondage, in taking away the guilt, the sting of
death, which is sin: This law discovering love, brings home that grace and
pardon, and seals up the soul til the day of redemption, the day of its
complete deliverance: And then,

Secondly, It sets the soul at liberty from the love and affectation of sin;
for naturally the very affections of love and joy are captivated and enslaved
to base, fleshly and carnal lusts: now this spirit of liberty sets the soul
free in its affections, through its light discovering the evil nature of sin,
and so its power in delivering the soul from the love of it. Believe it,
Friends, this is the light and liberty of the spirit, it enlightens souls to
see the evil of sin, and where its a light enlightening, there its a law of
liberty, setting free from the guilt, free from the love and affectation of
sin.

Thirdly, It works a liberty likewise from sin in the conversation; How,
says the Apostle, Romans 5. 2. shall we who are dead to sin live any longer
therein? Sin shall not reign in the mortal body; sin shall not have dominion
where this law of the spirit is in power; neither over the conscience, the
affections nor conversation; this grace of God which brings home salvation,
teaches to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, to live soberly, righteously
and godly in this present world: thus this law in the spirit is a law of
liberty from sin, from Satan, whom natural men serve, being taken captive at
his will, and that willingly. Its true that souls in whom this law of liberty
is manifest, may be taken captive, but its contrary to their minds, it is
their burden, it is their prison, and they can say with Paul, O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me? And they can say likewise through this spirit
of liberty, Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ, though in my flesh I serve
the law of sin, yet in my mind I serve the law of God; And thanks be to God
who gives me a victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, This law works a liberty from the world likewise, men naturally
being enslaved to it, there being such a sutablenesse unto it in the minds of
men: The first man being of the earth, earthly: this first man looks after
nothing, delights in nothing, because it apprehends nothing above its creation;
but souls borne from a bone by this spirit of liberty, For that which is borne
of the flesh is flesh, and that which is borne of the spirit is spirit; being
created after the image of him that created them, in righteousness and true
holiness; that as they have borne the image of the earthly, now they bear the
image of the heavenly; they are made capable to apprehend spiritual and
heavenly things; Being risen with Christ, they now seek after things above;
things of another nature: and being delivered into the enjoyment of those
spiritual and heavenly things, that they can say, God is mine, Christ, the
Spirit is mine, grace, love glory is mine (all is yours, says Paul) they can
say, I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine; now their hearts are tasten off
from things below, they have a loose affection unto it; they see now that
nothing is good to them, but as they have God in it, as they have love and
grace in it, being set at liberty from the inordinate affection to it by this
spirit of liberty; and this is the second part of the glorious liberty of the
Sons of God.

Thirdly, Those in whom this law of liberty is manifest in power, they are set
at liberty from men, viz. from being slaves and subjects unto men in the things
of God: The truth is, that men through the power and spirit of Antichrist, that
son of perdition, have a long time, out of that pride of heart naturally
residing in them, gotten into the seat of God, exalting themselves above all
that is called God, have become a law in the spirits of men, subjecting and
enslaving them to their own wills; and men through their ignorance of this law
of liberty in the spirit, have been, and yet for the most part desire to be
subjects and slaves unto them: now this spirit of liberty delivers souls from
this bondage, from this subjection to the wills of men in the things of God; Ye
are bought with a price, be ye not the servants of men, 1 Cor. 7. 23. They now
see in this light that they cannot serve two masters; they now in this law of
liberty are delivered from the fleshly law, into the glorious liberty of the
spiritual.

Fourthly, This law sets men at liberty from all other laws besides it self;
it teaches men not to fear those who can but kill the body, and cannot kill the
soul; it teaches men not to act in any spiritual duty, under the power of any
command besides it self; it sets souls at liberty from being subject to
ordinances; yet makes the soul able, in whom it is in a measure, to say with
the Apostle, Though all things be lawful to me, yet I will not be brought
under the power of any thing; that is, of any thing besides this law of liberty
in the spirit.

Ob. This seems to be a doctrine of liberty indeed, and may be an occasion of
liberty to the flesh.

A. First, Although it seem to be a doctrine of fleshly liberty, in the eye of
a carnal and fleshly mind, yet to a spiritual Christian there is no such
thing; and indeed it argues, that those who shall so think, have but little, if
any knowledge at al, of the light, liberty and power of this law: The Apostle,
Gal. 5. 1. says, Stand fast in that liberty with which Christ has made you
free, and be not entangled with any yoke of bondage: Yet verse. 13. Use not your
liberty as an occasion to the flesh. And I say farther, that this law in the
spirit teaches men to put on a conversation suitable to it self; it teaches
men to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts; and therefore these men are much
mistaken who think that it will teach men to be ungodly.

Secondly, Its true that men of the flesh may abuse this heavenly law in
getting a notion of it, and so instead of a spiritual, get into a carnal
liberty; but men's abuse of things through ignorance, derogates nothing from the
excellency of that truth; this I am sure is a most excellent soule-satisfying
truth, being known in power; this liberty from al other laws, besides this
law of liberty, this law of life; well might the Apostle James say, Whosoever
looks into this perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, shall be blessed
in his deed, Jam. 1. 25.

Thirdly, As this law delivers souls out of bondage, so it delivers into its
own glory; as it brings souls out of bondage and darkness, so it delivers them
into the Kingdom of his dear Son, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God.
But because I have occasionally mentioned this deliverance from bondage into a
glorious liberty, in some other Treatise, I have been, and shall be the more
brief in this.

Only note this particular, they are delivered into the liberty of sons: now
what this liberty of sons is, I shall mind in some few particulars.

First, A liberty to know their Father, No man knows the Father but the Son,
and those to whom the Son reveals him; they have a liberty to know his love,
his grace, his goodness to them.

Secondly, They have a liberty to know his will likewise; the Father reveals
in the spirits of his people his will concerning them, his will concerning
their justification, sanctification and glory, and so makes their calling and
election sure to them, seals them up by this spirit unto the day of
redemption; he makes known his will concerning his ways and actings to the
sons of men; he does nothing but he reveals it to his servants the Prophets;
To them it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom, when it is hid from
others; and thus the covenant of grace is made good in the spirits of
Christians; I will write my law in their hearts, and they shall all know me,
from the least even to the greatest; a glorious liberty to know their Fathers
will, their Fathers love, their Fathers secrets.

Secondly, The liberty of a son is to abide in the house for ever, to be one of
his fathers family when the servant is turned out of doors.

So is it with the Sons of God, made partakers of this free spirit, by which
they can call God Father, Gal. 4. 6.

When servants who work for wages, that is, all formal professors who serve
that they may serve themselves, shall be turned out of the family, out of the
Kingdom of his dear Son, with their wages into the Kingdom of darkness: When
the Son shall remain a Citizen of the New Jerusalem, a member of the family
and household of God, under the everlasting providence, perfection and guidance
of the Almighty: When all servants and slaves shall see Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, and all the Prophets, and all the sons of God set down in the Kingdom
of heaven at their Fathers Table, and they themselves thrust out of doors, Luke
13. 28. a glorious word for those who are established with this free spirit.

Thirdly, The liberty of a son is to have communion and fellowship with his
Father, in the knowledge of his will, in the enjoyment of his love, in being one
with his Father in all his undertakings: so is the spiritual Son made so by
his free spirit, brought into a sweet communion with the Father, where he
partakes of love, lives in his will, communicates with the Father in all his
undertakings, takes all his Fathers business as his own, and acts with the
like faithfulness in it, when the servant he works and looks for wages, a
hireling that looks not so much after his masters business as after the
reward, and that he accounts to be as debt unto him, the penny he looked for, he
has it duly paid him, though many be called and few chosen; when the penny the
Son looks for is still to be a Son, to have more and more communion with, and
conformity to his Father, that as the Father honors the Son, so the Son may
honor the Father, so as in all things to do, and be in that condition which
is suitable to such a calling, and all in the liberty and power of that free
spirit.

Fourthly, Liberty of the son is to have the Fathers inheritance, to be lord of
all, when the servant shall have nothing but his wages; the spiritual Son shall
be made heir, crowned with his Fathers glory; although its true, a Son when a
child, may be a servant through his minority; so is it with sons, many know not
their sonship, Gal. 4. 1. The heir when he is a child differs not from a
servant, though he be lord of all; But when the fullness of time is come, God
sends forth the spirit of his Son into their hearts, by which they call God
Father; and so see themselves now to be lords of all, heirs to all their
Fathers glory, crowned, not only with the titles of Sons, but Kings and
Princes with their Father, partakers of the same Kingdom, of the same glory,
in a measure they have it already, and the fullness is reserved in heaven for
them.

Fifthly, And till this glory be completed in them, they have liberty upon all
occasions to have free access into the presence of their Father, to make known
al their wants, al their wrongs; free access to the throne of grace, there
obtaining mercy and finding grace; a a great help, a great comfort in time of
need; that which the world is ignorant of, and goes without, when the prayers
of unbelievers are turned into sin, yet the prayers of his people are his
delight; a great encouragement to the Saints in all their troubles, to make
known their wants to their Father.

Thus my dear ones have I given you a brief hint of the sons liberty and
spiritual freedom; if the same spirit hints it to your enjoyments, then it
will be glorious; if the Son shall make you free, then are you free indeed, then
stand fast and be not entangled with any yoke of bondage, for freedom is
glorious, its glorious in possession, more glorious in expectation; when you
shall be delivered from every thing wherein is but the least appearance of
bondage, and be completed in perfect freedom, which will be your glory.

Chap. IV. Of false Liberty.
I shall now descend to speak something very briefly of that false liberty and
law in the flesh, flowing from that spirit of Antichrist now reigning and
ruling in the hearts of the children of disobedience; for as there is a law in
the spirit, so there is a law in the flesh rebelling against this law in the
mind, and leading captive to the law of sin, this law or power of darkness
working in the flesh, I shall discover briefly under these following
considerations.

1. The more common and carnal sort of people who account themselves
Christians too; they have a liberty, but its a false liberty, a liberty to do
evil, to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, and the desires of the fleshly mind.

Now this fleshly liberty in the hearts of the more natural and carnal
minded, flow from one or both of these two principles.

First, From a blind misunderstanding of the good, of the pleasure and
satisfaction the soul apprehends in those fleshly things; for always false
liberty flows from false light, and true liberty succeeds true light; now the
mind being natural, and the light which is in it indeed but fleshly, and
darkness it self: now in this false light the soul mis-judging, and so calls
evil good, and good evil; it takes a false liberty suitable to its light: the
soul seeing a good, a pleasantness, a sweetness, as it imagines in sin and
the world, in the service of Satan, it takes its liberty to act in it, a false
liberty flowing from a false light, for the actings of al men are suitable to
what they see; unless given up to a spirit of slumber so, as to quench the true
discoveries that sometimes God makes forth to them, and they cannot but own
it; therefore all you carnal Libertines had need to look about your selves,
for at present you seem to be given up to a great judgment, blindness of
mind, not to see good when it comes, but to call evil good, and darkness
light, to hardness of heart, to sin, and follow the lusts of the flesh with
liberty of mind, thinking God to be like your-selvs; but he will reprove you,
and set your sins in order before you.

2. Or from a mis-apprehension and application of Gods gracious love in giving
Christ; hence the natural creature hearing of free mercy, grace and love to
sinners, draws this conclusion, That now it may take liberty to sin the more
freely: Why? Because God is merciful, and Christ died for sinners. And thus
creatures abuse mercy, trampling under foot, as much as in them lies, the
grace of God; a high delusion; and a body requital of grace and love, to
offend grace because it is grace; to sin because God is merciful: Oh horrid
wickedness! What, shall we sin because grace abounds? God forbid! But this
false liberty in and after the flesh, will produce a bad requital if grace
prevent not: See Romans 2. 4, 5. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness,
and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God
leads thee to repentance; but after thine hardness and impenitent heart
treasurest up to thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of
the righteous judgment of God.

3. Come to the more zealous, and their liberty is in the flesh likewise, a
liberty to be servants of men; a liberty to serve God, as they think, and
themselves too in a fleshly way of obedience: And to but hear of this liberty
in spirit is bondage unto them; and thus it seems to be their liberty to be
slaves to others, Lords to other laws: then this law of true liberty in the
spirit to fulfill a fleshly righteousness, seems to be their liberty to be
subject to the wills of men, and so to become the servants of men, seems to be
their liberty; a liberty which truly is, and will end in bondage; and this
false liberty flows likewise from false light.

4. Come to others who have passed through this life of zeal to the wills of
men, and to their own wills, they having gotten a notion, not only of grace and
love, but of this spirit of liberty, (and only a notion) they presently
apprehending, as they think, that all is now good, they seeing no actions to
be differing to them, but all seems to be alike; they freely take a liberty
from this false light to act after the flesh; it is their liberty to be
profane, carnal, loose, unprofitable, and so indeed they make use of their
liberty which is a carnal one, as an occasion to the flesh; they sin as they
say not only because grace abounds, but because the spirit teaches them so to
do, which is a spirit of liberty; and indeed its to be doubted that they are
possessed with such a spirit of liberty after the flesh, that all bonds of
righteousness and true liberty are broken; and in this I may speak in the
Apostles words, Phil. 3. 18. For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and
now tell you weeping, that are enemies to the cross of Christ, whose end is
destruction, whose God is their belly, whose glory is their shame, who mind
earthly things. And thus poor creaturs being given up to work al wickedness
with greediness, do not only act those things themselves, but have pleasure
in them that do them; so that to walk humbly with God is become in their
eyes, not only a bondage, but a scorn; and those who talk of it, barbarous; a
thing so low as not to be understood.

Thus whereas Saints have a liberty from sin, these have a liberty in sin;
Saints have a liberty to be the Sons of God, these have a liberty to be the
sons of Satan, of darkness, and yet pretend themselves to be the Sons of God;
but his servants you are to whom you obey, whether it be of sin unto death, or
of obedience unto righteousness.

Chap. V. Of the righteousness of the Law in the spirit.
AS this law in the spirit is a law of light and liberty, so it is a righteous
law, that is, a law working righteousness in those in whom it is, making
souls partakers of its own righteousness, which is indeed the righteousness
of God; He was made sin for us, that we might be made the righeeousnesse of God
in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21.

Now the righteousness of this law may be produced unto these two heads.

1. An internal righteousness, as it has relation to God.

2. An external righteousness, as it has relation to men.

First, As it has relation to God, and so it is a righteousness in the
spirit; this may be considered likewise under these two heads.

1. As it is more external.

2. As it is more internal.

First, As it is more external, yes, spiritual, and the righteousness of God
too, because prepared by the Father for sinners, brought home and applied by
the spirit: and this is the righteousness of God in relation to what he has
done for them; in laying help upon one that is mighty; in laying iniquity upon
Christ, and condemning it there: that so through the apprehending and applying
of the Fathers love in this great work, the guilt of sin might be taken out of
the conscience, through the souls apprehending, the Father doing that in
Christ for it, which it self could not do; For what the law could not do in
that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness
of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, Rom, 8. 3. Herein the
soul beholding and enjoying love from the Father, sees it self now to be
justified, and that by grace, from al things by which it could not be justified
by the Law of Moses; this is a more external righteousness because wrought for
us, without us; yet the righteousness of God, of the spirit, because prepared
by God, eyed and applied in the light and power of the spirit.

2. That which I call a more spiritual righteousness, it is a righteousness
wrought within us by this law of righteousness; and this righteousness
wrought for us, without us, though declared in us, is but a precedent to this
righteousness wrought within; that so the righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit: this is
that mystery of Christ in you, the hope of glory, the forming of Christ within,
that is, when the soul has experience of the same spirit within as was and is
in Christ, working the soul into a spiritual conformity to Christ, growing up
in him, til it come to the same fullness, to the same perfection; but both
these I have in a measure unfolded in another Treatise, and therefore pass it
with the more brevity in this place; only I shall answer one Objection by the
way, and so pass to the second part of the righteousness of this law in the
spirit.

Obj. Some will be ready to say, That they know no such thing as this law in the
spirit justifying, this external forming of Christ, they know Christ no other
ways but as he dyed at Jerusalem, and that this talk of Christ within seems to
be a mystery, if not a delusion; for Christ dwells in his people, no otherwise
but by faith, that is souls believing only what he has done for them, and that
there is no other forming of Christ in them, till the day of resurrection of
their bodies from the grave.

Answ. I answer first, That its true this forming of Christ within is a mystery
indeed, the compleater of it will be the top and height of all mystery, this is
the mystery, Christ in you, the hope of glory, that is, the said spirit and
power conforming souls to Christ in death, resurrection and life, and this is
the more mysterious man of sin, the antichrist, who denies Christ to be come
in the flesh, this mystery of Christ in you the hope of glory. And although
some may abuse this truth, this mystery, being deluded only with the notion of
it, yet let others take heed they abuse it not through ignorance.

2. I answer, that whereas the Scripture says, Christ dwells in the heart by
faith: It Is true, but there is a twofold dwelling of Christ in the heart by
faith: the first is, when the soul sees and believes what God in Christ has
done for it: and secondly, when the soul sees and believes that this Christ,
that is the same spirit that dwelt in Christ dwells in him, as a law of light,
life and liberty in him, seeing the law of the spirit of life that was in
Christ Jesus, freeing it from the law of sin and death: for the soul taught
of God sees and believes both these to be a truth, Christ for, and Christ in
the soul: this we shall find clearly held forth in Scripture, not setting up
the one in denying the other, but you shall find that the Scripture presents
you with a death with Christ, and resurrection with him Romans 5. Phil. 3. 10.
with a life with him, John 14. 19. Because I live ye shall live also, and in
him by virtue of spiritual union, verse. 20. At that day ye shall know that I
am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you: Note a word by the way, at that
day they shall know it, At what day? in that day when Christ reveals himself in
them, The world shall see me no more, but ye shall see me: It is not such a
sight as the Apostles had of Christ, when he was with them in the flesh: it is
not such a sight as the world had, or at this day have of Christ: for the world
believes that Christ died for sinners, yet they see him not, now Saints see him
first dying for them. 2. They see him living in them: and this assurance of
Christ in them; they receive by faith, believing and knowing this to be a
truth, for faith and knowledge in this particular is but one thing, We believe,
and know, says Peter, that thou art the Christ the Son of the living God.
And thus Saints in whom this law of righteousness is manifest, can in a
measure say, We believe and know that God has revealed his Son not only to
us, but in us: and thus Christ dwells in the heart by faith, and there is no one
truth of God more clearly revealed in Scripture, more glorious in the spirits
of Saints then this truth of Christ formed in them.

2. I come now to the second part of the righteousness of this law in the
spirit, which is an external righteousness amongst men, for this law in the
spirit, teaches men to live soberly, righteously and godly in the world: God
is a righteous God, and this righteous law conforms souls unto this righteous
God; and where there is an internal, there will be likewise an external
righteousness. And this righteousness in conversation may be considered under
these two heads:

1. In the abstaining from works of unrighteousnes amongst men, and they are
such as these, 1 Cor. 6. 8. oppression and fraudulency, or such as are
mentioned, verse. 9. Know you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God: Be not deceived, neither fornicatours nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God: These are works of
unrighteousness; that is, works that declare men to be unrighteous.

2. In performing visible works of righteousness, Show me thy faith by thy
works: faith ever produces works, works of piety, and works of charity: in a
word, this law of righteousness in the spirit, makes good that word of
righteousness in them; Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, so
do unto them, for this is the law and the Prophets. It puts the man in whom it
is, in all his dealings amongst men in the other balance; and this is the rule
of his dealing with others, to do as he would be done unto, the true rule of
righteousness amongst men; and truly this law of righteousness is that I long
to see more abundantly manifest in the Saints, in these later days, for God
has a glorious dspensation of righteousness to bring forth in his Saints, and
through them to the world, that the righteous God appearing with so much
splendor, glory and righteousness in his people, and through them to the
world, that the world shall be driven to fall down, and acknowledge God is in
them of a truth: he will take out of them that perverse and peevish spirit, and
fill them with the spirit of love: he will take out of them that oppressing
spirit of unrighteousness, and fill them with the spirit of righteousness,
justice and equity, and this glorious appearance of righteousness in them,
will by them and through them bring to naught the unrighteousness and
oppression that is in the world: for as the wrath of God was, so now it is much
more abundantly made manifest against all unrighteousness of men, against all
unrighteousness within, against all unrighteousness without his people: and
this shall be effected by the glorious appearance of this glorious law of
righteousness in them. See Isa. 45. 14. And they (to wit, men of the world)
shall be thine, they shall come after thee in chains, they shall come over, and
they shall fall down unto thee, making supplication, saying, Surely God is in
thee, and there is none else, there is no God: Thus shall a King reign in
righteousness, and Princes shall rule in judgment, although its true never
more oppression then now under the pretense of liberty, a great argument that
the time is at hand, and then shall all oppressors and oppressions fall to the
ground, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day, then shall ye return
and see the difference between him that served God, and him that served him
not: for unto them that fear his name shall this son of righteousness arise
(filling them with righteousness) with healing under his wings, and they shall
go forth and grow up as calves in the stall: but this day of the Lord shall
burn like an oven, and all the proud, and all oppressors, and all that do
wickedly shall be as stubble: the day comes that shall burn them up, and leave
them neither root nor branch, Mal. 4. 1, 2. This is the day of the Lord, the
day of fire that is coming upon the face of the earth: Let the voice of Elijah
the Prophet be a warning unto men, lest he come and smite the earth with a
curse. How then should the spirits of Christians be up to the Lord in a way of
waiting for the more full revelation of this righteous law within them, that
they may see all enemies both within them and without them made a footstool
unto this righteous dispensation, that the world may not have cause to say, as
formerly, that they profess more then others, but they are as covetous as any,
as proud, peevish and hard hearted as any, as full of oppression as any, by
which means the name of God has been blasphemed amongst the world; But when
they shall read in the carriage of Christians nothing but love, and
righteousness, and in-offensive walking, a disposition always to do good,
and that unto all; I say when this appearance of God is manifest in the Saints,
it shall throw down that wickedness, that pride and that oppression which is
in the world: Wait therefore upon God for it, For blessed are they that wait
for him.

Chap. VI. The unrighteous Law.
I Shall come now briefly in a word or two likewise to speak a word in the
discovery of that false law of righteousness, or rather unrighteousness that
dwells in the hearts of natural men; and I shall mind it under these two heads
likewise.

1. As it is within them.

2. As it is manifest without them.

First, As it is within them, and that under several notions.

1. Some thinking their civility and morality to be a perfect law and rule of
righteousness in them, having good natures, doing as they think, and say no
body wrong, they think this shall be their righteousness, which is but a
rghteousnesse of flesh, and not of spirit.

2. Others look at, and talk of Christ dying for sin, not being made partaker
of any power, by which they are dead to sin, and yet expect a justifying, a
righteousness, a salvation in the end from the death of sin, this is a false
law of unrighteousness in the minds of most, not believing that the wages of
sin is death.

3. Others come higher then this under the notion of joining Christ and duty
together, flesh and spirit as coworkers together, talking of the righteousness
of Christ, but looking for it as it were, by the works of the law, being indeed
ignorant of the righteousness of God, these are zealous, but not according to
knowledge; and this is looked after, and pleaded for, as a high degree of
righteousness, when perhaps there is no more in it then what Paul accounted
loss, yea, dung and dross, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus his Lord; and was content to suffer the loss of al such things, as
grounds of righteousness, that he might win Christ, and be found in him. Good
it were, and much mercy to such, if they could with Paul, suffer the loss of
al such righteousness, in a way of grace, for it must be lost first or last;
if not til last, then they must be bid depart from al their works, as works
and workers of iniquity, into utter darkness, where shall be a lake of fire,
which will occasion weeping and gnashing of teeth.

4. Others seem to come higher then this again, seeming to be delivered from
works, as it is their righteousness, and are al for Christ and his
righteousness, free justification without works, but they are ignorant of, if
not enemies unto the righteousness of this law in the spirit: Although I
question not, but that many who are yet come no further, may be precious, and
enjoy true comfort according to that measure received, yet these two things are
considerable.

First, That many are likely to perish, after come forth of Egypt, in the
wilderness, before they come into this land of Canaan, this land of rest.

Secondly, That those who truly know Christ without them to be their
righteousness, do, or shall likewise know Christ within them, although at
present through ignorance they deny it, although its that which is or shall be
their greatest glory; but I say for a man only to know Christ without him,
glorying in this, without any experience of the life of Christ in him, in being
made conformable unto him, this is a fleshly and deceivable law of
righteousness.

Fifthly, Others seem, as they say, to come higher then all the rest into a way
of righteousness, although lowest of al; for they look not after morality nor
legality, nor Christ, nor this righteous law in the spirit, which is the
substance and perfection of al; but they have found a new law of
righteousness, or rather of unrighteousness, that is, the law of the flesh,
do what they will its al good, justifiable, righteous; but to such I say, Be
not deceived, God is not mocked; For what you sow you are like to reap; For
God is not as man, that he should lie, or as the son of man, that he should
repent; Let God be righteous, let God be true, and all false and fleshly
persuasions be a lie.

2. The external unrighteousness of this deceivable law in the flesh may be
considered either,

1. Doing or acting things contrary to the true rule of righteousness; thus
either,

First, In acting, that so they may appear unto men to be righteous, like unto
hypocrites; and this satisfies, if there can be such a visible walking as may
silence men, though hypocrisy, deceit and unrighteousness lie hid and lurking
within; these are the whited Tombs Christ speaks of which appear beautiful
before men, when within they are full of dead men's bones.

Secondly, Or else when men take liberty to appear outward to men as they list,
full of al unrighteousness, and yet think to be innocent, righteous and clear
before God, justifying themselves that they have good hearts, and the like:
these are they the Lord reproves by the Prophet, Will you steal, murder, commit
adultery, and swear falsely? and yet come and stand before God in his house,
thinking to be delivered, saying, They shall have peace, though they walk
after the stubbornness of their own hearts, etc.

Thirdly, Others not only making gain to be their godliness, but gain to be
their rule of righteousness to others and hence it comes to pass oft-times
that they have a law of liberty within them to lie and cosen for advantage, not
knowing that righteous rule, To do as they would be done unto: and this gain
selfadvantage is the great rule by which most in the world walk: I wish I had
not cause to say, that its the rule of many who would be accounted more then
ordinary Christians, which occasions (in the fourth place) much oppression and
fraudulency; now there is a liberty to defraud, oppress, to do any thing for
advantage; this is the unrighteousnes of this law in the flesh.

Chap. VII. The law of true holiness.
THis law in the spirit is likewise a law of holiness and purity in whom it is:
this law of the Lord is pure, purifying and purging souls: God is a holy God,
and he works the spirits of his people into his own likeness; hence it is the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 3. 18. says, That all we with open face beholding as in a
glass the glory of God, are changed into the same image from glory to glory,
even as by the Spirit of the Lord. The Spirit and glory of the Lord is a
transforming Spirit and glory, it never leaves those in whom its manifest,
until it change them into the very image and glory of the Father: This law of
holiness as it works holiness in the spirits of Saints may be considered
under two heads likewise, either more internal, or more external.

1. More internally, as it changes and renews the mind: for this spirit
begins to work holiness first within, it renews the spirit of the mind, it
takes possession of the heart: it does not only say, My son give me thy
heart, but it takes the heart and moulds it, and forms it according to its own
good pleasure: it does not only say, Be ye holy, but it works holiness, and
says, likewise, Thou shall be holy: hence it is called, The holy, the
sanctifying Spirit; not only in respect of its own purity, but as it works
purity in the spirits of Saints: Thus holiness becomes the house of the Lord
for ever: every believer, every Saint is Gods house, his temple, his
habitation, in them he dwells, and that by way of union and spiritual
communion; and therefore holiness becomes this house, this habitation for ever.

Qu. What is holiness?

Answ. Holiness in spirit it is, when the inner man by the power and operation
of the spirit is changed and renewed, by which means the old man flesh, is put
off with his deeds, and the new man is put on: it is an inward change from
flesh to spirit, being made partaker of the divine nature, of the nature of the
holy God: hence it comes to pass that the mind being thus renewed so earnestly
presses after more perfection in this sanctity: now the soul sees clearly what
was the Fathers everlasting purpose concerning him, to gather him up into the
same perfection of purity and holiness with himself: this indeed being the
Saints perfection, the Saints glory, the putting off of al flesh, the filth of
the old man, and to be clothed in this holiness of the new: And he that has
this hope in him purifieth himself, even as Christ is pure, that soul has no
pattern or perfection short of him who is their elder brother, who is entered
into the Sanctum Sanctorum, the holy of holies, the most holy place, perfection
it self, and a way being opened for Saints to follow him. Hence it is they with
so much earnestness press after, not as if they had already attained, or were
already perfect; but they press forward, if by any means they might attain the
resurrection from the dead, that is a full deliverance from this body of death
into the complete and perfect glory and purity of the Father.

Thus this law in the spirit is a law of holiness, of sanctification, it does
not leave men carnal, and fleshly, and filthy; no no the will of God is your
sanctification; and this he works, where he manifests himself; he truly effects
in the minds of his people (which is his house) what he did in the temple at
Jerusalem, he over-turned the tables of the money changers, and whipped the
buiers and sellers out of the temple: so he does in the spirits of his people,
whips out all those unclean lusts and fleshly imaginations which defile this
holy temple, not but that there may be the presence of these, but they are not
there with delight, with content: and this sanctifying spirit will never leave
them til he has turned them al out, the God of peace will tread Satan under
feet shortly, and all those enemies shall become the Saints footstool; this is
the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes: this is the Lords work, and
he will perfect it in his time: Let all those who wait upon him for the
accomplishment of it cry grace, grace unto it, the end of it will be glory in
the highest, when al flesh shall vail it self to this excellent glory, though
it be not accomplished as soon as you expect it, yet assuredly the end will be
glorious, that is, it will crown al your temptations, and trials, expectations,
when you shall partake of this perfect change.

2. There is an external holiness likewise, that is a visible demonstration in
the conversation of what is wrought within: There is not only holiness
within, but without; The Kings daughter is not only all glorious within, but
her clothing likewise is of needle work: There is a visible manifestation of a
renewed mind, where the God of peace sanctifies he does it through out not
only in soul and spirit, but in body too. Hence it is the Apostle says, Be ye
holy in all manner of holy conversation and godliness. This outward appearance
of holiness is but the fruit of that tree of holiness within, and where this
tree is, this fruit will appear, there will be fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life.

This external holiness appears under these two particulars:

First, In the forsaking evil courses.

Secondly, In the performing or acting that which is good.

1. In the forsaking evil there is not only an evil root, but there is evil
fruit, the fruit of the flesh: now where this law of holiness and purity is,
there is a purging of al filthiness of flesh and spirit. This is that the
Apostle minds, 1 Cor. 6. Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are
purged by the Spirit of our God, etc. This is the true property of this law in
the spirit, to make clear not only within, but without too: Wash you, make you
clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, Isa. 1. cease to
do evil; etc. al filthiness and profaneness flows directly from the law of
the flesh, and are the fruits of the flesh; the tree is known by his fruit. It
is altogether unpossible for a renewed, changed, sanctified heart to be given
up to the lusts of the flesh: they are fruits that grow in the devils garden,
upon the tree of nature, and not of grace; they are the fruit that grow upon
the forbidden tree, whosoever eats thereof is dead; if you walk after the
flesh ye are dead, but if by the spirit ye mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye
are alive: Therefore take this in a word for all, That it is altogether
unpossible for a man that lives in the spirit to bring forth fruits after the
flesh; they who live after the flesh savor the things of the flesh: Only two
cautions considered,

First, That those who live after the spirit, may be, and often are burdened with
flesh.

Secondly, Although they are burdened with flesh, yet they walk not, they
war not after the flesh, but spirit in them subdues and destroys flesh, and
the conversation is in a measure suitable to such a spiritual law within.

2. This holiness appears not only in the forsaking that which is visibly evil,
and carries a clear appearance in it to be of the flesh: But likewise

2. In the visible acting and performing works of holiness suitable to such an
inward principle: the soul does not only now cease to do evil, but learns to
do well; This is that the Scripture so often minds, and Saints so much
experienceth, Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good
works may glorify your Father that is in heaven: And this is the will of God
even your sanctification, that you may know how to possess your vessels in
sanctification and honor, and the tree is known by his fruit, Does a man
gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistls: And the good man out of the good
treasure of his heart brings forth good things; but the evil man out of the
evil treasure of his heart brings forth evil things. Thus Scripture clears
this truth; experience likewise manifests it, Those who are taught of the
Spirit can bear witness unto this truth, That the more that spirit of holiness
appears within, purifying the inner man, the more visible does that holiness
appear without.

Quest. But it may be questioned, What are these works of holiness that
visibly appear thus in the sanctified man?

Ans. 1. Negative: I mind not customs and forms, for in this natural men may
act far: But

2. Affirmatively: 1. In speaking forth and declaring the goodness, holiness
and love of God: A heart that is sanctified indeed, and enjoyes love and
communion indeed, cannot but according to the measure enjoyed, and the gift
received, but declare it forth unto others, Out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks. Thus Saints cannot keep silence when God speaks in them,
but are ever and anon breathing forth the good, the love of God; then says the
soul, Truly God is good, O taste and see that the Lord is gracious. Oh that men
would praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare his wonderful love to the
sons of men: The soul can now say, God is good, he is sweet, he is lovely,
and altogether delightful. Thus Saints are not either first breathing forth
fleshly and carnal discourse, unprofitable and vain things, but their words are
always seasoned with salt, that it may minister grace unto the hearers;
neither are they dumb and tonguetied always, not but that those who are
precious may be slow of speech; but being drawn forth, something they have to
declare of God: They are not first altogether empty, and so silent, that argues
a barren, fruitless, unsanctified soul; neither secondly do they pretend to be
high in knowledge, but will not declare any thing, except flesh talk of spirit,
and manifest flesh, no, they cannot withold the truth in unrighteousness, nor
hide his goodness within them, as by stealth; but still, Out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaks, and the tree is known by his fruit. God
creating in his people the fruit of the lips, peace, peace to them who are
afar off, and to them who are nigh: And as this fruit of the lips appears in
speaking of GOD, so likewise in speaking to GOD both in prayer and praise.

2. There is the fruit likewise of the conversation as well as of the lips;
there is not only the fruit of saying but doing; If any man do my will he
shall know, says Christ, etc.

Now this doing consists either,

1. In doing works of piety according to the power and liberty received.

2. In doing works of righteous justice and equity, not in seeking alone our
own, but others good.

3. In doing works of mercy both to the souls and bodies of those who want,
else you may see the fruits of this spirit, Gal. 5. 22. The fruit of the spirit
is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance, against such there is no law; These are the fruits of the spirit,
which being manifest, makes God, and truth, and Saints appear lovely, not
only each to other, but to the world likewise; they shall fall down and
confess, That God is in you of a truth: These fruits of the spirit Peter
minds, 1 Pet. 1. 5. Add to faith virtue, and to your virtue knowledge, and to
knowledge patience, and to patience temperance, and to temperance godliness,
and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity: Thus
the true Christian has a holy conversation, holy within and holy without,
holiness written upon the horses bridles, every pot in Jerusalem appears to
be holy, in all manner of holy conversation and godliness; a universal walking
with, and conformity to God in spirit, soul and body; Their conversation is in
heaven, their hearts there, their mind, their comfort and communion, and it
appears by their walking before men, in their word and actions, that it is so.

Chap. VIII. Of false or fleshly holiness.
AS there is a holiness in the spirit, so likewise there is a holiness after
the flesh, so accounted, so called, though it be indeed but unholinesse, for
the man of sin imitates Christ in every particular; and I believe that there
has been as great a mistake in the matter of holiness, in taking it to be
what it is not, as in any one particular: therefore I shall mind a word or two
briefly in the discovery of this mystery of iniquity.

1. This mystery of iniquity, the appearance of holiness when it is nothing
but flesh, may be considered either,

First, As it works within, and that either,

1. Looking upon good purposes and good resolutions to amend and to do better.

Or else, 2. In a good mind to leave sin, but it wants power; a good, a holy
heart, though a bad conversation, not knowing that good purposes are common to
the worst of men, and that where there is a bad outside, there is a worse
inside; for if the streams be filthy, the fountain is much more filthy; For
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks; and the outward man acts:
an ungodly conversation always flows from an unsanctified soul; if the
conversation be light, vain and foolish, the heart is much more light and vain;
for all prodigality, profaneness and vanity has its first rise in the heart;
therefore it is the Lord says, My son, give me thy heart.

Or 3. Not only in having a mind to leave it, but likewise in having some
hatred against it, and from hence a forsaking of it, because it sees an evil,
a danger in it; perhaps it now apprehends, that the wages of sin is death, and
it fears hell, and the eternal flames spoken of in Scripture; and from hence
grows out of liking with it, when perhaps else it could be content many times
to embrace it; thus most men under the name and notion of Christian, deceive
themselves with a fleshly fancy of holiness in the heart, when indeed, and in
truth it is nothing more then fleshly delusions, and that which is usually
found in the hearts of natural men.

Secondly, There is likewise a most outward appearance of holiness in the
flesh, which is indeed but fleshly; and this may be discovered, either,

1. In the more common and carnal sort, who account that now and then the
performance of a good act is enough to make them holy, and that their good acts
will weigh down their evil, they think that Lord have mercy upon me, or now
and then a good prayer is enough to make them holy, though perhaps they take
the more liberty to sin by means thereof; a wonderful delusion in the
minds of men.

2. Others come higher perhaps in an outward civility, and an external acting
in the use of Ordinances; they will go to Church, as they call it, and hear
Sermons too, perhaps have their Infants sprinkled, go to the Sacrament, as they
call it, etc. And this is a high degree of holiness in the minds of most; how
do poor creatures bless themselves in such vain and empty forms and
fashions to their own undoing? For this is that which is suitable to nature to
act in these low and formal ways after the doctrines and precepts of men, or
after the fleshly imaginations of the vain and deceitful heart, and not after
Christ.

3. Others come higher then this, into an universal, as they suppose, hatred,
and forsaking of sin, to the acting and performing of that which is good; and
thus it is much in doing and acting, looking upon outward actings to be their
holiness; and here has lien a mysterious mystery of iniquity both in
Ministers and People, the one teaching, the other practicing such a holiness;
Hence is it that Ministers when they would preach people in holiness and
righteousness, they press them to forsake sin, to weep and mourn, pray,
and hear Sermons, to be much in duty, and this without all peradventure was
enough to make them holy, never looking after that internal spirit of
holiness which occasions those external actings, suitable to such an internal
principle: Hence it comes to pass that many poor souls being thus misled,
come under a spirit of delusion, or else under a spirit of bondage, being
sensible of its coming short in performance; being daily told, that if thou
can not mourn, and pray, and perform such and such duties, then thou art no
Christian, but Satan rules in thee. Now the difference between the performance
of the external actings lies principally in these two things; the one acts in
it as under a task, a burden, a bondage, and he has no comfort till the thing
is done; the other acts in liberty and freedom of spirit, God is his portion
without any such acting, and God is his portion in it, he has communion with
God without it, and that is it he expects in it.

3. The one acts in duty that he might be holy, looks upon himself that the
more he is in exercising and performing, the more holy he is; the other acts in
externals, because he is holy that is made partaker of that spirit of
holiness, all true actions flowing from that fountain of light, life, liberty
and love; and thus most under several forms and apprehensions live low and
fleshly, contenting themselves with a fleshly holiness, a holiness consisting
in forms forms and creature actings, taking the shadow for the substance, the
fruit for the tree, nay or, rather the false and deceivable fruit of the flesh,
for both the tree and fruit of holiness in the spirit, but those who sow to
the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption.

4. I shall add in the fourth place, though I might have mentioned it in the
first, that fleshly law of unholinesse that dwells in the hearts of all natural
men, and yet they bless themselves in their present condition: There is, and
ever has been a natural antipathy in the hearts of all men, naturally
against God, and the appearance of holiness in truth in his people; such is
the contrariety of the hearts of natural men unto the holiness of God, that
they ever did, and do to this day oppose it; this is the law of unholinesse
that dwells, that rules in the hearts of all natural men; and hence it comes to
pass that men naturally are taken up with fancies and shadows instead of the
substance, something they must have to quiet them, but not the truth, the
substance that affrights them, because they are ignorant of it, and have an
enmity against it; hence it is they call evil good and good evil, they put
light for darkness and darkness for light, etc.

Chap. IX. Of the power of the law in the spirit.
I Shall now proceed to speak a word of the power of this Covenant of grace,
this law in the spirit; for as it is a law of light, liberty, righteousness
and true holiness, it creates a new man within in righteousness and true
holiness; so its a law of power and much glory, We preach Christ, says the
Apostle, the power of God and the wisdom of God: This is that word which is
mighty in operation, and powerful, sharper then any two edged sword, it enters
in to the dividing of the joints and the marrow; it is a searcher of the
thoughts and intents of the heart, the power of this law in the spirit: This
Covenant of grace made within the Saints may be discovered under several
considerations.

1. The power of this law is a convincing power, it over-powers the spirits of
men, it convinces men of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment; it
convinces them of sin, making them truly and deeply sensible of it. Of
righteousness, making souls sensible of the unrighteousness of all their
best righteousness. Of judgment, that al those things delighted in formerly
must be judged, must receive the sentence of death from Jesus Christ, sitting
as a refiner and purifier in them, etc.

2. It converts as well as convinces, it changes and renews the mind, takes
off the mind from sin, it changes the mind, and the conversation, it makes
a separation between the soul and sin, it separates between a man, and his
beloved lusts; it converts a soul from the love of sin, it converts it
likewise from the practice of sin, it works a real change within, which
produces a change without. This is that power which overcomes flesh, world and
devil; what is the reason many a poor soul would many times gladly be rid of
sin, but they want a power, not being sensible where their power lies, but
perhaps oppose flesh in the strength of flesh, when its proper only to the
spirit to destroy flesh? Therefore let Saints be informed where their power
lies that they may wait upon God whose work it is to subdue all things in
them, all things without them, that are contrary to him in his time.

3. As it convinces and converteth, so it makes those in whom it is a free and
a willing people, In the day of thy power thy people shall be a willing people,
Psa. 110. Willing to have sin sacrificed, lust and corruption subdued;
willing in the beauty of holiness to offer up spiritual sacrifice acceptable to
God in Jesus Christ; its this powerful spirit which works in us both to will and
to do of his good pleasure: nothing in the world is able to overpower the will,
and make it free, but this free spirit of power, its this spirit which makes
souls willing to yield up themselves to the scepter of the Almighty, which
makes souls free and willing subjects to the King of Kings, that fills them
with joy at the beholding of his presence, of his power, that says not with
the world, He is come to torment them before the time, but rejoiceth because
the Lord God omnipotent reigns, topping and keeping under all other laws and
powers besides it self. Thus the Lord reigns, and the Saints rejoice, the
Lord reigns, and the world trembles.

4. The power of this invisible, spiritual law will appear in the destruction of
Antichrist that man of sin, that son of perdition, this he will effect by
the spirit of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming. The coming of Christ
in the spirit, which is the glorious manifestation of this law, is that power
that must destroy Antichrist. By Antichrist that man of sin I understand any
thing within us, or without us, whether it appear in wisdom or power; if it
be of the flesh though its pretenses be never so fair and glorious, yet it is
but an Antichrist, a man of sin, a son of perdition: its true all the workings
of flesh is against Christ, but there are workings in a more higher and
glorious way, and then its the more deceivable, the more dangerous; and it
consists principally in wisdom and power, whether within us or without us; the
wisdom and power of flesh in the things of God, which occasions much pride and
fleshly exaltation above all that is called God: This is that deceivable
Antichrist, that mystery of unrighteousness, which the Lord will destroy by
this spirit of his mouth, and this brightness of his coming: therefore let all
wisdom, pride and power of flesh vale it self to this excellent glory; for
certainly its that which must be accomplished in these later times. The day of
the Lord of hoasts shall be upon every one that is lifted up, and upon every
one that is proud, and lofty, and he shall be brought low: Every proud thing
within the Saints, and every proud and lifted up person among them, upon all the
Cedars of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and upon all the Oaks of Bashan,
be they as tal as Cedars, as strong as Oaks, yet the day of the Lord will be
upon them, and upon every high mountain, and upon all the hills that are lifted
up, and upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall, and upon all the ships
of Tarshish, and upon every pleasant picture, and the loftiness of man shall be
bowed down, and the haughtiness of man shall be made low, and the Lord alone
shall be exalted in that day, Isa. 2. The day of the Lords power will be upon all the wisdom, pride, power, confidence, comfort and beauty of flesh, and then
the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day; this is the day of the Lords power,
we will rejoice and be glad in it, this will minister true occasion of joy to
Saints, when they can say and sing this song, The Lord God omnipotent reigns.
And thus this powerful law in the spirit will appear in the subjecting al powers
below, or contrary to it, unto it self, when al created powers whatsoever
below this omnipotency, shall acknowledge, That thou Lord God Almighty art
worthy to receive glory, and honor, and majesty, for thou only art worthy.
Thus shall this power cause al other powers to bend the knee unto it, to submit
and fall down before it. Learn therefore to wait upon this powerful law to
accomplish al your works for you, both within you and without you, to bring
down al your fleshly enemies, and then in conclusion shall you be able to see
and say, that through the help of your God you have gone through an host, by
the help of your God you have leaped over the wall.

5. The power of this Covenant and Law in the spirit appears in that it
upholds those in whom it is from falling; it endangers the soul to God; the
power of standing or falling is not left to the creature, but the power of God
is become the Christians power to uphold him; We preach Christ the wisdom of
God and the power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. Not only wisdom and power to
convert, but to uphold and keep up the soul with the Almighty; hence this
Covenant is called an everlasting Covenant, Jer. 32. 40. And, says the Lord, I
will not turn from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their
hearts, and they shall not depart from me: this is the power of this spiritual
law, it keeps souls perpetually with it self; so that as the Fathers love is
an everlasting love, so he makes with his people an everlasting Covenant, that
so their souls might live everlastingly in his everlasting love. In a word,
its this law of power which has undertaken the effecting of all the Saints
work both within them and for them, to carry them through temptations, and
trials, and all oppositions both within and without, until they come to be
completed in that Kingdom, Isaiah, 42. 8, 9, 10. But thou Israel art my
servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend: Believers are
the Israel of God, the spiritual seed of Abraham, Gal. 3. last. verse. 9. You
whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the chief
men thereof, and said unto thee, thou art my servant, I have chosen thee and
not cast thee off; Fear them not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I
am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold
thee with the right hand of my righteousness: A blessed word being spoken in
the spirits of Gods Israel: how will this raise souls above themselves; work
them to a dependency upon him who is higher then themselves? When the Lord
speaks this word with power, Fear not, I am thy God, I will uphold thee, I
will help thee, etc. What need such a soul fear temptations, trials,
enemies? This is that rock upon which Christ builds his Church, and the gates
of hell shall not prevail against it; a word of comfort for the weak Saints,
they are not left to themselves to stand or fall at their own power, but they
are carried along in the everlasting arms of the Almighty; He carries his
lambs in his bosom, he will not loose one of his little ones, but will raise
them up at the last day: See Isaiah 43. 1. 2, 3. But now thus says the Lord
that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not, for I
have redeemed thee, I have called thee by my name, thou art mine; When thou
passest through the waters I will be with thee, and through the rivers they
shall not overflow thee; When thou walk through the fire thou shall not be
burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, for I am the Lord thy God, the
holy One of Israel thy Savior; this is made good in the spiritual Israel of
God, he undertakes for them, his power and strength is to become theirs, he will
help them and uphold them, and carry them through fiery temptations and
trials, through floods of afflictions and tribulations: and thus through many
a fiery trial will he carry them to the Kingdom. Oh therefore look to Jesus
the author and finisher of your faith, look to him who is your covenant and
works all for you and all all in you; it is his word to you, and likewise in
you, Look to me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth, for I am God, and
there is none else, Isaiah 45. 22. There is no power below or besides God able
to save you, able to uphold and keep you, but he alone is able to keep that
which is committed unto him until that day; and his power is made manifest in
his Saints.

6. The power of this Covenant, this law in the spirit enables to do what it
commands; it is not only a law of light enlightening the mind, giving
understanding to the simple; but it carries on the soul in acting suitable to
the light communicated: hence it is the Apostle could say, I can do all things
through Christ strengthening me: And Christ, Without me you can do nothing; It
is he that works both to will and to do of his good pleasure; I work, says
the Apostle, yet not I, but his grace in me, 1 Cor. 15. 10. I live, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. 20. His power it is in you that destroys
corruption and flesh; he it is in you that works you up to a suitable acting
and walking with himself; I, says the Apostle, am dead to the law, that I
might live unto God, Gal. 2. 19. Through the power of this law in the spirit am
I dead to the law in the flesh, that so in the same power I might live unto
God: Thus Saints live in the power of this law, act to God in the light and
power of God: an excellent thing to be known of Saints, where the power, the
life of their lives lies, Because I live ye shall live also: Thus is Christ
who is the Covenant become not only the wisdom of God, but the power of God
in every one that believes: Thus this law in the spirit transcends all other
laws besides it self: the Law and Covenant of Moses commanded, but gave no
power to obey: hence it is the Lord complains, Jer. 3. That they had broken
the Covenant, though he was a husband unto them; but this is a Law, a Covenant
not to be broken, because it effects what it commands. The Law of Moses is
called a weak Law, Romans 8. 3. For what the Law could not do in that it was
weak through the flesh, etc. This is a law of power, it does that which the
Covenant in the letter could not; that was a Covenant that could not give life,
this is a law of life, a law of power in the spirits of Christians.

Chap. X. The power of the law in the flesh.
AS this Law, this Covenant in the spirit is a law of power, so there is a
powerful law in the flesh likewise, though this law in the spirit overpowers
it and subjects it to it self, where it is manifest in power.

This law of power in the flesh may be considered, either as it is more gross,
or more refined.

1. As it is more gross, powerfully working the minds and actions of natural
men into a conformity unto it self; it carries on the natural man to act all
manner of unrighteousness, and that with greediness: insomuch that they
think strange of those who run not with them to the same excess of riot; thus
it operates in natural men.

But 2. This same law of the flesh works with much power, many times even in
the spirits of Christians; this law of the flesh rebelleth against the law of
the mind, and lends captive to the law of sin in the members; how can
Saints experience this truth? Many times though the inner man be upright, and
as they are borne of God, they sin not, yet what temptations, what workings
of flesh appears within them? which occasions blackness and darkness many
times, the appearance of flesh in a way of power, which seems to stop the
current of the souls present communion, and leaves it under a waiting
condition for deliverance.

Qu. Is this law in the flesh too strange and powerful for that in the spirit,
when it seems thus to prevail in its rebelling against that holy law?

Ans. Its not too strong for it, but wisdom gives way to this rebelling law,
that it may act its part, that so the soul may see it self what it is by
nature, and so may the more prize grace, and the more earnestly wait for a
deliverance, and likewise for the keeping of the soul in a humble waiting,
dependency upon this Almighty power; therefore he sends a prick in the flesh,
the messenger of Satan to buffet, lest there should be an exaltation above
measure, as experience teaches us, that flesh is ready to take advantage, and
that from spiritual discoveries.

2. This law in the flesh works in a more refined and pure, though in a more
deceivable way; not only in working souls with violence and greediness in a
way of sin, but likewise work souls when they come to see their sin into
a fleshly righteousness; so that the soul being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, it goes about to establish its own righteousness, Romans
10. 3. And so it works the soul into a fleshly boasting, and a fleshly
glorying in fleshly and carnal excellencies, and that with as much violence as
into a way of sin and profaneness, unless the power of this spiritual law
prevent; then its true the soul is content with joy to suffer the loss of
all, and and to account all things but dung and dross that it may win
Christ, and be found in him; then its content not only to suffer the loss of
this law in the flesh in the grosser consideration, but in the most refined
consideration; then it can say, What things were gain to me those I counted
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, etc.

Chap. XI. The glory of this law in the spirit.
THis Covenant in the spirit is a glorious Covenant; when Christ comes, he
comes with power and much glory; this law rules in that Kingdom, where there
is power and much glory. The glory of this Covenant appears not only in all
those forementioned particulars, as its a law of light, liberty,
righteousness, holiness, power, etc. which must needs produce much glory
where all those excellencies met together in one soul, and all are glorious,
glorious light, and liberty, and righteousness, and holiness, and power, it
must needs be glorious, when made partaker of the light, liberty,
righteousness, holiness, power and glory of the glorious God.

Besides this, for illustrating of this glorious law, I might mind how it,

1. Interests the soul in whom it is into a near relation to the Father, not
only of son, and of heir, but likewise the relation of Wife, of Spouse, and
so is married to the Almighty eternally; this is a name better then that of
sons and daughters.

2. This glorious law makes forth many glorious discoveries and revelations in
the hearts of Christians, Such as eye has not seen, ear has not heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive those things that he
has prepared for them that love him, but he has revealed it to, or in us by
his spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10. Oh those sweet discoveries God often makes in the
spirits of his, that they can say sweetly to their souls after a black and
dark day, Return to thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully
with thee: Thus are they let see into that glorious mystery of love which
passes knowledge.

3. As it discovers glory, so it works a glorious mind, a desire in the mind
to be completed in this glory; not out of self-love (as most do desire
heaven that they might avoid hell) but for glories sake its self it beholds its
beauty, its sweetness, its purity, its perfection, and so the soul is
overcome with it; nothing in the world is to be compared to it: and hence it is
that Saints have such noble, heroic spirits, looking above, slighting all
things below as nothing, all riches and creature-excellencies and glories is
but grass, but dross unto it; this is the nature of this glorious law, it
fills the soul with so much glory where it is, that the desire is taken up with
it, because it out-glories all other glories in the world besides.

4. As it is an out-glorying glory, and so draws the desire of the mind unto
it, so it is likewise a transforming, changing glory, it never leaves souls in
whom it is til it compleates them in all the glory set before them, it works up
souls more and more to it self until it has perfected them in the glory of
the Father; Well done good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of
thy master: Hence it was Paul being possessed with this truth, expecting this
completing in glory, presses on to the mark of the price of the high calling
set before him; and was able to say, I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith, from henceforth is laid up for me a
crown of glory, which the Lord the righteous Judge has laid up for me, and
not for me only, but for all those who look for his appearing. Oh therefore
my dear brethren in the unity of this spirit look and wait for this day of
God, the glorious appearing of the great God, because when he shall appear, you
shall appear with him in glory, and you never enjoy the end of your faith
until you come into the perfection of this glorious salvation.

Chap. XII. The law in the spirit a law of peace.
THere is a false and fleshly joy and glory likewise which arises from the law
in the flesh; and that either,

1. When creatures glory in sin and profaneness, and ungodliness; such a
glorying is not good, it will prove their shame.

Or, 2. When men glory in the world, in their profits, pleasures and honors;
this glorying likewise is after the flesh.

Or else, 3. When men glory in external privileges, as they call them,
although they are indeed but delusions, as ordinances, forms, performances,
etc. This likewise is but a fleshly glorying, and that which Christ foretold,
Mat. 7. 22. Luke 13. 26, 27. and the Apostle rejected, Phil. 3.

Or else, 4. When men are gotten into such a notion as that now al is good,
every work of the flesh, and deed of darkness is now justifiable, and they
glory in it, why al these are but fleshly gloryings: And to such I say, Glory
not, lie not against the truth, for a day is coming when al flesh shall vale it
self unto this excellent glory, and al other glories shall perish as grass, as
dung upon the earth, and if mercy prevent not, al these gloryings will prove
your shame, Because you have rejoiced in lying vanities; you have made lies
your refuge, and covered your selves under falsehood. And to you I say, who have
tasted how gracious, how pure, how glorious the Lord is; Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, nor the rich man in his riches, nor the strong man in his
strength: but let him that glories glory in this, that he knows the Lord: and
his interest in him, That the Lord is his portion, his relation to him, that he
is his son, his delight, that he is heir with Christ to the same inheritance to
the same glory; and this is a glory will out glory al fleshly gloryings, in
which men of the earth are taken up withal. Or else 5. when this man of sin
gets higher in filling the fancy with high apprehensions and glorious
imaginations, and seeming revelations to amazement in the creatures
apprehension, that it thinks certainly its the glorious God, but the trial is,
it ends al in flesh, fills the soul with pride and selfe-exaltations, and is
but like unto new wine put into old bottles, that burst them al to pieces, and
by this means the evil one takes an advantage to blow them up root and branch,
and so to put an end to that which seemed to be in them, whereas the
discoveries of the spiritual law makes souls in whom it is, the more humble,
the more spiritual, the more conformable to it self: and the more this
glorious law appears the more it changes the soul into its own glory, the
more is flesh and fleshly exaltations subdued.

Chap. XIII. It is likewise a Law of peace.
I Shall add two or three particulars further in the discovery of this Covenant
in the spirit: And

First, Its a Covenant, a Law of peace: Its not only a law of grace and love,
but its likewise a law of peace: hence its called in Scripture, a Covenant of
peace, Ezekiel. 37. 26. Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them, and it
shall be an everlasting covenant, etc. This everlasting Covenant of grace, is a
Covenant of peace in the spirits of Saints, he is our peace, who has broken
down that middle wall of partition between us, etc. Ephesians. 2. 14. This Covenant
of peace may be considered, either

1. As it works the soul into a peace and unity with the Father, that now the
soul who was once afar off, is made near through the blood of this Covenant,
and so being justified by faith we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ: and the kingdom of God within the Saints is a kingdom of
righteousness, peace and joy. This is that the Apostle so often minds in his
Epistles, Grace, mercy and peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ. This is that peace of God which passes al understanding, of nature and
flesh, this is that peace which produces joy which is unspeakable and full of
glory: Now the soul being in a Covenant of peace can go boldly to the throne
of grace, there to have communion and fellowship with the God and Father of
peace, being made through grace a son of peace.

2. This law of peace works the soul into a peace with all creatures,
possesses it with a disposition of peace and love: He is now at emnity with
none, ready to do good to all, to pray for enemies, and those who oppose
themselves, being possessed with that law in the spirit, which is pure,
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, James
3. 17, 18. without partiality, without hypocrisy, and the fruit of
righteousness is sown in peace, in them who love peace: This disposition is
planted in them, as much as in them lies, to live peaceable with all men. Thus
are Saints not only a people of grace, but a people of peace; the fruit of
righteousness being sown in peace in them, they recompense not evil for evil,
but overcom evil with goodness.

3. This law of peace affords peace and quietness to the soul in all
conditions, under al trials and temptations, when others hearts shall fail them
for fear, and for looking after those things which shall come upon the face of
the earth, They shall lift up their heads with joy, being possessed with peace,
knowing that their redemption and deliverance draws near. Thus are Saints
quieted in their spirits through this spirit of peace, Isa. 32. 17, 18, 19. And
the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness
shall be quietness, and assurance for ever, And my people shall dwell in
peaceable habitations, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places: When
it shall hail, coming down upon the forest, and the City shall be low in a low
place. Here is a glorious Covenant of peace and quiet, and this shall be
effected when the spirit is poured forth, verse. 15. which will produce such
sweetness, quiet and peace in Christians and that when the City is low in a
low place, and hail comes down upon the forest, that is earthy creatures and
hypocrites shall be filled with trouble, perplexity, and amazement, then shall
Saints live in rest, and quiet peace shall come, they shall rest secure, nothing
shall make them afraid; Blessed are they which sow beside al waters in this
water of life, whose effect will be in such a soul quietness, and peace for
ever.

Chap. XIV. Of the Law of Love.
2. THis law in the spirit, as its a law of peace, so its likewise a law of
love, its the royal law of love, love being the great command, the ancient
command, commanded not only in the letter, but in the spirit likewise: where
this law is in power, this is manifest; first to God, God being love draws
love from souls: its true he works it first in them, and then being possessed
with love they cannot but love; We love God because he loved us first, and this
love being shed abroad in the heart, by this spirit we love him, we love him
most, we love him best; he has the heart, the soul, and its married to him;
all other lovers being rejected in comparison of him.

2. This spirit of love and grace produces love to the Saints in whom the
image of God, holiness and true righteousness appears: take this as an undoubted
truth, That where the love of God is shed abroad by the spirit, there will be a
sweet harmony in those souls, a sweet agreement; Love as brethren, being al
sons related to one Father, al possessed with one spirit, which it a spirit of
unity, al heirs to one inheritance, to one Crown, to one Kingdom, al made
partaker of the same divine nature, which is love: there is no one thing
wherein the visibility of a Saint more appears then in love; for love is of
God, and every one who loves is born of God, and knows God; he that loves
not knows not God, for God is love, 1 John 4. 7, 8. and he that loves not
his brother, neither knows nor loves God.

3. This spirit of love produces love in Saints to al: it makes those in whom
it is like unto their Father who is good unto al, and his tender mercy is over
al his works, as much as in them lies, they do good to al, especially to
those who are of the household of faith. In a word, this spirit takes away that
selfish disposition of nature in seeking it self, and causes the soul in whom
it is not to seek alone its own but others good; it works out that peevish,
perverse and envious disposition, and fills the soul with the spirit of love,
and that not feigned in show, but in deed and in truth, ready with a real mind
at al times to do good to any man, to any creature, that is capable of
receiving good. Thus (my dear Friends) as God is love, so those who dwell in
God, dwell in love; and its from the flesh, and not from the spirit that those
divisions, backbitings and reproachings flow, who call themselves by the name of
Christians. This I must tell you, that where the soul is possessed with love and
grace from the Father it produces love and grace suitable to such an enjoyment;
for grace and love in God being shed abroad in us, works grace and love in us,
love to God, to Saints, to al men, and he that has not this grace, this love
in him, how dwells the love of God in him.

Chap. XV. Its a Law of Edification.
3. THis law in the spirit its likewise a law of edification: it answers that
exhortation of the Apostle, Let all things be done to edification: It is this
law of grace which seasons the soul with grace, and the words and
communications with salt, that it may minister grace to the hearers; have salt
in your selves, and have peace one with another. In a word, it delivers souls
from earthlinesse, vanity and folly, from carnal and unprofitable discourses;
and that word of Christ is made good in them, John 7. 38. He that believes in
me out of his belly shall flow rivers of living waters. And this he spoke of
the spirit, that he would give, and this spirit, that he would give, and this
spirit gives several gifts, works several operations, but its given to every
one to profit withal.

How might this discover then first the fleshlinesse of those who pretend to be
Christians, and yet manifest nothing but flesh; vanity and unprofitablenesse in
their discourses and communicatitions, full of earth and flesh, but empty of
heavenlinesse and spirit.

2. This discovers the fleshlinesse of those, pretending such Christianity, yet
delight in vanity, I had almost said, slight, if not scorn any spiritual or
heavenly communication, which tends to edification: and indeed this law of love
and edification is much wanting; And therefore my exhortation to al you who have
tasted how gracious the Lord is, to wait upon him for a more full pouring forth
of this spirit of peace, love and edification, that so you may declare your
selves to be a people of peace and love; that you may become a blessing, a
comfort each to other; that the peace and love of God shining in you, and
through you, may so conform you to it self, and so gather you up into its own
nature, that you may shine forth as a people possessed indeed with love, that is,
may be made known to al men, that you are indeed the children of a heavenly
Father, not of this world, being born from above, not of mortal, but of
immortal seed, which shall endure for ever; so shall you be to the praise of the
glory of his grace, who has called you to an immortal crown, an eternal
kingdom and glory which never shall have an end.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 9. lin. 1. for in righteous, read inlightens. p. 16. l. 15. for eyes r.
dies.


