A Compendious DISCOURSE About some of the greatest matters of Christian Faith,
propounded and explained between a MINISTER and an enquiring CHRISTIAN,
designed for clearing the truths of the Gospel, the honor of Christ, and
advantage of men.

And also may serve for an answer to two books, one called, The practical
Discourse of the Sovereignty of God, the other called, The Death of Death, by
the Death of Christ, written by J. O. Whereunto is annexed a very brief
Appendix.

Written by T. Collier.

Gal. (...). To whom we gave place by subjection, no not for an hour, that the
truth of the Gospel might (...) tinue with you. 1 Timothy 6. 3. 4. If any man
teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine which is according to godliness, he i^ proud
knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strife of words, whereof comes
envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt
minds, destitu^^ of the truth, etc. Zec. 8. 19, Therefore love the Truth and
Peace. London, Printed by H. H. for Tho. Fabian at the Sign of the Bible in St.
Paul's Churchyard, a Corner sho^ (...) Ch^^^^^d^ 168^

The Authors desire and end in the ensuing Discourse.
GO forth, my Muse take Wings and flee,
Speak plain and true that all may see;
For none can see without a light,
Nor can they see without some sight.
All have some sight within them so,
As to discern what light do show,
And when discerned to make choice
Of what is spoke by the Lights voice.
But without Light no man can see,
Nor can in Truth instructed be;
Most true it is, that God is Light,
The Fountain clear in whom it is bright,
And from that Fountain it does shine,
In ways of his that are Divine.
The Eye within in the true sense
Has had three Books, to learn from thence;
The Works, the Law, the Gospel pure,
The Book of Life that shall endure.
To turn away from this clear Sun,
Is the right way to be undone.
This is the Light discoursed on,
And calls for reception;
It calls aloud and cries to men,
Let it not be rejected then.
And if that some do thee traduce,
That thou returnest, with abuse
Be not afraid what e're do come,
Nor yet dismayed for any doom.
It Is Gospel Light does in thee shine,
Therefore none can thee undermine.
Thy Dress is plain, thy Language sharp,
It Is that thou may speak to the heart.
If the good end designed by thee
Shall in some part effected be;
Which is the common good of men,
Let God have all the glory then.
And then again my heart shall sing
With joy, the praise of Sion's King;
And this also, thy work shall be,
And that unto Eternity.
The Epistle DEDICATORY. To the Learned Doctors, Masters and Students of the
two Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and to all the Learned in the Nation.
Learned SIRS,
It Is the saying of the Wise man. Prove. 4. 5. Get wisdom, get understanding,
forget it not. v. 7. Wisdom is the principle thing, therefore get wisdom, with
all thy gettings get understanding. v. 8. Exalt her and she shall promote thee;
she shall bring thee to honor, when thou do embrace her, and chap. 16. 16.
How much better is it to get wisdom, than gold? And to understanding, rather to
be chosen than silver? Then surely it is not wisdom to get gold and silver, but
that which is far above it. Which will give to thine head (not a Crown of gold
and silver, but) an Ornament of grace, a Crown of glory shall she deliver to
thee.

They are the great things of Divine wisdom (as revealed in the Scriptures of
truth) that I have been exercised about, and of which it is said 2 Timothy 3. 15.
They are able to make us wise unto salvation through faith in Christ Jesus. And
therefore I have no reason to suppose you will count it strange, or presumption,
that I present the Dedication of the ensuing discourse to your learned and
serious consideration. It Is true, it is a plain English Christian Discourse, yet
the things discoursed on are the great and high things of God, and the Gospel,
and therefore am not willing to doubt but you will readily grant; are such
things as concern your most scrious Studies.

Though with some their Studies may be much (if not too much) about things of a
lower and terrene concern (as indeed all things are, beneath the glorious
Gospel of the blessed God) yet I doubt not the lawfulness of endeavors for
seize in human learning, and that both as to the Languages ^^ Philosophy,
both in the rational, natural and moral parts thereof; though my self have
little or none of either in its artificial parts: Yet, it is radically in all
rational men, though it has been (and is) too much debauched and defaced, in
most, by sensual lusts.

Your learned and Philosophical studies may tend to make you men of parts, and
of use among men, in things of torrene concern, if not abused, and if kept
subject in its place, may prove no hindrance to you (but a help) in your Divine
studies, though I acknowledge not Philosophy to be the Mother of Theology, as
some say. Gal. 4. 26. yet this I dare say, that without rational Philosophy (in
its root) we could not be rational men, and then we could not be Christian men
without a miracle indeed (as some say) it being to the rational understanding
part in man that the Gospel comes, and by which it is understood and believed.

Learned Sirs,
Whatever ends you design in your studies, it concerns you all, to take in
Theology and the glory of God, as the chief and glory of all things of Gospel
concern, being of highest, of best, and eternal concern, and this I am sure
your learning (simply considered in it self) will not hinder (but help) you in,
while you keep humble and improve your acquired Talents for God.

The blessed Gospel of his grace by Jesus, being very much suited to the
rational capacities of men, or else it were in vain to publish it unto them.

Though the Gospel in it self, being the Ministration of Peace by Jesus,
properly relating to the general restitution, new world, new state and life,
with all its Ordinances of divine worship, faith and holy life in order to
preparing us for (and obtaining of) the glory, and as so, is above the reach of
reason, and all the human Philosophy in the world, without the Divine
revelation thereof, Romans 10. 14. 1 Cor. 1. 21. and 2. 7, 8. but being by the
Gospel revealed, and brought down and opened (...) Romans 10. 6, 7, 8, 9. to
those who believe the Scripture to be the Divine Revelation, it is rational (as
well as divine) to believe God in his word, and love and cleave to him therein
(which is the great and saving Faith of the Gospel) though over and above our
rational capacities. He has of his own grace ordered the Gospel (which is the
Divine Revelation thereof) to be the Ministration of the Spirit; 2 Cor. 3. 8.
and to minister the Spirit for our help therein; Gal. 3. 2. Romans 8. 26. yet,
its so far from the Gospel to destroy our rational and moral capacities, that
it tends to help and lighten us therein, though in a more Spiritual and sublime
way.

Some talk of losing (or laying aside) our reason, as if Christianity were an
irrational thing; if we lay aside our reason, we must lay aside our humanity,
and our Christianity too. Others talk of reasons being sanctified, and that I
like well, it stands with the truth of the Gospel, reason sanctified by the
word and spirit of the Gospel. Joh. 17. 17. Sanctify them through the truth,
thy word is truth. chap. 15. 3. Ps. 119. 9. and I understand reason then to be
sanctified, when it understands, believes, loves and obeys the truth of the
Gospel, which I take to be regeneration begun here, which being persevered in,
will issue in the perfect Regeneration in the world to come.

But I am afraid that under the notion of sanctified reason, two evils are come
in upon Christianity like a torrent, even to the spoiling thereof.

1. Some under the notion of the Spirit and sanctified reason, do out and end
the greatest part of the glorious Gospel of the blessed God, in the great
matters of Faith, narrowing and denying thereof in the largeness of its extent,
contrary to the very letter and scope of Scripture, alone from their supposed
sanctified reason, as will appear in the following discourse.

2. And others make additions, and change the Ordinances according to their own
devices, and all, by supposed sanctified reason, corrupted Philosophy and vain
deceit, after the will of men and not after Christ.

The Christian religion in it self, as it is the most divine, so its he
mostrational Religion in the world, or that ever was in the world, being opened
to us by the Divine Revelation, though there are some things in it above the
reach of reason to comprehend, even with the Divine Revelation and Teachings of
God therein, yet we may understand the truth thereof, and it is rational for us
to believe it, because God has said it; to instance in some particulars.

1. That God should so love the world, as to give his only begotten Son for its
redemption, and Christ so love the world, as to give his Flesh for the life
thereof, are incomprehensible mysteries of grace. Joh. 3. 16. and 6. 51. Ephesians.
3. 17, 18, 19.

2. The Incarnation of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is in it self
an incomprehensible mystery. 1 Timothy 3. 16.

3. The Resurrection, Judgment, the greatness, terribleness, righteousness and
justice thereof, the restitution, new world, with the diversities of the
glories and punishments thereof, are all incomprehensible mysteries till the
times come of effecting thereof, 1 Cor. 13. 9. 10. 1 John 3. 2. Ps. 9. 11. yet
by the Divine Revelation we may understand the truth of these unsearchable
mysteries, and it is very rational as well as divine, that we believe the truth
thereof.

So that I say, the Christian Faith and Religion is the most rational, and to
render it unreasonable in any of the parts thereof, does open wrong to God,
Christ, the Gospel, and to men: When in truth, in its own simplicity and
purity, there is nothing irrational in it; in this matter, we may and must say
(if we say right) as Prove. 8. 8, 9. All the words of wisdoms mouth are
righteous, there is nothing froward or perverse in them, they are all plain to
him that understands, and right to them that find knowledge and chapter 14. 16. a
scorner seeks wisdom and finds it not, but knowledge is easy to him that
has understanding.

God having given to men large Capacities, that if rightly exercised about the
works of God and word of life, they might attain to the excellent knowledge of
the most holy, and to the precious faith and life of the Gospel, through the
Divine teachings therein, which shall not be wanting to those that really
desire and seek it; Prove. 2. 1. to 6. Luke 11. 13. Jam. 1. 5. God having in his
wisdom and grace stated the things of the Gospel both in matters of Faith and
Worship, plain to the rational Capacities of men, to the end that they might
(through a right industry) obtain the saving knowledge of his will therein.

And its only the irrational devices, additions, and contrary interpretations
of men (both in matters of Faith and practice) that has filled the world with
irrational errors, divisions, and confusions, which the Scripture (if cleaved
to, in its own light and language, which is but reason it should be so, as well
as divine) would be the alone blessed way for us to arrive to unity in the
great things of Gospel concern, reason misled by Tradition, Blind-zeal, or
captivated by sensual lusts, has and does make bad work in the world. See from
Scripture how reason and Christian Religion unites.

1. It Is both rational as well as Religious that we believe God in the word of
his grace. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. where unbelievers are rendered to be unreasonable men,
as well as irreligious, and 1 Pet. 3. 15. we are to give a reason of our hope,
to every one that shall ask. Which can never be, if our reason be useless, nor
can merely rational men understand it when it is given them.

2. It Is rational, as well as Religious, that we should serve and worship God
according to his own revealed will in the Gospel, and not after our own wills,
or the inventions and Traditions of men. Romans 12. 1. 2. the contrary is
irrational, as well as irreligious.

3. The increase of divine grace (received by faith in the Gospel) is by the
rational exercise of our selves therein. Mat. 25. 29. with Heb. 5. 14.

4. The holy and honorable terms of the Gospel, on which the life and glory
thereof is promised, and without which we may not expect it, renders it to be
very rational and credible to men, no man in his right reason can conclude that
God should seek to save a people in so wonderful away, but in the way of
holiness, the contrary would render the Gospel incredible to all rational men.

5. It Is rational, as well as Religious that we abhor all moral evils, sensual
and brutish lusts, and to love all moral virtues and duties, and the contrary
is irrational and immoral, as well as irreligious. The Moral law, or Ten
Commands given by Moses, is commonly understood to be the same for substance as
is written in nature, or rational and moral Philosophy in men. Romans 2. 14, 15.
Which the Gospel destroys not, but tends to perfect it in us, as it is
administered to us by Christ. Romans 3. 31. and 8. 4. 1 Cor. 9. 21. not as from
mount Sinai, but as from mount Sion. Heb. 2. 18. 22. the sum and substance of
the Law and Prophets is to teach men to love God above all, and their
neighbors as themselves, to do to others, as they would they should do to
them, and the Gospel teaches the same Mat. 22. 37. to 40. and 7. 12. and this
is written in all men by nature, and is true rational and moral Philosophy, and
true Gospel Divinity, and where it is not effected, it is by the souls
captivation, by irrational, immoral, and sensual lusts; and how would the
Divine Law of Christ, and in the Gospel united to our understandings and
reason, effect it, if taken heed unto: A sin and shame it is, (and dreadful
will be the issue thereof) that many Learned men who account themselves above
others, both in Philosophy and Divinity, and yet are more immoral than many
moral Heathens. And as both moral Philosophy and Gospel Divinity unites in
teaching the abhorrency of all ungodliness, with the practice of all the
contrary virtues and duties, so would it teach us to abhor all persecution for
Conscience sake, if attended to, it would teach us in this matter, to do to
others, as we would they should do to us; the contrary being not only
unchristian, but irrational. No man in his right reason would be content to be
forced to believe and worship God as others do, contrary to his own light and
conscience, such in Justice, reason it self, and light of nature abhors; and
it is likewise contrary to the Protestant Doctrine and Faith, which is, to make
the Scriptures our rule in all matters of Faith and practice, and not to be
compelled to believe as the Church believes, which is condemned by Protestants
to be the Popish Faith, and not the Faith of Christ.

And strange it seems to be, that Learned men who profess themselves to have
most, both of Philosophy and Divinity, should be so great miscarriers herein: I
think it may be said (without all just occasion of offense) that throughout all
ages of Christianity, Learned men has lien at the bottom of most of the
persecutions for Conscience sake, surely it came not from their Philosophy or
Divinity, but from their enmity, pride, and profaneness, Ps. 10. 2. or from
some carnal and corrupt ends, within themselves must be irrational and
irreligious, or at best from blind and ignorant zeal, Joh. 16. 2. Phi. 3. 6.

It Is true the Scripture warns us to take heed of being spoiled by Philosophy
and vain deceit after the traditions of men, and the rudiments of the World,
and not after Christ, Col. 2. 8, i. e. When our reason turns us aside from the
Gospel either in matters of Faith or practice, being corruptly exercised, and
so becomes vain and deceitful, and is not pure reason, that submits it self to
the Divine Law of Christ in all things so far as it understands it.

And although Rational and Moral Philosophy was (and yet is) excellent in its
time and place, and in itself (in its degree) spiritual, being of (and from)
God (yet the Gospel is more spiritual) and by it, men formerly arrived to much
of the knowledge of God and themselves, and so to a good life in moral virtues,
(and yet might arrive to the same) and doubtless were then accepted of God, and
may yet be so, where the Gospel is not known, yet where the Gospel comes it
will not serve or avail us without the true faith and life of the Gospel, but
if it (being captivated by sensual lusts) reject or neglect the Grace of life;
it renders such the more liable to the Judgment and damnation threatened therein.


Learned Sirs,
The Reasons of my dedicating the ensuing Christian discourse unto you, are,

1. Because the things, discoursed on, are matters of great (if not of
greatest) concern, to the name of God and Christ, the glorious Gospel of the
blessed God, and the spiritual and eternal good of men, and therefore of
weighttest concern to have the precedence in your meditations.

2. Because most of the things discoursed on are not Novel, but the
controverted things of the past and present times, the Doctrine of the
Sovereignty of God, as exercised toward men, the Doctrine of Election and
reprobation, the general and special grace of God, etc. being the substance of
the discourse, and that on which all depends. The eighth chapter may at first
(probably) with some, seem most difficult, yet I doubt not, but is founded in,
and fully comports with the universal design of God, and undertaking of Christ
in the general grace to the World, in the restitution and world to come, in
times to be effected, and seems to be of very great weight to be understood,
and to have room in our Christian Faith as the topstone and glory thereof, and
without which, we shall lose the understanding of (and Faith in) the greatest
(if not the most glorious) part of Scripture and Gospel truth.

In the discourse I sometimes mention what some others have said about some of
the things discoursed on, and especially two Books, viz. The Practical
Discourse of the Sovereignty of God, and, The Death of Death by the Death of
Christ: Not designing a particular answer to them, (nor had I at all mentioned
them, had they not been sent in by some designedly to lead us aside from that
which we believe to be the truth of the Gospel) but have stated the truth about
these matters, to the best of mine understanding from Scripture light, which if
true, the substance of both are answered and must fall to the ground. And let
none count it strange, or tautologies, that I so often go over the same things
in the discourse, it is to show the incongruity of those invented principles
and practices with Scripture light and right reason, in all the ways mentioned,
it likewise being the method of God in Scripture, frequently to mention the
same things over and over again, designedly thereby to inculcate it on the
memory and heart, that it might not be forgotten.

3. Because, I think we have ground enough (at least) to suppose, that the
Apostasy from the Primitive faith, as it was then delivered to the Saints, has
been too much ushered in by learned ^^^en, I suppose that it will easily
appear, that in all the parts thereof, whether the Papabor others, some learned
man (or men) lies at the bottom thereof: And likewise has been chief actors in
its propagation, and therefore it greatly concerns you now at last to be at
work for God, Christ, the Gospel and good of men in good earnest, for discovery
thereof and reformation therein: O that you might have your share in this
matter! how might you honor God, and season the Nation with the truth of the
Gospel both in faith and life, having the greatest opportunities and advantages
in order thereunto, in the sincere endeavors of which you may expect Divine
direction, assistance, and blessing; and O that this little Essay may tend to
encourage herein, it being the common advantage and good of all, I really
design; I hope I have not, I am sure I would not follow cunning devised Fables
for the world, and if I am in any thing mistaken, I would gladly be informed
therein from Scripture light and right reason, Isa. 8. 20. the things being of
great, if not of greatest concern, and (if I mistake not) are all of them the
revealed things of Divine wisdom, and therefore it belongs to us to be
enquiring thereinto; and on these grounds, I am not willing to doubt your ready
and inoffensive reception of my poor endeavors in these great matters, with
this my Dedication.

Considering first that you know, though all men are not skilled in the
Langudges, nor in artificial Philosophy, yet it is radically in all rational
men, without which they could not be capable either of artificial seize,
or of Divine teachings.

2, That you know, God is at liberty in his teaching, (and always has been so)
and therefore may (as formerly he has done) led the unlearned into truth asson
as the learned, and sometimes before them, Luke 10. 21. 1 Cor. 1. 26. to 29.
Therefore let not the Learned despise the unlearned, nor the unlearned judge
the learned, but prize and own the teachings of God in each other, let us be
humble and self denying, let us own truth, and reject error where ere we find
it, and thus it will be where Christ and Grace rules. O that none of us all may
give the Lord cause to say of us as of his people of old, Hos. 8. 12. I have
written to him the great things of my law, and they were counted as a strange
thing. I desire that none of the great things God has written to us in his
Gospel law of grace, may be accounted strange by us.

And thus (not to detain you any longer in this Dedication) I commit the
ensuing Discourse to your most serious considerations (and the like unto all
into whose hands it may come) if any thing therein carry not Scripture
authority in it, let it not be credited, but if it do, take heed and beware how
you contradict it; this and no other is expected by him who longs for the
manifestation of the Gospel in its truth, purity, and power, the glory of God,
and the good of all men.


Fare ye well. T. C.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THis ensuing Treatise (or Christian discourse) as its brought forth by special
occasion, so its really designed for thy special profiting and spiritual
advantage, the name of God and Christ, the truth of the Gospel, the spiritual
and Eternal good of men being greatly concerned in the matters discoursed on,
although its true, that by reason of the Apostasy and other occasions, we may
truly say that darkness (yea gross darkness) has covered us, and the vail and
covering spread over all Nations has very much bewildred us, and that in the
great things of the glorious Gospel of the blessed God. And that which is most
of all to be lamented is, that we are willing to have it so; if any glimmerings
of light but begin to appear out of the darkness, we cry out upon it, as if
some prodigious Comet, or foul spirit had appeared; and that (it may be) before
we so much as admit of a serious search, and due consideration whether it be
true or false: A wonderful perverse spirit seems to be in us on this account.

Many (I am persuaded) crying out on that they never saw, and others on that
they never read with deliberation and judgment, seriously pondering it in the
balance of the sanctuary, and so speak evil of the things they understand not,
which necessarily may tend to bring under that woe. Isa. 5, 20. Woe to them that
call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness for light, and light for
darkness.

If we are so averse in our minds, as not to have patience to ponder ought but
what our selves indulge, be it right or wrong, and cry down all that seems
contrary thereunto, we may cry down truth for error, and cry up error instead
of truth, its an old and known proverb, the burnt child dreads the fire, the
sense of which laid to heart, would tend to make us more wise.

For help and cure in this matter, I shall premise a few things to serious
consideration.

1. That its a matter of highest concern to us all, to understand; believe and
obey the truth, to love the truth and peace, it being truth that must intrest
us in Gospel freedom, and without the saving knowledge thereof we may not
expect to obtain it. Joh. 8, 31, 32.

2. That we all come short in our knowledge and understanding of the great
things of the Gospel, and may (and must) say; if we say right even in this very
matter, that in many things we offend all, and need the mercy of God in our
Lord Jesus, to pardon and cover our ignorances, if not our wilfulness which on
our repentance, he is ready to do.

3. That notwithstanding this vail of darkness and ignorance, and too much of
wilfulness, yet in the due and true sense thereof, and (as its our great
concern) if we be duly and diligently searching and enquiring after the
knowledge of the mind and will of God, as revealed in the word of his Grace, and
that in all things relating to matters both of Faith and practice, its his
promise that in this way, knowledge shall be increased. And then shall they
know, if they follow on to know the Lord. Dan. 12, 4. Hos. 6, 3.

4. And as an encouragement herein (and as its generally in word acknowledged)
that matters of fundamental concern, are plainly (and not darkly) stated in the
Scriptures, which is (or should be) of encouragement to us all, to be enquiring
thereinto, and to strike dead that spirit and practice of putting harsh
interpretations on the plain revealed will of God in the Gospel, so darkening,
(if not outing and ending) even the fundamental truths thereof, the divine
revelation being the alone ground and rule of our faith and practice, in all
matters of Gospel concern.

5. And yet that we are moderate in our notions, and not impose our
apprehensions and supposed light on others, no otherwise than the apprehended
truth thereof, takes place in the understanding and conscience, imposition any
other ways, being the Babylonish apostatised spirit, and is far from the spirit
of the Gospel, where is most of Gospel light and truth obtained, such are
furthest from an imposing spirit on others. 2 Cor. 1. 24. Phil. 3. 15, 16. 1
Pet. 5. 3. and those who are most in the flesh and involved in darkness, are
ordinarily the greatest imposers of their supposed light upon others. Joh. 16.
2. Gal. 4. 29. 2 These. 2. 3, 4.

6. And yet, it concerns the children of light, as to concrete in, so earnestly
to contend for, the faith as it was once delivered to the Saints. Jude. v. 3.
Tho all should be done in the Gospel spirit of love and peace, which I hope I
can say has been my design in all, and would be my joy to see more of love and
peace, among all professed Christians, as any impartial person may understand in
my healing Word, or endeavor for peace, annexed to my additional word, tho
hitherto, I may truly say as the Apostle. 2 Cor. 12. 15. the more I love, the
less am I loved. and as Ps. 120. 7. I am for peace, but when I speak thereof,
they are for War. I think I may safely say, that those manifold divisions, and
by reason thereof, (through pride) enmities and contentions (for only by pride
comes contentions. Pro. 13 10.) arises from men's being wiser than what is
written, not submitting to the plain testimony of the Divine record, but make
human and harsh interpretations and inventions, both in matters of faith and
practice, and then quarrel with those who in conscience to God, dare not
believe and do as they would impose upon them; I think I may safely say, that
this has been (and is) the cause of almost all the contentions, divisions,
enmities and persecutions among professed Christians, ofttimes, selfinterest
(viz.) profit, honor and applause, concurring therewith, attended with pride,
and an itching desire after domination.

And the alone way for Christians to obtain more unity, love and peace is,
humbly to submit themselves, to the plain and express terms of the Divine
record (especially in all fundamental matters of faith and life) without human
inventions and interpretations, in which way they might easily come to unite,
and if in any thing they conscientiously differ, to bear with each other in
love, allowing the same liberty to each other, as every one for himself
rightfully claims, the contrary being irreligious, irrational and brutish.

My method in the ensuing discourse is in dialogue wise, by way of Question and
Answer, as it were between a minister and an enquiring Christian, the reason
thereunto moving me is, because, as the things are in themselves of weighty (if
not of weightiest) concern, and that which many are inquiring into, so in this
method I have had the advantage to make things plain and familiar to the
weakest capacity, as likewise to answer such questions and objections about
these ma^ters, as are most usual among men.

And my humble and earnest desire is, that you kick not, nor winch, either at
the instrument, or the matter for the instruments sake, God being at liberty to
make use of whom he pleases in his work, and if the instrument has been running
to and fro, it may be, more than some others, and has been (it may be)
sometimes out and sometimes in, don't reproach, it may be his industry has been
blessed of God with increase, and may judge those who lie still, being full, as
if they had obtained all, judging and passing the sentence of Heresy on all
that is new to them, tho it may be the good old truths of the Gospel.

My d^sign in the plainness and closeness of the ensuing discourse, is not
reproach to any, but to engage all concerned herein, to search and try, and
where they find just cause to turn from their errors to the truth: Its
Scripture light I have been prying into, and that, not dark, harsh and forced
interpretations, nor from any single text of Scripture, but the plain testimony
of Divine record compared, and united in the true harmony and unity of it self,
as I am yet greatly satisfied.

Yet notwithstanding, I shall readily and thankfully embrace any sober offers
of information of any mistake (if any be) or of further light in these, or any
matters of Gospel concern, and so I commit it to the judicious Reader, praying
the Lord he may not sin, in rejecting truth, nor in receiving error, desiring
the God of all light and grace, to lead into all needful truth, Amen.

The things discoursed on in the ensuing treatise are as follows.
Chap. 1. OF the sovereign power of God as exercised over men, opened and
cleared, in opposition to the dishonorable abuses thereof. Chapter 2. Treats of
Election. Chapter 3. Of the Extent of the love of God to (and death of Christ for)
the World. Chapter 4. What the Gospel is, and what is the faith of the Gospel, to
which the life thereof is promised. Chapter 5. Of the power and will of Man to
believe the Gospel. Chapter 6. Of the Nature of man, and the original defilement
thereof, and whether it brought us under the first death only, or under the
second death also, as some affirm. Chapter 7. Of the Apostasy from the Faith, what
it is, and wherein it consists. Chapter 8. Treats of the General restitution and
Salvation in the World to come and of the Kingdom of Christ therein. Chapter 9.
Shows that to hold truth in unity, is honorable to God and safe for our
selves. Chapter 10. That God intends what he speaks, and will perform it, and
that its greatly dishonorable to him, for any to speak or think the contrary.
Some of the greatest matters of Christian Faith, propounded and explained by
way of Question and Answer, as it were between a Minister and an enquiring
Christian.
CHAP. I.
Of the Sovereignty of God, as exercised over the World ever since the creation
opened and cleared, in opposition to the dishonorable abuses thereof.

Christ. HAving this opportunity I desire to be enquiring into some of the
great things of Christianity and matters of Faith, that concerns the glory of
God, and our own eternal welfare if your time and opportunity will admit a
discourse about such things as are of weighty concern.


Min. As for time and opportunity, I think we cannot improve it better, than
for the glory of God and our own eternal welfare, that being the great end of
our Creation and Redemption, and therefore I freely embrace your motion: What
are the things you desire to enquire into?


Christ. The things I desire to enquire into, I think are of weightiest
concern, and yet are differingly understood and believed by men, into which I
desire to enquire really for satisfaction, it being in my understanding of so
great and weighty concern, as that without steering right therein, we can
neither honor God, nor be safe our selves.


Min. If it be so, as its worthy our time which cannot be better spent, so
according to the best of my understanding in the word of l^ght and truth, I
shall endeavor your satisfaction, what is the first thing you desire to
enquire into?


Christ. The first thing is about the Sovereignty of God over mankind, whether
it be a truth, that God has Sovereign power over all, and does dispose of all,
according to the counsel of his own will.


Min. That Sovereign power belongs to God. (i e) that the great God ble^sed
for ever, the great Creator of all, has the absolute right and power over all
his creatures to determine and dispose of them as seems him good, is without
all ju^^ ground of doubt; that as he is the great Creator and God alone, so he
must needs have the Sovereign right and power to dispose of all, according to
the Counsel of his own will. Isa. 46. 9, 10.


Christ. As for the Sovereign right and power in God to dispose of all the
creatures that he has ma^e, I am well satisfied in, but the matter I most
question, and desire to enquire into, is about the manner and method of the
exercise and execution of this his right and power, (viz.) Whether God has from
his own will and power, (as some say) reprobated the greatest part of the World
to damnation, by an eternal decree before the world was, without respect to
sin, as the first and just deserving cause, but merely from his own will, which
they say was to glorifle his justice.


Min. Although I believe, reverence and adore, the Sovereignty of God over all,
and his proper right to dispose of all his creatures, yet I do not believe that
he has, or ever will so exercise his Sovereignty as some affirm. viz. to damn
whom he please from his own will and power, distinct from sin as the cause
thereof, but that he has, does and will, exercise this his Sovereign power,
according to the excellency of his name and nature, and righteous Laws given to
men on that behalf, as the boundary of his rule and Government over men, and
that in way both of judgment and mercy, and not to destroy whom he please from
his own will and power, without respect had to those Laws, otherwise to
understand, I believe it both dishonorable unto God, and pernicious unto men.


Christ. Can you prove from Scripture the manner and method of the exercise of
the Sovereign power of God over men?


Min. I can Ps. 62. 11. God has spoken once, yea twice have I heard this, that
power belongs to God, here is the Sovereign power stated. v. 12. is the
manner of its exercise and execution: Also to thee O Lord belongs mercy, for
thou renderest to every man according to his works. The exercise of this his
Sovereign power is in a way of justice and mercy, to render to every one
according to his works, and according to his righteous Laws given to men. Ps.
101. 1. I will sing of mercy and judgment, unto thee O Lord will I sing.


Christ. What instances can you give from Scripture to confirm this manner and
method of Gods proceedings with men, viz. by his righteous Laws given to men,
and not from his own Sovereign will and power, as distinct from (and contrary
to) those Laws?


Min. 1. When he first made man, he gave a Law (as it was most meet it should
be so, wherein he stated his Sovereign rule over his creature man) according to
which he exactly ruled, and man transgressing thereof, he according to his Law
(as the great Sovereign Lord) executes the penalty on man for breach thereof.
Genesis 2. 16, 17. with chapter 3. 6, 13, 19. Romans 5 12. he did not throw down man
from his first estate, from his own will and power, distinct from the breach of
his Sovereign Law, as the cause thereof.

2. And after the sin and fall of man into a state of death, in which he might
have exercised his power, either to have made a present end both of man and the
world, or have exercised his rule over men in this estate, at a distance and
distinct from all Law and rule, but he from his own Sovereign love and good
will to man, set him upon a promise of recovery and restitution by the Woman's
seed. Genesis 3. 15. wherein mercy met with Judgment in a needful time, and since
its apparent, that he keeps to the true rules of his own Laws in this matter:
Tho probably the world might be without law written as by Moses, yet not
without Law, both of nature and creation. Ps. 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. Romans 1. 20. And
probably some teachings from God instrumentally, as, Jude v. 14. Enoch the
seventh from Adam prophesied, etc. and Kain and Abel offered sacrifice,
probably by some Law from God, but Romans 5. 13, 14. puts it out of doubt, that
they were not without Law. For until the Law, sin was in the world, but sin is
not imputed where there is no Law, therefore there was some Law; that being the
design of the Apostle, to prove that they had some Law, or there had been no
sin.

The next great execution of Judgment upon the world was, in the deluge or
flood, which was not executed from the Sovereign will and power of God distinct
from sin against his Laws, as the cause thereof. Genesis 6. 5, 6, 7. and in this,
they not only transgressed his laws, but resisted his spirit. v. 3. my spirit
shall not always strive with man, etc. And he gave them further warning by
Noah, in making the Ark, waiting for their repentance, an Hundred and Twenty
years. 1 Pet. 3. 20. with Genesis 6. 3. and without doubt, would have been well
pleased with their repentance, so as to have prevented the Judgment, suitable
to, Jer. 18. 7, 8. and the example of the Ninivites. Jon. 3. 10. and
accordingly he saved Noah, not from his Sovereign will distinct from his
Sovereign law, but as unrighteous person that walked with God. Genesis 6. 8, 9,
and 7. 1.

3. Instance is, Sodom and Gomorah, God brought not the Judgment upon them from
his own will distinct from sin as the cause, wherein he exercised his Sovereign
power, not only as a righteous lawmakers, but as a righteous law-executor. Genesis
18. 20, 21. I will go down now and see, whether they have done altogether
according to the cry of it. Yea and so tender was he, that if there had been
but ten righteous persons, he would have spared it for their sakes. v. 32. and
finding but one righteous Lot he spared him, and for his sake would have spared
all his relations if they had believed, Genesis 19. 12, 13. by which it is
manifest, that the exercise of Sovereign power, was according to the right of
Law, by the lawmakers and executor, and ready to have been mixed with mercy,
had there been any footing for it, and Lot was saved, not only from the
Sovereign will and power distinct from all Law, but as a righteous person. 2
Pet. 2. 7, 8.

4. When God called Abraham out from all the world, as an act of Sovereign
love, will and power and owned him and his, as his peculiar people, nearer to
him in Covenant than all the world besides, he exercised his Sovereignty over
them, according to his righteous laws and promises in that behalf and no
otherwise, the contrary would be very wicked for any man to assert, and in
keeping thereof they had great reward, Psalm. 19. 11. and on the wilful breach
thereof, great punishment, as Levit. 26. 3. etc. and Deuteronomy. 28. 1. etc. with
Lamentations of Jeremiah throughout, and this was his method throughout that
ministration, punishing them for their sins, yet less than they deserved. Ezra.
9. 13. and delivered them many a time upon their repentance. Psalm. 78. 38. and
106. 43.

5. Though God left all the Nations in this choice, yet he did not so reject
them, as to leave them, at a further distance (or in a worse condition) than
they were before, but kept his real interest in them as his own, and made
provision for them, Psalm. 145. 15, 16. Act. 14. 17. and kept up his Sovereign
rule over them (at least) by such laws as he ruled over them before he called
Abraham out from them, and expected that they should thereby, feel after God,
if happily they might find him, Act. 17. 27. and accepted such as did so feel
after him as to find him, Job. 1. 1. Jona 3. 7. 10. and when he executed
judgment upon them, it was not from his Sovereign will distinct from sin as the
deserving cause, but for their sinning against him as their Sovereign Lord, and
from which Judgment they might have been (and sometimes were) delivered by
repentance. Jer. 18. 7, 8. Jona. 3. 7. 10. and when he used any of them as his
Rod to chastise his own people, and afterward judged them for it, it was not
for doing thereof, but for their ill doing of it, Isa. 10. 5. 7. 16. Amos 1.
11. I think it is clear from Scripture that God never executed Judgment upon any
of the Nations, but sin was the cause thereof, Genesis 15. 16. Levit. 18. 28. and
20. 23.

6. In the Gospel ministration (which is the highest and most gracious in order
to glory) he keeps to the same method in his Sovereign Government; (where the
Gospel comes) its carried on all, according to the righteous Laws thereof, not
saving and damning from his own power and will, without respect had to his
Sovereign Laws therein exhibited to men, but has stated, and will execute life
and death, according to those laws; otherwise to affirm is dishonorable unto
God, and tends to end his Laws and Sovereign rule in the Gospel, which Laws are
expressed in these and the like Scriptures, Mar. 16. 15, 16. Romans 2. 7. 10. Heb
5. 9. Rev. 22. 14.

7. And at the general Judgment, he will judge and pass sentence, not from an
unlimited Sovereignty, but according to his Sovereign Laws made known to men in
that behalf. Joh. 12. 47. 48. Romans 2. 5. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. 2 These. 1. 7. Rev.
22. 10. and 20. 12. and to assure us, that the world shall be judged in
righteousness, he will not be the immediate visible Judge himself, but by that
man whom he has ordained, Act. 17. 31. So that it is most apparent from these
seven instances, from holy Scripture, that God has throughout all ages, from
the beginning of the world, and will to the end thereof, exercised (and will
exercise) his Sovereign power over men according to his Sovereign Laws at
several times given forth to them, and not from his own immediate Sovereign
will and power, distinct from, and contrary thereunto.


Christ. I am greatly satisfied in what you have said in this matter, as to the
manner and method of Gods proceedings in his Sovereign Rule and Government over
the world, yet it being a matter of so great concern relating both to God and
men, if you have any further grounds to confirm the truth, I desire to hear
them.


Minist. I have yet seven Scripture grounds and Arguments for the further
confirmation thereof.

1. That which is contrary to the whole name and nature of God (as declared in
his Word) is irreligious to be asserted or imagined; that God should from his
own will (without relation to sin as the deserving cause) reprobate men to
eternal death (make them for that end) is contrary to his name and nature as
opened to us in his Word: and therefore it is irreligious to be asserted or
imagined. 1st. It Is contrary to his goodness and love to men, Psalm. 145. 9. he
is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works.


Christ. To this it will be said, that it intends temporary goodness relating
to this world.


Minist. In part I grant it, but is this all the goodness they will allow to be
in God toward men in general, to allow them the goodness and mercies of this
world only, designedly to prepare them for eternal destruction, as men fat
their Cattle for the day of slaughter? Are these the tender mercies they will
allow to be in God to the world, and no more? The Scripture says, Prove. 12.
10. That the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. and those who thus render
God in his tender mercies toward all, do exceedingly wrong and dishonor him,
and render themselves to be very cruel and merciless, for certainly it is not
so, Joh. 3. 16. Christ shows us the love of God to the world, on the Gospel
account.

2. It Is contrary to his Wisdom and Justice. 1st. His Wisdom, which is infinite
and of which there is no searching. Ps. 147. 5. Isa. 40. 28. that this infinite
Wisdom should find out no more righteous a way to glorify Justice, but to make
men designedly to sin and be damned, is contrary to divine Wisdom and Justice,
and therefore is irreligious in the Assertors thereof.

And as for the righteousness of God, the practical Discourse of the
Sovereignty of God acknowledges, Page 39. That his will is the rule of
righteousness, and righteousness the rule of his will. The Saints of old, were
perfectly of this mind, shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? And I
heartily wish, that all that profess Saintship now, were of the same mind, and
not lay the sin and judgment of the world on the Sovereign will of God, by
eternal Decree, the greatest unrighteousness, that can possibly be fixed on the
holy and righteous God, therefore let men tremble in the thoughts thereof. And
further in the same Page says, he will not punish without a cause, nor more
than is deserved. Which is the sum of all I plead for in this matter: For then
surely he decreed not the cause, that being all one, as to punish without a
cause, and methinks, should sound very harsh in all good men's ears, that love
the righteous God, who loves righteousness.

2d. Reas. That God from his decreed will, should hate and reprobate the world
before they were, even from all Eternity (as is affirmed by some) is
impossible, and therefore irrational to be imagined; that it was impossible is
apparent. 1st. Because when God made man he made him good, and so loved him, or
else he loved not that which he made, though good; and as the nature of all
mankind was made in him, so, in him was all mankind alike good and beloved of
God, or all could not have fallen from that good estate in him nor could have
lost any thing by his Fall, and that God should love the world in Adam, and
hate it too, at the same time (and before it, even from eternity as some say)
is impossible, and therefore irrational to be imagined.

2. The Scripture lets us to know, that God loved the world in the gift of his
Son, long since the Creation and Fall of men, even such a^ shall be condemned
for then sin and disobedience, Joh. (...). 16. 19. and he could not love and
hate the same persons at the same time, it is impossible, and therefore
irrational to be imagined.

3. It Is impossible from the goodness of his name and nature, for so good a God
to make people designedly to so bad an end, as to sin and be damned Eternally,
is impossible, and therefore is both irrational and irreligious to be imagined.


Christ. They will not say that God reprobated the world, but a great part
thereof, do you not wrong them in supposing them to assert the reprobation of
the world?


Minist. I do them no wrong at all, for 1. they call the Elect the world,
though they are never so called in the Scripture, which are in their own sense
the far less number, therefore the far greater number may be more properly
called the world.

2. Themselves will acknowledge that the wicked (especially the reprobates (as
they call them) are in Scripture called the world, therefore I do them no wrong
in saying their principle is, that God reprobated the world from Eternity, they
owning two worlds, one Elect and another reprobated.

3. Reas. That God should imprint in man by Creation, a principle of reason and
righteousness, wherein he was principally made in the Image of God, Genesis 1. 26,
27. Eccles. 7. 29. and require Righteousness and Justice among men, and damn
unrighteousness as a grievous sin, and yet to act so contrary to it himself, as
to damn people from his own will, is both irrational and irreligious to be
imagined, and does argue that he made not man in his own Image, and this
Principle put in man, and Law of righteousness given to man, would not be an
honor to him in the Judgment, but a reproach, if indeed he made men to destroy
them from his own will, which far be it from all good Christians to imagine.
Discourse of Sovereignty further says, p. 40. 41. The righteousness of God is
further evinced by the Laws he has given to men, the sum of which is to do
righteously, and the end of them, the good and welfare of the Creature, after a
Thousand years experience of these (compared with the issue of men's inventions)
they are acknowledged to be right Judgments, good Statutes and Laws of truth;
to this also might be added the strict injunctions that God laid upon the
subordinate Dispensers of his Laws, as namely to judge the people with just
Judgment, and not to wrest Judgment, nor respect Persons, yea he curses them
that pervert Judgment, and will surely reprove them that respect Persons, and
shall Mortal man be more Just than God? Will he under such penalties command
men to do thus, and not do so himself?

This great truth of the righteous Actings of God toward men, must this
Discourse acknowledge, which in substance contradicts and undoth it self, it
being to maintain an unaccountable disposing of Persons from the Sovereign will
of God, and that pure Sovereignty consists wholly in this, whereon Election
and Reprobation (in their sense) depends, and that there is no other Basis to
repose this Doctrine upon, and yet confesses that God acts righteously, as
he expects men should do; then surely he has not decreed the unrighteous
Actions of men designedly to damn them: how inconsistant these things are, the
prudent may easily judge.

And this is to be remarked, that the righteous Actings of God toward men, is
suitable to the principles of reason and righteousness placed by God in men, or
else man could not be in his Image, nor capable to understand his righteous
dealings with men, either here or in the Judgment, nor of doing righteously,
but would be as the Brutes; and that the exercise of the righteousness of God
toward men, is suitable to their rational capacities to understand, and not
from an hidden Supreme will at a distance there from, plainly appears, Genesis 18.
24, 25. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? viz. as Abraham was
capable to judge what was right. Will thou destroy the righteous and the
wicked? That be far from thee to do in this manner. This he judged to be right,
to judge the wicked and to spare the righteous, and the contrary to be far from
it, and therefore far from the righteous God so to do, and this is the
Testimony Moses gives of God, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. All his ways are Judgments, a God of
truth and without iniquity, Just and right is he. and in this very Case God
justifies himself, and pleads it out with men, who said his ways were not
right, Ezekiel. 18. 25. to 32. and 33. 17. 20. he justifies not himself from his
Sovereign power, to do with them what he pleased, distinct from their obedience
or disobedience, but according to principles of reason, law and righteousness,
he appeals to themselves to be Judge, which he would not have done, had he
ruled by an unlimited Sovereignty, or they not been capable to judge in the
matter.


Christ. Some will say, you make too much a do about this matter, they trouble
not themselves about it, God is righteous though we understand it not, he will
justify himself herein, in the Judgment, and we are to leave it to him, though
we cannot understand it, the Sovereign will of God is right what ever it be, he
being unaccountable of any of his matters, he might from his own will, have
reprobated and damned all, if it had so pleased him; we are not to question his
righteousness in any of his doings, but keep to this, whatever he does is just
and right, because he does it, and he gives no account of any of his matters,
Job. 33. 13.


Minist. 1. Men do trouble themselves so much about it, as by their unrighteous
Notions they fix on God the greatest unrighteousness imaginable, to determine
the world to sin and Judgment before he made it, and then dislike with those
that endeavor to remove this unjust Aspersion, let them give off abusing God,
and there will not be such occasion to contend in this matter.

2. In a work of highest concern to vindicate the name of the righteous God,
it is that both himself and his servants has pleaded throughout all Ages, and
therefore whiles men thus wrong and abuse the righteous and holy God, let them
not blame those that plead for his name and righteous Cause on Earth, it being
that in which his name, and the good of men, both here and hereafter, is so
much concerned; and it is true that God has, does, and will justify himself
from all such unjust Aspersions, and will justify those that rightly plead his
righteous Cause in this matter, and as to the whole, what has been said before,
does answer it.

Yet further, it is an undoubted truth, that what ever God does is right and
just, he never did, nor never will do the contrary, no, it is contrary to his
Name, Nature and Word, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Ps. 145. 17. that standing firm
beforementioned from Discourse of Sovereignty, Page 39. His will is the rule of
righteousness, and righteousness the rule of his will; the truth of which
rightly understood and believed, would deliver us from such unrighteous
Notions, and establish us in this, that his will is righteous, righteousness
being the rule thereof.

And as for that Job. 33. 13. he gives no account of his matters: I say 1st.
that he has and does, give us an account of his matters, viz. of his will
concerning men, else to what end are the Scriptures written, if not to give us
an account of the matters of God? Therefore thus to understand and apply that
saying, is very destructive to the whole design of God in his Word, which is to
give us an account of his matters and will, concerning men.

2. We being all in the fallen state under sin and the sentence of Death, are
liable to the various dispensations of God relative to afflictions and
prosperity in this world (which was the present case) in which God often acts,
out of our sight, so as to understand the particular reasons thereof, it being
so, that in this estate, no man can be just with God, Job. 9. 1, 2, 3. and v.
22. he destroys the righteous and the wicked, all being under sin and the
sentence of Death, it is said v. 12. behold he takes away, who can hinder him,
who can say unto him what do thou? And in this sense it is, he gives no
account of his matters, viz. he sends Afflictions and Death, how and when he
pleases, and that both to the righteous and the wicked, yet in all, keeps to
the true rules of righteousness, though to us often times, his way may be (as it
were) in the Sea, and his path in the deep waters, and his footsteps not seen.
Psalm. 77. 19. yet in all, he punishes sin, and rewards righteousness, both
in the righteous and the wicked, Prove. 11. 31. Jer. 25. 9. Jona. 3. 10. and so
keeps to the true rules of righteousness in all, and further, he has diverse
revealed ends in afflicting his people, and all in the end shall work for good,
as it did in the case of Job.

3. Because of the variety of the ways of God toward men in the fallen state, in
which often times we cannot find his way, nor he gives any account thereof, yet
keeps to the rules of righteousness therein, for men to draw up so horrid a
conclusion from hence, as that either, 1st. He gives us no account of his
matters, relative to our eternal Estate, or 2dly. That he will damn people
eternally in another world, merely from his own Sovereign will, that he made
them for that end, is so irreligious a conclusion, as not to be named among men.

4. Reas. To render God unto men, not only contrary to his Name, Nature and
Word, but under such Notions, as rationally tends to beget in them, hatred and
rebellion against him, instead of love, must needs be very irreligious, and
this manner of representing God unto men does so; either it makes them rebel
against him (which is more common than it may be some are aware of) concluding
that if they are appointed to be damned, there is no hope nor help, do what
they can the Decree cannot be altered; (which if it were true, is a very
rational and true conclusion from the premises) or else turn Atheists,
concluding that there is no God at all, or a very bad one: from these
irreligious representations of our holy and good God to men, it comes to pass
that Atheists are found among professed Christians, the law and light of nature
teaches it not, but those abusive, God-dishonouring, Gospel and soul-destroying
Principles it is, that is become the Nursery of such abominations, and that by
such who might learn to teach better things.

5. That Doctrine that fathers all the sinful actions of men, and Judgments of
God inflicted (or to be inflicted) upon men for sin, upon the eternal and
immutable Decree of God before the world was, is irreligious to be taught or
imagined; but this of the reprobation of the world before they were, and making
God the Decreer of all things whatsoever comes to pass does so: and therefore
is very irreligious to be taught or imagined. And that some does so, appears,
not only by what has been of late by some published as an Article of Christian
Faith; That God from all Eternity, immutably and unchangeably decreed in
himself, all things whatsoever comes to pass. But another that I could name,
but shall here forbear, says in his page 92. in Answer to some Questions about
this matter. 1st. Is not sin the cause of Reprobation? Ans. No, for then all
men should be Reprobates. 2. Quest. Is there no cause then of Reprobation in
the Reprobates? Ans. None at all, in that they rather than others are passed by
of God, this is wholly from the unchangeable depth of his free will and
pleasure: and page 93. That God in his freewill has justly decreed the evil
works of the wicked, for if it had not so pleased him, they had never been at
all, and that there is nothing sin as God decreed it, neither is there any
thing in it self absolutely evil; that God forbids nothing, because they are
in themselves first evil, but therefore are they evil to men because God has
forbidden them. and page 90. God from all Eternity, and according to his
free will, did from his own unchangeable purpose and Council, fore-appoint, and
certainly determine all things, together with their Causes and Effects, their
Circumstances and manner of being, etc. If this Sovereign Doctrine, do not only
tend to father all the sin and judgment of the world upon the holy and
righteous God, but to end all Religion, I know not what does. See my Postscript
to Confession of Faith, where this is further cleared.

6. That Doctrine that teaches men not to glorify God, nor blame themselves
in the Judgment, but rather Eternally to curse God, must needs be very
irreligious; but to teach people that God from his Sovereign will made them on
purpose to damn them Eternally, without hope or help, must needs teach them not
to blame themselves, but curse God, and not glorify him in the Judgment, if
they should then believe as now they are taught, but they shall then know the
contrary; and if they curse any, it shall be themselves, and such Teachers as
Deceived them with False Doctrine, and shall glorify God. Psalm. 64. 8. 1 Pet.
2. 12.

7. And finally, that Doctrine which is not only contrary to the principles of
Reason and law of Nature in man, in which he was made in the Image of God, but
abuses God in his Sovereign Government over men, and the truth of his general
Grace to men, turning the truth thereof into a lie, is very dangerous to be
taught or imagined; but this of his damning the world alone from his own
Sovereign will does so: and therefore it must needs be very irreligious for any
to teach or believe it. That it does abuse God in his Sovereignty and truth, is
most apparent, not only from all that has been said, but in that he not only
says, but swears, Ezekiel. 18. 32. and 33. 11. That he has no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, but that he should turn from his way and live, and 1 Timothy
2. 4. That he will have all to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the
truth, and that he loved the world in the gift of his Son, and sent him into
the world not to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be
saved. Joh. 3. 16, 17. And that he gave his flesh for the life of the world,
Joh. 6. 51. and gave himself a ransom for all. 1 Timothy 2. 6. And sent forth the
Gospel of this grace to be Preached to all, Mar. 16. 15. and calls upon and
inviteth all, with promise of life to all that believe and obey it, Isa. 55. 6,
7. Rev. 22. 17. all which this Doctrine of the damnation of the world by the
Eternal Decree alone, from the Sovereign will and power of God, turns into a
lie, and ends the truth thereof, and therefore is very irreligious to be
taught or believed.


Christ. These things seems to me to be of weighty concern, and I cannot see
how it can stand, either with Scripture or reason, for God to declare so much
love to man, and willingness to have all saved, and yet to Decree the damnation
of the world before he made it, and it seems to set the Scriptures at an
irreconcilable variance, yet there being several Scriptures, urged to prove
this Doctrine, I desire you to speak something to those Scriptures for clearing
them in this matter.


Minist. What are those Scriptures you especially desire to be cleared in?


Christ. The first is Romans 9. 14. to 24. and chap. 11. 7. which are much used
to prove this Reprobation of the world before they were made: so Sovereignty,
page 18. 19. the Sovereignty of God proclaims it self with a yet more
astonishing glory, in his Eternal dispose of men's Eternal condition, to show,
or not to show mercy to persons equally dignified (or rather indignified) in
themselves, to make of the same lump, one Vessel to honor, and another to
dishonor, is the most sublimest Act, and most apparent demonstration of
Sovereign power concerning men; and that from no other reason, but that of
right, he may do what he will with his own. and page 166. one God was the Maker
of all, but all was not made for the same use and end, he had a peculiar scope
in making some, which was not common to the whole, yea the whole was made for
the sake of those some; some God raised up to be Monuments of his power and
Justice, called Vessels of wrath, others are called Vessels of mercy, whom he
formed for himself, and are therefore said to be afore-prepared to glory? And
that Christ died only for this some, etc.


Minist. 1. I thought we should find those glorious principles of truth before
mentioned by the same Author, subjected and contradicted, viz. That
righteousness is the rule of his will, and that he will not command men to do
right, and not do so himself, and that he will punish none without a cause, nor
more than is deserved, and yet now, has Eternally disposed of men from his own
will, made them to be Vessels of wrath, in a word, to sin and be damned, that is
the true sense, horrible abuse to God, and contradiction of himself.

2. He might well call it an astonishing glory, were it true, enough to
astonish and affright all men (were it laid to heart) out of all their Reason
and Religion too; but it being not so, but a device of men, it is so far from
being an astonishing Glory, that it is an astonishing Falsehood, and to be
rejected of all sober men.

3. I still thought, that God had made all for himself, for his own glory, and
not that he had made the world for the sake of some, and when and where he will
prove that God made any for the sake of some, I do not yet know, I suppose you
must take his word for it, as for all the rest.

4. And as to the whole of this matter, I have often said enough to it
elsewhere, viz. that we may not understand one Scripture, so as is contrary to
the whole Word of God that speaks of the same matter, where he says that he
loved the world in the gift of his Son, and calls upon all, and inviteth all
to accept the grace, Rev. 22. 17. That he has no pleasure in the Death of the
wicked. That men by sin destroy themselves, Hos. 13. 9. That he would have all
men to be saved. 1 Timothy 2. 4. it must needs be irreligious to understand Romans
9. so as to contradict, and give the lie to all those Scriptures and many more,
this is enough, were there no more to be said in this matter.

Yet, further I say, that those Scriptures, viz. Romans 9. and 11. Chap.
contributes nothing at all to that Scriptureless Notion, rightly understood,
but rather strongly confirms the truth of what is by me asserted; and this
appears. 1st. In that there is nothing said about the Eternal Decrees and
Sovereign Will, distinct from his Sovereign rule by his own declared Laws, the
Apostle in the whole Treating about the people of the Jews already made, and
under his present Sovereign Government, who did wilfully sin away their mercy
in rejecting the Gospel, and as a punishment of this their sin, God did (or
might) give them up to blindness and hardness of heart, not that he made them
for that end by Eternal Decree, but in the present exercise of his Sovereign
power and Providence, as a punishment of their former sins, so he might make of
the same lump of the Jews one Vessel to honor and another to dishonor, and
this he has usually done in like case, and it is that which will stand with his
Sovereign rule in righteousness, viz. to give men up to hardness of heart as a
punishment of disobedience, rejection or abuse of former mercy, thus he did to
the same people formerly, Psalm. 81. 11. 12. (or it was a Prophecy of what was
fulfilled, Romans 9.) But my people would not hearken unto my voice, Israel would
none of me, so I gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and they walked in
their own Councils. So likewise he dealt with the Gentiles. Romans 1. 21. Because
when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were they thankful,
v. 24. 28. Wherefore God gave them up unto uncleanness, through the lusts of
their own hearts; so likewise in the Apostasy foretold, 2 These. 2. 10, 11.
Because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, and
for this Cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a
lie. Thus God ordinarily punishes one sin by giving up to another, which was
the present Case in Romans 9. they sinned away their mercy in rejecting the
Gospel, and the hardness of heart they were given up to, was as a punishment of
sin; so that it does not at all relate to the Eternal Decree, that God made
them, or any other people to be destroyed, but as a punishment of sin, he in
Justice gave them up to hardness of heart. And in this sense it is the Apostle
says, that wrath was come upon them to the uttermost. 1 These. 2. 16. and this
the practical Discourse of Sovereignty in some Cases acknowledges, page 12.
viz. Ezekiel. 14. 9. And if the Prophet be deceived, I the Lord have deceived that
prophet and will destroy him. and 1 King. 22. touching the lying Spirit, and
the effectual Commission he had from God to persuade and also to prevail, yet
confesses, that he does not reckon these two, as pure acts of Sovereignty, but
rather as punishing one sin by leaving to another, and to this mentions, Romans
1. 21, 28. by which it appears, that nothing is by them, accounted pure Acts of
Sovereignty, but an absolute dispose of persons by Eternal Decree, without
relation to sin as the Cause.

But this being granted, that God does sometimes punish one sin by leaving to
another, tends to lead him into a right understanding of Romans 9. and 11
Chapters, it being so apparently manifest, that it was as a punishment of their
former sins, and not from any Decree of Reprobation before the world was, no
otherwise than for sin as the cause thereof, and no otherwise may we understand
or imagine any Decreed Will in God, of wrong to them or any others; for this
read and ponder Luke 13. 34. and 19. 41, 42. Mat. 22. 1. to 8. Act. 13. 46.
Mar. 16. 15, 16. Rev. 22. 17. in all which Scriptures it appears, that God and
Christ was really for their good, and for the good and welfare of all men, and
that damnation comes in by unbelief and disobedience.


Christ. Though what you have said seems very apparent and plain, yet I desire
you to speak something, more distinctly to the expressions of the Text.


Minist. I shall; in which it will appear, there is not a sentence in either of
those Chapters, relating to Reprobation by Eternal Decree before the world was,
but the present dispose of persons in way of righteousness, suitable to their
demeanours toward God.

1. From verse. 7. to 13. is the distinction that God made between Isaac and
Ishmael, Jacob and Esau, the one being Children of the Flesh, the others of
Promise and purpose.

1. It Is apparent, it relates to the two Covenants made with Abraham, one
relating to his natural seed; in which was the Promise of the Land of Canaan.
Genesis 17. 7, 8. the other with the Spiritual seed in Christ, which included all
nations. Genesis 22. 18. In thy seed shall all the nations of the Earth be
blessed. Ishmael being a Figure of the first seed, is said to be born after the
flesh: And Isaac of the second, is said to be born by promise: And Agar and
Sarah, Figures of the two Covenants, and with their Sons, Figures of the two
Seeds. Gal. 4. 22. to 28. and Rom: 9. clearly distinguishes between the two
Covenants and the two Seeds, v. 8. to 12. the time being come that the new
Covenant takes place as a Ministration, the old Covenant and Seed must give
place unto it, and the Children of Promise (that is of Faith) are counted for
the seed; and in this sense, all are not Israel that are of Israel, because the
Gospel now, knows no man after the flesh. 2 Cor. 5. 16. This new and second
Covenant taking place according to purpose and Promise, now owns only the
Spiritual seed of Faith, whether Jews or Gentiles; and this the Jews stumbled
at, not believing the Gospel, by reason of which they were rejected, this being
the proper scope of the Apostle in Romans 9. and 11. Chapters.

2. More particularly and distinctly, the Election and rejection of these
Persons, personally was, one was Elected to National and Covenant privileges,
and the rejection of the others was from those Privileges, and not to Eternal
Condemnation, it having no relation thereunto, nor from other great and
Temporal blessings, in which God abounded to them. Genesis 21 13. 18. and 36. 15.
And this Election of Jacob, and leaving of Esau, being National; and to special
Privileges, to one above the other, was alone from the free will and pleasure
of God without any relation to works done, it being before they were born, or
had done good or evil; which was a just and Sovereign liberty in God, doing no
wrong thereby to them that were left out of this Election, as Gods calling
Abraham out from the world, did no wrong to the world; nor was their rejection,
but only from that Call and Choice, so was his carrying it on to Isaac and
Jacob (leaving Ishmael and Esau) according to his just and Sovereign rule over
men, the promise being to Abraham and his Seed. Genesis 13. 15, 16. God was at
liberty to fix it on whom he pleased, while it was upon his Seed to whom the
Promise was made, and so did no wrong to either Ishmael or Esau, especially he
making large provision for them both; and as to what is said, v. 13. Jacob have
I loved and Esau have I hated. It Is taken out of Mal, 1. 2, 3. spoken long
after Jacob and Esau were personally dead, and not before they were born, as by
some is vainly and foolishly suggested, and relates to their Posterities, so
called when they were dead and gone: and in this sense, God hated Esau for
their sins, and laid his mountains waste, but is never said to hate him before
he was born, but only this, the Elder shall serve the Younger. So that the
design of the Apostle in the whole matter is, to show the Just liberty of God
in rejecting the Jews for their sinning against him in his Gospel law of Grace,
as all the after instances do likewise fully demonstrate, as v. 15. relates to
the same people, when they had formerly sinned away their mercy, in making a
Calf in the Wilderness. Exodus 33. 19. I will show mercy to whom I will show
mercy. Which relates not to their Eternal Estate, but to the present exercise
of his Sovereign Rule over them, they having forfeited their mercy by sin, and
God had said to Moses that he would destroy them all. chap. 32. 9. to 14. and
upon Moses Prayer and Intercession for them, The Lord repented of the evil that
he thought to do unto them. Yet in this grace, he reserves this Sovereign
liberty, to show mercy on whom he would, viz. he would carry whom of them he
pleased into the Promised Land, and whom he pleased should for their sin die in
the Wilderness, not be Eternally damned. Moses and Aaron for sin died in the
Wilderness, and might not go into the good Land, and who dare say they were
Eternally damned? So likewise, when Christ and the Gospel was come, and they
rejecting their share therein. Act. 13. 46. God would now exercise the same
Sovereign Power over them, viz, To show mercy to whom of them he would show
mercy, even of those who had alike sinned, and whom he would he would give up
to their own hardness of heart, in which his Sovereign Power and Will was (and
still is) exercised toward Men in like capacity. And as for Verse. 21. Of the
Potters Power over the Clay, of the same lump, to make one Vessel to honor and
another to dishonor: It Is likewise taken from the Lords former dealing with
the same People when they had Rebelled against Him. Jer 18. 2. to 6. the Vessel
the Potter made was marred in his hand, so he made it again, another Vessel as
seemed good unto the Potter. v. 6. O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as
the Potter, says the Lord? And it still holds true that this, or any other
People, that has, or shall Rebel against the Lord, and his good will toward
them, it suits with his Sovereign Government, to have mercy on whom he will
have mercy, he may have mercy on some such, and others he may give up to
hardness of heart; he may do as the Potter, viz. break them if he please, and
make another Vessel of them as he pleased, as he did with them of old, to which
the Apostle refors: and in so doing, none have cause to find fault, or to say
unto him, who has resisted his will? (if they do) they find fault with the
Just and Sovereign rule of God over men, it being in this way he makes known
his Sovereign Power and Rules by enduring with much long suffering, the Vessels
of Wrath fitted to destruction. v. 22. and to this agrees and clears the
whole matter to us. Isa. 63. 17. and 64. 8, 9. and on this account it is they
could not believe. Joh, 12. 29.


Christ Have you any thing further to say for clearing this matter?


Minist. I have yet five things further to say, 1. It appears that the Apostle
did not intend in his whole discourse, their Reprobation by eternal decree,
(any otherwise than as has been minded) because v. 1, 2, 3. He declares his
great heaviness and sorrow of heart for them, and could wish himself accursed
from Christ for their sakes. And certainly he would not have been so heavily
grieved and sorrowful, at the Eternal Decree of God, which so, it must flow
from his dislike thereof; but it was for their obstinacy and unbelief, as
Christ himself was. Luke 19. 41, 42.

2. Speaking of these very same People that rejected, and for whom he was so
grieved, says, v. 4. that the Adoption, and the Covenants and the Promises,
did belong unto them, i. e. in right, it did all belong unto them, if they did
not forfeit their right by unbelief: Adoption, Covenants and Promises,
including not only the old (then ended) but the new, according to Act. 3. 25.
Ye are the Children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made with
your Fathers, saying unto Abraham, and in thy seed, shall all the kindreds of
the Earth be blessed. This is the new Covenant in the fullness thereof, of which
they were the Children, the first right belonged to them by promise, as they
were the natural seed of Abraham, if they did not forfeit and lose their right
by unbelief. Act. 13. 46. Luke 24. 47. And therefore could not be Reprobated
therefrom by eternal decree, and yet be the Children thereof, till they lost
their right by unbelief and disobedience to the Gospel.

3. If their sin and rejection had been the fruit of the Eternal Decree, then
it must have been well pleasing unto God, for I think it is little less than
Blasphemy against God, to say he is not well pleased with the fulfilling of his
Decreed will, and then there could not have been so much long suffering in God,
while they were doing his Decreed will, as it is said there was. v. 22. What if
God endured with much long suffering the Vessels of Wrath, etc. But the much
long suffering in God was, while they were doing that which was contrary to his
Will. Men are not said to suffer long, while those they wait upon are doing
their will and work, unless they are too long about it, or do it not to their
minds.

4. The Apostle says, Romans 10. 1. Brethren, my hearts desire and Prayer to God
for Israel is, that they might be saved. And v. 2. For I bear them Record, they
have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. And we cannot Religiously
imagine, that the Apostle would pray against the Eternal Decree of God, no, no;
he then could not Pray in Faith on any account, and it would have argued that
he liked not the decree, but was willing to have it altered, which we may not
imagine, but that he was grieved for the obstinacy of his Brethren, and Prayed
the Lord to turn their hearts, having some hopes that they were not arrived to
the highest Degree of wilfulness, but that their disobedience, did arise much
from Ignorant and Blind zeal, v. 2, 3. On which account he had some hope that
on Repentance they might obtain mercy, tho he had so spoken of them before, in
chapter 9. else he would not have Prayed for them. 1 John 5. 16.

5. The Foundation cause of their rejection, (so far as it was) is by the
Apostle resulted and concluded, chapter 9. 32. and 10. 3. to be, because they
sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the works of the Law, for they
stumbled at that stumbling-stone. And chapter 10. 3. They being ignorant of God's
Righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not
submitted themselves to the Righteousness of God. This was the true cause of
their fall, and not that God made them for that end, any otherwise than has
been before declared; and therefore those unscriptural Conclusions, unduly and
untruly drawn from hence, viz. that God from his own will made them (and the
greatest part of Mankind) on purpose to damn them Eternally, are to be Exploded
by all true Christians.

And it being urged much from the Potters Power over the Clay, it is most
apparent, the Potter did not make his Vessel on purpose to mar it, but it was
marred in his hand. Jer. 18. 4. and so he made another Vessel of the same Clay,
as seemed him good. So when People mar themselves in the hand of the great
Potter, he is at liberty to do with them as he pleases; and Men of this
Principle are pleased to set forth their Scriptureless notions by other things,
as some by a Watch-maker, who having made a Watch, tho good, yet has Power to
break it when he has made it, so God has Power over Men, to make them for
what end he pleases. It Is easily granted that he has Power so to do, but it
stands not with his Will, Wisdom, Mercy and Justice, nor with his Truth and
Faithfulness in his Word so to do, any otherwise than as a Punishment of their
former sins. So he is said to raise up Pharaoh as a Punishment of his former
sin in oppressing the People of God. Ex. 1. 8. to 22. and 3. 7, 8, 9. So Dr.
Usher' s Substance of Christianity. p. 58. It Is usual with God to Punish one
sin with another, as for Example, the hardening of Pharaohs heart, was a sin in
Pharaoh, and God brought it upon him, not as a sin, but as a Punishment of his
former sin; and this opens the whole matter in Romans 9. and 11. chapters, and
otherwise to understand it, makes God the Author both of sin and Judgment,
contradicts the Scriptures, and draws a black Clould over the blessed
Gospel of Gods free Grace to men.


Christ. I am well satisfied in what you have said in this matter: the 2d.
Scripture I desire you to speak to is, Act. 13. 48. As many as were ordained to
Eternal life believed. From hence some conclude, that the Elect only obtained,
and the rest were by Predestination rejected.


Minist. To this I shall say, 1. That the words may be as well read, as many as
believed were ordained to Eternal life.

2. As I have elsewhere said, the word Ordained, may be as properly read,
addicted. From (...), which may be rendered, to Ordain, Dispose, set in Order
or Addict, So is the same word translated, 1 Cor. 16. 15. They addicted
themselves to the Ministry of the Saints. it would be improper to say, they
Ordained themselves.

3. To conclude that the rest were reprobated by Eternal Decree, is very
unscriptural and unchristian like, for they that did not then believe, might
afterward or at least some of them. If a Minister should now come and Preach
to a People, that may be rebellious, would he conclude them all (or any of
them) to be reprobated by Eternal Decree, and never Preach more to them? If so,
Preaching for Conversion would quickly be at an end; does not God wait long
and, use much means to overcome men? by Romans 10. 21. Luke 13. 34.


Christ. The 3d. Scripture is, 1 Pet. 2. 8. Those that stumbled at the word,
being disobedient, whereunto they were appointed. From hence some concludes,
that they were appointed to disobedience, and therefore could not be saved?


Minist. This is a great wrong to the Truth of God, and to the true meaning of
that Scripture, they stumbled at the word, whereunto they were set, and so
Tindal Translates it; but take it set or appointed, it is all one: they were
set, or appointed to the word, to believe and obey it, to which they were
disobedient, and not appointed to disobedience as some vainly and wickedly
affirm.


Christ. The 4th Scripture is, 2 Pet. 2. 12. But these as natural Brute Beasts,
made to be taken and destroyed. Hence some conclude, that God made some Men on
purpose to destroy them, and such cannot be saved.


Minist. This likewise is greatly misunderstood and applied. It was the Brute
Beasts, that was made to be taken and destroyed, and not the People spoken of,
it being a Metaphor taken from Brute Beasts, which are fatted to the day of
slaughter; so such men do brutishly destroy themselves. Hos. 13. 9. read the
words and leave the Metaphor as in a Parenthesis, and you may easily understand
the true sense. But these (as Brute Beasts and) speak Evil of things they
understand not, and shall perish in their own Corruption, not because they were
made to be destroyed; it was the Brute Beasts that was so made. But as Brute
Beasts are prepared, so they prepare themselves for destruction, by speaking
Evil of things they understand not, and so perish in their own Corruption. A
word of Warning it should be to all (especially of that Spirit and Principles)
to take heed and beware, of speaking Evil of what they understand not, lest
they prove to be some of those here spoken of, like Brute Beasts who are made
to be destroyed, knowing that brutish principles, will as certainly end in
destruction, as brutish practices.


Christ. The 5th Scripture is, Prove. 16. 4. The Lord has made all for himself,
yea even the wicked for the day of Evil. Hence some infer that God made the
wicked to be Damned and therefore they cannot be saved.


Minst. 1. It Is certain true, that God has Ordained and declared that wicked
men, who so live and dye, shall have Condemnation.

2. The Scriptures do not say that God made them wicked, I think it would be an
Evil saying against God, so to affirm, and if he did not make them wicked, then
he did not make them (in the sense intended) for the day of Evil.

3. Take it in their sense, then all men must be damned; for themselves affirm,
That all are born liable to the second death, and the Scripture says, that
all, before Conversion are wicked, Romans 3. 9. to 18. 23. So that if wicked men
were made by the Lord to be damned, then all must be damned.

4. Therefore I understand the truth in that Scripture intended is, that God
made all for himself, and such as go on wilfully in a way of Rebellion against
him, he has determined and declared, that such are for the day Evil, i. e.
shall meet with the Evil of Punishment, and this stands in Unity with the whole
Scripture, yet probably in this Scripture, not intending so much (or only) the
Eternal Judgment, or second death, but the Temporary Judgments threatened and
executed on that People for their sins; although they were his own People, yet
they had many such Evil days, as a Punishment for their sin, and that as they
were wicked, and for the Glory of his Justice. Lam. 5. 16. Woe unto us that we
have sinned; but to infer from hence, that God made men on purpose to damn them
Eternally, is a very untrue Conclusion, and far from the words or intentions of
the Text.


Christ. The 6th Scripture I shall mention is Mat. 13 11. to 16. and Luke 20.
21. Where Christ speaking in Parables, gives a reason thereof as a Judgment
upon the Jews, that it was not given to them to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom. And hence it is inferred that they were reprobated by Eternal Decree.
And Luke 10. 21. I thank thee, O Father, that thou have hid these things from
the Wise and Prudent, etc. Hence it is concluded, that those from whom God did
hide the Gospel, was reprobated from of old, and could not be saved.


Minist It Is most evident in both, that it is the same as before I declared from
Romans 9. as a punishment of their former and present sins.

2. There is not a word about the Eternal Decrees in either of the Scriptures,
but the present Judgment upon them for their past and present sins.

3. They might (and very probably many of them did) afterward believe, God
having his times to work, those that believe not at one time and opportunity of
Grace may at another; and it is apparent the Jews time was not then come, but
afterward multitudes of them did believe. Act. 2. 4. and 4. 4. and 6. 7. and
21. 20.


Christ. The 7th. Scripture I shall mention is, Jude v, 4. Which speaks of
certain men of old Ordained to this Condemnation. Hence some conclude, that
some are Ordained to be damned and cannot possibly be saved.


Minist. Tho it is true that God has Ordained that wicked men persisting in sin
shall be damned, yet the inference as drawn from this Scripture is a great
abuse and wrong to the Text. The word in the Greek is, of whom it was written
in time past (or of old) unto this Judgment, and so Tindal renders it, that is,
God had of old, or in time past threatened such Judgment unto such sinners, as
a just reward of their sin. It was written of old. v, 14. not that he made, or
Ordained them for that End. So that the truth stands clear from the word of
truth, that God exercises his Sovereignty over men in a way of Righteousness
according to his word, and not from his own will to save and damn whom he
pleases, distinct from his Laws given to men on that behalf, the assertion of
which being the highest abuse and dishonor to God the Sovereign Governor of
the world, as can possibly be put upon him, and therefore is to be abhorred of
all sober men.


Christ. I shall at present enquire no further about this matter, being well
satisfied in what has been said, and likewise that there has been, and yet is,
great mistakes about this matter, that is of so great and weighconcern, rightly
to be understood. I desire you to give me some inferences by way of instruction
from the whole


Min. 1. To know and be assuredly established in this, that there is no decree
of God for your destruction, distinct from sin (as the just and deserving
cause) persisted in without Repentance.

2. Take heed and beware of sinning against this Gracious, Holy and Righteous
God, who tho he made not men to sin and be damned, yet he will by no means
clear the guilty, but will wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy scalp
of such a one as goes on still in his trespasses. Ps. 68. 21. Therefore let
not the Rebellious exalt themselves. Ps. 66. 7. As he is Gracious and full of
Compassion, so he is just, it is his name, his nature and word. Exodus 34. 6, 7.
Therefore I say, take heed and beware of all sin.

3. Take heed and beware of entertaining such notions about the Sovereignty of
God, as are not suitable to his name and nature, his Word and Will, in which
his Goodness, Mercy, Justice, Wisdom, Holiness, Truth and Faithfulness is so
much concerned, lest you dishonor him, in thinking and speaking that which is
not right concerning him, and his Wrath be kindled against you, as it was
against Job's three Friends, because they spoke not the things that were right
of him as Job did. Job. 42. 7. He is very jealous of his name and honor, and
accepts not those that plead wickedly for him. Job. 13. 8. That renders God
to be more cruel to the Creatures that he has made (his own offspring Act. 17.
28, 29.) than any of the Creatures that he has made, which are naturally
loving to their own; yea more hard and cruel to his own offspring, than the
worst and most cruel of the Sons of Men, more cruel and merciless than Pharaoh,
who laid heavy tasks on the Children of Israel, requiring Brick without straw,
yet it is apparent, he thought it was possible for them to get straw, and to
make up their full tale of Brick, for he said, they were Idle, by which it
appears, that he thought they might work the harder and do it. Exodus 5. But
this principle renders God not only to require Brick without straw, but to
require all Men every where to repent and believe the Gospel. Act. 17. 30. Mar.
1. 15. and will damn them for not believing, yet has allowed them no power so
to do, but Decreed the contrary. In a word it renders the Holy and Good God
(who is Good to all) to be worse to his own Creatures, his own offspring, than
it is possible for the Devil to be, who is the common Enemy of Mankind, and
goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour. 1 Pet. 5. 8. But he
can devour none but by temptations and delusions, he can devour none without
their own consent; but this presents the Holy God, by his Sovereign Will and
Power, to have devoured almost all Mankind by Eternal Decree, that he made them
for that very end. Had they fixed such things on the Devil, as they do on the
Holy God, they might have been credited, (had he power so to do) but to render
God to be worse to Men than it is possible for the Devil to be, is to be abhorred
of all that love and fear him, therefore take heed and beware thereof. He would
be accounted no Man, but worse than a Brute, that would beget Children
designedly to breed them up for the Gallows; abhor such thoughts of God.

4. Be encouraged from hence to believe and obey the Gospel, that you may be
saved, and know and believe assuredly, in so doing you shall be saved. It Is the
Sovereign Law of Christ your Lord, which is unalterable, Mar. 16. 15, 16. He
that believes and is Baptized shall be saved. Heb. 5. 9. He is become the
Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him; this is the Gospel Law
of Grace to Men, against which there is, nor can be no Decree.

5. And finally, be not afraid nor discouraged, be not affrighted, nor amazed
with any amazement either as from God or Men in this matter. 1. From God in the
untrue representations of his Sovereign Power, as if he would save and damn
from his own Will, as if he had reprobated the far greater part of Men to
Eternal Perdition, without hope or means of help; an amazing Doctrine it is,
that has sent many serious Souls with sorrow to their Graves, and it is to be
feared, has sent many to Perdition: but look up, lift up your head and heart,
God has determined no Damnation to any Man, but for sin as the deserving cause,
therefore believe, and obey the Gospel and you shall be saved. 2. Nor be afraid
of Men; in your Faithful following of your Lord, the Sovereign Power and
Providence is over you and for you Joh. 3. 31. He that comes from above, is
above all, therefore be not afraid of Men. Isa. 51. 7, 8. But sanctify the Lord
of Hosts himself and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. And he
will be a Sanctuary unto you. Isa. 8. 11, 12, 13, He rules by his Power for
ever, his eyes behold the Nations, therefore let not the Rebellious exalt
themselves. Psalm 66. 7. For the Rebellious shall dwell in a dry land. Ps. 68.
6. Zec. 14. 17. Isa. 66. 24.


CHAP. II.
Treats of Election.

Christ. I Desire to enquire into the matter of Election, that being stated
upon the Eternal Decree as some affirm, that Election and Reprobation of
Persons, was equivalent, and both determined in the Eternal Decree. I desire to
hear what you say to it.


Min. As to this, I have said enough to it elsewhere, yet now, on this
occasion, I shall add something further, what is it you desire satisfaction in?


Christ. Whether you do really own Election of Persons before time, and if so,
your Scripture grounds for it.


Min. That God Elected, or gave some to his Son from of old, as the most
special, peculiar and certain, reward of his undertaking in behalf of Men, whom
he has, does and will, in time call, justify and supply with persevering Grace
through the Gospel, till they come to Glory; I believe and own; my Scripture
grounds are, Joh. 6. 37, 39. Romans 8. 29, 30. and indeed it suits not only with
Scripture and so is Divine, but with reason also, it is rational that God in his
wonderful undertaking for men, by his Son (designing an especial espowsed
relation to reign with him, in the special Glory) should not leave it
altogether contingent and at uncertainty, but determine some without fail for
that Relation and Glory.

2. That this peculiar gift to Christ, is a secret known only to God, 2 Timothy 2.
9. all must be saved by the Law of Gospel Grace, persevering therein to the
end, Mar. 16. 16. Rev. 2. 10. and leaves no room for boasting or neglect to any.

3. Nor does this personal Election, in the least derogate from the general
Grace of God to Men, nor does it in the least import or imply, that all the
rest (or any) are Decreed from the Sovereign and Eternal will of God to be
damned, (otherwise than as for transgressing his Laws, persevering therein to
the end;) that I take to be a great mistake, and wrong both to God and Men, but
that the general love of God to the world, as Proclaimed in the Gospel, stands
free and clear, notwithstanding this Election, and that all, that truly believe
and obey the Gospel, persevering therein to the end, are the Elect and chosen
of God and shall be saved, and that the finally unbelievers and disobedient,
are therefore reprobated and must be damned.


Christ. This is the great matter I desire to be cleared in, viz. how
particular Election of Persons, and general Grace may stand together, and
therefore do desire you to give your grounds for this, with as much evidence of
light from the word, as possible you can.


Min. If it be granted, that God was and is capable of such a personal Election
before-time, which I suppose none dare deny, then 2. That he was capable to
elect some Persons, without any wrong at all to his general Grace to all, and
this I shall evince, from his manner and method of Electing Persons throughout
all ages; in which it will appear, that there was no Election attended with the
reprobation of the rest, and in this, I shall give, 1. Instances more remote,
as that which may tend to help and clear in this matter: And 2. such as are
more immediate and full to the matter in hand.


Christ What are your more remote Instances to illustrate this thing?


Min. 1. The Election of Persons to particular offices and works, as Jeremiah;
the Lord said to him, before I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee; and
before thou came out of the womb, I sanctified thee, and ordained thee to be
a Prophet to the nations, Jer. 1. 5. this preordaining and setting a part of
Jeremiah, before he was born, to be a Prophet to the nations, did not in the
least imply that there should be no other Prophets besides Jeremiah; neither
did it at all derogate, from the Prophesies of other Prophets of the Lord, of
whom we read nothing of such a Preordaining, neither may we affirm they were so
ordained, the Scripture being silent herein.

So the like of Cyrus, who was Ordained by name, to a great and noble work,
long before he was born. Isa. 44. 28. and 45. 1, yet this Decree, no whit
hindered others that had a heart, to set a hand to the same work, of whom we
read of no such preordination thereunto, as not only Cyrus. Ezra. 1. but Darius
chapter 6. and Artaxerxes. chapter 7. So that particular Decrees, is no hinderance to
others in that which is good. So the like of Paul, who says. Gal. 1. 15. that
he was separate to his Apostleship from his Mothers womb. Yet others of whom
the Scripture gives no such Testimony, were not at all prohibited from
Preaching the same Gospel. I might instance among the Lords chosen People of
old, there were several Elections, yet without wrong (but rather to the
advantage) of the rest. As David, was his chosen King, Ps. 78. 68. and his
posterity till the Kingdom came to Christ the Son of David, Ps. 89. 29, to 36.
And the Tribe of Levi set apart for Priests and Ministers in the service of
God, to come nearest to him, yet in all, it was without any wrong, (but for
advantage) to the rest. These were Elections more remote and of another kind,
yet of use to Illustrate in this matter.


Christ. What are your more immediate Instances, and full to the matter in
hand?


Min. The first Election and choice we read of in Scripture is that of Abraham
and his seed, who were chosen out from all the world besides, to be a peculiar
People to the Lord, yet this Election, did not reprobate all the world besides
to Eternal death; yet I am sure there is more said of the specialness and
peculiarity of this Election (as distinct from all the world,) than is of, his
Personal Election under the Gospel, Genesis 17. 7, 19. Exodus 19. 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 7. 6,
7, 8. Yet notwithstanding this special and personal choice, alone from free
Grace and Love, was without any wrong at all to (or reprobation of the) rest of
the world only left out of that choice.

For, 1. The world was left in no worse condition, than before this Election of
Abraham and his seed.

2. A liberty was left for any others to become profelites, and so partake in
the same covenant and privileges, and many of them did so, Act. 2. 10. and 13.
43. and 10. 27. A lively pattern of Gospel Election, take it in what sense you
will, it hinders none, but rather furthers the Salvation of others.

3. Notwithstanding this Election, God still retained his real property in the
world as his own, as much as before Abraham was chosen out from them, and that,
not to destroy and damn them, but to do them good, Ex. 9. 5. Ps. 145. 9, 15,
16. If God in this Election, had reprobated all the world to the second death,
woe bad been to us sinners, of the Gentiles, there could then have been no such
thing as Gospel, Grace or Election to us, and this Controversy had been over
and ended.

4. And it is apparent, that God had many precious People in the world out of
that Election, as Job, of whom was not the like on the earth, Job 23. Who was
of the land of (...) in the East, and might be of Abraham's posterity, of one of
the Sons he had by Keturak, whom he sent Eastward, into the East Country, Genesis
25. 6. And likewise his three Friends of the same Country, Job 2. 11. And Elihu
which made a fourth, chapter 32. 2. And Lo^ who was not within this Election And
Rahab the harlot Canonized for a Saint, for hideing the spies, with others that
might be mentioned.

5. And Abraham himself, that was first and chief in this Election, was so far
from monopolizing all to himself and to his natural seed, that it is apparent,
he expected many Righteous Persons to be in the world besides himself, as
appears in his Prayer for Sodom, Genesis 18. He began at fifty Righteous,
supposing that to be but a few, tho in his love to Lot, he descended by degrees
to ten, accounting that so few, that he durst not mention a lesser number.

6 And more than this, he believed for the world; in thy seed shall all the
Nations of the earth be blessed, Genesis 1. 2, 3. and 15. 5, 6. and 18. 18. and
22. 18. If he had not believed this promise of a Son and seed, in whom all the
Nations should be blessed, I know no ground to conclude that he could have
arrived to the Dignity of being the Heir of the world, or Father of the
Faithful, Romans 4. 11, 12, 13. And how they will prove themselves to be his
Children, or Heirs of the world with him, (as all true believers are Romans 4.
16.) who are so far from his Faith, as that they believe the damnation of the
world by Eternal Decree, it behooves them to consider in time.

2. To prosecute this Election, when it must pass upon Isaac and Ishmael is
left out, it was without any wrong to him, God making large provision for him
elsewhere, Genesis 21. 13, 18. Besides, those two with their Mothers, were an
Allegory of the two Covenants with their seeds, Gal 4. 22, 25. And Ishmael's
rejection was not to the second death, but from being Heir with Isaac, Genesis 21.
10. Gal. 4. 30.

So likewise Esau, when Jacob was fixed on and Esau left, it was not with any
wrong to him, the promise hitherto residing in the free will and pleasure of
God, and not by successive inheritance upon the elder; while it was conferred
on Abraham's seed, the promise was exactly performed, and that without any
wrong at all to Esau, especially, God making large provision for him elsewhere,
Genesis 36. 6, 7. His rejection from the Covenant and Promise being not to the
second death, which I suppose none dare to affirm it was. Tho on Jacob and all
his posterity, God settled the promise, Genesis 26. 2, 3, 4. So that this Election,
was so far from reprobating the world, or any part thereof to the second death,
or to any other wrong, that it was of very great advantage to the world.

And that 1. Thereby a liberty and advantage was given to the Gentiles, to come
to know and worship God, in becoming proselites.

2. He made large provision for the world, in common and Temporal blessings,
and by the common means and light afforded to the world, had many precious
People therein.

And 3. One must come of Abraham's seed, that should be the Savior of the
world, 1 John 4. 14. In whom all the nations of the earth shall be blessed,
Genesis 22. 18. So that the world losed nothing, but gained by that Election.

And for any to imagine an Election in the Gospel, by Eternal Decree, so as to
reprobate all the world besides to Eternal Damnation, is both unscriptural and
irrational, tending to undo the Gospel, and to render the design of God
therein, to be more for Damnation, than for Salvation, and to render this his
Election therein, to be contrary to any sort of his Elections from the
beginning of the world, all his actings toward men (in such cases) having been
in it self, for good to men and not for hurt; what of hurt comes to men being
of themselves.

4. Election in the New Testament (taken in the strictest sense) is no where so
stated, as to give us any ground of supposition, that a'l the rest must be
damned; but it keeps the Door wide open for all comers, that come rightly,
Mar. 16. 15. Joh. 3. 16, 17. and 6. 40. Rev. 22. 17. Whence it is that this
wide Door, should be so strangely shut up and barred against the world, we may
easily understand, that it is not from God, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. But from the
Prince and power of darkness, 2 Cor. 4, 3, 4.

5. Tho I own particular and personal Election (as before I said) yet I do not
believe it as some; Sovereign Discourse, p. 55. That the Doctrine of Election
contains the whole sum and scope of the Gospel. And p. 69. That Election is
the great Fundamental institute of the Gospel, the Supreme Law. I say, as held
by him, viz. With the absolute reprobation of all the world besides; it is no
Gospel at all, nor any part thereof, if we believe the Scripture, and call that
Gospel which the Scripture so calls, Luke 2. 10. Behold I bring you glad
tidings of great joy which shall be to all People, Mar. 16. 15. Preach the
Gospel to every Creature, etc. This is Gospel; but I am sure, that Election (as
pleaded for) is no where called Gospel, nor mentioned at all in the Scriptures,
no: if it were (which is far from it) it would be the sadest tidings that ever
came to the world, worse than the sin and fall of the first Man, which brought
the world under the first death only, if the second came only to raise the
world to Eternal Damnation, the second death, which is far worse than the
first, O woe would be to the world that ever Christ came, which is indeed the
best tidings that ever came to the world. And if men lose the advantage
thereof, it is their own fault, Joh. 3. 19. Nor do I know where it is, that
Election is called a Gospel Law, either in terms, or in the true sense thereof,
much less the Supreme Law, especially as held, if so, it would be a Law of
Damnation, far more than of Salvation; but the Supreme Law of the Gospel is,
that whosoever believes and obeys the Gospel shall be saved; and he that
believes not shall be damned, Mar. 16. 16. this is the Supreme Law of the
Gospel, by which we must all at last stand or fall. And against which there is
(nor can be) no Decree, Joh. 12. 48. I have often thought, that those who are
so merciless, as to damn the world by Eternal Decree, think themselves sure by
their Law of Election; but I do earnestly advise them, to see they stand clear
in the true Faith and Life of the Gospel, without which there is (nor can be)
no safety.

6. And so from the whole, I conclude, that God never Elected any with design
of wrong to the rest, but rather of advantage, if rightly improved.


Christ. They say, it is no wrong to any, but just and right; he might have
reprobated all, and have been just in so doing, and that it is mercy that he
has Elected any, and that in this way, he has exalted both Justice and Mercy.


Min. As held by them, it is the greatest wrong imaginable.

For 1. They say that God Elected some, and reprobated all the rest to Eternal
death from his own will, without any cause at all in them.

And 2. That notwithstanding he has by Decree, laid a necessity of Perishing
upon such, yet the Gospel must be Preached to them, designedly to damn them the
deeper, for that which they could not help, nor was any Grace thereby intended
to them; a greater wrong cannot be done to men, nor a greater wrong to God, and
the Gospel of his Grace to men.


Christ. I think you have said enough to this, for clearing this matter, I have
yet only one thing to enquire further, viz. How you can clear this of personal
Election before time, from that which is commonly objected, Act. 10. 34, 35.
That with God there is no respect of Persons. Does not this Election render God
to be a respecter of Persons?


Min. 1. This Scripture in the proper intention thereof, intends the breaking
down of the middle wall of partition between Jew and Gentile, that now there is
no difference on the Gospel account.

And 2. It stands true (and ever did) that in every Nation he that fears God
and works Righteousness is accepted; so was Cornelius before he knew the
Gospel.

3. Particular Election may stand without any contradiction at all to that
Scripture, or any other of like import, whilst God does notwithstanding, accept
of every one that does fear him and work Righteousness; for we may understand,
and must allow this Sovereign liberty in God, which men rationally and
rightfully claim to themselves, viz. a freedom of love and choice, whilst none
are wronged thereby, God had respect unto, and loved Abraham and his feed,
above all the world besides, Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7. And that rightfully too. Yet
without wrong or prejudice to any, he loved Jacob more than Esau, before they
were born, or had done either good or evil, yet without any wrong at all to
Esau, he did, (and does) accept of whoever did, (or do) fear him and work
Righteousness. And Christ loved one Disciple above the rest, yet without any
wrong, or offense, to any of the rest, men do (and Lawfully may) fix love on
particular objects, and while it is without wrong or hatred to others, it is no
unlawful respecting of Persons.


CHAP. III.
Of the extent of the love of God in the gift of his Son: and the extent of the
death of Christ, with the variety of the ends thereof, and the certain
effecting thereof, according to the designs of God therein.

Christ. I Am willing to make some enquiry into those two great (yet much
controverted) points of Religion, namely the extent of the Fathers love to, and
of the death of Christ for the world.


Min. This is that I have had often occasion of late, to speak to elsewhere,
and therefore may suppose it needless to speak any further to so plain Gospel
Truths as these are.


Christ. Yet notwithstanding, it being of so weighty concern, and that which I
conceive, on which the whole Gospel depends, I desire you to speak something
further to it, with as much plainness and evidence from the Scripture as you
can.


Min. Tho I have spoken so much of this matter elsewhere, yet, if meeting with
so much opposition, and being of so weighty concern, it lying at the bottom,
and being indeed the Foundation of all Christian. Faith and Religion, I shall
at your request, make a little further Essay herein.

1. Then as to the extent of the Fathers love in the gift of his Son, the Son
himself who best knew, determines with that evidence and plainness that whosoever
runs may read and understand, Joh. 3. 16. For God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life.


Christ. This seems to be very plain and full to the matter, yet those of the
contrary opinion say, that by world in this place is intended, the Elect only,
or world of the Elect, and that the word world, as used in the Scripture does
not always intend all the world, and in this place the Elect only.


Min. I know that this is the great plea, to end the plain Truth of the
Scripture, and I could name several of the Persons concerned herein, and I do
easily grant that the word world does not always intend all the world, but
often a part thereof, yet when so, a great part thereof is intended; but that
the word world in this place does not intend, the Elect, or Church, or
Believers only, is as apparent as the Sun when it shines at Noon, and I yet
never met with either Scripture or Reason sufficient to contradict it, tho (I
think) I have read as learned and able, as any that has attempted it, and that
it does not (nor cannot) intend the world of Elect only, I shall state some
weighty grounds to the contrary.

1. That the Elect are no where called the world in Scripture; that is not yet
proved, nor is never like to be: but because the wicked are called the world,
when they are but a part thereof, therefore the Elect may be so called, and
such like arguments, to argue out the plain Truth of Scripture; but till it can
be proved that the Elect are called the world, it must remain as a
Scriptureless notion; that is the first.

2. Because the word world in this place, is the common word for the world in
general. (...), which sometimes signifies the Heavens and the Earth, or whole
Creation, Mat. 13. 35. and 25. 34. Or a multitude or world of Men, Romans 3. 19
The same as, 1 John 5. 19. The whole world lies in wickedness, and is never
applied to the Elect, that is the second.

3. It Is such a world, as that whosoever of them do believe, shall have Eternal
life, in which note, 1. That it is the world of unbelievers that he loved, that
whoever of them do believe, might have life. After they believe they are not of
the world, Joh. 15. 19. 2. It Is such a world, as of which it is clearly employed,
that some of them may perish through unbelief, whosoever does believe shall not
perish, clearly implying, that whosoever of them does not believe shall perish,
fully agreeing with the commission, Mar. 16. 15, 16. Go into all the world,
Preach the Gospel to every Creature, he that believes and is Baptized shall be
saved, he that believes not shall be damned. So here he (or whosoever does
believe) shall not perish, i. e. shall not be damned; so that it is apparent,
it is the same world that God loved, to whom the Gospel is by Commission to be
Preached, and that is to all. And such a world as of which many (if not most)
may perish through unbelief, which the Elect world (in the owners own sense
cannot) do, which clearly contradicts their notion in this matter.

4, It appears from v. 17. 19. God sent not his Son into the world, to
condemn the world, but that the world by him might be saved. It Is the same
world, he still speaks of, that he was not sent to condemn but to save, and
that it is evident, that some of this world that God loved, and Christ was sent
to save (as before I said) may be condemned, v. 19. This is the Condemnation
that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather than light,
because their deeds are evil. God loved the world, and gave his Son to save the
world, the world loves darkness rather than this light of Love and Salvation,
and this is (and will be) the Condemnation, not want of love in God, nor want
of a Savior, but because they loved the darkness of ignorance and sin, more
than this light of Love, Life and Salvation, and surely this is not the Elect
world, who love Darkness more than Light and be Condemned.

5. Not only because the express terms and scope of that Scripture clears it,
not to intend the Elect only, but the whole Scope of the whole Scriptures
clears it likewise, the design of Love to the world in this matter being
included in that promise, Genesis 3. 15. The head design of the Serpent being the
destruction of Mankind, the Fathers design herein being as large for
prevention, So Genesis 22. 18. In thy seed, shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed, and suitable to, and answering of these promises, with many more to the
same effect, Ps. 72. 17. and 22. 27, 28. The Lord who best knew his Fathers
will and Love herein, states his Fathers Love and Good Will to the world,
suitable to the promises thereof, the love and good will was to the world, the
special Grace and Life, is to such as believe and obey the Gospel, and suitable
to this, is the Angels tidings, Luke 2. 10. Behold I bring you tidings of great
joy, which shall be to all people, and surely the Elect be not all People, but
because the word all, does not always intend all, therefore it must not hero;
but this Foundation of all, relating to this matter last mentioned, clears it,
and indeed, there is neither Scripture, nor right Reason to limit it to a few
only, it being contrary to the love and design of Gods Grace to the world in
the Redemption work, made manifest ever since the first sin and fall.

2. Of the extent of the Death of Christ, and that must be as large as the
Fathers Love in sending him into the world, or else it answers not his end in
sending him; for himself says, That he came down from Heaven not to do his own
will, but the will of him that sent him. And that he died for the world, is
most apparent, Joh. 1. 29, Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of
the world. (...), the same world as was mentioned before, which the Father
loved in sending of him, and this is to be noted, that when he is said to take
away sin as the Lamb of God, it is as he was a Sacrifice for sin, the substance
of that Type, the Paschal Lamb, the Passover, 1 Cor. 5. 7. Christ our Passover
was Sacrificed for us. Joh. 6. 51. The bread that I will give is my Flesh that
I will give for the life of the world. (...), the same world as before, 1 Timothy
2. 6. Who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be Testified in due time. 1 Cor. 5.
14, 15. If one died for all, then were all dead, and in that he died for all,
etc. v. 19 God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself. Heb. 2. 9. That
he by the Grace (the love) of God, should taste death for every man; That he by
the Grace and Love of God to all, should taste death for all. 1 John 2. 2. He is
a Propitiation for our sin, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the
whole world. (...), the same world as chapter 5. 19. The whole world lies in
wickedness. In all which Scriptures the death of Christ for the world, as by a
Cloud of Witnesses, is asserted and confirmed.


Christ. The Scripture seems wonderful plain and apparent in this matter, yet
some say, that by world and all, is not intended all the world, but that in all
these Scriptures, the Elect only are intended.


Min. What I have already said, about the love of God to the world, does in
substance clear this matter. By which it appears, that it intends the world,
and not the Elect only, they being never so called.


Christ. Some say, that Joh. 1. 29. cannot intend the sins of the world in
general, but of the Elect only, because the sins of the world are not taken
away, but the whole world lies in wickedness, and therefore their sins are not
taken away.


Min. For answer to this, I shall refer you to the 3d. particular to be spoken
to in this Chapter, namely, the varieties of the ends of the death of Christ.

And as for the word all, tho it does not always intend all, in many other
cases, yet in this it does, proved not only from the reason before given, viz.
the design in the Gospel of good will to all, which is the Fundation of all the
general expressions in the Scriptures about the Redemption work by Christ, as
world and all; but 1 Timothy 2. 6. gives us further and full light, in all such
like expressions about the same matter. Who gave himself a ransom for all, to
be testified in due time.

Now the great question is, whether all in this Scripture intends the Elect
only, or all the world, I suppose it will be granted by all, that it intends
one or both of them; I say both, but that it intends not the Elect only,
apparently appears. Which I shall endeavor to clear as follows:

Verse. 1. Is an Exhortation, that first of all, Prayers Intercession and giving
of Thanks be made for all Men. Verse. 2. For Kings and for all that are in
Authority. This being the Foundation of all that follows to verse. 6. as
arguments to enforce the Exhortation of Praying for all, and if the first all
for whom we are to Pray, be not the Elect only, then the other that follows is
not. The first argument seems to arise as the reason of the Exhortation of
Praying for all, in the word therefore. I Exhort therefore, verse. 1. which
relates to something spoken before, as a reason of the Exhortation, and most
probably to chapter 1. 15. This is a Faithful saying, and Worthy of all
acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world, to save sinners. i. e.
Sinners in general, without exception, or limitation (if they believe and obey
the Gospel,) I Exhort therefore, that Prayers be made for all Men. In that
which follows:

The 1. Argument to enforce the Exhortation is, v. 3. This is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. A great encouragement it is to Pray
for all, it being good and acceptable in the sight of God.

The 2 is verse. 4. Who will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge
of the Truth. It Is the same all, that we are to pray for, and a great
encouragement it is to Pray for them, if God wills to have them saved.

And the 3. Argument is verse. 5. From the Mediatory office of Christ, for there
is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus; a great
encouragement it is, to Pray for all men, Jesus Christ being upon his Mediatory
Office and Work for men in general.

The 4th Argument is, verse. 6. He gave himself a ransom for all, and therefore,
it is no marvel he Mediates for all, and commands us to Pray for all, it being
the same all that we are to Pray for, that he dyed for, and for whom he
Mediates, and that he will have to be saved; now let us consider, whether this
be all the Elect only. Two things declare the contrary. First, It Is for all
Men, for Kings, and for all in authority. And surely all Men, and all in
Authority, are not the Elect only, especially in those days, when the most of
men were Heathen Idolaters, and almost all that were in Authority the same, and
yet this is the all, that God will have us Pray for, that he wills to be
saved, and for whom Christ died, and for whom he mediates. And if this all be
the Elect only, then there are more Elect than they will grant, or (I think)
any else, and by this way the other Scriptures that assures us of Christ dying
for all, be understood. And further, the Scripture lets us to know, that some
denied the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2. 1. I know men exercise their wits,
to get off from the weight of this Scripture, which as a Talent of Lead, sinks
them in this matter, as Death of ^ath, p. 251. 252. That the word translated
Lord, is not (...), which is given to Christ, but (...), commonly given to the
Father, so that it is a doubt, whether it is Christ or the Father that is
intended in the word Lord. 1. I think there is no ground of doubt in the
matter, but that it is Christ that is intened. For I think we rarely (if at
all) find any mentioned that did deny God the Father, for all the world
confesses that there is a God; but the Antichrists and Heretics, were such,
as after they had owned Christ, denied him, 1 John 2. 22, 23. and 4. 3. 2 Pet.
2. 20.

2. The matter is all one, (...) signifies Lord, Ruler, Master, and (...) the
same, but be it the Father, or the Son, it is all one in this matter, if it be
the Father that bought, it was the Son sure enough, that was the Price of our
Redemption, 1 Cor. 6. 20. seems to attribute the buying to the Father, ye are
bought with a Price, therefore Glorify God in your Bodies and in your Spirits
which are his. That is, his by purchase; so that let the word Lord intend, the
Father or the Son, it is all one, in the true sense thereof, the Blood of Christ
being the Price,

Another shift is, There is no mention of Blood in the Text, and therefore a
doubt whether it was with the purchase of the Blood of Christ that they were
bought.

No more is Blood mentioned, 1 Cor 6. 20. the word (...), properly intends to
buy, purchase or procure, and is the same as 2 Pet. 2. 1. and 1 Cor. 7. 23. And
I suppose, none dare say, that the Price, was not the Blood of Christ, tho
Blood is not mentioned in either, and I think, I may safely say, that in the
New Testament, wherever the Redemption work is spoken of (as by purchase) the
Price is the Blood of Christ.

And further he says, there is no purchase, but a deliverance, from the
blindness of Judaism, in escaping the pollutions of the world. It Is true, that
was the effect of the purchase, the same as to hem that were not fallen, but
were in the precious Faith of the Gospel. chapter 1. verse. 4. Having escaped the
corruptions that are in the world through lust, the same that is spoken of, of
them that were fallen, chapter 2. 18. They were such as had clean escaped from them
who live in Error, and verse. 20. They had escaped the Pollutions of the world,
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; where is as much
said of them (if not more) as of them that were still in the precious Faith of
the Gospel, chapter 1. verse. 4.

And further he says, The Apostle speaks of Wolves and Hypocrites, in respect
of that estimation others had assumed, and of the profession themselves made,
to be purchased by him.

Whereas it appears, and is apparent, that the greatness of their sin lay in
this, in denying the Lord that bought them, had he not bought them, they could
not have committed that sin, but to deny the Lord that bought them, was the
greatness of their sin, especially having professed Faith in him: and indeed, to
deny that the Lord has bought the world, if it be not the same sin, yet it is
very near of kin to it. These are some of the devices of the wise and learned,
to out the great purchase of the Blood of Christ: Namely, that he gave not his
flesh for the life of the world. Joh. 6. 51.


Christ. If so, why then are not all saved?


Min. See the fourth inference from this matter.


Christ. The Opposites to this say, that Christ Prayed not for the world, and
he died not for those for whom be would not Pray?


Min. I know that this is a common and great argument in their esteem for their
cause, but indeed has nothing at all in it; for were there no more to be said
in this matter but this, suppose it true (which is far from it) that Christ did
not Pray for the world, yet that proves not that he died not for the world: And
that

1. Because no Argument, or Inference drawn from any Scripture, can possibly be
true, nor may be admitted of, that is contrary to the express Letter and Scope
of Scripture as this is, as before has been plainly proved.

2. Because, Christ died for (and will save) those for whom he Prayed not, viz.
Abraham, Isaac and Ja^^, and all the Prophets and Righteous men, that dyed
before he came in the flesh, or made that Prayer, Joh. 17. Unless they will
deny that he dyed for them, or affirm that he Prayed for them after they were
dead, which I think, they will scarce do either.

But 2. Tho Christ in his Prayer, Joh. 17. Particularly Prayed for his
Disciples, verse. 9. And for all actual believers, verse. 20. And if he
interceeds for none else, then he Prayed not, nor interceeds for the Conversion
of any, no, not for their Elect world, and then (on their own account) he
prayed not for them, for they say, he prayed not for the world; and yet they
say the Elect are the world, so that on their account, he prayed not, nor
interceeds for the Conversion of any, but only for his Disciples and actual
believers. By which you may see how ill their arguments will hold together.

3. Christ did pray for the world; and this is most apparent, if we consider
his Prayer, which has in this matter three Gradations. 1. He Prays
distinctly for his present Disciples, verse. 9. And in this petition, he prayed
not for the world, nor for all Believers. 2. In verse. 26. He prayed for all
Believers. 3. And in this Petition, he did as well pray for the world, as for
Believers: that being the reason (yea and all the reason rendered) why he
prayed for Believers, it was for the worlds false, verse. 21. That Believers
might so walk, in Unity, that the world seeing thereof might believe that he
was sent of God. By which it is apparent that the very end of his praying for
Believers was for the worlds sake, in which he as really prayed for the world,
as for Believers, and wonderful ignorance it is, in those who affirm, that he
did not pray for the world.


Christ. Some will say, (as Death of death) that for the world believing, it
intends not believing unto life, but a Conviction, that Christ was not what
they took him to be, i. e. a seducer and false Prophet.


Min. This is boldly affirmed, but the plain truth of the matter is, that the
great end of Christ in praying for Unity among Believers was, that the world
might believe that he was the sent of God, i. e. That they might believe and be
saved. It being evident, that to believe he was the sent of God, includes the
whole Faith of the Gospel, the same as the Apostles had, who were the first in
his prayer, v. 8. They have known surely that I came out from thee, and have
believed that thou did send me. So chapter 16. 30. And so, of all other
believers. Joh. 8. 24. and 20. 31. 1 John 4. 2. and 5. 1. So that it is most
evident, that Christ's prayer for the world was, that they might believe and be
saved.


Christ. Whence is it, that to believe that Christ is the sent of God, is so
commonly stated in Scripture to be the Faith of the Gospel, to which Salvation
is ensured, seeing there are many other things to be believed concerning him,
without believing of which we cannot be saved.


Min. 1. Because to believe that he was the Messiah promised, the sent of God,
was the whole of Faith, before his sufferings, Mat. 16. 16, 17. Joh. 17. 8.

2. Because, after his sufferings, if they believed that he was the Christ, the
sent of God, then Faith in his Death and Resurrection, with the ends thereof
was included therein.

3. Because it is most apparent that the great ends of his coming into the
world, was understood in a great measure, both by Jews and Gentiles before he
came, tho the manner of his effecting thereof they were greatly ignorant in,
viz. by his being a sacrifice for sin; but that the end of his coming was to be
the Savior of the world, they knew, the Jews by the prophesies and promises
thereof, that he should be for Salvation to the ends of the Earth, Isa. 49. 6.
and 45. 22. Mal. 1. 11. Suitable to which is the saying of Simeon. Luke 2. 32. A
light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy People Israel. And John the
Baptist, the forerunner of Christ, says, John 1. 29. Behold the lamb of God,
that takes away the sins of the world. And after his sufferings, John the
Apostle and Evangelist, testifies 1 John 4. 14. We have seeen and do testify,
that the Father sent the Son, the Savior of the world. The weight of this
Testimony is, to confirm, that the Father had sent him that was promised, the
Savior of the World: this being their great work, to convince the world, and
confirm believers, that he was the promised Messiah, the Savior of the World.
Act. 9. 22. and 18. 28. And that he suffered, and was raised again from the
dead. 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4.

And as it was understood among the Jews, that when he came, it was to be the
Savior of the world, so was it likewise among the Gentiles, by their converse
with the Jews, and Septuagint translation many among the Gentiles, expected the
coming of the Jews Messiah, and understood that the end of his coming was to be
the Savior of the World, Joh. 4, 25. 26. The Woman says to him, I know that
Messiah comes which is called Christ, when he is come, he will tell us all
things, verse. 29. The Woman goes into the City and says, see a Man that told
me all that ever I did; is not this the Christ. And verse. 40, 41, 42. The
Samaritans believed and said, we have heard him our selves, and know that this
is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the World, tho they were of the Gentiles,
yet these were Principled in this (and that truly too) that the Messiah
promised, was to be the Savior of the world, and therefore the great Doctrine,
to be taught, and matter of Faith was, to believe that he was the Messiah, the
sent of God, which as thus understood included the whole of the Gospel. A sin
and a shame it is, that we who profess to believe him to be the Son, and sent
of God, should deny him to be the Savior of the World, and so in this great
matter, to come short of the Faith, both of Jews and Gentiles, before he came
in the Flesh, and before he suffered for the sins of the World.


Christ. It is objected; If Christ dyed for the World, why is not the Gospel
Preached to all the World, there being many parts of the world where it is not
known, and it is not likely he should dye for them, and not Vouchsafe to make
it known to them.


Min. As to this, it is enough (were there no more to be said in this matter)
that the Lord both sent the Gospel by Commission, to be Preached to all the
Creation, Mar. 16. 15. Among all Nations, Luke 24. 47. So that there is no bar
(or limit) set by the Lord upon it; the defect lies in Men, and not in the
Lord, or the Commission for publishing thereof, it having been the usual method
of God in his Dispensations toward Men, to give the word, and leave the Issue
to men for the improvement thereof; so he did to Adam, and so to the world, in
the Law of Creation, Romans 1. 20, 21. Act. 17. 26, 27. And so to Israel of old,
and so in the Gospel. Mar. 16. 15, 16. Israel of old often became strangers to
the Law, and sometimes lost it, and after, found it again, 2 King. 2. 8. And
tho the world was more large (unto whom the Gospel was sent) than the house of
Israel, to whom the Law was sent, yet God had so ordered it (over and above the
general Commission for publishing thereof) that at the first pouring down of
the Spirit in order thereunto, there were present, some out of every Nation
under Heaven, Act. 2. 5. Which doubtless tended much to the publishing of the
Gospel among the Nations, Col. 1. 23. And if the Nations have lost it, or be
Apostatized from the truth thereof, the fault is in themselves, and not in God,
nor does it at all argue, that Christ died not for them, nor that if they
perish, it is for want of a Sacrifice or Savior; what God has done, does, or
may do, for Particular Nations, Persons, or for the world, to cure this defect
must be from his Grace, over and above the general and unlimited Commission for
publishing thereof to the world

2. It Is as good an argument, to assert that the greatest part of the world was
not lost by Adam's transgression, because they did not (nor do not) know it nor
can they know it, without the Divine and Scripture Revelation; as to affirm,
that the second Adam died not for them, because they did not (or do not) know
it; or to affirm, that he dyed not for all, or any part of the world that was
dead and past before his sufferings, because they did not, nor could not hear
thereof and know it. All shall hear thereof and know it in the end. 1 Timothy 2.
16. Phil. 2. 9, 10. Rev. 5. 13.


Christ. It Is strongly asserted (in Death of death) that for whom Christ dyed,
for them he interceeds, and that they shall certainly be saved, and that he
dyed for none else, unless we will Blasphemously ascribe, want of Wisdom, Power
and Efficiency of working to the Agent; the sum of all is, that for whom he
dyed for them only he interceeds, and they shall certainly be saved and none
else: He being heard in what ever he interceeds for Joh. 11. 41, 42. And
therefore he died and interceeds for the Elect only, and they only shall be
saved.


Min. The answer to this will lead us into the Third particular mentioned, viz.
The varieties of the ends designed by this one Sacrifice, with the certain
effecting of all the ends designed thereby, which will further confirm the
truth of his being a Sacrifice for the sins of the world, those who are of the
narrow principle and Spirit, can see but one end designed in this undertaking,
viz. To dye for the Elect only, and to damn all the world besides. But we shall
find in Scripture, varieties of Glorious ends intended thereby, some of which,
must go before the Salvation of the Elect. And without which, there had been no
Election or Salvation to any.

But this I would should be especially noted, that Gods love to the World in
the gift of his Son; and Christ giving himself a Sacrifice for the life of the
World, is the Basis and Foundation of all Christian Faith, and whatever things
were designed thereby, is founded upon, and must have its spring and effecting,
from this general Love, and general Sacrifice, the denial of which, tends to
root up the Foundation of Gospel, Faith and Salvation, as you may understand in
that which follows.

Now I come to show the variety of the ends designed by this one Sacrifice, and
the suitable advantages thereof, according to those ends designed thereby.

1. By this one Sacrifice, Mankind and the whole World was continued and
preserved, in order to the Restitution of all things (which was designed
thereby) without which Sacrifice (as lying in promise and virtually taking
place Genesis 3. 15.) Both Man and the World had been ended by the first sin and
fall, Psalm. 75. 3. The Earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved, I
bear up the Pillars thereof. It Is not spoken of the Father, that is plain. verse
2, 3. Then it must be of the Prophet, or of Christ, not of the Prophet, for he
could not bear up the Pillars of the Earth, and therefore it must intend
Christ, by whom are all things, 1 Cor. 8. 6. And by whom all things consist,
Col. 1. 17. Who lights every Man that comes into the World, Joh. 1. 9. And
that not only upon the account of Creation as it was made by him; but on the
account of Redemption, when by sin it was dissolved, if the promise of Christ a
Sacrifice had not intervened; and therefore it is said, Rev. 13. 8. That he was
a Lamb slain, from the Foundation of the World, viz. His Sacrifice then to
come, virtually took place to bear up the World, and by virtue thereof, (...)
has been (and shall be) preserved to the Restitution of all things, Act. 3. 21.
So that not only the Being of Mankind and the whole World is continued by this
one Sacrifice, but likewise all the good that Men possess and enjoy in this
World, is by virtue of this one Sacrifice, so that I may say in this matter, as
the Apostle in a differing case, behold, I show you a mystery. Yet revealed by
the Sacrifice himself, Joh. 6. 53. Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye
eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no life in you;
and that not only by Faith unto life Eternal, but unless we enjoy all the good
things of this life, as coming to us by the Blood of Christ, this one general
Sacrifice, we have not the Gospel light and life in us. This is the first end
and Effect of general Grace, by the general Sacrifice, that the sin of the
World is safer taken away thereby, as that Mankind and the whole World, is (and
shall be) preserved and continued to the times of the Restitution of all
things: and this was so great an end, as without which there could have been no
Election or Salvation of any.

2. And as an effect of this first design, was designed and effected, the
Reconciliation of the World to God, and that not only to enjoy good things from
God here, on the temporal account, but so far, as that nothing stands in the
way to hinder the special Reconciliation and Salvation, but unbelief and
disobedience to the Gospel, where the Gospel comes, Joh. 3. 16, 19. That there
is such a universal Reconciliation thereby. See Col. 1. 20 And having made
peace by the Blood of his Cross, by him to Reconcile all things to himself, I
say, whether things in Heaven, or things in Earth, 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in
Christ, Reconciling the World to himself, not imputing their sins. All Men are
so far Reconciled to God by this one Sacrifice, as that nothing stands in the
way to hinder their Salvation but themselves: Who ever will may come and take
of this Water of Life freely, Rev. 22. 17. And by virtue of the same Sacrifice,
who ever has feared God, and wrought Righteousness since the first sin and
fall, has been accepted, before the Gospel Grace was known in the World, as
it is now made manifest, Act. 10. 34, 35. Thus far the sin of the World is taken
away.

3. The whole is so far Reconciled to God by this one Sacrifice, and sin not
imputed, so as not to hinder the Resurrection of all, and the Restitution, this
being the great and universal end of God in this matter; sin would have buried
all in Oblivion for ever, but by this means, shall be a universal deliverance,
1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. Romans 5. 18. And with Mankind, the Renovation and Restitution
of all things, that fell by the sin of the first Man. That as all fell by the
Sin of the first Man, so shall all be Restored by the second, which shall be
the new World, or World to come, Heb. 2. 5, 8, 12. Pet, 3. 13. Rev. 21. 5. And
on this account He gave his Flesh for the Life of the World, Joh. 6. 51. In and
over which shall be his Eternal Kingdom and Glory with his Saints, Rev. 11. 15.
and 22. 5. And in this sense also, he has taken away the sins of the World.

4. He dyed, for the Elect, for the Sheep, for the Church, Act. 28. 20. Ephesians. 5.
25. And as he dyed for them, so they shall have the special Benefit, Blessing
and Salvation thereby, he is the Savior of all, but especially of them that
believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10. But this Salvation of the Elect of Believers, as it is
certain, so it is founded in the general Grace, and in the general Sacrifice, so
that we may safely conclude, that had there been no such general Grace, nor
general Sacrifice, there had been no such thing as Election or special Grace to
any, had not God compassed the World in this wonderful design of Grace, all had
been lost, by the first sin and fall, and buried in Oblivion, and this
universal design of Grace to the World, compasses and includes all
particulars; and that is it I say, that special Grace is founded in general
Grace, that had there been no such general Grace, to the World, there had been
no special Grace and Salvation to any, therefore to out this general Grace and
Sacrifice, is in it self, really to out and end all the Grace and Salvation of
the Gospel.

5. By the Death, and Resurrection of Christ was designed, and is, and shall be
effected, the Lordship of Christ over all. It Is true, he was Lord of all by
right of Creation, Col. 1. 16. But this Lordship by right of Redemption, must
be arrived to by his suffering, as a Sacrifice for the Redemption of the World,
because all was lost, both Man and the World by the sin of Man, and therefore
without a Redemption, there would have been no Men, nor World to be Lord of,
Romans 14. 9. For this end, he dyed, and rose and revived, that he night be Lord
both of the Dead and of the Living. This was one end of his death, and such
(and so great) an and thereof, as if we suppose it left out; we may well
suppose he had never dyed for the World, and on this account it is, that this
Dignity is conferred upon him by the Father, as worthy thereof by right of
purchase, Phil. 2. 10, 11. Rev. 5. 12, 13.

2. That all those designed ends of this general Love, by the general
Sacrifice, are, and shall be, certainly effected, it being that for which he
dyed, and for which he Mediates, most of them being absolute and inconditional,
as to Men, viz. the Preservation of this present World, till the times of
Restitution, the general Reconciliation, Restitution and common Salvation, only
a right to the special Reconciliation, Justification and Salvation, is stated
and must be obtained on the terms and conditions of the Gospel, all must come
in and obtain by Faith, Obedience and Perseverance, Mar. 16. 15, 16. Col. 1.
22, 23. Jam. 1. 25. Rev. 22. 14. And all depends upon, and shall be effected by
virtue of the Death, Resurrection and Mediation of our Lord Jesus; he dyed for
all, and Mediates for all, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. And that he Mediates for all,
further appears, in that he has made it our Duty to pray for all Men, 1 Timothy 2.
1, 2. For Enemies, Persecutors, and them that hate us, that so we may be the
Children of our Heavenly Father, Mat. 5. 44, 45. And surely all Men, Enemies
and Persecutors, are not the Elect only, and we have no ground to believe that
Christ has made it our Duty to Pray or interceed for any things, or Persons,
for which he will not Interceed for, because if we pray for any thing he will
not interceed for, how can we expect him to present such prayers as acceptable
to the father? Rev. 8. 3. he died for the Elect, his Church and mediates for
them. Romans 8. 34. Joh. 14. 16. he died for the World, that he might be the
visible Lord thereof, and mediates for the effecting of it, Psa. 2. 8, 9. tho
this is ignorantly enough, applied to his meditation for the Elect, by some
professing themselves to be wise, which if so, and they should prove to be some
of those Elect, they would much miss of their expectation, it being to break
them with a red of Iron, and to dash them in pieces like a potters vessel. The
same as Rev. 2. 26, 27. where the Elect Overcomers, shall be with Christ in
this breaking work, it being the Worlds portion in the Judgment, to be thus
broken, before they obtain what of grace may be designed for them. Psa. 82. 8.
you may see more of this in Chap. 8.

And as for his being heard in all things he mediates for, it is already fully
granted, only this we are to understand, that in his mediation for men here, in
order to believing and persevering in grace, it is for a sufficiency of means
and power for Effecting the end, and that he is heard therein, tho the end may
not be Effected, his mediation being an official mediation, and having to do
with capable subjects and not with brutes, and those who assert that what ever
he mediates for, shall be Effected in their sense, do really (tho not
intentionally) end all faith, Election and the mediation of Christ, in as much
as (by this assertion) there are now no believers in the world, for he prayed
for such a visible unity among all believers, as that the world might behold
it, and be converted thereby. Joh. 17. 20, 21, 23. but there is no such visible
union among all believers, but rather such visible divisions, that tends to
harden and stumble sinners, so that there are none of the believers yet in the
world, for whom Christ interceeds; or we must understand it as I have said,
unless they will have the Roman unity to be the matter intended: Which (such as
it is) is maintained by persecutions, massacres and blood, a union more suting
brutes than christian men. But we shall one day know, that the dreadful
divisions among professed Christians, is not for wans of a mediator, but from our
own sinful selves.


Christ. I am well satisfied in the truth of what you have said about this
matter (in all the parts thereof) I desire you to give me some further
instructions, by way of inference for my learning herein.


Min. 1. You may learn, what bad and sad work they make, who deny the general
grace of God to men, and the general sacrifice of Christ for the world, casting
contempt and reproach thereupon, calling and accounting them adversaries that
believe and own it, when themselves it is, that teach a doctrine and lay a
foundation the Scripture knows not, viz. that God loved but a few only in the
gift of his son, and that Christ died only for a few, and reprobated all the
rest to eternal destruction, so denying the Scripture, and root up the
foundation of Gospel faith and salvation.

2. Of the impossibility for any person thereby, to have any gospel ground of
faith and hope of salvation, tho they talk high, from fancy and imagination,
but not from Scripture grounds, for from that notion, no man can have a
Scripture ground of hope, it being so exceeding contrary to the gospel and
says thereof, the says of the gospel, being that to which the promise is made
(as I shall show in the next Chapter) there can be no grounded hope of
salvation out of the faith thereof.

3. It justifies the practice, and takes off the reproach, cast upon such as
are instructed in the doctrine of the general grace of God to men, viz. that
they are adversaries to the truth, and are all for that doctrins and discourse,
as if their religion consisted wholly therein; I say it is no marvel it is so,
being the foundation of all Gospel faith, and without it can be none in the
truth thereof, even those who oppose it are beholding to it, if they held to
their own principles without contradiction, it would appear to be the most
irreligious and ridiculous in the world called Christian, but they cannot
preach to the world without the help of general grace, tho they preach it in
the highest contradiction to their own principles, which if plainly preached to
the people as held and printed would affright the people, and shame themselves
out of their work, If they should tell the people that they bring them tidings
of great joy to all people, that Christ dyed for the World, but it was but for
a very few, the elect World only, and that all the rest were reprobated before
the world was, that they were made to sin and be damned, and that they have no
more power to believe unto life, than brute Beasts, than a stock, or a stone,
or a dead corpse; and yet for all this, it is their duty to believe, and they
must be damned the deeper in hell if they do not believe, and yet if they do
believe, if they be not Elect, they are but Hypocrites and must be damned: This
being the spirit and life of that principle, and of their gospel in the plain
truth thereof, which if they dealt honestly with their hearers, they ought to
preach; it being their gospel and faith, as in Print and discourse is fully
manifest, so that did they not mix their doctrine with general grace, tho not
in love thereto (standing in direct opposition thereof) to make it savory
without which it would appear to be loathsome unto all. And therefore the
doctrine of the general grace of God by Jesus Christ, being the alone
foundation, savory and saving doctrine of the gospel, Christians instructed
therein have no cause to be ashamed of the reproach thereof, but to glorify
God in this behalf, and others may learn to be silent for shame, and will, when
they understand the truth and worth of this glorious doctrine.

4. You may learn from hence, where the difference about salvation and
damnation lies (and why all are not saved; a matter it is of great and weighty
concern unto all) and that is in believing or not believing the gospel; it is
faith and unbelief that makes the difference, and not the eternal decrees of
Election and Reprobation, and want of a Savior, as some unjustly, and untruly
assert, to the dishonor of God, the Gospel, and wrong of men. The condemnation
will not be for want of love in God, or for want of a sacrifice and Savior ^
but for men's wilful and chosen wickedness, and that they shall one day know.
Joh. 3. 16, 19. And therefore let the fomenters of this unholy doctrine, be
ashamed, any more to lay the sin and damnation of the World on the holy and
righteous God, it being so apparent from the word of the God of truth, that
it is obedience, and disobedience to the Gospel that makes the difference, and
not the want of a sacrifice and Savior.

3. It gives us to understand the vanity of that doctrine that teaches
Justification and Salvation by an inconditional Covenant; It Is true that the
general parts thereof, are wholly inconditional both in promise and performance
(as before has been showed) and that part only* that assures salvation to
sinners, with Eternal glory, is conditional (which is alone pleaded for to be
inconditional) I may safely say, there is no man on Earth can show any promise
of salvation in the Gospel, that is wholly inconditional, but that the
condition i^ either expressed or employed, Mar. 16. 15, 16. which is the
commission for gospel preaching and salvation, and carries in it the sum of
the whole, according to which all promises may (and should) be understood, and
was so by the Apostles, Act. 2. 38. and 16. 31. Jam. 1. 25. Rev. 2. 7, 11, 17,
26. and 3. 5, 12, 21. and 21. 7. and 22. 14. so that this inconditional
covenant (in the sense pleaded for) is that which the doctrine of the Gospel is
altogether unacquainted with.


Christ. Some will grant, that there are conditional promises in the Gospel,
but withal, there are absolute inconditional promises for performance thereof,
as Sovereignty, Page 295. called, conditional promises, and promises of the
condition; those named are Ezekiel. 36. 25. Jer. 31. 32. Ezekiel. 11. 19. and 36. 26.
with others of like import.


Min. I doubt not, but fully believe, that God grants a sufficiency of power
for performance of what he requiers, or I must be like that evil servant, that
said he was a hard Master, Math. 25. 24, 28. Yet, 2. I believe it to be a great
mistake in the application of those absolute promises to the present time and
state, which are all promises to the house of Israel, and to be performed at
their restitution and redemption, in the World to come when they shall all
return to the Lord, as I shall fully show in Chap. 8. to make the promises
(that are proper to that people, and to be performed in their restitution)
applicable to us gentiles before that time and state (as it has been common) is
dangerous, being a perversion of the intent and design of God therein.

And further, it is ridiculous to apply those promises made to the house of
Israel, (as such) to unconverted persons among the gentiles under the notion of
Election; as promises of conversion. So that if any will yet apply those
promises to the present time and state which in the largeness thereof cannot
truly be) yet the persons to whom they are thus applied, must be of the house
of Israel, viz. true Jews, either by nature or grace, before any of these
promises can be applied to them; they are not to the sinners of the gentiles,
who by nature, before conversion, are children of wrath; and not of the house
of Israel, to whom these promises belong; nor can they take place (according to
the true intention of them) till the time of Isreal's redemption is come: it is
true they are grounds of faith and consolation to true believers, that such a
time shall come.


Christ. It Is usually objected, that if there is any condition for us to
perform, on which salvation depends, it renders the salvation not to be of
grace; makes it uncertain, tends to destroy free grace, and turns the Gospel
into a covenant of works.


Min. 1. We may not, to satisfy our own imaginations, turn away from the whole
and holy word of God, in this (or any other matter, if the Lord has so stated
it (as is undeniable) let men be silent before him, and learn to know there
duty, looking to God for divine assistance, in which way the certainty of
obtaining is assured, Jam. 1. 5. Math. 10. 22.

2. The performance of the holy terms of the Gospel on which salvation is
dispensed, no whit derogates from the freeness of the grace and salvation
thereof; it is a vain (if not a profane) imagination so to think. What now
makes the difference (in all sober men's apprehensions) but faith and unbelief,
obedience and disobedience, holiness and unholiness? If there are no conditions
on which Gospel Grace and life is dispensed, Why then, are not the unbelieving
profane and unholy* as freely and fully enrighted therein as any? Which (...)
contrary to the Scriptures, and the common principles of all sober men.

3. The holy terms of interest in (and obtaining of) the salvation of the
gospel, no whit derogates from the freeness thereof, nor renders it to be a
covenant of works, because there is something for us to do in order to the
obtaining thereof, and this is fully demonstrated from the parable of the
marriage of the Kings son, Math. 22. 1, 2. etc. which is apparent (and I think
by most is so understood) does intend, the tenders of the Gospel, first to the
Jews, and their invitation to the Gospel marriage supper, with their refusing
the invitation, Act. 1^. 46. Now the question is, 1. Whether God and Christ
were real in this invitation, or did mock with them? Which I suppose none will
be so graceless as to deny the one, or affirm the other, but that if they had
accepted the invitation, there was life for them, and in their wilful refusal
they lost it.

2. Then, whether the life being tendered to them, on the terms of their
acceptance thereof, did any whit derogate from the grace of the Gospel? Or cast
any cloud thereon? Or render it to be a Covenant of works; because it was
tendered to them on terms of their acceptance thereof?

It Is a wonderful mistake among men, not to allow that to be free grace, which
the Scripture so calls, viz. that which is free for all commerce, Rev. 22. 17.
whoever will, let him come and take of the water of life freely. Joh. 7. 37.
This is free grace, if the Scripture may determine; what ever God works in
some more than in others, Is a secret, and comes rather under the muchness of
grace, than the freeness thereof, Romans 5. 17. while he does enough for all, and
(as one says) more (...) enough, viz. more than men could in reason de^^, his
grace being open and free to all that will accept (...): The holy terms no whit
derogate from the freeness ^^ereof, but renders it the more credible to all
rational ^ersons. It no whit derogates from a Princes grace in ^^doning
Malefactors on terms they accept thereof, and become good subjects for time to
come; so it derogates not from the freeness of the grace of God by Jesus,
^^rough faith and holiness as the terms thereof, it being ^^e holy prudence of
God to have it, and the contrary would render it irrational and incredible unto
men.


Christ. I thing you have spoken fully to this; but some (...), that your self
was sometimes of another mind in these matters.


Min. 1. It Is easily granted; which demonstrates that we are men, and liable to
failings in the great things of the Gospel.

2. We have read and heard of the apostasy from the faith, foretold in the
Scripture. 2. These. 2. and as it is our great concern (so it will be our great
mercy) to get see therefrom, which is not so easily, nor suddenly arrived to,
as is by some supposed, it being learnt by tradition, and so is become habitual
and natural to us.

3. As it is no loss, the change of a bad principal for a ^^tter, and error for
a truth, so in it self it is no shame or dishonor, but a virtue and a glory.
And I am greatly of the mind, that there are very many, that need such a
change, and I pray it may be, before it is to late; if men change not, both in
principle and practice in these ^^d the like matters, what will be the issue, I
leave to the Lord and Judge to determine.


CHAP. IV.
What the Gospel is, and what is the faith thereof, to which the life and glory
therein is promised.

Christ. I Desire to make some further enquiry about the Gospel, and 1. I
desire to know what the Gospel is.


Min. To this I think I may say, it is generally understood, that (...) intends
a joyful message, glad or good tidings, and so it is frequently translated, as
Luke 2. 10. Romans 10. 15. from Isa. 52. 7. Nah. 1. 15. so Act. 3 33. And we
declare unto you glad tidings, etc. which is commonly translated Gospel, i. e.
glad or good tidings, and the truth is, that there is no sad or bad tidings in
the Gospel, till rejected, or neglected, or not believed and lived to,
according to the truth thereof, and design of God therein.


Christ. What is the glad tidings of the Gospel, and wherein does it consist?


Min. That God sent his Son in love to the World, to all people, Joh. 3. 16.
Luke 2. 10. the entrance of this glad tidings lay, 1. in promise, Genesis 3. 15.
and 12. 3. and 22. 18. And now in performance, Gal. 4. 4.

2. That Jesus Christ being sent for that end* Joh. 6. 38. Heb. 10. 7. did in
love freely lay down his life a sacrifice for the sins of the World, Joh. 1.
29. and 6. 51. 1 John 2. 2. and this is called Gospel or good tidings. 1 Cor.
15. 1. the Apostle calls it the Gospel that he preached unto them, and ver. 34.
explains this Gospel, what it is. i. e. that Christ died for our sins, and was
raised again the third day according to the Scriptures, and indeed if he had
not been raised again, there had been no glad tidings in his dying for our sins?


Christ. How shall we account it glad tidings? Was it not sad tidings rather,
that the prince of life, the Lord of Glory, should be crucified and killed for
our sins.


Min. 1. It Is true, it was sad that man by sin was fallen into such an estate of
sin and death, as that nothing short of the life and blood of the Son of God,
the Prince of life, and Lord of Glory, could help him out thereof, the due
sense of which, it concerns us to keep duly and daily upon our hearts, to keep
us humble, and thankfully to prize the mercy.

2. It was sad, that when he was come into the world, that the World, (viz.
both Jews and Gentiles) should be so bad, as to unite to put him to death.

Yet, 3. It stands true, that it was (and is) the best tidings that ever came
to the world, that God should so love the world, as to send his Son; and that
Christ should so love the World, as to give himself for the life of the world,
is the greatest Mystery of grace, and the best tidings that possibly could come
to the world, so that it may well be called glad tidings, it being the
foundation of all Gospel doctrine, and so of all Gospel faith, of all Gospel
grace, and of all Gospel glory, it is all built on this one Sacrifice for sin;
on this foundation all is built, pardon, peace, acceptance in service,
preservation too, and the glory to come, it is all founded here, Romans 1. 16.
Ephesians. 1. 14.

3. And as the effect of this foundation glad tidings of the fathers love, and
the sons giving himself for the life of the world, as the glad tidings of the
restitution of all things, which was the great design of God and Christ in this
wonderful undertaking, the recovery of mankind out of that state of death fallen
into by the first transgression, Act. 4. 2. 1 Cor 15. 21, 22. and with man the
whole creation shall be restored, Act. 3. 21. Romans 8. 19, 20, 21. 2 Pet. 3. 13.
Which shall be the new and restored world, called in Scripture the World to
come, Heb. 2. 5. Rev. 21. 1, 5. in and over which the Kingdom and Government of
Christ shall be eternally, Rev. 11. 15. And from hence is the Gospel so
frequently called the Gospel of the Kingdom, Mat. 4. 23. and 9. 35. and 24. 14.
Mar. 1. 14. so called not only because it opens the Kingdom to us, and prepares
us for it, but because the restitution, new world, and the kingdom of Christ
therein, is so great a part thereof, as that all before it, and without it can
be no glad tidings at all, Cor. 15. 19.


Christ. Is there nothing else in Scripture called Gospel, the word seems to be
general, and to be given to the whole Scripture of the New Testament,
especially the four Evangelists, which contains precepts and threats as well as
promises, and so^^ say, that it is all Gospel?


Min. Although the grace, the blessing, the restitution, the glory is properly
the glad tidings; yet in a right and true sense all things concurring thereunto
may be called Gospel, viz. the holy precepts directing us in the way to obtain
the glory, and the threats of Judgment and damnation, to those who reject, or
neglect it, considered as designed to prevent the damnation, and as a help to
obtain the salvation, viz. so far as it is designed to work us from sin to
Christ, and a constant cleaving to him, it is Gospel and good tidings, that
being the Prime and proper end thereof, viz. Salvation, and not damnation, but
to deliver and preserve from it, and men's destruction is (and will be) of
themselves, by wilful transgressing the good Laws of the Gospel, which (...)
not the prime design of those Laws, but salvation; yet the penalties must be
executed on the wilful transgression thereof.

It Is human good tidings, when those in human po^er, make good laws, with
strict and severe penalties, for preservation of human society, order and
property among men, their design in so doing, is not punishment primarily, but
the peace, preservation and safety of all; if men wilfully transgress and come
under the penalty, the fault is in themselves and not in those good laws; and
so it is in the present case. Hos 13. 9.


Christ. I desire you would speak something of the faith of the Gospel. viz.
what faith it is to which the salvation thereof, with eternal glory is promised?


Min. True faith, ever has been and still is to believe God, and to cleave to
him and obey him suitable to the ministration under which men have lived in all
ages. This was Abraham's faith. Romans 4. 3. Abraham believed God, and it was
counted to him for righteousness. Jam. 2. 22. this being Abraham's faith, the
father of the faithful, the faith of his children must needs be the same. So
then to believe the truth of the doctrine of the Gospel in all its parts, and
to cleave to the Lord therein, is the faith of the Gospel to which the life
thereof is promised. What the Gospel preaches to us, that we ought to believe,
and that is the faith thereof.

The doctrine of the Gospel consists especially in these particulars. 1. That
Jesus Christ is the Messiah promised, the Son of God and the son of man, the
son of David, of the seed of Abraham, according to the Scripture, Luke 1. 32.
Joh. 20. 31.

2. That God in love to the World sent him, Joh. 3. 16. and that he in love
gave himself a sacrifice and ransom for the life of the world, Joh. 6. 51. 1 Timothy 2. 6.

3. That by virtue of his death and resurrection, all shall be raised and
restored to a new life and world, when he shall come again to raise and judge
both the quick and dead, 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. 2 Timothy 4. 1. at which time or times
shall be the restitution of all things, Act. 3. 21. the new and restored world
to come, in and over which with his saints, shall be his eternal Kingdom and
glory; which will be the finishing of the Mystery, spoken of by the holy
Prophets, and then the time of this world shall be no more, Rev. 10. 6, 7. with
chap. 11. 15. and 22. 5.

4. That those who believe and obey the Gospel of this his grace and glory
shall be saved, and those who do not believe and obey him therein shall be
damned; these being the great parts of the Gospel, faith therein, and obedience
thereto, must needs be the faith of the Gospel to which the salvation thereof
is promised.

More distinctly, as to the restitution, world to come, and the eternal kingdom
of Christ therein, (tho all founded in that one sacrifice) is so great and
fundamental a part of the Gospel, as that short of it, and without it is no
Gospel, nor glad tidings at all, 1 Cor. 15. 19. all the promises both of grace
and glory Issuing here, and as it is the great doctrine of the Gospel, so it
sometimes was the common faith of saints, tho through the Apostasy, now almost
lost out of the world; that it was the common faith, appears from these
following grounds.

1. It was the faith of Abraham the father of the faithful, and very probably
so called, from his believing this general promise to the world, denoting that
our faith must be the same, or else we are not his children; that this was his
faith see Romans 4. 13. the promise that he should be the heir of the world, was
not to Abraham and his seed through the Law, but through the righteousness of
Faith. This his heirship to the world to come, was through his faith in the
promise, which faith he had before he was circumcised, v. 10, 11. and on this
faith it was, he became the heir* of the world, and father of all that do
believe. We may well suppose, that if he had not believed God in his promise of
a Son, and Seed, in whom all the Families of the Earth should be Blessed, he
had not arrived to that Blessing and Dignity, of being the Heir of the World,
and Father of all that Believe. Which must likewise be our Faith, if we will
prove our selves to be his Children, and Heirs with him of the same World;
according to promise, Romans 4. 16. Gal. 3. 29. viz. To believe the truth of the
promise relative to the World to come, and that the Son and Seed is come by
whom all shall be effected.

3. It was the common Faith of the Prophets, the Restitution of all things, was
spoken of by all the Holy Prophets since the World began, Act. 3. 1. And as I
understand, by the Learned Readers of the Jewish Rabbis, that the Restitution
and World to come, was the common Faith of the Jews, expected to be effected by
their Messiah.

3. It Is apparent, that in the Primitive time of the Gospel, it was the Faith
of all, both Ministers and People; Ministers according to the Commission
Preached it, Act. 3. 21. Romans 8. 19, 20, 21. Ephesians. 1. 10. And the People
believed it; this is plain and apparent, 2 Pet. 3. 13. Nevertheless we
according to his promise, look for a new Heavens and Earth, wherein dwells
Righteousness, Verse. 14. Wherefore, Beloved, seeing ye look for such things,
etc. Here is all, both Ministers and People, we, and ye, all looked for this
new World: and they could not look for what they did not Believe.

4. It Is the Faith that is stated by our Lord in the Commission, for Preaching
the glad tidings, Mar. 16. 15, 16. Go ye into all the World, Preach the glad
tidings to all the Creation. So the word is, tho some be so bold as to make a
mock thereof, and yet would be accounted Gospel Preachers, it is to all the
Creation. And dare any to conclude, there is nothing of Divine Wisdom in the
Lords Words; or to charge him with having so little respect to his Church, as
to state the Gospel Commission, both for Preaching, Faith and Salvation, in so
dark and dubious terms, as to need their help, to alter or amend it, and so
making themselves Wiser than the Lord.


Christ. Can you demonstrate this kind of Preaching to all the Creation, from
the Scripture, viz. That to Preach and speak thereof, is a true Preaching of
the Universal Restitution and glad tidings to all the Creation, and that to
which Christ in his Commission had relation to: if you can, I desire it, that
Men may learn not to mock.


Min. As the whole Gospel is (and shall be the fulfilling of the Prophets, Joh.
4. 38, Act. 3. 31. Rev. 1. 7, 10. It Is all stated by the Prophets, Act. 26.
22.) So the Commission for publishing thereof, must be as large as the
Prophesies that went before thereof, and a substance, very near the same
expressions; the promise was, that in him, all Nations of the Earth should be
blessed, Genesis 22. 18. Which includes the whole Restitution and World to come,
Romans 4. 13. The promises made to Abraham being the Basis and Foundation of all
the Prophesies and Promises that followed about this matter; and the Commission
of Christ suits this Promise, i. e. Of glad tidings to all the Nations of the
Earth. See Ps. 96. and 98. calling to the whole Creation, to rejoice in the
Lambs Restitution, and Rev. 5. 13. is in Vision the effecting thereof, to John,
as it shall be done when the time comes. So Ezekiel. 36. 1. to 15. Which relates
to the same time and state, tho more distinctly to the Restitution of the
Tribes of Israel, and of the Land of Canaan their promised Inheritance, where
the Prophet is commanded, to Prophecy unto the Mountains and to the Hills,
etc. Not that he was to speak to the Mountains and Hills, but to the People,
and this is called a speaking to the Mountains and Hills. And Act. 3. 21.
asserts, That the Restitution of all things, was spoken of by all the Holy
Prophets, since the World began: and the sutableness of the Commission of
Christ hereunto, is most plain, to Preach the Gospel to all the Creation, that
Men might understand and believe it and be saved, and the Practice of the
Apostles was suitable to the Commission, which should be our Practice likewise,
Act. 3. 21. Romans 8. 19, 20, 21, 22. In all four Verses in the Greek, it is the
Creation, verse. 19. The expectation of the Creation, verse. 20. The Creation was
made subject to vanity, verse. 21. The Creation it self shall be delivered, etc.
Verse. 22. The whole Creation groaneth, etc. See Ephesians. 1. 10. Rev. 5. 13. And as
this was the Doctrine of glad tidings by the Commission (from the Lord thereof)
to be Preached them, what must be the Faith, but to believe the Doctrine? He
that Believes and is Baptized shall be saved. Believes what? The Doctrine of
the Commission, the glad tidinge to all the Creation, the Restitution of all
things by Jesus Christ, Rev. 21. 5. So that in the Commission we have the
Doctrine and Faith of the Gospel, to which the life thereof is promised, which
is the general Restitution, and glad tidings to all the Creation, this being
the Doctrine and Faith, that was once delivered to the Saints, and for which we
ought garnestly to contend, Jude verse. 3.

The sum of all is, to believe, That Jesus is the Christ, the seed of Abraham
in whom all the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed; The Son of God, and the
Son of David, the true Messiah promised; that God in love sent him, and that he
in love gave himself a Sacrifice for the life of the World, and is Raised and
Ascended into Heaven, in performance of his Mediatory office for Men, and shall
come again from thence to judge the quick and the dead, and to perfect the
Restitution of all things: and to bring in the New and Restored World, in and
over which shall be his Eternal Kingdom and Glory, and that whoever do
sincerely believe and obey him in this his Grace, shall Live and Reign with him
in his Glory, Mar. 16. 15, 16. Heb. 5. 9. This is the substance of the Doctrine
and Faith of the Gospel, to which the Salvation thereof is promised, which was
once delivered to the Saints; which Doctrine and Faith should be more precious
to us than our Lives.

Or more briefly thus; Whoever comes right in the Faith and Life of the Gospel
shall be saved: this is the sum of all I seek, or plead for, it being that
which deeply concerns every one to come right in: which life is called a life
of Faith, Heb. 10. 38. A life of holiness, 1 Pet. 1. 15. A life of Humility, 1
Pet. 5. 5. A life of love both to God and Men, 1 John 4. 16, 20, 21. Mat. ^.
44, to 48. Which Faith and Life, shall certainly issue a Glory.


CHAP. V.
Of the Power and Will of Man, to believe and obey the Gospel of this Grace,
and of Regeneration, and whether there be any possibility of falling from Faith
and Grace after Believing.

Christ. IN as much as there are differing Apprehensions about the Power and
Will of Man to believe and obey the Gospel, some affirming a Power to ^e in Man
to believe, and some denying thereof; I desire your apprehension therein, it
being (I suppose) of weighty concern to be rightly understood.


Min. In as much as there are differing Apprehensions about the Power and Will
of Man, (tho I think I have said enough to it elsewhere) yet, it being a matter
of weighty concern, I shall on this occasion, say something further to it.

2. Touching the Power; that there is a power in Man to believe, with the
common helps by God afforded, especially where the Doctrine of the Gospel
comes) I ^^^ert as a great Truth, tho in this, methinks should be ^o room for
a difference, in this (I think) all agree, that all Power is of God, that it is
in him we live, move and have our being, Act. 17. 28. We cannot live, nor act,
think, nor speak without him, all Natural (and all Spiritual) Power, both of
Motion and Action, being of him and from him, in and by Jesus Christ, there
being but one Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 4. Who had his Operation and Work in the
Creation, Genesis 1. 1, 2. Job. 26. 13. Ps. 104. 30. And is the influencer thereof
still, by Jesus Christ the Redeemer, 1 Cor. 8. 6. And the same Spirit it is
that Influenceth the Gospel, to the work of Regeneration, and impowers Man
thereunto, Joh. 3. 3, 5. And so the Gospel is truly the Power of God to
Salvation, to all that do believe, Rom 1. 16. And in this (I suppose that) all
agree, that there is no Power but is of God.


Christ. I suppose that the great question about this matter, is, whether God
in the Gospel affords a sufficiency of Power (where it is published in the truth
thereof) to believe and obey it unto Life.


Min. To this I say, That we have sufficient grounds so to believe, excepting
Infants, Idiots, and distracted Persons, who have not the use and exercise of
Reason; tho no Scripture says it in express terms, yet the Reason and Truth of
the Scripture speaks it in fullness and plainness, as appears:

1. From the constant converse of God with Men ever since the Creation, not
only in the perfect, but in the fallen state, in making known his Will, and
giving Laws to Men, both Precepts and Promises, especially under the Gospel,
which is most to our case; and for us to imagine Men not to be sutably
Influenced by him, with understanding and Power, to answer his will therein, no
more than Brutes, (as some affirm) I think are Brutish thoughts of God, as well
as of Men; it would be greatly dishonorable to Men, to give Laws to Brutes, of
which they are not capable; much more dishonorable is it to God, to affirm,
that he gives Laws to Men, that are by him, made no more capable to perform
them than Brutes.

2. It appears, in that he blames and punishes (and will punish) those that
wilfully transgress his Will, and pittieth and bemoaneth those that Rebel
against him, Psalm. 81. 13. Luke 13. 34. And has made great promises to those
that believe and obey him; all which are rendered to be incredible, if Persons
be not capacitated by him to answer his will therein.

3. The contrary renders God to be unjust, and unrighteous in the Judgment, to
punish Men for not doing what they could not possibly do through impotency and
weakness: which are hard and untrue thoughts of the Righteous and Holy God.
Impossible commands, constituting no Duty, nor can the not performance thereof,
justly incur any punishment, either from God or Man.


Christ. But you know what is usually said in this matter, viz. That Men had
once a power in Adam, and list it by transgression, so that, tho Man has lost
his power to obey, yet God has not lost his right to command.


Min. This I know is a common Plea, but has nothing at all of weight in it.
For, 1. Tho Adam had a power to have yielded perfect obedience to the Law of
his maker, in his first and sinless estate, yet he had not power then to
believe and obey the Gospel, (which is our command) neither was he capable
thereof, having no need of a Savior, it being no part of the Law given to him,
neither could he obey it, therefore he could not lose that which he had not,
nor we in him; but indeed after his sin and fall, and the promise of a Savior
(it being suitable to his fallen needy Estate) he had power to believe the truth
thereof, so that it is a vain pretense, of Adams loss of what he had nor, and if
we must needs have our power in him to believe and obey the Gospel at all, it
must be after his sin and fall, when he needed a Savior; and if so, let it be
proved when he lost it, and that we lost it in him.

2. If this suffice not, let it be proved, that since the first sin and fall,
God has given (or gives his commands) to the lost power, and that he will
Judge and Condemn Men, for not improving a power which they had not, but (as
they say) was lost long before When this is done, it will be of weight, but not
till then,

3. As it is unscriptural and irrational so to affirm, so it is greatly
dishonorable unto God, and his Gospel Grace to Men, and indeed nulls and ends
it, rendering it to be no Grace at all, to suppose that after such provision
and declarations of Gospel Grace to Men, in so wonderful a way, that he should
state the obtaining an interest therein, to a power lost for some thousands of
Years before, which is indeed, to state it on impossible terms, is dishonorable
unto God, rendering his design in the Gospel of his Grace to Men, to be but a
Fable, and of none effect, yea to be pernicious, as a Trap or Snare to catch
Men, instead of free Grace: to damn them for what they could not do; which
dishonorable, dreadful and dangerous Notions are to be abhorred by all that Love
the Name and Honor of God, so that a power in Man to believe and obey the
Gospel, with the helps therein afforded, which is all of God, is without all
just ground of doubt.


Christ. Some affirm, that the reason why Men believe not, is not because they
cannot (tho they cannot) but because they will not, viz. If they could, yet
they will not, therefore their damnation is just.


Min. It Is true, they will not, who wilfully refuse and reject the Grace, on
the Holy terms thereof, and therefore their damnation is just.

Yet, 2. To say the reason why Men believe not, is not because they cannot, tho
they cannot, is all one, as to say, the reason why a blind Man does not see, is
not because he is blind and cannot, but because he will not; and the reason why
a dead Man does not live, move and act, as living Men do, is not because he
cannot, tho he cannot, but because he will not: especially their Opinion being,
that Men by Nature, are as dead, blind and incapable to understand, move or act
in Spiritual things, as a dead Corpse, a stock or a stone is in Natural things;
and also that God has destinated them, that believe not by an Eternal and
unchangeable Decree thereunto, which imports an impossibility for any such to
believe and be saved, being by Eternal Decree determined to Sin and be Damned,
but that all Men are capable (with the common helps afforded of God) to believe
and be saved, is most apparent, or else they could not (in Justice) be capable
to be damned.


Christ. I am well satisfied in this matter, but it being so, that God affords
a sufficiency of Power to do his will; whence is it that Men's unbelief and
disobedience arises, if not from want of Power?


Min. All unbelief and disobedience to the Gospel, (...) from the wilfulness of
the will, and not from want of power to will; for the case is the same, if the
defect lay in want of Power to Will, Joh. 5. 40. Ye will not come to me that ye
might have life. It Is wilfulness and not weakness, that will prove to
Condemnation, Joh. 3. 19. As all Power is of God, the Power of all actions,
both Natural and Spiritual, so in all the Will is left free, and not forced by
any coercive Power, but by voluntary choice; as in the lowest, so in the
highest things, the Will determins the choice which I think has been the
understanding of Christians throughout all Ages since the Primitive time of the
Gospel; and is indeed both Divine and Rational.

I know many cry out upon this as free Will, as if it were reproach enough to
use that term in way of reproach; but rightly understood, viz. That Men have a
power from God to Will, and are left free for its exercise by him, and that it
is his Will that they should improve their power in Willing the best good, (not
that they do Will it, then the work would be done;) this is most apparent from
Scripture: to this purpose read and ponder well, Isa. 55. 6, 7. Rev. 22. 17.
Those calls and invitations would be to no purpose, but indeed Mockinvitations,
had not Men power and freedom of Will to answer them. And not only the
Scripture which is plain and clear for it: But, tho I am not versed in History,
yet I shall here relate what I have taken out of a Modern Author on this same
account, and I suppose credible, and not to be contradicted, viz. The Discourse
of Natural and Moral impotency, page 58. Speaking of the Ancients near the
Primitive time, says, All Men verst in their Writings, know and confess, that
all the Fathers, and whole Church (Nemine Contradicente) of the purest Ages
next after the Apostles, after a Controversy was moved concerning it, in the
second and third Century, did maintain free Will, as a foundation Principle of
all Religion against the Manichees and other Heretics that denied it. And
indeed the following Ages did also maintain it, whatever any say to the
contrary. And page 52. That Augustine lib. 2. De Precat. Merit. Remiss. Cap. 6.
Affirms it as undoubted, that God commands no Man any thing which he cannot
do, and page 53. He calls it Blasphemy to say that God commands any thing,
that Men in particular cannot do, Ser. 191. De tempore. And page, 153. That
Augustine tells us, lib. 2. De Precat. Merit. chap. 18. That it was the great
care of every Orthodox Teacher in his time, to take heed lest they did so
defend Grace, as to deny free Will, and lest they should so defend free Will,
as to deny Grace, (and a good care it was.) And further the Author says,
Neither is there (I think) to be found one of the ancients accounted Orthodox,
that does maintain (in the strict sense opposed) that God commands Men what
they cannot do, but all abhorred it, as an Opinion laying a high accusation
upon God, till after many hundred Years of this Age of Augustine.

By all which it appears, That it is no new Notion, that the miscarriage of Men,
is from their own wilfulness, and not from weakness, they shall blame
themselves and not God, in their Cendemnation; that free Grace and free Will
must stand together, (and indeed to deny the power and freedom of Will, is to
deny all Grace, for it is no Grace, but a mock, if there be no power possibly to
accept it,) and that those that were contrary minded, in the more purer times,
were accounted Heretics and Blasphemers, and how they will acquit themselves
therefrom, that now own and maintain the same, it behooves themselves well to
consider; and indeed were there no power in Men, to believe and obey the Lord,
(which his common helps afforded) they could then be capable of neither Vice
nor Virtue, but must be as the Brutes, without Sin, and how honorable this is,
either to God or Man, is easy to be understood by the weakest capacity.

Yet in this matter, two things had need prudently to be considered. 1. That
it is not perfect and sinless obedience, that is required, or that Men are
empowered to perform, but universal and sincere, to the best of their knowledge
and power, which answers the Gospel-Law, and is accepted of God in Christ. 2,
Nor is it meritorious obedience (imperfect cannot be meritorious) but such as
the Gospel requires, as the terms of life, and way in which we must walk to
Glory, so that Salvation is wholly of Grace.


Christ. Tho I am well satisfied in what is said, yet there being some
Scriptures much urged against it, I desire to enquire into them, for mine own
and others satisfaction; the first is Joh. 6. 44. No man can come to me, except
the Father which sent me draw him.


Min. There are three cannots mentioned in Scripture. The 1. Is an Ignorant
cannot, viz. For want of the means of Faith, the Doctrine of the Gospel,
without which Men cannot believe and obey it. Romans 10. 14. How shall they
believe on him of whom they have not heard? God always working by means, and
suitable to it: no Man can believe the Gospel that never heard thereof.

The 2. Is a Customary and Traditional cannot, Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiop^an
change his skin, or a Leopard his sports, then may ye also do good, that are
accustomed to do evil Custom in sin, makes it to become habitual and natural,
and begets a cannot, next of kin to a will-not; custom in Principles and
Practice, received by Tradition, is very hard to be left; woeful experience
declares the truth thereof.

The 3. Is a downright will-not, a wilful cannot, a resolvedness to cleave to
sin, and self inventions, Joh. 50. 40. You will not come to me that you might
have life, Jer, 2. 25. But thou said there is no hope no, for I have loved
strangers and after them will I go, And chapter 18. 12. But thou said, there is
no hope, but we will walk after our own devices, and will do every one the
imaginations of his evil heart.

Now the cannot Christ speaks of, must needs come under one, or some of these
three, and that is, Custom and Tradition, wilfulness united, by reason of
which, the cannot takes place.

2. The manner of the Lords drawing is by the Gospel, and that the next Verse
explains, every man therefore, that has heard and learned of the Father,
comes to me, Gods drawing is by means and Ministry; they must first hear and
learn, and then come to Christ; but whose will not both hear and learn cannot
come to Christ, which was the present case with the Jews, who instead of
learning, murmured against his Doctrine, verse. 41. 43. Hos. 11. 4. I drew them
with the Cords of a Man, with the bands of Love, I laid meat before them. God
lays the good things of the Gospel before Men, which has a natural tendency to
draw Souls to Christ, and it is the wilful cannot that hinders.

It being so far from truth to affirm that Man has no power to will his own
good (distinct from ignorance of what is for his good, customariness or
wilfulness, or some other great temptation) that he has not power really to
will his own hurt, God having placed that Law in nature (not only of Men, but
of all sensitive Creatures) to will their own good and safety, so far as they
understand it, and have not power from God, to Will the contrary, (but in the
cases mentioned) and with the helps afforded by God, to cure the ignorance and
wilfulness, or any other hinderance, Men might Will the best good.


Christ. The 2. Scripture is, 1 Cor. 2. 14. But the Natural Man receives not
the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him, neither can
he know them, because they are Spiritually discerned.


Min. 1. It Is true that Natural Men by reason, without Gospel Revelation,
cannot understand or discern the Spiritual things of the Gospel, this is an
ignorant cannot, verse. 8.

Or 2. They do not like, love or favor the things of the Gospel, when they
hear it, it is foolishness to them, and so they will none of it, and this is a
wilful cannot, because they have no mind to it, while they account it
foolishness they cannot receive it.

3. And most probably, the Apostle intends the Corinthians, to whom he writes,
who, as he says, were Carnal, and what difference (in this place) we may
conceive, between Natural and Carnal, I do not understand: apparent it is, that
the Corinthians were very Carnal and ignorant in the great things of the
Gospel, verse. 12. 13. The Apostle speaks of himself and those Ministers with
him, see how, verse. 14. of chapter 2, and chapter 3. verse. 1, 2, 3. will unite, chapter 2.
14. But the Natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness to him, neither can he know them, because they are Spiritually
discerned, chapter 3. 1. And I Brethren could not speak to you, as unto Spiritual,
but as unto Carnal, even as unto Babes in Christ, I fed you with Milk, etc. For
ye are yet Carnal. It Is not only possible, but too common, for prosest
Christians, through their Naturalness and Carnalness, i. e. Resolving to follow
their own Natural, Carnal and Customary notions in the things of the Gospel, to
account many of the Spiritual Gospel things of Jesus to be foolishness, and
while it is so, they cannot understand those Spiritual Gospel things, and yet
may be high in other Gifts, which was the case of the Corinthians; see 1 Cor.
1. 5, 6, 7. with chapter 3. 1. 2.


Christ. The 3. Scripture is, Phil. 1. 13. It is God that works in you, to
Will and to do of his good pleasure. This Scripture is much urged by some in
this matter,


Min. It may be as properly r^ad, it is God that works in you, and will work
for his good pleasure; so that the intention of the words plainly i^, to
encourage to the duties exhorted to, viz. Do you your duty, and God will assist
you therein, up and be d^^^g and the Lord will be with you, he works and will
work, willing Christians, shall not want Divine assistance: this is the sum of
this matter.


Christ. If God only give the power of Willing, and ^^t the Will it self, have
not those that do will, and obey the Gospel, cause of Glorying in themselves,
that they had better Wills than others that obey not, and s^ give not the Glory
of Willing (is will a^ the power to Will) unto God, and so (...) of Willing to
themselves, the Scripture (...) makes thee to differ? And what (...) thou not
received? 1 Cor. 4. 7.


Min. Here seems with some to ^e the great straight in this matter. (...) Then,
if God has (...) nothing for us to do in his power, nor (...), nor (...), then
cannot any thing done by (...), be truly s^^, to (...) our duty, or our work,
in any sense, nor can there be any reward of grace, for any thing done (or
sa^^ered) by us, nor cause of humiliation for any failing, for as this notion
supposes, it is God that does all himself, and his work being perfect, there is
no need of grace, and the reward must be to himself and not to us, which is
wholly contrary to the Scripture, which constitutes our duty, and the reward of
grace in performance thereof. So Sovereignty says, p. 180. there will have
something to be done by themselves, that Christ is not the doer of. And if
there is nothing to be done by us, but what Christ does, then it is his work and
not ours, which ends all duty and reward.

2. Whether we can find no better a way, to honor God in this matter, but by
rendering men as brutes; yea worse than brutes, not so much as capable to will
their own safety, with the helps that God affords? Or if so; then to glory
therein, and dishonor God, for if men glory in themselves, they dishonor God,
and wrong themselves, but certainly those who render men in this matter as the
brutes, viz. that if God rule not in and over them as if they were brutes, they
can do nothing, nor will, nor work, do wonderfully dishonor both God and man,
rendering all men incapable, either of vice, or virtue, without a miracle which
he could so rule in and over any other creatures if he so pleased; so that,
from a supposition to avoid dishonouring God, in a way that does indeed and in
good earnest wonderfully dishonor him, must needs be very dangerous.

3. Is it either dishonorable unto God, or any occasion of pride in those who
in the power of his Gospel grace, do their duty? i. e. does will and choose the
good and forsake the evil? When others abuse the same power, and grace, in
refusing the good and choosing the evil, does not God himself command the one
and forbid the other? Commend the one and blame the other? Justify the one and
condemn the other? Men humbly ^esolving to do the will of God when they know
it, ^^ring their duty so to do, as the Prophet, Psa. 119. ^3. 34. And cannot
this be without pride and dishonor (...) God? Has not Christ taught us in this
matter. Luke 17. 10. When ye have done all those things that are Commanded you,
say, we are unprofitable servants?

4. And as for, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Tho it is a great truth, that all distinguishing
grace is from the Lord, yet the difference there intended is, the difference in
gifts, given after conversion, for the Churches use, as is appa^^nt, compared
with v. 6. and not the difference made in the grace of says and first
conversion unto God.


Christ. But do you not think, that God works in ^^e more than in others, in
order to rectifying the will, is well as in affording the power; or ^o you
think he works alike in all, in order to the work of faith and conversion?


Min. The manner and measure of Gods working in the Gospel in this matter in it
self is a secret; yet I doubt ^^t, but that he does exercise a liberty in this
matter, as it is capable to love some more, and some less, with his first love
of pity (as before I showed) so he may (and doubtless does) work in some more
and in some less; so likewise in the use of means, on some he waits longer, and
uses greater means then with others, some yielding to his means and workings
sooner than others, who in long waiting and much means submit to his call, when
others under the same means continue rebellious s^^ll.

Yet in this matter, it behooves us to understand two things. 1 That whatever he
works i^ any, it is suitable to their rational capacities (and not as brutes)
with freedom of will and liberty of choice, the manner of working being by
arguments from without, prevailing upon the understanding and reason, that in
Judgment it makes its choice, or else conversion might be effected by an
immediate power without the word of the Gospel, which I think was never yet
done; if any instance can be given of any person that has been converted, to
believe in Christ crucified that never heard of him, this will be much
answered, but indeed it is contrary to the Scripture, Romans 10. 14. and contrary
to reason and experience, because no man can possibly believe and be converted,
till he know what to believe, and from what, and to what to turn, Act. 26. 18.
1 These. 1. 9, 10. It Is true God can possibly work without means, which would be
indeed miraculous, but in this matter he has not, nor does not, but the Gospel
is the only means designed of God for Gospel conversion and faith, therefore
Paul must have a ministry without him (tho from the mouth of Christ) for his
conversion; if an immediate work with out means might have done it, Saul had
been a sit subject for such a work, tho through his Ignorant and Blind-Zealous
Perverseness, he was without the reach of the ordinary means, yet (tho in a more
than ordinary way) Christ wrought upon him by his wordwithout him, to his
understanding within him, Act. 9. 4, 5, 6. what he heard and saw, affected his
heart, and the work was done.

2. The manner and measure of the work, is not so much material, while he
affords a sufficiency unto all, and is before hand with all in this matter as
the parable of the Talent does fully demonstrate, to one he gave five, to
another two, and to anothr one. He works and gives as he pleases and
expects improvement in which way he will give more, Mat. 25. 29. with. Heb.
5. 12, 13, 14, and those who deny all ability of improvement, do render men to
be but as brutes.


Christ. Does not the Apostle complain, Romans 7. 18. for want of power, more
than for want of will? For me to wi^ is present, but how to perform that which
is good I know not. By which it seems to appear, that the power is wanting more
than the will, want of power being the matter of complaint?


Min. This is no more in substance, than what I said before, viz. it is not
perfect obedience the Lord requires, or impowereth us to perform, while here,
in the mortal and fallen state, Ps. 103. 14. but sincere and universal;
weakness being really upon us, and by reason of our sinful and mortal estate it
comes to pass, that tho persons before conversion, have more power than
(ordinarily) they have will to improve, yet after conversion (in some cases)
they have more will than they have power to perform (and this was the Apostles
case) they would serve the Lord, as freely and universally, so fully and
perfectly without distraction or imperfection, and this they cannot do, and
this experienced Christians find and feel by woeful experience as the Apostle
did, and in this, they will beyond their power, yet they serve him as they
should, (when their will and desires do really outrun their power in service)
tho they serve him not as they would, i. e. perfectly without mixture,
distraction, or imperfection.


Christ. Ephesians. 1. 19. Is much used to prove an Almighty, irresistible power in
the work of conversion; what say you to it?


Min. This Scripture is frequently used to prove that which it does not at all
intend, it being so apparent, that the Apostle speaks of the givings down of
the Spirit in it is mighty works after believing, and not in the first work of
conversion, it being the promise (and was performed) that the spirit should be
given down abundantly upon believers after believing, as clearly distinct from
it is sacred work in the Gospel in begetting souls to the faith; see for this,
Joh. 7. 38, 39, Act. 2. 38, 39. Ephesians. 1. 13. so that to apply the giving down of
the Spirit according to promise, after believing, to the first work of faith
and conversion, is a very great weakness and mistake.

2. The Apostle in that place intends not the giving down of the Spirit upon
the Ephesians to whom he wrote (much less, to persons in the first work of
faith) it being evident that the Apostle throughout this chapter keeps, the
distinction between himself, the ministers with him, and the Church, as was
usual in his other Epistles, from v. 1. to 13. he speaks to (but not of) the
church, but of themselves, distinguished by We, Us and Ye, and v. 13. speaks of
the church, and from v. 16. to 19. speaks of themselves, and lets the church to
know, the exceeding greatness of his power, to us ward who believe, i. e. to
the Apostles, in the mighty gifts of the spirit, and works done by them, for
confirmation of the truth of the Gospel, according to Mar. 16. 17, 18. Heb. 2.
3, 4.

3. I conclude that the work of faith and conversion of sinners, is so far from
being a m^racle (as some pretend) that it is rather a marvel that so few believe
and are converted, certainly our Lord would not have marvelled at their
unbelief, Mar. 6. 6. nor grieved for their hardness of heart, if they could not
have believed without a miraculous work, which he was able to have effected,
Mar. 3. 5. It Is true many believed on the sight of miracles done without them,
but we read not of any miracle done within them to work faith, nor is the work
of faith and turning to God at all called a miracle.

4. And from the whole, we have great cause to fear that the Spirit is much
more talked of by us all, than known and enjoyed, either in it is operations in
the Gospel to conversion, or in its gifts according to promise, and cause we
have to mourn in the sense thereof, that he should be so much amongst us in
word and so little in Power. If the Spirit of the Gospel, were a spirit of
Ignorance, error and pride, a spirit of Worldlyness, oppression, envy, hatred
and division. Were this the Spirit of the Gospel, we have enough and too much
of this. But if the Spirit of Christ is indeed (in its operations and effects)
the Spirit of Power, of Love and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1. 7. If it be the
Spirit of Love, Joy, Peace, long Suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith,
^eckness, Temperance, Gal. 5. 22. 23. Then surely we have cause to complain as
the Prophet, Isa. 24. 16. My leanness, my leanness, woe unto me.


Christ. What think you of the work of Regeneration, relative to the matter in
hand? I desire to enquire, 1. What it is, and 2. How it is effected.


Min. Without doubt, it carries the sum of the matter in it, and includes
Faith, Repentance, and the whole of Gospel Conversion, and turning to God.

But more particularly, 1. Negatively, what it is not; it is not any Conversion;
then a Conversion only from ^in might be it, there may be many Convictions and
Conversions too, that may be far short of Regeneration, and Persons may be (and
it is to be feared that many are) deceived herein.

2. Affirmative what it is; the word Regeneration I find but twice used in the
New Testament, in the terms thereof (and not at all in the Old, it being most
proper to the New) tho I doubt not but that the true sense thereof is often
expressed, Joh. 3. 3, 5. And it implies and imports, a renewing, returning, or
restoring to a new Estate. And those two Scriptures in which it is mentioned,
te^ds much to give us a tight understanding therein.

The 1. I shall mention is, Tit. 3. 5. According (...) his mercy he saved us,
by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Spirit. Which
Regeneration, here, consists in our being by the Power of the Gospel begotten
to believe the Truth of the glad tidings thereof, relating to the Restitution
and World to come; our Faith must be in the Regeneration to come, or else it is
none of the Faith of the Commission, or of Regeneration, Mar. 16. 15, 16. Nor
brings us under the promise of a share in the Regeneration to come, it not
being the Faith of Regeneration, Regeneration begun here being a preparation to
the Glory of the perfect Regeneration of (and in) the new and restored World.

The 2. Scripture is, Mat. 19. 28. Ye which have followed me^n the
Regeneration, when the Son of M^^ shall ^it on the Th^one of his Glory, ye also
shall sit upon twelve Th^^n^^, u^^g^^g the twelve Tribes of Israel. That this
Regeneration relates to the New life, in the New World, at (and after) the
Resurrection, I think, is by the Learned gener^^ly owned, that the true reading
and sense of the Words is, ye that have followed me, shall in the R^gen^^a^^en,
sit upon twelve Thrones, etc. That is, in the new and restored World, see
Wilson's Scripture Dictionary on the Word, the day and time of the last
Judgment, when our whole Nature being restored, both Body and Soul shall enjoy
the Heavenly inheritance, Mat. 19, 28. You which have followed me, shall in the
Regeneration sit upon twelve Thrones; and the English, Greek Lexicon on the
Word, the last day of the World, and it is so called, because in it, God will
create a new Heaven and a n^w Earth, and will perfectly engender again a Man
that is chosen, Mat. 19. 28. And indeed, this is properly the Regeneration time
and state, when all things shall be renewed, restored, and return to a new and
better estate. So that Regeneration may be thus defined:

When a Man does truly believe the truth of the glad tidings reported in the
Gospel, by Jesus Christ Crucified for our sins, raised and ascended into
Heaven, and shall come again from thence to perfect the Redemption, viz. The
Resurrection, Regeneration and new World, and to perfect his People with
Himself therein, and is in this Faith effectually turned to the Lord in heart
and life, according to the Gospel: This i^ Regeneration begun here, which, if
persevered in, will certainly issue in the perfect Regeneration and Glory in
the World to come.

2. How it is effected; and that is, 1. For us, by Jesus Christ Crucified,
Raised and Ascended; in and by him, the whole work is (and shall be) effected,
Act. 3. 21. Rev. 21. 5, 12. 2. In us here the Lord begets us by the word of his
Grace, to this lively hope, by the Res^rrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
1 Pet. 1. 3. By which is ensured to us the perfecting of the Redemption,
Adoption and Regeneration, when the time thereof is come; the Gospel of this
Grace and Glory it is, that is the Power of God unto Salvation to all that ^^
believe, Romans 1. 16.

Of which whole Regeneration, Baptism is the most lively Figure and
Representation, both of Death and Resurrection, and of the Death of sin, and
new life of Grace here, and Glory in the new Life and World to come, 2 Pet. 3.
21. 1 Cor. 15. 29. Romans 6. 3, 4, 5. And it being so, those who deny this
Figurative Ordinance, do (in effect) deny their part in this Regeneration.


Christ. I desire you to speak something of persevering and falling from Grace,
whether there is any Possibility, for Believers to fall from Faith and Grace?


Min. As to this matter, I do not question. 1. But that some are so known of
God and given to Christ, as to be supplied with persevering Grace, till they
come to Glory, yet not as distinct from the power of willing their own good,
and the constant exercise thereof, nor so as does in the least acquit them from
their duty, or danger in neglect thereof, 1 Cor. 9. 27. this being a secret
only known of God, that none might boast, and that all diligence may be given
by all, 2 Pet. 1. 10.

2. This considered, if we believe the Scriptures, there is danger of falling
from Grace, and this is stated by the Lord of Grace and Life, and all his
Apostles, who best knew the danger, and what Doctrine was most (and best) for
our safety, and never taught the contrary, what ever some pretend. 1. By Christ
to his own Disciples, Joh. 15. 3, to 7. verse. 3. Now are you clean through the
word which I have spoken to you, and verse. 7. He shows them the way, so to
preserve themselves, with the danger of neglect, verse. 10. I have loved you,
continue in my love, if ye keep my commandment, ye shall continue in my love.
So Paul our Apostle, Romans 8. 13. states the danger: If ye live after the Flesh
ye shall dye. And 11. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 10. 12. Col. 1. 21, 22, 23. Heb. 2. 3. and
3. 12. So Jam. 2. 12, 13, 19, 20. and Peter, 2 Pet. 3. 17. and John 1 John 2.
28. and 2 John verse. 8. Read and ponder well these Scriptures, which will fully
wise you in this matter, and Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. Where the Apostle states a
possibility of falling away of the Regenerate, such as were enlightened by the
Gospel, and had tasted of the Heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the
Holy Spirit, and tasted of the good word of God, and the powers of the world to
come, etc. The highest seize of any Regenerate Persons in the world, and
yet in danger to fall finally from all. Men now plead the contrary, and say
they were Hypocrites, (who are themselves ^^rangers to those Gospel
seize) but from what ground I know not; it is certain Men can never fall
from (or lose) that they never had. Compare with this, chap. 12. 22, to 25.
Where it is most apparent that Persons that are come to the highest Gospel-state
that it is possible for any to come to, now by Faith, yet are in danger to lose
all, and themselves too, verse. 25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks:
for if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on Earth, much more shall
not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from Heaven. I know that
some lightly and profanely, make God's Ifs to be nothing, but they shall one
day know, they are not in vain.


Christ. Some say, that in this, you teach falling from Grace.


Min. It Is great ignorance and mistake so to affirm, they may as well say, that
Christ and his Apostles taught falling from Grace, because they taught the
danger of falling, 1 Cor. 10. 12. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed
lest he fall. And indeed, to teach the danger of falling, is the only way and
means to prevent it; and those who teach impossibility of falling, do really,
though not intentionally teach People to fall, by neglecting their Watch and
War, through Carnal and ungrounded security, which Doctrine has proved
dangerous to many Souls. Suppose, two Families lived by a dangerous River, the
Parents of one warn their Children to take heed and beware, they fall not in,
if they do. they will certainly be drowned, if some help at hand prevent not;
the others likewise give warning of the danger, but withal, lets them know,
that if they fall in, they may receive some wrong, but they shall not fear, for
certainly they shall not be drowned; for they will so attend them, as to draw
them out again, without any danger or fear of drowning: now which of these do
really teach their Children to adventure on the danger of drowning, or to
prevent it, is easily determined, and so is it, in the present case.


Christ. This seems much to the matter in hand, for they say Believers may fall
grievously, and dishonor God, and lose their peace, but not hurt their Eternal
Estate, not fall finally; that it is one thing to fall and break the Bones, and
another to fall and break the Neck. Sovereignty. page 386.


Min. I know that this is commonly said, and that by them that might better
understand, it being so plain a way to teach Men to grow careless, fearless,
and graceless, and indeed, to open the door to Apostasy, it being a Doctrine
that neither Christ nor his Apostles taught, but the contrary; and from whence
it is learnt I leave the owners thereof to account.

And notwithstanding the honor of God should be more to us than our lives, yet
the duty and danger is rarely (if at all) stated there, but on the danger, and
that, not of losing the Peace and that Consolation, but the Salvation, Joh. 15.
6. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a Branch that withers, and
men gather them and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. The danger is
of fire and burning. So in all the Scriptures you may read as much; it is stated
on the danger of Judgment, 1 Cor. 3. 17. Heb. 2. 3. and 12 25. Therefore it is a
Scriptureless Notion, and vain fable, sowing Pillows under men's Elbows, in
hiding the danger from them.

It Is true, that 1 John 2. 19. is much urged to prove that none but Hypocrites
can fall away, they went out from us, but they were not of us. And,

As to this, 1. I take it as a universal rule, to understand no one Scripture
contrary to all the Scriptures that speak of the same matter. So then, we may
not understand John in this place, contrary to all that Christ and his Apostles
said in this matter, who all agree, in showing the danger of falling from
Grace, unless we will conclude all to be Hypocrites.

2. We may not understand John so, as to contradict himself, who plainly states
the danger, and the way of safety and preservation, 1 John 2. 28. and 2 John
verse. 8. In which he speaks very much, as Christ did i^ the same matter.

3. Therefore we may understand John to intend, either, 1. That they were not
of them, when they went out from them, if they had, they would no doubt, have
continued with him; he says not, that they were not at all of them.

Or, 2. If they were not at all of them, but Hypocrites (which is not affirmed)
he might speak in an infallible Spirit, as sometimes Peter did of Ananias, Act.
5. 3, 4. Which is no common rule for us; but that Persons have, and may, fall
from Grace, in this imperfect state, is so apparent, (if we believe the
Scripture) that it is past all just ground of doubt, and may warn us, not to be
high minded but fear, To. 11. 20. 1 Timothy 1. 19. 2 Pet. 2. ^8, 20, 21. and 3. 17.

3. Yet, notwithstanding, there is a way of safety and certain preservation to
the Glory promised, stated in the Scripture, viz. If we, with purpose of heart
cleave to the Lord, in the Faith, Love and Life of the Gospel, in this way, he
will accept us, assist and preserve us to the Glory. His Grace and our duty
uniting, will be our safety, there being no promise of Preservation out of (but
in) the way of Gospel-Faith and Obedience.


Christ. Some will say, this is Nonsense; it is as much as to say, keep and
preserve your selves, and you shall be preserved, continue your selves in the
Faith and Obedience of the Gospel, and you shall be kept.


Min. This reproach lights on Christ and Scripture, who will take it all
away, Joh. 15. 7. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in me, and my words
abide in you, etc. Verse 5. He that abides in me, and I in him, the same
brings forth much fruit. Verse 6. If a Man abides not in me, he is cast
forth as a Branch that withers, And verse. 10. Shows us the way to abide in
Christ* If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love, not else, 1 Pet.
4. 19. Let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of
their Souls to him, in a way of well doing, and in this way he will keep them,
Jude verse. 21. Keep your selves in the love of God. And the way so to do, see
Joh. 15. 10. and 14. 21, 23. So that the Scripture justifies this great and
needful truth to be known, and takes away the reproach.

The sum of the whole is, let us look to our duty therein looking for (and
believing) Divine acceptance and assistance therein, and God will not fail us,
Psalm. 125. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 5. But keep us safe to the Glory promised, Joh. 10. 27,
28, 29. Where Christ states the certainty of our preservation, in hearing his
voice and following of him; such shall never perish.

It stands both with Scripture and Reason, that Gods Grace and our Duty unite,
there being no promise of safety or Salvation, out of the way of Gospel-Duty,
Rev. 22. 14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have
right unto the Tree of life, etc. Without this, there can be no right, by any
Gospel-Law of Grace; and as Faith and Obedience constitutes right by Divine
Ordination; so Perseverance therein continues that right, by the same Law of
Grace, without which can be no entrance, Mat. 10. 22. Luke 9. 62. And mercy it
is, that God has assured us of Acceptance, Assistance and Preservation (in his
Son) in this way of Gospel-Faith and Obedience, Isa, 64. 5. Heb. 5. 9.


CHAP. VI.
Of the Nature of Man, and the Original Defilement thereof.

Christ. IN as much as there are differing Notions about the Defilement of our
Nature: some affirming the Nature of Man to be so Defiled by the first
transgrassion, as that simply from its Original, it is a sink of filth and
abomination, and lays liable to the second Death; others think Nature in it
self to be a pure and undefiled thing. I desire your apprehension in this
matter.


Min. That there is a Defilement in the Nature of Men (I suppose) is most
Evident, and that both from Scripture and Reason. 1. From Scripture, Job. 14.
4. and 15. 14. Psalm 71. 5. 2. From Reason, which will tell us, that in as much
as by the first transgression we are fallen into a state of weakness, mortality
and death, our nature must needs be weak and Defiled, and so more liable to sin
than before, yet what the Defilement is, and how far it extends it self, is
that which (I think) none can truly determine, yet I believe, it is not wholly
free from Original Defilement, from the grounds mentioned; nor that it is
(distinct from all occasions of further Defilement) so bad as some do render it.


Christ. I desire you to give your apprehension herein, with as much light and
evidence as you can.


Min. 1. I doubt whether any are capable to determine of Adams nature before
his fall, and so of our nature in him, for as his was, so was ours, or else we
could not have fallen in him, nor have suffered loss by his sin and fall, tho
it is granted by all, that he was created in an upright sinless estate, and so
we in him; yet that his nature was capable of defilement and sin, is likewise
apparent, else he had not sinned.

2. What Acts he did in resisting the temptation before be sinned, or whether
the first temptation was not too hard for him, we find not in Scripture record,
but most probably that he fell by the first temptation

3. What we find in Scripture of the badness of his nature after his fall more
than before; or of the badness of his actions: I think we find nothing of
either, and if so, Whether we may not in charity suppose, that he learned by
his sin and fall, to be more wise and ^eedful than he was before, (as David,
Peter, and other holy men have done) and so, did better after his fall then
before.

4. If the nature of man in its original defilement did become such a heap of
filth and sin as some pretend: Then, whence it is, that Christ had so much
respect to little Infants; and direct us to become as such, Mat. 18. 3, 4. and
that of such is the kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19. 4. If the nature was thus
defiled, what pattern does the Lord direct us to, in order to the obtaining of
the kingdom? And further they are said to be innocent, Jer. 19. 4, 5. they have
filled the place with the blood of Innocents. and chap. 2. 34. in thy skirts is
found the blood of the poor Innocents. Then they were not such a sink of filth
and abomination as some pretend, but such a^ God accounted innocent.

Yet, 5. Doubtless there is something in this matter, something of defilement
(as before I said) man by sin, being fallen into a state of weakness and
mortality (as a punishment of his sin) it is come to pass, as Job 14. 4. Who can
bring a clean thing out of an unclean, and 15. 14. and 25. 4. How can he be
clean that is born of a Woman? But what this defilement is, is by man
indeterminable; but be it what it is, God accounts those in whom it is
(before and without act, or consent of will to act) to be innocent, and fit for
our imitation in Gospel conversation, in order to our obtaining the heavenly
kingdom; and (I think) it is confessed by all, that infants (as such) are
innocent, meek, humble, teachable, etc. and yet affirmed by many (if not most)
to be born the children of wrath.


Christ. If it be so; I desire them to enquire whence it is, that the nature of
men is become so bad, as that they are thereby rendered in Scripture, to be the
children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3.


Min. In this matter, it may be meet for us to enquire. 1. How far
concupiscible nature was by creation and Gods ordinance, good and undefiled
before the fall; and how far it so continues now in the fallen state. And as to
this, it is apparent, there was natural lustings by creation in Adam, (in
themselves sinless) and lawful both before and since the fall; as, 1. To a
married state, which was lawful, and Gods ordinance, in the state of innocence,
before the sin and fall, Genesis 1. 28. and 2. 23, 24. and so continues lawful and
Gods ordinance still, Heb. 13. 4. It was lawful before the fall to be lawfully
employed in labor, to dress or till the garden, Genesis 2^. 15. So it was after
tho fall. Genesis 3. 23. to till the ground, the same word as, chap. 2. 15. It was
lawful before the fall, to eat and drink, Genesis 2. 16, 17. and so it was after
the fall, Genesis 3. 18, 19. 1 Timothy 4. 2, 3, 4. It Is lawful to be angry; so was
Christ, Mar. 3. 5. see, Ephesians. 4. 26. It was lawful both before the fall, and
since, to think, meditate, speak and act; in all which concupiscible nature is
exercised.

But the sin is in breaking Gods allowed rules, in all these cases, abusing our
selves, in transgressing by excess (in things in themselves in their Original
by creation and Gods ordinance good and lawful) as in adultery, Heb. 13. 4.
gluttony, drunkenness, covetousness, swearing, lying, evil speakings, wrath,
Murders, etc. so that (I think) I may safely say, that almost all Moral evils,
consist in out running of, and making a breach upon Gods allowed rules and law
in nature, so that nature in its Original, was not, nor is not in it self so
bad a thing as some do render it, but as in Adam, and as since continued in us,
is in it self (by Gods creation and ordinance) good and lawful; and it is the
excess (through temptation) in which the sin lies.

2. Then, the defilement is from the weakness of nature it self (as before I
said) it being in the fallen state, Romans 7. 24. O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death? And hence, it is liable to further
defilements by occasions and temptations, if Adoms nature was so liable to
temptation and defilement thereby, when pure and free, and he in full strength
of person and reason, and so more capable by far to resist temptation than any
since, it is no marvel if nature in the weak and mortal state is by occasions
and temptations, more infected, especially being upon its first trial in
infancy, where capableness of resisting is wanting.

3. All Infants having prospects before them, patterns to learn by, parents and
others, to learn that which by nature they are capable of; children (while so)
are capable to learn good as well as evil (if rightly taught) or else those
exhortations to parents are vai^ and useless, which we may not imagine, Pro. 22.
6. Ephesians. 6. 4. But parents and others instead thereof, teach their children
pride and folly, by which it becomes natural to them.

4. It comes to pass as by evil example, and bad education, so by the
temptations of Satan as was the case of Adam. Wicked men are called the
children of the Devil, Joh. 8. 44. not because they have their nature from him
(so, they are the Offspring of God, Act. 17. 28, 29) but by yielding to his
temptations, and doing his work, and from hence the enmity and the evil springs

5. The things of this world ensnares, 1 John 2. 15, 16, 17. Jam. 4. 4. by all
which means, men become bad, yea very bad by nature, being by example,
tradition, temptation and custom, naturalized to sin, are thereby become the
children of wrath, by consenting unto, and following after such things, as will
issue in wrath, unless timely faith and repentance prevent, and this is most
apparently the true sense of Ephesians. 2. 3. with, Col. 1. 21. the Apostle speaking
of grown persons thus corrupted, and not of Infants.


Christ. Is there not a natural inclination in Infants to vanity and folly?


Min. We are to distinguish between childish nature (as inclined to childish
weakness, frowardness and folly, which is in it self weakness of childhood, and
want of the exercise of reason and undorstanding, and so, not their sin) and
the nature of grown capable persons, 1 Cor. 13. 11. and hence it is, that
children in their weak and childish state, are under no Law, (and where (...)
Law is, there is no transgression) but the law of their parents, who are to
deal with them according to their capacities, and when capable, to instruct
them in the Law of Christ, and as need requires to correct them, thereby to
cure their childish folly, Pro. 22. 6. 15. Ephesians. 6. 4.


Christ. The Scripture sometimes speaks of good, to be in the nature of man,
Romans 2. 14. 1 Cor. 11. 14. and sometimes of evil: Is there no difference to be
made in the nature?


Min. I think it meet (and according both to Scripture and reason) that we
distinguish in the nature of man, viz. that there is a two fold nature in man,
Rational and Sensitive, that which I call rational is that wherein man differs
from other sensitive creatures; the Sensitive, is that part of the soul, which
is the life of (and animates) the body, as in other creatures, and is by some
called the concupiscible, lower or worser part of the soul, which is only
capable of lustings, and such like suitable, natural motions and Actions, in and
with the body, as in other creatures, and it is in this sensitive concupiscible
part of the soul (as in conjunction with the body) in which the lustings after
evil lies, and the enmity to that which is good, by reason of which men become
the children of wrath. And hence it is, that those who follow the unlawful
lusts of this sensitive part of the soul, are called sensual persons, Jam. 3.
15. Jude. v. 19.

The Rational part of man's nature, is that wherein he was (especially) made in
the image of God, which consisted not only in rule and government (as some say)
but in a capableness thereunto, by reason and understanding, which is still in
its remainders, the glory of man, which reason should rule the lower and worser
part of the soul (and body likewise;) and when, and where any Moral good is
found, it is when, and where this better part of the soul prevails, from whence
all Moral good among men is, by divine creation and ordination; and such is its
created excellency, that if men lived purely to it, there would be no need of
Human Laws among men (Human Laws, being but as an help to keep this sensitive
Nature in subjection, for common society among men) it would teach men to do,
as they would be done unto; and this we may suppose to be perfect in Adam,
before his sin and fall, and Nature in this sense, is not so bad, in it self,
as some do render it, it being that without which we could not be rational Men,
but as the Brutes (as some affirm;) nor could we ever have been Christian Men.
Therefore it behooves us to take heed how we cry down Nature in this sense, lest
we dishonor the God of Nature, in whose Image we are made, Jam. 3. 9. Unless
it be for ruling no better over sensual Nature, but suffering it self to be
corrupted and captivated thereby.

The sensual Nature is spoken of in such Scriptures as these, Romans 1 26, ^7,
Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Some of which, following their Brutish Lusts, even against
concupiscible Nature it seh, doing such things as Brutes refuse to do. Nature
in this sense, is frequently called, Carnal and Flesh, and that which is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8. 7. But the rational
part should rule it, because that from Nature, as thus considered, arise all
the unlawful Lusts and Actions of Men, which if Reason did rule, would prevent
much. And this Nature it is, by which Adam fell. Lust captivated reason, Genesis
3. 6. And still rebels in true Christians, and is not, (will not) be subject to
the Law of God, longer than the Watch and War is maintained; yet, this is to be
noted, that we cannot be without this concupiscible part of Nature in this
world, there being (as before I said) a Natural good therein, being in it self
good, in its first Creation and still is, were it not abused; without it we
cannot live, nor the world be continued, all worldly Actions in order
thereunto, being effected thereby, as eating, drinking, procreating the world
and the like, which in it self, as guided and ruled by Reason and Religion, is
good and Lawful, Heb. 13. 4. There being a Lawful sinless use thereof, which
God allows, yea and commands, but the abuse thereof is the sin, in breaking
Gods allowed rules, which Reason and Conscience, (much more Christianity)
should regulate and order, according to Divine rule; but alas, this unruly part
of Nature, not only captivates Reason, but even Persons professing high in
Christianity, are too often shamefully captivated thereby, and the most serious
and sincere Christians, have their groanings and complainings by reason
thereof, Romans 7. 24.

Let us learn from hence, not to quarrel with reason any more unless it be for
not doing its Work and Office, but suffering sensual and sinful Lusts to
corrupt and captivate it; for the new Birth, viz. Faith, Repentance, even the
whole of Regeneration here, is effected in the rational, understanding part of
Man, even in the Spirit of the mind, Ephesians. 4 23. and so rules in and over the
whole Man, 2 Cor. 5. 17.


Christ. I am greatly satisfied in this distinction, and likewise that it has
been a great error and mistake, to render whole Nature to be Brutish, which I
perceive is contrary both to Scripture and Reason; but do you understand that
the first sin, and the Original Natural Defilement thereof (what ever it be)
did of it self bring under the second death, or damnation of Hell ((...) some
affirm) without the act or consent of mind to sin, since the fall?


Min. This Natural Defilement, in it self simply considered (what ever it be)
without act or consent since the first sin and fall, extends only to the
first death, it coming in by the first trangression, can in it self, be no
greater, nor so great, as the actual sin, nor produce any greater effects than
the actual sin, the Original Corruption and Defilement being in Adam and (...),
before the actual transgression as the cause thereof, Genesis 3. 6. And was all,
but one and the same defect and sin, according to Jam. 1. 14. 15. And the
punishment of that sin, we find stated, Genesis 3. 19. And the Nature being
mortal, effects the same death in all, Romans 5. 18. As by one offense, into all
men, unto Condemnation, so in the Greek: and this is certain, that whatever
death came into the World by the first sin, and the Nature thereof into us, (as
called Original sin) shall be cured by that one Sacrifice, as in the same Text,
even so, by one Righteousness, (or by the Righteousness, of one) into all men
unto justification of life, verse. 19. For as by one man's disobedience, the many
were made sinners (so the Margent) that is all; so by the obedience of one,
shall the many be made Righteous. If all came under the second death thereby,
all shall be justified there from, for justification unto life is, and shall
come upon (or into) all that Condemnation came into (or upon) by the first
transgression, which is a Resurrection from the first Death, 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22.

And indeed those that hold this unscriptural and irrational Notion, it might
for ever deter them from a Married state, which is Gods Ordinance, and in it
self undefiled, Heb. 13. 4. If they are certain to beget Children (if any) that
must by Nature and Birth, be Heirs of the second and eternal Death, without
hope or help, especially, if they dye in infancy before capable of Faith and
Repentance; it is true, we all know, that we procreate Children like our selves,
in a mortal state, liable to the first Death, but no further, without their own
actual transgressions and unbelief.

So that I conclude it to be a great ignorance and error, in any to assert the
second Death to be the wages of the first transgression, and very cruel and
hard thoughts of God, to damn all (or any) Infants Eternally (so dying) for
they know not what, and that which they could no more prevent than their
Conception in the Womb: and further it is apparent, there had been no second
Life, but by the second Man, and then there could have been no second Death to
any, so that is the second and new life came in by Christ the second Adam, so
will the second Death come in, as a punishment of Men's actual sinning against
God, since the first sin and fall; so that I conclude, that neither Adam's
Transgression, nor the Defilement of our Nature thereby (whatever it be)
without act or consent to sin, shall bring under the guilt and punishment of
the second Death, the contrary being unscriptural and irrational to be imagined.


CHAP. VII.
Of the Apostasy spoken of in Scripture.

Christ. I Desire to enquire into the Apostasy spoken of in Scripture, what
you understand it is, and wherein it does consist?


Min. That there is an Apostasy from the Faith prophetically foretold in
Scripture (I think) is that which few do doubt or question, but what it is, and
wherein it does consist, I fear but few do rightly enquire into, but all are
willing to excuse themselves, and put it upon others, as Adam upon the Woman,
and the Woman upon the Serpent; so it is put all upon the Pope and upon the
Devil, far enough from our selves, neither Papist nor Protestant will have any
share therein, but put it upon each other, thou art the Man and not. I.


Christ. The case being so, on what particular Sort or Sect of People by Name,
may it be fixed?


Min. I shall not fix it only on any particular Sort or Sect of People by name,
but give some account what it is, and wherein it consists, and where the Marks
thereof are found, there it is likely to be; tho I cannot leave out the Turkish
Alkoran and Mohammedan Religion, nor the Papal profession, as chief and head in
this Apostasy, the one professing to own Christ, but only as a great Prophet,
but Mahomet to be greater; the other to own Christ really in word, but the Pope
^^ be his Vicar, great High Priest and head of the Church, and so truly and
really, in act and deed, to be above him, as is manifest by all his doings; but
in as much as it has spread it self so universally, and contains such variety
of parts, I shall only endeavor its discrimmation, leaving the application to
all concerned therein.

1. Then I conclude that the Apostasy spoken of in Scripture consists in
departing from the truth of the Gospel, both in matters of Faith, and practice,
but chiefly in matters of Faith, because Faith includes practice, and practice
follows Faith, and that it is stated in these and the like Scriptures, 2 These.
3. to 12. Let no man deceive you by any means, for that day shall not come,
except there be a falling away first, etc. Which falling away, as it is
explained to relate to the Man of sin, so it is to believe lies, verse. 3, 11.
and 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter
times, some shall depart from the Faith, 2 Timothy 3. 1, to 9. This know also,
that in the latter days perilous times shall come, and verse. 8. They are
reprobate (or of no judgment) concerning the Faith, ch 4. 4. They shall turn
away their Ears from the truth, and be turned unto Fables.

Now our search must be to find out where these things really are, and there
the apostasy is, where ever lies are believed in stead of truth, and the truth
thereby denied; such are in the apostasy, that consisting in believing lies.

1. Whosoever denies Jesus Christ crucified for our sins, raised and ascended,
to be the Son of God and the Son of David, truly God and man, and as so, to be
the alone foundation of Gospel faith, grace and glory, denies the gospel and
the faith thereof and is in the Apostasy, 1 Cor. 3. 11. and 2. 2. and 15. 3.
4. Luke 2. 32.

2. Who ever denies in word or deed, Jesus Christ crucified, raised and
ascended, to be the alone head, Lord and Lawgiver of (and to) his Church, and
that subjection in all things does not of right belong to him, is deeply in the
apostasy, Ephesians. 5. 23, 24. Col. 1. 18. Act. 3. 22. Luke 19. 14. 27.


Christ, But few professed Christians, will in word deny these things, but all
profess to own him as the Foundation, Head and Lord of his Church.


Min. Notwithstanding persons may in word confess him so to be, yet whoever
lays any other foundation of faith and life, than Jesus Christ crucified, or
chooses to themselves, or submits to any other Lord or Law giver in things
truly divine and Spiritual (viz, in matters of Gospel says and Worship)
besides Christ the Lord, (whether Papal or others) do really and indeed deny
Christ, to be the foundation of Christian faith, or to be the Head and Lord of
his Church, and whoever accepts such a headship, Executing thereof, usurpeth
his Authority, of whom the papal Head, has been chief and leader in this
matter, the exercise of human coercive power, in things properly belonging to
Jesus Christ, (viz. all matters of faith and worship, wherein conscience toward
God and our Lord Jesus Christ alone is concerned) being that which does really
out and end his Lordship and rule in this matter, and in this, the Scripture
seems to place the head of the apostasy, at which door, most of the errors,
both in faith and Worship, has been ushered in: 2 These. 2. 4. gives us a full
description of this, Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called
God, or that is Worshipped, so that, he as God, sits in the temple of God,
showing himself that he is God, viz, he sets himself and sits where God
alone should rule, viz, in and over the conscience in divine things (which is
proper only to Jesus Christ) giving Laws to men, on this account, which must be
submited to, whatever Jesus Christ the Lord, has said to the contrary, and
wherever, and as long as this Spirit lives and works, the Pope, nor
Apostasy will not die.

3. Who ever denies the Holy Scriptures to be the alone ground and rule of
Christian faith, in all matters of Gospel faith and Worship, and that it is not
sufficient in it self to wise and instruct us therein, without men's inventions,
additions and harsh interpretations, is deeply in the Apostasy. The reasons
there of are,

1. Because it being the divine Revelation of the will of God, it is sufficient
in it self for our instruction. To make us Wise unto Salvation, Isa. 8. 20. Ps.
119. 98, 99. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.

2. Because, otherwise, our faith and obedience must depend on human Authority,
and not on the divine word and will of God, and so must be a human faith and
Worship and not divine, and how far this is from the Popish faith, to believe
as the Church believes, and Worship as the Church requires, is easy to be
understood by a weak capacity.

3. Because without the divine Revelation of the will of God in these matters,
we must have been as other Gentile Nations that are without it, and never heard
thereof, and therefore in reason we ought to submit thereto in all things,
according to our knowledge therein, having no other rule to submit unto (that
is divine) in things of Gospel concern, so that if we turn away from this, we
turn away from Christianity it self in the truth thereof, thereby declaring our
selves to be Wiser in our own Conceit, than our Lord and Lawgiver.

4. Whoever fixes the sin and damnation of the World on the eternal Decree of
God, and not on man's chosen and willful wickedness, as the first, just and
deserving cause thereof, but fathers both the sin and Judgment on the eternal
Decree of God, as the first cause of both, denies the Scripture, belieth the
Lord, and believes a lie, Ezekiel. 33. 11. Joh. 3. 16, 19. 1 Timothy 2. 4. Rev. 22.
17.

5. Whoever denies the Love God to the world in the gift of his Son, affirming
that he loved but a few of the Elect only, denies the Scripture and believes
a lie, Luke 2. 10. Joh. 3. 16.

6. Whoever denies that Jesus Christ gave himself for the life of the World, a
ransom for all, a Propitiation for the sins of the World, affirming that he
died but for a few, the Elect only, denies the Scripture and believes a lie,
Joh. 6. 51. 1 Timothy 2. 6. 1 John 2. 2.

7. Whoever affirms, that men are no more capable to believe and obey the
Gospel unto life, than Bruit Beasts, or Stones or a dead Corpse, and yet that
God will damn them for not believing thereof, it being both unscriptural,
irrational and dishonorable unto God, denies the Scripture and does open
wrong both to God and men, and believes a lie, To 3. 3, 4, 5.

8. Whoever believes and teaches Salvation by an inconditional Covenant, and
Justification by faith without works, denies the Scripture and believes a
lie, Mar. 16. 15, 16. Rev. 22. 14. Jam. 2. 20.


Christ. To. 4 5. Is much made use of to prove Justification by faith without
works; But to him that works not, but believes on him that Justifies the
ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.


Min. 1. If we hold Justification without works, a^ must then hold Salvation
without works, because every Justified person is in a saved state, To. 8. 30.
and so bid a due to works, both as to Justification and Salvation.

2. So to understand the Apostle in this or any other Scripture, is to set him
in direct opposition to Christ, and all the Apostles, which we may in no case
do, 1. Contrary to Christ, Mat. 7. 21, 24. and contrary to his Commission for
Gospel Preaching and Salvation, Mat. 16. 15, 16. 2. Contrary to the rest of the
Apostles, Heb. 5. 9. and 10. 36. and 12. 14. Contrary to James, chapter 2. 24. Ye
see then how that by works a man is Justified and not by faith only. chapter 1. 22.
25. Contrary to Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 5. to 12. and Contrary to John, 1 John 2. 3,
4, 5, 6. v. 17. he that does the will of God abides for ever.

3. So to understand Paul in that Scripture, not only sets Paul against Christ
and all the Apostles, but against himself, and that in the same Epistle, who
Commonly states Salvation upon Obedience to the Gospel, tho not as the
deserving cause, but as the Terms, without which is no Obtaining thereof, chapter
2. 7, 8, 9, 10. and we may not suppose the Apostle to be so inconsiderate, as
to contradict himself, and that in the same Epistle.

4. It Is most Aparent, the Apostle intends not Gospel works in that place, but
the works of the Law (as such) compared with, chapter 3. 20, 21. By the deeds of
the Law, there shall no Flesh be Justified, v. 28. Therefore we conclude, that
a man is Justified by faith, without the deeds of the Law, but not without the
deeds of the Gospel; that contradicts the whole Gospel, and the design of the
Apostle, as is most apparent.

9. Whoever denies the danger of believers falling from grace, now in this
imperfect state, and holds and teaches the impossibility thereof, does wrong
to me^, denies the Scripture and believes a lie, Romans 8, 13, and 11. 20. Heb.
3. 12, and 4. 11. 2 Pet. 3. 17. 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20.

10. Whoever denies the restitution of all things, the world to come, and the
eternal Kingdom and Glory of Christ and his Church therein, denies the
Scripture and believes a lie, Act. 3. 21. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Rev. 11. 15, and 22.
5. Mar. 10. 30.

11. Whoever believes and teaches, that when Christ the Lord and Judge, does
come again from Heaven, to judge the world in righteousness, Act. 17. 31. that
he will ^urn up the world and not make it new, and carrry away the saints with
him to heaven, and send all the world eternally to hell (in their sense) viz.
that none of them shall have any advantage at all by the woman's seed, denies
the truth and glory of Christ's undertaking for the world, and a great part (if
not the whole) of his kingdom and glory in the world to come, and so denies
the Scripture and believes a lie, the truth of this, see cleared in the next
chapter.

12. Whoever demeth the free operations of the Gospel Spirit, in the word and
work of Grace, or in the ministerial gifts in prophecy and preaching, as
sufficient thereunto, limiting Gospel ministerial gifts and offices in the
Church of Christ, to human acquired abilities, denies the sufficiency of the
Gospel Spirit in the Gospel work, introducing the human spirit instead thereof,
and is in the depth of the Apostasy, 1 Cor. 2. 12, and 12. 4. 7. 13. Whoever
sets up the common light that is in all men, instead of Christ and the
Spirit of the Gospel, is in the Apostasy, and believes a lie.


Christ. Some sa^, that some of these things, Especially, the 4, 5, 6, 7 8, and
9, particuars, are the great Bulwarks against popery, and that to assert such
things as these, tends to weaken the protestants, and to strengthen the hands
of the Papists.


Min. I hope, these are not the best Bulwarks and strength of Protestants
against Papists (if it were) it would surely fail in the time of need.

2. If these things has been the strength of Protestants against Popery, it is
no marvel so little is done for advantage to the Protestant interest, and
conviction of Papists; if we lay the foundation in falsehood, and build
thereupon, it is no marvel we are not blessed of God, and Popery gain upon us.

3. Let Protestants fall in with the truth of the Gospel, as it is in Jesus,
both in principle and practice, Especially in these great and fundamental parts
thereof, and they will have enough to bear up with great authority from
Scripture, against Popery in all its parts.

1. Hold firm to this, both in principle and practice* that the Scripture is in
it self, the alone sufficient ground and rule, in all matters of Christian
faith and Religion, and needs not the Churches Authority for it is warrant, nor
the inventions, traditions or additions of men, which as it is a Christian, so
it is a Protestant principle.

2. Let the Express letter, plain reason and scope of Scripture united in and
with it self (without the harsh and contradictory interpretations of men, or
consequences drawn contrary, to and against the express light, language and
scope of Scripture) be adhered to, especially in the greatest matters of faith
and practice otherwise, our faith and practice must be built on men's
Interpretations, and not on Scripture Revelation; and further, admit we of men's
Interpretations of plain and express Scriptures, or of the more dark so as to
contradict that which is plain, as it is the ready way to make an end of the
truth of Scripture, so in reason, one man's Interpretation is as good to himself
as another is to himself, and so in Infinitum which fill us with divisions,
merely from Interpretations of men and not from any obs^urity or contradiction
in the Scripture.

4. And so, as an effect hereof, maintain Christian Scripture, and Protestant
liberty in Religion, in opposition to the Popish Scriptureless Principle, (and
protested against by Protestants, as exercised by Papists,) viz. by human power
to compel to believe as the Church believes, which perverteth the Scripture,
denies the headship of Christ, and the Scripture and Christian liberty of
Christians, and establishes the Pope in his Persecutions, to the great blame
and shame of Protestants.

5. That Jesus Christ, as he was the alone Sacrifice for the sins of the World,
so he is the alone foundation of Christian Faith, and the alone Mediator
between God and Man, that he shall come again from Heaven to raise and judge the
quick and the dead at his coming and Kingdom, and to perfect the Adoption and
Redemption, the Restitution of all things, the great ends of his undertaking.

6. That whoever do believe and obey the Gospel shall be saved, and that
Gospel-Faith and Works, are so united by the Lord (in order to both
Justification and Salvation) as without which, it cannot be obtained, tho not
as the cause, but as the Holy terms thereof.

7. These things being th^s fixed to by Protestants, and pleaded out, both by
word and deed, would root up Popery Root and Branch, all the rest of their
Scriptureless, and Fabulous inventions and devices, (as Transubstantiation;
Image Worship, multiplicity of Mediators, Sacrifices of the Mass and Eucharist
for quick and dead, Pardons, Pilgrimages and Purgatory, with all the rest of
their human inventions) would fall to the ground, if these forementioned
Christian and Scripture Principles, were soundly pleaded out, and lived to, by
Protestants.


Christ. I perceive that the Apostasy has been very great, and more universal
than has been imagined, and likewise, that the danger thereof is very great.


Min. I take it to be a matter of highest concern to all, to lay these things
to heart in time, and not to make light thereof, it being the great things of
the Gospel, and of weighty concern it is, to come right herein; and I doubt
not, but that oy a due and true enquiry, we may come to know better where we
are, and what to do in the great matters of God and the Gospel, wherein his
name and honor, the honor of Christ, the Gospel, the good of all Men, and our
own safety is so much concerned.


Christ. Your self have been sometimes differingly minded about some of these
things, do you think you are wholly gotten out, and free from the Apostasy?


Min. I do not so think, much less so say, but repent of my former ignorance
and mistake in any of these things, taken up by Tradition, blessing God for any
of his teachings, waiting on him for further light and leading, in the right
understanding of his mind and will in his word, and that what I understand, I
may be Faithful to him therein, in which way I may expect his further
teachings, Hos. 6. 3. Joh. 7. 17. My real desire being to attain unto, the
Faith that was once delivered to the Saints, Jude verse. 3. Which is the great
concern of all that make mention of (and call upon) the name of the Lord Jesus,
and in a humble and self-denying way of seeking and waiting, they may (and
shall) obtain, Ps. 25. 4, 5, 9, 14. The sum of all I desire, is, to come right
in the Faith, Love and Life of the Gospel, which is the great concern of all,
that do expect to Glorfie God here, and to be Glorified with him hereafter.


CHAP. VIII.
Shows that there shall be, not only a special, but a general Salvation
effected by Christ in the Restitution and World to come, in and over which
shall be his Eternal Kingdom.

Christ. IN chap. 3. You showed the general Love of God to the World in the
gift of his Son, and the general Love of Christ in dying for the World, with
the varieties of the ends thereof, all certainly to be effected in the times
appointed, I desire you in this, to speak something further of the great
mystery of the Restitution and Salvation in the World to come, and of the
Eternal Kingdom of Christ therein.


Min. What is it, in particular, you desire to enquire into?


Christ. That you clear from the Scripture, the truth concerning the World to
come, and what it is.


Min. This I have largely spoken to, in my answer to Mr. Coxe, chapter 7. Yet I
shall at present say something briefly further to it, for your present
satisfaction.

1. That there is a World to come, is so plainly stated in the Scripture, as
that (I think) none dare deny it, Mat. 12. 32. Mar. 10. 50. Ephesians. 1. 21. Heb. 2.
5.

2. What this world to come is, or shall be. 1. Negatively what it is not. 1.
It is not heaven above which is Gods throne, as some vainly think and teach.
The reasons are,

1. Because that is already, and probably has been from Eternity, Psa. 11. 4.
and 93. 2. but this is not, but is a world that is yet to come, and shall be in
the times appointed.

2. Because heaven is in Scripture, no where called the world to come, nor
indeed could be so called because it has been (and is) in being, but the World
to come is not yet in being, otherwise than in purpose and promise, nor is
heaven above (which is called Gods throne) at all called world, or any part of
the created world.

3. Christ when he came into the world, is not said to come out of (or down
from) the world to come, but that he came out, from God and down from heaven,
Joh. 6. 38. and 16. 30, and 17. 8.

4. When he ascended, he is not said to ascend up into the World to come, but
that he ascended into heaven, and up where he was before, Mar. 16. 19. Joh. 6.
62.

2. It is not this present world, as others do as vainly imagine, that it is the
Gospel day of Grace now in this world; that this is not it, the reasons are,

1. This world was in being, long before the world to come was spoken of and
promised, but that is a world that is not yet in being, but is to come.

2. Because that where the world to come is spoken of it is clearly in way of
distinction from this world, viz. this world and that which is to come, clearly
distinguishing them into two worlds, one present, and another as yet to come.
Ephesians. 1. 21. Mar. 10. 30. Luke 18. 30. this is called the present world,
importing a future World as yet to come. Gal. 4. 4. Tit. 2. 12.

3. Because the eternal life promised in the Gospel, is to be enjoyed in the
World to come, Mar. 10. 30. Luke 18. 30. and I think, but f^w will grant that
to be in this world; if so, Believers were of all men most miserable. 1 Cor.
15. 19.

4. Because the inheritance promised to Abraham and his seed (viz. believing
Gentiles as well as Jews) is to be the heirs of the world, Romans 4. 13, 16. but
neither Abraham, nor believers, have been, are not, nor are like to be, the
heirs of this world, therefore it must be in the world to come, that the
promised inheritance is, Act. 7. 5. with Heb. 11. 8, 9, 13. So that as it
appears that the promised inheritance, arrived to by faith, shall be possessed in
the World to come, so it is as apparent that neither, the highest Heaven, nor
this present World, is the World to come, nor tho promised inheritance of
Abraham, and his seed.

2. Affirmatively, what the world to come is, or rather, what it shall be when
it is come, and in this the Scripture is as clear and apparent. 1. It Is called
a new Heaven and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness, 1 Pet. 3. 13. the
making of all things new, Rev. 21, 5. the restitution of all things, Act. 3.
21. the regeneration, Mat. 19. 28. the restoring, renewing, and returning of
the World to its former estate, yea and far better than under the first Adam
before his fall, it will not be a new creation of what was not, but a renewing
and restoring of the old, such a dissolution shall pass on the whole, as shall
effect a change. 2. Pet. 3. 10. 12. with Heb. 1. 11. 12. so that it will be a
waking all things new, and no^ a making of new things, a restitution, and not
(properly) a creation, as a change shall pass on the bodies of men and yet be
the same in Essence, 1 Cor. 15. 57. so must the change pass upon the whole
creation, and this is the World to come, so much spoken of in Scripture and
promised, and of which Abraham and his seed are the heirs, and in and over
which with Christ, they shall reign, Rev. 5. 10. Dan. 7. 14, 27. Rev. 11. 15.


Christ. I am well satisfied in this brief account about the world to come, I
desire you likewise to show me from Scripture, that the Eternal Kingdom of
Christ, shall b^ in this world to come.


Min. 1. That Christ shall have a visible Kingdom, as upon the throne of his
father David, is most apparent from the Scriptures. We may say in this, as Heb.
10. 7. It is written in the volume of the book, Isa. 9. 7. Act. 2. 30. Psa.
132. 11. Jer. 23. 5. and 33. 14. Luke 1. 32, 33. v. 69. 70. the kingdom of
Christ as David's son, and as upon his throne, is fully and plentifully proved
from the Divine revelation thereof.

2. That this kingdom of Christ as upon the throne of David, shall first and
principally be (to and) over the house of Israel, they shall be first and chief
in this kingdom, as he is David's son and successor. Jer. 23, 5, 6. and 33. 14,
15, 16. Ezekiel. 37. 21. to 25.

3. That this kingdom shall be over all the world, as well as over the House of
Israel. Dan. 7, 14. Rev. 11. 15. Phil. 2. 9, 10.

4. It shall be in and over the World to come, that this visible, glorious
Kingdom of Christ shall be, and not in this world, and this appears. 1. Because
it will not be till the restitution and redemption of Israel, which shall be in
the new Heavens and new Earth. Isn. 65: 17, 18 and 66. 22. which takes not
place till after, the conflagration of the old by fire. 2 Pet. 3. 13. 2. When
the time of this kingdom takes place, the time of this world shall be no more,
Rev. 10. 7. with 11. 15. and therefore it must be in the world to come.

5. That as this kingdom shall be upon the Throne of David, so it shall be
Eternal, and shall have no end; and of this the Scripture likewise is very
full, Isa. 9. 7. Luke 1. 32. Dan. 7. 14. Rev. 11. 15.


Christ. In what sense may the kingdom of Christ b^ said to be upon the Throne
of David, then, more than it is now?


Min. Christ is now said to be on the throne of his Father in heaven, which was
never David's throne, and there he must sit, till he come to his father David's
throne on Earth, to have the visible government of the whole creation, Psa.
110. 1. 2. 1 Cor. 15. 25. And then shall he give up this his right hand kingdom
to his father. When all is made visibly subject to him, and be set on his own
throne as the son of David. 1 Cor. 15. 27, 28. Isa. 54. 5. Zec. 14. 9.

2. It may properly be called David's throne, not only as he is his son and
successor, but because it shall be a visible throne and kingdom on earth, and
in the land of Canaan where David's throne was (in its renewed estate) as is
most apparent, if we consult, Jer. 7. 7. with Ezekiel. 36. and 37. chapters, chap.
37. 21, 24, to 28. in which it is plainly expressed that it shall be in the land
of Canaan, and fully agrees in terms with, Rev. 21. 3. from whence (and to
which) most probably it is taken and relates.


Christ. Christ being already exalted to the right hand of God his father in
heaven, which is the highest throne of Glory, for above the throne of his
father David on earth, it seems to be a loss, rather than an increase of his
kingdom, dignity, government and glory, to come off from his fathers throne in
heaven, which is the most glorious, to come to his father David's throne on
earth, seems to be a decrease rather than an augmentation of his Glory?


Min. I grant, that it seems so to be, if we understand not the mystery of the
design of God herein, but that being understood, it tends wonderfully to the
increase of his Kingdom. Dignity, Government and Glory, tho I will not affirm
an additional personal increase, but official, wherein the glory of his visible
kingdom and government (as the son David) was designed, and does, and shall,
consist, Isa. 9. 7. and in this respect will be a difference and increase of
his Kingdom, Government and Glory, and that in four things.

1. In that he is sat down now, on his fathers throne in heaven, is a great
dignity and glory, yet not such, as when he shall sit on his own throne; his
father David's throne is given to him and therefore properly called his own,
Luke 1. 32. hence, Rev. 3. 21. he calls it my throne and this is never said of
his fathers throne in heaven, that it was given to him, or that he called it
his own throne, he being to sit there, but till his enemies be made his
footstool, that is, till he come to his own throne and kingdom, of which he is
in Expectation, Heb. 10. 13. yet in this his kingdom will the father reign in
and by him, 1 Cor. 15. 27, 28. see this more full, confession of faith page 35,
36, 37, 38.

2. It shall be a visible kingdom, dignity and glory, his kingdom now is much
invisible as to men, his person altogether invisible, and his government much
veiled and hid from the world, and but little thereof apprehended by, and seen
among his people, but then it shall be an open, visible and manifest Kingdom,
Government and Glory, Rev. 1. 7. Isa. 40. 5. and 66. 18.

3. As it shall be visible, so it shall be universal over all, it is true it
shall be first and especially over the House of Israel. Jer. 23. 5, 6. Luke 1.
32, 33. but it shall likewise be over all the world, that ever has been, or
shall be, Dan, 7. 14. Rev. 11. 15. Phi. 2. 9, 10. and the whole creation
restored, Act. 3. 21. Romans 8. 19, 20, 21.

4. And all shall be, as the effect and fruit of his humiliation, so that no
kingdom and glory, besides (or short of) this, can possibly answer the end of
his sufferings, nor the design of God therein, this being the glory designed by
all, the issue of all the prophecies and promises; the fulfilling of the
mystery of God designed and spoken of by the prophets, Rev. 10, 7, with chap.
11. 15. Act. 3. 21. and indeed the top glory of all the Gospel design, and that
relative both to the father and the son, Phi. 2. 9, 10, 11. And therefore it is
ignorance in us to suppose that it tends to lessen his glory, R^m. 14. 9. Rev.
5. 13, 14. it being the great glory designed as the fruit of his death and
sufferings, Isa. 53. 12. Phi. 2. 9, 10. and that he is in expectation of, Heb.
10. 13. and mediating for, Psa. 2. 8, 9.


Christ. If the Kingdom shall come to the House of Israel first and chiefly,
what great Advantage will it be to us Believers of the Gentiles, and not by
Nature of the House of Israel.


Min. Of great advantage to all true believers among the Gentiles, who are by
faith accounted for Abraham's Children, the true seed and heirs according to
Promise, Gal. 3. 29. and so are entrusted in the same Promises in Christ by the
Gospel, Ephesians. ^. 6.


Christ, As you have given your understanding about the World to come, and the
Kingdom of Christ therein, the next thing I desire to enquire into is, whether
the World in General, may be supposed to have any favor and blessing therein,
or only to be raised to Judgment and eternal Misery, as is Commonly held?


Min. That there shall be (by the Woman's seed, the seed of Abraham) not only a
special Salvation to some believers (even among the Gentiles) with Christ in
Glory, Who shall not come into Condemnation, nor be hurt of the Second Death,
Joh. 5. 24. Rev. 2. 11. But a more General and Common Salvation of the World
from the penal part of the Second Death, in times to be Effected, after they
have past the Judgment and born their Punishment that the Generality both of
Jews and Gentiles, shall in time partake of a General and Common Salvation in
the World to come, is as great a truth, and as fully and plainly stated in the
Scriptures of truth, as the Salvation of believers with Christ in Glory, only
let this be understood, that I intend not all and every one, but the Majority
and Generality of the World, wilful Transgressors that rebel against the Light,
especially against the Light of the Gospel I intend not.


Christ. I desire you to give your Scripture grounds fully, 1. For the General
Salvation of the Jews; if that be proved, I suppose it will be a great Light,
and inlet, to the Salvation of the World.


Min. That the Generality of the Natural seed of Israel shall be saved is most
apparent from these Scripture grounds following.

1. Because, God always owned them for his own People, as in the best, so in
their worst condition, both of Sin and Judgment, that he owned them for his own
People and Portion, that their provocations were the Provocations of his Sons
and of his Daughters, in their worst sinning state, and he losed not his
Propriety in them is most apparent, Dent. 32. 19. Ps. 81. 8. Hear, O my People,
and I will testify unto thee, v. 11. But my People would not hearken to my
voice, Israel would none of me, Isa. 1. 3. Israel does not know, My People does
not consider, and chapter 58. 1. Show my People their sins, etc. By all which it
appears, they were owned of God to be his own People, his Sons and Daughters,
the Portion and lot of his Inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32. 9. In their worst and sinning
Estate, and therefore, tho he Judged and Punished them severely, yet we have no
ground to conclude, that he will Eternally Damn them, being his own People; and
so they own themselves to be, Isa. 64. 9. We are all thy People.

2. He owned them for his own People, when they were under his Judgment and
Wrath, for sin, Ps. 78. 62. He gave his People also to the Sword and was Wroth
with his Inheritance, v. 63, 64. Isa. 5. 13. Therefore my People are gone into
Captivity, because they have no knowledge, chapter 47. 6. Jer. 5. 7. Ezekiel. 21. 12.
All fall to the same purpose, so that, notwithstanding, their sin and Judgment,
yet they were still his People, his Portion, his Inheritance, the precious Sons
of Sion, Lam. 4. 2. The precious Sons of Sion, comparable to pure Gold, how are
they esteemed as Earthen, Vessels, yea, in and through all, they were the
beloved of his Soul, Jer. 12. 7. I have forsaken mine House, I have left mine
Heritage, I have given the dearly beloved of my Soul, into the hand of her
Enemies. They were the Lords Heritage and dearly beloved, Notwithstanding all
their Sin and Judgment, and this particular Interest, and Relation that God
still owned, was from the Covenant of Election and choice that God made with
their Fathers, Exo. 32. 13. Ps. 106. 45. Romans 11. 27, 28. And this Relation to
God in their worst sinning and Judged Estate, is owned and pleaded by the
Prophet as personating them, Isa. 63. 16. Doubtless thou art our Father, tho
Abraham be Ignorant of us and Israel acknowledge us not, yet thou, O Lord, art
our Father, See, chapter 64. 7, 8, 9. And we may safely conclude that God will
never Eternally damn, the precious Sons of Sion, his own Children, the dearly
beloved of his Soul, tho he severely punish them.

3. Tho he made use of Instruments to punish them for their sins, yet they
doing of it cruelly, and dispitefully, he reproved them and Judged them for it,
it was not for doing thereof (because appointed by him) but for their ill doing
of it, Isa. 47. 6. 7. Amos. 1. 11. Ob. v. 10. to 15. Zec. 1. 15.

4. And after all (and as an Effect of this continued Relation, interest and
pity in and toward them) he has made to them, many great and precious
promises of their return and Salvation in the times appointed, and that to the
very same sinning and Judged People, the same that he owned, loved and pitied
when he Judged them for their sins, and not only their seed, or posterity, that
might be of them, some Thousands of years after, as has been Imagined, but to
the same People to whom the promises were made, after he had recompensed them
double for their sin, Jer. 16. 16, 17. 18. v. 14, 15. is a promise of
deliverance, yea to all of them; Ezekiel. 20. 40. For in mine Holy mountain, in
the mountain of the height of Israel says the Lord; shall the House of Israel,
all of them, serve me, and chapter 39. clears it so plain as may silence all
Objections chapter 36. 10. I will multiply men upon you, all the House of Israel
even all of it, and chapter 30 about this matter, and that both as to the persons
concerned, and the time of Effecting thereof. 1. The persons concerned, and
that is, the same that fell by the Sword for their Iniquities, v. 23. For their
Iniquities, so fell they all by the Sword, v. 25. Now will I bring again the
Captivity of Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole House of Israel, v. 26. After
they have born their shame, and all their Trespasses whereby they have
Trespassed against me, when they dwelt in their own Land and none made them
afraid. So that, they are the very same People that sometimes dwelt safely in
their own Land, and for their sins were destroyed by the Sword, and not their
posterity only that never dwelt safely there, that are here intended; and this
is remarkable that the promise is to the whole House of Israel, not of Abraham,
nor of Isaac, because Ishmael and Esau went out from thence, but to the whole
House of Israel, whose whole posterity was under the Promise, Genesis 26. 2, 3, 4.

2. And as for the time of this return and Salvation, it shall be at and after
the destruction of Gog. the last and great Enemy, Ezekiel. 38 and 39, Chapters.
And of this Salvation we may see, Amos 9. 3. Tho they be Sifted among all
Nations, yet not one Grain (or stone) shall be lost, Hos. 11. 10, 11. Isa. 43.
5, 6, 7. with many more which relates to this universal Salvation of Israel.

5. And then it is no marvel, the Apostle says Romans 11. 26. That all Israel
shall be saved. Of which I have spoken in my Answer to Mr. Coxe, chapter 7. To
which Salvation of all Israel, not only all the Scriptures Mentioned, agree,
but, Isa. 45. 17. Jer. 30. 10. etc. Ezekiel. 37. 21, 22, 23. with many more; to
which Promises we may conclude the Apostle relates, when he says, v. 27. This
is my Covenant with them, when I shall take away their sins; this is the
Covenant after they had born their Punishment for their sins, Ezekiel. 16. 52, 58.
and 37. 26.

6. This universal Salvation shall be after the Resurrection and Judgment is
over, or else it could not reach them all, but it shall be when they are raised
up and come all of them: and in this the Scripture is as express, as to the
Salvation it self, Isa. 25. 8. The time when God will take away the rebuke of
his People from off all the Earth, is, when he does swallow up Death in
victory; Which words the Apostle applies to the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 54.
Then shall he bring to pass that saying that is written, Death is swallowed up
in Victory, Isa. 26. 19, 20, 21. Thy dead Men shall live, together with my dead
Body shall they arise; awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is
as the dew of Herbs, and the Earth shall cast out the dead, chapter 49. 6. It is a
light thing that thou should be my Servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob,
and to restore the preserved, (or desolations) of Israel, And Ezekiel. 37. 10, 11,
14. and 39. 23, 25. plainly declares the time thereof. So Zech. 10. 9. They
shall live with their Children and turn again. So Hos. 13. is, 1. A discovery
of their Sin and Judgment, verse. 2, to 9. 2. A promise of help, verse. 9, and
verse. 10. I will be thy King, etc. But how can this be, when he had destroyed
them? See the time when it should be, verse. 14. I will ransom them from the
power of the Grave, I will Redeem them from Death: O Death I will be thy
Plague, O Grave I will be thy Destruction, Repentance shall be hid from mine
Eyes. Here is an absolute promise to those People, of which God will not
repent, and this Scripture the Apostle applies to the Salvation of all Israel,
Romans 11. 29. The gifts and callings of God are without Repentance, viz. He will
never repent of the Promises and Salvation made to those People, and the same
Apostle applies the same Scripture, to the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 54. All
which makes, Ezekiel. 37. 10, to 14. plain unto us. So that, the time of this
general Salvation of all Israel, is plainly and fully stated in the word of
Truth, to be at and after the Resurrection and Judgment, when the deliverer
shall come from God out of Sion, and turn away ungodliness from Jacob, this is
the Covenant with them, when he shall take away their sins. Romans 11 26, 27.

1. To them then, shall be Repentance for sin, Ezekiel. 16. 61. Then shall thou
remember thy ways and be ashamed, verse. 63. That thou may remember and be
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, and 20.
43. and 36. 31.

2. To them then, shall be purging and cleansing of sin, Isa. 1. 25. I will
turn mine hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy Dross, and take away all
thy sin, chapter 4. 4. When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the
Daughter of Sion, and shall have purged the Blood of Jerusalem, from the midst
thereof, by the Spirit of Judgment, and by the Spirit of burning, see chapter 7. 9.
Jer. 33. 8. Ezekiel. 36. 25, 33. Joel 3. 21. Mal. 3. 2, 3.

3. To them then, shall be pardon of sin, Isa. 43. 25. I, even I, am he that
blotteth out thy transgressions, for mine own sake, and will not remember thy
sins, Jer. 31. 34. I will forgive their iniquities, and will remember their
sins no more, and 33. 8. I will pardon all their iniquities whereby they have
sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against me, See Mic. ^ 19, 20.

4. And in this way of Repentance, Pardon and Purging, will God be pacified
toward them, Ezekiel. 16. 63. That thou may remember and be confounded, and
never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward
thee for all that thou have done. And when he is thus pacified toward them,
after he has raised up and gathered them, he will be no more angry with them,
nor hide his face from them, Isa. 12. 1. Ezekiel. 39. 29. But will dwell in the
midst of them, Zec. 8. 3. And reign over them for ever, Mic. 4. 7. Ezekiel. 37.
24. 25.

5. And all shall be effected by the new Covenant, Jer. 31. 31. and 3. 16.
Ezekiel. 16. 61. It shall be, by the Blood of thy Covenant, I will send forth the
Prisoners out of the Pit, wherein is no Water, Zec. 9. 11. And thus, shall
Salvation come to Israel from God out of Si^n, Psalm. 14. 7. And all Israel
shall be saved, this is the Covenant, when he shall take away their sin, and it
behooves us to believe it, and not oppose it, but to pray for the effecting
thereof, and to give the Lord no rest until he has made and Established
Jerusalem a praise in the Earth, Isa. 62. 6, 7. Jer. 31. 7, 8.


Christ. What you have said in this matter, seems very plain from Scripture,
but are you not singular and alone herein?


Min. If I were (as to the present apprehensions of Men) it is not material,
while I have all the Holy Prophets and Apostles, even the whole and Holy Divine
Revelation and Record for it; yet I am not alone, but many are for the
Redemption of Israel, one of which I shall mention, viz. Mr. Jucreas Mather,
teacher to a Church in Boston in New England, on the Mystery of Isreal's
Redemption, from Romans 11. 26. says,

Page 5. Some think that by all Israel, is meant some few of all Israel, but
that cannot be the meaning of the words; for the note of universality, all
Israel, will no bear such a particular restrained interpretation, surely the
Scripture is not wont to use such harsh improprieties of Speech, as to say all,
when not all, but a few only are intended; and the Apostle opposes the
Salvation of all Israel, to the Salvation of a Renmant, verse. 5. page 6. Others
think that by the Salvation of all Israel, is meant the Elect only, which says
he, tho that be true, yet there is a Carnal and Natural Israel, i. e. those
that are by Generation the seed of Jacob, who was afterward called Israel;
hence we read of Israel after the flesh, as well as after the Spirit, 1 Cor.
10. 18. Romans 9. 4, 5. Gal. 4. 23. Now of this Israel does the Apostle here
speak, Romans 11. 14. Nor indeed, had he declared such a mystery as he speaks of,
verse. 25. If only he had said the Elect should be saved, doubtless the Romans
knew that before, whereas the Salvation of all Israel was a mystery they little
thought of, (and I fear it is a mystery too little thought of or believed
still,) page 7. Others there are that understand, all and every one of the
Natural Posterity of Jacob, Sic Thomas Cajetanus Dominicus Asoto, that every
Person among the Children of Israel should partake of this Salvation, which he
likewise thinks is a mistake, page 9. Others think that by all Israel, is
intended the body of the Israelitish Nation, as Mr. Strong in his Sermons on
Romans 11. 26. And that seems to be the Genuine interpretation of the words, for
in other places, all is used to signify many, Mat. 3. 5. All, notes a
multitudinous number, and so is all to be taken, Isa. 66. 23. Joel 2. 28. All
Israel shall be saved, i. e. very many Israelites shall be saved, yea, all here
notes, not only many; but most, it signifies not only a majority, but a very
full and large Generality, page 10. Their rejection was not of every particular
person, nor yet of a few only, but of the body of the Nation, so shall their
Salvation be, page 12. The Salvation of the world to come, is comprehended
under this saying, all Israel shall be saved, for the words may well have
reference unto a speech that the Hebrews made frequent use of, that every
Israelite should have a part in the World to come; therefore everlasting life,
which shall be vouchsafed in the World to come, is here intended, Mar. 10. 30.
Thus far Mr. Mather, with many more like sayings to the same purpose that I
might mention, but these are enough to demonstrate a harmony, with the truth by
me asserted.


Christ. The matter seems very plain, only one thing seems to lie in the way;
that is, Isa. 10. 22. Tho the number of the Children of Israel be as the sand
of the Sea, a Remnant shall be saved, and chapter 6. 13. But yet in it shall be a
tenth, and it shall return and be eaten, and the holy seed shall be the
substance thereof, by which, the Salvation of Israel seems to be restricted to
a few, and ^^t to be so general as you speak of.


Min. This doubt, or objection (I think) is cleared in my answer to Mr. Coxe,
chapter 7. p. 56, 57. That the Remnant shall be saved with the first and special
Salvation of the Gospel; so the Election, a Remnant only obtains.

2 I think, Mr. Mather is full and plain in this matter, viz. That the
Salvation of all Israel, intends the Natural Israel, and not the Elect, but as
distinct from the Remnant, verse. 5. So that the Salvation of all Israel, and
the Salvation of the Remnant, as it is differing, and both positively stated in
the Scriptures, so it necessarily must be differing Salvations, as for the
first and special Salvation by Faith, now in the day of Grace; so a Remnant
only obtains it, the Holy seed are the substance thereof, the Glory thereof;
and had it not been for this Remnant, they had been as Sodom, and should have
been like unto Gomorrah, Isa. 1. 9. Romans 9. 29. viz. To have partaked of the
Judgment as Sodom, and of no other Salvation than what is promised them with
Sodom at that day, Ezekiel. 16. 53. 61. Which Salvation will be a lower and lesser
Salvation than the Remnant shall obtain, and that too, after they have past the
Judgment and born the punishment of their sins, Ezekiel. 39. 26. and 16. 58. And
all shall be as the effect of the ancient love of God, and promise to their
Fathers, Romans 11. 28. And by that one sacrifice for sin, Zec. 9. 11, 12. Which
intends not the Remnant, but the Captivated Prisoners throughout their
Generations.


Christ. I am now well satisfied concerning the general Salvation of Israel, I
desire you to declare you grounds likewise for the general Salvation of the
World, and that with as much Evidence, as (from the Scripture) you can.


Min. This I have spoken to in my additional word, and more fully in my answer
to Mr. Coxe, chapter 7. And in Confession of Faith Article 7. But it being a truth
almost lost out of the world, and by reason thereof accounted strong almost by
all, tho I may safely say, (as I said before) that the general Salvation of
Israel and of the World, is as clearly and fully stated in the Scriptures, as
the special Salvation of Believers, viz. the world (...) general, as Israel, I
say not all, but the Majority, a very full and large generality, after they are
raised and have past the Judgment and born their Punishment, shall (as Israel)
obtain a mitigation of their Punishment and some Degrees of blessing and
Salvation, by the seed of the Woman, the seed of Abraham, by whom they have
been Redeemed to a new life and world, in whom all the Nations of the Earth
shall be blessed; which Salvation shall not only wonderfully come short of the
Salvation of believers, but shall be inferior to (and differ from) the common
Salvation of the Jews, God in the degrees of his Grace to men in the
Restitution, designing to keep up an Eternal distinction between the World and
the natural seed of Abraham, in their various and respective distinctions and
degrees, yet the World shall Enjoy some favor blessing and Salvation in times
to be Effected, which is one part of the mystery of the Gospel, Ephesians. 1. 9, 10.
My further grounds are;

1. Because God always retained his propriety in the World (as in the Jews tho
more remote) he ^ever Elected Abraham and his seed, so as to lose his right and
propriety in all (or any of the World besides) tho Abraham and his seed had the
preheminency above all the World, they were the chief (or first fruits) among
the Nations, Amos 6. 1. and so shall be in the new World, Isa. 60. 14. but in
this choice he losed not his real Propriety in the World, Deuteronomy. 10. 14, 15. and
hence he was (and still is) good to all, and made (and makes) provision for
all, Ps. 145. 9, 15, 16. Mat. 5. 45.

2. Because the Woman's seed (according to promise, Genesis 3. 15) has undertaken
and will Effect the breaking of the head design of the Serpent for all mankind,
in recovering all (in the resurrection) to a new life and World, Joh. 6. 51.
Heb. 2. 14, 15. Romans 5. 18. 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. and the Generality shall in time
reap some advantage thereby, Ps. 96. 10. 11. 12. 13. and 98. 4. to 9. Rev. 5.
13.

3. And Especially (as an effect of this undertaking of Christ for the life of
the world) because there are as manifold Promises to the Nations in general as
to the Jews, and that as distinct from blessedness, and the Tribes of Israel,
tho they shall be chief among the Nations, and that not only of some believers,
but a return is Promised to the Nations at that day, as fully as to the Tribes
of Israel, tho they are and shall be chief, Jer 12. 14, 15. Thus says the Lord
to all mine evil Neighbors, that touch the inheritance that I have caused my
People Israel to inherit, behold, I will pluck them out of their Land, and
pluck out the House of Israel from among them, and it shall come to pass, after
that I have plucked them out, I will return and have compassion on them, and
will bring them again, every man to his Heritage and every Man to his Land,
verse. 16. And it shall come to pass, if they will diligently learn the ways of
my People, to swear by my name the Lord lives (as they taught my People Israel
to swear by Baal) then shall they be built in the midst of my People. What is
intended, to swear by the Lord, see Isa. 19. 18. and 45. 23. With Romans 14. 10,
11, 12. And suitable to this promise, is Zec. 9, 1. The burden of the word of
the Lord, in the Land of Hadrach and Damasci^, shall be the rest thereof, when
the eyes of Man shall be toward the Lord, as the eyes of all the Tribes of
Israel. This will be a universal Restitution and Reformation indeed, when the
eyes of Man in general, shall be toward the Lord, as the eyes of all the
Tribes of Israel in their restored estate, according to chapter 8. 20, 21, 22. When
the Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the
Sea, and as I have frequently elsewhere showed (especially in my Answer to Mr.
Coxe) the manifold promises to the Nations at that day, as that they shall
serve the Lord with gladness and joy, which cannot be, but in the enjoyment of
some good by (and from) him, Psalm. 67. 3, 4, 5. and 100. 1, 2. and 22. 27, 28,
29. and 86, 9. And promises to particular Nations, which will be made good to
all, as to Egypt and Assyria, Isa. 19. 17, to 25. and Jer. 48. 47. is a
particular promise to Moab, yet will I bring again the Captivity of Moab, in
the latter days says the Lord. And to Ammon, chapter 49. 6. And of Elam, verse. 39.
But it shall come to pass in the latter days that I will bring again the
Captivity of Elam, says the Lord. compared with Ezekiel. 32. 24, 25. And Ezekiel.
16. 53, 61. Is a promise of Sodoms return at that day, as full and firm, as to
Judah, and all these promises to the Nations, refer to (and are to be fulfilled
in) the latter days, as those to the house of Israel, Isa. 2. 2, 3, 4. Mic. 4.
1. The last and latter days (in Scripture sense) frequently relating to the
Judgment and new World to come, Jam. 5. 1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 1. 5.

4. Because the New Testament fully falls in with the same truth, as an
explanation of those Prophesies and Promises thereof, as the Restitution of all
things, Act. 3. 21. the uniting of all things in Christ the Head and Lord of
his Church, and the then visible Lord of the World, and shall be so
acknowledged and Worshipped, Phi. 2. 9, 10, 11. Rev. 5. 13. Isa. 5. 45. Of this
general Salvation we read, 1 Timothy 4. 10. He is the Savior of all Men, but
especially of them that believe. It Is true, it is God the Father that is here
intended, but he saves no otherwise than by Jesus Christ, Act. 4. 12. and 13.
47. So he is called, the Savior of the World, Joh. 4. 42. 1 John 4. 14. And
that all flesh shall see his Salvation, Luke 3. 6. And Jude v. 3. calls it the
common (public, or general) Salvation; I know that there it is Objected, that
the Faith of the Gospel is called the common Faith, Tit. 1. 4. Which Faith is
so called because it is the common Faith of all true believers, and so is the
Salvation called common, as the Faith is, i. e. common to all true believers.

To this I say, if this common and universal Salvatition is included in the
Doctrine of the Commission for Gospel Preaching, (as indeed it is) Preach the
glad tidings to all the Creation, Mar. 16. 15. Which do undoubtedly intend the
common or general Salvation; and if the Faith to which the special Salvation is
promised, is to believe the general and common Salvation, as it is most apparent
it is, Mar. 16. 16. And that there is but this one Gospel-Faith to which
Salvation is promised; then it is no marvel that the Faith is called the common
Faith, as the Salvation is called the common Salvation, the Faith being as
large as the Salvation, or it is not the Faith of the Gospel, or of Gods Elect,
and 1 Timothy 2. 4. That he will have all Men saved and come to the knowledge of
the truth. It says not only, he wills to have all saved, but he will have
all men to be saved, (and if so) who shall say him nay? He says not, come to
the knowledge of the truth and be saved, that being the way to be saved now in
this day of Grace, preparative to the Glory, but saved, and come to the
knowledge of the Truth, which suits with verse. 6. Who gave himself a ransom for
all to be testified in due time, there being various times of this Testimony,
else all the World that never heard of him here, could not give Glory to him,
(as they shall) in the World to come, Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. Rev. 5. 13. When the
Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea,
Isa. 11. 9. and Tit. 2. 11. The Grace of God that brings Salvation to all
Men, has appeared. It brings Salvation to all men, and teaches us who
believe it now in this day of Grace, to live suitable thereunto, verse. 12. As a
preparation to the Glory, 2 These. 1. 10.

5. And finally, and as that wherein the abundance of the promises to the
Nations at that day are manifest; and in which it appears, they are altogether
as manifold as to Israel, this favor and blessing being promised,

1. To all Nations, and to the ends of the Earth, Isa. 52. 10. Jer. 3. 17. Rev.
15. 4. Ps. 72. 17, and 98. 3. 2. To all flesh, Ps. 65. 2. and 145. 21. Isa. 40.
5. and 66. 23. 3. To all Kings, Ps. 72. 11. and 102. 15. and 138. 4, 5. Isa.
62. 2. and Princes, Psalm. 47. 9. and 68. 31. and Kingdoms, Ps. 68. 32. and 102.
22. Rev. 11. 15. 4. To all People, Ps. 47. 1, 2. and 67. 3, 5. and 148. 11, 12.
Luke 2. 10. 5. To all the kindreds and Families of the Earth, Genesis 12. 3. and
22. 18. Ps. 22. 27. and 96. 7. 6. To all the Earth. 1. Chro. 16. 30, 31. Ps.
66. 1, 4. and 67. 7. and 98. 3, 4. And 7. To all Tongues, Isa. 66. 18.

All which gives us to understand the abundance of Promises to the Nations in
general, and to be performed in the times of the Restitution, at and after the
Resurrection and Judgment in the World to come, set forth in holy Scripture, in
such multiplicity and variety of Promises and Expressions (as all Nations, all
Flesh, all People, all Kings and Kingdoms, all Tongues, all the Earth; all
Kindreds and Families of the Earth) to inform and confirm us both in the truth
and weightiness of the matter, and if any yet dare to deny it, and to apply all
these Promises, to the Elect (or Believers) only (in any sense) let them at
their own peril take their wilful will, contrary to all Scripture and reason.


Christ. The Scripture seems wonderful clear and full in this matter, if it be
to be performed in the new and restored World, I think there can be no
resisting hereof.


Min. 1. If any make doubt of that, let them fix the time (or times) when it
shall be else where, from evidence of Scripture light, or else they say nothing
to it.

2. The Scripture determins the time, with such open face and evidence of
light, that whosoever runs may Read.

1. It shall be, when he comes to judge the World in Righteousness, and the
People with his truth, Ps. 96. 13. and 98. 9.

2. It shall be, when the Kingdom is the Lords and he shall govern among the
Nations, Ps. 22. 27, 28. when the Lord shall be King over all the Earth, and
there shall be one Lord, and his name one, Zec. 14. 19. Rev. 11. 15.

3. It shall be in the time of the new Heavens, and new Earth, Isa 66. 18, 22,
23. which will be the new World, and will not be, till after the old is
dissolved and renewed, 2 Pet. 10. 11, 12, 13. and after the judgment is over,
v. 7. Rev. 20. 11. etc. and chapter 21. 1, 5, 24.

4. It shall be in the time when the great transgressors are suffering their
eternal Punishment, Isa. 66. 23, 24.

5. It shall be when, the time of this World shall be no more, in the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Rev. 10. 6. 7. with
chapter 11. 15.

6. It shall be in the new World, that the leaves of the tree of Life shall be
for the healing of the Nations, and the fruit for those with Christ, in the
Holy City, Rev. 22. 2. all which does clearly show us the time. For further
reason see, Confession of Faith, Article, 7.


Christ. Some make the application of all to the Thousand Years Reign and limit
it there, Rev. 20.


Min. 1. We may not lose the eternal Estate, Life, Kingdom, Glory and World to
come, in a Thousand Years, there being no other Kingdom, World, Life or Glory
promised, but in the World to come, in which all these things are to be
accomplished.

2. Those Scripture grounds now mentioned all of them, carry it beyond the
Thousand Years and the Judgment, into the World to come and the eternal Kingdom
of Christ, and the promises being as manifold to the Gentile World, as to the
Jews, we may safely conclude, they shall arrive thereto in (and after) the
Judgment, by repentance, purging and pardon as the Jews shall, as before has
been showed.


Christ. The Judgment of penal Punishment is said to be eternal, it is called
the eternal Judgment, Heb. 6. 2. Some say, that this notion overthrows the
fundamentals of the eternal judgment.


Min. 1. The Judgment threatened in the Gospel, is especially intended, against
such as sin immediately against the Gospel, who as they have had the greatest
means of light, so will they be liable to the greatest Judgment, Mat. 11. 20,
24. Mar. 16. 15, 16. to suppose the eternal Judgment threatened, and to be
inflicted on the wilful Rejecters of the Gospel, to be intended to all the
World that never heard thereof, has been and is a very great mistake.

2. And for the use of the word Eternal, Everlasting and for ever, I have fully
spoken to, both in my Additional word, chap. 7. page 51. and in my answer to
Mr. Coue, chapter 7. page 62, 63. That it is frequently limited to time in Scripture
sense, that it usually intends a long time, sometimes more, and sometimes less,
as is most apparent, and might be manifested (I think I may safely say) not
less than a hundred times, I shall here, only mention a few, in t^^ present
case, viz. Threats of temporary Judgments, to be for ever and perpetual, yet a
time promised of an end thereof, and of Salvation and deliverance, as Deuteronomy. 28.
29, 46. yet chapter 32. 36. is a promise to the same people of an end, which indeed
includes both the Judgment and the Mercy, the Lord shall judge his People, and
repent himself for his Servants, etc. 1. Judge them, compared with Heb. 10. 30.
And afterward repent himself for his Servants, Jer. 17. 4. The Judgment is
called a fire that shall burn for ever, viz. a fire that shall not be quenched,
perpetual desolations, Jer. 25. 9. yet a time of deliverance is promised, verse.
11, 12, and 29, 10. And hence it is, the Prophet in the true sense of the
Scripture, prayed for deliverance from the perpetual desolations, Psalm. 74. 2,
3. Remember thy Congregation, etc. Lift up thy feet to the perpetual
desolations, viz, make have to deliver from the perpetual desolations. I might
instance the promise of the Land of Canaan everlasting, Genesis 17. 8, and 48. 4.
Covenant everlasting, Genesis 17. 7, 13. Priesthood everlasting, Exodus 40. 15.
Number. 25. 13. Deuteronomy. 18. 5. So likewise temporary Statute^ and Ordinances said to
be for ever, Lev. 16. 34. Number. 10. 8. and 18. 8. And not only time to come is
frequently called Eternal and Everlasting, when it intends but a time. But the
time past, and of old, since the Creation, is likewise in Scripture called
Eternity and from Everlasting, see some Margent Bibles, As Jos. 24. 2. Your
Fathers dwelt in the other side of the Flood in old time, Hebrew Meolam, that
is from Everlasting, 1 Samuel* 27. 8. Those of old, were the Inhabitants of the
Land, Heb. those from Eternity, the same as Mich 5. 2. Isa. 63. 11. Then he
remembered the days of old, Moses and his People, Heb. days of Eternity, Jer, 5.
15. I will bring upon you an ancient Nation, Heb. a Nation from Eternity, Ezekiel.
36. 2. The Enemy said against you aha, even the ancient High places are ours in
possession, Heb. High places of Eternity, Mal. 3. 4. As in the days of old,
Heb. days of Eternity, Romans 16. 25. (...), Eternal, translated from the
Foundation of the World. And that properly (or from the beginning) all which
Scriptures do not intend from Eternity, in the common received sense, but a
long time before, in some longer, and in some lesser time is intended; which
tends (with the multitude of other Scriptures that speaks of time to come,
under the same expressions yet limited to time) to direct us to such an
understanding in this matter, as is suitable and agreeing to the Analogy of
Scripture, and the mind of the Lord therein; and likewise help us to a right
understanding of 2 Timothy 1. 9. and Tit. 1. 2. (...), translated before the World
began, properly Eternal, (agreeing with the forementioned Scriptures) of old;
there being no promises of (or in) Christ Jesus, that we are capable to take
knowledge of, but such as have been made since the World began and Recorded in
the Scriptures.

3 The Judgment will be truly and properly in Scripture sense Eternal.

For, 1. Take it according to the Analogy of Scripture, and common sense
thereof, if it be a long time it is accounted Eternal, as has been fully
manifested.

2. One sentence may determine all to their Eternal estate, with the various
measures and times of penal punishment, suitable to the various facts of Men,
according to 2 Cor. 5. 10. Rev. 22. 12. Which as it is most Righteous and
Godlike, and that which he requires among men, and likewise most rational, so
it is all I plead for in this matter, and that without which all those great
promises to the World, in the World to come, cannot be effected.

3. The Judgment and Punishment of loss will be Eternal to all that come short
of the Glory with Christ, to all that must be purged by fire, and hurt of the
second Death, and this renders the Judgment to be really Eternal, and in no
case intrenches on the Eternal Judgment.

4. Christ the Lord and Judge, shall be the eternal Lord, King and Judge of the
renewed State and World to come, and so his Judgment shall be Eternal; in this
sense Magistrates have been and are called Judges, so were the rulers of Israel
of old, 1 Samuel 15. 16, 17. And in this sense, shall the Lord Christ be the
Eternal, visible Judge of the new and restored World, who will rule and Judge by
such Laws, as himself shall then give; else what means, 1 Chro. 16. 33, Ps,
96. 10, 13. Say among the Heathen the Lord reigns, the World also shall be
established that it shall not be moved, he shall Judge the People Righteously,
verse. 13. He comes, he comes to Judge the Earth; he shall judge the World with
Righteousness, and the People with his truth, Psalm. 98. 4, 9. and 67. 4. For
thou shall judge the People Righteously, and govern the Nations upon the Earth,
Isa. 2. 4^ Psalm. 86. 9. and 102. 22. To which agrees, Act. 17. 31. He will
judge the World in Righteousness by that Man whom he has ordained, and Rev.
11. 15. He will reign and judge the World Eternally in its renewed Estate,
according to those many promises thereof, and it shall be, when the World is
Established, when it cannot be moved, 1 Chro. 16. 30. Psalm, 93. 1. and 96. 10.

5. It concerns us so to understand the Judgment as may comport and agree with
all those promises to the World at that day, lest we derogate from the truth of
the Scripture Record, both concerning the Judgment it self, and the Glory of
Christ's undertaking for the World, and the Glory of his Kingdom in the World to
come; all which stands clear and in unity in Scripture Record, had we but eyes
to see and understand it.

6. And so, from the whole I conclude, that my ^otions about this matter, are
so far from overthrowing the Fundamentals of the Eternal Judgment, as that they
are the most Scriptural, Righteous, Rational and true Discoveries thereof, in
which the whole Scriptures unite, in which the whole name of God (as opened to
us in his Word) agrees, and in which his wonderful design by Christ in the
Gospel will Issue, Phi. 2. 9, 10, 11. Rev. 5. 13. and 10. 7. with 11. 15.


Christ. If so, that which Men say they fear is, that the knowledge hereof, will
take off People from fearing the Judgment to come, supposing an end of the
penal part, will grow careless or fearless.


Min. 1. Were there any ground, so to suppose (as rightly understood there is
not) must not truth be declared for fear Men will abuse it to their own
destruction? Did the Apostles refrain to publish the mysteries of Gospel Grace
to men, for fear they would ^buse it? Romans 5. 20, 21. and 6. 1, 2. And this
Doctrine now discoursed on, is but a more remote strain of the same
Gospel Grace to the World, both of Jews and Gentiles, of which God has filled
his Word, that men might understand and believe it, (without fearing the event
thereof) and must we be afraid to publish it?

2. Those who seem to be most under this complaint and fear, have (indeed)
least cause, were the danger so great as is surmised; their own declared
principles of Faith being that which tends (really and truly) to teach People
not to fear the Judgment, viz. That God reprobated the World in general, both
to sin and Judgment by an Eternal and unchangeable Decree, before the World
was, that he made men to be Vessels of wrath, that neither the hope of Heaven,
nor fear of Hell can alter it: which truly teaches People to be Atheists, and
not to fear the Judgment, to conclude there is no such thing as sin in the
World (as many have done) if all are the Decreed Acts of God, then it must be
well pleasing to him, and that for which there can be no Judgment; Or, 2. If
both the sins and Judgment were Decreed, it must needs be unrighteous, and that
of which there is no avoiding by fear thereof; and the most I have yet heard in
Answer to this is, that the fear of Judgment may prevent them from gross sins,
and so their Damnation may be the less; and they thereby rendered the better
Neighbors among Men; but this is a contradiction, their Principle of Gods
Decreeing of all acts whatsoever comes to pass, kills and ends this; for if
that were true, neither hope of Heaven nor fear of Hell, could possibly prevent
one sin, either against God or Men: therefore such may learn shame, so much to
cry out on this, when their own Notions tends to end both Sin and Judgment, or
to render the most Holy and Righteous God, to be most unholy and unrighteous in
the Judgment.

3. Rightly understood (were not Men perverse) it is in it self, so far from
tending to occasion any negligence, or fearlesness in this matter, as that it
would rather tend to warn and awaken all sorts of People under the Gospel,
(which is our concern) to look about themselves, there being no hope nor help
for wilful Transgressors (so p^rsisting to the end) under the Gospel, all the
most Eternal Judgments and Damnation threatened in the Gospel, being against
such; and if any g^ow careless and wilful, their Damnation will become thereby
the greater and Eternal. The reason is, because the greater mercy and means of
Light and Life is afforded unto any here, it being rejected or neglected, the
greater will their Damnation be. To whomsoever much is given, of them shall
much be required, Luke 12. 47. Mat. 11. 20, to 24.


Christ. Do you suppose, that this general Grace, is only to the Heathen World
that ne^e^ ^^^rd of Christ? Nay no sinners under the Gospel parta^e the^eof?


Min. 1. As before I said, no wilful Transgressors may expect any share
therein, Prove 1. 23, 10 31. Yet, 2. I do not question, but that many under the
Gospel may (as have need thereof, so) have share therein; or else woe, woe,
woe, will be the case of many Gospel-Professors at that day, but there may be
many Gospel-Professors among all sorts, that may have high confidence of their
good estate, and yet may meet with great Judgment at that day, that may in
time^ partake of deliverance, that must to the fire, and yet be saved, 1 Cor.
3. 15. If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss, but himself shall
be saved, yet so as by fire; here is both the Judgment by fire, and the loss,
which loss without doubt will be Eternal, yet the person saved, when he has
past the Judgment. I know there are several Opinions contrary to (and
Objection^ against) this plain truth in this Scripture, as, 1. Tha^ it intends
Ministers building of false Doctrine upon the true Foundation, and not Members
or Gospel Professors.

1. I easily grant it; yet if Ministers works must be burnt that are not right,
and yet themselves saved so as by fire, then certainly the Members built and
led by them shall suffer the same loss and Judgment with them, if the bl^nd
lead the blind, both must fall into the ditch.

2. The Ministers first and Principally intended, as the cause of these words
(we have more than probable ground to conclude) were those bad ones of (or
belonging to) the Church of Corinth, of whom the Apostle so much complains, 2
Cor. 11. 13. Calling them false Apostles, deceitful Workers, the Devils
Ministers, verse. 15. Yet, it is apparent, verse. 4. that they kept to, and built
upon the same Foundation the Apostle had laid; they Preached not another Jesus,
nor another Spirit, nor another Gospel, but the same as Paul did, tho to bad
ends; yet these, and such as these, shall be saved by fire.

2. Obj. That it intends not the day of the Lords coming to Judgment, but some
other day of Gospel Grace in this World, to brun up the Wood, Hay and Stubble,
by the fire of the Word and Spirit, bofore the d^y of Judgment comes, because
it is said, the day shall declare it, not the day of the Lord, as the coming of
Christ and the Judgment, is usually called the day of the Lord, Joel 2 31. 1
These. 5. 2. 2 Pet. 3. 10. To this I say, 1. That the coming of Christ is called
the day, as well as the day of the Lord, Mal. 4. 1. To which probably the
Apostle may have respect, Behold the day comes that shall burn as an Oven. And
Romans 13. 12. It Is called the day, The day is at hand, and Ephesians. 4. 30. the day
of Redemption, Heb. 10. 25. Exhorting one another, and so much the more, as you
see the day approaching, so that it is called the day, as frequently, as the day
of the Lord, and indeed it is all one. And it is likewise called, that day, 1
These. 5. 4. 2 These. 2. 3. 2 Timothy 1. 18. and 4. 8.

3. Others say, That if it do intend the day of the Lord, yet it intends the
burning up of things, but not of Persons.

To this I say, 1. It Is true, it intends the burning up of things, viz. Of all
things built on the Foundation contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel, both in
matters of Faith and practice, but the Persons must to the fire as well as
their works, they shall be saved, yet so as by fire.

2. Else all bad Ministers and Christians, that have built bad matter and made
bad work, must be saved, suffering only the loss of their building, without any
personal or penal suffering, (for the Apostle says, that those who come under
this consideration, shall be saved, so as by fire) and if so, this Notion opens
the Door wider than the Scripture, or themselves will grant; and therefore,
necessarily we must understand it in the sense by me asserted, which is
likewise plain, without any harsh interpretation, or wresting, and wi^h this,
Rev. 2. 11. seems fully to agree, he that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the
second Death, which imports not only a security to overcomers, but that some
may be hurt of the second Death, that may not be Eternally swallowed up
therein, that may to the fire, and yet be saved; so 1 Cor. 11. 30, 31, 32. we
read of some, that were judged of the Lord, that they might not be condemned
w^the the World; which clearly imports, if they had o^ been so Judged of the
Lord here, they must have bee^ condem^ed with the World, at that day, and that
whoever ^^ like case, is not Judged here, must meet with cond^mnation then, so
1 Timothy 5. 24. Some men's sins are open before h^nd g^ing before to Judgment, and
some they foll^^ after, not o^^y to be Judged by the Church, but by the Lord,
as 1 Co^. 11. 32. They are ju^ged and chastened of the Lord, and Mat. 18. 23,
to 35. Christ the Lord and Judge lets us to know that some whose sins are
forgiven, may by their unme^^^fulness to others forfeit all, and be Judged to
punishment, till full satisfaction to J^^t^ce i^ made, verse. 35. a warning and
an awakening word it should be to all merciless men in Gospel-Profession, Mat.
25. 41. Jam. 2. 12, 13. And this is so far from m^n^^tring any any occasion of
sinful neglect, that if rightly pon^er^d it would, 1 Be a warning word to all
so^s of Gospel-Professors, to take heed and beware, what they build, both in
matters of Faith and Life, lest they come short of the Glory, and meet with the
fiery Judgment, and be hurt of the second Death, it is that which ^ends to
season all, with the fear of the Judgment to come, and a suitable preparation
thereunto, which being so much wanting herein, some of those that ^^ll so much
thereof for others, expect not ever to come to it themselves, which renders
them the more in danger thereof; and, 2. If any wilfully neglect on this
account, they may suffer the Et^rnal punishment a^cording to the Scr^pture
threats thereof.


Christ. Some cry out against this, as if they were like to be undone thereby,
because (say they) you own a Redemption from Hell, and a threefold state in the
World to come.


Min. This arises much from Tradition, and ignorance of the Restitution and
World to come, while the Faith of the Gospel is lost, as to the Glorious design
of God to the World by Jesus Christ in the Restitution, it is no marvel they are
all for Hell and burning in another World, while they conclude themselves to
have no share therein; tho it is true, there will be sire and burning enough,
and that to those who have the least share therein, Luke 12. 48. And good it
will be to all, to look well to themselves in time, and come right in the Faith
and Life of the Gospel, lest their own fire devour them.

2. Let men come right in the Faith, as to the Restitution, World to come and
Kingdom of Christ therein (without which we have not the Faith of the Gospel)
and the difference in this will quickly end, when that is believed, the
difference only remains about the various states of men in that World, which (I
suppose) may well be born withal in each other, especially it being so, that we
all must come short in the knowledge thereof till the time comes.

3. And concerning Redemption from Hell, the word translated Hell, frequently
in the old Testament (and sometimes in the New) intends the Grave, and from
thence shall be a universal Redemption of all, it being one of the proper ends
of the Death and Resurrection of Christ, Romans 5. 18. 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. And is
called the day of Redemption, Romans 8. 23. Ephesians. 4. 30.

2. Sometimes, Hell intends great and deep asslictions and sorrows, Psalm. 18.
4, 5. and 116. 3. From which has been (and may be) deliverance, Psalm. 116. 8.
and 86. 3.

3. The Whales belly is called Hell, which is rarely mentioned in the Old
Testament, probably because the old Covenant (as such) could not bring in the
second life, without which could have been no second Death, and it is called
Death Metaphorically and not properly, the first Death* being properly Death,
the second not so, but a life in misery, called Death and Hell, which great and
deep afflictions, pains and sorrows (called Hell) do most sutably represent.

And as there has been (and shall be) a Redemption from Hell, in all the first
mentioned respects, viz. Out of great and deep afflictions, pains and sorrows,
of Jonah, out of the Fishes belly, and all shall be Redeemed from the Grave,
called Hell; why we should be so incredulous of, and affrighted with, a
Redemption from the pains and sorrows of the second Death, called Hell, to me
seems strange, especially the Scripture being so abundantly full and clear in
the matter in the true sense thereof, as before has been showed, and as for the
Kings of the Earth at that day relative to this matter, read and ponder, Isa.
24. 21, 22.

And as for the Redemption of the World, or deliverance after Judgment (which
includes the Redemption from Hell, besides what has been already said) we may
read as much, in that wonderfully mistaken Scripture, Psalm. 2. 8, 9. Ask of me,
and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts
of the Earth for thy possession, where is, 1. Christ's mediatory office,
respecting the World, ask of me. 2. A promise, I will give thee the Heathen for
thine inheritance, for thy possession. Inheritance and Possession in Scripture
sense, being generally taken for good, for advantage, for riches, for honor,
Deuteronomy. 4. 21. ^^ad very probably, this saying, (as it suits with) may ^^er to,
Lev. 25. 44, 45, 46. As a Figure thereof, ^ere the Lord allows his People to
buy of the Heathen ^^^d-men and Bond-women, and they should be their
^^d-servants, possession and inheritance for ever. A ^^ely resemblance of
Christ's purchasing, possessing and ^^eriting the Heathen World for ever, as
his subjects ^^d servants, suitable to Isa. 49. 18. As I live says the ^^d,
thou shall cloth thee with them all; but verse 9. ^^ is to break them with a
rod of Iron, and dash them ^ pieces like a Potters Vessel. True, it is so, he
must ^ge, dash and break them first, that so they may be ^ for his Inheritance,
Possession and Service, they are ^^en to him on such terms as first to dash and
break ^^m, and so conquer them to himself, Psalm. 18. 42, ^^n, did I beat them
small as the dust before the wind, ^^ and verse 43, 44, 45. follows the service
of the same ^^ken and conquered People, which relates to the very ^^e matter,
or to David as a Figure thereof, and Psalm. ^. 8. agrees fully hereto, Arise, O
God, judge thou ^^ Earth, for thou shall inherit all Nations. 1. Thou ^^lt
Judge, break them to pieces, and then Inherit ^^m^ and further we read in
Scripture that God will ^^me, be pacified toward his People when they have ^n
the punishment of their sin in the Judgment, who ^^e as great sinners against
God as any of the Hea^^^, Ezekiel. 16. 47, 48, 63. And Sodom and Gomorrah, ^^
which there can be no worse among the Heathen, yet ^^d will in time be pacified
toward them, and return ^^^n, when he returns his sinning People, Judah and
Is^^^l, Ezekiel. 16. 53, 61. and Zeph. 3. 8. Where is declared ^^ universal
Judgment of the World, and when that ^^ finished, verse 9. Then will I turn to
the People a ^^ Language, that they may all call upon the Name of the Lord, and
serve him with one consent. The same Judged People, shall afterward serve the
Lord, he says not my People, but the People, which fully agrees with other
Scriptures of the same import, Psalm. 102. 22. When the People are gathered
together, and the Kingdoms to serve the Lord, and 22. 27. and 86. 9. And many
more that might be mentioned, and Luke 12. 48. The servant that miscarried
through ignorance shall be beaten little, so the word is, tho much in it self,
yet little, compared with wilful Transgressors, and [little] fully imports an
end of beating; and Eternal beating and striping, can in no sense be said to be
little, or few stripes, so that an end of, or Redemption from the penal part of
the second Death (though not of loss) to the generality of the World both of
Jews and Gentiles, in times to be effected, is most apparent, from the
Scriptures of truth; and I verily believe, it is nothing else but a Traditional
Reception contrary thereunto, that makes it so strange unto us.

And as for the threefold state of the World at that day, by some so much
stumbled at, it is likewise as apparent, not only from Psalm. 64. 8, 9, 10, verse
8. are the Eternally Condemned ones, verse 9* the generality of the World, all
men, verse 10. are the Righteous with the Lord, and Isaiah 66. is first a
description of the Church in its Glory with Christ, verse 10, 11, 12. 2. The
gathering of all tongues, and all flesh, to worship, verse 18, 23. 3. The
Eternally Condemned ones, verse 24.

But if our eyes were but half open, we might read as much in Mat. 25. 32, etc.
Where we may necessarily understand three states, two mentioned, and a third
not mentioned, but implied. 1. All Infants (so dying) are not there mentioned,
not being capable of such a sentence, either to life or death, (viz. on the
same ^^ounds, for feeding or not feeding the Members of Christ,) which are not
a small part of the World. 2. All the Heathen World, that never heard of Christ
or his ^embers, and as they have not been, nor are capable to ^ew mercy to
Christ in his Members, so are they ^ot capable of such a sentence, it being
proper only to Gospel-Professors; but indeed, that World may not only admit of
a threefold state, but of three thousand, ^a infinite, as to us, if it be true
(according to Scri^ure) that God will render to every man according to ^s
Works, 1 Cor. 5. 10. Rev. 22. 12.


Christ. Some cry out against this Doctrine, as grie^^^ Heresy, and scandalous
to the Gospel.


Min. To this I shall say but little, tho I could say much. 1. For truth to be
accounted Heresy, is no (...) (and therefore no strange) thing. 2. After the
^^y they call Heresy, so believe I, and worship God. 3. I ^eartily desire they
may repent of this in time, it being ^ ^oful sin, to call good evil, and evil
good. 4. To under it Heresy and scandalous, is to render the whole lord and
design of God by Christ in the Gospel to ^ Heresy and scandalous, relative to
the Judg^ent and World to come, according to the true declara^on thereof, as
has been plainly and plentifully pro^d before. 5. Suppose it* true, that it
were Heresy which it is far from) I query of them, whether it ^ould possibly be
any more than as a drop to the Ocean, ^^ respect of the Errors and Heresies
held by them^^ves, (as has been before unvailed) 6. And as for ^^s being
scandalous to the Gospel, I say, 1. If to as^^t, that God will Judge the World
in Righteousness by (...) Christ, and render to every man according to his
^^rks, penal punishment, both for measure and time, suitable to the Facts of
men, that he will punish none without a cause, nor more than is deserved, if
this be in good earnest scandalous either to God or Man, then I acknowledge I
am guilty of this scandal, and shall (I hope) till I dye. I conclude this with
the saying of Tertullian, which I think is true, viz. Good things offend none,
but such as have ill minds.


Christ. Some say, suppose all you say about these matters be true, yet they
question what advantage may be supposed in publishing thereof, especially it
being an offense to many.


Min. 1. If there were no worth at all (nor advantage) in the knowledge of the
Glorious design of God to the World by Jesus Christ in the Restitution and
World to come, certainly he would not have filled his word with the discoveries
thereof as he has, he would not have made it the work of all his holy Prophets
since the World began to speak thereof, but to the end that we might understand
and believe it to his praise, things revealed belonging to us, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
There being no truth in the Scripture more fully and frequently declared, than
the Restitution and World to come, with the Glories thereof. I think I may say,
the Scriptures abounds and excels in this, Act. 3. 21. And what may we conceive
from hence, but the greatness of the truth thereof, and the greatness of our
concern to understand and believe it?

2. If it be the Faith to which the promise of life in the World to come is
made (as has been before proved) then certainly it concerns us to understand
and believe it, and the publishing thereof, should be no o^ence unto any, but
rather their joy; and though Christ sometime said, Joh. 16. 12. I have many
things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now, which is by some urged in
this matter. To this I say, that the times before, and after the sufferings of
Christ much differed, afterward Christ did not forbear the publishing of that
to them, which they were not capable to bear before he suffered, nor did the
Apostle forbear the publishing of further truth to them that were dull of
hearing, Heb. 5. 11. with chapter 6. 1, 2, 3. And the Apostle complains, that he
was become (or esteemed) an Enemy because he told them the truth, Gal. 4. 16.
And indeed, a sin and a shame it is, that any professed Christians should be
offended at the Doctrine of the Restitution of all things, the World to come,
with the Glories thereof, it being the Crowning part of the Glorious Gospel of
the Blessed God. And if men will now be offended at the truth, I know no help
for it.


Christ. Some say that the World to come is a Mystery, and none are capable to
understand the perfection of the Glories thereof, yet you have undertaken to
declare what it is, and so have presumed beyond what is written.


Min. This saying must needs arise from ignorance or enmity, for I enter not
into the discoveries of either the perfect Glories, or Miseries of the World to
come, what it shall be, but that it shall be, and that according to the
Scripture discoveries thereof, no further have I presumed to speak or write: I
know they are mysteries beyond our capacity to understand, till the time
thereof is come.


Christ. I am well satisfied about this matter, and shall trouble you no
further at present about this; but in as much as I perceive your understanding
is, that the Holy City spoken of Rev. 21. 2. Is a material City, and shall come
down from God out of Heaven, and in as much as some think it to be the Church
and not a City, I desire you to clear this matter, and that it shall come down
into the new and restored World, as sometimes you have asserted.


Min. In this, I shall endeavor to clear three things of weighty concern, in
order thereunto.

1. That God has, does and will, Tabernacle and Sanctuary himself with men,
and dwell among them; and as to this, (besides his manifesting himself by his
works, Psalm. 1. 2, 3. Romans 1. 19, 20.) we find a fourfold dwelling of God with
men declared in Holy Scripture, the first three being but a preparation to the
fourth, in which will be the perfect Glorious presence Eternally.

In the first, he did Gloriously, (yet figuratively, Heb. 9. 9.) Sanctuary
himself in the Holy Tabernacle and Temple, by himself ordained and appointed
for that end, Exodus 25. 8. and 29. 44, 45, 46. 1 King. 6. 13. and 8. 13.

2. His Sanctuarying himself in his Son, in a wonderful, unconceivable,
unspeakable and Glorious manner, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Col. 2. 9. And hence, he himself
(alluding to the Figurative Temple) calls himself the Temple, Joh. 2. 19, 21.
As God of old dwelt in the Temple, so now in a more wonderful way he dwek in
his Son, Joh. 14. 10, 11. and 10. 38. And in this way, God in Christ dwelt
among men while he was in the World. Joh. 1. 14.

3. Christ being in Person ascended to his Father, now in the Gospel day of
Grace, he dwells in and among his People by his Word and Spirit, and in this
way manifests himself to the World. 1. By his Word and Ordinances, Joh. 15. 7.
Col. 3. 16. 1 John 2. 24. 2. By his Spirit, in and with his Word in unity, 1
Cor. ^ 16. 17. and 6. 19. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Ephesians. 3. 17. Gal. 4. 19. Psalm. 68. 18.
with Ephesians. 4. 8. to 12.

4. And as the finishing of his Figurative dwelling among his People of old,
and the preparations thereunto by his dwelling in his Son, and since, in, and
among, his People, he will Sanctuary and Tabernacle himself and dwell among men
most Gloriously in the World to come, but then it will be in and with his Son,
which in his first appearing in his Humiliation state was a preparation
thereunto, and this Glorious dwelling of God among men (which will be the
Crowning Glory of his whole Gospel design toward men) is foretold by the
Prophets, Isa. 12. 6. Ezekiel. 37. 26, 27. Zec. 2. 10, 11. And showed to John in
Vision, Rev. 21. 3. Which Vision we have ground to believe, was presented to
John as the fulfilling of the promises that went before thereof, and as it
shall be performed when the time is come.

2. That this Glorious dwelling of God, in and with Christ among men, will be
especially and principally, in the Holy City that shall come down from God out
of Heaven, when his Tabernacle shall be with men.


Christ. I suppose one great doubt about this matter is, whether it be a
material City, or the Church, that is there intended, I think, most has and
does understand it to be the Church, and not such a City as you mention,
because it is called, Rev. 21. 9, 10. The Bride the Lambs Wife.


Min. This being the great doubt in this matter, I shall endeavor the clearing
thereof, and that I doubt not but with evidence of truth and; doing of which I
shall observe four things.

1. That this City is frequently spoken of in the Scripture, as Glorious, and
as the Saints expectation, Psalm. 87. 3. Heb. 11. 10, 16. and 12. 22. and 13.
14. So that this City and the expectation thereof, is no new notion, but of
ancient expectation.

2. That this City is spoken of in Scripture clearly in distinction from the
Church, and to be above in Heaven. Gal. 4. 26. Jerusalem which is above is free
which is the Mother of us all, so called because we are begotten from thence by
the Gospel. Of us all, who are the Children and Church, as distinct from the
City, so Heb. 11. 10. 16. He has prepared for them a City, where the City is
distinguished from them for whom it is prepared, and 12. 22. The City of the
living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, is mentioned as clearly in distinction from
the Church, verse 23. so chap. 13. 14. is the City distinct from those that
seek after it, and Rev. 21. 27. The City is mentioned as distinct from those
that shall enter into it, and the Scripture clearly presents us with a City (or
habitation) in the Heavens, of which the Old Testament, Tabernacle and Temple
were the pattern, Heb. 8. 5. and 9. 1, 2, 9, 23. By which it appears, that
those former things were Figures and Patterns of things in the Heavens, and I
take Joh. 14. 2, and 2 Cor. 5. 1. To intend the same thing; in both which, the
house is distinct from those that shall dwell therein.

3. I fully grant that the Church may be and is called the City, i. e. after
the name of the City, tho improperly, the place is properly the City, old
Jerusalem was properly the City, yet the People that dwelt therein were so
called from that name, Jer. 13. 27. Luke 13. 34. So that both City and Church
are included therein, and in this sense it is, the City is called the Bride the
Lambs Wife, relative to the Church in the City, Isa. 60. 14.

4. I query, where ever there was a People called by the Name of a City, that
never was in being, but derived their Name from the City? Where ever there had
been a People called Jerusalem, had there been no such City, or London, had
there been no such City as London? So what reason there is for any to suppose a
People to be called New Jerusalem, were there no such City; especially the
Scripture being so plain and express in the matter; It Is true that those who
build a City, ordinarily give the Name, and then the Inhabitants are called
after that Name; he that built this City is God, 2 Cor. 5. 1. H^b. 8 2. And
has given it the Name, and will write the Name thereof upon all overcomers,
Rev. 3. 12. New Jerusalem, although but the Citizens, Ephesians. 2. 19. It being so,
that Christ and the Saints shall have, not only Glory, but a Glorious place,
it is impossible it should be otherwise. And why should we be so incredulous
herein, the place being so plainly revealed in the Scripture?

3. That this City, the new and Holy Jerusalem, shall come down from God out of
Heaven, into the new and restored World, and shall be the Glorious habitation
of God, in and with Christ and the Saints Eternally, in which shall be the
Throne of Christ's Kingdom as the Son of David, whose Throne was in (or very
near unto) the old Jerusalem, a Figure of this Glory, which shall be the Glory
and Joy of the whole Earth, Psalm. 48. 1, 2. and 97. 1. The same as, Ezekiel. 48.
35. Which will be the finishing of the Mystery of Gods Gospel Grace and Glory
to Men, Rev. 10. 7. with chap. 11. 15. We find not the coming down of this City
mentioned, till the new Heavens and the new Earth were finished, and therefore
it must be in the new World, Rev. 21. 1, 2.


Christ. Do we not find it mentioned, chap. 29. That God and Magog did compass
the Camp of the Saints and the beloved City, between the Thousand Years and the
Judgment, by which it seems the City was on Earth before the new Heavens and
new Earth, or else that the Church was the City.


Min. (...), is more properly read Holy, they compassed the Camp of the Holy
and beloved City, and indeed the Saints are the Camp of the Holy and beloved
City, i. e. They belong to it, and so were (and are) all the Saiuts interested
therein and seeking after it, Heb. 11. 10 and 13. 14. And therefore might well
be called the Camp of the Holy City, tho that was in Heaven; true believers are
said by Faith to be come to it, and probably it is the place of the Spirits of
just men made perfect, Heb. 12. 22, 23. And are all of the Camp that belong to
it, and shall with Christ dwell therein (when all others shall be without, Rev.
21. 27. and 22. 14, 15.) and hence may be (and are) called the City, or have
the name of the City called upon them, Rev. 3. 12.


Christ. I shall enquire no farther about these matters, but desire you to give
me some instructions for my further learning by way of inference some the whole.


Min. 1. You may learn to understand the great mistakes that have been (and yet
are) about the great matters of the Gospel, and the designs of God therein, the
Restitution of all things, the World to come and the Kingdom of Christ therem,
the Holy City new Jerusalem that shall come down from God out of Heaven, all
truths of greatest weight and worth, and all plainly stated in the Scripture,
yet almost lost out of our Faith, and not only so, but we are ready to give
them the names of Error and Heresy; the Heathens that never heard of the
Divine Revelation thereof (as is by some observed) do generally own another
being after Death than in this World, (in another World) but ^^^ows not what it
is, nor where it shall be, some fancy ^^^ thing and some another; whether this
expectation ^^ them be from some Divine instinct in Nature, or from ^adition,
or both, I shall not undertal^e to determine. ^^t a wonderful shame it is, that
God having given us ^ open a Revelation thereof in Scripture, and that as ^ a
effect of Christ's undertaking, and the most Glori^^^ part of the Gospel, that
Persons in highest pro^esion, should be (almost) as ignorant in these great
^aysteries, as the Nations that are without the Gospel of ^ ^^s Grace and
Glory, and you may learn the great^^ss of your concern to come right in these
things.

2. You may learn hence, to understand the mista^en notions about the Eternal
Judgment, which ren^ers God and Christ, to be gone beyond all mercy in ^he
Judgment, to execute Judgment without mercy, upon all sorts of People, that
come short of the special Salvation and Glory. Which is, 1. Contrary to all
rules of Justice that himself has given to men, which rules of Justice are to
allot a just recompense of reward for every transgression, Heb. 2. 2. And only
presumptuous sinners and despisers of the Law, died with^at mercy, Heb. 10. 28.
Psalm. 19. 13. And as for there is that come under the Judgment of stripes, the
utmost number for the greatest offense, might not exceed forty, fewer they
might give, not more, Deuteronomy. 25. 2, 3. To which it is likely Christ relates, Luke
12. 48. And as for sins of ignorance, no stripes were appointed for such,
whether it was a particular Person, or the whole Congregation, Lev. 4. 2. 13.
They were to offer a Sacrifice, and the trespass should be forgiven, because it
was ignorance. And was it thus among t^^ Jews, and not among the Gentiles also?
No, verily, Act. 17. 30. The times of this ignorance God winked at, etc. And
may we not, as safely conclude, that he does, and will ^^ do, where the People
are altogether without (and a^ ignorant of) the Gospel, as the Nations were
before Christ came in the Flesh, and the Gospel published to ^ the Nations,
calling them to Repentance, and that as ^ Sacrifice for sins of ignorance
satisfied under the Law; so that one Sacrifice for the sins of the World under
the Gospel, may be sufficient to expiate all sins of ignorance, and in times to
procure some Favor, Blessing and Peace to the World, after they have past the
Judgment, according as it is written in the Volume of the Scripture that speaks
thereof.

2. It Is contrary to his own proceedings with men throughout all ages. 1. With
Adam the first sinner against God, of Mankind, and we in him; it is true, he
justly executed the Judgment threatened, yet not without mercy (both to him and
us) in that he even in the Sentence of the Judgment, set both him and us on the
promise of a Restitution and Recovery by the Woman's seed, Genesis 3. 15. And
afterward when he executed Judgment without mercy upon the World by the Flood,
it was as they were obstinate and presumptuous sinners resisting the Spirit of
God, and the Preaching of Noah, abusing the long suffering and patience of God,
120 Years, Genesis 6. 3. 1 Pet. 3. 20. And further, I think, no man durst affirm,
that that Judgment did include in it the second Death. I shall not mention any
more particulars; but how frequent was it with him, in the execution of
Judgment, both upon his own People and upon the Nations, to leave them under
the promises of Mercy. 1. His own People, Isa. 1. 26. and 4. 4, 5, 6. and 43.
25. Jer. 23. 5, 6. But in this the Scripture abounds, I need mention no more.
2. And as for the Nations, Isa. 19. 18, 22, 23. Jer. 12. 15. and 48. 47. and
^39. With many the like that I might mention. It Is contrary to what he has
promised, both to ^ People and to others, viz. To be pacified in ^^gment, Ezekiel.
16. 63. and 39. 25, 26. And the ^^ Sodom, verse 53. 61. And the same to the
Na^^^. 12. 15. And indeed, it is contrary to all the ^^de of promises made to
the Nations in general, ^^ been before abundantly showed, which promises ^^^
mercy in the Judgment, cannot be performed.

It Is contrary to his Name and Nature, who has ^^ed himself to be infinitely
good and Gracious, in thole Name, Exodus 34. 6, 7, And delights in ^^, Mic. 7.
18. Good to all, Psalm. 145. 9. All the ^^ed Goodness, Love and Mercy, in (and
among) ^^en, is but as a drop to the Ocean, of what is essen^^ in God, and on
this very account it is, he says, ^^. 27, 28. That he faints not, neither is
weary. from this infinite Goodness and Mercy it is, that he been so ready to
show Mercy throughout all ages, to ^ost incorrigible offenders, and that
sometimes on ^^ little, little repentance, compared with the great^^ of their
sins, as Manasseh, 2 Chro. 33. 1. 10 13. ^^, 1 King. 21. 1, to 29. His own
People, Psalm. 78. ^^o 39. See Act. 2. 3. And to suppose him to be gone ^all
Mercy to the World in the Eternal Judgment, ^^ must determine men's states to
Eternity, is contra^^ the Goodness of his Name and Nature, toward ^^^ fallen
man, it being a common received Notion ^ng men, that sin in it self is a finite
thing; but in ^uch as it is against an infinite Majesty, it deserves ^mite
punishment, and because Creatures cannot bear ^mite-punishment for measure,
therefore it must be ^mite for time; so that if the Majesty offended were
^infinite, it could not deserve infinite punishment.

Now as to this, let us consider two thin^s. 1. A^ those who affirm that God
Decreed all things whatsoe^ come to pass, and that nothing is done but by
virtue his immutable Dec^ee, and overruling providence order thereunto.
Whether we may rationally, or Reli^^ously conclude, that Justice cannot at all,
be offended, ^ doing its Decreed will and work: And whether Just ^ might not
rather be offended, if men did not those A^ of sin Decreed to be done, if it
were possible not to ^ the Decreed will of God? Now consider the weight this
reason, for infinite punishment, because sin is again^ an infinite God.
Therefore, there must be infinite su^feri^^ ^^r d^rat^o^, for that which
infinite Justice D^^cr^^d to be done, which were it true, there could ^^ no
puni^hment at all, in way of Justice to affirm the co^tr^y, viz. That God will
damn men Eternally, an^ will never be satisfied in ^^ Judgment, for doing tho^^
things by himself Decreed to be done, is the highe^^ asper^ion that possibly
can be laid on the Holy Righ^teous and Good God that made us, and is willing to
sav^^ us, Psalm. 14. 5. 17. And eads not only all mercy, but al^ just Judgment
and punishment for sin, both in thi^ World, and in that which is to come, there
being no^ need of mercy for doing the Decreed will of God, and turns the
Sacrifice and sufferings of Christ into a mee^^nullity and nothing, there being
no need of a Sacrifice of peace, for what God decreed must be done, and so
could not be offended, unless some things be done over and above his Decreed
will, which is not possible if he Decreed all things; this must necessarily
follow, unless any dare to be so b^ld as to assert (which this principle does
in the necessary cons^quences thereof^) that God Decreed sin to be in the World
to make work for his Son to bear it. As if he took pleasure in sin, and
^^^tings of his Son, and the Eternal damnation of

And for such as own not this (for ever to be ab^) principle, I say, 1. That as
sin is against an in^ God, so it deserves infinite punishment, yet here^eth,
all the hope and help of Mankind, that this ^^e Majesty, has always kept up
infinite mercy, ^e infinite Justice, yet without any wrong thereto, ^, 9. 13.
Neh. 9. 31. Psalm. 78. 38. And will so do ^ Judgment, as is most apparent, as
has been before ^^^lly manifested, Rev. 22. 2.

and so, 2. It Is the infinitness of God, that is the alone ^^d of hope in this
matter, next to his promises ^^ Faithfulness therein, it is the foundation of
all ^^e, in all the parts thereof, had he not been God ^ not man, he had let
man and the World pass away ^ Oblivion, for the first sin; but infinite
Goodness ^ Mercy took hold of Man, and so, of the World, in ^onderful way, to a
wonderful and Glorious end, and ^ designedly to sin and damned Eternally.

^ It being contrary to infinite Wisdom, Goodness and ^^ghteousness. And it is
the sinite Devil that is impla^^le toward Mankind, and not the infinite God.

So that all the good and mercy, that has, or ever all, come to Mankind, is
from the infinitness of God, that as it is true, he is infinitely just, so he is
in^ely Good and Gracious, and mercy rejoiceth against ^^dgment, Jam. 2. 13.
Mercy and Truth are met toge^^er, Righteousness and Peace has kissed each
other. ^al. 85. 10. So that because he is infinite, shall this ^alvation be.

And you may learn from hence, that as men have ^^used God in their Notions
about his Eternal Decrees, a preparing men thereby, to sin and be Eternally
damned; so have they abused him in their No^ about the Eternal Judgment (as to
the World i^neral) that his Justice will never be satisfied, nor ^ ever he will
be pacified, or say it is enough, 2 Samuel ^ 6. Nor that he can take vengeance and
forgive ^ iniquities, Psalm. 98. 8. A wonderful strange Noti^ is, to suppose
that God who is infinite in Goodness, has been so exceeding good to Mankind
ever since first sin and fall, and will be to the Judgment, should t^ lose all
Goodness and Mercy to Mankind (except a ^ only) and be turned all into Justice
and Wrath eter^ly. Surely (I think) he must then, cease to be w^ he has been,
and be what he never was, especially it ^ing so exceeding contrary to his
Gospel design by ^sus, made manifest throughout the Scriptures ever si^ the
first sin and fall, tho in this, we may safely conclu^ that as the Glory
prepared for (and promised to) ^ Saints, is such, as Eye has not seen, nor
Ears hear^ nor can it enter into the heart of Man to conceive. ^^ he being
infinite and just, the least measure of Judgme^^ and Vengeance at that day,
will be such, as Eye ha^^ not seen nor Ear heard, nor can it enter into the
hea^ of Man to conceive. Yet that mercy in times shall ^^ extended to the
World, as it is suitable to the Scripture and Gosp I design, so it is suitable to
the Name and Nature of God.

6. It Is contrary to the Kingdom and Glory o^ Christ in the World to come, what
Glory will it be t^ the most Gracious and Glorious King of the World (who has
purchased his Kingdom and Subjects with hi^ own Blood, Romans 14. 9. Joh. 6. 51.)
to reign over almost all his Subjects, in Wrath, under eternal torments. And
how would this render the fifth Kingdom and Monarchy (so much spoken of in
Scripture, and talked of ^ men, but little understood) to be far worse, much
^^e merciless and miserable (except to a very few fa^^ites only) than any of
the four that went before it, ^ figures thereof, whereas it shall in times as
far ex^^d them all, as the new World shall exceed the old, ^^ as the Lord
thereof exceeds all that ever went be^^e him; and further, If it were not so,
how should ^^ey then sing unto him and glorify his Name, as it is ^^d they
shall, Psalm. 66. 4. and 96. 7, 13. and 98. 4. ^v. 5. 13. If the Lord by his
blood redeemed them ^^m death to a new life, for no other end, but to tor^^nt
them for ever, how shall they then sing his praise ^^d glorify his Name?

The sum of all, I say, about this matter, is,

1. That God made all good, yea, very good, and man ^ his own Image.

2. That man by sin lost himself, and all came under the ^^se, and death with
him.

3. That the great design of God made manifest, is ^y the second Nan, the Lord
from heaven, to recover ^^an, and all with him, that fell by his sin, out of
that ^^ate of curse and death, to a new life and world eter^ally.

4. That all must come to Judgment, for the things ^one in the body, which
Judgment shall be just and ^ighteous, according to the various dispensations
under which they have lived, and against which they have transgressed, Romans 2.
12. Joh. 12. 48. Jam. 2. 12. ^^ 1. 25. Rev. 20. 12. Which Judgment, as it will
be very great and terrible, suitable to the greatness of the Majesty, against
whom all sin has been, so in the true Analogy and sense of Scripture, it will
be Eternal unto all, and will be wonderful, dreadful and amazing to all that
meets with the least portion of penal punishment therein; yet in this matter,
God will not proceed contrary to all rules of Justice he has given to men, nor
contrary to the method of his own dealings with men in like cases, he always
having kept, (and will keep) to measure and times in the Judgment, which is
most righteous, Psalm. 80. 5. Isa. 27. 8. Jer. 30. 11. and 46. 28. Nor contrary
to his Name, Nature, and Promises at that day, Jer. 12. 15. Ezekiel. 16, 61, 62,
63. Luke 12. 47. 48. And so that mentioned before, from Sovereignty, will
undoubtedly stand true; He will not punish without a cause, nor more than is
deserved, but rather less, Ezra 9, 13. To this righteous proceeding of God. See
Genesis 18. 25. Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Psalm. 116. 5. and 145. 17. Romans 3. 5, 6. It Is true,
God says to his people of old, That he would punish their iniquity and sin
double, Jer. 16. 18. But that I ta^^ to relate to times, and not to measure, it
not standing with the Justice of a righteous God, to punish sin double for
measure, but double may relate to times:

1. Then by destruction temporal by their enemies, And,

2. At the day of Judgment; and then will he be pacified toward them, Ezekiel.
16. 63. And afterward shall they inherit the promises, Jer. 16. 14, 15. But,
first he will punish them double, Isa. 40. 1.

3, Hence you may learn two good Lessons further, 1. To be preparing for this
great and glorious day. O it will be a great and terrible day; and it is your
great concern, now to be preparing and making ready for it; to get right in the
says and life of the Gospel; in order thereunto, it is called the great and
terrible day of the Lord, Joel 2. 31. because the Judgment will be great and
very terrible, Mal. 3. 2. Who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall
stand when he appears? The terribleness of the Judgment then to be executed,
^ described under varieties of dreadful Expressions, ^ereby to discover the
dreadfulness thereof, it is called, ^^ll, utter darkness, a lake of fire, the
second death, ^erlasting shame and contempt, etc. attended with ^^ping and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth; whoever ^^ets with the least Portion therein,
(both for measure ^^d time,) will find it to be of sinking and dreadful
^oncern; and therefore deceive not your self with a ^^in conceit, from
self-confidence, (as I fear many do.) ^^e those, Isa. 28. 15. who said, they
had made a cove^^nt with death, and were at agreement with hell; ^^ey feared
not the judgment, it should not come n^gh them. v. 18. All their confidence was
disannulled, and ^^t to stand: it is true, some men talk much of the ^edgment,
but expect not to come to it themselves, tho ^^e Scripture tells us, 2 Cor. 5.
10. That we must all ^ppear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and receive
^^cording to the things done in our bodies, whether it be ^udor bad. v. 11.
Knowing therefore the terror of the lord, we persuade men, yea, believers; and
the Apostle, ^ Pet. 3. having declared the Conflagration of the ^orld by fire,
being reserved thereunto against the day ^f Judgment and perdition of ungodly
men. v. 7. Which is enough to amaze men in the thoughts there^f, were there no
other, or further, Judgment; but to ^e burnt up with the World at that day,
Mal. 4. 1. (when ^e lake of fire must be eternal) from whence the A^ostle draws
this result, (or conclusion,) v. 11. Seeing ^hen, all these things shall be
dissolved, what manner of ^rsons ought we to be, in all manner of holy
conversa^ and godliness, that so we may escape the fire of that ^ay; and v. 13,
14. from the expectation of the new ^^eavens and new Earth that shall succeed,
exhorts, saying, Wherefore, beloved, seeing ye look for such things, be
diligent, that ye may be found of him, in peace, without spot, and blameless.
And it is the Exhortation of the Lord and Judge himself, Luke 21. 36. Watch ye
therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape al^^^ose
things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man. And chap.
12. 40. Be ye also ready, for the Son of man comes at an he^ that ye think
not. Mat. 25. 10. And they that were ready, went in with him to the Marriage,
and the door was shut. O! therefore, I say, be preparing every day for your
Lord's appearing, lest it come upon you as a snare, as it will upon all the
World, and all that are unprepared for it: read and ponder well, Luke 12. 35,
36, 37.

2. Being ready, look and wait for him, love and long for his appearing; to
such, he will appear a second time without sin unto salvation, Heb. 9. 28. It
is to those that love him, and look for his appearing, that the crown of
righteousness shall be given, 2 Timothy 4. 8. And none can really and rightly look
for, and love, his appearing, (and say, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly) but
such as are prepared for him; nor can any assure themselves, that they love
him, if they long not and wait not for his appearing, that they may be with
him; and then when he comes, you shall be able to say, as, Isa. 25. 9. Lo, this
is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us; this is the Lord, we
have waited for him, we will rejoice and be glad in his salvation. This has
been the long looked for day by all the Saints instructed therein. Tit. 2. 13.
Looking for the blessed ^ope. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9, 10. It will be the day of Marriage
to the Saints. Now is the day of Espousal, 2 Cor. 11. 2. Then will be the day
of Marriage. Rev. 19. 7. It will be the day of joy and gladness to the Church;
who shall ^e and reign with him eternally in the World to come. ^ ^ho that
loves him, does not say with John, Rev. ^. 20. Amen, even so, come Lord Jesus?
Does the ^^ole Creation wait for (and groan after) this time of ^^rty and
restitution, Romans 8. 22. and shall not those ^o profess to be the Children of
that glorious liberty? ^ shall say no more, but this; Prepare rightly for it; ^
always ready; love and look for his appearing; be ^^stant therein to the end,
and you shall inherit the ^ory when the time is come, 2 Timothy 4. 8.


Christ. Some say, that if all these things be truth, ^ they are too high; that
you exercise your self in ^ings that are too high for you, contrary to the
say^g of the Prophet, Psalm. 131. 1. he did not exercise ^mself in great
matters, or in things too high for ^m.


Min. 1. In one sense it is true, consider we the mat^ers themselves, and
consider we our own weakness and ^worthiness; they are indeed too high for us,
even the ^^h things of God; and so is the Gospel in all its ^rts, (of which
these are not the least) yet others do ^ddle about the high things of the
Gospel, without ^uple or offense.

2. They being the revealed things of God, and in ^s sense they are not too
high, re^ealed things be^ging to us, and so it is our concern to inquire there^
^o, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. And as it was God's end in reveal^g thereof, that we might
understand and believe ^, so it is our duty to be humbly inquiring therein^^.

3. The Prophet, who spoke those words, (I think I ^^y safely say) pryed into,
and was exercised about ^^se very things, (viz. The Mysteries of the World to
come; The General Grace and Glory thereof, with the Kingdom of Christ therein)
as much as any (if no^ as all the) Prophets besides, and obtained as great and
^ large an understanding therein; and, probably, God would have it so, because
his seed and Son, was, by promise, to be the Heir, universal King, Lord and
Governor thereof, Psalm. 72. 1, 2, 11, 17. Heb. 1. 2.


CHAP. IX.
Shows, That to hold Truth in Unity, is honorable to God, and safe for our
selves.

Christ. WHat think you of the harmony and unity of the Scriptures? do you
suppose it to hold unity and harmony with it self, without any contradiction?
if so; then whether it do not concern us so to understand it, as may hold in
unity and not in contradiction?


Min. The Scripture being the Word of one God, given by one Spirit, and one
Lord Jesus, stands in unity, and so it concerns us to understand it, to hold
truth in contradiction, being next of kin to holding it in un^^ghteousness. If
any thing I have herein said, or do hold, stand not in unity with the body of
Scripture, or with it self, I shall gladly understand it, and lay it down as an
Error, my desire and design, being so to ^^derstand the Scripture and mine own
Principles from ^^^ce, as may stand in unity, it being that which is ^^th
honorable to God, and satisfactory and safe for ^^ self, and accountable to
others; This is really my ^^re, tho I dare not say* or think, that I have in
all ^^gs so obtained, nor deny or hide what I have (through ^^ce) obtained.


Christ. Wherein stands the unity of the things ^^ursed on with the Scripture,
and the contradiction ^^ the other notions thereunto? I desire to understand ^^
something further about this matter.


Min. 1. As touching the Sovereign Power and Will ^ God, so to understand the
exercise thereof toward ^^, as is before declared, viz according to his own
^^s in that behalf, proved from the Creation to the ^^gment, stands in unity
with the whole truth of ^^ripture, and Name of God, and to understand it
^^erwise, viz. That God from his own decreed Will, ^^ore the World was,
determined the greatest part of ^^n by far to no other end but to sin and be
damned, ^ttradicteth not only the plain revealed method of ^ proceedings in
this matter, but the substance of his ^^ealed Will in his Word, Ezekiel. 33. 11.
Joh 3. 16. ^ 12. 47. 1 Timothy 2. 4. and therefore is not likely to be ^her true
or safe.

2. To deny the general love of God to the World, ^^d Christ giving himself for
the life of the World, be^^use the Scripture says he laid down his life for
the ^^ep, for the Church (which is in it self a truth) con^adicteth the whole
Scripture in this matter, as has been ^^ly proved, and therefore is not likely
to be either true ^ safe.

But that he died both for the World and for the church, is the truth of
Scripture, which being understood, holds Scripture and Truth in unity and
harmony, without any contradiction at all, but what men devise from their own
heads, at a distance from any Scripture ground, or right reason, the general
and special grace of God to men, being thereby understood, and therefore is
most likely to be both true and safe.

3 To understand the Scripture so, as to render not only the Scripture, but the
holy Name of God, to stand in unity, is most likely to be true and safe, viz.
to understand and believe, that he loved the World in the gift of his Son, and
that Christ died for the World, and will save all tha^ do believe and obey the
Gospel, and judge and condemn those that obey him not, as the just and
deserving cause, Romans 6. 23. and not from his decree of reprobation, as the
first cause of sin and damnation; this stands in unity with the whole Name and
Word of God, without any contradiction at all, and therefore most likely to be
true and safe.

But to understand the Scripture so, as to limit the love of God to a very few
only, and the death of Christ to as few, and yet that he will damn people for
not believing that which was never intended to them, nor was it possible for
them by any means to obtain, being reprobated therefrom, is so great a
contradiction to the whole Word and Name of God, (in all his attributes which
stand in unity) viz. his Goodness, Love, Truth, Holiness, Justice, Mercy, and
Wisdom, as is inconsistent with that Holy Name, and, as I may safely say, is
such, as neither Men nor Angels can reconcile, and therefore is not likely to
be either true or safe.

4. That there is a sufficiency of power in man, given to him by the Lord, to
will and to do what he requires, under his several Ministrations, with the
helps afforded, Genesis 3. 6. Prove. 1. 23. especially under the Gospel; this
stands in unity with the whole scope of Scripture, which lets us to know, that
men's condemnation is of themselves, and is (and shall be) for wilfulness, and
not for weakness, for what they might have done and would not, and not for what
they could not, else their damnation could not be just; this being most
scriptural, and most rational, is therefore most likely to be both true and
safe.

But to believe and teach, that Men have no power at all to believe and obey
the Gospel, (with the common means and helps afforded) without a Miracle, and
yet that God will damn them eternally for not believing, (for not doing what
they could not) is both unscriptural and irrational, tending to null both the
Truth of the Gospel, and the Righteousness of God in the Judgment, and
therefore is not likely to be either true or safe.

5. To understand Justification by Faith and Wor^s, as the holy ^terms thereof,
(on which God freely justifies by his Grace in Christ Jesus) and as that
without which men can have no right thereunto; Faith without Wor^s, nor Works
without Faith, brings us not under the Gospel-promise, Jam. 2. 20. to 26.
Rev. 22. 14. And so it is, because God designed to save men by his Son, in the
way of holiness, Heb. 12 14. And this stands ^^ unity thorugh the whole Gospel
of this salvation, without any contradiction at all, and therefore is most
likely to be both true and safe.

But those who affirm Justification to be either from Eternity, as some say,
otherwise than a purpose to justify in time, on the Gospel terms, as declared
in the Gospel; or actually at the death of Christ, as others say, otherwise
than the general justification of all from the first death to be effected in
time, Romans 5. 18. Or by Faith without Works, as others say, or by Works without
Faith, or Faith and Works, (yea, through Gospel Faith, and Works,) as the
meritorious and deserving Cause, as others say, are all contradictory, not only
one to another, but to the whole Scripture, that speaks thereof, and therefore
is not likely to be either true or safe.

6. To understand the Scripture so, as that believers may (and some shall) be
preserved in the Gospel way of faith and holiness to the glory promised, and
yet believers may (and some have) through their own default, miscarried, and so
come short of the glory. This stands in unity through the whole Scripture, and
therefore is most likely to be true and safe, 1 Pet. 1. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 19. 2 Pet.
2. 20.

But those who affirm, an impossibility of falling from says and grace, it
being contrary to the whole Scripture that speaks thereof, and dangerous unto
men, to beget in them carnal security, carelessness, fearlesness, and
presumption, contrary to Romans 11. 20. Heb. 3. 12. 1 Pet. 3. 17. And therefore
is not likely to be either true or safe.

7. To understand the eternal Judgment, so as may comport with the truth of all
the Promises, relating to the World, in the World to come, and the glory of
Christ's Kingdom therein, and so to understand the Promises, as may comport and
agree with the Judgment, and not to understand either, so as to violate and
make null the other, this stands in unity, and holds the Scripture in unity,
and therefore is most likely to be both true and safe.

But to understand the eternal Judgment so, as to contradict and null all the
great Promises, relating to the World; in the World to come, and the glory of
Christ's Kingdom therein (as has been explained in ^^. 8.) and so as to
derogate from the glorious undertaking of Christ in the restitution, in
bringing in a ^ew State, Life, and World, seems to hold the Scripture greatly
in contradiction, and to out and end the great revealed glory of the Gospel,
and design of God and Christ therein, and therefore is not likely to be either
true or safe.

That the Judgment shall be eternal upon all wilful transgressors against the
Gospel, according to the Scriptures that speak thereof, and that Judgment shall
be executed upon the World in general, according to the Scripture, Zeph. 3. 8.
Rev. 3. 10. Act. 17. 31. And yet those manifold Promises to the World in the
times of the restitution, to be accomplished by the Woman's seed, the seed of
Abraham, (in whom all the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed,) to stand firm
and unviolated, renders the whole Scriptures (in these things) to stand in
unity, suits with the whole name of God, rendering it to be honorable and
glorious in the restitution ^ork, and capable to be understood by Christian men.

But those Notions, which for the most part, are contrary thereunto, setting
the Scripture at an irreconcilable variance and contradiction, are unlikely to
be either true or safe, and therefore it concerns us to relinquish them, and to
adhere to Principles of Truth, Unity and Safety.


CHAP. X.
Shows, That God intends what he speaks, and will perform it, and that
it is his Perfection (and not his Impersection to speak and do after the manner
of Men.

Christ. IN as much as God in his Word has made known his mind to Men, and
therein speaks much after the manner of Men, I desire to inquire, Whether we
may understand, that he thinks and intends what he speaks, and is what he
has declared himself to be, and will really perform what he has promised and
threa^n^d ^n his Word?


Min. I shall answer you in the words of Dr. Usher, in his S. C. or B. D. page
71. 1. He thinks as he speaks. 2. He does both as he thinks and speaks.
3. There is no one part of his word contrary to another. 4, He loves truth and
hates those that are liars.


Christ. If this be true, then his Word is a sure and stable Ground and Rule
for us to fix upon and cleave unto in all matters of Gospel Faith and Practice,
according to Psalm. 93. 5. Thy Testimonies are very sure. And Psalm. 119. 140.
Thy Word is very pure, therefore thy servant loves it. And Joh. 17. 17. Thy
Word is truth.


Min. That the Word of God is true, and a sure Ground and Rule both for Faith
and Practice, is that (which I suppose) but few professed Protestants will, in
word, deny, and that in his Word he has condescended to us, declaring his will
and mind therein suitable to our capacities and understandings; but that we are
to understand and believe him as he speaks, is (in substance) denied by many.


Christ. In what particular cases are any of his sayings denied, or perverted?


Min. Not only in all the cases before mentioned, but 1. That there is no such
thing as love in God at all; that that which is called love in God, is but a
mere act of his will, as in Death of Death, p. 92. That God has any natural or
necessary inclination, by his goodness, or any other property, to do us good,
we deny; every thing that concerns us, is an act of his free will, p. 201. on
Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the World, etc. he says, Our Adversaries agree, that
a natural affection and propensity in God to the Creature, lost under sin in
general, is intended by love; we on the contrary, that by love here, is not
meant an inclination or propensity of his nature, but an act of his will,
wherein his love is sealed, an eternal purpose to do good to men, p. 203. If
the Lord should not show mercy and be carried out to the creuture, merely upon
his own distinguishing will, but should be naturally moved, to show mercy to
the miserable, he should, first, be no more merciful to men than to devils;
nor, secondly, to those that are saved than to those that are damned; for that
which is natural, must be equal in all its operations; and that some look on
love in God as an unchangeable ^ffection; but the truth is, as an affection or
passion, it has no place at all in God; certainly then, in God, his love is
but a pure act of his will, his good pleasure, not a natural affection to the
creature, no such affection is in God.

If this contradicts not, and gives not the lie, to all the Scriptures, that
declare the love of God to men, and strikes not a death on them all, I know not
what does: What! no love, no affection in God toward men? No natural
affection, propensity or inclination, from his goodness, or any other property,
to do good to men? That this has no place in God, but only will and purpose,
but no love. Had he said so much of the Devil, I think he had said right, for
he has no love, no affection or inclination to do good to men; and had he power
(as God) to make men, he might, (as the saying is) be good to some from his
will, though no propensity or inclination in him moving him thereunto: thus the
love of God to men is ended, and the Scriptures that speaks thereof belyed; the
Scriptures being so far from this (for ever to be rejected) Doctrine, that it
says, Joh. 3. 16. That God so loved the World, that he gave his Son, etc. And
Ephesians. 2. 4. But God who i^ rich in mercy, for his great love, wherewith he
loved us, etc. 1 John 4. 9. In this was manifest the love of God, etc. See v.
10, 11. yea, and v. 8. 16. God is love, he that dwells in love, dwells in
God, and God in him. And 2 Cor. 13. 11. He is called the God of Love and Peace,
as the original thereof; but this asserts no love at all to be in him, either
to the World, or to his Elect, either to Angels or to Men, but will save some,
because he will, and damn the rest, because he will: it is a hundred to one (as
I said) but that the Devil, had he power to have made a World, might have done
as much as this.

And doubtless this Gospel-destroying Doctrine was devised to maintain the
reprobation of the World by the Eternal Decree, for the apprehension of any
love to be in God, to men, would end that Principle, it being impossible for
one that has any goodness or love in him, to bring forth an offspring on
purpose to damn them, Act. 17. 26, 27, 28, 29. And this the reasons mentioned;
to prove it, does demonstrate, viz. Because, then, he must love the Devil as
well as men, and could be no more merciful to those that are saved, than to
those that are damned, because that which is natural must be equal in all its
operations.

Goodly Arguments to end the love of God to men. 1. Then, doubtless, God loved
the Devils before they sinned. 2. As if God could not (from reasons in himself)
love Men after they had sinned, with the love of pity and design to do them
good, though he give us no account of his reasons moving him so to do; that he
has loved the one and not the other, is a great Scripture truth; the reasons
thereof are in himself, and our mercy it is, that it is so, let us believe it,
and not deny it, lest he deny us; and for his love to men, that he is capable
to love some more than others, has been before proved, he loved (and loves)
all, with the love of pity and compassion, Joh. 3. 16. and such as believe and
obey the Gospel, with the love of relation and delight, Joh. 14. 21, 23.

And to assert that which is natural, must be equal in all its operations, is
neither Divine, nor Rational.

1. It Is not Divine, or Scriptural, for God did (and does) naturally love his
Son, (and our Savior) or he did not, which I am willing to hope, that none are
so graceless as to deny (though this Principle does so) and then there is natural
love in God to his Son, and that his love is not equal ^^d alike, (though
natural;) for he loved (and loves) his holy Child and Son Jesus, above all,
and most of all, in whom he loves others, Matthew. 3. 17. John. 17. 24. Col. 1.
13. He loved his people of old, Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8. And he loves his people now,
Joh. 14. 21, 23. Yet not with the same love (for measure) as he loved and
loves his Son, Joh. 17. 23. And he loved (and loves) the World, but not with
the same love as he loves those that believe and obey the Gospel, but with the
love of pity and compassion, desiring their spiritual and eternal welfare, Joh.
3. 16. Isa. 55. 6, 7. Rev, 22. 17.

By all which it appears, that it is Divine; that God can (and does) not only
love, but distinguish in his love, and not only so, but that he is love, it is
his nature, 1 John 4. 8, 16. And this the Scripture assures us of, thereby to
confirm us in the truth of his love to men, to his people, and that if we love
him, his people and all men, we are therein most like him who is love, 1 John
4. 7, 12. Matthew. 5. 44, 45. And that those who are in the hatred, are most like
the Devil, 1 John 2. 9, 11.

2. It Is irrational. For it is natural for Parents to love their own Children,
yet frequently they love some more than others, and often on grounded
occasions; and likewise to love others, and the like, in varieties of cases,
there is a lawful difference in natural love, and therefore it is irrational to
affirm, that natural love must be equal in all its operations, but, I think,
it is dangerous to be wise, above (and against) what is written both in the Book
of God, and in the law of Nature, especially when it tends to pervert and
overthrow the express Letter and Truth of Scripture, and the foundation of all
our Faith and comfort, God can and does love, and distinguish therein, or we
are all deceived who have believed his Word, 1 John 4. 16. We have known and
believed the love that God has to us. But this principle says in effect, John
thou art deceived in believing a lie, there being no such thing as love in God;
out I believe, he never did, nor never will, hate any, either Angels or Men but
for sin.


Christ. This seems to be greatly contrary to Scripture indeed, that there is
no love in God to men, tending to break the hearts of Christians and to destroy
their Faith in God, and in the truth of his Word; but what say you to the truth
of his Laws and will to men, does that likewise, suffer violence under this
abuse?


Min. It Is a common avowed principle in effect, that God commands one thing
and has Decreed another, contrary thereunto, which they call his revealed and
his secret Will; the secret they call his Absolute Decreed Will, which must be
done, he commands men by his Word to believe and repent, but Decreed the
contrary. Death of Death, says about the proffers of Grace, page 190. If by
proffers they understand his commands and promises; Who told them that these
things were declarations of his will, purpose or intentions? I thought always
that Gods commands and promises, had revealed our Duty, and not his intentions,
what God would have us to do, and not what he would do. And in the same page So
they think of all that is new to them, viz. That as Gods proffer is, so is his
intention, that he intends what he says in his Precepts and his Promises.

And indeed this is new Doctrine, and needs some more than ordinary new
miracles to confirm it, it overthrowing the Doctrine of the Gospel that was
confirmed by Miracles, if neither his Precepts nor Promises be his purpose or
intention, but only declare our Duty, and not his purpose or intention, what he
commands us to do, not what he will do, they being not declarative, of his
will, purpose or intentions; then we know not when we have the will or
intention of God, either in Precept or in Promise, a secret will and intention
may be contrary thereunto; and if this be good and true Doctrine, farewell all
Scripture and Christian Religion.


Christ. I desire you to proceed to other things, wherein you apprehend the
truth wronged, for I think, it is of weighty concern to believe that God
thinks as he speaks, and that his Precepts and Promises, are his
intentions, and that he will do what he has promised, as he expects that we
should do what he has commanded, and that whoever says the contrary are liers,
Romans 3. 4. Or else our Faith and Religion is yet in vain, it being fixed on
God, his Truth and Faithfulness in his Word, which if it be not his Purpose nor
intentions, I think our Faith therein is ended.


Min. There are many things in Scripture affirmed, and that God therein affirms
of himself, of Which men say, there is no such thing, as not only what has been
already mentioned, the Scripture not only says that God is Love, and does
Love, but that he is angry with the wicked every day, Psalm. 7. 11. And that he
was angry with Moses, Deuteronomy. 1. 37. And very angry with Aaron to have destroyed
him, Deuteronomy. 9. 20. And angry with Solomon, 1 King. 11. 9. And very angry with
his People, Psalm. 79. 5. The Scripture frequently declares God to repent, Genesis
6. 6. Exodus 32. 12, 13. Jer. 18. 7, 10. Joel 2. 14. Jona. 3. 9, 10. Pitying
and bemoaning his People, Hos. 11. 8. And wishing they had done otherwise, when
they sinned against him, that so, it might have been better ^ith them, Psalm.
81. 13. Isa. 48. 18. That God does ^^ar and see, that Heaven is his dwelling
place and ^hrone, with many other like sayings, of which men say ^here is no
such thing in God, but words spoken to our ^pprehensions, which if they are not
true, our appre^^nsions are deluded thereby, which we may not ^^agine.


Christ. Some say, that if we apprehend such things ^^ be in God according to
the Letter of the Scripture, ^^ must then suppose him to be a Man like our
selves sub^^ct to passions, which is dangerous, Exodus 15. 3. It Is ^^d God is a
Man of War; and take it according to the atter it is not so.


Min. As for this saying, Psalm. 78. 65. and Isa. 42. ^^, Explains it, viz. He
is like to (or as) a man of ^^ar, doing mighty things, and so may, Exodus 15. 3.
be ^^ry properly read (is, being added) read, as, instead ^f is, and then you
will read it, the Lord as a Man of ^^r, the Lord is his Name, viz. He has done
like a Man ^^ War, verse 4. Pharoahs Chariots and his Hosts has ^^ cast into
the Sea.

And for all those Anthropical expressions in Scrixure, with many more of like
import, it behooves us to ^elieve the truth thereof, and not to say it is not
so, in ^^ doing we give God the lie. All which we may bet^^^ understand, than
to suppose him to be a Man, yea, ^ight we not in all these Anthropical and
manlike ex^essions, better understand him, than to say it is ^ot so? When God
is said to love, to hate, to be angry, ^^ repent, to be grieved, to pity, and
to bemoan for ^iscarriages, to wish it had been otherwise, to require and
desire that which may never be, to hear and see, ^^at Heaven is his dwelling
Place and Throne, etc. And that there is a truth in all, and no delusion of our
understandings, and you does none of all these things as men do them, and so be
far enough from imagining him to be a man, it being his perfection, that he can
do all these things (with many more) as God-like properties essential to him,
and therefore in a God-like way, and not as created qualities and passions, as
in men, and tho we cannot understand how it is, (as indeed is not meet we
should) yet let us not deny it, and say it is not so; in so doing we give God
the lie.


Christ. What may be the reason that men thus deny, alter and change the
express, Divine and revealed declarations of God in his Word? And what may be
the danger thereof?


Min. We may well suppose the cause to be ignorauce and pride, not liking to
receive (or to retain) the knowledge of God, as he has made known himself in
his Word unto us, and to maintain some unscriptural Notions received by
Tradition, (will be wiser than what is written, supposing to get up into God,
to know him in his essential being, and so deny him in his own revelation of
himself in his Word unto us.

2. As for the danger thereof, 1. It derogates from the perfection of God (from
which they pretend thereby to escape) denying him to be capable to be what he
has said he is, and his Throne and dwelling Place to be where he has said it
is, and to do what he has said he does and will do, which is his perfection in
a God-like way to do.

2. It Is that which tends to end the Scripture revelation (as the truth of God)
tending to make us wholly at a loss concerning his mind and will relating to
us, rendering him to have two Wills, contrary to each other, and that he
intends not what he speaks, and so leaves us wholly at a loss about the Divine
revelation, ^^ich is exceeding dishonorable unto God; and perni^^rs unto men.


Christ. Christ says (in the institution of the Sup^^, Mat. 26. 26, 28.) Of
the Bread, this is my Body; ^^^ of the Wine, this is my Blood, etc. And if we
take ^ according to the Letter, we know it is not so. And it ^^^ise justifies
the Popish Transubstantion.


Min. Much might be said to this, but I shall in this ^^ce, only say this unto
it, viz. That both Christ and ^^ Apostle Paul fully explains these Words to be
a fi^^ative Speech. 1. that Christ explains it, Luke 22. ^^. This do in
remembrance of me, to let them and us ^^w that he did not intend that it was he
himself, but ^^ Ordinance instituted and left to the Church in re^^mbrance of
him, viz. Of what he had suffered for ^^m; so the Apostle likewise from the
mouth of christ explains it, 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25, 26. This do in ^^membrance of
me, and this do in remembrance of me, ^^^ as often as ye Eat this Bread, and
Drink this Cup, ^^ do show the Lords Death till he come: it was Bread all, even
when they eat it, and the Cup, viz. the ^ine, was Wine still, and it was to
show the Lords ^^ath, and not the Lords Death; so that it is fully ex^^ained in
the Divine Record to be, a remembrance, a ^^ure, a show, and not the thing it
self, so that Tran^^bstantiation is not only irrational, but unscriptural, and
so irreligious.


Christ. I shall at present enquire no further, but de^re you to draw up the
sum of the whole as briefly as you ^^n and so to conclude the present
discourse.


Min. I shall, but before I so do, and in order thereunto, I shall briefly
promise five things.

1. That the Scriptures are the divine and revealed Word and Will of God, and
as so, are our rule in all matters, both of Gospel-Faith and Practice, Isa, 8.
20. 2 Timothy 3. 15. 1 John 4. 6. and that whoever denies this, denies the
ground of all Christian Faith and Religion, as likewise those who affirm, that
the promises and precepts, are not God's intentions or purpose.

2. That all matters of Faith, especially of things fundamental (viz. things to
be believed and de^^ without which we cannot be saved) are plainly set down in
the Scripture, and are to be understood according to the express Letter of the
Scripture, or the plain Scope and Reason thereof, and not to build our Faith on
men's interpretations and additions, otherwise our Faith must be built on men's
interpretations and additions, and not on the Word of the Lord, which must
needs be an uncertain and unsafe building; and if we so build our Faith, how
far we shall be from Rome in this matter, is easy to be understood by the
weakest capacity.

3. That had we not had this Divine Revelation of Gospel grace by Christ, we
should have been as ignorant thereof, as the Nations that are without it.

4. And therefore it much concerns us, to believe it on its own authority, and
to prize it, and cleave to it, without adding, or diminishing, by
interpretation^ or additions of failable men, especially in things fundamental.

5. I add, That what I have said in this Discourse, (or shall further say,) is
not so much by way of interpretation, otherwise than by comparing and uniting
the Scripture, in its own light, language, and reason, so as that, I doubt not;
but the meanest capacity (being wil^^g) may easily understand; and the belief
thereof, impose on none, further than it is apprehended truth ^^d worth, takes
place in the understandings and con^^ences of men.

Having premised these things, I shall result the whole, ^ briefly as possible
I can, in which (if I am not very ^^ch mistaken) is comprehended, most of the
Funda^entals of Gospel Doctrine, and Christian Faith and ^^ligion, in order to
salvation, united in the plain ^^ds* sense and truth of Scripture, as a golden
^^in; of which not one link may be broken without ^^ger to the whole.

1. That God is, Heb. 11. 6. and that there is but one ^^d the Father, and one
Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 8. 6. ^^d that this one God, is an infinite,
incomprehensible, ^^rious and eternal Being, most holy, wise, just, good ^^d
gracious, almighty, omnipresent, merciful, and true ^^d faithful in his
sayings, Deuteronomy. 33. 7. Isa. 40. 28. 1 Samuel 1 Psalm. 139. 7.

2. That this almighty, wise and good God made all ^^^ngs by Jesus Christ, Joh.
1. 1, 2, 3. with Ephesians. 3. 9. ^^ 1. 16. Heb. 1. 2. and that he made all things
good, his own content, Genesis 1. 31. and made man best of ^^l, viz. in his own
Image or likeness, Genesis 1. 26, ^, 28. and so did not (nor could not) make any
de^rdly to sin and be damned, it being contrary to the ^^dness of his nature,
and name, and the truth of his lord, and so impossible for so wise, holy, just
and good God, to make any of his Creatures designedly to so ^^ an end.

3. That man by transgressing the Law of his Maker^ seil from that good estate,
in which he was made into an estate of sin and death, Genesis 2. 16, 17. and 3. 6*
and that death threatened and inflicted, was only the first death, Genesis 3. 16,
17, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 1^. 21, 2^ and that this death came into, and passes upon
all men Romans 5. 12, 18.

4. That God of his own free goodness and mercy immediately aft^r the sin and
fall, set him upon promise of recovery and restitution out of this fal^ state,
by the ^^^d of the Woman, that should brou^^ the head design of the Serpent,
Genesis 3. 15. and afterward frequently renewed the promise of this Grace to
Mankind, Genesis 22. 18. and 26. 4. and 28. 14. Psa^ 72. 11, 17. Joh. 1. 45. with
Act. 3. 21.

5. That according to the promise of this grace, who the fullness of time was
comes God sent forth this promised Seed and Son, made of a Woman, Gal. 4. 4.
the Seed of Abraham, the Son of David, and the Son God, truly God and Man,
Matthew. 1. 1. Luke 1. 32, 3. Romans 9. 5. as a real demonstration of love to the
World according to the foregoing promises thereof, Luke 2. 1 John 2. 16.

6. That this Son and Savior, being come into ^ World for this cause, Joh. 6,
78. and 12. ^7. did free in love, lay down his life, a sacrifice for the World,
a ^^ some for^all, Joh. 10. 17, 18. and 6. 51. 1 Timothy 2. Heb. 2. 9. 1 John 2. 27
and was raised again from dea^ by his Father's and his own power, Act. 2. 24,
32. J^^ 10. 17, 18. no more to return to corruption, Act. 1^. 3 Romans 6. 9. and
is ascended into heaven, to the right h^ of the Majesty on high, in performance
of his mediatory Office for men, Mar. 16. 19. Heb. 1. 3. 1 Timothy 2. 5. made
Head, Lord and Lawgiver to (and of) his Body the Church, Ephesians. 5. 23, 24. Col.
1. 18. and Head over all things to and for the Church, Ephesians. 1. 22.

7. That after his resurrection, and before his ascension, having received all
power from the Father, he sent forth the Gospel by commission, in the authority
of the Father, Son and holy Spirit, in unity, to be published to the World,
without respect of persons, that whoover do believe and obey him therein may be
saved, and whoever do neglect (or reject it) shall be damned, Matthew. 28. 18,
19. Mark 16. 15, 16. Luke 24. 47. 2 Timothy 2. 10. and that the promise of life,
is to Gospel-Faith and Works, as the terms thereof, and not to Faith alone,
without Works, Works, Matthew. 7. 21, 24. Jam. 2. 20. to 24. and that whosoever do
thus believe, are the Elect and chosen of God, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 4. to 8. 2 Thessalonians.
2. 13. Romans 9. 29, 24. and shall be saved, Act. 16. 31.

8. That he has, and does empower all, by the Gospel where it comes, in the
light and truth thereof) to believe and obey him therein, this being so great
and fundamental a truth, that has not only the reason, light and whose scope of
Scripture for it; but the contrary draws a black cloud and line over the Gospel
of the free Grace of God to men, nulling and ending thereof (as all would
easily understand and conclude, were it tendered to Brutes, on the terms it is
to men,) and renders the righteous God, to be unrighteous in the Judgment, to
sentence men for what they could not do through weakness and debility, though God
is at liberty in the degrees of his operations to conversion, while he does
enough for all, Matthew. 25. 14, 15. the promise of the Spirit being to
believers, after believing, Joh. 7. 38, 39. Act 2. 38. and 5. 32. Ephesians. 1. 13.
and to be obtained (by promise) in the way of Faith and Prayer, Luke 11. 13.

And likewise that believers, while in this mortal, sinful and imperfect
estate, are in danger, through temptation, to fail of (and fall from) the Grace
of God, Heb. 3. 12. and 12. 15. and 4. 11. the knowledge of which tends much
for their safety, in keeping up their watch and war, Luke 21. 36. Romans 11. 20.
and the contrary, is a dangerous way to usher in carnal security, presumption
and apostasy from the Faith, Rom 11. 20. 1 Cor. 10. 12, and that the certain
way of security and preservation to the glory promised, is by constancy in the
faith and obedience of the Gospel, in doing and suffering the will of God, 1
Pet. 1. 5. and 4. 19. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Matthew. 10. 22. Heb. 10. 36. and for our
assistance, in this way, we have the promise of Christ, if we diligently seek
it, Matthew. 7. 7, 8, 11. Luke 11. 13.

9. That Jesus Christ raised and ascended, shall come again from Heaven, at the
time appointed, in power and great glory, Matthew. 24. 30. to raise and judge,
both the qui^k and dead, at his appearing and kingdom, Joh. 5. 28. 2 Timothy 4. 1.
which Judgment shall be universal, Zeph. 3. 8. Matthew. 25. 32. R^v. 3. 13. just
and righteous, Act. 17. 31. Romans 3. 5, 6. Rev. 22. 12. very great, terrible and
eternal, J^el 2. 3^. Rev, 6. 15, 16, 17. Heb. 6. 2. yet mixed with mercy, 2 Timothy 1. 18. Act. 3. 19. Jude, v. 21.

10. That then, and after this glorious appearing, resurrection and Judgment,
he will effect the restitution of all things, Act. 3. 21. bring in the new and
restored World, wherein shall dwell righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. called in
Scripture the world to come, Ephesians. 1. 21. Heb. 2. 5. in and over which shall
be his Eternal Kingdom and Glory, with his Church, Dan. 7. 14. Rev. 11. 15. and
22. 5.

Under which Kingdom and Government the generality of Mankind, shall (after the
Judgment) enjoy son^e blessing and favor, and acknowledge, worship and serve
the Lamb, the Lord Jesus, for ever, by whom they have been redeemed to this new
life and world, Genesis 22. 18, Psalm. 22. 27. Zeph. 3. 9. Phil. 2. 9, 10. Rev. 5.
13.

And the whole Creation that was brought under curse and vanity by the sin of
man, shall (with man) be restored and have their shar^ (suitable to their then
capacities) in the glorious restitution, new World, and liberty of the sons of
God, Act. 3. 21. Romans 8. 21. this being the glorious issue designed of God by
Christ in the Gospel, the sum and substance of all the Scriptures, spoken of by
all the holy Prophets since the World began, Act. 3, 21. and will be the
^^^shing thereof, as declared by the Prophets and Apostles of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, Rev. 10. 7. with 11. 15.

O, therefore let us believe it, and not spurn against it, lest we miss of the
Faith of the Gospel, to which the life thereof is promised, Mark ^6. 15, 16.
there is no Gospel without it, in the Doctrine, it is glad, (or good) tidings to
all the Creation; and this must be our faith, which brings us under the promise
of life, and faithful is he that promised, and will not deceive us, if we
deceive not our selves with a false faith, Heb. 10. 23. 2 Pet. 3. 13.

Therefore, I say, let us believe it, rejoice in it, and pray for it, as the
holy Prophet, as one overcome in the deep contemplation of this very glory, the
whole Psalm does demonstrate unto us, and with whose Words, I shall at present
conclude this Discourse, Psalm. 72. 18, 19. Blessed be the Lord God, the God of
Israel, who only does wondrou^ things, and blessed he his glorious Name for
ever, and let the whole Earth be filled with his glory. Amen, Amen.


THE Appendix.
WHerein is presented, 1. Certain Queries of weighty concern, relative to the
foregoing Discourse. 2. The general and special (or particular) expressions as
stated in the Scripture, about the general and special Grace of God to Men.

Querie 1. Whether to believe that God reprobated any of Mankind, by an Eternal
Decree to sin and be damned, is not contrary to the whole Scripture (Name and
Nature of God) in which it is expressly said, that he made all Good, Genesis 1. 31.
And that it was sin brought in (and will bring in) the condemnation, as the
deserving cause thereof; and whether we have not grounds to believe it to be
impossible, for so Wise, Holy, Just and Good a God, to make Creatures
designedly for so bad an end? And whether this Principle of Christian Faith, do
not destroy the very Foundation of the Gospel? Being contrary to the whole
manifested design of God therein.

Quer. 2. Whether to believe that God loved not the World in the gift of his
Son, but a few only? And that Christ gave not himself for the life of the
World, nor a ransom for all, but for a few only, i^ not contrary to the express
Letter, Reason and Scope of the Scripture? Joh. 6. 51. 1 Timothy 2. 6. And whether
so to believe, do not root up the Foundation of Gospel-Faith? 2 Cor. 2. 2. and
15. 3, 4, 11.

Quer. 3. Whether we have not sufficient ground to believe, that the general
love of God to the World in the gift of his Son, and the general Sacrifice of
Christ for the World, is the alone Foundation of the general Commission for
Preaching the Gospel to the World. If so, (it being granted by all, that the
Commission, Mar. 16. 15. is general, and ought not to be limited;) then whether
to understand the Commission for Preaching the Gospel, to be larger than the
Foundation and Basis thereof, (viz. The Fathers Love, and the Sons Sacrifice,
without which could have been no such Commission) tends not to null and make
void the Commission it self, for Gospel Preaching, it out-running of, and being
larger than the Foundation thereof; or at least to render the Lord
inconsiderate in stating so large a Commission on so narrow a Foundation? it
behooves those who deny the general Love and Sacrifice, to ponder this.

Quer. 4. Whether to believe, that Men have no power to believe and obey the
Gospel with its own helps, without a mighty, miraculous and irresistible power,
(which God does not effect, and yet will damn People Eternally for not
believing, be not contrary to the whole Reason, Light and Truth of Scripture?
and contrary to the whole Name and Nature of God, and contrary to the whole
Light and Law of Nature and Reason placed in Man by God. Then whether these
things are not meet to be exploded by all true Christians?

Quer. 5. Whether to believe any other terms between the Father and the Son,
about the work of Gospel, Redemption and Salvation, than what are the expressed
terms thereof in the Gospel, does not tend to null and make void the Gospel it
self? Or at least (and best) render it uncertain, if we suppose any other
secret terms besides (and contrary to) what is expressed, or a secret will
contrary to his revealed Will.

Quer. 6. Whether to deny Jesus Christ in his Person to be the Son of God and
the Son of David, the true Messiah promised, and as Crucified, Raised and
Ascended, to be the alone Foundation of Gospel-Faith, head Lord and Lawgiver to
his Church, without men's inventions or additions. And whether to deny him in
Word or Deed in any of these, be not deeply dangerous?

Quer. 7. Whether to assert there is no such thing in God as Love, or a natural
propensity to do us Good, from his Goodness, or any other property? And that he
intends not as he speaks, either in his precepts or his promises, that they
declare our Duty, not his intentions, is not wholly contrary to the Scripture?
And the Right and Reverend thoughts we ought to have of God. And whether it
does not tend to root up the Foundation of all Christian Faith and Religion of
all hope and trust in God? And whether it does not really make God a lier, if
his Commands and promises be not his intentions?

Quer. 8. Whether to believe that when Christ the Lord and Judge of the World
comes again from Heaven, to raise and Judge the Quick and the Dead, and when
that is over, will burn up the World, so as not to restore it and make it new,
and carry away the Saints with him to Heaven, and send all the World besides,
to Hell with the Devil, there to be tormented Eternally, is not contrary to the
whole Body of Scripture, contradicting the Restitution, World to come, and the
Kingdom and Glory of Christ therein with his Church and the Glory of his great
undertaking for the World? And if so; Whether this Faith be right or vain?

Quer. 9 Whether those who grant the thousand years reign, and limit the
Restitution, World to come, and the Glory of that Estate to the thousand Years,
are not much mistaken? And whether the Kingdom and Glory of Christ and the
Saints in the World to come shall not be Eternal? Dan. 7. 14, 27. Mar. 10. 30.
And whether they do well to confine the Eternal Kingdom, Life and Glory, within
the compass of a thousand Years? There being no other World, Life and Glory
promised, beyond that in the World to come.

Quer. 10. Whether those who grant, that after the Conflagration of the World
by fire, that there shall be new Heavens and new Earth follow, wherein dwells
Righteousness, after the Judgment, according to the Scripture, 2 Pet. 3. 13.
And yet affirm, that Christ will send away all the wicked of the World to Hell
with the Devil eternally to be tormented, and carry away all the Saints with
him to Heaven; (I say) whether they have considered who shall be the
inhabitants of this New and Restored World, wherein shall dwell Righteousness;
or whether it shall be the habitation (only of Birds and Beasts) or of nothing?
And whether it it does not concern us prudently to consider, whether the
Traditional Faith of going away to Heaven, has not led us besides, and so (in
our Faith) lost the true inheritance, and heirship promised in the World to
come?

Quer. 11. Whether it is to any sort of Faith that owns Christ in Name, to
which the promise of Life is made, or to the true Faith and Life of the Gospel?
If to any Faith that owns the Name of Christ, then why may not all the World
called Christian be saved as well as any? If not; but that the Life of the
Gospel is promised to the true Faith thereof, (called the Faith of God's
Elect.) Then whether it does not greatly concern all, without delay, to
endeavor to come right in the Faith and Life of the Gospel to which the
promise is made? And not to content our selves with any sort of Faith and Life?

Quer. 12. Whether bad and corrupt Principles of Faith, tho attended with a
good life, be not as dangerous and pernicious, as good Principles of Faith,
attended with a bad life? Romans 10. 2. Phi. 3. 4, 5, 6.

Quer. 13. Whether some of those Principles of Faith before mentioned, viz. the
reprobation of the World by Eternal Decree both to sin and Judgment, does not
really tend to render God to be most Cruel, most Unholy, most Unrighteous, and
most False, etc. in Decreeing, and so in being the first and Foundation cause,
of all the Cruelties, Unholiness, Unrigheousness, Falseness and Wickedness,
either in Devils or Men? It being a maxim, that the first cause of that which
is bad, is worst of all, as a bad Life, has a worse Heart, because both Words
and Works, flow from (and show) the badness of the Heart, which is the first
cause. Mar. 7. 21, 22, 23. And then whether it do not deeply concern men,
principally concerned in these Notions, speedily to relinquish them?

Quer. 14. And tho probably the persons concerned in these things, may deny
some of the bad things so essentially included therein, yet whether it does not
very greatly concern them now to consider, and deeply to ponder, that if to
deny one fundamental truth of the Gospel, namely, that of the Resurrection, 1
Cor. 15. 12. did by consequence, end all Faith and Christian Religion, verse,
13. to 17. tho very probably they intended it not, nor understood the dangerous
Consequences couched in their Opinion, till the Apostle informed them therein,
then whether to deny (or at best, corruptly to hold) almost all the Principles
of Christian Faith and Religion, is not more abundantly dangerous to the
persons concerned herein? and whether it concerns not all to look well to
themselves in time, about these great matters of Faith, to come right therein,
seeing no man can rightly claim an interest in the grace of life from Gospel
grounds, whose faith is not right in the substantial things thereof?

And although I take most of the things mentioned, to be in themselves deeply
heretical, yet I shall not pass the Sentence of Heretics on those that hold
them, nor dare I have so foul a Mouth; (let themselves look to that) I had
rather they pass the Sentence of Heretic on me, than I on them, (tho I desire
neither) because I really desire the good of all, and I know it will not be to
their honor in the end, but I hope I have learned better things from Christ; I
find none in Scripture stigmatized with that foul Name, but those that denied
the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2. 1. and that too, after they had professed
Faith in him; it is a black Name, and let them use it that delight in it; I
think it is learnt from the great high Priest and Apostate at Rome, who
stigmatizeth all for Heretics, that believe not as his Church believes; and
well were it, if those who profess to be come quite away, did not walk too much
in the same steps.

Quer. 15. Whether we have not cause well to consider, whether those manifold
and great Miscarriages, in the greatest matters of the Gospel, arise not very
much from Traditional Receptions from Forefathers? by reason of which our Eyes
are blinded, that we cannot see into the great and plain things of the Gospel,
it being most apparent, that not only the Jews in general (but the better sort
of them, even the Disciples of Christ) received by tradition, that Christ was
to come as a King, to restore the Kingdom to Israel, (which was a truth in it
self, and shall be effected at his next coming) by reason of which, they
understood not his first coming and suffering in order thereunto; nor could
they believe it, being blinded by their former received Notion, (tho true in it
self,) viz. that he should reign, but not suffer, tho Christ instructed them
therein (at least) three times; and if it be so, that the reception of one
truth may (through corruption) blind persons in another part of truth, (which I
fear is too common) Whether it do not concern us all to look well to our selves
in this matter? lest we for ever miss of truth, and spend our time and strength
to maintain our Traditional Receptions (the devices of others that have gone
before us) directly contrary to the Word of Truth, and so endanger to lose our
selves eternally.

Quer. 16. Finally, Whether those Scriptures, that exhorts us to lay up our
treasure in Heaven, and that the inheritance is reserved in heaven for
believers, will not all be performed in the new Jerusalem, that shall come down
from God out of Heaven, and Heaven shall be on Earth, viz. in the new
Jerusalem, in the new Earth and World? And so the Scriptures stand in unity in
this matter; and Peter explains it, 1. Pet. 1. 5. It Is ready to be revealed in
the last time; i. e. revealed from Heaven, v. 13. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. which fully
agrees with Rev. 21. 2.

2. I shall give some Account of the General and Particular Expressions in the
Scripture, about the General and Special Grace of God to Men.
1. Of the General.
1. OF the General Love of God to the World in the Gift of his Son, Luke 2. 10.
Joh. 3. 16. Tit. 2. 11. 1 John 4. 14.

2. The General Sacrifice of Christ for the World, Joh. 1. 29. and 6. 51. 2
Cor. 5. 14, 15. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Heb. 2. 9. 1 John 2. 2.

3. The General Reconciliation and Peace effected by this one Sacrifice, Romans
5. 10. 1 Cor. 5. 19. Col. 1. 20.

4. The General Justification unto Life thereby, in the Resurrection and
Restitution, Romans 5. 18. 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22.

5. The General Judgment, at (and after) the Resurrection, Joh. 5. 28. Act. 17.
31. Rev. 3. 10. Chro. 20. 12. Matthew. 25. 32.

6. The General Restitution and Uniting in and under Christ the Head and Lord,
and the General Salvation that shall follow, Act. 3. 21. Ephesians. 1. 9, 10. 1 Timothy 4. 10. Rev. 22. 2. 1 John 4. 14.

7. The General Commission for Publishing this glad Tidings to the World,
grounded on the General Love and General Sacrifice, Mark 16. 15. Luke 24. 47.

8. The General Worship and Service of the World in the World to come, Psalm.
22. 27, 28, 29. and 72. 11. and 86. 9. Isa. 66. 23. Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. Rev. 5.
13. and 21. 24.

2 Of the Particular Expressions of the Special Grace of God to Men.
1. THat God gave some to Christ, as a Particular and certain Reward of his
Undertaking, before his Suffering for the World, Joh. 6. 37, 39. Romans 8. 29, 30.

2. Christ laid down his Life for the Sheep, for the Church, Joh. 10. 15. Act.
20. 28. Ephesians. 5. 25.

3. A Special Justification by Faith in Christ, Romans 5. 1. Act. 13. 38, 39.
Romans 4. 5.

4. A Special Reconciliation and Peace with God, Romans 5. 1. 11. 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Ephesians. 2. 13, 14. Col. 1. 21.

5. Special Relation to Christ as his Spouse and Members of his Body, 2 Cor.
11. 2. Ephesians. 5. 23. 1 Cor. 12. 27. and to the Father (in Christ) as his
Children, Gal. 3. 26. 1 Cor. 6. 17, 18. Joh. 1. 12.

6. Special Preservation to the Glory promised, in the way of Gospel-Faith and
Obedience, 1 Pet. 1. 5. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Jude, v. 21. Joh. 10. 27, 28, 29.

7. Special Salvation and distinct Glory with Christ in the World to come, 1 Timothy 4. 10. 2 Timothy 1. 10. Mark 10. 30. Coloss. 3. 4. Rev. 14. 4.

Thus have I mentioned some of the Expressions in Scripture, relating both to
the General and Special Grace of God to Men by Jesus Christ in the Gospel of
his Grace, that the prudent may consider, whether it be not safe for us to
conclude, that there is something of Divine Wisdom in these multitude and
varieties of Expressions in both cases? and whether we may not both rationally
and religiously conclude, that it declares the manifold Wisdom (as well as the
manifold Grace) of God to men, Ephesians. 3. 10. Tit. 2. 11, 12. Ephesians. 1. 10. 1 Timothy 4. 10. 1 Pet. 4. 10. And then whether it may be safe for us to in^rpose
our own Wisdom and Devices in these ^eat Matters, so as either to null and make
^oid the General Grace by the Special? or to ^^trench upon the Special Grace by
the Gene^al, knowing that we may so own one truth, ^s to out and end another,
as the Jews did, and ^et do, as before I showed, and therefore whether it is not
our Wisdom and Safety (as well as Honorable unto God) and that where^n we
shall show our selves to be Wisdom's Children, to let these (and every Truth of
God) stand in the Latitude of the Scripture's own Expressions, so Justifying
Divine Wisdom, as Wisdom's Children, Luke, 7. 25.

And whether the contrary may not be deemed presumption in a high measure, to
alter and change Wisdom's Words, according to our own Will and Wisdom? as if
the Lord knew not best how to utter his own mind, but needs our Wit and Wisdom,
to alter and change it as we please, making it speak what it does not; and
whether we may not fear of falling under that Judgment threatened, for adding
to, or diminishing from the Wor^ of God? Rev. 22. 18. and that Sin an^
Judgment, Romans 1. 22. professing themselves to be wise, they bec^me fools; but
that it be ou^ greatest care to glorify the Lord now in this day of
Gospel Grace, in believing the truth thereof in all its parts, and living
suitable thereunto, that so we may live and reign with him in the day of glory.
Amen.

FINIS.
^hese BOOKS following are Printed for Thomas Fabian, at the Sign of the Bible
in St. Paul' s Churchyard.
THE Works of Josephus, with Cuts. Folio. The Packet of Letters. Quarto. The
Gentleman's Recreation, with Cuts. Octavo. Drummond's History of Scotland;
Containing the Lives and Reigns of James the First, the Second, the Third, the
Fourth, the Fifth; with several Memorials of State, during the Reigns of James
the Sixth, and Charles the First, with their Effigies. O^tavo. A Discourse of
Friendship. Octavo. Vincent's Discourse of Christ's certain and ^uddain
Appearance to Judgment. Octavo. Flavell's Navigation Spiritualized. Octavo.
Esop's Fables in English. Twelves. The Downfall of several Great Men, or Popish
Plottings, not to be paralleled in form Ages; being a Seasonable Warning for
the Times. Twelves. Robinson's Learning-Foundation; teaching to Spell and to
Read English. Twelves. A Sermon Preached at the Ordination of ^^ Elder and
Deacons in a Baptized Congregation in London. By. N. C.

