GREAT BRITAIN's COASTING-PILOT.

The FIRST PART.

Being a New and Exact SURVEY of the Seacoast OF ENGLAND, FROM THE RIVER of
THAMES TO THE WESTWARD, WITH THE ISLANDS of SCILLY, And from thence to CARLISLE.

DESCRIBING All the Harbors, Rivers, Bays, Roads, Rocks, Sands, Buoys,
Beacons, Sea-Marks, Depths of Water, Latitude, Bearings and Distances from
Place to Place, the Setting and Flowing of Tides, with Directions for the
knowing of any Place; and how to Harbor a Ship in the same with Safety.

With Directions for Coming into the CHANNEL between ENGLAND and FRANCE.

By Captain GREENVILE COLLINS Hydrographer in Ordinary to the KING and QUEENS
most Excellent Majesty's.

LONDON: Printed by Freeman Collins, and are to be Sold by Richard Mount
Bookseller, at the Postern on Tower Hill. 1693.

HONI SOIT QVI MALY PENSE

IE MAIN TIENDRAY

Great Britains Coasting Pylot BEING A NEW SURVEY OF THE Sea Coast By Capt.
GREENVILE COLLINS HYDROGRAPHER to their MAJESTYS 1693.



Sold by Richard Mount at the Postern on Great Towerhill LONDON

TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY WILLIAM III. OF Great Britain, France, and Ireland KING,
THIS SURVEY of the Seacoast OF GREAT BRITAIN IS MOST HUMBLY DEDICATED and
PRESENTED BY YOUR MAJESTY'S MOST FAITHFUL SUBJECT AND SERVANT, Greenvile
Collins.

royal blazon or coat of arms W R M R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV MON DROIT
William R. WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc.
To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas We are humbly Informed, That our Trusty and Welbeloved Servant,
Captain Greenvile Collins, Our HYDOGRAPHER, has for several Years past, with
great Pains and Expense, made a Survey of the Seacoast, which will be of great
Use and Advantage for the Safety of Navigation, and now being about to publish
the same, under the Title of GREAT BRITAIN'S COASTING PILOT, has humbly
besought Us to grant him Our Royal License for the sole Printing and Publishing
thereof, We have thought fit to condescend to that his Request, and We do
accordingly hereby grant Our Royal License and Privilege, unto the said
Captain Greenvile Collins, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, for the
sole Printing and Publishing the aforesaid Survey, under the Name and Title of
GREAT BRITAIN'S COASTING PILOT, as aforesaid, for the Term of Fourteen Years,
to be Computed from the Day of the first setting forth of the same. And Our
Royal Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby Require and Command, That during
the said Term of Fourteen Years, no Person or Persons whatsoever, being our
Subjects, do presume to Imprint, Engrave, or Publish, or cause to be Imprinted,
Engraven, or Published the same, or any part thereof, or to Epitomize the same,
and Imprint, Engrave, or Publish it, or any part thereof under the same, or any
other Title or Name whatsoever, or to sell the same, or to Import into our
Kingdom of England, any Copies thereof Imprinted in any Parts beyond the Seas,
upon pain of the Loss and Forfeiture of all Copies so Imprinted, Sold or
Imported, contrary to the Tenor of this our Royal License, and of such other
Penalties, as the Laws and Statutes of this Our Realm will inflict, without the
Knowledge License, and Consent of him the said Captain Greenvile Collins, his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns; And Our further Will and Pleasure, is,
That the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the Company of Stationers, in Our
City of LONDON, do take due Notice hereof, and cause the same to be Entered in
their Register; And that if Occasion requires, they be Aiding and Assisting
unto the said Captain Greenvile Collins, his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, in Searching for and Seizing any Plate or Plates, Print or Prints, or
Copies, or Epitomies of the same, or any part thereof.

Given at our Court at Kensington the 22th Day of February, 1691/2. in the
Fourth Year of our Reign. By his MAJESTY's Command, SYDNEY.

The High and Mighty STATES of HOLLAND's PRIVILEGE TO Captain Greenvile
Collins 1692.
DE Staten van Hollandt en Westvrieslandt: Done te weten. Alsoo ons vertoont is
by Greenvile Collins, Capiteyn van het Jaght van Sijne Koninglijke Majesteyt
van Groot Brittagne, end desselfs Hydrogrifus. Dat den Suppliant den tijd van
twaelf jaren, naar den anderen met groote naarstigheyt, doende was geweest, om
even Boeck van veelderhande Caarten te practiseren en op te stellen, van all de
Zeekusten, Eylanden, Havens, Landen, Ondiepten, end verdere gelegentheden van
de Zee ontrent Engelandt, Schotlandt en Yrlandt met den aankleven van dien, by
hem geintituleert, De Nieuwe Piloot van Groot Brittagne, het welke veel
bequamer en distinctelijker was, voor all Schippers, Pilooten en Zeevarende
Persoonen, dan voor henen; Dat den Suppliant daar toe veel moeyten en kosten
had aangewent, sijnde deselve ten reguarde van de voorgaande Caarten van de
voorsz Zeekusten, even heel nieuw en klaar werk, noyt te voren soodanig gesien
of uytgegeven, gelijk, uyt de voorsz Caarten oogenschijnlijk en klaar konde,
gesien en aangewesen worden, sijnde den Suppliant van voornemen, 't selve
Caarte-Boek (onder Gods hulpe) binnen den tijt van ses Maanden eerstkomende te
laten drucken en uytgeven, so in Engelandt in die Taal, als alhier in onsen
Land in de Nederduytsche Tael, omme by de Zeevarende Persoonen alhier te Land
mede geemployeert te werden, als haar mede seer nodig sijnde: Derhalve keerde
hy Suppliant hem tot Ons ootmoedelijk versoekende, dat wy hem Suppliant, sijne
Erven en Nakomelingen, voor den tijd van 15 eerst achter even volgende jaren
geliefde te verlenen Octroy, comme in den voorn. onsen Land alleen te mogen
laten drucken, uytgeven en verkoopen, het voorsz Caarte-Boek, genaamt de Nieuwe
Piloot van Groot Brittagne, in soodanige Talen, Formaet, en met sulke
descriptie, uytlegginde en Registers, als hem Suppliant goet duncken soude, en
dat op seekere groote poene by ons tegens de Contraventeurs van dien te
statueren, en hem daar van te verleenen Octroy in debita forma. SO IS IT; Dat
wy de sake en't versoek voorsz overgemerckt hebbende end genegen wesende ter
bid van den Suppliant uyt onse rechte Wetenschap, Souvrayne Macht en
Authoryteyt, den Suppliant, sijne Erven en Nakomelingen geconsenteert,
geaccordeert geoctroyeert hebben consenteren, accorderen en octroyeren mits
desen, dat hy geduerende den tijdt van vijftien eerst achter eenvolgende jaren,
het voorsz Caarte-boek genaamt De Nieuwe Piloot van Groot Brittagne, binnen den
voorn. onsen Land alleen sal mogen laten drucken, uytgeven en verkoopen;
verbiedende daarom allen end eenen ygelijken het selve Caarte-boek in 't
geheel often deel in eenigerhande formaet, en met sulke discriptie, uytlegginge
en Registers, en Talen, naar te drucken, often elders naargedrukt binnen den
voorn. onsen Land te brengen, uyt te geven often te verkoopen, op verbeurte van
all de naargedrukte, ingebrachte often verkochte Exemplaren, end even boete van
dry hondert guldens daar en boven te verbeuren, te appliceren even derde part
voor den Officier die de calange done sal, even derde part voor den armen der
plaatse daar het casus voor vallen sal, en het resterende derde part voor den
Suppliant. End dat hy gehouden sal zijn, even Exemplaar van't voorsz
Caarte-boek gebonden, en well geconditioneert te brengen in de Bibliotheeck van
onse Universiteyt tot Leyden, end daar af behoorlijkt te doenblijcken, op
poene van het effect van desen te verliesen. End ten eyende den Suppliant
desen onsen Consent en Octroye moge genieten als naar behooren. Lasten wy
allen en eenen ygelijken die 't aangaan mag, dat sy den Suppliant van den
innehouden van desen, done, laten, en gedogen, rustelijk, vredelijk en
volkenomtlije genieten en gebruyken, cesserende all belet ter contrary.

Gedaan in den Hage onder onsen grooten Zegele, hier aan done hangen den 28
Maart in 't Jaerons Heeren en Zaligmakers duysent ses hondert een-en
t'negentigh. vt. A. HEINSIUS, Ter Ordonnantie vande Staten Simon van Beaumont.

TO THE MASTER, WARDENS and ASSISTANTS OF THE TRINITY-HOUSE OF Deptford-Strond.
Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
WHEN first His Majesty King CHARLES the Second, was pleased to make Choice of
me for Surveying the Seacoast, I then, as in Duty bound (being a younger
Brother) did acquaint you with it, and most humbly laid the Proposals before
you; whereupon you were pleased not only to approve of them, but did most
bountifully Advance toward the Charge of the WORK, which being now finished,
with all Submission and Gratitude, I assume the boldness to present these
Effects of my Seven Years Industry to your Protection and Patronage.

If at any Time there should be made new Discoveries of any Rocks or Shelves,
that are not yet known; or that Sands shall change their Situation (as often
they do) I shall be ready by your Advice and Commands (by God's Blessing) to
make a further Progress in this Survey.

I could heartily wish that it might be so ordered by your Corporation, that
all Masters of Ships, both using foreign and home Voyages, might be encouraged
to bring you in their Journals, and a Person appointed to Inspect them, which
would be a great Improvement of Navigation, by imparting their Observations and
Discoveries of the true Form and Prospect of the Sea-Caost, with all Harbors,
Rivers, Bays, Islands, Creeks, Sands, and Rocks, and other dangerous Places,
with the Settings and Flowings of Tides, and Currants, with the Variation of
the Compass; by which means, in a few years, we might have much more exact
Sea-Charts and Maps; and for want of such a Method, we have lost many Excellent
Discoveries, to the unaccountable loss of Navigation.

And that those Persons that make and sell Sea-Charts and Maps, were not
allowed to alter them upon the single Report of Mariners, but with your
Approbation, by which means our Sea-Charts would be more Correct, and the
common Scandal of their badness removed, that God may prosper all your Generous
and Charitable Undertakings; which that they may always succeed the greatest
Advantage possible of all their Majesty's Subjects, is the constant hearty Wish
and Prayer of

Your most humble and most obedient Servant and younger Brother, GREENVILE
COLLINS.
Deptford, Febr. 24. 1693.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. To my Fellow Mariners of GREAT BRITAIN.
GENTLEMEN,
HIS most Excellent Majesty King CHARLES the Second, who was a great Lover of
the Noble Art of NAVIGATION, finding that there were no Sea-Charts or Maps of
these Kingdoms but what were Dutch, and Copies from them, and those very
erroneous, his Majesty out of his great Zeal for the better Improvement of
Navigation, was pleased in the Year 1681. to give me the Command of a Yatch for
the making this Survey; in which Service I spent Seven years time.

The Intent of this Survey is only to give Directions to Mariners to Sail
along the Coast of Great Britain, and how to carry a Ship into any Harbor,
River, Port, Road, Bay, or Creek with safety, and how to avoid all Dangers
known.

It sometimes happens, and that too frequently, that when Ships which have made
long and dangerous Voyages, and are come home richly Laden, have been
shipwrack't on their Native Coast, whereby both Merchants, Owners and Mariners
have been impoverish't. All our Neighbors will acknowledge that no Nation
abounds more with skilful and experienced Seamen than our own, none meeting a
Danger with more Courage or Bravery; none taking more Care, or use more
Circumspection to prevent it, or are more laborious to overcome it: But we
cannot expect that the Master and Mates of every Ship should be acquainted with
all the Coasts and Harbors of Great Britain, into which they may be
accidentally obliged to Enter. Sometimes it happens, that in long Voyages the
Master and the most knowing Men die, and the Ship is brought into sight of Land
by those who have skill enough to conduct the Ship at Sea, but are wholly
unacquainted with the Coasts and Harbors, or having but little Knowledge, dare
not trust to it; in such Cases, and to such Persons, this Survey will serve in
the room of a Pilot.

As many Ships are lost by Ignorance and Negligence, as by stress of Weather,
so a Master of a Ship has a very great Charge, and ought to be a sober Man, as
well as a skilful Mariner: All helps of Art, Care, and Circumspection are to be
used by him, that the Lives of Mariners (the most useful of their Majesty's
Subjects at this Juncture) and the Fortunes of honest Merchants under his Care,
may be preserved. To supply the Defects of which, I have been Employed by their
Majesty's Predecessors, and Encouraged by Ingenious and Noble Benefactors; and
as I have hitherto made it my Business to make those true Figures of our Coasts
and Harbors so to serve my Country, I shall not be wanting to give them such
Additions and Amendments as I shall find hereafter needful: Wishing you always
happy and successful Voyages, and safe Returns, with Prosperity to the Nation
and its Forces by Sea and Land, that as we have been hitherto, so we may even
be at home Sovereigns of the Seas, and Umpiers of the Differences betwixt our
Neighbors abroad, which as it is every good man's Wish, so is it the constant
hearty Prayer of

GREENVILE COLLINS.

Note that in the Year 1685 I found the Variation at D M Edinbrough 6 00
Aberdeen 6 30 Cromertie Orkney Isles 7 00 Shetland Isles 1693 at Greenwich 6 30
Westerly

The same throught England to a small matter which I advise all Seamen to allow
in their Courses.

The NAMES of those Persons that Encouraged this WORK by Subscription, and
Advancing money toward the Charge and Printing thereof for the Public Good.
KIng CHARLES the Second. King JAMES the Second. King WILLIAM the Third. Prince
GEORGE.
A.
EArl of Arran, Scotland. Sir John Ashby Admiral of the Blew. Sir Samuel Astry,
Glostershire. City of Aberdeen, Scotland. Mr. Thomas Alcock, Bristol. Mr.
William Anguish, Purser in the Navy. Capt. Jonthan Andrews, Kenton-Park.
B.
DUKE of Beaufort. Earl of Berkley Vice Admiral of the Blew. William Blathwaite
Esquire. Secretary of War. Arnold Brown Esquire. Stepney. Sir John Barlow, Wales. John
Boscauen Esquire. Cornwall. Capt. James Bonnell, London. Thomas Baker Esquire. Consul
at Algier. Mr. John Bulfinch, Wapping. Capt. Robert Bristol. Capt. John Bowers,
Rotheriff. Capt. William Bond, Rotheriff. Capt. Hopfor Bendall, Stepney.
C.
MArquess of Carmarthan. Earl of Clarendon. City of Chester. Capt. John
Clements in the Navy. Sir John Clayton, Parsons-Green. Capt. Anthony Crow in
the Navy. Mr. Robert Castle, Deptford. Sir Arthur Chichester, Devonshire.
Capt. Thomas Cole in the Navy. Capt. James Conaway, Limehouse. Mr. John Colson,
Goodmans-fields. Mr. Thomas Cullum, London.
D.
EArl of Darby. Earl of Danby. Lord Dartmouth. Trinity-House of Deptford
Strond. William Davies Vice Admiral of the Red. Sir Ralph Delaval Admiral.
Edmund Dunmar Esquire. Surveyor of the Navy. Mr. Robert Dawson, Greenwich. Capt.
Robert Dorrell London. Mr. Samuel Deane, London.
E.
CIty of Edinbrough. Mr. Thomas Enys, Penrin. Capt. Benjamin England, Wapping.
Walter Etrick, Sunderland. Capt. Thomas Ekins of Silly.
F.
JOhn Flamsteed M. R. Greenwich. Mr. Joseph Fownes Clerk of the Check Deptford.
Capt. William Falsby in the Navy. Capt. John Frost, London.
G.
DUKE of Grafton. Capt. Christopher Gunman in the Navy. Sir Thomas Grantham,
London. Mr. John Gayar, London. Sydney Codolphin Esquire. Cornwall. Capt. Nicholas
Goodridge, London. Capt. Charles Gibson, London.
H.
SIR Richard Haddock Comptroller of the Navy. Trinity-House, Hull. Town of
Harwich. Capt. Thomas Hobson in the Navy. Capt. Thomas Harlow in the Navy. Mr.
Peter Hallimore, Penrin. Mr. James Harle, Penrin. Mr. Benjamin Hatley, London.
Capt. William Heath, Limehouse. Mr. Robert Henley, Bristoll.
I.
SIR Henry Johnson, Blackwall. Mr. Jeffry Jeffrys, London.
K.
EArl of Kent. Sir Peter Killigrew, Cornwall. Henry Killigrew Admiral. Mr.
James Kemp, Penrin. Mr. John Kent, London. Mr. Philip Keale, Penrin.
Killingworth.
L.
Sir John Lowther Commissioner of the Admiralty. Rowland Langherne Esquire. Wales.
Town of Liverpoole. Capt. Edward Ledger, London. William Lownds Esquire.
Westminster. Mr. Thomas Lane Merchant. Mr. Gyles Lytcot, London.
M.
EArl of Manchester. Sir Humphrey Mackworth, London. Capt. John Mar of Dundee.
Capt. Thomas Monk in the Navy. Mr. Richard Mount Bookseller, London. Capt. Erby
Montague, Westminster.
N.
DUKE of Norfolk. Sir Dudley North. Trinity-House, Newcastle. Mr. John Newman,
Penrin. Sir Walter Norris, Penrin. John Nance Esquire. Cornwall. Town of Newcastle.
O.
DUKE of Ormond. Sir Hugh Owen, Wales. Arthur Owen Esquire. Wales. Capt. William
Oxton, London.
P.
EARL of Portland. Hector Philips Esquire. Wales. Sir Peter Pett, London. Capt.
Peter Pickard in the Navy. Samuel Pett Esquire. Battersey. Sir Philip Parker,
Suffolk. Capt. Samuel Philips, London. Mr. Samuel Park, Ipswich. Capt. Peter
Paggon, London. Mr. James Pearla Jun. Westminster.
R.
SIR Richard Rooth, Kingsale Sir George Rooke Vice Admiral Jonathan Rashley
Esquire. Cornwall Sir Robert Robinson in the Navy Colonel Jacob Richards John
Romsey Esquire. London Sir Paul Rycaut, London
S.
CHarles Sargison Esquire. Commissioner of the Navy Sir Henry Shere Knight. Kent Sir
Robert Southwell, Kings-weston Capt. Ralph Sanderson in the Navy Capt. George
St. Lo in the Navy George Spry Esquire. Cornwall John Sansom Esquire. London James
Sotherne Esquire. Secretary of the Admiralty Sir Cloudsley Shovel Admiral Mr.
Nathaniel Symons, Yarmouth Joseph Saul Esquire. Cornwall
T.
LOrd Viscount Torbet, Scotland Capt. Richard Travaion Sir Jonathan Trelawny
Lord Bishop of Exon Capt. John Tyrrel in the Navy Sir Jos. Tredenham, Cornwall
Mr. John Tucker, Westminster Mr. William Tregea, Cornwall Mr. Thomas Tailor,
London
V.
JOhn Vivian Esquire. Cornwall Henry Vincent Esquire. Cornwall
W.
SIR Francis Wheeler in the Navy Colonel John Windham, Sarum Capt. Lawrence
Wright in the Navy Sir Christopher Wandesford, Yorkshire Mr. Willnam Worth,
Penrin Mr. Thomas Worth, Penrin Sir William Williams, Wales Mr. Thomas Weedon,
London Capt. William Wright in the Navy Mr. Reeve Williams, London Capt. Thomas
Warren, London Capt. Andrew Wardlow, Rotheriff
Y.
EARL of Yarmouth Mr. Robert Yates, Bristol Town of Yarmouth
GREAT BRITAINS COASTING PILOT.
The Explanation of some Marks in the Sea-Charts.
4/1 THE Depths of Water are all put down at Low Water on Spring Tides, as you
may see in the Chart going into Foy, Number 17. there you will find that the
least water going into that place is three Fathom. But where you find a Line
drawn between two Figures, as in the Margent, which is used no where but at
such places as there is not three Fathom at Low Water. As for Example; At the
going into Rye, as you may see in the Chart, Number 8. there on the Bar you
find the Figure 4 above the Line, which shows that there is four Fathom at
High Water: Then under the Line there is the figure 1, which shows that there
is but one Fathom at Low Water on a Spring Tide. 18/6f But for more exactness,
the depths of water on some Bars, where there is but little water, there the
depths are set down in Feet at High and Low Water; and to be known from
Fathoms, there is the Letter f placed by them, as in the Margent, as you may
see in the Chart going into Exmouth, Number 14. there you find, as in the
Margent, that there is 18 foot at High Water, and 6 foot at Low Water. Where
you shall see a Half Moon, as in the Margent, placed by or on any Rock or Sand,
it signifies that such a Rock or Sand is to be seen at the Half-tide; that is,
from half Ebb to half Flood, as you may see in the Chart of Falmouth, Numb. 18.
There is a Rock in the Harbors mouth, called Falmouth Rock, and has a Pole on
it to show where it is overflowed, and by it you will see a Half Moon. Where
you shall see an Arrow, as in the Margent, it shows that the Tide of Flood,
or part of it, running the same way the Arrow points, as you may see in the
Chart of the Isle of Wight and Chester-Bar.
It may be expected that I should have given Directions for Sailing from the
River of Thames over the Flats into the Downs; and likewise from the River
Thames down the Swin and the King's Channel, and so into the Downs: But upon
consideration that these Places are under the Care of Pilots, and for the
constant supply of them, the Trinity-House of Deptford Strond have taken care
that there be a sufficient number of them, both for great and small Ships, I
have put the Sands down in the Sand-Chart from the Thames into the Downs, and
from the Thames to the Buoy of the Gunfleet, as they were most carefully
surveyed by Trinity-House, and all the rest of the Charts is my own Survey.

Directions to Sail from the Downs to the Westward.
Dunginness.
FRom the South Foreland to Dunginness, the Course South west by south six
Leagues. Dunginness is a low Beachy-point, on which is a Light-house; this
place is very bold, you may keep within nine and ten Fathom of it close by the
shore. There is good Anchoring on the East side with a westerly wind, if the
wind be contrary, and that you should turn to windward from Dover to the Ness,
there lies a Sand called the Riprap Riprap.
in the Midway between Dover and the French shore. The shoalest part of it
bears from Dover south, and south by east, and from Calis Cliffs west by
south. It lies in length North east and south west, both ends pointing the
English Coast in length about four Leagues, but very narrow; there is on it at
Low Water fifteen foot. There lies another small Sand between this and Dover,
called the Gunman-Sand, where is but twelve foot at Low Water, and lies from
the South Foreland South about five or six miles, and is not above two miles
over; it lies North east and South west; you have five and six Fathem close to
it all round, and twenty Fathom between it and the Riprap.

Rye.
To the westward of Dunginness lies Rye Harbor; it is a Bar-place, but the
water rises three and four Fathom. On the east side, going in, there are two
white Beacons on the Beach, which you keep together till you bring the Leadings
Marks together, then run in. When you are in the Harbor you will have no less
than fifteen and sixteen foot at Low Water, as you may see in the Chart, Number
8. where the going in is so plainly demonstrated, that you need have no other
Directions. As you Sail from Rye to Beachy, keep not near the shore, when you
come thwart of Pemsey; Pemsey Shoal.
for there lies a small Stone-bank on which is but eleven and twelve foot at
Low Water. The Mark for it is Beachy North west, and Pemsey Castle North half
east.

Beachy-Head.
From Dunginness to Beachy-Head the Course is West south west about nine
Leagues. Beachy is a high steep white Chalk Cliff: To the westward of which
lies the seven white Chalkey Cliffs, called the Seven Cliffs, Seven Cliffs.
and are very remarkable. Some say there lies a Shoal right off of
Beachy-Head, but I could not find it; however, it may be a small Spot, and hard
to find, therefore the best way is not to come too near it.

Cuckmore Haven.
Cuckmore Haven lies four miles to the westward of Beachy-Head, and is a Bar
Harbor, not having above six foot at Low Water, and thirteen and fourteen at
High Water. When you are in, you lie dry at Low Water. This place sometimes by
storms is stopped up with the Beach, and by great Land-floods is opened again.

New Haven.
New Haven is another small Bar-place, and lies eight or nine miles to the
westward of Beachy, only fit for small Vessels.

Shorum.
Shorum lies between six and seven Leagues to the westward of Beachy, and is a
Bar-place; but better than Cuckmore and New Haven: The Bar often shifts. There
are Beacons to run in by: when you are in, there is nine foot at Low Water.
Here are many good Ships built.

Bright-Hempston.
Bright-Hempston is a Town that stands by the Seaside on a Beach. There are
many Vessels belong to it, which they heap up with Crabs on the dry Beach. This
place lies four miles to the eastward of Shorum.

Arundel.
Arundel lies ten Leagues to the westward of Beachy, and four short Leagues to
the westward of Shorum, and is a Tide-Haven: where at High Water and Half-flood
Ships go in, keeping the West Side aboard; and being in, may there ride afloat.
I might have said more of these Bar-Harbours, but I leave it to Coasters, and
do not recommend it to Strangers, they being Harbors of little Trade or Resort.

East-barrow-heads.
From Beachy to the Isle of Wight the Course is West south west eighteen
Leagues. When you Sail from Beachy to the Isle of Wight, you must have a great
care of the East-barrow-heads and the Owers; which lie seven Leagues to the
Eastward of the Isle of Wight, and four Leagues from the shore. The East
barrow-head lies from Arundel south by west four Leagues, on which is but ten
foot at Low Water, and is about three miles in length south and north, and
about two miles broad east and west. A mile north by east from this Bank lies
another shoal called the Little East-barrow-head, and is about two miles in
length north and south, and a mile broad, having but nine foot at Low Water,
and bears north west from Chichester Church-Spire, and two miles to the
northward of these lie a small parcel of Rocks, called Kingman-Rocks, and lie
four miles south by west from the going into Arundel. You have five Fathom
between them and the shore.

Owers.
The Owers lie south south east from Chichester Spire, and four Leagues from
the shore, and about four long Leagues or five Leagues east from Bendridge
Point on the Isle of Wight; there length is north east and south west, about
three Leagues, and about three miles broad in the middle, and narrow at each
end, and dry at Low Water. There lies another shoal on the inside of this, the
north end of it dries at Low Water: Between which and the shore is another
Shoal lying in length as the Owers do, called the Mixens, and lies from Selsey
Point about two miles south. There is a Channel between the Owers and the
Mixens, but it being of no use but to those that are very well acquainted, I
will not give any Directions to Sail through them, nor within them. There lie
some other Banks within them, which I forbear to speak of them. The only and
chief end of my business is to give good Directions how to avoid these shoals,
that have proved so fatal to many Ships. There are very good Marks to avoid
them, if you keep Dunnose west, you run a good brith without them; there is
twelve Fathom water close to them; keep in eighteen Fathom and you will not be
in any danger of them. How Ships are lost on the Owers.
The great reason why so many Ships have fallen in on these Shoals, is the
great Indraught of the Tide setting strong into St. Helens eight hours or more;
the latter part of the Flood sets into St. Helens. My advice is, That when you
are near this place in the night time, or thick weather, to be very careful,
and keep your Lead well: In little Wind or Calms you shall be drawn in here to
admiration, by the strong Indraught, which if you find, Anchor in time.

Chichester.
To the eastward of the Owers is the going into Chichester, and very difficult;
therefore I advise none but them that are acquainted to go in there without a
Pilot.

Directions for Sailing into the East end of the Isle of Wight, called St.
Helens.
COming from the Eastward, come no nearer the Owers then eighteen Fathom water,
and keep the Culver Cliff or Swan Cliff west north west, which is a high steep
white Chalkey Cliff, as you may see in the making of the Lands, Number 35. and
is two miles from Benbridge Point, which is the eastermost Point of the Island.
Being come within a League of the Swan Cliff, or thereabouts, then steer in for
St. Helens, and have a care of the Spit that lies away to the eastward from
Benbridge Point; when the Swan Cliff is hid behind Benbridge Point, then are
you within it, as you may see in the Chart, Number 9. you may run over this
Spit in five and 6 Fathom water. If you will Anchor in St. Helens Road, St.
Helens Road.
bring St. Helens Church west south west, and Anchor in five, six, seven, or
eight Fathom water. There is a small Owsey Bank in St. Helens Bay, which has
but fourteen foot at Low Water on it, and is called the Warner, which bears
N. E. from St. Helens Church. Being in St. Helens Road, and that you would go
in for the Spithead, you will see a leading Mark, which is Gilkicker, a white
Tower by the Seaside and Stoke-Church, one in the other; but the best of the
Channel, between the Horse and Nomans Land, is to keep the said Church just
open to the southward of Gilkicker, and Anchor at the Spithead, Spithead.
bring the small Village called Ride by the Seaside on the Isle of Wight to
bear west south west, and Gilkicker north west, then you may Anchor in the best
of the Road, at the Spithead, To Anchor at the Spithead.
which is a very good Road, and clean Ground, where the Royal Navy many times
ride. The Horse Marks for the Horse.
is hard Ground, and in some places not above seven foot water at Low Water;
when the great white Patch on Portsmouth Down is on south Sea-Castle, then are
you within it; keep Portsmouth Church-steeple on a small Redoubt which is like
a Dove-house, and stands on the East Side of Portsmouth: these two in one
will carry you close by the Horse in five and six Fathom water. The eastward
part of this great Bank is called the Dean. Dean.
When the Windmill on the Isle of Wight bears south west by west, then are
you abreast the Buoy of the Horse.

Nomans Land.
The Thwart-Mark for the Spit of Nomans Land, Nomans Land.
is to bring the Windmill on the Isle of Wight between the south west and the
south west by west, then will the said Mill be just over a square Field by the
Waterside; which said Mill, if you keep sight of it, will carry you clear of
Nomans Land; but if the Mill is hid by the Land, then will you run aground on
the said Spit. This Mark will carry you up into Cowes Road: But for Anchoring
in Stoaks-Bay, going up into Hamton water, or to Sail up to Yarmouth, I refer
you to the Chart, which is so plain, that there needs no Directions. If you
have occasion to turn from St. Helens Whento turn into St. Helens.
into the Spithead, have a care of Nomans Land, which is steep too; you will
have twelve Fathom, and next Cast a shore; but on the Horse you may stand into
eight or nine Fathom, and turn the Church a little open of each side of
Gilkicker. There are several other Marks in the Chart, which I refer you to,
that I will not mention, as being needless. All within the Isle of Wight is
good safe Anchoring.

Being in Yarmouth Road, and that you would Sail out of the Needles, How to
Sail out of the Needles.
steer away for Hurst Castle, which place is very steep; being past the Castle,
steer away for the Needles, which are sharp white Rocks; giving a birth to some
Rocks that lie off from the Island side, in the fair way between the Castle and
the Needles, you must keep close to the Needles. The Tide of Ebb sets on the
Shingles, which are hard Stones. The Flood sets on the Needles.

To Sail into the Needles; How to Sail into the Needles.
you will know the going in by the high white Land which is the west end of the
Isle of Wight; run boldly in with the Land, till you see the Needle You may
Sail within a Ships length of the Needles.
Rocks, and then keep close to them, observing the Tides, as in the Directions
coming out. Note, that there is a strong Indraught that sets in at the Needles,
Indraught into the Needles.
and into Pool; which Indraught has hauld many Ships into Fresh Water Bay. But
I think it, and I am very sure, that no Ship can run ashore in Fresh Water Bay,
if they did but mind the Lead; the neglect of which has been the loss of many
Ship. Keep in five and twenty and thirty Fathom water, and you need not fear
the Indraught of the Wight.

Christ-Church.
Christ-Church Christ Church.
is a Bar-place, where small Vessels run in at High Water. This place lies
seven miles to the westward of Hurst Castle.

Pool.
Pool Pool.
is a Bar-Haven, and lies five Leagues to the westward of the Needles, or Isle
of Wight, where Ships Sail in with a High-tyde. There is good Anchoring in
Studland-Bay, Studland Bay.
which lies between the Entrance of Pool Haven and Studland Point; and
Sandwich-Bay lies between Studland Point and Peverly Point, where is good
Anchoring for westerly Winds. I have not as yet surveyed Pool Harbor, but it is
intended God-willing.

From Peverly Point to the westward the Land is high, and is called the
High-land of St. Albans. About two Leagues or more to the westward of Peverly
Point Foul Ground and Shoal-water between Peverly Point and Waymouth.
is Kembridge Ledge, and lies off from the shore south by east into the Sea a
mile and half off, and has at that distance but six foot at Low Water, and
three quarters of a mile off thirteen foot, and a mile off four Fathom. There
is another Ledge that lies right off from St. Albans-head, about three
quarters of a mile off shore, and has but twelve foot at Low Water, and lies
between Kembredge Ledge and Peverly Point.

Lulworth.
Four Leagues to the westward of Peverly Point is a small Cove called Lulworth,
Lulworth.
where small Vessels may Ride.

Portland Road.
Portland Road P^rt^and R^ad.
is a most excellent good Road for westerly and southerly Winds, very good
holding clear Ground. As you Sail into Portland Road, you must have a care of a
Shoal called the Shambles, Shambles
which has but fourteen foot water at Low Water, as you may see in the Draught
of Portland, Number 12. Bring Waymouth Castle just on the eastward part of
Portland, and that will bring you just on the edge of it in three Fathom and a
half; then will the Bill of Portland bear west by north: But if you keep the
said Castle and Point a Sails breadth open, it will carry you clear. You may
Anchor in Portland Road from five Fathom to ten Fathom, bringing the eastward
part of Portland to bear south and south by east, and south south east. You may
Sail close by the Land of Portland from the Bill into the Road.

Waymouth.
Waymouth Waymouth
is a Bar-Haven, where at Low Water there is but six foot, and the Tides rise
but six and seven foot on a Spring; within the Bar is a small Hole, where there
is nine foot at Low Water: and those Vessels that lie by the Keys before the
Town, lie dry at Low Water. There is good Riding in Waymouth Road.

Race of Portland.
The Race of Portland Race of Portland.
is a great Ripling of the Tides, caused by the unevenness of the Ground at the
bottom, called Overfalls; and when the Sea is high, and the Tides strong, it
breaks in great Seas, and one that is a stranger would think that there were
shoal-water. This Ripling or Race begins a mile to the westward of the Bill,
about a mile and a half or two mile off; and runs to the eastward as far as
St. Albans.

There is good Anchoring to the westward of Portland for easterly Winds.

Lime.
Lime, Lime.
a small Peer called Lime-Cobb, where Vessels lie aground at Low Water. This
Place lies six or seven Leagues to the westward of Portland.

Exmouth-Bar.
Exmouth-Bar Exmouth.
lies fifteen Leagues to the westward of Portland, and three or four Leagues
to the northward of Torbay; the going into this Place is very narrow, having
Rocks on the east side, and Sand on the west side. At Low Water there is but
six and seven foot on the Bar; but at High Water sixteen and eighteen foot
water. Here are always Pilots ready to come off; and I advise no man to venture
into that Place without a Pilot. Being over the Bar, there is a Place called
Star-Cross, Star Cross.
where Ships commonly ride afloat in ten and twelve foot at Low Water. But such
Ships as go up to the Town of Topsham Topsham.
lie aground at Low Water, from whence their Goods is carried up in Lighters
through Sluices to the City of Exon. Exon.


Tinmouth.
Tinmouth Tinmouth.
lies between Torbay and Exmouth, and is a Tyde-Haven where small Vessels use;
and had formerly a great Trade to Newfoundland.

Torbay.
Torbay Torbay.
is a large Place, very good and clear ground to Anchor in, especially for
westerly and southerly Winds, provided they be not to the eastward of the
South. You may Anchor so far, as to bring the Berry south south east. Here are
two Peers in this Bay where small Vessels lie aground, Brixham on the south
side, and Tarkey on the north side. Here the Royal Navy rides in safety.

Dartmouth.
Dartmouth Dartmouth.
lies two Leagues to the westward of the Berry or Torbay; the going in is very
narrow between two high Lands; in the narrow it is but just a Cables length
over. On the west side is a Castle, and on the east side a Block-house. The
going in and out at this Place is very dangerous, except the Wind blow right
in, which are southerly Winds: for if the winds be either easterly or westerly,
then the high Lands which lie off each side, cause Overflows and Calms,
sometimes blowing in, and presently right out again, which hinders a Ship in
turning in and out, by putting them astays unawares. There are always Boats
ready to come off, which are good Boats to row, and are called Two-boats, and
are very serviceable in towing ships in and out, and to tow them a-stays;
without which Boats it is very dangerous going in and out. The northerly Winds
blow right out, and the southerly Winds right in; but the easterly and westerly
Winds blow with Flaws and Calms in and out. Being in, it is a most excellent
good Harbor, and can contain the Navy Royal.

There is good Anchoring without the Harbors mouth in the Road, called
Dartmouth-Range. Dartmouth Range.


From Darmouth to the Start Start.
there is a Bay, and the shore bold, only there lies a small Rock half a mile
or more off of the Start. The Start is a low ragged Point rising from the Sea
high into the Land.

From the Start to the Praul Praul.
the Course is west north west, about a little League; and from the Praul to
the Boulthead west north west, two miles. Between these two Heads is the going
into Salcomb, Salcomb.
which is a Bar-Harbour, on which there is nine foot at Low Water, and four
Fathom at High Water, and more. Being in, there is very good Anchoring in the
Bagg at three, four, and five Fathom water at Low Water. The Boulthead is very
high Land. The Entrance into Salcomb is very narrow between the Old Castle and
the Black Stone, being not above three quarters of a Cables length over, as you
may see in the Chart, Number 6. The Block Stone shows at Low Water, or the
last quarter Ebb. It flows here at Full and Change at six of the Clock.

Plymouth.
Plymouth Pl^mouth.
lies between the Start and Ramhead, where is a large Sound, called Plymouth
Sound, Plymouth Sound.
and lies a mile to the eastward of the Ramhead. Here is a sunk Rock in the
Sound, called the Shovel, where is but sixteen foot water at Low Water, as you
may see in the Chart of Plymouth, Number 16. the west side of it is the best
sailing in. The common Mark Marks to Anchor in the Sound.
for to Anchor in the best Ground in the Sound, is to bring Mount Edgcom-house
just open, and Withy-hedge right up and down, as you may see in the Chart on
the east side. There lies another Rock near the Shagstone, called the
Tinkers-shears or Swiftsure, and has seventeen foot at Low Water.

Catwater.
Catwater Catwater.
is a good Place, where Ships ride that are bound to the westward; going in,
there lies a Buoy against Mount Batten; you Sail in close by the west side of
the Buoy: Being in, you must haul out a good Anchor well over to Mount Batten
side; for want of so doing many Ships have drove ashore on Catdown side. There
is a Place within the Citadel and Barbigan, called Sutton Pool, Sutton-Pool.
where Ships lie aground on soft Oaze at Low Water, by the Keys side before the
Town of Plymouth.

Ham-Oaze.
Ham-Oaze. Ham-Oaze.
is a Place where Ships ride that are bound to the eastward. To Sail into
Ham-Oaze, you must give the Island a great birth, keeping in the fair way
between the Island and Mount Batten, till you have opened Mount Edgcomb within
the Island; then stand away with Mount Edgcomb between the Island and the Main,
giving a birth to German-Rock, which lies on the Starboard side going into the
Narrow. You must have a care that you do not go in here when the Tide of Ebb is
made strong out, for it will set your Ship ashore on Mount Edgcomb side. There
lies a Ledge off from Passage-Point going into Ham-Oaze, of which you must
have a care: being in, you may Anchor where you please. Just above
Froward-Point is a most excellent Dock and Yard, Kings-Dock.
built for the use of the Navy. Ships may Anchor between the Island and the main
Close under the Island. Yalme-water Yalme-water.
is a place where is two and three Fathom water at Low Water, but very seldom
made use of; it flows here at Full and Change east by north.

Eddy-stone.
The Eddy-stone Eddy-stone
lies south south west from Plymouth-Sound; the north west part of it is above
water (at a high Spring-tyde) about six or seven foot high; the north west side
is bold and steep, but the south south east part of it is foul about half a
mile at Low Water; there are several Rocks show themselves above water. This
Rock lies from the Start west a little southerly, and from Ram-head south by
west. A little westerly, about three Leagues or rather more from Ram-head, you
have twenty Fathom water close by Ram-head; and between the Head and the
Eddy-stone thirty five and thirty six Fathom water; and in the Stream of the
Eddy-stone forty Fathom. Keep without forty Fathom water, and you cannot come
foul of the Eddy-stone. It is High Water here at the Stone when it is
High Water at Plymouth; from the Start to the Lizard in the Offing, it flows
half Tide, Half-tyde
that is, south east by east: It is half Flood at Plymouth before the Flood
gets to the eastward in the Offing.

Loo.
East and West-Loo Loo.
are two small Towns, which lie three Leagues to the westward of Ram-head; you
may know the Place by a high Island that lies a little to the westward of the
going in to the Harbor, which is a Bar, where are many small Vessels and
Fisher-boats, which lie dry at Low Water: you have at High Water commonly ten
foot going in; you may Anchor before the Town in a wild Road.

Directions for Sailing into Fowey or Foy.
FOY lies four Leagues north east from the Deadman, and two miles to the
westward of a great Bay called St. Blazey-Bay, Predmouth-Point being the west
side of the Bay. There lies a Ledge of Rocks south east about half a mile from
the said Point, called the Canneys, and show themselves above water at
half-Tyde: there is but seven and eight foot water within them at Low Water.
From these Rocks to the going into Foy the shore is bold. Keep the Deadman
without the Winhead-Rock, and it will carry you clear off the Canneys.

Foy.
Foy Foy.
may be very easily known, lying in between two high Lands; on the west side
the going in, is an old Church and Castle, and on the east side the Ruins of an
old Church, as you may see by the making of it in the Draught of Foy, Number
17. The going in is a Cables length over from side to side, and no danger; when
you are in, you may Anchor before the Town, or run up above the Town. In the
time of the Dutch War, in the Year 1666. there was above sixty Sail of Virginia
Ships put into this Harbor. This Place lies north east and south west in and
out, which makes it a better Outlet to the westward then Plymouth or Falmouth.
And whereas it has been reported to be a Bar-Harbour, and that you cannot
enter till half Tide, I do assure you that there is no less than three Fathom
at Low Water at a Spring-tyde: here you may lie ashore to Wash, Tallow, stop
Leeks. The Spring-tides rise and fall sixteen and seventeen foot; and it is
High Water here at Full and Change half an hour past five. There is good
Anchoring in the Road without the Harbor, from five to ten Fathom water, but
without that Depth foul Ground.

Deadman.
The Deadman Deadman.
is a high Bluff-head, and lies south west four Leagues from Foy, and north
east by east seven Leagues from the Lizard, and three Leagues from Falmouth.
North east from the Deadman lies a big Rock above water, called the
Winhead-Rock, Winhead-Rock.
and lies three miles from the Deadman, and a mile from the nearest shore.
Small Vessels that are well acquainted Sail within this Rock.

St. Blazey-Bay.
Between the Deadman and Predmouth-Point, St. Blazey-Bay.
by the going into Foy, is a large deep sandy Bay, called St. Blazey-Bay. From
the Deadman to Falmouth the Coast is bold; and close by the shore, between the
Deadman and Falmouth, lies a Rock above water, called the Gull-Rock.

Directions for to Sail into Falmouth Harbor.
Falmouth Falmouth.
lies between the Lizard and the Deadman, and may very well be known by
Pendennis Castle, which stands on a Hill on the west side of the Harbors
mouth, as you may see by the making of it, in the Draught of Falmouth, Numb 18.
There is a Rock which lies in the Harbors mouth, and lies nearer the west
shore than the east shore; this Rock is called Falmouth-Rock, Falmouth-Rock.
and shows it self above water at half-Tyde; there is a Pole placed on it, to
show where it lies when it is under water. You may Sail in and out of either
side of this Rock; the east side is the best. Being past the Rock, and that you
would Anchor in Carreck-Road, Carreck-Road.
which is the Place where great Ships ride, you may Sail up in the fair way,
keeping your Lead; for there is a narrow deep Channel which has eighteen
Fathom water all the way up to Carreck-Road; you may borrow on St. Mawes side
in five and six Fathom water: the west side is shoal. Being past about St.
Mawes Castle, there lies off from the east shore a sandy Bank, and is very
steep too, and lies almost half Channel over from the east shore. The best
Anchoring in Carreck-Road is to bring St. Mawes-Castle east north east, laying
your eastward Anchor in eighteen Fathom, and your westward Anchor in four and
five Fathom, as you think convenient. But if you would Sail up in St.
Just-Pool, which is the best Place in all the Harbor, then keep near the west
shore, or Trefusis-Land, and then stand over into St. Just-Pool, between St.
Mawes Sand and the middle; you may run up by your Lead, borrowing on either
side no nearer then six Fathom water more or less, according to the bigness of
your Ship. Note that you are not so ready to Sail from St. Just, as you are
from Barreck-Road.

From St. Just-Pool you may Sail to Turner-ware Point, keeping close by the
east shore, where you will have two Fathom at Low Water, and five at
High Water. Being come up to the Point of Turner-ware, give the Point a
distance to avoid a Shoal that lies off from it: being above the said Point,
you many Anchor any where between Turner-ware and Mopass in great safety: but
such Vessels as go up to Truro Truro.
take the Tide, and there lie dry at Low Water. You may lay up a great Fleet of
great Ships between Turner-ware and Mopass.

If you will Anchor before the Town of Falmouth, To anchor before the Town of
Falmouth.
and that your Ship draws above twelve foot water, you must not go over the
Bar at Low Water (which lies between Trefuses-land and Penden^^s) but must
take the Tide with you, and Ancho^ before the Town. Against the Rock is three
Fathom at Low Water, and above and below it there is two Fathom and a half
(...) Low Water. Those Vessels that go up (...) Penr^^ must take the Tide,
where at Low Water they lie dry by the Keys side.

If any Ships have occasion to haul ashore to wash, tallow, stop leaks, or load
or unload Goods, Sir Peter Killigrew has been at very great Charges in
building a very good, A good place to load or unload.
convenient and safe Mole or Peer, where are Keys with Cranes, and good
Storehouses or Warehouses, to load or unload Goods, the Ships lying by the
Keys side close by the Storehouse. Many Virginia Ships have here unloaded
their Tobacco, and is very convenient for that purpose. The Tides rise and fall
here at a Spring Tide eighteen and tweenty foot, and twelve and fourteen at a
Nep-tyde. It flows here at Full and Change five hours and a half. There is a
small Place called St. Mawes-Road, St. Mawes Road.
where small Vessels ride before St. Mawes Town in two and three Fathom at
Low Water.

Manacles.
Manacles.
In sailing in and out at this Place, and that you come from the westward, or
are bound to the westward, you must have a care of the Manacle-Rocks which lie
south by west from the mouth of Falmouth Harbor two Leagues, some of them lie
above water, and some under water, and lie about three miles east away from the
Land into the Sea. You may Sail out of Falmouth to carry your self clear of
them south by east; but with the Tide of Ebb you must steer south south east,
and south east by south.

Helford.
Helford Helford.
lies between Falmouth and the Manacles, it is an open Sound and lies west
in: as you Sail in and out keep in the fair way, but more to the south shore
than the north, the north being foul Ground some distance off. Being in, you
may bring Maunan Church N. N. W. or N. W. and anchor in three Fathom and a half
at low water, and two Fathom, according as your Ship is big. A little to the
eastward of Helford Town lies a Bar, the best of it is by the south shore,
where is nine foot at low water, and the same depth before the Town, where
small Vessels lie. The going in to this Place may very well be known by Maunan
Church, which stands on a Hill on the north side, as you may see in the
Draught of Falmouth, etc. Right off from the Point of the Lizard lies a parcel
of steeped Rocks above water, Staggs Lizard.
called the Staggs; they lie off south from the shore into the Sea, about a
short mile off; they are steep too: you shall have twelve Fathom close to them.

Directions for Sailing into Mounts-Bay.
MOunts-Bay Mounts-Bay.
lies north west from the Lizard six Leagues, and three Leagues from the Lands
end. On the east side of Mounts-Bay is a high pecked Island, called the Mount,
on the top of which is an old Castle, and on the north west side of the Mount
is a small Peer, where small Vessels lie aground at low water, and lies from
the Main about a quarter of a mile: you go over dry at low water.

Eglandkey.
Eglandkey Eglandkey.
are a parcel of sunk Rocks, which lie south east about two or three miles from
the Mount, and about a mile from the west shore; there is not above eight or
nine foot on them at low water.

Pensance.
In the north west of this Bay is a small Pensance.
Peer, called Pensance, where small Vessels lie aground at low water.

Govers-Lake.
On the west side of Mounts-Bay, Govers-Lake.
over against the Mount, is a Bay called Govers-lake, and is a good Place to
Anchor in, because you bring the sunken Rocks of Carrenbase and Lowleigh south
east from you, which Rocks break off the Sea, on which there is but four and
five foot at low water; they lie about a quarter of a mile from the west Land,
and bear from St. Paul's Church north west by west, and west north west. To
Anchor in Govers-lake To anchor in Govers-Lake.
you must bring St. Paul's Church south west by south, and St. Clement's Island
south and south by east, and Pensance north, and you will have four and five
Fathom water at low water on a Spring tide. Keep St. Paul's Steeple above the
Land, (that is) that you keep sight of it, and then you will run without
Lowleigh and Carrenbase, that is, you will go to the eastward of them.

Mousehole.
There is a small Peer at Mousehole, Mousehole.
but now gone to decay.

You may Anchor in Mounts-Bay To anchor in Mounts Bay.
as you please, from twenty to seven Fathom water, as you may see in the
Draught, Number 27.

It flows here at Full and Change half an hour past four, that is, east north
east. The Spring-tydes rise eighteen and nineteen foot.

Rundle-stone.
From Mounts-Bay to the Lands-end the shore is bold; and a mile, or a mile and
a half due south from the Lands-end, lies a Rock called the Rundle-stone,
Rundle-stone.
and shows above water from half Ebb to half Flood, and then under water
there is twenty Fathom water between the Lands-end, and this Stone.

Gulf-Rock.
Gulf-Rock.
The Gulf is a small Rock, and always above water, and lies from the Lands-end
south west three Leagues; this Rock is steep too on every side, and is no
bigger then an ordinary Longboat: Keep the outward part of the Longships on
the Brizan Island, and that will carry you just on the Gulff. There is forty
Fathom water within a quarter of a mile of it.

Long-ships.
From the Lands-end to the Long-ships Long ships.
the Course is north west by north two Leagues. These Rocks are high above
water, and lie in length west two miles from the Land; it is all foul Ground
between them and the Land; yet I have been told that small Vessels that are
well acquainted will Sail within them. To the northward of them is a small Bay,
called White-sand-Bay, where small Vessels and Coasters anchor.

Brizan-Island.
From the Long-ships to the Brizan-Island Brizan-Island.
the Course is north north east, about five or six miles. This is a high small
round Island, and lies to the westward of Cape Cornwall a mile from the shore.
Them that are well acquainted Sail within the Island.

Seven-stones.
Seven-stones Seven-stones.
are a parcel of Rocks that lie from the Brizan and Cape Cornwall west half
south, about six or seven Leagues, and show themselves above water at half
Tide; they lie in length north west and south east about two miles, and half a
mile broad: they bear from St. Martin's- head at Scilly north east three
Leagues, and are very dangerous.

The first place of the beginning of the Flood in the West of England, is at
the Long ships, which Place divides the Stream, one setting to the northward,
and the other to the southward. At Full and Change the Flood begins east north
east, and sets nine hours to the northward: And from the Long-ships to the
Rundle-stone and Gulff, the Tide sets south east three hours, that is, it is
high water by the shore, before the Flood sets to the southward.

At the Seven-stones, The stream sets 9 hours to the northward and but 3 to
the southward.
and between Scilly and the Lands-end, the first of the Flood sets north
west, and ends in the north east nine hours; and the Stream begins to set
to the southward at high water, which is east north east ashore.

It is high water at the Gulff at Full and Change east north east, and the Tide
sets to the eastward till half Ebb ashore. And when it is half Ebb ashore at
Mounts-Bay, then the north stream begins in the north west, and ends in the
north east nine hours, till it is high water ashore.

Directions for Sailing in and out at the several Sounds at the Islands of
Scilly.
THese Islands lie to the westward of the Lands-end of Cornwall nine or ten
Leagues, and are many Islands and Rocks, you may see them six and seven Leagues
off the south west: Part of these Islands are very Rocky, but are bold. On the
southernmost big Island there stands a high Light-house, erected by the
Corporation of Trinity-House, Deptford-Strand, and is a most excellent good
Light, and may be seen six and seven Leagues off. Before this Light-House was
erected, there was not a Winter but there were some Ships cast away: but since
the erecting of it, there has not a Ship been lost, but by Ignorance; so that
Navigation is much obliged to the great care of Trinity-House in erecting this
Light.

St. Mary's Road.
How to Sail into St. Mary's Sound.
The principal Road is St. Mary's Road, and the best and most common Sound to go
in to it, is St. Mary's Sound, between St. Mary's Island and the Island Gugh.
Being to the eastward of the Island, you must run in at the south side of St.
Mary's; you may know St. Mary's Island by the Castle and two Wind-wills, which
stand on the south west part of the Island; run boldly in with the Mills,
keeping close by St. Mary's side, which is very bold. In the fair way between
Penmis Point and the Gugh, lies a Ledge of Rocks, called the Spanish Ledge,
Spanish-Ledge.
on which is but six foot at low water, therefore keep close to Penmis, and
then steer away for the Hughland, on which stand the Castle and Wind-mills,
giving them a fair birth to avoid the Woolpack, Woollpack.
which is a sunk Rock close by the south end of the Hugh. You may boldly Sail
within a quarter of a mile of the Hugh, from the Woolpack to the Stevern, and
that will carry you clear of Bartholomew-Ledge, Bartholomew-Ledge.
which has but six foot water at low water, and lies south south west from
the Stevern, about half a mile; between the Stevern and the Gugh, when you have
the Light-House south west by south, then are you abreast of it. There are two
leading Marks to avoid the Spanish Ledge and Bartholomew Ledge; keep the high
Land of Sampson on the Stevern, and that will carry you clear of the Spanish
Ledge; and being past it, then keep Castle Bryer, which is a high round Rock,
on the low-land of Sampson, and that will carry you clear of Bartholomew Ledge.
But if you are not sure of knowing these Marks, I advise you to your former
Directions of keeping a quarter of a mile from the Hugh, or if you keep sight
of the Vanes of the Wind mills, but not the Mills, that is, keep sight of half
the Vanes above the Land, and that will carry you between Bartholomew Ledge and
the Stevern. If you will fire a Gun, and make a Whaff, you will have a Pilot
come off. Being about the Stevern Rock, How to Anchor in St. Mary's Road.
steer in to the Road, and bring the Nut Rock west north west, or north west by
west about half a mile from the Rock, or a quarter of a mile; or bring the
Castle south south east, and anchor in five Fathom water at low water, or seven
or eight at high water. Here you ride well for all Winds but south west Winds,
which Winds bring in a great Sea. It flows here at Full and Change east north
east.

There is a small Peer Peer.
at the Hugh Town, where small Vessels lie aground at low water, and is a good
place to clean, wash, tallow, or stop leaks, etc.

Crow-Sound.
Crow-Sound Crow-Sound.
lies at the north end of St. Mary's Island, and is a Bar-Channel, where at
low water there is not above four foot water, therefore to Sail in here you
must take the Tide. To Sail into Crow-Sound, you must Sail close by the north
end of St. Mary's, off of which place lies a Sandy Point, and makes the Bar.
Being over the Bar, there lies a Rock a quarter of a mile from the shore,
called the Crow, and is above water at half Tide: between it and the shore is
no more then six or seven foot at low water. To Sail between this Rock and the
shore, you must keep within half a quarter of a mile of the shore, or a Cables
length. But I advise no Man to go into this Place without a Pilot, except well
acquainted. If you fire a Gun, and make a Whaff, you will have a Pilot come off.

Broad-Sound.
Broad-Sound Broad-Sound.
is a dangerous Sound for those that are not acquainted. There are two Channels
that lead you into this Sound, the south west Channel, and the north west
Channel. To Sail in at the south west Channel, which is the best of the two,
you must Sail in between the Bishop and the Crim, which are the two westernmost
Rocks of Scilly, and are a good height above the water, then steer in north
east by east, keeping the Islands of Great Gannelly and Great Gannick open and
shut of St. Mary's Island, as you may see in the Draught of the Islands of
Scilly, Number 20. and with this Mark you run in amongst many Rocks very
terrible to behold, and the Marks difficult to be known; therefore I advise
none to Sail in here without a Pilot from the Island.

Smith's-Sound.
Smith 's-Sound.
Smith's- Sound is likewise a dangerous Sound, and very narrow. This Sound
lies on the west side of the Island Agnis, on which stands the Light-House.
The Mark to Sail in is to bring Castle-Bryer, which is a high round Rock above
water on the Great Smith, as you may see in the Draught; and this Mark will
carry you in between St. Agnis, Melledgan, and a small Rock called Menpingo,
and being between the Island St. Agnis and the Island Annet, steer then between
Annet and the Great Smith Rock; being about the Rock, steer in for St. Mary's
Road, as before.

New Grimsbay.
New Grimsbay.
New Grimsbay is a Road, or rather a small Cove between the Island of Tresco
and the Island Bryer; there is no danger in going in. This Place is narrow, and
only fit for small Ships. You Anchor before the Castle in five, six, or seven
Fathom water. At low water it is dry between Tresco and Bryer.

Old Grimsbay.
Old Grimsbay.
Old Grimsbay is a Place where small Vessels may ride. There are two Channels
in and out, and very narrow, and not to be made use of except you have a Pilot.

It is high water at all the Islands of Scilly at Full and Change, half an hour
past four, that is, east north east. The Spring-tydes rise and fall 21 and 22
foot, and the Neaptydes fifteen and sixteen foot.

The Tide or South-stream sets out of St. Mary's Sound from half Flood to
half Ebb. The west stream comes into St. Mary's Sound from half Ebb to half
Flood, and runs out through Broad-Sound.

Note that about Scilly, and for six or seven Leagues to the westward of it,
and from the Islands to the Lands-end of England, the North-stream North Stream.
runs nine hours to the northward, and begins to set to the northward the
last quarter Ebb, beginning to set to the north west, and so altering till it
end in the north east, at which time it will be high water ashore at Scilly,
and then the South Tide comes and runs three hours to the southward.

You may see the Islands of Scilly from the south in sixty Fathom water,
shelly, sandy Ground, at which time you will be six or seven Leagues of; and
from the north in sixty Fathom, about six or seven Leagues of owsey sandy
Ground. Twenty one or twenty two Leagues west by north and west north west from
Scilly, is a Bank A Bank.
on which is but fifty, fifty one, and fifty two Fathom water, and between
Scilly and this Bank sixty Fathom.

Directions for Sailing up the Severn into Bristol.
St. Ives.
ST. Ives St. Ives.
is a Place where Vessels lie aground at low water, and is four Leagues to the
eastward of Cape Cornwall, in a sandy Bay.

Lundy.
Lundy Lundy.
is a high Island which lies in the Severn: at the east side of it is good
Anchoring in ten and twelve Fathom water for westerly Winds.

Barnstable.
Barnstable Barnstable
is a Bar-Haven, where good Ships may go in at half Flood. There are many Ships
belong to this Place: It is very good riding in the Bay without the Bar. This
Place is not yet surveyed by me, but I intend it God willing, etc.

Going up the Severn, you cannot miss the Isle of Lundy, it lying in the fair
way. The English Coast is bold and steep, but the Welsh Coast full of Sands and
Shoals; you may sail off either side of Lundy but stand no farther than 3
Leagues from Lundy toward the Welsh Coast to avoid the Sands: from Lundy steer
along the English Coast, till you come up as high as Purlock Purlock.
or Minehead, and then steer away north east between the Steep Holmes and the
Flat Holmes: the south Island next the English Coast is called the Steep Holme,
and is high round Land; the north Island is low Land, and is called the Flat
Holme; there is deep water between them; keep nearest the Flat Holme, which is
the steepest side, you may sail close to it without any danger. Being up with
the Flat Holmes, steer away to the northward till you bring the Flat Holme
south west, and keep it so for three or four miles, till you have a Mill that
stands on a Hill comes on the west end, a Land that shows like an Island;
or bring the Mill south east by south, then you are past the Point of the
English Ground; then steer away east north east on the side of the English
Ground, which are flat, and keep the Lead going. The Tides rise here at a
Spring seven and eight Fathom; so if you bring a Tide with you, you cannot come
to any damage; and steer amay to Poslet Point, which is steep too. A little
above that is King's Road, where you Anchor; but be sure when you Anchor at
high water, that you consider how much the Tides fall. Here you take a Pilot to
carry you into Hung-Road, and so up to Bristol.

Hung-Road.
Hung-Road.
Hung-Road is a Place where great Ships lie afloat by the shore side, and there
Careen, having no Dock. Lesser Ships go up to the City of Bristol.

Those Ships that have occasion to go above King-Road up the Severn, or up to
Chepstow, must take a Pilot. Note that the Tides are very strong in all the
Severn from Milford to King-Road. There are several Places on the Welsh and
English sides of the Severn, but being Places only for small Vessels. And such
as are acquainted, I advise such as have occasion to make use of them, to take
a Pilot. In going up and down the Severn, you must be very careful to keep the
Lead when you stand over to the Welsh Sands.

Minehead.
Minehead Minehead.
is a Stone Peer, where small Vessels lie aground: Here Ships that are not
acquainted, may have a Pilot for Bristol. You may Anchor in the Road before
Minehead.

The Draught of the Severn is not so well finished as was intended, by reason
the Ingraver lost the Original Copy.

If any Ship that may be bound up the English Channel, and should happen to
come up the Severn, and have not a Wind to get into the English Channel, then I
advise them to go for Milford. See the Directions for Milford.

Directions for Sailing into Milford-Haven.
Milford-Haven.
MIlford-Haven is very easily to be known, There are three Hills up in the
Country, which you see first at Sea in clear weather, and bear from the
Harbors mouth north east by north.
having the Island of Scoockam, Scanmore, and Gresholme on the west, and the
Isle of Lundy to the east. You may know the going in by an old Light-Tower
which stands on St. Anns Point: likewise you will see two old
Stone-Blockhouses or Forts which stand on each side on the Cliffs going in;
likewise Sheep-Island, which lies just at the Entrance on the east side, and
another Island within the Entrance, called Rat-Island, and is like the Mewstone
at Plymouth, but lesser. To the westward of which Island lies a sunk Rock
about a quarter of a mile of, on which there is sixteen and seventeen foot at
low water on Springtydes. A long mile within this Ratt-Isle lies a great Rock
above water, called the Stack, this Rock is bold. Angle-Road is the best place
to Anchor in, but in truth the whole Haven is very good and safe. Ships may
ride afloat as high as Langham-ferry and Coetcanles, in three, four, and five
Fathom water at low water. Small Ships may ride afloat in Crowpool within
Pennet-mouth, and may go up with the Tide to Pembroke Key, and there lie
aground at low water; small Ships go up to Landshipping-Key, where Sir Hugh
Owen has made all Conveniences for loading of Coals: small Ships likewise go
up to Haverford-west and Crosswell with the Tide. The Colliers that are bound
out commonly lie in Dale-Road. It flows here at Full and Change, east and
west nearest.

A farther Description of Milford-Haven.
Milford-Haven.
MIlford-Haven is certainly the best Harbor in the three Kingdoms, there being
no manner of danger in Sailing in or out of the Harbor, so that you need no
Pilots, and may turn in and out with safety with contrary Winds, taking the
Tide, as well by Night as by Day. When you are entered into the Harbor, you may
Anchor where you please, according as the Ship is in bigness: And if a Ship
come in without Cable and Anchor, she may run ashore on soft Owse, and there
lie with safety.

Here is most excellent Conveniences for hauling great and small Ships ashore,
to Grave, Wash, and Tallow, stop Leaks, etc. good places to Careen, good places
for making of dry Docks, Yards, Storehouses, Rope-walks, Victualling-Offices,
etc. Building and Repairing of Ships, here being good store of Timber, good
fresh Water, Wood and Coals, Provisions good and plenty.

The Spring-tydes rise six and thirty foot, and the Neep above six and twenty
foot, so that you may lay Ships ashore at any time.

But that which makes this Harbor more excellent and useful than any other,
is, that in an hours time you are in and out of the Harbor into the Sea, being
in a fair way between the Lands-end of England and Ireland, and lies in the
Mouth of the Severn, and are in eight or ten hours over on the Coast of
Ireland. You may get to the westward out of this Place much sooner then when
you came from Plymouth, Foy, or Falmouth.

Oliver Cromwell shipped off his Forces from this place for Ireland, and in time
of War kept a Squadron of Ships to Randezvous here; and Henry the Seventh
landed here. This Haven lies north north east nine and twenty Leagues from
Cape Cornwall. There lies about three Miles from the Havens Mouth a small
Rock, called the Crow, and shows at half-tyde; it lies about half a Mile
from Lonny-Point.

The Sea-shoar about Milford is about the height of the Land of Plymouth.

A Description of the Islands and Rocks which lie to the Westward of
Milford-Haven.
Schookham.
SCookham Scookham.
lies west north west from St. Ann's Point going into Milford a League and a
half. Scanmore lies north north west from Scookham about a League, and west
from St. Brid's-head, and is bigger then Scookham.

Gresholm.
Gresholm Gresholm.
is a high small Island or great Rock, and is green, and lies to the westward
of Scookham and Scaumore two short Leagues. There is a good Channel between
Gresholm and Scookham and Scaumore, and are all very bold and steep too.

Barrel.
Barrel Barrel.
is a small Rock, and shows at half-tyde, and bears from Gresholm west and
west by north about a short League, and are steep too.

The Hats.
The Hats Hats.
show at low water, and lies two Leagues to the westward of Gresholm, and are
steep too.

The Small.
The Small Small.
is a small Rock always above the water, about the bigness of a Longboat, and
lies to the westward of Gresholm two Leagues and a half, or three Leagues: The
west north west and north west end is foul and rocky a mile off, and is steepy
too. The Tides run very strong amongst these Islands and Rocks.

The Mascus.
The Mascus Mascus.
is said to be a sunk Rock, and lies from St. David's- Head west north west
three Leagues; but I never could hear of any Coaster or other that ever found
it.

There is a narrow Channel between Ramsey Island and St. David's, and is used by
none but small Coasters, and those that know it very well. The Tides run very
strong, which makes the water to breach and ripple, as though it were
shoal-water; and so it does between Gresholm, Scookham, and Scaumore.

Holyhead.
It flows at Full and Change at Holyhead Holyhead.
at ten of the Clock; the Spring-tydes rise and fall twenty foot, and the
Neep-tydes thirteen and fourteen foot. Between Holyhead and Dublin the Flood
and Ebb run north north east, and south south west, and flows south south
east.

Holyhead-Road.
Road-Harbour. Platters. Cubby, Platters.
Holyhead-Road lies to the eastward of Innis-Cubby-Island, to the northward of
which Island, about half a little Mile, lies some sunk Rocks which have but
three foot water at low water, called the Platters of Cubby. The Road is clear
Sand, the Harbor is dry at low water, where Ships lie on the Sand, but the
Wind out at north makes a Sea in the Harbor. The Packet Boats for Ireland use
this place.

Scarrys.
Scarry-Platters.
Between the Scarrys and Carren-Point lies sunk Rocks, and are called the
Platters of Scarry, and lie about a short half Mile from the Scarrys; therefore
keep near Carren-Point which is bold.

Cole-Rock.
Cole-Rock.
There lies a small sunk Rock east north east from the Scarrys about two Miles
and a half, and north by east from the West-Mouse a Mile, or a Mile and a half,
which has but six foot at low water, called the Cole-Rock. Holyhead is very
high Land, as you may see in the Chart, Number 27.

Isle of Man.
Isle of Man.
It flows here at Full and Change south east by south: The Spring-tydes rise
twenty foot.

Darby-Haven.
Darby-Haven.
Darby-Haven is a small Bay where Vessels ride affoat or lie aground.

Douglas-Harbour.
Douglas-Harbour Duglas-Harbour.
runs into a small fresh water River, where at high water is ten and twelve
foot water, and at low water lie dry.

Ramsey-Bay.
Ramsey-Bay Ramsey-Bay.
is a most excellent Road, having a Sand without which breaks off the Sea. In
this Bay is a small River where small Vessels run in at high water, and lie dry
at low water. There runs very strong Tides all round this Island, and in
some places ripple as though there were shoalwater, especially near Point of
Air. At this Island the north and south Tide meet; here is great plenty of Fish
of all sorts.

White-haven.
A little to the northward of St. Bees-head lies White-haven, White-haven.
being a good dry Peer, where great Ships take in Sea-coals and carry them to
Dublin in Ireland. This place belongs to Sir John Lowther.

North east from Great Orms-head, about a League off, lies a Bank north by
east and south by west about a Mile in length, whereon is not above thirteen
foot, being a narrow ridge; on the east side it shoaleth gradually, but the
west side is steep too.

Directions for Sailing into Beaumorris.
THere is a small high Island called Priestholme, on which is a ruined Chapel
with a Steeple; half way between this Island and the Main Point called Trwyndu,
is a Rock which shows at Half-tyde, called the Horse, which you must leave on
the Larboard side going in, keep in the middle of the Channel between the Horse
and Trwyndu-Point. There lies some Rocks from the north east part of
Trwyndu-Point, as you may see marked at A in the Chart, Number 26. The Tides
run in and out very strong; therefore the best going in or out is at high or
low water slack; the Ebb runs strong upon the Horse. After you are entered in
you may Anchor where you please between the Entrance and the Beaumorris. Note
that the Depths are set down in Fathoms at low water. You may sail in to the
southward of Priestholme between it and Levan-Sands, with a Tide of Flood, keep
nearest to Levan-Sands to avoid the Rocks that lie at the south west end of the
Island. The water rises and falls three and twenty and four and twenty foot
at a Spring-tyde. It flows here at Full and Change between the south south
east and south east by south 10h-30.

Directions for Sailing over Carnarvan-Bar.
Carnarvan-Bar.
CArnarvan-Bar has not above seven, eight and nine foot at low water, but then
the Tides rise four and twenty foot. The Mark of the Bar is Tuttle-hill, and a
Tower on the north end of Carnarvan Town, and a little House on the
Larboard-side going in, which stands on a low sandy Point; bring these three
in one, or any two of them, and this will carry you into the Ferry, and
afterward Anchor as you please, as you may see in the Draught. There are but
few Vessels make use of this Bar; only such as go to Carnarvan to load Corn,
etc. There are some Ships that have lain wind-bound at Beaumorris bound for
Virginia, and not daring to turn out at Priestholme, have gone through the
Swilly, and so over Carnarvan-Bar; but the Rocks at the Swilly are dangerous,
the Passage narrow, and the Tides very strong; and be sure to pass the Swilly
at a slack Tide. It flows on Carnarvan-Bar at Full and Change south east; and
the Tides rise at a Spring four and twenty foot. Small Ships may sail up to
Conaway with a Pilot at high-tyde.

Directions for Sailing over Chester-Bar.
Chester-Bar.
CHester-Bar lies from Ormeshead five Leagues and a half east half north; keep
Great Ormeshead and Little Ormes-head just open of each other, as in the Chart,
Number 30. and so run in till you bring the three Hills south, then are you on
the shoalest of the Bar, and about two little Miles from the shore; then you
will presently have deeper water, and may keep along by the Main in what depth
you please, keeping Hailsand without you, which always shows it self: this
Sand is always above water, except an hour or two at high water on a
Spring-tyde, and then it shows by a rippling. You may sail up to Dortpool or
Nesson or Wild-Road or Highlake this way. You will find nine foot water at
low water on a Spring-tyde on Chester-Bar; there are some Patches on the Bar
which alter, but the Tides rising so high as five Fathom at a Spring, and three
and a half at a Neep, there is no danger. It flows here at full and Change
between the south south east, and south by east.

If you would sail up to Dort-Pool and Nesson, you must have a care of the out
Scar-Rocks which show at low water, therefore keep over of the Bugg-side; the
thwart Mark of this Out-Scar is Grange-Mill on Kerby-Church; and when you have
Kerby-hall open of a Hill then are you past them. You may Anchor at Dort-Pool
in three Fathom water

Point of Air.
Three Miles within this Bar lies a low sandy Point, called Point of Air,
Point of Air.
which you leave on the Starboard-side going in. And three Miles from this
place is Moyston Mark within Wild-Road, where Vessels lade Coals, being half a
Mile from High-water-mark; and those Ships that cannot take the ground, then
such Ships may take in their Loading in Wild-Road, and their ride with safety:
Ships may sail from Moyston Mark at a Neep-tyde. This place does not only
supply the Neighboring places with Coals, but the Kingdom of Ireland.

Directions to sail into Highlake and Liverpool.
BEing on the back of the Hylesand, bring the Mill and Wood one on the other,
as in the Chart, Number 30. and run in keeping close along Hylesand, and so
into Highlake, and Anchor. Highlake and Liverpool.
Here the great Ships that belong to Liverpool put out part of their Lading
till the Ships are light enough to sail over the Flats to Liverpool. K William
and the English Army Embarked at this place for Ireland.
There is a Channel near Formby to go into Liverpool, where is three Fathom at
low water on the Bar; but this place is not Buoyed nor Bekon'd, and so not
known: the Ships lie aground before the Town of Liverpool; it is bad riding
afloat before the Town, by reason of the strong Tides that run here; therefore
Ships that ride afloat, ride up at the Sleyne where is less tide.

Pillafoodra.
Pillafoodra.
Pillafoodra is a place where good Ships may go in, but the going in being
dangerous to those that are not acquainted, I leave those that have occasion to
go there to take a Pilot, which they may have at Liverpool. This place lies
out of the way of trade, and so is but little frequented, and not as yet
surveyed by me.

Directions for coming into the Channel between England and France, called the
English Channel.
THE Mariner having left the vast Ocean, and brought his Ship into Soundings
near the Land, amongst Tides or Streams, his Art now must be laid aside, and
Pilottage taken in hand, the nearer the Land, the greater the danger, therefore
your care ought to be the more.

To be mindful of Tides and Courses.
Being in Tydes-ways, narrow Channels, Rocks and Sands, I hope the ingenious
Mariner will not take it amiss, in recommending this to your care, your Tides,
Courses, Soundings, and the goodness of your Compasses.

To be mindful of your Compasses, and how to order them.
That you have a great care that no Iron be near the Compass, and that after
long Voyages that the Compasses have been much used, they will grow dull, and
yet the virtue of the Magnet holding good; but that which causes the dullness,
and the Compass being not quick in traversing, is caused by the Pin's point (on
which the Compass stands) being worn blunt, therefore sharpen it with a Hone or
fine Whet-stone with care and exactness. And this take for a certain Rule, that
the light Card-Compasses traverse best in fair weather, and the heavy
Card-Compass best in foul weather. I mean by the heavy Card-Compass that which
is stiffned with Muscovy Glass, and a Plate of Steel which is touched by the
Loadstone, instead of Steel-wyre, which is in the light ones. The heavy
Card-Compasses are in brass Boxes, which are made to open to take the Card out
at any time.

Tides, with their S^^^^^gs.
The next thing that I recommend to your care, is the setting of the Tides,
which alters the course to the loss of many Ships, especially when you Sail
close upon a Wind, then if the Tide take you on the Weatherbough, you shall
fall much to Leeward of your Expectation; and if the Tide take you on the
Leebough, ir carries you to windward of your Expectation.

Coming out of the Ocean into the Soundings, Depth of Water.
which you may know by the water being discolored, your best help is a good
Observation of the Latitude. The next Consideration is your Depth of Water,
with the color and quality of the Ground. Color and Quality of the Ground.
But as for the color and quality of the Ground, I think it very uncertain, as
I found by Experience lying becalmed in the Soundings, when I very often heaved
the Lead, and did find one cast so different from another in quality, and still
in the same depth of water, that I would not have any to trust to it; only this
is generally observed, That the Ground to the southward on the French Coast is
more gruffer, that is, the Sand is bigger or more gravelly, bigger shells and
more variety, with a sort of sharp small things called Needles. West south west
from Vshant eight or ten Leagues, you will have seventy four and seventy five
Fathom water, and four and five Leagues west from Vshant sixty eight and
seventy Fathom, west north west from Vshant eight or ten Leagues you will have
seventy and seventy one Fathom, and four, five, or six Leagues of sixty six and
sixty five Fathom.

North west from Vshant eight or ten Leagues seventy Fathom, and five Leagues
north west sixty four and sixty five Fathom; North north west from Vshant about
seven, eight, or ten Leagues, from sixty five to sixty eight Fathom, and four
Leagues north north west sixty Fathom. North from Vshant eight or ten Leagues,
sixty four and sixty five; and from three Leagues to five Leagues north you
will have sixty Fathom. In these Depths, Bearings, and Distances the Ground is
white things like Hakes-teeth, and the Ground ruffer then on the English Coast.
But, as I said before, that the quality of the Ground being so uncertain, I
would not have any Persons to give any trust to it.

But on the Coast of England the Ground is finer in general; for five, six, and
seven Leagues to the southward of Scilly, you will have from fifty to sixty
Fathom water fine white Sand, with some red and black amongst it, and some
times some small shells or pieces of shells, and at other times white Sand only.

The Islands of Scilly how far seen.
Keep in the Latitude of forty nine degrees thirty minutes, or forty nine
degrees thirty five minutes, or forty nine degrees forty minutes, till you have
from sixty to fifty five Fathom water, more or less, as the Tides may be high;
for at Scilly and thereabouts the Tide rises above three Fathom at Full and
Change. I have seen the Lighthouse of Scilly in the Latitude of forty nine
degrees thirty five minutes, at which time the Light-house boar north by east
about six or seven Leagues off, and at the same time had fifty eight Fathom
water, fine Sand with black speckles, and pieces of shells. To the westward of
Scilly the Ground is fine gray and white Sand, mingled with small black Sand
and pieces of shells, and sometimes without black Sand and pieces of shells.

But if you are to the northward of Scilly then your Ground will be white Sand,
and owsey Sand: when the Islands of Scilly bear south about five or six
Leagues, you will have fifty three to fifty seven Fathom water. You may see the
Light of Scilly six and seven Leagues in the Night when it is clear weather.

A stream setting nine hours to the northward.
Many Ships have fell to the northward (into the Welsh Channel or the Severn)
contrary to their expectation; the cause of which is by a Stream setting nine
hours from the north west to the north east, and but three hours to the
southward: this Stream begins to set to the north west when it is half Ebb at
Scilly, and ends in the north east when it is high water. This Stream
begins six or seven Leagues to the westward of Scilly, and four or five
Leagues to to the southward of Scilly, and so between Scilly and the Lizard.

Being to the southward of Scilly about the Latitude of forty nine degrees
thirty minutes, or forty nine degrees thirty five minutes, or forty nine
degrees forty minutes, and having from sixty to fifty five Fathom water, you
may keep away east in that Latitude, according as you have wind or weather, and
in that depth. But when you have sailed about fifteen or twenty Leagues from
sixty to fifty five or fifty two Fathom, then if the weather be clear you may
steer northerly for to make the Land. The Lizard Lizard.
North by east, about nine leagues you will have fifty five, fifty six, and
fifty seven Fathom water, then will you have pieces of shells of several
colors, thin small slatty stones, and no sand; meeting with this Ground you
may stand in to the northward into fifty Fathom. Being past the Lizard, if you
keep without forty Fathom water, you need not fear the Eddy-stone: Eddy-stone
you will have forty Fathom in the stream of the Eddy-stone; if you keep in
thirty five Fathom then are you within the Eddy-stone. There is thirty five
Fathom between the Ramhead and the Eddy-stone.

For the knowing of the Land when you see it, I refer you to the several
makings of the Land in the sheet, Number 39. And the making of some Lands are
put down in the Draughts of the Harbors; as the making of the Land of
Dartmouth is put into the Draught of Dartmouth; Foy and Falmouth the like, etc.

Being sure of your being past the Lizard, be sure to keep off from the French
shore, for fear of the Rocks called the Gaskets, Gaskets.
for when you are near them, the Tide of Flood sets in amongst the Islands of
Garnsey and Jersey: you will have deeper water near these Rocks, and gruffer
Ground then on the English Coast. You may from the Start to Portland and the
Wight, keep between forty and thirty Fathom water, or between thirty five and
thirty, according as you go up the Channel.

When you come near the Isle of Wight Isle of Wight.
have a care of the Indraught that sets strong both into the Needles and St.
Hellens, as you may see in the Directions for sailing into the Isle of Wight,
which has drawn many Ships into Freshwater-Bay, Freshwater-Bay.
and others on the Owers, which lie to the eastward of the Isle of Wight, as
you may see in the Description of the Owers and East-Burrough-Heads; Owers and
East-Burrough-heads.
for the last half-flood, or the last quarter-flood, and all the Ebb, sets
into St. Hellens, which has caused many Ships to run aground on the Owers,
which lie to the eastward of the Isle of Wight. The Description of which, and
how to avoid them, and how to sail from the Isle of Wight into the Downs, you
may see in the Directions from the Downs to the Isle of Wight; only I would
have you to observe, that if you stand over on the French Coast, that there is
a Bank in the Fair-way between Dunginness and Bullin-Bay, which has but
thirteen Fathom on it, which in the Night may cause you to think that you are
nearer the shore than you are.

Courses and Distances from Place to Place along the Coast of England from
Dover to the Lands-end to the Islands of Scilly, etc.
COurses and Distances from place to place are better demonstrated in the Mapps
than this way; but at the instigation of some Seamen I have done this.

From Dover to Dunginness south west half west, 6 leagues. Dunginness.
From Dunginness to Rye-Road west 2 leagues. From Dunginness to Hastings west 5
leagues. From Dunginness to Pemsey west by south 7 leagues. From Dunginness to
Beachy west south west 8 leagues. Beachy.
From Beachy to New Haven west 3 leagues. From Beachy to Shoram west northerly 6
leagues. From Beachy to the East-barrow-head and Owers west south west 15
leagues. From Beachy to Dunnose on the Isle of Wight Wight.
west by south, but to keep clear of the East-burrough-head and Owers west
south west 21 leagues. From Dunnose Dunnose.
to the Needles west north west 5 leagues. From Dunnose to Peverel-Point west 8
leagues. From Dunnose to Portland west by south 16 leagues. From Peverel-Point
to Portland west by south 7 leagues. Portland.
From Portland to Lime west north west half north 7 leagues. From Portland to
Exmouth-Bar west by north 12 leagues. From Portland to Torbay west 14 leagues.
From Portland to the Berry west by south 14 leagues. From Portland to Dartmouth
west by south 16 leagues. From Portland to the Start west by south half south
18 leagues. From the Start to the Bolt west north west 2 leagues. From the
Start to the Ramhead west north west 8 leagues. From the Start to
Plymouth-Sound west north west half north 7 leagues. From the Bolt to
Plymouth-Sound west north west half north 5 leagues. From the Start to the
Eddy-stone west northerly 7 or 8 leagues. From the Start to Foy west by north
14 or 15 leagues. From the Start to the Deadman west half north 16 leagues.
From the Start to Falmouth west 19 leagues. From the Start to the Lizard west
half south 23 leagues. From Plymouth-Sound to the Eddy-stone south south west 4
leagues. From the Ramhead to the Eddy-stone south by west 4 leagues. From the
Ramhead to the Loo west by north 4 leagues. From the Ramhead to Foy west 7
leagues. From Foy to the Deadman south west 3 leagues. From the Deadman to
Falmouth west south west half south 3 leagues. From Falmouth to Helford west
south west 1 leagues. From Falmouth to the Manacles south 2 leagues. From the
Manacles to the Lizard south west 3 leagues. From the Lizard to the Eddy-stone
west by south 14 leagues. From the Lizard to the Deadman north east by east 7
leagues. From the Lizard to Foy north east by east 11 leagues. From the Lizard
to Mounts-Bay north west by north 6 leagues. From the Lizard to the Lands-end
west north west 8 leagues. From the Lizard to the Rundle-stone west north west
8 leagues. From the Lizard to the Gulf west 9 leagues. From the Lizard to the
Seven-stones west north west 15 leagues. From the Lizard to the south of Scilly
west half north 16 leagues. From the Lizard to the north of Scilly west by
north 16 leagues. From the Lands-end to Mounts-Bay east north east 3 leagues.
From the Lands-end to the Rundle-stone south 1 M. leagues. From the Lands-end
to the Gulf south west 3 leagues. From the Lands-end to the Seven-stones west
by north half north 7 leagues. From the Lands-end to the south of Scilly west
by south 9 leagues. From the Lands-end to the north of Scilly west 9 leagues.
From the Lands-end to the Long ships north west by west 2 leagues. From the
Longships to the Brizan north by east 3 leagues. From the Brizan to the Gulf
south by west 7 leagues. From the Brizan to the Seven-stones west by south 6
leagues. From the Brizan to the south of Scilly south west by west 10 leagues.
From the Brizan to the north of Scilly west south west 9 leagues. From the
Seven-stones to the south of Scilly south west by south 5 leagues. From the
Seven-stones to the north of Scilly west south west 8 leagues. From the
Seven-stones to the Gulf south east 7 leagues. From the Seven-stones to the
Rundle-stone east by south half south 7 leagues. From the Seven-stones to the
Longships east 5 leagues.
Courses and Distances from places between England and France in the Channel,
etc.
FRom the South Foreland to Calis south east 8 Leagues. From the South Foreland
to Deep south 28 Leagues. From the South Foreland to Seynhead south south west
half south 37 Leagues. From the South Foreland to Cape Barfleur south west 43
Leagues. From the South Foreland to the Cape de Hague south west by west 49
Leagues. From the South Foreland to the Gaskets west south west half south 54
Leagues. From Dunnose to Calis east by north 40 Leagues. From Dunnose to Deep
east by south half south 38 Leagues. From Dunnose to Seynhead south east 33
Leagues. From Dunnose to Lehogue south south east 22 Leagues. From Dunnose to
Cape Barfleur south by east 18 Leagues. From Dunnose to Cape de Hague south by
west half west 18 Leagues. From Dunnose to the Gaskets south west 19 Leagues.
From Dunnose to Vshant south west by west 64 Leagues. From Portland to Deep
east by south 52 Leagues. From Portland to Seynhead east south east easterly 45
Leagues. From Portland to Cape Barfleur south east easterly 26 Leagues. From
Portland to Cape de Hague south east half south 20 Leagues. From Portland to
the Gaskets south by east 16 Leagues. From Portland to Vshant south west 50
Leagues. From the Start to Cape Barfleur east south east easterly 20 Leagues.
From the Start to the Gaskets east south east 21 Leagues. From the Start to
Vshant south west by south 36 Leagues. From the Lizard to the Gaskets east by
south easterly 22 Leagues. From the Lizard to Vshant south 31 Leagues.
Courses and Distances from Cape Cornwall and the Islands of Scilly to Bristol,
Wales and Ireland.
FRom the Islands of Scilly to Cape Clear in Ireland north north east easterly
35 Leagues. From Scilly to Kinsale north east 40 Leagues. From Scilly to the
Tusker Rock north easterly 39 Leagues. From Scilly to the Small's Rocks north
by east easterly 35 Leagues. From Scilly to Milford-Haven north north east half
easterly 37 Leagues. From Scilly to Lundy north east 30 Leagues. From Cape
Cornwall to Cape Clear west by north half west 51 Leagues. From Cape Cornwall to
Kinsale north west by west 43 Leagues. From Cape Cornwall to the Tusker Rock
north west by west northerly 34 Leagues. From Cape Cornwall to the Small's Rocks
north half east 29 Leagues. From Cape Cornwall to Milford-Haven north north east
30 Leagues. From Cape Cornwall to Lundy north east 24 Leagues. From Cape Cornwall
to St. Ives east by north 5 Leagues. From Cape Cornwall to Padstow north east by
east 14 Leagues. From Cape Cornwall to Hartle Point north east half east 23
Leagues. From Cape Cornwall to Mort Point north east half east 26 Leagues. From
Lundy to the Smalls Rocks north west 15 Leagues. From Lundy to Milford north
north west westerly 10 Leagues. From Lundy to Caldy north 7 Leagues. From Lundy
to Barnstable-Bar south east by east 5 Leagues. From Lundy to Minehead east by
south 14 Leagues. From Lundy to the Flat-Holmes east by north half north 18
Leagues. From the Flat-Holmes to the Posset Point east north east 5 Leagues.
From the Flat-Holmes to King-Road east north east 5 Leagues. From King-Road to
Hung-Road 1 Leagues. From Hung-Road to Bristol by water 2 Leagues. From
Milford-Haven to Cape Clear west by south 60 Leagues. From Milford-Haven to
Kinsale west 46 Leagues. From Milford-Haven to the Tusker west north west 18
Leagues. From Milford-Haven to the Smalls Rocks west by north 7 Leagues. From
Milford to Gresholm west by north 4 Leagues. From Gresholm to the Bishop and
Clerks which lie off of St. David's-head north north east 3 Leagues. From the
Bishop and Clerks to the Isle of Barzey north by east half east 19 Leagues.
From Barzey to Holyhead north by east northerly 12 Leagues. From Holyhead to
the Tusker south west 32 Leagues. From Holyhead to the Head of Hoath at
Dublin-Bay west 19 Leagues. From Holyhead to the south west end of the Isle of
Man north 15 Leagues. From Holyhead to the Skerreys north east by north 2
Leagues. From the Skerreys to Ormeshead east half south 8 Leagues. From
Ormeshead to Chester-Bar east 6 Leagues. From Ormeshead to Highlake east 10
Leagues. From Highlake to Chester 7 Leagues. From Highlake to Liverpool 4
Leagues. From Highlake to the south west end of Man west north west half west
23 Leagues. From Highlake to the north east end of Man north west by north 25
Leagues. From the north east end of Man to the Mull of Galloway in Scotland
north west westerly 14 Leagues. From the north east end of Man to Dublin south
west by west 31 Leagues. From the north east end of Man to Carlingford west by
south half south 27 Leagues. From the north east end of Man to Copland Islands
going into Carrekfergus west north west 19 Leagues. From Copland Island to
Carreck-fergus west north west 4 Leagues. From Carrek-fergus to Belfast south
west 3 Leagues.
A TYDE-TABLE, SHOWING The Time of High Water and Full-Sea WHEN The Moon is at
Full and Change: How the Tide of Flood and Tides of Ebb Sets, and how many
Feet the Spring-Tydes Rise and Fall, beginning at the Downs or Deal, and so
Continuing away to the Westward.
H. M. F. DEal-Beach south east 09 00 16 Downs south south east half Tide and
half quarter Tide 10 30 16 Dover south south east 10 30 16 Rye-Harbour south
and by east and south south east 10 30 24 Beachy-head and Fair-Lee south south
east 10 30 20 St. Hellens by the shore south by east 11 15 16

Note that it is half flood, and sometimes more then half flood, before the
Tide comes into St. Hellens and the Spithead.

From Dover to Dunginness the Flood sets north east by east, and the Ebb south
west by west.

From Dunginness to Beachy the Flood east north east and the Ebb west south
west.

From Beachy to the Isle of Wight the Flood set east by north, and the Ebb west
by north. The Tide of Flood from the Ness, Beachy and the Isle of Wight,
sets one hour and half, and two hours after it is high water by the shore.

H. M. F. Portsmouth-Harbour south 12 00 16 Hampton south 12 00 15 Cowes south
by east 11 15 16 Needles south east by south 9 15 14 Pool south east 9 00 8
Portland-Road and Weymouth east and west 6 00 6 Exmouth-Bar east by north and
east 5 30 1^ Torbay east and by north 5 15 17 Dartmouth east by north 5 15 18
Plymouth Salcom east by north 5 15 16 Eddy-stone east by north 5 15 18 Foy and
Falmouth east by north 5 15 18 Helford and the Lizard east by north 5 15 18

From the Isle of Wight to the Start, and from the Start to the Lizards, the
Tides set as the Lands lie Channel Course; only take notice that by the shore
in Bays the Tides round them. But at St. Hellens and the Needles you have a
great Indraught, as you may see by the Directions for sailing into the Wight,
and the sailing up the Channel from the Isle of Wight in the Offin to the Start
and the Lizard; the Tides of Flood run three hours to the eastward after it is
high water ashore; that is, it begins to set to the eastward at half Flood
ashore, and runs six hours, till half Ebb ashore, and the Ebb to the contrary.

H. M. F. Mounts-Bay, Pensance, east north east and west south west 4 30 19
Scilly east north east and west south west 4 30 20

Note that the Stream between the Lands-end and Scilly sets nine hours to
the northward, and but three to the southward; when it is half Ebb ashore in
Mounts-Bay, then the north Stream begins in the north west, and runs nine
hours till it ends in the north east.

H. M. F. At St. Ives east by north and west by south 5 15 24 Padstow and
Barnstable-Bar east and west 6 00 24 Isle of Lundy east and west 6 00 30
Minehead east and west 6 00 36 King-Road and Hung-Road east by south and west
by north 6 45 48 Milford-Haven east and west 6 00 36 Caldy and Swansey east and
west 6 00 36

Between Lundy and the Holmes the Flood sets east north east, and the Ebb
west south west.

From the Holmes to King-Road the Flood runs north east by east, and the Ebb
south west by west.

Note that the Tide of Flood runs up at King-Road an hour after it is
high water.

H. M. F. Holyhead south south east and south east by south 10 00 21
Carnarvan-Bar south east 9 00 24 Beaumorris south south east and south east by
south 10 30 24 Chester-Bar south and by east and south south east 10 45 30
Highlake south and by east and south south east 11 15 00 Liveroool south and
south by east 11 30 30 Isle of Man south east by south 9 45 21 White-haven
south east by south 9 45 00 Carrick-fergus south by east 10 38 8 Carlingford
south east 9 00 14 Dublin-Bay south east by east 9 45 12 Kinsale east by north.
5 15 00

The Flood or North stream comes in between Ireland and Scotland, and there it
is high water at south south east Moon. At the Isle of Man the north and south
flood meet each other. Between Holyhead and Dublin-Bay it flows south south
east; the Flood sets south south east, and the Ebb north north west.

This is all that is Surveyed of the Coasts of England as yet. I have added
some Harbors that are most useful in Ireland, being a Third Part of Great
Britains Coasting Pilot.

Note that the Letters H and M signify Hours and Minutes, and the Letter F.
signifies Feet. As for Example; At Chester-Bar it is High Water at Ten of the
Clock, and forty five Minutes, and the Tides Rise and Fall Thirty Foot at a
Spring Tide.

The End of the First Part.
chart of the English and Bristol channels and adjacent coasts To the Right
Honorable Admiral Killegrew This Chart of the Channel is Humbly Dedicated
and Presented by Capt G Collins
view of naval battle royal blazon or coat of arms chart of the Camber near Rye
and Winchelsea, East Sussex To the Honble Robert Austen Esquire; One of the Ld:
Commiss.^^ for Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of England etc. This
Mapp is most humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt Greenvile Collins


chart of the Solent (Isle of Wight, Southampton, Portsmouth To the Rt. Hon.ble
EDWARD RUSSELL ADMIRAL OF THEIR MATIES. FLEET One of their Maties. most
Honble. Privy Council and Treasurer of ye Navy etc This is most humbly
dedicated and presented by Capt. Greenvile Collins.

Needles are steep Chalk stones high and Steep: ^^o. Shingles are a Pibble stone

chart of the approaches to Weymouth and the Isle of Portland To Captain GEORGE
ST. LO This M^^ (...) Most humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt G Collins.
chart of the English channel To the Right Honorable The LORDS COMMISSIONERS
for Executing the Office of LORD HIGH ADMIRAL OF ENGLAND
chart of Breast Harbor A Seal of English and French Leagues 20 in A. Degree.

To the Right Honorable The LORDS COMMISSIONERS for Executing the Office of
LORD HIGH ADMIRAL OF ENGLAND This Mapp is most humbly Dedicated and Presented
by Capt Greenvile Collins. Hydrographer to the KING and QUEENS most Excellt:
Majesty 1693:

chart of southeast Devon (Kingsbridge, Torquay, Exmouth) To the Right
Honorable THOMAS Earl of Pembrooke and Montgomery Ba^o HERBERT of Sherland
etc. Primier Commiss^: for Executing the Office of Ld: High Admiral of England
etc. And one of their Ma.ties most Honorable Privy Council This is most humbly
Dedicated and presented by Capt: Greenvile Collins.

Note that the depth of water in the River Ex. is set down in feet being
distinguished by an f

depiction of King William's landing, Nov. 1686 chart of Dartmouth and the
River Dart DARTMOUTH TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE LORD DARTMOUTH. MR. General
of his Majesty's ORDNANCE etc. This Map is Humbly Dedicated, and Presented, by
G. COLLINS. Hydrographer to the KING.
depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus Shows the Start when
the point at A bears S. W. 2 or 3 Leagues off.
depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus Shows Dartmouth when
the Harbors mouth at C bears N. by W. 3 miles off.
depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus Shows Dartmouth when
it bears W. N. W. 2 miles.
chart of Plymouth PLYMOUTH To the Rt. Honble. ARTHUR Earl of TORRINGTON Baro
HERBERT of Torbay. First Lt. of the Admirality ADMIRAL of their Ma.ties Navy
and Capt. Genll. of the Narrow Seas. Humbly Dedicat^^ By Ct.G: Collins Hydrogr.
to the KING.
chart of River Fowey FOWEY and MOUNTS-BAY Is most Humbly Presented and
Dedicated To the RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD JONATHAN LORD BISHOP OF BRISTOLL
By Capt. Greenvile Collins Hydrographr. to the King
chart of Mounts Bay depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus
shows the going into Fowey when Fowey Castle bears N b W 3 Miles

chart of Falmouth and Carrick Roads FALMOUTH. To SR: PETER KILLEGREW. Baronet.
This MAP is Dedicated and: Presented by Capt GREENVILE COLLINS. Hyd: to ye KING.
depictions of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus Shows the goeing
into Falmouth when Pendennis Castle bears N: W: b N: 2 Leagues.

Thus Shows ye goeing into Helford when the Harborsmouth at A. bears West 2
Leagues.

chart of the Scilly Islands TO THE HONBLE: THE GOVORNOR DEPUTY GOVORNOR AND
COMMITEES OF THE EAST INDIA COMPANY This Chart is Humbly Dedicated and
Presented by CAPT: GREENVILE COLLINS Hydrographer to the KING.
detailed chart of the Scilly Islands THE ISLANDS OF SCILLY. TO HIS GRACE.
HENRY DUKE OF GRAFTON: VICE ADMIRAL OF ENGLAND: and This CHART is most Humbly
Dedicated: and Presented by Capt. G: COLLINS. Hydrogr to the KING. 1689
chart of St. George's Channel, the Irish Sea, and the Isle of Man chart of the
Bristol Channel To the Right Honorable SR. ROBT. SOUTHWELL KNIGHT. Who attended
his MAJ.TY K WILLIAM the (...) in his Expedition for Ireland in Quality of
Principal Secretary of State for that Kingdom
depiction of the King's landing Sept. 8th, 1690 A(...) hampton near King Road.
landed his Maj.tie on the 8t. of Septr. 1690 he sailed in ^7 hours from
Duncann^^ Fort to King Read and lay that night at Kings Weston at the house of
Sr. Robert Southwell.
chart of Milford Haven MILFORD-HAVEN.

TO HIS GRACE HENRY Duke of BEAUFORT, and Earl of Worcester, Baron Herbert of
Chepstoll. Raglan, and Gower. Lord President, and Lord Lieut. of Wales, etc.

This Draught of MILFORD-HAVEN. is humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt.
Greenuile Collins. Hydr. to ye King.

depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea These Hills show at Sea
before the ^and^ the Seaside

chart of Milford Haven and St. Brides Bay Milford Haven and the Islands
Adjacent most Humbly Dedicated and Presented to Sr. HUGH OWEN Bart. By Capt. G.
Collins Hydrographer to their Majesty's.
chart of Pembroke north to Amlwch depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed
from sea Ramsey Island N. W.
depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Scamor E. N. E. 2 miles.
depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Grasholm N. b. N. 4 mile
depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Barzey Island E. b. N. 2
Leagues
depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus Shows Stockham and
St. Brides

Stockham W. N. W. 2 miles St. Brides

To Sr. CLODISLEY SHOUELL Knight. and REAR ADMLL. of the BLEW, This Chart of the
Coast of WALES is humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt. Green: Collins.
chart of Holly Island and western Anglesey HOLY-HEAD Is most Humbly Dedicated
and Presented to Capt: Thomas Hewetson By G: COLLINS Hydrographer to the KING

depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Part of Anglesey Carrenpoint
Holy head Skerries

depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus Shows Carrenpoint,
Holy head and ye Skerries Island when ye highest part at A bears S.W.b.S. 3
Leagues.

chart of the Menai Strait To the Right Worshipful Sr. William Williams BAR
This is most humbly Presented and Dedicated By Capt. G. Collin^.
chart of the tip of Anglesey and "Pritest Holme I" chart of the Isle of Man
and surrounding coast To the Honble. SR. JOHN LOWTHER Bart. One of the
Comm^s^^^ for Executing the Office of Lord Rich Admiral of England. 1689
depictions of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Little Ormes head Great
Ormes head

Thus shows Great and Little Ormes head when you go over the best of Chester
Bar

Thus shows lite^^^ Hills then you are on (...) Chester barr^ (...) 3 ^ill
bear (...)
chart of Liverpool, River Dee and River Mersey A New and Exact Survey of the
River DEE or CHESTER-WATER, is most humbly Dedicated and Presented to his most
Sacred Majt. WILLIAM the III KING of Great Britani. France. and Ireland By
Capt. G. Collins Hydraghe. to the KING.
Note that the depth water is set down in Fathams at Lowater in Spring Tide.
at which ti^^ Tides Rise five Fa^^^^^ and 3 1/2 at a Ne^ Tides

chart of the Isle of Man To the Rt. Honorable WILLIAM, ELE, OF DERBY Lord of
ye ISLE of MAN and This Map is humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt. G.
COLLINS.
depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Peel Castle
chart of the bay of Belfast To the most Potent and Heroic Prince WILLIAM the
III of Great Britain France and Ireland KING Defender of the Faith etc This is
most humbly Dedicated and Presented by Your Majes. most Dutiful and Loyal
Subject and Servant Capt G: Collins
A Prospect of CARRECK-FERGUS. Being the Place where King William landed in
Ireland.

A. The King in the Mary yacht Capt. Collins B. Prince George in the Henneretta
Yacht Capt. Sanderson C. The King goeing a Shore in Sr. Clo: Chouells Barg D.
Sr. C. Shovell Rear. Admll. of the Blew in the Monk with his Squadron Bonfiers
on the Shore.


chart of Carlingford Lough depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea
Thus shows the goeing into Carlingford, when the Harbor at A. Bears N. W.
by N. 2 Leagues off.
Note. that on the Bar you will have 9 and 10 footwatter at lowwater the
Common Tides Rise 10 and 12 Foot at Neap Tides.
depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus shows the Mountains
of Dundrum, which ly to the Northard of Carlingford, when they bare N. N. E. E.
about two Leagues off.
chart of the bay of Dublin To His Grace JAMES Duke of ORMOND etc. This is
humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt. G. Collins.


How these Several Lands show at Sea

depictions of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea So Foreland St. Margretts
Church Walmer Castle

Thus Shows the South Foreland when you are in the Gull Stream, keep St.
Margretts Church a little on the side of the third Cliffe as at A. and this is
the best mark of the Gull Stream

Seven Cliffs Beachy head

Thus shows Beachy and the Seven Cliffs when Beachy Head bears N N W 2
Leagues Beach is a high White steep Cliff the Seven Cliffs are likewise White

Seven Cliffs Beachyhead

Thus shows Beachy head and the 7 Cliffs when the Head is E b N 2 Leagues

Dunnose Isle of Wight Swan Cliff

Thus shows the Isle of Wight when Dunnose bears West 5 Leagues the Swan
Cliff W N W The Swan Cliff is White

5 Donnose Swan Cliff

Thus shows the Isle of Wight when the Swan Cliff bears N W 3 W 4 Leagues

Donnose Swan Cliff

Thus shows the Isle of Wight when the Swan Cliff bears N b W

Bill Portland White Cliff

Thus shows Portland when it bears N W b W 2 or 3 Leagues

Portland

Portland N b E 2 Leagues off

Portland St Albans

Portland N E 3 Leagues off

Portland

Thus shows Portland when it bears E N E 4 Leagues off

St^k^ Fleming Darlmouth MOunt Wh^^ler Berry

Thus shows the going in to Darlmouth and the Berry: when Darlmouth bears N
b W 2 Leagues off

going into Darlmouth Berry

Thus shows the going into Darlmouth when it bears N W 4 Leagues off

How these Several Lands show at Sea

Startpoint

Thus shows the Start when you are a Leagues to the Eastward of it

Boult Praul Start

Thus shows the Boult Praul and the Start when the Boult bears W b N 4
Leagues The Praul W N W and the Start N N W A is the going into Salcom

Start Deadman

Thus shows the Start from the Eddy Stone

Deadman

Thus shows the Deadman from the Eddy Stone

Hinkston Ramhead Maker Plymouth Menstone Gornore

Thus shows the Land about Plymouth when you are 2 Miles without the Eddy
stone

Start N E b N 5 Leagues

Deadman NW 3 Leagues

Foy Bindon Looc

Thus shows the going into Foy and Looc when the Castle at C bears N W by W
3 Leagues And the going into Loo at A N b W 2 Leagues, B is Looe Island

Lizard point

Thus shows the Lizard point when it bears East 5 Leagues off

Lighthouse Mills

Thus shows the Islands of Scilly when the Mills bear W b S 3 Leagues off

Longshipps Brezan Cape Cornwall Cape Cornwall

Thus shows Cape Cornwall and the Longshipps when A bears N and the
Longshipps N b W 3 Miles.

Cape Cornwall

Thus shows Cape Cornwall when it bears E N E 3 Leagues

St Jues Cape Cornwall

Thus shows the Land from cape Cornwall to St. Jues

L^ndy E N E 3 Leagues.

The Isle of Lundy N N E 2 Leagues

Seaumor Scookham

Thus shows the Island of Milford when the going into Milford at A bears
five Leagues off

Light House St. Anns point Rat Island Sheep Island

Thus shows the going into Milford at A when the Light House bears E b N 2
Leagues off



GREAT BRITAIN's COASTING-PILOT.

The SECOND PART.

Being a New and Exact SURVEY of the Seacoast OF England and Scotland, FROM
THE RIVER of THAMES TO THE NORTHWARDS, WITH THE Islands of Orkney and Shetland:
DESCRIBING All the Harbors, Rivers, Bays, Roads, Rocks, Sands, Buoys, Beacons,
Sea-Marks, Depths of Water, Latitude, Bearings and Distances from Place to
Place, the Setting and Flowing of Tides, with Directions for the knowing of any
Place; and how to Harbor a Ship in the same with Safety.

By Captain GREENVILE COLLINS Hydrographer in Ordinary to the KING and QUEENS
most Excellent Majesty's.

LONDON: Printed by Freeman Collins, and are to be Sold by Richard Mount
Bookseller, at the Postern on Tower Hill. 1693.

GREAT BRITAIN's COASTING-PILOT. The SECOND PART.
The Explanation of the Marks in the SEA-CHARTS or MAPPS.
21/7 THE Depths of water in all the Mapps are all put down at low water on
Spring-tydes, as you may see in the Mapp going into Harwich, Number E. there
you will find that between the Naze and the Stone-Bank, there is one Fathom and
half at low water; but where you find a Line drawn between two figures, as in
the Margent, show the depth of water at high water and low water on
Spring-tydes, and if there be the Letter f placed by them, then it shows that
the depth is feet, otherwise it is fathoms.

As for Example; You will see at the going over the Bar at Tinmouth or
New Castle, there you will find 21 above the Line, and 7 below the Line, as in
the Margent; which shows that on the Bar at a Spring-tyde there is 21 foot at
high water, and seven at low water: But if there is not the Letter f by the
depth or feet, than the depth is fathom.

Where you shall see a Half Moon placed by any Rock or Sand, it declares that
such Rock or Sand is to be seen at Half-tyde. Where you shall see an Arrow in
the Margent, it shows the Tide of Flood sets the same way the Arrow
points; as you may see in the Mapp of the Isles of Orkney, numbered with the
Letter R. D Where you shall see the Letter D placed by any Sand or Rock, such
Rock and Sand is to be seen at low water.
It may be expected that I should have given Directions for Sailing from the
River of Thames over the Flats into the Downs, and likewise from the River of
Thames down the Swin and King's-Channel, and so into the Downs. But upon
consideration that these Places are under the Care of Pilots, and for the
constant supply of them, the Trinity-house of Deptford-strond, have taken care
that there be a sufficient number of them, both for great and small Ships, etc.
I laid the Sands down in the Sand-Chart from the Thames into the Downs, and
from the Thames to the Buoy of the Gunfleet, as they were most carefully
surveyed by Trinity-house; but all the rest of the Charts or Mapps were
actually surveyed by my self.

Directions for Sailing over the Spits, the Wallet, and by the Naze into
Harwich.
Harwich.
Harwich.
HARWICH being a good and convenient safe Harbor, and much frequented by those
that use the Northern Navigation, and a place where Ships many times are forced
in by bad weather, I have taken care to give such following Directions as will
carry any Stranger into that place.

Sailing down the Swin or King's Channel, and that you would Sail into Harwich
over the Buoy of the Spits Buoy of the Spits.
into the Wallet, you must observe your Tides; for at the Spits the Buoy lies
in five, six, and seven foot water at low water, and the Passage often
alters, sometimes more water, and sometimes less. The Buoy lies on the west
end of the Gunfleet-Sand, and the east end of the Buxey, bearing from a flat
Steeple, called Great Holland-Church, south and by east: Being over the Spits,
you come into the Wallet, Wallet good riding.
where is very good Anchoring in five, six, seven, and eight Fathom water; the
Sands lying without makes it a most excellent Road. There is a good and deep
Channel to Sail into the Wallet between the Gunfleet and the West-Rocks, as you
may see in the Mapp of Harwich, Number E. but this Channel is very seldom used.
Being over the Spits into the Wallet, steer away for the Naze, Naze.
which may be known by the Trees, and a House that stands on it; keep about
half a mile, or a mile of from the Naze, to avoid the Stone Bank Stone Bank
which has but five foot water at low water on it, and lies from the Naze
Trees east by north about a mile and a half from the Naze Point; there is but
eight or nine foot water between it and the Naze at low water. Mark^^ the Stone
Bank
Keep Pain's Trees (which lie a little to the southward of Harwich) open and
shut with Harwich-Cliff, and this Mark will carry you on the Stone Bank, and
the Trees on the Corkland just open of the Nazeland will carry you on the Bank
also. There is a good leading Mark to carry you between the Naze and the Stone
Bank, Mark (...) go between ^ Naze (...) Stone Bank.
which is Harwich Steeple on Harwich Becon-Cliff, and will also carry you
between the Pye-Sand and the Ridge into the Rowling-ground, Rolling ground
where Ships Anchor in three and four Fathom at low water. The Mark to Anchor
in the best of the Rowling-ground is to bring Harwich Windmill two Sails
breadth open of Harwich-Cliff. And to Sail from the Rowling-ground to the Naze
keep Pain's Trees open of Harwich-Cliff till you bring the Naze to bear south
west, then keep Harwich Steeple on the Becon-Cliff to run within the Stone Bank.

There is a Channel to Sail from the Naze between the Cork-Sand and the Ridge,
How ^^ Sail f^^^ the Naze between the C^^^ and the Ridge.
keeping the Naze Trees south west, sailing down north east between the Cork
and the Ridge in five, six, and seven Fathom water; and when you have brought
Harwich Steeple on the Brewhouse that lies to the northward of Landguard-Fort,
then are you clear of the Cork-ledge. Cork-ledge.
This Channel is much used by the Light-Colliers going to the northward.

Being in the Rowling-grounds, and that you would Sail into Harwich Harbor,
keep close by the Andrews, Andrews.
which is a Sand that lies off from Languard-Fort, and is steep too on the
west side; the Tide of Ebb runs strong over the Andrews the first half Ebb,
of which you must have a care; this Sand is dry at low water. Keep close by the
Beach of Languard-Fort to avoid the Altar, Altar.
which is a small stoney Shelf that lies right west from Languard-Fort about a
Cable and a halfs length from the Beach at the Fort, on which is but five and
six foot at low water: you may Sail to the westward of it, between it and
Harwich-Cliff, according as the Tide is up, and what drought of water your Ship
draws. But if you should chance to go into Harwich at low water, and your
Ship draw above fifteen foot, you must stay for the Flood to have water over
the Glutton, Glutton.
which is a narrow Ridge, and stretches off from the Beach thwart the Channel
a little within the Brewhouse that is to the northward of Languard-Fort. Being
past the Glutton, you must keep close to the Beach to avoid the Gristle ^ristle.
that lies in the middle between Harwich and the Beach of Languard-Fort, on
which is but three foot at low water. There is a small Channel between the
Gristle and the Guard ^uard.
of nine foot at low water, but when you have opened Dover-Court Church of
Harwich Town, then are you clear of the Gristle and Guard, and may Anchor
before the Town of Harwich ^^rwich ^arbour.
in five Fathom water, or run up into Ipswich-water and Anchor. This is a very
safe Harbor; and if a Ship should chance to blow ashore, she cannot take any
harm, the shoars being soft Owse.

There is a Yard at Harwich where many of the great Ships of the Navy have been
built, where is a convenient place to haul such Ships (as can take the ground)
ashore to Wash, Tallow, stop Leaks, etc. This place is much approved of by the
Commanders of Virginia Ships, being very convenient for unloading their Goods,
having good Storehouses for that purpose by the water side, and is the best
Inlet and Outlet between England and Holland, as is experienced by the
Pacquet-Boats, having made this place their station. It flows here at Full
and Change in the Harbor south; the Spring-tydes rise fifteen and sixteen
foot, and the Neap-tydes ten and eleven foot.

Directions for to Sail into Harwich through the Sledway.
BEing at the Buoy of the Spits, and that you will not Sail over the Spits,
then keep down by the Gunfleet-Sand ^^nfleet.
in seven and eight Fathom water, till you come within two Miles of the Buoy of
the Gunfleet, and then come no nearer then nine Fathom; for there lies off a
Spit east south east from the Sand, about a Cables length. To the eastward of
this Spit is a small Swatch through the Sand, into which and Goldmore's-Gatt,
Goldmore's Gatt.
the Tide of Flood sets strong into the Wallet, of which you must have a
care when you come near it, especially in little Wind or Calms you may be hauld
on the Gunfleet-Sand. This Sand lies north east and south west, and dries in
several places. The Buoy of the Gunfleet Buoy of the Gunfleet.
bears from the Naze south east by east easterly. You may stand into seven
and eight Fathom along the side of the West-Rocks West-Rocks.
into the Sledway, keeping Balsey Church north by west and north north west
till you bring Harwich Steeple on the Brewhouse (that lies to the northward of
Languard-Fort) which will carry you clear of the Cork-ledge, on which is two
Fathom and a half at low water, and then stand to the westward, and keep Orford
Church and Castle open of Balsey-Cliff a Sails breadth, till you have the
Lights together, keeping them so till you are past the Andrews, and then follow
the former Directions for sailing into Harwich. You may stand in upon the
Platters Platters.
into five Fathom, on which Sand is but two and three foot at low water; the
Ridge has seven foot at low water. A great part of the Cork-Sand Cork.
dries at low water; and lies in length northeast and south west about two
miles and a half long, and a mile broad.

West-Rocks.
The West-Rocks West-Rocks.
lie in length north east, and south west about three miles, and two miles
broad, and dries in several places, full of Banks and Swatches, the Ground
rocky and stony in many places. There is a small narrow Channel between the
West-Rocks and the Cork.

Directions to Sail from Harwich out the Sledway.
SAiling out of Harwich, keep close to the Beach of Languard-Fort, observing
the Directions going out as you did going in, and when you come near the
Andrews, if the Tide of Ebb be made, it runs strong over them the first half
Ebb, of which you must have a care; bring the Lights in one, and Sail out so
between the Andrews, the Ridge, and the Platters, till you bring Orford Church
and Castle open of Balsey-Cliff a Sails breadth; Sail so till you bring Harwich
Steeple on the Brewhouse, and then stand out the Sledway, keeping Balsey Church
north north west out. But if you turn out, How to turn out at the Sledway.
then turn Balsey Church on the two Trees to the northward of the Wood; and for
the other side the Church two Sails breadth open of the Cliff. But if you know
not the Marks, you may stand over to the West-Rocks till you bring Balsey
Church north by west, and over to Balsey-Sand and the Shipwash, till you bring
Balsey Church north west by north and north west.

Balsey-Sand.
The Marks for the south end of Balsey-Sand. Balsey-sand.
is to bring Balsey Church north west half west, and lies from the shore a
long League; this end is steep too, being eight and nine Fathom close by it.
The Mark for the north end is to bring Orford Castle between the north by west
and the north north west, and the Light-house north half east. This end lies
about five miles from the shore. Some part of this Sand dries at low water.

Shipwash-Sand.
The Shipwash Shipwash-sand.
lies without Balsey-Sand and the Whiting, and dries in many places at
low water: It lies in length north by east and south by west about nine miles,
and is very narrow, not above a quarter of a mile over in breadth, except the
south end, and there it is broader. The Mark for the south end is to bring
Balsey Church north west half west about eight or nine miles off. The Mark for
the north end is Balsey Church north west, and Orford Light-house north north
west half west.

Whiting-Sand.
Whiting-sand.
The Whiting lies north east by north in length about five miles. At the south
end Balsey Church bears west by south and west south west: and at the north
end Orford Castle north west by north in five Fathom water. There is good
Soundings on both sides of it.

Woodbridge-Haven.
Woodbridge-Haven.
Lies just at the west end of Balsey-Cliff, and is a Bar-Haven, where is but
three and four foot water at low water; the Bar often shifts there, I advise
such as are not acquainted to take a Pilot. After you are in it is a very good
Harbor, and goes up to Woodbridge. The water rises and falls on the Bar at
a Spring-tyde fifteen foot, and at Full and Change it flows south and south
by east.

Cutler.
Cutler.
Cutler is a small Sand that lies right off from Balsey-Cliff about a short
mile, and has but six foot water on it at low water, and two Fathom between it
and the Cliff. The Mark to go clear of of it, is to keep Harwich Steeple just
open of Felsto-Cliff.

Hoseley-Bay.
Hoseley-Bay Hoseley-Bay.
is a very good place to Anchor, you having the Sands without, and is very good
clean ground.

Directions for sailing from the Sledway into Hoseley-Bay, and out at
Winterton-Ness.
BEing in the Sledway you Sail into Hoseley-Bay between Balsey-Cliff and
Blasey-Sand; I have given you the bearing of Balsey-Sand already; you may Sail
from Hoseley-Bay down to the Ness all along the Beach, having good Sounding
you may turn down with safety. Orford-Ness is a low Beach on which stands two
Light-houses, but the Castle and Church are high, and may be seen six and seven
Leagues off clear weather. There were formerly two small Sands between the Ness
and the Whiting, but they are now worn quite away; the Lights together carry
you out between the Shipwash and Albrough-Knaps.

Albrough-Knaps
Albrough-Knaps Albro^^^Knaps
is a small Sand that lies due east from Albrough Church about five or six
miles off, on which there is but two Fathom at low water. The Mark to carry you
clear besides the Lights in one, is Orford Church and Castle together; between
the Land and the Shore you will have twelve, eleven, ten, nine, eight, seven,
six, and five Fathom good sounding shoaling gradually. But without this Sand
you will have sixteen and twelve Fathom water.

Directions to Sail from the Buoy of the Spits about the Longsand-Head and
Kentish-knock.
BEing at the Spits, keep the Shoalings of the Gunfleet in seven and eight
Fathom, and if the Winds are contrary, and that you must turn down, keep the
Shoalings of the Gunfleet also, till they bring the Naze Trees north north
west, then steer away north east by east and east north east, till the Naze
Trees bear west by north, and then steer more easterly till you get into
seventeen or eighteen Fathom water to go clear of the Longsand-head and
Kentish-knock, but no Shoaler; then steer away south south west if you have the
Tide of Ebb; and if you have the Tide of Flood, then steer away south south
east and south by east and south, according as you have Tides strong or weak,
and that will carry you into the North-foreland.

When you are near the Kentish-knock you may see the North-foreland, and it
bears from St. Peter's Church on the North-foreland north north east
easterly. But from the Longsand-head it must be very clear to see the Land.
This Sand-head lies from the Naze east south east and south east by east about
five Leagues. At the Knock it flows north and south.

But when you are in seventeen or eighteen Fathom of water, and that you would
Sail without the Goodwin, steer away more easterly till you get six and twenty,
seven and twenty, eight and twenty or thirty Fathom water, and keep that depth
till you bring the Lights together which stand on the South-foreland to go
clear of the Southsand-head; or bring the Land off Dover open of the
South-foreland, etc.

Directions to Sail from the Spits down without the West-Rocks and Shipwash.
FRom the Spits keep in seven and eight Fathom water down the Gunfleet and
West-Rocks; but in turning down be sure to keep the Shoalings of the Gunfleet
and West-Rocks, and stand no farther over to the Sunk then twelve Fathom; the
Shipwash is steep too, you will have ten Fathom close to it. It lies in length
north by east and south by west; keep it fifteen and sixteen Fathom water, and
that depth will carry you two miles without it.

Gallaper-Sand.
Lies in length south by west and north by east about nine miles very narrow,
Gallaper-sand.
not being a quarter of a mile broad; and at low water there is but two Fathom
on it: This Sand is steep too. The Tides run strong over it north east by east,
and south west by west. A north and south Moon makes high water. The south end
bears from the North-foreland north east half north eight or nine Leagues:
and the north end bears from Orford Castle south east and south east by east
about eight or nine Leagues. The Depths from this Sand to the Shipwash are from
twenty to fifteen Fathom; and on the south east side of the Sand from eighteen
to six and twenty Fathom.

Gabard-Sand.
Lies in length north by east and south by west about three miles and a Cables
length broad. Gabard-sand.
The north end bears from Orford Castle south east by east and east south
east about six Leagues off, and from the Shipwash east twelve miles, and about
eleven miles from the Gallaper. Between which two Sands you will have from
sixteen to eighteen Fathom, and from the Gaba d to Orford-Ness from eighteen to
twenty Fathom. And west north west from the north end there is a small Hole of
six and twenty and seven and twenty Fathom not a Cables length over.

The Falls.
Is a long narrow Sand lying north by east and south by west about five Leagues
in length: The Falls.
The north end bears from the Lights of the North-foreland east north east
about six Leagues, and the south end bears from the South-foreland east north
east half north about five Leagues; and from the North-foreland south east half
south; and from Callis north westerly. The shoalest water is near the south
end, which is three Fathom and a half. This Sand is steep too, having twenty
Fathom close to it; at the north end there is five Fathom.

Directions for Sailing from Orford-Ness to Yarmouth.
FRom Orford-Ness to Albrough Town the shore lies north about four Miles,
being a Stoney-Beach and good Shoalings. You may Anchor before Albrough in
five, six, or seven Fathom good ground. Half way between Albrough and Dunwich
there is a Wood in form of a Saddle, and is a good Mark to know the Land, being
the first Land discovered when you fall in with this Land. The shore lies from
Orford-Ness to Lastiff north by east.

Dunwich, Walter-Swick and Sole, or Southwould go all in at one small Creek,
and divides into three Branches. Dunwich on the south Branch, Sole on the
north, and Walter-Swick in the middle. This is a Bar-Haven, where at high water
small Vessels go in; there is good Anchoring against these places from eight to
twelve Fathom. South-would Church has a high square Steeple, and stands near
the Seaside, as you may see, in the makings of the Land numbered with the
Letter V. Sole-Creek lies four Leagues from Orford-Ness north by east.

The Bernard and Newcom are one Sand that lies from Carthyness to Pakefield;
the southermost part is called the Bernard, beginning at Cathyness and ending
at Sero; and the northermost part is called the Newcom, and begins from Sero
to Pakefield. There is not above three and four foot water on these Sands at
low water, there is a Channel within these Sands close to the shore, where
small Vessels that are acquainted go at high water; these Sands lie a long Mile
from the shore. This Sand has good shoalings; stand no nearer it than four or
five Fathom.

Red-Sand.
Red-Sand.
Lies in length north north east, and south south west, about two miles in
length, very narrow, not above a Cables length over; when you are on the
shoalest part of it, then is Lastiff Church about two Sails breadth over the
south end of the Town. It bears from Sole Church north east by east, from
Lastiff south east, from Guntonwood south south east. The Distance from the
Sand to Lastiff is two Leagues. You have sixteen Fathom between the Shore and
the Sand; the shoalest water is three Fathom that I could find: but Mr. John
Grist of Yarmouth says that he has very lately sounded it, and found but two
Fathom water on it. You will have eight and nine Fathom within half a Mile of
it on the inside, and sixteen Fathom close by it on the outside.

Directions for to Sail into the Standford at Lastiff.
TO Sail in at the Standford you will see a Light-house which stands on a
Hill to the northward of Lastiff, and as you run in you will see the other
small Light-house which stands on the Low-Beach close by the Seaside; keep
these two Lights together, then will they bear north north west northerly, and
run in boldly with the Lights till you come into three Fathom water, or a Cable
or two Cables length from the shore, then keep along close by the Beach to
the northward, and when you have brought the highest Light-house west by south,
then you are on the shoalest of the Standford, between the Beach and the Home,
where at low water you will have but two Fathom, and two Fathom and a half. The
Tides do not Rise and Fall at the Standford above six and seven foot. You may
Anchor in Lastiff Road in three or four Fathom, to stay for water over the
Standford. At the Standford the Channel is narrow between the Beach and the
Home; there is six Fathom close to the Home-Sand. The north part of the Home is
called Corton-Sand, for the Home and Corton are but one Sand. Being over the
Standford sail down between the Sands and the Shore into Yarmouth Roads; as you
may see in the Map of Yarmouth, numbered with the Letter F.

But if you happen to turn into the Standford, you may stand in toward the
Newcom into four Fathom, and into the Home-head into eight Fathom; and between
the Beach of Lastiff and the Home you may stand to the Beach into three Fathom,
and over to the Home into seven Fathom: being over the Standford, there is a
good turning Channel down into Yarmouth Roads.

Yarmouth Haven, or Yarmouth Peer.
Ya^m^uth H^^^^.
Lies between two wooden Heads where Ships enter at high water, at which place
the Tides Rise and Fall at a Spring but six and seven foot, and Neap-tydes four
and five foot. The maintaining of the Peers of Yarmouth is very chargeable, and
toward which Charge the Town of Yarmouth has had sometimes Relief by
Parliament, for this Haven is the only and chief Place for the Herring Fishing;
and should this Peer go to decay, it would be the Ruin of the Herring Fishing:
and notwithstanding the badness of the Haven, yet such is the Industry of the
People of that place, that they have about five hundred Sail of Ships belonging
to that place.

St. Nicholas Gatt.
St. Nicho^^^ Gatt.
Is a Channel that lies between Corton-Sand and the south end of St.
Nicholas-Sand, which is called the Knowle; this Passage has altered very much
within this five years, there being now a middle Ground which tails off from
the Knowle, on which lies a Buoy, which you keep on the Starboardside going
in, and Corton-Sand on the Larboard-side: The going into this place is now
difficult for such as are not acquainted; and since the Sands have altered so
much, I think it fit to give no further Directions for Sailing into this Gatt,
but advise Strangers to take a Pilot. It is high water in Yarmouth-Haven at
Full and Change south east by south nine hours and three quarters; and the Tide
runs into the Haven, and to the southward in the Road an hour and a half
after it is high water in the Haven, which is quarter Tide.

Directions for Sailing from Yarmouth Road out at Winterton-Ness,
BEing in Yarmouth Road keep close along by the shore to Caster-Lights,
keeping the Lights together (to avoid the south end of the Cockle) till you
come within a Cables length of the Beach, or half a Cables length, then keep
close by the Beach till you come to Winterton, where are two Lights which you
keep together to Sail out at Winterton-Ness. There is a Buoy on a Spit of Sand
that lies off from the middle, which Channel is very narrow; you leave the
Buoy on the Starboard-side going out.

There are two more Lights which stand on Winterton-Ness Sand-hills, and are
low Lights, and serve to keep clear of the north end of the Middle. But the
Lights of Winterton is a high Light, and stands on high Land, and is seen
four or five Leagues off. Winterton Church has a high square Steeple.

Note that there is as much water at Winterness at low water slack, as there is
at highwater slack. The Tides Rise and Fall here but six and seven foot; and at
Full and Change it is high water south east at nine of the Clock. It is very
narrow turning in and out at Winterton. The Tide runs in at the Ness three
hours after it is high water ashore, which is half Tide.

Directions to Sail without Yarmouth Sands.
BEing off of Lastiff, and that you would Sail without the Sands, keep about
four or five miles off in twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, and sixteen
Fathom on the back of the Sands. The southermost part of Yarmouth Sands is the
Home-head against Lastiff, and the northermost is the middle at Winterton-Ness;
the Home and Corton are one Sand; the next is the Knowle, St. Nicholas, Scroby
and the Calves Knowle, all which are one Sand; there are small Swatches over
them, and are made use of by the Fishermen. The next is the Cockle and the
Middle; the Cockle lies between the Calves Knowle and Caster. Some places of
these Sands are dry at low water. Being on the back of the Sands you may keep
four or five Miles from the shore of Yarmouth from twelve to sixteen fathom
water, which will carry you between Yarmouth Sands and the Newark-Sand.

Newark.
Is a Sand that lies to the eastward of Yarmouth, and the south end dries at
low water; the south end of it lies from Yarmouth Steeple east half north
three Leagues, and the north end bears north east half east from the same
Staple, and east half north from Winterton Light about two Leagues and a half.
There is a brave Channel between Yarmouth Sands and the Newark, Newark.
the narrowest place being between the north end of the Newark and the Calves
Knowle, which is four Miles, and sixteen, seventeen, and eighteen Fathom
between them. This Sand commonly shows it self by the Sea breaking on it at
high water: This Sand lies north west by north about four or five Miles long.

The Overfalls of Newark.
The Overfalls of Newark.
Lie north east from the north end of Newark, and lie in length north east,
having at one place, which is the middle, but three Fathom, and so deepneth
toward each end to seven and eight Fathom; you have nineteen and twenty Fathom
water close to them; they lie from the Lights of Winterton north north east
half east about four or five Leagues. I am told that there are more Banks and
Overfalls to the north east of Yarmouth Land too, on which is but two Fathom
and a half; but I have no authentic ground for it.

Hasebrough-Sand, or the Vrrey-Sand.
Hasebrough, or the Vrrey-Sand.
Is a Sand that lies eight Miles from Winterton-Ness, and lies north east and
south west about seven Miles in length, and very narrow, on which is but six,
seven, and eight foot at low water. The south east end bears from Winterton
Church north east by north eight miles; and the south end bears from
Hasebrough Church north east half north, about six miles off. This Sand is
steep too, having twenty and one and twenty Fathom close by it on the inside
and out side, but the ends lie off shoal, four, five, six, and seven Fathom.

Leman and Ower.
Are two very dangerous Sands, Leman and Ow^^.
the innermost is the longest, and is called the Leman, the body of which lies
from Hasebrough north east by east about eight or nine Leagues: This Sand lies
in length north west by north about six Miles, and at low water has not above
six, seven, and eight foot water. This Sand is steep too, having two and twenty
Fathom close to it.

The Ower lies two or three Miles without the Leman, and lies in length north
west by west about three miles, on which is nine foot at low water, and is
steep too, having two and twenty Fathom on each side of it, and two and twenty
Fathom between the two Sands. At the ends of Ower you will have three, four,
five, six, seven fathoms a Cables length off, and then fifteen and two and
twenty Fathom. How to avoid the Leman and Ower
If you keep a fair sight of the Land you will run within it, for I could not
see the Land from the Mast-head of the Yatch, when I rid at Anchor close by the
Leman; but being at Anchor three or four Miles within the Leman, I saw the
Church and Land of Hasebrough. The Distance between this Sand of the Lemon, and
Hasebrough Sand is six Leagues, and the Depth between them is nineteen, twenty,
one and twenty, and two and twenty Fathom.

Welbank.
The south east part of it bears from Winterton-Ness north east about
fourteen leagues, We^^^^^.
the north west part of it bears north and by east seventeen Leagues, and
three Leagues from the Leman and Ower. It lies in length north east and south
west one and twenty or two and twenty leagues, and in breadth north west and
south east twelve leagues at the south west end, which is the broadest, the
north east end growing narrow. There is on this Bank from thirteen to seventeen
Fathom water; and two and twenty, three and twenty, and four and twenty Fathom
between the Leman and Ower and this Sand, and from four and twenty to eight and
twenty Fathom. Between it and the Dogger Bank, and the Distance between this
Sand and the Dogger Bank is six leagues.

White-water Bank.
(...) Bank.
Lies between the Wellbank and the Broad Fourteens, and lies north east and
south west about ten leagues in length, whereon is sixteen Fathom, and is
distant from the Wellbank five leagues.

Dogger Bank.
The south west end of this Bank lies north east from the Spurn about ten
leagues, and is a sharp Point growing broader to the Sand, as you may see in
the Map. It lies in length east north east northerly about seventy leagues,
and in breadth ten or eleven leagues; the west end is shoaler than the east
end; on the west end you will have ten, eleven, and twelve, and about the
middle fourteen, fifteen, and sixteen; and toward the east end from eighteen
to four and twenty Fathom. Between Flambrough-head and the Dogger Bank
Dogger-^ank.
you will have from twenty to thirty Fathom.

Directions for Sailing from Winter-Ness to the Humbers-Mouth or the Spurn.
BEing without Winter-Ness in ten or twelve Fathom, keep along the shore
north west within Hasbrough or the Vrrey-Sand: This Sand is steep too; you will
have two and twenty fathom close by it: The shore is bold and clean, and very
good Anchoring all along. Hasbrough Church stands on high Land, and is a high
Steeple, and may be seen six and seven Leagues off at Sea. From Hasbrough steer
along the shore till you come up with Foulness, which is high Land, on which
stands a Light-house, but no fire kept in it as yet. From Winterton to this
place you may stand into the shore into seven, eight, and nine Fathom water.

Blakeney and Cly.
Blakeney and Cly.
Are two small Towns which lie into a small Creek ten Miles from Foulness.
Blakeney is a great Church, and a high square Steeple; bring the Church south
east, and run in so into five or six Fathom water, till you see the Buoy's;
there is but half a Fathom of water at low water, but at high water thirteen
and fourteen foot: You sail in between two Buoys, and then keep the rest of the
Buoys on the Starboard-side going in, till you come up with the Beacons, and
there you may Anchor, where you will have two, and two Fathom and a half at
low water; if you run higher up, you lie a ground at low water. It is
high water here at Full and Change east south east.

Wells, Burnham, Lyn and Boston I have not surveyed, Wells, Burnham, Lyn, and
Boston not surveyed.
being hindered by this present War; but as soon as the War shall be over, I
intend to survey it all, with the Assistance of such Seamen of Lyn and Boston
as are best acquainted with these places.

Being off of Foulness Ships, steer away for the Humber on Flambrough-head, in
which Course you will meet with many Banks and Overfalls, and this place is
called the Well. Many of these Banks wash away, and grow up again in time. I
have not heard of any Collier of late years that has been lost on them.

From Foulness to the Spurn or Flambrough-head, you shape your Course according
as you have the Tide, of which you must have a great care. The Flood setseth
strong into Lyn and Boston Deeps; when you are open of them, the Flood sets
south east, and the Ebb north west. I have no certain Account of these Banks
and Shoals: I have discoursed many able Coasters and Colliers, who all differ
much in their Bearing and Distances from the Land. At Cromer I was told, That
some years ago two Colliers Anchored north north east from Cromer as much as
they could see the Land, which might be about seven Leagues off; the one Ship
Anchored in twelve Fathom, the other in two and a half at low water, and is
called in the Map Cromer Knowle. Cromer-Knowle*


Blakeney-Knock.
Is a small Bank, lying about six or seven Miles north from Blakeney,
Blakeney-Knock.
on which is but three Fathom and a half at low water.

Outward Dowsen.
Is a Sand that lies north from Wells about eight Leagues, Outward Dowsen.
on which is but three Fathom at low water.

Directions for Sailing into the River Humber up to Hull.
TO Sail into the River Humber, Humber.
you must have a care of the Dreadful-Sand, on which is but six and seven foot
at low water. This Sand lies about four Miles, or three Miles and a half from
the Spurn. There are two Lights erected on the Spurn, a high Light and a low
Light; keep the two Lights together, and it carries you to the southward of the
Dreadful, as you may see in the Map of Humber, numbered with the Letter H. There
lies a small Bank between the Dreadful and the Spurn in the Fair-way, on which
is but three Fathom and a half at low water; between the Dreadful and Sand-hail
you have 12 Fathom water. Sand-hail shoaleth by degrees; you may stand over to
the Sand into five Fathom water. The Spurn is a low stony Beach, on which the
Lights stand; but the Land of Kelsey is indifferent high, coming from the
northward; the Land is bold and clean; you may come fair aboard the shore from
Kelsey to the Spurn, keeping in five, six, and seven Fathom water. About a Mile
from the shore, and that Distance, will carry you clear of the Stone-Bank,
which lies off from the Spurn a quarter of a Mile, or more.

Bull.
Between the Spurn and the Bull Bull.
there is ten and eleven Fathom water, a brave turning Channel; you may stand
over to the Bull into five Fathom, and so to the Spurn.

Hawk.
Being within the Spurn you may Anchor in the Hawk Hawk.
in three, four, five, six Fathom water: Bring the Light-house east by south
about two mile off, and Anchor in five or six Fathom water good Ground.

Buoy of Chlyness.
The Buoy of Clyness Buoy of Clyness.
lies west from the Light-house on the Spurn four Miles, and two Miles from
Clyness; which Buoy you leave on the Larboard-side as you Sail up.

Buoy of Burcum.
And from the Buoy of Clyness to the Buoy of the Burcum, Buy of Burcum
the Course is west north west three Miles; you may keep about half a mile from
the Buoys in a Channel of eight Fathom, and Anchor to the westward of the Buoy
of the Burcum in Grimbsbay-Road in five or six Fathom. The Buoy of the Burcum
lies on the east end of the Burcum-Sand, on which Sand is but three foot at
low water.

The Middle.
The Middle Middle.
is a long narrow Sand that lies between the Buoys of Clynness, Burcum and the
Sunk. In the Fair-way between the two Buoys and the Sunk there is a good
Channel of either side of eight or nine Fathom water. This Middle has six and
seven foot on the middle of it at low water, and deepneth toward the ends to
three and four Fathom. You may steer up the north Channel between the Middle
and the Sunk, keeping the shoalings of the Sunk in four, five, or six Fathom;
when you come near the west end of the Sunk, keep nearest to the Sunk, for
over against it lies a Flat off from the shore of the Marsh, called
Staningbrough-Flats; bring Patrington Church on the House on the Sunk, then are
you just come on it. Being past this Flat, then keep the Larboard-shoar, to
avoid the Foulhome; when you have Ottringam Church on Saltawood, then are you
abreast the Foulhome; a Mile above which is Whitebooth-Road, which is the best
Road in the Humber. The Mark to Anchor in Whitebooth-Road is to bring
Patrington Church on Saltawood, as you may see in the Map.

Hull.
From Whitebooth-Road, if you will Sail up to Hull, Hull.
steer away for Poul, and keep that shore till you bring a white House, which
is the Town Hall, and is kept white for a leading Mark. Keep this white House
on the South-Blockhouse by the water side, and these two Marks together will
carry you clear of Skitterness-Sand, which lies half Channel over from
Skitterness. You Anchor before the Town in five, six, or seven Fathom at
low water, where is a very strong Tide, especially upon a Spring. The Ships
that belong to the Town go into the River Hull, and there lie in safety by the
shore. It is high water here at Full and Change East and West. The Spring-tydes
rise and Fall eighteen foot.

Flambrough-head.
(...).
From the Spurn to Flambrough-head the Course is north and by west Distance nine
Leagues, a bold and clear shore. Flambrough-head is a high Promontory, on which
stands a high Light-house, but does not burn as yet.

Burlington-Bay.
On the south side of Flambrough-head lies Burlington-Bay, ^^^ling^^^-Bay.
where is very good Anchoring, and clean Ground: In which Bay lies
Smithick-Sand, on the shoalest place of it is but ten foot, as you may see in
the Map of Burlington-Bay, numbered with the Letter I.

Smithick-Sand.
^^^thick-^^^d.
The north end of this Sand lies south south west from Flambrough-head,
distance two Miles; between it and the Head you have seven, eight, and nine
Fathom water; the south end bears from Burlington-Key south east by east,
distance three miles. The shoalest place of the Sand bears from
Burlington-Key south east by east, and east south east. Within this Sand is
very good Anchoring in four, five, and six Fathom water at low water. There is
very good going in and out at the west end of this Sand between it and the
shore; you may stand in to the shore to what depth you please by the Lead.

Burlington-Key.
Burlington-Key ^^^ling^^^-Key.
or Peer, is a place where Vessels go in and out at high water, and and lie dry
at low water. It is high water here at Full and Change in the Peer east north
east. The Spring-tydes rise thirteen foot.

Filey-Brigg.
To the northward of Flambrough-head lies Filey-Brigg, ^^ley-^^igg.
which Bridge is a natural Ledge of Rocks that stretch from the shore into the
Sea, and is distant from Flambrough-head three Leagues; within which Ledge you
may Anchor in five Fathom water at low water, and is a good Road for northerly
winds.

Scarbrough.
Lies north west from Flambrough-head five Leagues; the Castle stands on a
Cliff by the Sea side; to the southward of which Cliff is a fair Sandy-Bay,
where is a good Peer, as you may see in the Map, numbered with the Letter I; in
which Ships lie dry at low water. It is high water here at Full and Change east
north east. There is good Anchoring in the Road called Scarbrough-wick, in
four, five, six or seven Fathom water. The Spring-tydes rise thirteen foot.
From Flambrough-head to Scarbrough Scarborough.
the Land is high, and so Whitby and the River Tease.

Robinhood-Bay.
Between Scarbrough and Whitby is Robinhood-Bay, Robinhood Bay.
where you may Anchor in six, seven, or eight Fathom water, and is a good Road
for westerly winds, but not to the eastward of the south.

Whitby.
To the northward of Robinhood-Bay lies Whitby, Whitby.
where Ships enter at high water into a River, where you lie dry at low water;
on the east side is a Beacon; you may lie up as high as the Bridge. There is a
Rock lies off, the Mark to Sail clear of it is Whitby Church-steeple open to
the northward of the south Point of the Harbor.

Huntly-foot and Redcliff.
To the west north west of Whitby it is high land, Huntley-foot and Redcliff.
and very remarkable to know the Land by. First there is Huntly-foot, which is
a high Hill or Cliff by the Sea side, and is about three Leagues from Whitby.
And to the westward of that lies Redcliff, Redcliff.
which is so called by the Color of the Earth, which is very red. Between
which Cliff and Hartley-Pool lies the River Tease, Tease.
which River is not as yet surveyed by me, but as soon as the Wars shall be
over, I intend to survey it. Hartley-Pool Hartley-Pool.
lies seven Leagues from Whitby, where is a stone Peer, in which Vessels lie
very safe, but dry at low water. As you go into the Peer there is a Beacon,
which you leave on the Starboard-side going in, as you may see in the Map
numbered with the Letter I. There is good Anchoring in the Road to the southward
of the Town in four, five, or six Fathom water. Hartley-Pool is a Peninsula, on
the west side of which is the Peer. The Spring-tydes rise 13 foot.

Dogger and Boat.
Dogger and Boat.
Are two Rocks that lie two Leagues to the northward of Hartley-Pool, about a
Mile from the shore; the Dogger is the biggest, and shows above water like
the bottom of a Vessel, and always above water. The other is less, and lies
under water, on which is seven foot at low water.

Sunderland.
Sunderland.
Lies four Leagues to the northward of Hartley-Pool, and seven Miles to the
southward of Tinmouth-Bar. It is a Tyde-haven, where at high water, on a
Spring-tyde, is twelve foot water, and two foot at low water; but within in
Lady-hole, there is one and twenty foot at high water on a Springtyde, and nine
at low water. A little within the Bar, just without the mouth of the River, are
two Beacons, called the Stell-Beacons, as you enter into Lady-hole, and there
you lie by the Key side at Sunderland. Great Colliers that are laden with
Coals, and have not water enough over the Stell, take in the remainder of their
Coals in the Road, brought out in Keels. It flows here at Full and Change
north east. Note that you have a foot less water over the Stell then over the
Bar.

Tinmouth-bar.
Tinmouth Bar.
Tinmouth is the mouth of the River Tine, called Tinmouth-Bar, and ten Miles
from the said Bar up the River is the Town of New Castle.

The Entrance of this River may be easily known by a Castle and Light-house
which stand on a high Cliff by the Sea side, just on the nroth side of the
going into the River. The Entrance is a Bar, on which is but seven foot at
low water on a Springtyde, and one and twenty foot at high water. There are two
Light-houses within the Bar on the north shore (besides the high Light-house in
Tinmouth-Castle) and are a leading Mark over the Bar; the shore at the north
side going in is rocky and stony, and the south shore a Sand, called the
Hardened: being over the Bar, open the Lights to the southward, and keep close
by the Fort on the north shore, where stands the low Light; being past that low
Light, then Auchor between the two Towns of North and South-Shields. There are
several places up this River where are Keys that Ships load at; and some run up
as high as New Castle, and there lie by the Town Keys. The Map of the River
Tyne is numbered with the Letter L. Note that the depths of water in the River
are feet, and a Line above the figures shows that is the depth at low water.
But where you see a Line drawn between the figures, it shows both high and
low water, as you may see at Tinmouth-Bar; there is seven foot at low water,
and one and twenty foot at high water; so that the Tides rise and fall at a
Spring-tyde fourteen foot. It flows here at Full and Change south west and
north east.

Coller-Coats.
Is a Peer that lies a Mile and more from Tinmouth-Castle to the northward,
Coller-Coats.
and is a Peer where Vessels enter at high water to load Coals, and lie dry at
low water. The going in to this place is between several Rocks, the way in is
beacon'd.

Seaton-Sluce.
Lies five Miles to the northward of Tinmouth-Castle, Seaton Sluice.
and is a Tyde-Haven, where small Ships enter to load Coals. There is in the
Peer at high water on a Spring-tyde, ten foot, and at Neap-tydes when the Ships
have not water enough out, they go into the Road and there take in the rest of
their loading, which is brought out to them in Keels. There is good Anchoring
in the Road in four, five, six, and seven Fathom. It flows here at Full and
Change south west by south: The water rises at a Spring-tyde ten foot in the
Peer, and seven foot at a Neap.

Blythe.
Blythe Bly^he.
lies three miles to the northward of Seaton-Sluce: There are two Beacons on
the Sand-hills to the southward of the Entrance into the River, which leads you
in between two Beacons; and being between the two first Beacons, or outward
Beacons, then steer away close to the second Beacon, and leave it on the
Larboard-side, and then run up and Anchor before Blythe-Key, where is sixteen
Fathom water at high water on a Spring-tyde, and six foot at low water: but
between the Beacons going in there is but two Fathom at low water, and sixteen
at high water.

The Rocks which has a Beacon on it, which you have on the Starboard-side
going in, them Rocks show at low water.

There are Rocks that lie to the eastward of Blythe a Mile off from Blythe,
which are above water the last quarter Ebb, and lie north and by east three
Miles from Seaton-Sluce Peer, of which Rocks you must have a care at
high water, when you Sail along shore. It flows at Blythe at Full and
Change south east and by south: The Spring-tydes rise sixteen foot, and the
Neap seven foot.

Cocket-Island.
Lies six Leagues from Tinmouth-Castle, Cocket-Island.
and above a Mile off shore, and is a good Road for southerly winds. From the
south end of the Island to the shore, it is all Rocks and broken Ground, where
at low water at one place there is eight and nine foot, and dangerous; but the
north side is bold, only from the north west part of the Island lie off some
Rocks about half a Mile; small Vessels may bring the Island south, and Anchor
in three and four Fathom, but greater Ships must bring the Island south east,
and Anchor in five Fathom at low water. The Road is clean Sand.

chart of "Cocket Isle," "Humble Town" and "Warpworth Castle" PART OF
NORTHUMBERLAND


Fernie-Isle and Staples.
Fernie-Isle and Staples.
From Cocket-Island to Ferne-Island and the Staples, the Course is south,
Distance six Leagues, and five Mile from Holy-Island. The outward part of the
Staples lies five Miles from the Main. Between the Isle of Fern and the Main
is a good Channel, a Mile and a half broad, where is seven, eight, nine, and
ten Fathom water. Between Ferne-Island and Bambrough-Castle is good Anchoring,
which place is called Scate-Road, Scate-Road.
and is good for east and north east winds. There is a Light-house on the
Fern, but does not burn. The Staples are a parcel of small Islands or great
Rocks, and lie north east from the Fern. A Mile without the Staples you will
have thirty Fathom, and four and twenty Fathom a Stones cast off; keep in eight
and thirty and forty Fathom, and that Depth will carry you three and four
Leagues from the Staples, (and the high Hills up in the Land) called
Chevet-hills, Chevet-hills.
bear off each other east by north, and west by south. These Hills are seen
eight Leagues off at Sea, and are very remarkable to know the Land. It flows
here at Full and Change south west by south. Note that the Flood goes to the
southward till it is two hours, and two hours and a half Ebb ashore.

Holy-Island.
Holy-Island.
Lies five Miles north west from the Fern, a fair bold shore, five and six
Fathom water. This Island is easily known by a Castle which stands on a high
Hill. On the south side of the Island, which side is little more then half a
Mile from the Main, between the Island and the Main, is the Harbor: To Sail
between the Staples and the Goldstone.
There are four several ways to go in and out the Harbor; First between
Ferne-Island and the Main; then between the Staples and the Goldstone; and
between the Goldstone and the Plough, and between the Plough and Holy-Island.
The broadest Channel is between the Staples and the Goldstone; you may keep
within half a Mile of the Staples. The Goldstone Goldstone.
shows from half Ebb to half Flood, and is a small Rock and bold too.

To Sail between the Goldstone and the Plough.
The Mark to Sail between the Goldstone and the Plough is to bring the
Light-house on the Fern a Sails breadth on the east part of the Megstone, and
that carries you between the two Rocks. The Plough shows the first quarter
Ebb, and is a small Rock, the north east end of it is foul about a quarter of a
Cables length. There is another Mark to Sail between the Goldstone and the
Plough, which is to keep a hole open in the Wall of the east part of
Bambrough-Castle, which hole, if you see through, will carry you clear: but
this Mark being not easy to be seen, I advise none to use it but such as are
well acquainted. The Plough lies east from the Castle on Holy-Island, and
lies half a mile from Holy-Island. There is five Fathom water at low water
between the Plough and Holy-Island; you may stand into three and four fathom to
the Island.

Being clear of the Goldstone and Plough, How to Sail over the Bar into the
Harbo^^
and that you would go into the Harbor, you must stay for the Tide, for there
is but nine foot water at low water over the Bar, between the Partner-still and
the Stone-Ridge; bring the Old-Church at Holy-Island north west, and get the
Soundings of the Stone-Ridge, being the boldest side; there is one part of the
Stone-Ridge always above water, being shingle Stones, keep close to them, being
steep and bold: Having brought the Castle north east, Anchor in four or five
Fathom at low water. The Partner-still are a Ledge of Rocks that lie from the
Main, and show themselves the last quarter Ebb. There is no failing between
Holy-Island and the Main, it being all dry Sand at the last quarter Ebb. This
place is much frequented by the Colliers, when they are put away to the
northward of New Castle by bad weather. This Harbor is defended by a Castle
and Platform of Guns. Here is good convenience to haul ships ashore to Wash,
Tallow, Careen, or stop Leaks. It flows here at Full and Change south west
and by south two hours and a quarter; the Spring-tydes rise and fall fifteen
foot: The Flood goes to the southward two hours, and two hours and a half in
the Offin after high water ashore. The Map of this place is numbered with the
Letter M.

Barwick.
Lies northwest and by west from Holy-Island, Barwick.
Distance three Leagues; there is a Bar at the going into the River, The Map of
Barwick was Surveyed by Col. Jacob Richards.
where at low water, at a Spring-tyde, is but six and seven foot water; the
going in is beacon'd, which Beacons you leave on the Starboard-side going in,
keeping close to them, as you may see in the Map, numbered with the Letter M.
Being in, you may Anchor by the Car-Rock, or Still-Rock, where is nine foot at
low water, or run up to the Key by the Bridge. It flows here at Full and
Change south west by south. The Spring-tydes rise eighteen foot, and the Neap
thirteen and fourteen foot. There is good Anchoring in the Road: without the
Bar is five, six, or seven Fathom water.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE East-Coast of Scotland, WITH The Isles of Orkney and
Shetland.
St. Tab's-head.
^^. Tab's-^^^d.
FROM Barwick to St. Tab's- head, the Course is north west and by north,
Distance five Leagues: between these two is a small place, called Haymouth,
used by Fishermen with small Boats.

Isle of Bass.
(...) of ^^ss.
From St. Tab's-head to the Isle of Bass, the Course is west north west four
Leagues. This Island is a high round Island in the Sea, and lies on the south
entrance of Edinborough Frith, a little above a mile from the shore: this
Island is steep too all round it; there is fifteen Fathom water between it and
the Main. On the south east side of it is a small Fortification with Guns on
it, but naturally strong of it self, and not to be taken as long as they have
Provisions: there is a Spring of fresh water on the top of it. This Island is a
good Mark to know the Frith.

Isle of May.
The Isle of May Isle of May.
bears from the Isle of Bass north north east easterly seven miles, and is
bigger than the Bass, but not so high; on which stands a Light-house, that
Ships may know the Frith in the Night; this Light may be seen six Leagues off.
You may Anchor to the eastward of this Island in Eighteen Fathom water,
bringing the Light-house west south west; and if your Anchor hold not you will
drive into deep water, of which you must have a care to give Cable enough.
Dunbar is a small Haven, used by Fishermen and small Vessels.

Keith-Isle.
From the Isle of May to Inch-Keith-Island, Keith-Isle
the Course is west south west, Distance seven Leagues, and from Inch-Keith to
Leith south south west three miles; bring Leith south or south south east, and
Anchor in Leith-Road Leith-Road.
in five, six, seven, or eight Fathom water.

Leith-Feer,
Leith is a Tyde-Haven, where you enter at high water, leaving the Beacon on
the Larboard-side going in, as you may see in the Map of Leith, numbered with
the Letter O. You Sail in between two wooden Peers, and lie dry at low water by
the Keys side. Here you have thirteen foot at high water on Spring-tydes, and
ten foot at Neap-tydes.

Queens-Ferry.
To Sail from Lies to Queens Ferry.
To Sail from Leith-Road up to Queen's-Ferry, Sail along the south shore till
you come to the small Island of Cramend, which you leave on the Larboard-side
going up, and the Rock-Muckrie on the Starboard-side, and being past them,
steer away west north west, till you open Queen's-Ferry-Town, and so stand away
for it, and Anchor before the Town of Queen's-Ferry in five, six, or seven
Fathom water. Note that the Tides run very strong here; and those that have
occasion to Sail further up, I advise them to a Pilot.

Brunt-Isle.
Brunt-Isle
Brunt-Island lies south by west from Leith four or five miles, and is a good
Tyde-Haven; you Sail in north north west between two Stone-heads, where you lie
dry at low water. The Spring-tydes rise and fall here fourteen and fifteen
foot, and the Neap-tydes eleven and twelve foot. It is high water here at Full
and Change south west by south; the same throughout the Frith.

There are several good Peers in the Frith, but all Tyde-Peers, where Ships lie
dry at low water.

Port-Seaton.
Port-Seaton.
My Lord Winton has been at great Charges in building a Stone-Peer at
Port-Seaton, where is twelve and thirteen foot water at Spring-tydes, and nine
and ten at Neap-tydes. You may Anchor in the Bay before the Peer in six, seven,
and eight Fathom good Ground.

Note that it is a general Rule for Anchoring in the Frith, that if you Anchor
without twelve Fathom water, you will have good and clear Ground.

You may Anchor on the west side of the May in fifteen and sixteen Fathom water.

Carr-Rocks.
The Carr-Rocks Carr-Rocks.
lie off from Fifness east north east a mile in the Sea, the outward Rock
dries the last quarter Ebb, the others are only seen at low water on
Spring-tydes. Keep the Light of the May south and by west, and that will carry
you clear of the Carr; in the Night come no nearer it then in fifteen and
sixteen Fathom water. If you be to the northward of it, you will have fifteen,
sixteen, and seventeen Fathom; and if to the southward, you will have two and
twenty, three and twenty, and four and twenty Fathom.

Inch-Cape-Rock.
Lies from Fifness four leagues north east half north; Inch-Cap^ Rock.
from the mouth of the River Tay east half south four leagues; from the
Red-head south east three leagues and a half, and from the Light of the May
north north east six leagues. The Isle of Bass on the Isle of May carries you
just on the edge of the Cape-Rock; but the Bass on the east part of the May
carries you clear; you have from eighteen to two and twenty Fathom within a
mile of it, except the southwest part of it, and there you will have four and
five Fathom a mile off, as Mr. Mar says, who is a very ingenious Mariner at
Dundee. The Flood runs over it south west, and the Ebb north east. This Rock
is about a mile long, and a Cables length broad, and dries the last quarter
Ebb, and is very dangerous, especially in smooth water at high water time.

St. Andrew's-bay.
This Bay lies to the northward of Fifness, and between Fifness and the River
Tay, St. Andrew's Bay.
in which Bay is very good Anchoring for Landerly-winds. In the bottom of which
Bay lies the Town and Haven of St. Andrew's, St. Andrew's-Peer.
where is a small Stone-Peer for small Vessels, where at Spring-tydes at
high water is ten and eleven foot, and seven and eight at Neap-tydes. Two miles
to the northward of this place lies an Inlet called Eden, Eden.
and at high water shows as though it were a Harbor, but it is only a place
for Boats.

River of Tay.
^iver of Tay.
Lies four leagues to the northward of Fifness, and lies from the Carr-Rocks
north north west. On the north side of the River is a red Sand-hill, called
Bukannais, or Bottonnas, on which stand two Light-houses by the Sea side, being
a leading Mark to Sail into the River Tay, between two Sands, the one Sand,
which is the north sand, is called the Goa, and lies off east south east a
mile and a half off from Bukannais side; the other Sand, which is the south
Sand, is called Avertie, and lies off from the south side of the River, east
north east two miles and a half, and dries at low water. Between these two
Sand-heads in the going into the River Tay, which are a mile asunder, without
which Sand-heads is but three Fathom water from Sand-head to Sand-head.

Directions to Sail into the River Tay.
BRing the highest part of Bukannas-Hill north west, or north west westerly, or
the Lights together, till you bring the high pecked Hill, called Dundeelaw,
just over Castle-Broughty, which is a leading Mark in; you may Sail within a
Cables-length of the low Light by the water side, having six and seven Fathom
water; then Sail up west and west southerly, being above Castle-Broughty; keep
nearest the north shore to avoid the Newcom-Sand that lies on the south shore
above Castle-Broughty, and then Anchor before the Town of Dundee in five or six
Fathom water; bring the Town north east, where is a very good and safe Road for
all Winds.

If you shall Sail into this River when it blows hard, and the Sea high, take
two or three hours Flood with you, more or less, according as your Ship is in
burden, and be sure to keep a good Head-sail: but if you should go in with the
Tide of Ebb, and a great Sea, it is very frightful and dangerous for laden
Ships, all the Channel being of a breach.

Directions for Turning into the River Tay.
FIrst be well assured of your Ships staying, then take an hours Flood with
you, then are you sure of a good Tide running in with you. In turning in you
may open the Light-houses a little on either side, and when you are above the
Lights, you stand to the northward into three Fathom water, and to the
southward to the South-bank, which you may always know by the Ripling or Beach
of the water in it; the Lead is not sure, for this Sand is steep too. You may
open the Marks of Dundee-Law and Castle-Broughty a little off either side. The
Map of Dundee is numbered with the Letter P. It flows here at Full and Change
south west by south. The Spring-tydes rise sixteen foot, and the Neap twelve
foot.

Red-head.
From the River Tay to the Red-head Redhead.
the Course is north east by north about three Leagues. A mile to the westward
of Red-head is the Town and Peer of Arbroth, Arbroth.
a place for Boats only. To the northward of Redhead is a fair Buoy, called
Lounan-Bay, Lounan-Bay.
where is good Anchoring in eight or nine Fathom water, Redhead bearing south.

Montross-River.
Lies four miles to the northward of Red-head; Montross-River.
the going in to this River is very narrow; About two Cables length over there
lies a Rock east north east from Scurdinnais, called the Stone, on the south
side; and from the north side runs off a Spit of Sand, called the Annot:
between this Sand and the Stone-Rock is the going into the River. The Marks to
Sail in this River is this; bring the Rivers mouth west and by south, and run
in till you see three Hills lying together in the Country, and a little House
on an Island in the River, bring the House on the middle of the three Hills,
and this Mark carries you in; run up before Ferry-Den and Anchor in four
Fathom, or four Fathom and a half of water, and moar your Ship. But if the Wind
blow hard, and the Sea high, be sure of your Ships working, and take notice
that the Tide of Flood comes from the northward, and sets strongly thwart the
Rivers mouth to the southward; but being within Annot, the Tide runs in
strong with you; the Rivers mouth is all of a Breach when the Winds are out and
blow-hard, with the Tide of Ebb. The House on the Island being kept open of the
Southland, is also a good Mark to Sail into the River. The Map of Montross is
numbered with the Letter P. It flows here at Full and Change south west by
south.

Todhead.
From Montross to Todhead Todhead.
the Course is north east three Leagues; betwixt both is good Anchoring for
Landerly-winds.

Dounfit.
From Todhead to Dounfit Dounfit.
the Course is north north east. Easterly three Leagues on the north side is
Dounfit, it is a good Bay for Anchoring in nine Fathom water, the Point south.
In the bottom of this Bay is the Town and Peer of Stonehive, where at
Spring-tydes at high water you have twelve and thirteen foot water, and ten and
eleven foot at Neap-tydes.

Girdlenais.
From Dounfit to Girdlenais Girdlenais
the Course is north north east half east four Leagues. A little to the
northward of Girdlenais is the Bay of Aberdeen, where is good Anchoring in
seven, eight, or nine Fathom water; you may bring the Point of Girdlenais south
and south by east.

Aberdeen.
Aberdeen.
Lies a mile to the westward of Girdlenais, and is a Tyde-Haven, where Vessels
enter at high water; you Sail close in by the south shore: the Entrance into
the River is very narrow. On the Larboard-side, going in, is a Beacon, you Sail
close by it; the north shore is a low sandy Point, on which is a Block-house,
which you leave on the Starboard-side. You must not venture in here without a
Pilot, for the Bar often alters: And you are to observe, that no Ship of any
Burden, that draws ten, eleven, or twelve foot water, will adventure here, but
when the water is very smooth, and the Winds off shore, and Spring-tydes. Here
are always Boats ready to help Ships in and out.

Bokannais.
From Girdlenais to Bokannais, Bokanna^^
the Course is north north east and north east by north eight or nine Leagues.
In the midway between them, is Newbrough-Creek, a place only for small Vessels.

Peter-head.
Peter-head Peter-head.
lies a little to the northward of Bokannais, and lies within Calk-Inch. Here
are two little dry Peers, only fit for small Vessels to enter at high water.

To the southward of Peter-head is a large Bay, where you may Anchor in eight
or nine Fathom water, and may Ride with the Wind off shore: but have a care
that the southerly Winds do not catch you there, for then you will have a hard
Road.

Ratter-head.
From Calk-Inch to Ratter-head Katter-head.
the Course is north two Leagues. There is a Ledge of Rocks runs off from
Ratter-head east north east a mile into the Sea, therefore keep no nearer the
shore than twelve or thirteen Fathom; or keep Mormount, (which is a high Hill
in the Country, and shows like a Saddle) in sight above the Sand-hills of
Ratter-head. Mormount may be seen ten or twelve Leagues at Sea.

Murrey-Frith.
Is a deep Bay, M^rr^ Frit^.
and lies in between Bokannais (which is the east part of Scotland) and
Dungsby-head, which is the north of Scotland. This Bay is known by the name of
the North-Frith, as Edinbrough is by the name of the South-Frith. In the
western-most part of this Frith lies two most excellent Harbors, Cromerty and
Inverness.

Cromerty.
Lies to the westward of Kinnards-head, Crome^^y.
which is the north part of Bokannais, twenty Leagues; the going in is almost a
mile over between two high Lands, the shore bold and steep, and no manner of
danger in going in or out. The best Anchoring is on the south side, just within
the mouth of the Harbor. The Town or Village of Cromerty lies on the south
side in the mouth of the Harbor; the north shore of the Harbor is sandy, and
dries at low water: you may stand into either side of the Harbor by your
Lead, the sounding being good, and shoaleth gradually. Five miles above the
Harbors mouth it falls narrow at Inverbrecky-Ferry, where is fifteen Fathom
water; and as you sail further up it shoaleth gradually, there being five
Fathom water at low water five miles above the Ferry of Inverbrecky. The Map of
this place is numbered with the Letter Q. This Harbor is able to contain the
Navy Royal. It flows here at Full and Change south and by east. The
Spring-tydes rise and fall fifteen and sixteen foot, and the Neap-tydes twelve
and thirteen foot.

Inverness.
Lies to the south end of Cromerty fourteen miles, To sail to Inverness
^^^erness.
from the mouth of Cromerty, keep close to the west shore till you come to
Chanry-Point, which is a low sandy Point, and there it is very narrow. Being
about the Point of Chanry, keep the west shore till you come near to the mouth
of Inverness, where on a low Point of the mouth of the River, you will see the
Ruins of a Citadel; about a mile from this Citadel lies a Bar, on which is
but fifteen foot at low water; so that if your Ship draw above fifteen foot
water, you must stay for a Tide. Being over the Bar, you may run up the River
Beauly, and Anchor at Kessock in ten or fifteen Fathom water. The Town of
Inverness lies a mile up the River, which is fresh water.

Being got within the Chanry-Point, you may Anchor before the Town of Chanry,
as you may see in the Map. But if any Ship that is not acquainted, and is
fearful to adventure up to Inverness, they may have a Pilot at Cromerty.

Findhorne.
Lies east south east from Scromerty four Leagues, Findhorne
and is a Tyde-Haven, where Vessels enter at high water.

Tarbetness.
From Cromerty to Tarbetness, Tarbetness
the Course is north east and by north four Leagues, a bold and clean shore;
only in the Fairway there lies a small parcel of Rocks, about half a mile from
the shore, called the Three Kings, which show above water.

Tarbet-Bay, or The Frith of Taine.
To the northward of Tarbetness Tarbet-Bay or The Frith of Taine.
lies into the westward a deep Bay, called Tarbet-Bay, or The Frith of Taine.
Such Ships as have occasion to sail up to Taine must take in a Pilot, for there
lies a Bar about five miles to the westward of Tarbet-Point, where is but six
foot at low water. But in the Bay is good Anchoring for all Winds but easterly.

Dungesby-head.
From Tarbet-Point to Dungesby-head, Dungesby-head.
the Course is north east and by north and north north east fourteen Leagues.
Between which Head and the Islands of Orkney is a Channel, called
Pentland-Frith, where is the strongest Tide in all the Coast of Great Britain.

THE ISLANDS OF ORKNEY.
ARE several Islands that lie to the northward of Scotland, in which are many
good Harbors, and good sailing between the most part of them. The Tides run
very strong amongst them: You will see (in the Map of the Isles of Orkney,
numbered with the Letter R.) several Arrows, which show that the Tide of Flood
sets the same way the Arrows Point, and the Tides of Ebb to the contrary.

Pomona.
Pomona.
Pomona is the greatest Island, on which is the Town of Kirkwell, where the
Bishop of Orkney resides. In this Island of Pomona are two very good Harbors,
Dearsound and Cairston.

Dearsound.
Dearsound
Lies on the north east end of Pomona, just within the Mulhead, which Head is
high land and very remarkable, as you may see by the making of it in the Map,
numbered with the Letter S. The Mulhead is bold and steep too; the Harbors
mouth lies from this Head a League, and the Harbors mouth is about a mile
over. Keep in the middle, for there lies off some sunk Rocks from Point
Nestin, which is on the Starboard-side going in; being past this Point, then
edge to the northward, and bring Point Nestin east and by north, and Anchor in
five Fathom water at low water. It flows here at Full and Change south east
and by south. The Spring-tydes rise and fall ten and twelve foot, and the
Neap-tydes seven and eight foot in this Harbor. The English Convoy and
Fishermen for Iceland, make use of this Harbor most commonly to fill fresh
water, and take in Turff for Firing. Provisions are here good and Plenty, all
these Islands afford much Corn. Fish of all sorts is very plenty and cheap.

Cairston.
Lies at the south west end of Pomona, Cairst^^
and is a good and safe Harbor, and is a good outlet to the westward. There
are several Channels to sail to it, as you may see by the Map. There is a good
Channel at the south end of Pomena, called Hamsound. You sail close by the
Point of Rosness, leaving the Island Lamholme on the Larboard-side, and so keep
the Island Pomona aboard till you come up to Cairsound.

There is a good Channel beween South-Ronalsha and Burra, and another broad
Sound between the Island of Hoy, Flota, and South-Ronalsha. Betweeen the Isle
of Hoy and Pomona, are many good places to Anchor in, where you ride
Land-lock't. The Tides run in and out very strong between the west end of Hoy
and Pomona, where you will have great Riplings and Breaches, as though there
were shoal-water, yet the Channel is bold and deep, and no danger; in the
Harbor of Cairston is no manner of Tide, where you ride with great safety. It
flows here at Full and Change south east. The Spring-tydes rise and fall ten
and twelve foot.

Kirkwell-Road.
Kirkwell-R^ad.
To sail into Kirkwell-Road, you must sail between Pomona, and Shapinsha,
leaving the Island Elgar-Holm on the Starboard-side, and the Island
Thieves-Holm on the Larboard-side; being about the Island, stand into
Kirkwell-Road, and Anchor before the Town in five, six, seven, eight, or nine
Fathom water.

Moonos-Bay.
M^^nos-^^^
There is very good Anchoring to the westward of Kirkwell-Bay, called
Moonos-Bay. There are several sunk Rocks that lie to the northward of
Kirkwell-Bay, between it and the Island Garsay. But I would not have any
Stranger sail that way but with a Pilot.

Wiresound.
Wiresound.
To sail into Wiresound from the eastward you must sail into Stronsa-Frith,
between the Mulhead and Stronsa; in which Frith runs a very strong Tide,
especially on Spring-tydes, so that if you should Anchor, your Cables and
Anchors must be very good to hold, besides the Ground is foul. Here you will
have great Riplings and Breaches caused by the strength of the Tides, and yet
deep water. Being entered into the Frith between the Mulhead and Stronsa, keep
over to Shapinsa, and sail between it and Green-Island, leaving Shapinsa on the
Larboard-side, and Green-Island on the Starboard-side, and then sail between
Wire, Eglesha and Rowsay, which three Islands make a good Road, called
Wiresound; you may turn in with a Tide, there being no danger; only from the
south end of Eglesha lies off some Rocks, of which you must have a care, they
lie a mile off Bring St. Agnis Church north east, or east north east, and
Anchor in six, seven, eight, or nine Fathom water. This is a good Road, and but
little Tide, and is used by the Iceland Fishermen when they are bound for
Iceland.

Scoknesholm.
There is a narrow Channel to sail out at the north end of Wiresound, between
Rowsay and a little Island, called Scoknesholm, Scokensholm.
where is four Fathom at low water, keep in the middle between them. But the
best Channel is to go out at the south end of Eglesha, and so sail out
Westra-Frith, between Rowsay and Westra, keeping nearest to Rowsa, for there
lies some sunk Rocks about two Miles off from Croskirk on Westra.

There is a Channel between Stronsa, Sanda, and Eda into Stronsa-Frith, and so
to Wiresound, and out of Westra-Frith.

I have given you an Account of the best Harbors in these Islands; only there
are several others, which are made use of but by small Vessels, which I have no
occasion to mention, my only design being to harbor Ships in the best Harbors.

Faire-Isle.
Between the Islands of Orkney and the Islands of Shetland, is a small Island
called Fair-Isle, Fair-Isle.
which is inhabited. The Dutch East India Ships, as they go and come from
India, sail between the Islands of Orkney and Shetland, and homeward bound they
send ashore at this Fair-Island for Letters of Advice; but commonly the Dutch
East India Company send a Ship to meet them here with Advice.

THE ISLANDS OF SHETLAND.
THese Islands lie away north half east from Bokannais in Scotland about five
and forty Leagues to the southward part of them, called Sumbrough-head, and
north east from the Island of Orkney sixteen or seventeen Leagues. Shetland is
high Land, and very remarkable, as you may see by the making of the Land,
numbered with the Letter W.

A Description of the East side of the South part of Shetland, from
Sumbrough-head to the Isles of Brasey and Nos, and from thence to Laxford and
Catford-Sounds.
Sumbrough-head.
Sumbrough-head.
SVmbrough-head is the south part of Shetland: between it and Fitfil-head are
three Bays, as you may see in the Map of Shetland, numbered with the Letter W

Quindel-Bay.
The best is Quendel-Bay, and lies on the east side of Fitfil-head, and is a
good place to Anchor in six, seven, or eight Fathom water; the Sea being open
but to four Points of the Compass.

West-Voe.
A little to the westward of Sumbrough-head is a small Bay, called West-Voe,
West-Voe.
where you Anchor in seven or eight Fathom water, and is a good Road for all
Winds, but from the south to the south east.

East-Voe.
About a Mile to the northward of Sumbrough-head is a Bay, called East-voe,
East-Voe.
and lies south south west in, where you Anchor in three or four Fathom, and
is a good Road for all Winds, but north east Winds. As you sail in and out you
must keep a Cables length. At the Entry into this Bay is another Bay, and
runs in west and by north, where is shoal-water, not above four and five
foot.

About six miles to the northward of Sumbrough-head is a little Inlet, where
are two Bays, Lewenwick and Sandwick.

Lewenwick.
Lewenwick Lewenwick.
lies in west north west, and west and by north; and as soon as the Bay opens,
you sail in west, and west and by south, and Anchor in seven and eight Fathom
water.

Sandwick.
Sandwich Sandwick.
runs in north, and north and by east, and is a little Bay, where you Anchor
in seven Fathom water. The Point of Nonnaise lies from Lewenwick about a Mile.

Island of Musa.
From the Point of Nonnaise lies the Island of Musa Island of Musa.
north east about a mile: there is a Channel between the Island and the Main.
North west and by north, and north north west from this Island, is a little
Inlet going in north, called Eths-Noe, where is but ten and twelve foot.

Brasey.
(...)
From the Island of Musa to the Head of Brasey or Wart-hill, the Course is north
two Leagues. Between the Island of Brasey and the Main is the going into
Brasey-Sound, leaving Brasey on the Starboard-side, there is no manner of
danger in sailing in and out at Brasey-Sound. You may Anchor before the Town of
Lerwick in five, six, seven, eight, nine, or ten Fathom-water Land-lock. The
Earl of Sandwich, in the Year 1665. in the War with Holland. Anchored here with
the English Fleet under his Command. This is a most excellent Harbor, and much
frequented by the Dutch Herring-Fishers Busses; for at these Islands the Dutch
begin their Summer-herring fishing, and so follow the Fish from this Place to
the Coast of Scotland, and the Coast of England; they begin to fish at Shetland
about the middle of June, and continue fishing from thence to Yarmouth, till
the latter end of September: there have been five hundred Sail of Dutch
Herring-Busses at a time in Brasey-Sound. Here you have fresh water, and Turff
for firing, and great plenty of several-sorts of Fish.

Island of Nosse.
^^^and of ^^sse.
You may very easily know the going into Brasey-Sound by the Island of Nosse,
which lies to the eastward of the Island Brasey, the eastward part of which
Island is called Hang-cliff, being a high steep Cliff by the Sea side, and
hanging over into the Sea. Wart-hill, or Sandwich-hill is very remarkable, as
you may see in the Map of Brasey, numbered with the Letter T. It flows here at
Full and Change south east and by south. The Spring-tydes rise and fall eight
foot, and at a Neap-tyde five foot; here is but a small Tide: the Flood comes
into the south Entrance, and runs out at the north Entrance, and the Tide of
Ebb to the contrary: the Tides are strongest at the north Entrance.

Holme of Cruester.
B^ing in Brasey-Sound, and that you would sail out at the north end, called
the North-Sound, keep the Main-side till you are past a small Island, called
The Holme of Cruester, The Holme of Cruester
for to the westward of this Island lies some sunk Rocks, called Loofhabor,
being past these Rocks, steer away to the northward, and when you come to the
first narrow Entrance, there is a middle bank on which is but fifteen foot
water; but there is a narrow Channel of eighteen foot water of each side of it;
you may keep of either side of it, the shoars being bold, and then you come
into a broader place, and then narrow again, which is the northermost Passage;
you must keep the Main aboard, and go close by the small Island or Rock called
Scotland, for there lies some sunk Rocks off from Brasey side, as you may see
see in the large Map of Brasey: being out at the north end, you have a good
Channel out between Beoster-Island and Green-Island into the Sea.

The Voes.
Between the Island of Brasey and a head Land called the Mull of Esweek, lies
in four deep Sounds and Bays, called by the Inhabitants Voes: the southernmost
is called Deal's Voe, Deal's Voe,
and lies two Miles to the northward of the Island Brasey, and is a Bay, lying
in south west and by south two Miles, but not above a quarter of a Mile broad.
About three quarters of a Mile from Kebester-Point, which is on the south side,
there lies a Rock called Toagrood, and shows at half-tyde. It bears from
the said Point of Kebester north east and by north.

Laxford-Voe.
A Mile to the northward of Deal's Voe is Laxford Voe, Laxford Voe.
lying south west and by south two Miles, much like Deal's Voe, where is three,
four, five, six, seven, eight, nine and ten Fathom water clear Ground, and good
Anchoring.

Websters-Voe.
A little to the northward of Laxford-Voe, lies Websters-Voe, Webster's-Voe.
a Mile in west and by south, where is good Anchoring in four, five, six,
seven, and eight Fathom water.

Catford-Voe.
Catford: Voe.
Catford-Voe is the northernmost and the best, for there you ride Land-lockt
for all Winds. This is a most excellent Bay, and able to hold a Navy Royal,
where you may Anchor in what depth of water you please, from fourteen Fathom to
three Fathom clear Ground.

From Sumbrough-head to Nonnais, the Flood runs to the northward; but from
Nonnais to Brasey, the Ebb falls to the northwards, and the Flood to the
contrary, as the Ebb does from Nonnais to Sumbrough-head, so that the Tides
part at Nonnais.

A Description of the West-Coast of the south part of Shetland, from
Fitfil-head to Scallaway.
Colsa-Island.
FROM Fitfil-head to the Island of Colsa, Colsa-Island.
the Course is north north west two Miles, and from Colsa to the Island St.
Ringins, St. Ringins Island.
the Course is north and by west two Miles. This Island is joined to the Main
by a little Isthmus of Sand, which overfloweth at some high Tides. To the
southward of this Isthmus, and within the Island, is a fair sandy Bay, where is
a good Road to Anchor in seven, eight, or nine Fathom. There is a good Road to
the northward of this Isthmus, where is a good Road for easterly and southerly
Winds.

Little Hevra and Great Hevra.
Two Miles north and by west from the Island of St. Ringins are two Islands,
called Little Hevra and Great Hevra; Little Hevra and Great Hevra.
between which and the Main is the little Island, called the Holme of Maywick.
Between this Island, and the Island Hevra, is the Entrance into Clift-Sound,
which is a fair and clean Sound, and runs in north half east two Leagues and
a half, having the Island of East-Buro, and the Island Tronzo on the west, and
the main Land on the East, and a mile broad in some places, and other places
less, as you may see in the Map; where you may Anchor in good Ground, from
eighteen Fathom to five Fathom. At the northernmost part of this Sound the
Island of Tronzo lies within a Cables length of the Main, at which narrow
place is a Bar, where is but six and seven foot water at low water, and eleven
and twelve foot at high water to sail over the Bar, Keep close to the Main, and
within half a Mile of the Town of Scallaway.

The best Channel to go into Scallaway, How ^^ Sail i^^^ Scalla^^^
is to sail without the Island of Buro, and bring the Castle of Scallaway north
east and by east; there is a leading Mark, which is to keep the Castle of
Scallaway just open of the south side of Green-Island, and this Mark will carry
you in between Buro, Oxna, and Papa, leaving Buro on the Starboard-side, and
Oxna and Papa on the Larboard-side, and so sail in between Green-Island, and
the little Island called Narry, which are not above a Cables length asunder:
being past these Islands, run in with the Castle open before the Town, in four,
three, or two Fathom water. It flows here at Full and Change south south
east, and south east by south.

From Sumbrough-head to Scallaway the Tide of Ebb runs to the northwards,
and the Flood to the contrary. Here I found the Variation to be six Degrees
westerly; Variat^^^
and the same at the Islands of Orkney.

The north part of the Island of Shetland I had not time to Survey, the Summer
being well spent; at which time I went to the Islands of Orkney, and from
thence to Cromerly and Inverness; from which place I parted at the latter end
of October in the Year 1685.

1681. I surveyed the Channel from Dover to the Lands end in Cornwall. 1682. I
surveyed the Channel from Dover to the Lands end in Cornwall. 1683. Surveyed
the Islands of Scilly and the Severn, with Milford-Haven. 1684. Surveyed the
Coast from Harwich to Edinbrough. 1685. Surveyed the Coast from Edinbrough to
Orkney and Shetland. 1686. Surveyed the Coast from Milford to Chester. 1687. I
surveyed Liverpool, the Isle of Man, Carreck-fergus, Dublin, Kinsale and Cork,
which is all that is surveyed, and is the most usefullest and necessary part to
Navigation. I could heartily wish that the west part of Ireland and Scotland
may hereafter be surveyed, etc.

COURSES and DISTANCES From Place to Place from LONDON BRIDGE (All along the
Seacoast) to BARWICK.
Note that the Distances are put down in Leagues or Miles, L standing for
Leagues, and M for Miles.

L. M. FROM London to Gravesend several Courses down the several Reaches 6 2
From Gravesend to the upper end of the Hope west 1 0 From the upper end of the
Hope to the lower end of the Hope north and by east 1 0 From the lower end of
the Hope to the Buoy of the Nower west 3 2 From the Buoy of the Nower to the
Black-Tayl west north west 3 2 From the Black-Tayl to the Shoo-Beacon the
Course is north east 1 1 From the Shoo-Beacon to the Whittaker-Beacon, the
Course is north north east 1 From the Shoo-Beacon to the Buoy of the Middle
north east by north 1 1 From the Buoy of the Middle to the Buoy of the Spits
north east 2 From the Buoy of the Spits to the Buoy of the Gunfleet north east
3 From the Buoy of the Gunfleet to the Middle of the Sledway north east and
north east and by east 3 From the outward part of the Sledway or West-Rocks to
Balsey-Cliff north north west 3 From Balsey-Cliff to Orfordness north east and
by north, and north east 4 From Orfordness to Sole-Bay north by east 4 From
Sole-Bay to Lastiff north by east and north 3 1 From Lastiff to Yarmouth-Haven
2 From Yarmouth-Haven to Castor-Lights north From Castor-Lights to
Winterton-Ness-Lights north and by west, and north north west and north 2 2
From Winterton-Ness to Hasebrough north west 3 From Hasebrough to Foulness
north west and by west 2 1 From Foulness to Blakeney north west and by west 3
From Foulness to the Spurn north west westerly 19 From Blakeney to the Spurn
north west 16 From the Spurn to Flambrough-head north by west 9 From
Flambrough-head to Scarbrough north west 5 From Scarbrough to Whitbay north
west and by north 5 From Whitbay to Hartley-Pool north west and by west 7 From
Hartley-Pool to Sunderland north by west 4 From Sunderland to Tinmouth-Bar
north 2 2 From Tinmouth-Bar to Seaton-Sluce north north west 2 From
Tinmouth-Bar to Blythe north north west 3 From Tinmouth-Bar to Cocket-Island
north by west 6 1 From Cocket-Island to the Staples north 6 2 From the Staples
to Holy-Island north west and by west 2 From Holy-Island to Barwick north west
and by west 3

Courses and Distances from place to place along the Seacoast of Scotland,
from Barwick to the Islands of Orkney and Shetland.
L. M. FRom Barwick to St. Tabb's-Head north west by north 5 From St.
Tabb's-Head to the Isle of May north north west half west 5 From St.
Tabb's-Head to the Isle of Bass north west and by west 4 1 From the Isle of
Bass to the Isle of May north north east 2 1 From the Isle of May to the Isle
of Keith west south west 7 1 From the Isle of Keith to Leith south west by
south 1 From the Isle of May to Fifness north by west 2 From the Isle of May to
the Carr-Rock north 2 From the Isle of May to the Cap-Rock north north east 5 2
From the Cap-Rock to the Redhead north west and by north 3 2 From the Cap-Rock
to Montross north north west 5 From Montross to Todhead north east 3 1 From
Todhead to Dunfit north east and by north 3 1 From Dunfit to Girdleness north
east and by north 3 From Girdleness to Aberdeen west 0 1 From Girdleness to
Buckanness north east and by north 8 From Buckanness to Peter-head north 1 1
From Peter-head to Ratter-head north north west 1 2 From Ratter-head to
Kinnards-head north west 1 1 From Kinnards-head to Cromerty west 20 From
Kinnards-head to Tarbet-Ness west by north 19 From Ratter-head to Dungesby-head
north west 25 From Ratter-head to South-Ronalsha on the Isles of Orkney north
west and by north 27 From Ratter-head to North-Ronalsha one of the Isles of
Orkney north by west half west 35 From South-Ronalsha to Fair-Isle north east
20 From North-Ronalsha to Fair-Isle east north east 9 1 From Buckanness to
Fair-Isle north westerly 40 From Cromerty to Tarbet-Ness north east and by
north 3 From Tarbet-Ness to Noshead north north east 11 From Noshead to
Dungesby-head north by west 2 1 From Dungesby-head to Stroma north by west 2
From Cromerty to Fair-Isle north north east half east 41 From Cromerty to
Sumbrough-head in Shetland north north east half east 48 From Buckanness to
Sumbrough-head in Shetland north easterly 47 From Buckanness to Vnst the north
east part of Shetland north by east 67 From South-Ronalsha in Orkney to
Sumbrough-head in Shetland north east northerly 28 From North-Ronalsha to
Sumbrough-head north east and by east 15 1

Thwart Courses and Distances between England, Flanders and Holland, etc.
L. M. FRom Winterton-Ness to the mouth of the Maze going up to Rotterdam east
by south 28 From Winterton-Ness to Gorey east by south southerly 28 From
Winterton-Ness to Flushing south east by east easterly 27 From Winterton-Ness
to Ostend south east half south 25 From Winterton-Ness to Newport south east by
south 25 1 From Winterton-Ness to Dunkirk south south east 25 2 From
Winterton-Ness to the Texel east north east 38 2 From the South-Foreland to
Dunkirk east and by south 12 From the South-Foreland to Newport east 15 1 From
the South-Foreland to Ostend east northerly 17 From the South-Foreland to
Flushing east by north northerly 24 2 From the South-Foreland to the Maze east
north east half north 32 2 From the South-Foreland to the Texel north east 51 1
From the North-Foreland to Dunkirk south east by east 14 From the
North-Foreland to Newport east south east 16 From the North-Foreland to Ostend
east by south 17 1 From the North-Foreland to Flushing east 23 2 From the
North-Foreland to Gorey east by north half north 27 2 From the North-Foreland
to the Maze east north east 30 From the North-Foreland to the Texel north east
half north 48 From the North-Fo^eland to the Gallaper north east half north 9
From Lastiff to Dunkirk south south east half south 32 From Lastiff to Ostend
south east by east 30 From Lastiff to Flushing south east 30 From Lastiff to
the Maze east by south half south 28 From Lastiff to the Texel east by north
northerly 34 2 From Winterton-Ness to the Maze south east by east 31 1 From
Winterton-Ness to the Texel east half north 34 From the Maze to Harwich west 32

Thwart Courses and Distances from place to place between England, Holland,
Jutland, Norway, and Scotland.
L. M. FRom Winterton-Ness to Holy-Island or Heylgelant before the mouth of the
River Elve east by north 71 From Winterton-ness to the Naze of Norway north
east and by north 113 From Winterton-ness to Bergin in Norway north north east
150 From Winterton-ness to the Statlant in Norway north by east 200 From
Winterton-ness to Flambrough-head north west half north 34 From Winterton-ness
to Tinmouth-Bar north west half north 47 From Winterton-ness to the Staples
north west by north 68 From Winterton-ness to Buckanness in Scotland north
north west westerly 100 From Winterton-ness to Shetland north by west 144 From
the Spurn to the Texel east by south 54 From the Spurn to Heylgelant before
the mouth of the Elve east half north 87 From the Spurn to the Naze in Norway
north east easterly 113 From the Spurn to Bergin in Norway north east by north
northerly 147 From the Spurn to the Statlant in Norway north north east 180
From the Spurn to Buckanness in Scotland north by west 86 From the Spurn to
Shetland north westerly 124 From Tinmouth-Bar to the Maze south east 87 From
Tinmouth-Bar to the Texel south east by east 80 From Tinmouth-Bar to Heylgelant
east by south 106 From Tinmouth-Bar to the Naze of Norway east north east
northerly 110 From Tinmouth-Bar to Bergin north east northerly 130 From
Tinmouth-Bar to the Statlant in Norway north north east half east 160 From
Tinmouth-Bar to Shetland north 95 From Tinmouth-Bar to Buckanness N. 40 From
the Isle of May in the mouth of Edinbrough-Frith to the Maze south east half
south 106 From the May to the Texel south east half east 98 From the May to
Heylgelant before the Elve east south east 120 From the May to the Naze of
Norway east by north 109 From the May to Bergin north east by east easterly 120
From the May to the Statlant north east by north easterly 150 From the May to
Shetland north 73 From the May to Buckanness north east by north 27 From
Buckanness to the Maze south south east easterly 132 From Buckanness to the
Texel south east by south 120 From Buckanness to Heylgelant south east half
east 132 From Buckanness to the Naze in Norway east half south 100 From
Buckanness to the Bergin east north east 96 From Buckanness to the Statlant
north easterly 46 From the Statlant to Drunton north east, and north north east
80 From Shetland to the Statlant east north east 80

Note that there is now on the Coast of England and Scotland six Degrees and a
half variation westerly, of which I advise all Seamen to allow it in their
Courses.

A TYDE-TABLE, showing the Time of High Water, when the Moon is at Full and
Change, how many Feet the Water Rises and Falls at a Spring-Tyde, and how
the Tide of Flood and Tide of Ebb sets, beginning at London Bridge, and so
continuing to the Northward to the Islands of Orkney and Shetland.
Note that H stands for Hours, M for Minutes, and F for Feet.

H. M. F. London Bridge south west 3 00 18 Gravesend south south west 2 30 20
Buoy of the Nower south half west 12 15 Shoo-Beacon south 12 Buoy of the Middle
south 12 Buoy of the Gunfleet south 12 Harwich Harbor south 12 Handford water
south 12 00 16 Woodbridge-Haven south half east 11 45 14 Albrough-Haven south
half east 11 45 10 Orfordness south by east 11 45 Sole-Dunwich and Walters-wick
south south east 10 30 7 Lastiff south south east quarter Tide 10 30 7
Yarmouth-Haven south east and by south quarter Tide, that is, the Tide of Flood
runs to the southward one hour and half after it is High Water in the Peer.
The same at Lastiff and the Standford 10 15 6 Gallapar-Sand south. The Tide
runs over it south west by west, and north east by east three or four Leagues a
Watch 12 00 16 Gabard-Sand south 12 00 15 At the Maze south south west: but the
Tide runs in one hour and a half after it is High Water; so that a slack
Water is a quarter Ebb. The Tide of Flood runs three hours in the Offin to
the Northward, after it is High Water on the Maze, which is Half-tyde 2 15 7
Winterton-Ness south east. But the Flood runs into the Ness three hours
after it is High Water, which is Half-tyde 9 Cromer and Blakeney east south
east 7 30 10

From Blakeney to Flambrough-head the Flood sets south east, and the Ebb
north west

H. M. F. Spurn east by north 5 15 1^ Hull east and west 6 00 16
Burlington-Peer east north east 4 30 13 Scarbrough east north east 4 30 13
Robinhood Bay, Whit-Bay, Tease and Hartley-Pool north east by east 3 45
Sunderland north east 3 00 10 Tinmouth-Bar, and North and South-Shields, north
east 3 00 13

From Tinmouth Bar to Flambrough-head the Flood sets south west, and south
west by south, and the Ebb to the contrary.

H. M. F. Seaton Sluice north east and by north 2 45 10 Blythe north east by
north 2 45 10 Cocket-Island south west by south 2 45 15 Holly-Island south west
by south 2 45 15 Barwick south west by south 2 45 18 Leith, and all the Peers
in Edinbrough-Frith 2 45 14 St. Andrews and Dundee south west by south 2 45
Montross south west by south 2 45 Aberdeen south by west 0 45 Buckanness,
Peter-head, and Ratter-head south 12 Cromerty and Inverness south by east 11 45
16 Isles of Orkney south east by south 9 45 12 Shetland south east and by south
9 45 8

FINIS.
chart of the English channel, with the coasts of England, France, Belgium, and
the Netherlands To the Honorable Sr: RALPH DELAVAL Knight. Vice Admiral of the
RED This is most Humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt Greenvile Collins
Hydrographer to the KING.
chart of river Thames and coast of Essex The River of THAMES from London to
the Buoy of the Noure Sold by Rich and Mount at the Postern on Great Towerhill
London
To the Right Worppll the Master and Wardens of the TRINITY HOUSE of Deptford
Strond This Mapp is most humbly Dedicatd and Presented by Capt G: Collins
chart of English channel and the coasts of France, Belgium, and the
Netherlands To the Honorable Sr John Ashby K^: ADMIRAL of the BLEW This is
most Humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt: G: Collins
chart of Harwich Harbor, Suffolk HARWICH Woodbridg and Handfordwater with the
Sands from the Nazeland to Hosely Bay.

To ye Honble: SAMUEL PEPYS Esqr: Secretary of the ADMIRALTY of ENGLAND.
President of ye Royal Society and Master of ye TRINITY HOUSE of Deptford:
Strond.

This Chart is Dedicated and Presented by Capt. GREENVIL COLLINS. Hydrogr: to
the KING. 1686

chart of Great Yarmouth YARMOUTH and the Sands about it Is most Humbly
Presented and Dedicated TO HIS GRACE HENRY DUKE OF NORFOLK etc By Capt.
Greenvile Collins Hydrogr to the KING.
chart of Blakeney To Sr CLODISLEY SHOU^ Knight REAR ADMLL: of the BLEW This is
most humbly Dedicated an^ Presented BY Capt. G. Collins.


chart of the River Humber THE RIVER HUMBER is most Humbly Dedicated and
Presented. To the Worshpll. Corporation of TRINITY-HOVSE at KINGSTON upon HULL.
By Capt. Greenvile Collins Hydrogr. to the KING.
chart of the bay of Bridlington and Flamborough BURLINGTON BAY. SCARBROUGH and
HARTLEPOOLE.

To Capt. RALPH SANDERSON this Chart is Dedicated and Presented by Capt.
GREENVILE COLLINS Hydrogr to the KING. 1686.

chart of Hartlepoole chart of Scarborough chart of the River Tyne To the
Worshpl. the MASTER and the Rest of the Gentlemen Brethren of TRINITY-HOUS
NEWCASTLE upon TYNE This Draught is humbly Presented and Dedicated by Capt. G:
Collins Hydrohe. to the KING.
chart of Blyth The Depth of the water with(...) Bar in ye River T(...) Blyth
Seaton Sluice and ^^nderland is set down ^^ ^et, the figures above the line
^^ow ye Depth at highwater (...) below the line low wate^ (...) Spring-Tyd's

chart of Sunderland chart of Holy Island and Staple Island HOLY ISLAND Staples
and BARWICK. is most Humbly Dedicated and Presented to Capt. WILL DAVIES vice
Admiral to the Rt. Honorable the Earl of TORRINGTON by Capt. Greenvil Collins
Hydrogr. to the KING.
chart of River Tweed A. Lowwater mark B. Highwater mark C. a Whitepatch in ye
wall D. a Whitehouse for a mark


chart of north coast of Scotland, Shetland and Orkney Islands THE EAST COAST
of SCOTLAND with the Isles of ORKNEY and SHETLAND Is most humbly Dedicated and
Presented To the Honble: GEORGE ROOKE Esquire and Vice Admiral of ye BLEW. by Capt
Greenvile Collins Hydror: to the KING.
chart of the bay of Edinburgh TO THE Right Honble. JAMES EARL of PERTH Lord
Chancellor of the KINGDOM of SCOTLAND. This Chart is humbly dedicated by Capt.
Greenvile Collins. HYDROGRAPHER to the KING.
chart of Leith depiction of Leith Prospect of LEITH form the East-
TO THE Right Honorable Sr. JAMES FLEMING Lord PROVOST of ye City of
EDINBURGH, And ye rest of ye Honble. Council of the said Burgh. This Mapp is
humbly-dedicated by Capt. Greenvile Collins HYDROGRAPHER to the KING.
chart of Dundee and River Tay To the Honble. the Magistrates of the City of
ABERDEENE.

This Map is most humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt. G. Collins
Hydrographe^ to the KING.

The Sea Coast from Fiffnesse to montros was Surveyd by mr. Mar. an Injenious
mariner of Dundee

chart of Montrose chart of Aberdeen chart of northern Scotland (Inverness,
Ross and Cromarty, and Sutherland) To the Rt. Honble. my Lord Viscount TORBAT
Lord Register of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND This Map is Most Humbly Dedicated and
Presented by Capt. G. Collins Hydroghe. to the KING. 1689.
chart of the Orkney Islands THE ISLANDS OF ORKNEY

(...) Islands, did once belong to the Kingdom of DENEMARK, But since the
Year 1472 to the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

The Arrow marked thus show the setting of the Tide of Flood.

TO HIS ROYL, HIGHS. GEORG PRINCE of DENMARK

This Chart is most humbly Dedicated and Presented by Capt. GREENVILE COLLINS,
Hydroghe to the KING.

chart of the Orkney Islands chart of Kirkwall chart of Graemsay depiction of
coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Copinsha Horse Mulhead

Thus Shows the Island of Copinsha when it bears S. W 3 or 4 Miles off. and
the Mulhead west 2 leagues of the Cliffs Show Blac^

depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Copinsha Horse Mulh(...)

Thus Shows Copinsha when it bears West a league off.

depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus Shows Fair Isle when
it bears N. E. 3 leagues at n^ time R^wsey if bear W. Sr. W. W. and Nth.
Runoldsey with.

depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Maiden Papps

Thus Shows the Maiden Papps of off Catnesse. when they bear with. and the
nearest shore 2 miles of. and depth 23 Foth.

depiction of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Thus Shows Dunkins bay
head N. W. b. W. 2 leagues off.

The Chief Harbors in the Islands of ORKNEY Are most humbly Presented and
Dedicated to Capt. WILL BOND by Capt. Greenvile Collins Hydrogr. to the KING
1688.
chart of Bressay, Noss, Lerwick, and the bay of Mainland To the Rt. Honorable
DANIEL EARL of NOTTINGHAM. This Chart is most humbly Dedicated and Presented
by Capt. GREENVILE COLLINS Hydroghe. to the KING.
chart of the southern tip of Mainland in the Shetland Islands The South Part
of the Isles of SHETLAND is Dedicated and Presented to Mr John ^olson Teacher
of ^^ Mathematics in London by Capt Greenvile Collins


depictions of coastal landmarks as viewed from sea Becon Dunwich Walterswick

Thus Shows Dunwich and Walterswick when Dunwich Church bears N W 2 Leagues
off. The Shore side is white Sandy Cliffs

Dunwich Southwould vulgo Sole

Thus shows Southwould or Sole when the Church bears N: W. b. N: 2 Leagues
White sandy Cliffs.

Lowest often vulgo Lastiff

Lastiff Church Lights

Thus shows Lowestost or Lastiff when the two Lights are in one, and bear N:
b. W. With. about a League off.

Lastiff Church

Thus shows Lastiff when the Church bears S: W: on the back of Corton sand
about 2 Leagues.

Wood Light Mill

Thus shows Lastiff from the Reds and when the Church bears N: W

F^ulnesse Light

Cromer Dagger Shield

Cly Blakney Priorey

Thus shows the Land from Foulness to Blakeney when Blakeney Church bears
S W: b. S 2 Leagues

Spurn Sisters

Thus shows the Land from the Spurnae to the Northward when the Sister
Churches bear S: W 3 miles.

Light Tower

Thus shows Flambrough head when the light Tower bears N: N: W: 5 Leagues

Thus shows the Land to the Southward of the Tees called the Red Cliff.
Hartlepoole is a high Church with a Square Tower

Maiden Papps Sunderland

Thus shows the Maiden Papps and Sunderland when Sunderland bears W. b: S:
4 Miles.

Tantalland Bass

Thus shows the Bass bearing S: W ^ Miles

Light

Thus shows the Isle of May bearin No: 3 miles off.

Bowens Boddam Peterhead

Thus shows Peterhead in Scotland 4 Leagues of Skerry bearing W: b: N.

Thus shows New and Old Aberdeen in Scotland when it bears With: 3 Leagues A:
New Aberdeene B: Old Aberdeene





