A REPLY TO THE Absolution of a PENITENT, According to the Directions of the
Church of England, etc.
I Once thought to disengage from this Dispute, and pursue my Defense no
farther: But this Author appearing of a higher Class than some of the rest, I
shall pay him the Civility of an Answer. I perceive this Director of
Absolutions was resolved to distinguish himself, and promise something more
than ordinary, at his first setting out: What else could make him clap Mr.
Cranburn in his Title Page, with Sir William Perkins, and Sir John Friend, and
then point it all against Mr. Collier? I would gladly know how Mr. Collier is
concerned with Mr. Cranburn, unless it is because he never saw him; and was
forced to abscond, some Weeks before the other was Executed? I Am confident
these are some of the Director's most plausible Reasons for placing Mr.
Cranburn to my Account. And therefore he never so much as mentions his Name in
any part of his Paper. What then could be the fancy of Garnishing his Title
with Mr. Cranburn? Truly the Reason is pretty obvious. We are to observe then,
that Mr. Cranburn when he suffered, left some Disobliging Sentences behind him.
Now the common People who don't use to carry much Chronology in their Head, by
seeing him joined in Print with the Executions of Sir Will. Perkins and Sir
John Friend, would be apt to conclude that they all three died together, or at
least were Absolved by the same Persons: And then according to the Logic, and
Charity of some People, it would probably follow, that whatever they thought
Exceptionable in Mr. Cranburn, might be thrown upon me.

I Am sorry to see Calumny stand thus in the Front of a Paper, and am afraid
those who begin without Conscience, will end without it too. The Director in
the entrance upon his Subject flies out into some passionate, and very
uncourtly Language. The Apology he makes for it is somewhat surprising, he tells
his Friend, You know my way, and therefore will, I hope, take the less Offense
at the roughness of the Expressions. (Absolut. p. 2.) It seems Prescription in
Misbehaviour is a good Excuse with some Men; and an old Fault is enough in all
conscience to justify a new one. If he keeps to his Maxim, may he have the
credit on it.

This Director has the ill luck to miscite me at his first Quotation; he makes
me say, My Presence, and Officiating at Tyburn, has been too hotly censured,
etc. But, by his favor, my Words run thus: My being present, and in some
measure officiating at the place of Execution, has been censured with a great
deal of Heat. (Defense, p. 1.) Now the first way of wording the matter, is
stiff, Pedantique, and Disrespectful; the other, Common, and Inoffensive. He
that does not see the difference of these two Turns of Expression, has an ill
Palate for Sense: And he that does see it, and misquotes the worst, must lie
under a harder Imputation. The Director has fallen into this Mistake more than
once, as may be seen by comparing Page 6. line 14. and P. 8. l. 26, 27, of his
Paper, with P. 4. l. 17, 18; and P. 5. l. 26, etc. of my Defense. And wherever
his Memory fails him, it is always for some unlucky Purpose or other: It Is
either to ridicule the Expression, or weaken the Argument, or provoke the
Reader. And yet after all, this Gentleman has the Resolution to complain of
Shifting and Disingenuity! And why am I charged with Shifting, etc? ( P. 7.)
For this wise reason: Because I defended myself with Queries, and did not think
fit to expose my Conduct, or fail in my Duty. The Director may please to take
notice that the Questions were used to put the Objectors upon the Proof; to
prevent breaking into the Confession, and acting against the Canon. Were a Man
never so well prepared, he is not bound to inform against himself, to declare
away his own Safety, or violate his Conscience. If nothing but the Knowledge of
forbidden things will serve the turn, Curiosity must be ungratified. When
People will press thus unreasonably close, the way is to hold them at a
Distance, and Dispute at the Arms end. Nothing can be more defensible than such
a Method, while it keeps within the compass of Truth. This our Director may
call Fencing, and Evasion if he pleases. But I hope it is no harm to Fence
against Aggression and Design, and to Evade playing the Fool, or the Knave.
It Is presumed by the Director, etc. That Sir William acquainted me with his
being privy to the intended Assassination; and that I ought not to have given
him Absolution, without public signs of Repentance. But how does the necessity
of such a supposition appear? It Is possible Sir William might keep some part of
his Conscience to himself. The plainness of a Case, or the niceness of
Discovery, may sometimes lead Persons toward such a Reserve. Our Church does
not insist upon particularities, nor make the entireness of Confession
necessary to Absolution. She Absolves upon general Repentance at the daily
Confession: And in the Rubric of the Visitation of the Sick, the Minister is
directed to Examine the Sick Person, whether he repents him truly of his Sins:
But the Rubric does not say, the Enquiry must reach into every single
Circumstance and Miscarriage; and the Penitent be obliged to lay his whole
Memory before him. If we will collect the sense of the Church from her practice
both at the Sacrament, and daily Confession, a general Declaration of
Repentance seems sufficient. And may not such Considerations as these persuade
a Penitent, That it is lawful for him to transact part of his Repentance between
God and his own Soul; especially if we reflect on the natural aversion there is
in Mankind, to discover their Failings?

If it is objected, That it is very improbable Sir William should conceal that
from me, which he confessed to the Committee. To this I Answer: That Artificial
Questions, and Surprise, sometimes extort Confessions, which would not have
come of their own accord. I don't say any thing of this happened, but the
possibility of it is enough for my purpose. Farther: It Is possible Sir William
might be straightened in point of time. I had scarcely two Days of private
Conversation with him: He very much desired this freedom might have been longer
continued, but it was not thought convenient. Now might not the Examination of
private Life, the Interruptions of Company, and the Business of Devotion,
employ the Visits of a Day or two? The Priest is not tied to any stated Method,
or Order of Questions; but may begin and proceed, at what Heads of Confession
he pleases: Might not therefore the public part be referred to a farther
opportunity, since the Execution was at a distance, and neither of us under any
Apprehensions of the Denial of Privacy? If these unexpected Restraints
prevented him in speaking his Mind at length, I desire the blame may not lie at
my Door. If it is urged, that where there is ground to suspect a Confession
imperfect, Absolution should be refused. I Answer; That if the usual Liberties
of Access had been unrestrained, there had been some color in the Objection;
but when the Penitent is barred the advantage of Privacy, denied the
Conversation of the Priest, and wants leizure to lay the whole of his Practice
before him, the case is otherwise. No Man ought to suffer for unavoidable
Accidents, for things which were utterly out of his Power to prevent. If a
Person gives fair Indication of Sincerity, and Christian Temper, if there
appea^s a hearty regret for what has been done amiss, and he repents as far as
he discovers; why should the interruptions of Force, and the involuntary
Defects of a Confession, deprive him of the Benefit of Absolution? In such
Circumstances, I desire to know whether the Priest is not bound to go upon
Presumptions of Charity, and to reason from the regularity of Behavior; to
conclude that the Penitent has completed his Repentance by himself, and
confessed that to God, which he could not do to his Minister? What fault can
the Director find in such Proceedings as this? If he would know whether these
Probabilities I have mentioned, were matters of Fact; I ask his excuse: I am
not obliged to answer that Question. The likelihood, or possibility of things
comes up to my point. For from thence he must grant, it is by no means certain,
that there was either Negligence in my Enquiry, or over-indulgence in the
Absolution. And then with submission, why should a Man fall under Severities at
all Adventures? Why should the Punishment be certain, where the Fault is not
so? Are the Interests of Liberty and Fortune to lie at the Mercy of
Suppositions, and be overruled by Conjecture and Surmise? Besides, the
supposed mismanagement is never to be made out. If there was Truth, there can
be no Evidence, without which it is somewhat hard to punish. The Matter passed
only between Sir William and my self. From him there can be no Account, neither
is there any reason to expect it from me. He that turns Informer against
himself, has a very slender share of Discretion. Besides, if I were never so
well furnished and inclined for such a Prosecution, the Canon would stop it. (
Can. 113.) This the Director calls making Black, White, ( p. 6.) and gives us a
great deal of Flourish and Declamation about it. But by the way; I think making
Black, White, is a better natured Undertaking, than the contrary, at which this
Director seems to have no ordinary Talent. However, I shall prove against this
Gentleman that I have represented the Matter in its natural Complexion, and
made use of no Varnish or false Coloring. This will appear by inspecting the
Canon; in which it is positively decreed, That if any Man confess his secret
Sins to the Minister. -- We straightly Charge and Admonish Him, that he do not at
any time reveal, and make known to any the Crime committed to his Secrecy,
under pain of Irregularity: Except they be of such Crimes as by the Laws of
this Land his own Life may be questioned for concealing; or as the Latin has
it, of which the Concealment is a Capital Offense, Can. 113.

That this Canon is full for the point I cited it, I shall make good by
removing two Objections.

First, It may be objected, That Sir William' s being privy to the intended
Assassination was no Secret.

Secondly, That the Life of the Priest may be questioned for concealing a
Design of this Nature, and by consequence the Case falls under the Exception of
the Canon.

That Sir William' s being privy to the Assassination was no Secret, may be
pretended,

First, Because this Charge was Sworn against him at his Trial: And,

Secondly, Because he owned it in his last Paper. To the

First, I answer, That tho I intend not to object against the Witness, yet I
must say in general, That to infer the truth of the Fact, from the Oaths of the
Evidence, is no good reasoning. I grant where other Circumstances are
unexceptionable, the Legality of the Sentence may be concluded from thence: But
to be positive any further, is to argue from a false Principle. As long as Men
have Defects in their Memories, and Irregularities in their Wills, there is no
depending upon their Infallibility. I desire not to be understood in a sense of
Reference and Reflection. However, it seems Sir William conceived himself
misreported with relation to the Commission. This Commission the Witness lays a
singular stress upon, points it upon Person and Design, and swears it in proof
of the Assassination. On the other hand; Sir William's Paper owns no more than
a general Authority to make War, without any particular, extraordinary
Application. Thus I have related this matter of Fact, without interposing my
Opinion.

Secondly, If home Swearing is a sufficient proof of the reality of things, to
what purpose is the Prisoner allowed to go on in his Plea of not Guilty, to
defend himself, and weaken the Credit of a Testimony?

But Sir William owned his being privy to the intended Assassination in his
Paper. He did so. And for all that it might be a great Secret before. The Paper
was not public till after the Execution; and then the Absolution was over. In
a word, It Is ridiculous to make any Inferences from the Paper upon me, unless
they can prove me pre-acquainted with it.

Secondly, It may be objected, That the Life of the Priest may be questioned,
for concealing the intended Assassination, and by consequence the Case falls
under the Exception of the Canon. This is the Opinion of the Director, who
after he has quoted the Canon, puts this triumphant Question to his Friend:
What can any one see here, that should compel Mr. Collier to conceal what Sir
William confessed to him of the Assassination? In answer to this Question, tho
I don't say, Sir William confessed the Assassination to me, yet for the
Director's satisfaction, I shall give him all the liberty imaginable. And since
Suppositions neither affirm nor deny any thing, I shall go upon the largest,
and the Director may make his Advantage.

Put the Case therefore, that a Person Condemned should own to his Confessor,
that he had been privy to a Design of Assassinating the King, and had his share
in the Concert: Granting this, I say, the Priest's Life cannot be questioned
for concealing the matter; and if not, the Canon obliges him to Secrecy. This I
shall prove from the Reasons following,

First, Because the bare Concealment of Treason, without any thing of
Engagement, or Consent, is not always Treason: Especially if the Acknowledgment
implies only a past Resolution, and not any intention for the time to come. For
the purpose. If a Man tells me, That he once was in a Design to kill the King:
In such a case the omission of a Discovery amounts to no more at most than
Misprision of Treason, and there the Forfeiture reaches no higher than Liberty,
and Estate.

Secondly, There are several Circumstances peculiar to a condemned Person,
which alter the common Case. For

1st, There is no danger that the Penitent will discover his own Confession,
neither if he should, is he a legal Witness without a Pardon: And this Favor
he is in no likelihood of receiving only for the Merit of being False to his
Confessor. But not to insist upon this, I argue,

Thirdly, That the Law is founded upon Reason, and therefore no Punishment
ought to be stretched beyond the reason of the Case, and the clear Intention of
the Legislators. Now the reason why the Concealing a Practice which is Treason
in the Design, is made Criminal, is because by such Concealment, the Guilty
Person may be left in a Condition either to execute the Design, or escape being
punished. But neither of these Inconveniences can happen from a condemned
Person. Such a one is disabled from finishing his Design, though his
Inclinations should continue: And being under Restraint, he may be punished at
pleasure.

So that nothing either of danger or impunity can follow from such a
Concealment. And when a Plot is perfectly broken, and most of the Persons
concerned either Executed, or in Prison, the reasons for discovering such a
Confession, sink still lower if it is possible.

Thus I have argued from the largest Grounds, and Suppositions, and made it
evident that the Canon did not oblige me to reveal the Assassination-part of
the Confession, provided I had been acquainted with any such Thing. And as I
observed in my Second Paper, what the Canon does not oblige me to Discover, it
obliges me not to Discover. And if I was bound up to Silence in this point, I
desire to know which way I could publicly press Sir William to an
Acknowledgement, without laying open the Secret, and breaking the Canon? It Is
true such a Violation seems to sit lightly upon the Director's Spirits. He
tells us very entertainingly, That he who falls under that Curse, is for ever
incapable of giving any more Absolutions, (Absolut. p. 6.) I own I have not the
Director's Courage. I dare not say any thing that looks like Burlesquing the
Authority of the Church, and Drolling upon the Power of the Keys. I believe the
Church a more Noble Society than the State: that her Original is as Divine, her
Commission as Unquestioned, her Powers as Significant, and the Ends of her
Institution more Important: I say more Important, as much as Time is
outstretched by Eternity, and Heaven is better than an Estate, and Hell is more
dreadful than the Gallows. For these Reasons I shall always desire to have a
great Regard for Ecclesiastical Laws, and the Orders of my Spiritual
Superiors. Besides, the Canons are Ratified by the King, and cannot be broken
without insulting the Civil, as well as the Sacred Authority. However, the
Director thinks it somewhat extraordinary, that a Man who stood Sentenced as a
Contriver of the most Barbarous and Ungenerous Design, etc. should receive so
easy and so glorious an Absolution! (p. 2.) I have already given him a Reason
why the Absolution was so Glorious as he calls it, ( First Defense, p. 2.)
Therefore if he pleases he may Expostulate upon this Head with some Body else.
And as for the Easiness of the Absolution, how comes he to know that? No Person
ought to accuse without Certainty: That is the lowest requisite. Well! He
guesses at it because there was no public Abhorrence of the Intention, etc.
This Director sure has not seen the Report of the Committee, Apr. 2d. The not
minding of which, he charges as a great omission upon me: The Votes of that Day
tells us, That Sir William confessed himself privy to the intended
Assassination, and thought 'twas a fault that he approved it. I hope the
Director will not dispute the Testimony of the Committee: And if not, the two
main Articles of his Charge must be dropped. For,

First, This Confession implies Repentance, as to the Assassination part. For
when a Man thinks he is in a Fault, he must repent of course, if he is in
earnest. I say he must do this unless he is an Atheist, and such People don't
use to press for Divines to Visit them.

Secondly, Here is public Repentance too; and I suppose such a one as the
Director will not be so hardy as to except against. Will he deny the Committee
to represent the Commons, or the Commons the Kingdom? If not, which way could
an Acknowledgment be made more public, or conveyed with better Advantage? Is
Confession good no where but at the place of Execution? Let him produce any Law
of Church or State for such an Assertion. If he cannot, the Objection is at an
end, unless he prefers the Authority of the Crowd, to that of St. Stephen's
Chapel. If the Director replys, That what Sir William owned to the Committee,
can do me no Service, because I endeavor to represent my self Ignoramus, as he
decently expresses it. ( Page 7.) My Answer once more is, That this is
concluding too fast. I grant I did say, in my first Defense, That I never saw
Sir William after his Examination, till Friday Noon; nor the Votes that
mentioned it, till after that Time. And upon this I asked, How I could know
what Sir William had confessed? And what of all this? The direct Affirmations
are all Truth: And for the Question, it can be no disadvantage, for it asserts
nothing. Questions don't always imply a determined sense. They are sometimes
put to silence an over-inquisitiveness, and check an unreasonable Accusation.
Tho I did not see Sir William after his Examination, till the time he Suffered,
yet there are other ways of Communication, besides Visiting. I never affirmed I
had no Correspondence with him by Letters, or Message, after I was refused to
see him. So that notwithstanding any thing that appears, Sir William might
acquaint me with what passed between him and the Committee; he might repeat the
regret he had there acknowledged, and receive Absolution upon that Score. The
case might happen thus for ought the Director knows to the contrary. For my
part I affirm nothing: My Office does not give me leave, neither does my
Defense require it. But Sir William made no Reparation in one respect, but what
he was forced to, which made up his Resignation, and completed his Penitence.
( Absolut. P. 5.) Most Divinely said! This Man seems to relish an Execution
extremely, what else could make him insult the last Misfortunes of Gentlemen,
and play upon the Agonies of the Dying? These are Excesses of Charity, and
admirable strokes of Humanity and good Nature! His saying that I Absolved both
without, and against Authority, ( Page 8.) is like the rest. To argue upon the
Director's Principles. I desire to know, Whether the Priesthood is not a
sufficient Authority for Absolution? Had the Apostles their Power of Binding
and Loosing, from the Civil Establishment? If not, where lies the Necessity of
a Lay-permission? If the Church is not sui juris in matters purely Spiritual,
and Independent in the Exercise of the Keys, Christianity lies at the Mercy of
the State, and may be extinguished at pleasure. Call you these Directions
according to the Church of England? God forbid! This Divinity comes from
Seldom, or Erastus, or else from Hobbs's Leviathan; and makes Religion look
like a Court-invention, and a Politic Design.

And now at parting I should call the Director to an account for his ill
Language, and return him his Present: But I hope I have learned Religion to
better purpose; and besides, I scorn the Meanness of such a Contest.

In short, If the Director thinks it worth his while to Misreport, and Inflame,
and Sharpen the Edge of Severity, I shall never envy him the Advantage, but
heartily wish him a better Employment.

I. C.
May the 20th. 1696.
FINIS.

