THE MARROW OF CHRISTIANITY OR A spiritual discovery of some Principles of
Truth; meet to be known of all the Saints represented in ten SECTIONS.

By T. Collier, Minister of the Gospel.

Whereunto is added an Epistle, written by M. SALTMARSH.

Isaiah 32.20. Blessed are ye that sow besides all waters, etc.

Isay 33.16. He shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the
munitions of Rocks, bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure

verse 17. and thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty, etc.

London Printed by Charles Sumptner for Giles Calvert at the Black spread
Eagle, near the West end of Paul's, 1650.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
FOr to thee alone do I commend this small Treatise, who alone, art able to
judge of spiritual things; for, the spiritual man judges all things. I have
here in this Treatise, presented unto public view, some principles of truth.
Although I suppose that some particulars herein, may seem somewhat strange at
the first sight, yet I question not, but the same spirit of Truth which is
given forth from the Father through the Son to the Sts. will by degrees so
gather us up into the mystery of Truth, that we shall all speak the same thing,
from our walking in the same light, and acting in the same power, I have in
this place only three words to mind thee of, as a preparative to what thou
shall read in this ensuing Treatise.

First, that the discovery of the first man Adam, to be but a humane man: a
man, endued with humane perfections; is not a strange, but a glorious truth,
and meet to be known for, the knowledge of this one particular, leads us to the
knowledge of the Creatures nothingnesse, the wisdom, power, righteousness;
etc. of the Creature, it is all but of the Earth; and that it is the proper
work of Christ, the second man* to ruin and destroy in thee, all, that is of
the first Adam, even those relics that remain; that wisdom is turned into
folly that strength, into weakness; that righteousness and holiness; into
mere filthiness and pollution, so that Christ does not where he comes in
mercy, restore man to his first condition, as it was in Adam; but destroys
those principles, as we are Christians, and so creates a new man in us, which,
after God, is created in righteousness, and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. and
he that is in Christ, is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. All old things are done
away, behold all things are become new; and as is the earthly, such are they
who are earthly; as is the heavenly (that is, Christ) such are they who are
heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.48.

Secondly, that the glory of a Christians life is in the knowledge of Christ
living in him: so the Aposte Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ;
Nevertheless, I live yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and Christ in you:
the hope of glory, is the great mystery of the Gospel for the Saints to know,
Col. 1.27. that is, not to live wholly on the eying of what Christ has done,
without us for us; but likewise to be able to experience the life of that
Christ in us, being made partaker of the same spirit, of the same Anointings,
etc. Thirdly, that the knowledge of Antichrist, is the knowledge of a mystery,
I mean, a mystery of Iniquity, which none can know, but those enlightened from
above: that, as the mystery of the Gospel is hid; so likewise is the mystery of
Iniquity hid from them that perish.

Lastly, and in a word; my desire is, that, what truth thou find here
written, thy spirit may be made one, in and with the same truth; that so, both
thou and I, may have communion and fellowship with the spirit in the same
truth, and what information and consolation thy spirit finds from what is
truth (letting any Creature-weaknesse, thou find pass) let God have the
glory, and so thy poor friend in the unity of truth, and fellowship of the
(...)

A Table of the principle things contained in this Treatise.
SECTION 1. OF Adams condition before his fall. Page 1 Adams in a condition of
humane perfection. p. 1. 2. The Jmage of God, what in Adam p. 2. 3. 5. Man's
best wisdom, but the remainder of the first Adam; in it, many too much glory.
p. 3. 4. What the Jmage of Adam is not. p. 8.
SECTION 2. The cause or ground of man's fall. First the mutability of his
condition: p. 8. God not the cause of sin. p. 10. The second causr of mars fall
p. 11. Satan's temptation. Why Satan called a, Serpent p. 12. The cause of man's
fall, disobedience. p. 13. The tree of knowledge of good and evil. why so
called. p. 13.
SECTION 3. Man's misery by reason of his fall p. 14. 15. Man's misery considered
under 3 heads p. 16.
SECTION 4. What is the means God has appointed for the recovery of man out of
this condition, that is Jesus Christ p. 27 The sin and fault is laid upon
Christ p. 17. 18 Christ bare the sins of all: all are saved, and how not saved;
and the reason why. p. 19. 20. 21 Christ not the efficient cause of love, but
rather an effect of love. p. 22. 23. 25 How Christ delivers from wrath. p. 13.
24.
SECTION 5. How persons come to have benefit by this means that God has
appointed, as the way of life; which is by Faith. p. 26. What Faith is. p. 26.
27. How Faith is obtained. p. 28. Faith not a condition of the Covenant. p. 29.
Faith a branch of the Covenant. p. 3. Faith an evidence of the Covenant. p. 30.
The means by which Faith is wrought. p. 31. The properties and effects of
Faith. p. 31. How Faith justifies. p. 32. 33. Faith produces peace with God.
p. 33 Faith puts the soul into the possession of love, it fills the soul with
joy. p. 34.
SECTION 6. Wherein the condition of person restored by Christ, and their union
with God, is discovered: which is, first; a freedom from sin. p. 35 Second, in
being one with, and in Christ. p. 36. Christ and the Christians relations, one:
first, Christ a Son; so the Saints. p. 36. Secondly, relation of spiritual
union. p. 37. In the spirit, power, wisdom, righteousness love, and glory. p.
38. to the 49. Saints Communion with the Father, Son, and each other. p. 50.
51. 52
SECTION 7. Wherein is declared what the Law is, and what the Gospel; with the
difference between them, both in the Letter, and in the Spirit. p. 55. First,
what the Law is, in the letter. p. 55. 56. 57 Secondly, what the Law is in the
Spirit. p 56. What the Gospel in the Letter is. p. 61. 62 What the Gospel, in
the Spirit is. p. 64. The Mystery of the Gospel, what. p. 65 The life of Faith
in the most spiritual. 67. 68 The difference between the Law and the Gospel.
p. 70. 71. The glorious effects of the knowledge of God in Spirits. p. 63.
SECTION 8. The matter of the Church, what. p. 75.
SECTION 9. The spiritual Kingdom of Christ in his Church in the latter days
of the Gospel, discovered. p. 80. Who are the subjects of Christ's Kingdom, p.
81 The external glory of the Church of Christ in latter days. p. 82. 83 The
spiritual glory of the Church. p. 85. The Kingdom of Christ wholly
spiritual. p. 90 Objections answered, conceruing the personal reign of
Christ. p. 93
SECTION 10. Of death, resurrection, and Judgment. p. 108. 2. Part. A brief
discovery of Antichrist or the man of sin, both in the History and in the
Mystery. p: 113;

To the Reader.
PErusing this Treatise, J could not but take notice of some precious truths in
it, and commend them abroad; The spiritual design of this Author I find to be
this; Romans 14 17. Ephesians. 4.3. 2 Cor.
to set up the Kingdom of God in spirit, and to draw believers by that more
into spirit, and that no difference of outward administration, or Ordinances,
should divide Christians that are baptized into one spirit; which truth J did
much rejoice to see from his Pen, and practice, and should rejoice to see the
like from all the rest. We know he is not a Jew, who is one outward, Romans 2.
neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh, we are the
circumcision says the Apostle, Phil. 3.
who rejoice in Christ Jesus; and have no confidence in the flesh.

There are some excellent truths hinted in this Book which I intend to speak
on, as of the two Adams* the spiritual Church, the spiritual Liberty, the
spiritual, not personal reign of Christ) in a little Treatise of my own.
Ephesians. 1.17. ^ Cor. 2.
The Lord fill us with the Spirit of wisdom and Revelation: The spiritual man
judges all things.

John Saltmarsh

THE MARROW OF CHRISTIANITY
SECTION 1. Of Adams Condition before his fall.
THe condition of Adam in his innocence before his fall, was 1. A condition of
humane perfection, an upright and perfect man, this is the conclusion of
wisdom, Eccles. 7.29. Lo, this only have I found that God has made man
upright, but they sought out many inventions.

Obj. But it is said Genesis 1.27. that God created man in his own Image, in the
Image of God created he him: therefore it seems that Adam had more in him then
perfect humanity, that he was made partaker of the divine nature.

Answ. For the clearing of this Scripture, two things are to be considered. 1.
what is meant by the Image of God? 2. what is not meant by it? 1. what we are
to understand by the Image of God in which Adam was created: 1. reason, wisdom
and understanding, Adam was made a reasonable wise and understanding man: in
this particular he was in the Image of God: A wise God; there is no searching
of his understanding. Esa. 40.28. Adam had the Image of Gods wisdom, not the
wisdom of God, not the thing it self, it dwelled in God fully, it was
essential in him, but imparted to Adam, it was, and is in God essentially, he
is wisdom it self Adam was but the Image, God himself the substance. That
this Image was in man at first, appears first from Scripture, Genesis 2.19.20. the
Lord brought all the creation, to wit, sensitive Creatures before Adam that he
might give names unto them, or to see what he would call them: God would now
put him to the employing of that reason and understanding he had given unto
him, a perfection of reason above all other Creatures. 2. It appears from
natural experience, hence it is, that there is so much enquiring after a
perfection of humane reason so much studying of Arts, as Philosophy, Logic
Rhetoric etc. but from these corrupted relics or principls of reason, yet
remaining, in fallen man, striving after and hardly being satisfied without the
perfection of reason, able to give a reason of all thiings and this your
heathen Philosophers have gone far in, this is that maybe attained in an high
measure, and yet be but a reasonable moral man, nay, were it possible to
attain that perfection that was in Adam, yet it would be no more then a moral
and humane perfection, and this is that which many who bear the name of
Christians to much press after and glory in, as if without this wisdom there
could be no knowledge of mind of Christ, thus did the Greeks seek after wisdom.
1. Cor. 1.22. the Greeks being the deepest in the knowledge of humane Arts and
of the nature and cause of things, therefore they would judge of the Gospel
according to reason they seek after natural wisdom: but says the Apostle, we
preach Christ to the Greeks foolishness; so indeed is the Gospel in the
mystery of it mere folly to the highest natural understanding in the world,
nay it is that which the wisdom of the Gospel destroys where it comes, in
power he destroys the wisdom of the wise, and brings to naught the
understanding of the prudent, 1 Cor. 1.19. and here lies the great mystery of
mistake, I had almost said, of Iniquity, we seek after the knowledge of God
unto this wisdom of the first Adaem, how many are there that would confine the
knowledge of God in the wisdom, who are not ashamed to say that Philosophy is
the mother of Theology, and without this natural wisdom men must com short
in the knowledge of God; when the truth is, the first Adam was of the earth,
earthly, the 2d. is the Lord from heaven, and they who have but the first Adams
wisdom are still of the earth, earthly, the wisdom of the first Adam comes
infinitely short of bringing us to the knowledge of God in the spirit, but it is
by the wisdom of the second Adam, who is the Lord from heaven, and the wisdom
of the father, we attain the knowledge of God in the spirit; which wisdom
destroys, and brings to naught the wisdom of the first Adam, 1 Cor. 1.19.
Chap. 2.6, 7, 8. and 3 Chap. 18.19.20.

Note that all unbelievers and carnal professors are in the wisdom of the
first Adam, all believers spiritually made alive by Jesus being delivered from
themselves are in the wisdom of the second Adam, the Lord Jesus who is the
wisdom of the Father, 1 Cor. 1.24.

2 Adam was in the Image of God, that was in a perfect moral pure, and
sinlesse condition, he was made upright, innocent without sin, but he sought
out many inventions.

Quest. How may a moral purity and righteousness be said to be the Image of
God?

Answ. 1. God was, and is perfectly, essentially, and spiritually pure, Adam
was but the Image or Character of this purity, as it is possible to draw a
complete Image of Character of a living man in a piece of stone or timber, and
we say and speak truly, that it is the Image or likeness of a living man, yet
it is not a living man, nor has it any part of man's nature in him: even so was
Adam in the Image of God, there was not only the wisdom of God in creating of
him, but the properties of God in some measure imparted to him, yet not
partaker; of the divine nature, righteousness, and freedom from sin was
morally in him, yet not partaker of that spiritual holiness that is in God.

But secondly, and more principally in the first Adam who was earthly, was the
Image of the second who was the Lord from heaven, so that all the
righteousness, holiness, wisdom, etc. of the first Adam, was but an Image of
the second Adam, and that moral and humane perfection in the first, and those
remaining principles that yet remained in his nature was at the highest and yet
it is but an Image, as a drawn Character in a piece of timber or stones of the
second; the spiritual and divine nature which dwelt in Christ bodily, and is
communicated spiritually unto all the spiritual posterity of the Lord Jesus,
who in himself and in his Saints is the substance of this Image which was the
first Adam.

3. Adam was in the Image of God in respect of a power: he had power given him
to stand or fall, and in this power he stood til the temptation came: the first
temptation he fell, and this power was but an Image of the power of God in
which the second Adam came, and of which all the Saints are made partakers,
they enjoy the substance of Adams Image.

4. Adam was in the Image of God in respect of eternity, he had given him an
everlasting being in that moral upright estate, had he not degenerated from
it, as appears Genesis 2.17 In dying thou shall dye, hence a negative must be
necessarily inducted, in obeying thou shall live, but this life in Adam was but
a Character or Image of that spiritual and eternal life, souls are made
partakers of in the second Adam, John, 4.14. thus it appears that Adam was a
man in whom all humane perfections, wisdom, righteousness, and purity dwelt
yet secondly, he was in a mutable and changable condition, and so quickly fell
from his station, and perfection in which he was created he sought out many
inventions. A second thing considerable, is what this Image is not?

1. It is not that wisdom and understanding which the second Adam was endued
with, and all believers are made partakers of in the days of the Gospel Esa.
11.12.1 - John 2.27.

2. It is not that purity and righteousness which dwelt in the Lord Jesus the
second Adam, and so spiritually in all the saints, 2. Cor. 5.21.

3. Neither was it that power put in the second Adam who is one in God* and
stands while God stands, for he is the Lord from heaven: neither that power
saints are made partakers of who are one with God in Christ, and kept by the
same power unto salvation, 1. Pet. 1.5. preserved in Christ, Jude 1.

4. Neither was his eternity such an eternity in which the saints are inverted
a spiritual eternity, an eternity in God the Father and in the Son a glorious
unconceiveable eternity, Col. 3.4. Psalm. 16 11.

2. As it was a condition of humane profection not of spiritual perfection, so
it was a condition free from pain, and sorrow, for he was free from sin. and
so from sorrow; his sin brought in sweat and sorrow

SECT. 2. The cause or ground of man's falling.
THe cause or ground of man's falling from his first estate may be considered
under there particulers 1. The mutability of his condition. 2. The temptation
of Satan. 3. His disobedient acting, contrary to the revealed mind of God.

First, the mutability of his condition, he was created of God, though upright
and perfect, yet subject to a change: the power being put in his own hand; the
first opportunity presented him, he falls, and (indeed) it could not be
otherwise, he could not stand of himself unless he had been God.

Obj. If the mutability of Adams condition was the first cause of his fall;
then it seems that God himself was the first cause of sin, if God made man at
first in that condition that he might fall, nay that he could not but fall,
then God himself seems to be the first cause both of sin and misery.

Answ. It is true* that the first cause of all things is in God, he was before
all things, he created all things, and all things live, and move in him, ann by
him, and he works all things after the counsel of his own will, yet 2.
Although he be the first cause of all created things, yet not of any evil that
through degeneration, and Satan's temptation, flows from those beings: man in
his first creation was good, but through his degeneration from it, he became
evil so that the evil was not in God but in man.

3. God having made man in such a condition, man of himself freely
voluntarily, and rebelliously falling God brings about his everlasting
purpose in raising up some in the second Adam, to a spiritual and everlasting
union with himself, where they shall be for ever preserved and be kept by the
power of God from falling: and others; (to wit) all unbelievers left in the
nature of the first Adam; and there he manifests his Justice. 2. the cause of
man's falling was the temptation of Satan or the Serpent so he is called Genesis
3.1. note first what Satan is that tempts and overcomes man, 1. he is a
spiritual enemy to mankind, as appears not only by his deluding of our first
parents but the whole Scripture discovers as much; he goes about like a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour, no sooner was man created of God, but he
seeks presently to devour him, God having given forth Christ as a remedy, he
presently sets upon him likewise, to devour him, if he could, and so in him
all mankind for ever Mat. 4. Thus you see Satan is an adversary to mankind,
2. Satan or the devils, or the fallen Angels the Angels that fell seem to be
many, Iud. 6. the Angels that kept not their first estate are reserved in
everlasting Chains under darkness unto the Judgment of the great day, so
there are many devils or spirits, as appears by the man possessed by the
devil, when Christ asked his name, he answers my name is Legion, for we are
many. 3. He is a lying and deluding Spirit, that oft-times transformes himself
into an Angel of light: hence it comes to pass, that he so deludes all the
Sons and Daughters of disobedience, that they look upon all his works of
darkness with delight and pleasure: and oft-times it comes to pass, that he
so far transformes himself into a son of light, that he deludes souls under
the name of Christ, and when nothing less then the name of a Christian will
serve, he, will be the Christ, or rather the Antichrist to deceive souls,
hence it comes to pass, when downright Papacy will not serve, he will turn
himself into a prelatical shape rather then loose his rule and credit amongst
the sons of men: if once Prelacy grow out of date, he can change himself into
other shapes; if ten horns be too heavy to be born, he will be content to wear
but two like a Lamb, rather then none at all.

Qu. Why is Satan called a Serpent?

Answ. Because in his first prevailing with that woman he did either make use
of the Serpent Genesis 3.1. who was a Subtle creature, and so comes in the
Serpent unto the woman, or else secondly transformes himself in the shape and
form of the Serpent and so represents himself unto the woman, and so from
hence received the denomination of a Serpent Rev. 12.9. In the first, then
learn, that Satan usually makes use of the wisest and subtilest creatures to
bring to pass his will in or by them: if the second learn that Satan can
transform himself into any shape or form to delude and deceive souls.

A third cause of man's fall; was, disobedient acting, contrary to the mind of
God, In the day thou Eatest ihereof, thou shall dye, says the Lord, Adam
eats thereof, and dies: disobedience was the cause of man's fall Romans 5.18.19.

Qu. What was Adams disobedience?

An. Eating the forbidden fruit. Genesis 2.15.

Qu. What was this fruit?

Ans. The fruit of a Tree in the Garden or Paradise of God, Genesis 2: 9.16:
called the Tree of knowledge of good and evil: good, if a man did not eat of
it; evil, if he did eat of it. A Tree, who so eats the fruit thereof, shall
know the difference between good and evil; so he indeed knew good by the want
of it, and evil by the sense and enjoyment of it: What mystery might be
presented by this pleasant fruit, I shall not at present dispute, because it is
something dark unto me; whether sin which seems very pleasant unto a carnal
eye; or the world, which much prevails upon a carnal mind; or honor, or
both: All these temptations Satan made use of unto Christ himself, and
represented them to his eye, as a deceiveable fruit, if possible he might
deceive him: And the Tree of Life representing Christ, that whosoever eats
and drinks of him, might live for ever, Io. 4, 14. Rev. 22.2.

SECTION 6. Man's misery by reason of his fall.
Man's misery by the sin of Adam, was death, In dying thou shall die, or thou
shall dye the death, Genesis 2.17. Now under the name of Death, the Scriptures
comprehend diverse things: A spiritual death in sin; so are all natural men
dead in trespasses and sins, subject to external miseries, and deadly
plagues, Exodus 10 17. External afflictions upon the body, so Paul 2 Cor. 1.5.6
the dissolution of man's external and natural ltfe, Genesis 35.18. Psalm. 146.4.
The perdition of body and soul for ever: All which miseries come in by the sin
of Adam. As the second Adam was the way letting in all good to mankind; so was
the first Adam the way or floud-gate, letting in all miseries upon foul and
body.

Object. Some will object and say, But how could Adam lose a spiritual life,
and so come under a spiritual death? seeing he never had a spiritual life in
God; how could he lose that which he never had?

Answ. Although Adam had never a spiritual life in God, yet he had a
spiritual subsisting given him of God, free from sin; and so capable of
defilement: For the truth is, it is the internal part of man that sins, the
form or body of man is acted by the guiding of the internal part; so that
Adam now dies in his spirit, he has neither power, wisdom, nor will, to do
that which is well-pleasing to the Lord; he has not only lost that wisdom,
will, and power of acting* in the first Adam; but likewise of believing, and so
of applying that salvation tendered in the second Adam, until he spiritually
and powerfully draw up the soul unto himself, John 6.44. and so makes him not
only partaker of all that complete righteousness wrought for him; but
likewise sulfils all righteousness in him, Romans 8.4. Or else man's misery may
be considered under these three heads.

1. A condition of death, as you have heard. In the day thou eatest thereof,
thou shall dye the death; that is, death internal, and death external, and
death eternal; without a means, or a remedy preventing it. 2. A condition of
enmity, I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and
her seed; and all unbelievers, which so live and remain, are in a state of
enmity, God has not declared himself any other unto them; and their nature is
still at enmity with God. 3. A condition of insufficiency to help themselves:
Adam was not able to help himself, and all he could do, was to hide himself,
he could not deliver himself out of this condition: neither are all the sons
and daughters of Adam able to help one soul our of this condition, if God help
not. Therefore this should teach souls made alive by Christ, to admire mercy,
and to cry Grace, Grace, un to the whole work of God, both in them, and for them

SECT. IV. What is the means God has appointed for the recovery of man out of
this condition?
THe means God has appointed to deliver Man out of this condition, is Jesus
Christ; and therefore promises Christ immediately upon the Fall, Genesis 3.15.
Herein is Gods love manifested, that he leaves not man in his lost estate; but
gives forth his Son out of his bosom, that he might seek and save that which
was lost, and so deliver us from wrath to come, Romans 5.9. 1 These. 1.10. He is
Jesus the Savior, and the alone Savior of his people from their sins, Mat.
1.21. acts 4.12. that is, he is the alone way, through which the Father brings
down salvation to sinners, and through which he draws up souls to himself;
there is no other way of God, down to the soul, nor of the soul, up to God,
but through Jesus, John 14.6.

Quest. What must Christ Jesus undertake and perform; before the breach is
made up, and fallen man recovered?

Answ. 1. He must take the sin and fault upon himself, Isai 53.6. 1 Pet.
2.24. He that knew no sin was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him 2 Cor. 5.21. Admirable mercy! that when man had
sinned, and lost himself; Jesus Christ, who never knew sin, either in act or
thought, must now take upon him the sinners sin, and so be made as it were a
lump of sin, and this he did willingly of himself, he bare out sins on his
own body on the Cross; Christ took the whole sin of Adam, and the whole
world upon himself, when Adam had sinned, and all mankind in him, Adam and all
must have died, Christ takes the sin upon himself; and so taking the sin
upon himself, he withal takes the curse, and so undergoes the sentence of
death. The curse was, In the day thou Eat est theroof, thou shall dye the
death. Christ he dies the death, that so he might free man from death; and so
Christ in bearing the sin and the condemnation, recovers man out of this lost
and undone condition. Two objections here need to be cleared.

Object. 1. Whether Christ Jesus the Second Adam bare the sins, and so, the
condemnation of all men?

Answ. First, it is without question, that he took the sin and fault of the
first Adam upon him, and so the sin of the world, whose nature was in him,
and so taking the sin, so the condemnation of the whole upon him; else he could
not have effected that work for which he came.

Object. If Christ bear the sin and condemnation of all, why then are not all
saved?

Answ. 1. All are, in one sense, saved, that is, with an external salvation
from the present curse and death pronounced, and so the whole world have a
being by Christ, and a redemption, a salvation, a peace, which it enjoyes by
him; a mercy that they are not sensible of, Col. 1.20. having made peace by the
blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things to himself, whether things
in heaven or things on earth, etc. Note, all things are reconciled. What
things? The same that were made by him, verse 16. All things partake of this
reconciliation and peace.

Secondly, all are not saved with an eternal salvation, because all do not
believe. It is true, that there was a salvation purchased from the external
part of the present curse for that present sin; yet Adams posterity acting
other sins, draw on other external judgments; but there was likewise, by
the taking away of the present judgment, or death threatened, a prevention of
the present execution of that eternal death, included; and so a spiritual and
an eternal life by Christ obtained; yet so, as that none partake, of it but
believers: so that although there be a salvation purchased by Christ and
tendered unto all, yet none are made partakers of this salvation, but
believers; and none can believe savingly, but those who are drawn up to the
Father, through the Son by a power above themselves, who were known and
beloved of God from everlasting, the Father giving forth his Son as a public
person, making satisfaction to the law of transgression, that all mankind might
be brought under the tender of the Gospel; that so, upon believing, they might
be delivered from both the first Covenant, and transgression, no man being
(indeed) delivered from either, but by believing; all men remaining in the
first Adam, and so under the Law of transgression in the spririt, unless
believers; Christ having purchased an eternal salvation; but keeps it in his
own hand and dispenses it in the spirit, to those to whom God gives hearts to
receive both him and it: so now nothing hinders the salvation of any man, with
relation to Christ, a Savior or Deliverer from the transgression and sin of
the first Adam; (on Gods part) externally all partake of it; internally, only
believers; He is the Savior of all, but espeacially of them that believe. And
nothing (on Gods part) hinders the eternal salvation of all, with relation to
the purchase, or price paid, but only on Gods part, his eternal purpose to
draw up some into union with himself in his Son; and leaving others to
believe, if they would, or could. And from hence, on the creatures part, being
thus left, only a Christ tendered able to save them, if they believe, they
being left of God, having neither will, skill nor power to believe, perish
everlastingly, under the rejecting of the Gospel.

Object. It seems to be injustice in God to condemn the sin of all upon
Christ, and yet to condemn it upon the sinner too.

Answ. 1. It was as easy for Christ, being thereunto appointed of the Father,
to make satisfaction to the Law of Transgression for the sins of all, as one.
Such was his excellent worth.

Secondly the spiritual and eternal part of it remains still with God in
Christ, and is handed forth to none but believers; and of it remains that
there is no injustice in God to put such a worth in the sufferings of his
Son, that it is able to satisfy the Law of transgression for all, and able
to save all that come to God by him; and yet to condemn sin, even the sin
of the first as well as the rejecting of the second Adam, in all those that
refuse him, seeing his eternal purpose in all was, the setting forth of his Son
as a maker that so there might be a visible ground upon which the beloved of
God might accept of peace, and so come to enjoy that invisible union with the
Father in the spirit, which he from eternity intended: and likewise, that there
might be a visible rule of rejecting all who wilfully contemn their own
peace, and so judge themselves unworthy of eternal life.

Quest. Did Christ purchase life and love from the hand of the Father?

Answ. Nay, he did not purchase life and love from the hand of the Father, but
was a gift flowing forth from the fathers love: the death of Christ was not the
cause efficient either of life or love: but love in God was the efficient cause
of the coming forth and suffering of Christ Ioh 3.16. God so loved the world,
that he gave his son

Qu. In what sense then may Christ be said to deliver from wrath, 1 These. 1.10.
And to purchase his Church with his blood, acts 20.28?

Answ. 1. He delivers from wrath in a twofold consideration. First, from that
wrath and Justice of God, gone forth in a righteous Law it being broken, wrath
is gone forth upon all, because God is truth, and so in the Letter, wrath is
gone forth upon all through Adams transgression, and so all unbelievers in that
sense, are under wrath, and there remain eternally if not delivered, John the
3.2. They are delivered from wrath with relation to their apprehension: never
any soul comes savingly to Christ, but the first makes him sensible of an
estate of Wrath, and so every believer may truly say, They were once Children
of wrath, that is in an estate of wrath under the Law of Transgression, and so
are delivered from wrath to come; because if God had not from everlasting
received them into the number of those written in Heaven, they must likewise
have endured wrath to come.

Secondly, he purchased his Church with his blood; and so salvation for them
under two considerations: 1. He purchased his Church from the law of
transgression God having said, in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall
dye. Man eats and so should have dyed eternally, had not God provided such a
remedy: therefore he gives his son to purchase Man from that condition. 2. He
purchases His with his blood from wrath and condemnation in their own
apprehensions: man being sensible of his lost condition, must have something to
satisfy his conscience; therefore likewise the Father gives Christ, and in
both these, not as the first and moving cause of any thing in God: but God out
of his love gives forth his Son to effect that work. As if a man indebted for
more then he is ever able to pay, the Creditor having vowed satisfaction, the
debtor is cast down and troubled exceedingly: the creditor to satisfy both
his own word and the mind of the debtor: sends forth his son, and fully inables
him to pay the debt; he brings along the debtor with him, pays the debt,
cancels the bonds and sets him free; and thus it was with the Father, man had
sinned, God had said in the day thou sinnest thou shall dye, this debt of death
must be discharged: the Father, that he might be just and yet a justifier, and
that the conscience of fallen man whom he loved might be satisfied, he gives or
sends forth his Son, he pays the debt, and so satisfies the word of the
Father, and the conscience of the sinner, and so (indeed) is not essentially
the procuring cause of love, but rather an effect of love to satifie both the
word of the Father, and the conscience of the sinner, and this was Gods way
from eternity through which he intended to manifest hmselfe to his people.

SECTION V. How persons come to have benefit by this means that God has
appointed as the way of life?
SInners come to have benefit by Jesus Christ, by believing, John 3.16.36. He
that believes on the Son, has life, and he that believes not on the Son,
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides in him: Faith as an instrument
is the means appointed of God by which, sinners receive, and own Jesus
Christ, and life by him. For clearing this truth, three things will be
necessary to be considered.

First, what Faith is?

Secondly, how it comes?

Thirdly, the properties and effects of it.

1. What it is; Faith is the apprehending and applying Christ, and so the
Father, and his everlasting grace in him. 1. It is the apprehending of Christ
that is the observing and beholding of him, as he is in himself, the seeing of
him in his beauty, and excellency, Esa. 33.17. thine eyes shall see the King in
his beauty, it is to see all that worth to be in him that the soul needs, and
then 2. To apply him according to the souls present occasion, a dying Christ
to a dead soul, and this Christ commends unto us to be the faith by which
Souls come to enjoy salvation, John 6.40. this is the will of him that sent
me, that he that sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting
life, (note) He that sees the Son, that is, apprehends that worth and
excellency, that ability the Father has put in him to save sinners, able to
save all those to the utmost that come unto God by him, and believes on him,
that is applies him, receives him as its alone Savior, and justifier, to
them he gives power to become the Sons of God, John 1.12. even to as many as
believe on his name. 3. This faith does not only apply Christ, as given forth
of the Father singly, and a part from the Father, but it applies, that is,
ownes the Father in the Son, and that everlasting love of the Father to the
Soul, brought down through the Son; for the Son is but the Fathers way down
to sinners, John 14.6. John 12.44. He that believes on me, believes not on
me, but on him that sent me that is, believes not alone in Christ, but
believes and injoyes that everlasting good will and love of the Father, to the
soul, anb so sees the Father in Christ commending love, and so giving forth
himself to the soul, and so is able to see and say that it is indeed God that
justifies, and that God was in Christ, (as the way) reconciling sinners to
himself, not imputing their sins; and now the sinner sees that Christ never
acted any thing, or brings down any thing to the soul, but what was and is
the good will and pleasure of the Father, and so faith ownes, not only Christ,
but the Father giving forth the son as the price of their redemption, Ephesians.
1.7. Gal. 3.13. and way of their adoption, Gal. 4.5.

2. How is this Faith obtained?

Answ. It is the free gift of God, as Christ who is its object and all other
good things, for every good and perfect gift comes down from the Father, God
in Christ, is the Prince and Author of our faith, Heb. 12.2. Looking to Jesus
the Author and finisher of our faith, Ephesians 2.8. ye are saved freely by grace,
through faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God; faith is the
proper and peculiar gift of God, no man comes unto me, except the Father
which has sent me draw him it is the Father that works all the Father first
loves, and then gives his Son, and then draws souls up unto himself in the
Son, else they never come: No man comes to me, unless the Father draw him,
John 6. hence it is, that the experienced soul desires to be drawn, Cant. 1.2.
Phil. 1.29. for unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe, but to suffer, that is, you who have received this gift of faith, must
expect to suffer likewise.

Obj. But is not faith held forth in the Gospel, as the condition of the
Covenant of grace, he that believes shall be saved?

Answ. 1. Although it seems in the letter of the Gospel, to be held forth as a
condition of the Covenant he that believes shall be saved, yet it is in the
spirit mystery of the Gospel, a condition on Gods part, it is true, none can be
said and say truly himself, that he is in the Covenant of grace, before faith;
yet this faith is the gift of God, as you have heard, and if any condition it
is on Gods part in the mystery, and it is his promise, Heb. 8.10. This is the
Covenant I will make with them, I will write my Laws, in their hearts, says
the Lord, that is, I will take them off themselves, and make them partakers of
my spirit, which shall cause them to own love in God, and to live out of
themselves, in God, and shall cause them to act spiritually, even as Jesus
Christ himself acted, and so faith may be said (indeed) to be rather a branch,
or part of the Covenant of grace, then the condition, for God in the Covenant
promises to write his Law, and to give faith and all good unto the soul, he
gives Christ a Covenant, and with him he gives all, having given us his Son,
how shall be not with him give us all things?

2 Faith is indeed an evidence to the soul, that is in the Covenant of grace
and made one with God, hence it is called, Heb. 11.1. The evidence of things
not seen, that is, not seen with a carnal eye, the spirit evidenceth it, and
says receives that evidence, and so the soul is satisfied through faiths
believing of the word and spirit of God.

Obj. What is the means by which God works faith?

Answ. The means by which God works faith, is, his word and spirit by the
preaching of the Gospel, as the isntrumental means of this spirit working as
the principal means, Romans 10.14 John 6.63. now it is true, God is not limited
in his way of working, (that is) he has not confined himself to a verbal
preaching, although it is true likewise, that he ordinarily and usually works
faith by such means: but a Gospell-preaching is of necessity in the working of
faith; that is a spiritual Gospel-discovery of the love of God in Christ, and
such a preaching may be by the spirit of Christ in reading some word; or any
other way he pleases to work, and it may truly be called a Gospell-preaching:
any spiritual Gospel-discovery to a soul, through which it is brought up into
Gospell-injoyments, may truly be called a spiritual unfolding or preaching of
the Gospel, hence it is, that the preaching of the Letter, or a verbal
preaching, is no where called a powerful and prevailing preaching, unless the
spirit preach: it is the spirit that must convince the World of sin, Ioh. 16.
And our Gospel came not only in word, but in power and in the holy spirit. 1
These. 1.5. It is true, God usually works by means, but it is as true that he
can as well work spiritually without means, if he please; and this he has
done much of late, I do not question but many who are spiritually enlightened,
and live in the spiritual enjoyments of God, have had experience of it.

Qu. 3. What are the properties and effects of faith?

An. The properties and effects of Faith are many; It justifies the soul from
sin, Act. 13.39. by him all that believe are justified from all things from
which they could not be justified by the law of Moses.

Qu. How may faith be said to justify?

Answ. 1. Not as the efficient cause of our Justification, that is, God only
in Christ, it is God that justifies who shall condemn?

But 2. Faith justifies as it receives Christ and applies him as its
justification; so that it is said to justify, because it satisfies and quiets
the soul in Christ who is its justification, Romans 4.5. He that works not,
but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness. Note two words: 1. He that believes on him that justifies: that
is, Christ all that believe, are justified by him, Acts 13.39. So it is Christ
that justifies; faith only ownes that justification held forth in Christ. 2.
Word, His faith is counted for righteousness; that is either first, God never
declares a man righteous and just, until he gives him faith to enjoy his
righteousness, in Christ: or else secondly, his faith is counted or called his
righteousness, because he never till then enjoyed his righteousness.

And so that when I say, or the Scripture says, that Faith justifies: that
is, faith receives and ownes the justification of God in Christ declared, and
so soul by it lives in the enjoyment of justification and freedom from sin.

The 2. property or effect of faith, is union and peace with God, Romans 5.1.
Being justified by faith we have peace with God, chapter 15.13. Now the God, of
hope filyou with joy and peace through believing.

This is one glorious effect, that those who once were a far off, should now
be made nigh by the blood of Christ, and be brought into the enjoyment of it by
believing.

The third effect is, it puts the soul into the possession of the love of God,
1 Ioh. 4.16. We have known and believed the love that God has to us: and God
is love, and he that dwells in love dwells in God, and God in him. It acts
the soul above it self and causes it to dwell in God, and so to dwell in his
love, and this is an exceeding glorious effects, and that which in the fourth
place, fills the soul with joy. 1 Pet. 1.8. joy unspeakable, and full of
glory. What can a soul desire more, then to dwell continually in the love of
God? When the soul is satisfied from its union with God, and its dwelling in
God, that all the administrations and makings forth of God, is love unto it.
And thus it dwells in love, and from hence is filled with joy, it causes the
soul always to dwell at the right hand of God, where is joy and pleasure for
ever more.

Fifthly, in a word to conclude, the effect of faith is such, as that GOD by it
works up the soul to an internal and external conformity to Christ in some
measure, with a spiritual and eternal conformity in perfection in another
world, 1. John 3.1, 2, 3. Phil. 3.19. where faith shall cease, and love and
unity be made perfect, 1 Cor. 13.13.

SECTION VI. Wherein is the condition of persons restored by Christ and their
union with God discovered?
THe Restoration of persons by Christ may be considered, 1. Either external
and general: or else 2. more special and spiritual.

First, externally and generally, and that has a relation to all, it is as ye
have heard formerly, 1. A condition of being in the world. 2. A condition of
possibility of a spiritual and eternal wel-being in God, if God in his Son
draw up the soul to himself, Ioh. 6.44.

But secondly, and that I principally intend, is the more special and
spiritual condition of souls thus drawn up to God in Christ; it is not only
a restoration to the condition of the first Adam, with relation to a freedom
from sin. This every believer enjoyes by Christ, a freedom, a justification
from sin. But secondly, every soul drawn up out of it self to God, is
brought into the condition of the second Adam; which is a condition as far
above the first, as the Heaven is above the Earth: For, the first man is above
the earth, earthly; the second man is the Lord from Heaven: and as all men have
born the Image of the earthly; so those who believe, bear the Image of the
Heavenly; and as is the Heavenly, such are all they that are heavenly, 1 Cor.
15.47, 48, 49. And wherein in Christ exceeds the first Adam, therein believers
exceed; for they are as he is, even in this world, 1 John 4.17.

Now the condition of Christ. and so the Saints, exceeds the condition of the
first Adam, not only in their being upheld by God: but principally, in these
four particulars.

1. In their spiritual relations unto God: Christ, and so all believers are
related to the Father as Sons, and that not only by creation, as the first
Adam, or natural generation: but first Christ a Son by a spiritual
proceeding and coming forth from the Father, who was eternally one in the
Father, and so in him all believers are made by the same spirit, the adopted
sons of God, being made partakers of the same divine Nature. Adams Sonship was
in the flesh by creation, ours in the spirit by regeneration, and the spirit of
adoption, which is indeed a mystery to all natural men, and worthy to be
looked into and known of all the sons and daughters of Syon, 1. John 3.1, 2,
3. Behold what manner of love is this that we should be called the sons of God.

2. Relation of Christ, and so of the Saints as of sons, so of a spiritual
union with God, not only a union by way of peaee, but a union of spirit: thus
was the Father and the Son one, John 14.10.11. Ioh 10.30. I and the Father are
one. And thus are all the Saints one in the Father and the Son, and in and with
each other in the spirit, John 17.21. It was a part of the prayer of Christ,
who was heard in all things he asked, That they also may be one in us: Now the
union of the Father, Son, and Saints may be considered, either as first a
union of spirits; The Lord powered down of his Spirit abundantly upon the Lord
Jesus, according to that Glorious prophecy, Esaias 11.2. And the spirit of the
Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of
council and might, the spirit of knowledge and the fear of the Lord. And this
was fulfilled when Christ was haptized Mat. 3.16. John 1.22.23. Of this spirit
are the Saints made partakers, Ioh. 14.16.17. I, says Christ, will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, and he shall abide with you
for ever even the spirit of truth, whom the world can not receive, This spirit
of Christ, or this spiritual anointing, is that which every son and daughter
of God are made partakers of, Romans 8.9. Now if any man have not the spirit of
Christ, he is none of his, Christ dwells spiritually in all the Saints, Christ
is in you, except ye be reprobates. Therefore it concerns, all who profess
themselves to be Christians, to examine themselves. It is much to be feared,
that there are exceeding many carnal Christians, I mean, that bear the name
of Christians, and that in a more then a common and ordinary way. And if Christ
be in you, Romans 8.10. the body is dead because of sin, that is, the body is a
dead and sinful body, and cannot act toward God; and if Christ be in you, you
shall be sensible of it. Never a soul wherein Christ dwells, but is sensible of
its own deadness, through the dwelling of Christ there, Col. 3.8. Ye are dead
(says the Apostle) and your life is hid with God in Christ: but the spirit is
life because of righteousness, that spirit of Jesus that adopteth sons to the
Father in him, and has discovered and made the soul partaker of the
righteousness of God in him: lives and acts continually in the spiritual
Christian. Hence it is, the Apostle could say by experience, Gal. 2.20. I live,
yet not I, but Christ lives in me: Thus are the Saints made partakers of the
same spirit of life that was in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to
the Lord is one spirit, of the same anointings, and the anointings that ye have
received shall teach you all things, 1 Ioh. 2.27.

2. They that are joined to the Lord, are made partakers of the same power:
there is a union with the Father in his power, the spirit of might was powered
upon Jesus Christ, and he stood in the power of the Father: as he came forth in
the wisdom of the Father, so he acted by the power of the Father, and this
power the first Adam never had, and as Christ the head was upheld in the
Fathers power, he was anointed with the holy spirit and with power, Acts 10.38.
All power in Heaven and Earth was given to him, so that he stood in the power
and strength of the Almighty (and this did not the first Adam, if he had, then
he had not fallen) he is called, Esa 9. the mighty God, the everlasting Father,
the Prince of Peace, so that he stands while God stands; So likewise this is
the condition of all the Saints, spiritually made one with God in him, the same
power upholds them that upheld Christ, they are kept by the power of God unto
salvation, Gods power is become the Saints power: A glorious word of comfort
for the Sons and Daughters of Sion, with relation to afflictions, either
external or internal, they stand not in their own strength, they are not
founded upon their own bottom, they are out of themselves, the power of God
is theirs, and they may conclude with comfort, that while God stands, they
shall stand, he has promised to be with his in affliction, to uphold them, to
comfort them, to carry them through in his bosom: If the Saints were but
sensible of this truth, that the power of God is for them: it is that would
exceedingly help them against the fear of falling. 2. Consider this might be a
warning to the Saints, to take heed of acting in their own power but in all
undertakings to see themselves acted by a power above themselves.

3. As there is a union of spirits, a union of power; so there is a union in
wisdom, the wisdom of God is become the Saints wisdom, and that not as in the
first Adam; he was made partaker of wisdom; God imparted wisdom unto him, so
as to make him a reasonable man, humane wisdom according to his humane nature:
so that here dwelt in him, as you have heard formerly, a humane perfection in
this particular: but the second Adam, Christ, was not only made partaker of the
gifts of wisdom but he was the very wisdom of the Father, he was both the
power and the wisdom of God, he had the spirrit of wisdom powered down upon
him, he dwelt in the Fathers hosome, and lived in the knowledge of the whole
Council of GOD, and from hence he never did his own will, but the will of the
Father, and as Christ, so all the Saints are made one in this wisdom, Christ
who is the wisdom of God is made unto us, wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30. not only by way
of imputation, but by the operation of the same spirit who dwells as truly in
every believer as in Christ, and as the wisdom of the spirit increases, so the
wisdom of the flesh decreaseth that wisdom in the first Adam was a humane
wisdom, this a spiritual and heavenly wisdom, this wisdom destroys that
wisdom: that is, in the things of God, he destroys the wisdom of the wise,
and brings to naught the understanding of the prudent: that wisdom sets the
creature aworking; this sets the creature a believing: that wisdom carried on
the creature in its own power: this spiritual wisdom sets the creature out
of himself in the power of God: that wisdom carried on the creature to the
answering of God in the Letter (and yet in all comes short) this wisdom
carries on the soul, where it dwells, not after the oldnesse of the Letter,
but after the newness of the spirit: in a word, that wisdom could not help to
the knowledge of God in the spirit: this does, 1 Cor. 1. After that in the
wisdom of God, the world ( viz. in the wisdom of the first Adam) by wisdom
knew not God, but the wisdom of Christ teaches the spiritual knowledge of
God, 1. Cor. 2.12.14.15.16. Hence it is, that those who are taught of God,
despise the worlds wisdom, and are content to be fools to the world, and in
the worlds eyes, that they may be wise in God. Hence it is likewise, that so
many ignorants, in the wise and learned men's account, are made partakers of the
knowledge of God in the mystery; which (indeed) according to the word of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.27. confounds the wise and learned, and mighty things of the
world: this being a truth, that Saints are made one in the wisdom of the
Father. How should this, in the first place encourage them to look up to the
Lord, for the more full enjoyment of this spiritual wisdom? that as they are
made one in the wisdom of God so they might live in the same wisdom: and from
a deep sense of their own folly, to look unto the Lord for continual
teachings, and leadings forth in the spirit, expecting that promise to be
fulfilled, Thou shall hear a voice behind thee, saying; This is the way, walk
in it, when thou turnest to the right hand, or to the left. 2. This might be a
ground of comfort to the Saints, in all their walkings with God: the wisdom of
God is theirs, that God, with, and in whom they are made one, is their wisdom;
and in the conclusion they shall be swallowed up in the perfection of it, as
Christ himself, 1 John 3.2. 3. This might answer that foolish opinion of they
world, who look upon the most spiritual Saints, as the worst fools in the
world: It is true, the wisdom of God is folly with men; but if the could look
with a spiritual eye, they should see that those people are the only wise
people, wise in God, and those who live below upon Creatures, and things that
will not, nor cannot satisfy, are (indeed) in Gods account the only fools,
and they themselves shall be driven to confess it one day. 4. Christ and the
Saints are made one with God in righteousness; Gods righteousness was Christ's
righteousness: for the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily; He was
filled with the spiritual in-dwellings of God; who continually acted him
according to the divine pleasure, and as the second man was made one in the
righteousness of the Father, so are all the Saints made one in the same
righteousness: he was made sin for us, that wemight be made the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.

Quest. How may the Saints be said to be the righteousness of God in Christ?

Answ. Either, First in the Letter; there is a righteousness presented, which
is the first thing sinners are made partakers of; that is, the righteousness
of a Christ, dying upon the Cross, making satisfaction to the letter of the
Law, and to the conscience troubled, by reason of that letter, which is
(indeed) the cause of sin, for where no law is, there is no transgression; Now,
Christ dying upon the Cross, satisfies the Law; and likewise upon the sight
and application of him, satisfies the troubled conscience. This is the first
righteousness of God discovers to the souls of sinners, and by faith makes
them partakers of it, and this is called the righteousness of God, because God
gave forth his Son, enabled him to go through, and by his suffering, to obtain
such a righteousness for his people, that might both satisfy the Law
transgressed, and the Conscience of man's transgressing.

Secondly, in the spirit, the Saints are made the righteousness of God; that
is, God, now as in Christ, dwells and acts in the Saints by his Spirit, writes
his Law in their hearts, makes them partakers of his own nature, and so goes
on in fulfilling his own righteousness in them: For, the righteousness of
the Law in the Spirit is fulfilled in us, as well as the Law in the Letter for
us, who walk not alter the flesh; that is, after the Law in the Letter, but
after the spirit of Christ who dwells in us, and acts according to its own
pleasure, and so by degrees draws up the spirits of his people to himself,
until at last, they are swallowed up in the fullness, of the rigbteousnesse of
God in the Spirit, and be made wholly and for ever one in the Father with
Christ, 1 John 1.2. A glorious mysterious truth, meet to be known of all
spiritual Ones; this is the top of the Saints glory, and their height of
spiritual perfection, the knowledge and enjoyment of this spiritual Oneness
in the Father, and in the son, 1 John 2.2, 4.

5. There is an Oneness in love and delight between the Father, Son, and
Saints: the Fathers love and delight is in his Son, and Saints, Mat. 3.17. This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; well pleased with his Son, and
with his Saints in his Son. Hence the Lord speaking after the manner of men, is
said to delight and sing and rejoice over his people, even as the Bridegroom
rejoices over the Bride Esa 62.5. Zeph. 3.17. to rejoice even with joy and
singing; So Likewise it is the delight and joy of the Saints to live in the
Fathers love, the very thoughts of it is precious, and the enjoyment of it,
exceeding glorious, though the soul seems to come short of the perfection of
that enjoyment in this world, yet what it sees and injoyes, with the
expectation of perfection in another world, fills the soul with joy
unspeakeable and full of glory; and now as the soul dwells in the Fathers
love, delight, and joy; so likewise it dwells in the Fathers will, and it
delights in, and is well pleased with the will of the Father, it can say with
Christ what ever temptation presents it self, yet not my will, but thy will be
done, such is the Oneness between the Father, Son, and Saints, they delight
and take pleasure in each other.

6. There is a union in glory likewise; the Fathers glory is the Sons glory,
and the Sons glory is the Saints glory, what this glory shall be is
unconceiveable and unexpressable, to go about to express it, either with
tongue or pen, would rather darken it then illustrate it: yet a word by the
way; the perfection of the Saints glory shall be the enjoyment of all things in
God, who is, and shall be their everlasting fullness in the spirit. Those who
dream of a Kingdom after the flesh, or of any external pleasures in the
highest measure, discover themselves, to have exceeding carnal thoughts of the
Saints glory: It is true, they shall have a Kingdom, but a spiritual one, so
called, because enjoying all spiritual satisfactions in the fountain, when
the body and all the whole internal and external part of man shall be turned
into spirit, 1. Cor. 15.44. And our vile body shall be changed and made like
his glorious body. In a word, Such is the Saints Glory, and shall be in the
perfection of it, through their union with God in Christ; that we must conclude
with 1 John 3.2. We are already the Sons of God; but it does not yet appear
what we shall be, But this we know, when Christ shall appear, we shall be made
like unto him; and this is enough for us to know: And as there is an Oneness
between Father, Son, and Saints; so likewise there is a spiritual union
between the Saints: this was Christ's prayer who was heard in all things he
prayed for; that the Saints might be one, as he himself was one, in, and with
the Father: the union of the Saints, is not a carnal union, but a spiritual:
they who are joined to the Lord, are one Spirit.

Use. 1. To encourage all the Saints to press forward in the power of the
Lord, after a farther knowledge and enjoyment of this spiritual union with the
Lord, and with the Saints; Truly, friends, as this was not only the resolution
of the Apostle himself, Phil. 3. but his prayer for the Ephesians, 1.16, 17.
That the God of our Lord Jesus, the Father of glory, might give unto them the
spirit of wisdom, in the Revelation of him, that their eyes being enlightened,
they might know what was the hope of their calling, and the riches of his
glorious inheritance in the Saints: so is it my desire, not only to press
forward in the power of God, after the knowledge of this mystery; but that all
the Saints might live in the knowledge of it, that their hearts might be
comforted together, being knit together in the spirit of unity and love. The
effects of the knowledge of this blessed union will prove exceeding glorious.

1. It is that will produce a glorious spiritual communion, and fellowship,
with the Father, Son, and Saints; union alwaves being that which produces
communion, even a civil union with the flesh: when once the Lord says,
concerning man and woman, they are no more twain, but one flesh, that
produces fellowship and communion after the flesh: so likewise, and much more
does a spiritual union produce a spiritual communion and fellowship; a
fellowship and communion with the Father and the Son, in all his
administrations, in all the ways and acts of his providence, civil or
spiritual: the spiritual Christian injoyes God in all, 1. John 1.3. Our
fellowship is with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ (Christ and the Saints
from their union with each other.)

1. They dwell together in the spirit, they are his house, and he dwells in
them; the Temples of the holy spirit, and they dwell in him: they who dwell in
God, dwell in love.

2. They eat together in the spirit Eat, O friends; drink, yea, drink
abundantly; the Lord takes as it were spiritual satisfaction in his Saints,
and they take spiritual satisfaction in the Lord; it is their life to live in
the enjoyment of him.

3. They walk together in the spirit, they have their garden and galleries,
and pleasant delights.

4. They talk together, and commune with each other in the spirit, the Lord he
makes forth himself in the spiritual discoveries of his love to his Saints, and
then they are carried forth to tell him of it, to admire him in it, and to
praise him for it: and thus there is many sweet conference and heart-discovery
between the Lord, and a spiritual Christian, which makes the soul to revive
within it self.

5. Christ and the Saints lie down together in the spirit, and take their fill
of love each with other, they sleep, as it were, in the bosom of each other,
and so they rest themselves in love. And this likewise produces fellowship
amongst Saints, a fellowship in spiritualls, fellowship in temporalls, And they
continued in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, in breaking bread and
prayer, and breaking bread from house to house, being filled with gladness and
singleness of heart, Act. 2. And they who believed had all things common; a
community as well as a unity; that is, so far forth, as need is, and calls for
it; so in gifts, so in all things, 1. Cor. 3.22. All is yours, Paul, Apollo.
and Cephas: And Secondly, the knowledge of this spiritual glorious oneness,
which the Father produced an exceeding earnest desire in the soul enjoying of
it; to live more and more in that glory. What is the reason Professors content
themselves to be so low, so carnal in their minds, but because they were never
acquainted with, nor enjoyed higher things? but the Apostle who had seen and
tasted of that glory, forgets all behind, and presses forward; if so be, that
he might obtain the resurrection of the dead, Phil. 3. and apprehend that for
which he was apprehended, that love, that grace, that God who had apprehended
him. Certainly, that soul who has once tasted how good, how gracious the Lord
is, in the spirit, can never be satisfied with the knowledge of him, in the
letter. 3. the knowledge of the spiritual union with God produces an acting
more in and after the spirit of God: How does the creature set it self a works
and acts it self even in the letter of the Gospel, as well as formerly in the
letter of the Law, for want of knowledge of the union in the spiritual power of
the Lord, although without Christ, that is, not being acted by Christ; we can
do nothing; the Creature being unacquainted with that spiritual mystical
union with God, acts himself in the things of God. 4. The knowledge of this
spiritual union with God, produces the killing and crucifying of that earthly
part: nothing kills and destroys the flesh, but the rowing up in the spirit.
Oh! how would the soul many times be content to undergo any thing, so it
might be rid of pride and self, and those fleshly corruptions, and why? it is
the growing up in the spirit, that destroys the flesh: the more you live in
and after the spirit, the less after the flesh. 5. It is that will help us to
know Christ and the Saints, the more in and after the sdirit, the less after
the flesh, and so will produce a more spiritual communion amongst all the
spiritual Saints of Jesus. 6. And lastly, it is that will make the thoughts of
a change exceeding sweet, because the soul lives in expectation of a glorious
freedom, from sin and sorrow, and a full perfection of spiritual and eternal
glory; therefore it can be contented to be dissolved, and to be with Christ;
whichs best of all, where it shall for ever live in the connuall admiration of,
and glorying in the spiritual enjoyment of God, whose work shall be
everlastingly and fully to enjoy, and freely to sing praises unto the Lord.

SECT. VII. Wherein it declared what the Law is, and what the Gospel is; with
the difference between them both in the Letter, and in the Spirit.
THE Law in the Letter is a rule of Life answerable to those moral principles
of nature left in man since his fall; the substance of which Law, was written
in the heart of the first Adam, and was contained in that Verbal word; In the
day thou eatest, thou shall die the death. Man having yet the principles of
that law remaining in him, God having by the promised Messiah, given a farther
being to mankind in the world, he gives forth the righteous Law more at large
in the letter, that so his creatures might have a rule in the Letter, to walk
by, and likewise might be the more sensible of the loss of both; that
principle and power they had once in Adam, given unto them; and likewise with
it given, though not the same power, yet the same promise of external life in
the Land, God gives them. 2. The Law was that by which sin came: that is, by
which sin became sinful: For it is true, had not God given a Law; yet man
would have been acting contrary to the pure mind of God: therefore he give a
Law, that sin might become out of measure sinful, and it was added, because of
transgression; for where no Law is, there is no transgression: For by the Law,
was the knowledge of sin, and so it was an, administration of death, both in
the hands of Adam, as well Moses, 1. Cor. 3.6.7.

3. The Law in the letter was an Image or Character of that spiritual
righteousness, God intended to bring in by Jesus Christ: as Adam was an Image
of that spiritual perfection God intended to make his partakers of in the
spirit by Christ; So this Law in the letter was a rule answerable to that
moral principle of righteousness in Adam, and a Character likewise of that
spiritual righteousness that every believer attains in Christ: the righteousness
of the law in the letter, was not that believers enjoy in Christ; but that
righteousness Adam enjoyed in his state of innocence. It was not the
righteousness of God; but a Character of that righteousness, holiness and purity,
that all believers are made partakers of in the spirit: It was not that
righteousness, by which God intended to give life and glory eternally; but such
a righteousness which had external promises annexed unto it: For, if there had
been a Law given, that could have given life; then righteousness had been by
the Law. Wherefore I conclude, that the Law in the letter was but a Character
of the spiritual righteousness of God, which is the life of the Saints, and
that by which God never intended to justify any to eternity: for the law in
the letter kills, not justifies; but the spirit gives life, 2. Cor. 3.6.
The law was given to Adam in the letter, and Moses was the Minister of the law
in the letter, but Christ is the Minister of the law in the spirit: Therefore
Moses says himself, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, like
unto me, him shall you hear in all things, Acts 3.22, 23, Deyt. 18.15.

Obj. It is said Romans 15.8. that Jesus Christ was the Minister of Circumcision.

Answ. True, he was the minister of it for the truth of God, to confirm the
promises made unto Abraham, he was a Minister of it, so as to fulfill the truth
held forth in it: So the word Minister, (Diaconos) signifies, God having
promised Christ to come of the seed of Abraham, he gives forth circumcision,
and diverse other Ordinances, as Types representing him, and he is the Minister
of all, to act and fulfill all, and to be the substance of all those Types for
the truth of God: else God had not been true in his promises, neither had
salvation been obtained either by the Fathers, to whom the promises were made;
or the Gentiles who were a far off, and likewise included in the promises;
Therefore he was the Minister of circumcision for the truth of God to confirm
the promises unto the Fathers, and likewise that the Gentiles might glorify
God for his mercy: Not so much a Minister in the giving forth of it; but in the
fulfilling of it, which gives occasion to the Gentiles to rejoice and praise
the Lord.

Obj. Paul applies the words of Moses in the Law, Deuteronomy. 30.12, 13, 14. Romans 10
6, 7, 8. to be the righteousness of faith, the righteousness of faith
speaks on this wise.

Answ. It is true, that Christ and the righteousness of the Gospel, was
included in the Law. There was a literal or external righteousness expressed
in the letter, to which were external pall promises annexed: but there was a
spiritual and internal righteousness included, which only believers were
made partakers of, which was a righteousness brought in by Christ, and
obtained by faith, which is the law in the spirit, or that spiritual
righteousness of God, that believers are made partakers of, which is the
second thing propounded, what the law in the spirit is.

Secondly, the law in the spirit, or the spiritual righteousness contained in
the law, as you have already heard, is the righteousness of God, which every
believer is made partaker of. Note these two words for the more full clearing
of it.

First, that there wasa spiritual righteousness included mystically in the
letter of the Law, which none ever saw into; but those spiritually enlightened.
Paul had experience of it, Romans 7.14. For we know that the Law is spiritual,
but I am carnal: The Law in the letter was not spiritual: For the same
Apostle could say, that he walked concerning the righteousness of the Law in
the letter, blameless, Phil. 3. yet he calls it a fleshly walking: If any man
had cause of glorifying in the flesh, I much more. And he says, he was alive
ones without the Law; but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I died,
Romans 7.9. alive, without the law, in the letter: by that it was he judged
himself to be alive; he walked concerning that, blameless; but when the
Commandment came, that is, when the spiritual righteousness of the Law was
unfolded, which was no less then the righteousness of God; then he saw how
short he came of that righteousness: he was yet but in the letter, in the
flesh, and not in the spirit; Then sin revived, I died.

Secondly, that this Law in the spirit, is that spiritual righteousness of
God, that believers are made partakers of, 1 Cor. 3.6. The letter kills, but
the spirit gives life. The letter kills, the letter requires an exact and
perfect obedience, which none was able to perform; and so the very letter of
the law did kill. So at first it killed Adam and all his posterity, and so it
killed the Jews, being given forth in a more large way; for it was the
administration of death: but the spirit gives life, viz. the Lord Jesus, the
spirit and substance of the law, both moral and ceremonial; for the first man
was made a living soul, to answer a moral righteousness; the second was made
a quickening spirit, to give life to those, dead in the first Adam: And as the
Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in
himself, and he quickneth whom he will, John 5. The Law in the letter kills;
the Law in the spirit quickneth: Therefore Christ says, I came not to destroy,
but to save, John 12.47.

Secondly, what the Gospel is, There is likewise the Gospel in the letter, and
the Gospel in the spirit: The Gospel in the letter, which properly does
signify glad tidings; and this Gospel is to go forth amongst all; but none are
made partakers of it in the spirit, but believers: All are made partakers of it
in the letter, it is glad tidings to all, and that in a double sense: 1. It is
glad tidings to all; for all have a being by it: it is that which has made
peace for all; an external peace, in taking away that present curse.

Secondly, it is that wherein internal and external peace is held forth and
propounded to all, which is glad tidings; none are exempted in the letter, till
they exempt themselves through unbelief, and so judge themselves unworthy of
eternal life.

Secondly, there is the Gospel in the letter likewise, as it is a Gospel of
spiritual peace and reconciliation. And thus every believer receives it first
in the letter, through the power of the spirit, and this is Christ in the
flesh, dying upon the cross, taking away the condemnation of the Law in the
letter. And this is that answers the guilt of sin in the natural conscience, a
visible satisfaction for a literal transgression; This was Gods way to take
away sin, and this is the first discovery God makes of himself to a sinner,
because he is pleased to conform himself to that way that might best suit with
our understanding, and so by degrees to draw us up more in the spirit unto
himself, and this is the Gospel in the letter, answering the Law in the
letter, and the conscience troubled through the sense of sin, which is the
first knowledge of Christ; and is (indeed) but a knowledge after the flesh, and
so is in the esteem of the Apostle, but a carnal knowledge (that is) being
compared to the spiritual knowledge: therefore the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 3. I
cannot write unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto Carnal, even as unto
Babes in Christ. Note, I do not speak thus of the knowledge of Christ upon the
Cross, and the application of it, taking away the guilt of sin, as a low and
slight thing in it self: For first, it is Gods way to satisfy finning souls,
and so none ever partake of mercy, but by this way. Secondly, it is that, being
wrought by the spirit of Christ, brings souls under the denomination of
children, 1. John 2.12. Thirdly, it is that by which the soul injoyes much joy
and peace; who so has obtained it from the Lord, has obtained a good degree,
and much boldness in the spirit. Yet fourthly, God usually by this way, brings
souls up into a spiritual union with himself, and in comparison of the
souls enjoying of God in Christ, the Scripture calls it a carnal or fleshly
knowledge: and doubtless many may attain the knowledge of the Gospel in the
letter, and may own a dying. Christ upon the Cross, and yet be but a humane
faith, a literal Gospel, and never truly known in the spirit. But those who
are brought to the knowledge of and believing in Christ dying upon the Cross,
by the saving work of the spirit, shall grow up in the more spiritual
knowledge of him,

Secondly, the Gospel in the spirit is the righteousness of God imparted in
the spirit to the believer: it is the making of the believer partaker of the
same nature, of the same spirit that was in Christ Jesus. The Gospel in the
spirit is the same as the Law in the spirit, and represents the spiritual
righteousness of God, with which he intends to cloth his people, and it is
called, The righteousness of God in Christ, 2. Cor. 5. As there was a literal
transgression of the Law; so there is a Gospel in the letter, to answer it; and
a Christ dying upon the Cross. As there was a spiritual righteousness
included in the Law, so likewise is there a spiritual righteousness in the
Gospel, that is, in Christ, they are both in Christ: the former righteousness
is the knowledge of Christ, without, as dying, and satisfying: the second, is
the knowledge of Christ spiritually formed is us, which is here done in part,
and we shall in the conclusion, be wholly changed, and swallowed up in that
spiritual righteousness. And indeed here lies the great mystery of the
Gospel in these three particulars.

1. God in Christ, 1. Tim. 3.16. 2. Christ spiritually in the Saints, Christ in
you the hope of glory, Col. 1.27.3. That full spiritual change into the spirit
at the last day, of the Gospel in the spirit, not only that we are made one
with God; but likewise that we are made one in God; he dwells in us, and we
dwell in him, and we now serve no longer in the oldness of the letter, that is,
with our old nature, in the old letter, given forth Adam, and by Moses to the
old end, the obtaining of righteousness, but in the newness of the spirit, that
is the renewed mind by the spirit, to a new letter written in the heart to a
new end, to glorify the name of our Lord Jesus, and to declare our conformity
to him in the spirit. That this is in the Gospel, in the spirit, which the Lord
Jesus brings up his unto by degrees; the Scriptures in the spiritual
understanding will declare, not only for conformation, 2. Cor. 5.16. with Heb.
10.19.20. In the first, the Apostle says: Henceforth we know no man after the
flesh; yet, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth we know
him no more after the flesh. Note, first there is a knowledge of Christ after
the flesh even of the Saints; Although we have known Christ after the flesh,
yet know we him no more. Why? v. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature, Christ is formed in him after the spirit, and he comes now to know a
spiritual Christ within him, as well as a fleshly Christ without him. The 2d.
Scripture faith, We have boldness to enter into the holiest, by the blood of
Christ, by a new and a living way, that he has consecrated for us through the
veil; that is to say, his flesh: where likewise note, that the blood of Christ,
is but the way into the holiest, and the flesh of Christ is the veil, through
which we enter into the holiest, that is, into the spiritual and heavenly
enjoyment of God. We come first to the flesh, and secondly to the spirit, the
flesh being the way to the spiritual enjoyment of him, where Christ is entered
already in the perfection, and will in conclusion draw all his spiritual Ones
after him unto the same perfection, into the same glory.

Object. If this be the Gospel in the spirit, to know Christ no more after the
flesh, and to live in the spirit, to look upon Christ as the way, in the
flesh, into the spirit or holiest where he is; then what need of faith so much
spoken of in the Scripture, the just shall live by faith, and we are justified
by faith, etc.

Answ. 1. Faith may be acted not only on Christ dying upon the cross, but in
Christ living in the soul: that is, my believing that Christ is spiritually
formed in me; as well as that he has dyed for me, that I am justified in the
spirit, as well as in the flesh; faith has the same object in the spirit, as
in the flesh, to believe that Christ lives spiritually in the soul, and that
it shall be swallowed up in the conclusion, wholly in the spirit.

2. There may be often occasions to make use of faith likewise, while we are in
this body of flesh: although the soul obtaines a good degree of the enjoyment
of the spirit from, and in God; yet there will be through the presence of
corruption, some stir and trouble; and this God in his wisdom permits for
ends best known to himself. The Apostle Paul, who lived exceeding highly in
the spirit, sometimes in the third heaven, that is, in the highest dicovery of
God; yet he meets with a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet
him, that was, some strong lust in the flesh, that might cause him to look down
again: And the reason he renders, lest he should be exalted above measure, 2
Cor. 12. For, the truth is; if God should cause any one to live always in
heaven; that is, above all lusts and corruptions, in the highest discovery and
enjoyment of God; he would be ready to be lifted up above measure. Experience
teaches us as much, ready to look upon all knowledge and enjoyment, believe it
to be nothing but carnal; therefore he brings down Paul, that he might
exercise faith, and live upon grace as well as others My grace is sufficient for
thee, my strength shall be perfected in thy weakness, So that notwithstanding
this life of a Christian in the spirit; yet there will be the use of faith
always either in the spirit, or in the Letter: sometimes God brings a soul to
live upon grace, as it was revealed by Christ in the flesh and brought home and
enjoyed by the spirit, when we are at home in the body, we are absent from the
Lord in the Spirit; but when we are absent from the body, we are at home in
the spirit.

3. There is a continual use of faith, and that of the most spiritual
Christian, with relation to the perfection of our eternal enjoyments: for the
Saints do not only enjoy a oneness with God here, and from hence much
spiritual and internal glory; but by faith believes, and hope expects that
perfection of glory hereafter, wherein it shall be perfectly made like unto
Christ, when this vile body shall be changed, and made like unto his glorious
body, which at present so acts it self even in the Saints, which prevents
them even of that perfection of glory, which they by faith expect when the
change comes: when corruption shall put on incorruption, and mort all shall put
on immortality: when this natural body shall become spiritual; then shall be
fully enjoyed what has been by faith believed, and by hope expected; and of
this has the spiritual christain a taste by the spiritual enjoyment of God
here, although not as then so fully swallowed up in that glory.

Obj. But it seems that Christ in the flesh is the way to Justification and
glory, the way into the holiest, which is heaven it self, where none shall
enter till they are changed, but Christ who is entered already, Heb. 9.24.

Ans. True, Christ is entered into heaven It self only in perfection; but
believers they enter likewise in part, viz. when they are got within the veil,
that is to say, the flesh; then they see into the spiritual mystery and
mansions of glory unconceivable, and indeed un-utterable, as the Apostle says;
and desire to live continually within the veil, if it might be, while they are
here, yet they are raised up more and more in the spirit: and in the
conclusion, shall be for ever with Christ within all veiles, which was best of
all; as the law in the Letter was a veil to the Gospel, both in Letter and
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.14. So is the Gospel in the flesh a veil through which, and
within which all the Saints by degrees shall fully enter.

Qu. What is the difference between the law and the Gospel?

A. The difference is both in the Letter, and in the Spirit; the Gospel in the
spirit is the substance of that righteousness, spiritually included in the law,
as the Type, Image, or character of that spiritual substance the Saints are
partaekrs of. Hence it is often called the Law in the Spirit the Letter
kills, the Spirit gives life, and I through the Law am dead to the Law, that
I might live unto God, Gal. 2.19. that is, I through the Law of the Spirit,
that is, the righteousness of God in Christ, am dead to the Law in the Letter,
that I might live unto God in the spirit, and not to the Law and self in the
Letter.

2. Difference is in the Letter, of the Law, and so of the Gospel, and this is
glorious, for the Letter of the law requires a righteousness that was broken;
death seiseth on all by that means, the Gospel in the Letter holds forth a
righteousness in Christ, fulfilling the letter of the law, so that what
righteousness is in the law required, is obtained by Christ, and every
believer is made partaker of it, and so the difference is, 1. The Law
prescribes a Rule, the Gospel fulfills the Rule, Mat. 5.28, The law requires a
righteousness, the Gospel fulfills that righteousness. Romans 10.3. The law
was the administration of death; the Gospel, the administration of life.

Quest. Is not the law in the letter, a Rule to believers?

Answ. 1. Not as it was handed forth by Moses, from Mount Sinai: so it was a
killing letter; but 2. as it was taken into the hand of Christ, and so
satisfied and handed forth by Christ being turned into Gospel-Rules; it
remains a rule, so far as we are in the flesh, I mean, in the knowledge of
Christ after the flesh: but as God writes his Laws in the hearts of his
people, and takes them up in the spirit; so shall they live above the law in
the letter, even of the Gospel; yet not without: for they have it within them:
it is in their hearts, and so they are a law unto themselves; Then the rule in
the letter is as a stay in the hand, or as a guide in the way, helping the
soul up to the Spirit, and then he walks not after the flesh, but after the
spirit, having the law of the spirit of life within him, guiding him in the way
of holiness, and so that Scripture is made good, 1. John 3. The anointings
which you have received shall teach you all things, and ye need not that any
man teach you: and the spiritual man judges all things, yet he himself is
judged of no man, 1 Cor. 2.14.

Application: To encourage the Saints in the power and spirit of Jesus to
press forward after this knowledge, and enjoyment of God in the spirit: this
was Paul's resolution, who had tasted of the spiritual discoveries of God (as
deeply as any) to press discoveries of God (as deeply as any) to press
forward after perfection, Phil. 3. Forgetting things that are behind, not
always living below. The effects of it will prove very glorious, 1. It is that
by which you shall be able with the more evidence of light and truth, to judge of
things that differ, the spiritual man judges all things. 2. It is that will
make the life of a Christian exceeding glorious, carrying him through all
difficulties with much spiritual joy. 3. It is that will put a period to all
differences and divisions amongst the Saints. Divisions flow from our
ignorance, and dwelling so much in the letter, 1 Cor. 3.3. Whereas there are
among you divisions and strife, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? Those
divisions, and that strife amongst the Saints about things in the letter, argue
that they are exceeding carnal; but this knowledge of God in the Spirit, will
as a mighty Gulf swallow up all those little differences, and put an end to
all strife, both among particular Saints, and in the Nations. Isa. 2.2, 3, 4.
When once the mountain of the Lords house (which is his Saints) come to be
established on the top of all Mountains and Hills, that is, in the spiritual
enjoyment of God, above all caruall and fleshy things; then shall all wars
and divisions have an end, and not till then.

4. It is that will cause many a glorious Star to fall from Heaven: many who
have acted much after the Letter, will upon the discoveries of the glory of God
in the Spirit, fall from that light they seemed to have.

SECT. VIII. The matter of the Church, what?
THE Church of Christ may be considered either as more general, or more
particular. 1. More general, and then it includes the whole body of the Saints
in the spirit: This of some is called the invisible Church; but to speak in
the Scripture Language, it may be rather called the general or universal
Church, the whole body of Saints in the spirit, called the mystical body of
Christ, because of their spiritual union with, and in Christ their head: This
Church or assembly (for so the Greek Ecclesia properly signifies) we shall
read of Heb. 12.22, 23. Ye are come to Mount- Sion, and unto the City of the
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels,
and to the genearal Assembly or Church of the first born, and written in
heaven, and to the spirits of just men made perfect; this is the Church that
shall be made one in glory; the general assembly of Saints, the spirits of
just men, and it is that might be desired at present, that Saints Communion
might flow more from their union in the spirit, and not altogether from the
union in the letter: this is the glorious Church of Christ; and the knowledge
of it in the spirit will cause Saints to own each other more in the spirit. 2.
The Church of Christ may be considered more particular, or a particular body,
or company of Saints in the visible profession of the Gospel, walking in the
enjoyment of Ordinances; taking particular care of each other, and building up
each other in the faith, and of this Church we shall read, freqent in the new
Testament; and this Church is likewise called the body of Christ 1 Cor. 12 27.
and it is not to be questioned, but that this practice is very commendable
amongst Saints: and the knowledge of God in the Spirit, and of Saints in the
Spirit, will not break or lessen the fellowship of particular Churches, but
increase it, and make it to be more spiritual: for, questionles that which
tends to the breach of communion and fellowship amongst Saints, is not God, for
God is love: and they who dwell in God dwell in love: it is that will increase
love, and this is the more excellent way, and that which in conclusion will
swallow up all differences: yet one thing is much to be desired, that is, that
there might be a general union amongst the Saints that those who are spiritual
might not be divided in the spiritual Communion, because of some literal
differences about the use of ordinances, and the like, Oh that the Lord would
help us to bear with each other in such things! why cannot Saints in the
matters of difference bear with each other according to the Apostles rule?
seeing he that observes a day, observes it to the Lord; and he that observes
not a day, observes it not to the Lord, and both give God thanks.

Obj. But our difference is in matters of Ordinances for the most part which
God commands, and has given them to us as privileges;

Answ. True, yet they are such commands and privileges as God has given to
His servants to lead them up to himself in the spiri: and what if some enjoy
God gloriously in the Spirit without these, and we find them spiritual, and
walking answerable to the spirit of Christ: why should my conscience judge
another man's Liberty? and why should not we hold communion with such in the
spirit and in the letter too, in those things wherein there is a union? but the
truth is, there is too too much erring at present upon both hands; the one
judging it too carnal for any Saints to walk in the use of Ordinances, which
is not a truth at present; the other judging it inconsistent with the Gospel,
and the state of a Christian to live without the practice and use of
ordinances; a third sort there are that would submit to Ordinances, but want
Administrators; and this is more carnal then either of the former, because
they expect that to be in a creature which is only in God; but here should be
a bearing and forbearing where the Spirit of Christ is.

A fourth sort there are who put Ordinances upon those not capable of them
without any word at all in the letters, and this the most carnal work of all,
and savours much of the earth, and of an Old Testament-spirit, from whence
usually the ground is brought: and it were much to be desired that the Lord
would be pleased to enlighten their eyes, that they might have more spiritual
apprehension of the Gospel, and the end of Gospel Ordinances; yet it should be
the wisdom of the those taught from above, to own any thing of God wherever
they find it: and although it is true, there cannot be a Communion with, and in
thing a never of God prescribed; yet the spirit of love should so temper our
spirits, as that we should not bite and devour on eachother; but, that as many
as are spiritual, though differing in some circumstantiall things in the
letter, yet own each other in the Spirit, imputing those differences to the
flesh; and this union in the spirit, the knowledge of it, will in conclusion
bring all the Saints into one spiritual way, Isa. 35.9. And so they shall
worship God in the Spirit with one heart, Zeph. 3. and so put an which flow
merely from the flesh.

SECTION IX. The spiritual Kingdom of Christ in his Church in the latter days
of the Gospel, discovered.
THe Kingdom of Christ has always been and still is spiritual; but in the
latter days of the Gospel it shall be much more spiritual and glorious than
formerly, with relation to the subjects of it, for the clearing of this truth
in hand, note these 4. particulars.

1. That Christ is a King. 2. Who are the subjects of this Kingdom. 3. That
his Kingdom shall increase in glory and spiritualnesse in the latter days. 4.
That his Kingdom is spiritual, and not of this world.
First that Christ is King; I suppose it is unquestionable: all who own the
Gospel but in the letter, confess as much in word; see a scripture or two to
confirm it Ps. 2.6. the Lord spaking of Christ, says, Yet have I set my King
upon the holy Hill of Sion, notwithstanding the rage of men, yet Christ is
King, and will reign; so likewise, Psalm. 45. with Heb. 1.8. but unto the Son he
says, Thy Throne, O God is forever, and ever; a Scepter of righteousness is
the Scepter of thy Kingdom: he has a Kingdom and a Scepture by which he
rules; he is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, a King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords.

2. Who are the subjects of his Kingdom; it is true, he is King over all, King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, he will rule over his enemies with his Iron rod,
and dash them to pieces like a Potters vessel; but he is in a more special
manner King over the Saints, and in them he lives; and so rules: in them as
well as over them: he is not only King of Nations, but King of Saints; Rev.
15.3. It is part of the Saints song of joy, just and true are thy ways O thou
King of Saints; and in the Saints he reigns spiritually and powerfully; for in
the day of his power he makes them a willing people: the Subjects of Christ's
Kingdom are a free people: the manner how Christ reigns in and over his
people, and what are his Laws, I pass it in this place, and referr you to the
Kingly Office of Christ in my book entitled, the exaltation of Christ in his
Offices: and so come to the 3. thing propounded; That is, that the Kingdom of
Christ shall increase in glory and spiritualness in the latter days: the glory
of the Church in the latter days shall increase, and the manifestation of
Christ's Kingly power shall increase, Esa. 9. of the increase of his Government
and Peace; there shall be no end. The Churches glory shall consist of two
partciulars, that is, external and internal.

1. External, the Church shall enjoy much external glory, liberty, and peace,
even in the world in the latter days.

Quest. Wherein shall the external glory of the Church consist?

Answ. 1. In the abundance of peace and quiet, even from the men of the World,
Esa. 66.12. I will extend peace to her, like a River, and the glory of the
Gentiles like a flowing stream: peace shall be extended not only in the
spirit, but in the letter likewise; for the ground of this peace is rendered in.
verse 15, 16. for behold the Lord will come with fire, etc. Esae. 65.25. the
Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, etc. They shall not hurt nor destroy in
all my holy Mountain, says the Lord: God will take away the Wolvish
disposition of men, that they shall live peaceably amongst the Saints, they
shall nor hurt nor destroy, etc.

2. God will take off the spirits of evil men he will make them stoop, and fall
before the Saints, Mich. 7.16, 17. The Nations shall see and be confounded at
all their might, they shall lay their hands upon their mouth, their ears shall
be deaf, they shall lick the dust like a Serpent, they shall move out of their
holes like worms of the earth; they shall be afraid of the Lord our God, and
shall fear because of thee. Thus will the Lord deal with his enemies in the
lattr days, he will take away their Chariot-wheels, and cause them to drive
heavily.

3, God will give the Saints a good name, even amongst their enemies; they
shall be high even in the thoughts of bad men, Isa. 65.15. And ye (to wit, the
Lords enemies) shall leave your name for a curse to my chosen: for the Lord
will slay thee, and call his servants by another name. Formerly, the Saints had
a name of reproach amongst the wicked: if a man departed from iniquity, he made
himself a prey; but the Lord will give his servants another name, even amongst
their enemies, that men shall not bless themselves in their evil ways; but who
so blesses himself in the earth, blesses himself in he God of truth.

4. God will make his enemies in stead of persecuting, to serve the Saints,
Isa. 60.12. For the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish;
yea, thoso Nations shall be utterly wasted. Ver. 14. The sons of them that
afflicted thee, shall come bending unto thee; and all they that despised thee,
shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet, and shall call thee the
Cities of the Lord. Thus you see the Churches enemies shall not only
acknowledge the Saints, and confess them to be the Lords City, but bow down
unto them, and do them service.

5. The Saints shall be exceeding many, and that will add to their external
glory: Times have been, that to be a Christian indeed, would have been a
wonder, and he that departed from iniquity, made himself a prey, and so was
counted the offscouring of all things; but now a little one shall become a
thousand, and a small one strong Nation; yea, the Lord will hasten it in his
time, Isa. 60.22. and v. 5. Then shall thou see and flow together, and thy
heart shall fear, and be enlarged; because the abundance of the Sea shall be
converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee. This,
with much more, shall be the external glory of the Church.

Secondly, the Church shall enjoy abundance of internal glory in the latter
days: both is coming on apace.

Quest. Wherein shall the Churches internal glory consist?

Answ. 1. In the abundance of spiritual light and knowledge: Much ignorance
has possessed the souls, even of Saints, a long time; a veil has been spread
over all Nations, both Gentile as well as Jew; but the veil shall be taken away
Isa. 25. And I will says the Lord destroy or swallow up in this mountain (that
is in the Church) the face of the covering cast over all people, and the veil
spread over all Nations. Such has been the ignorance that has overspread all
People, and Nations, through the spiritual operation of the man of sin; that
the mystery of the Gospel has been hid, as it were from us, and sealed up
even with leaven seals, a perfection of darkness, that none was found worthy
to open; Humane Arts, and Creature-wisdome being set a work, did but so much
the more darken it, and cast a veil, till at last the Lord Jesus begins to open
it himself, and will unseale it by degrees, and cause the veil to vanish away,
to the great glory of his spiritual Ones; but to the great terror of all
humanists who were left without this spiritual knowledge of Christ. See the
further confirmation of this truth Isa. 11.9. The earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the Sea. As ignorance has, as a veil
bespread over all Nations: so shall the knowledge of the Lord go forth
abundantly through out all Nations, Isa. 60.17.19, 20. Rev. 21.12, 23.

Secondly, that which shall make for the Churches spiritual glory, shall be
the enjoyment of a full freedom from the guilt of sin; that which much
troubles many a precious soul: and it was that the Apostle Paul was freed
from, Romans 8. We have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again; but
the spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba Father, And this is that the Lord
has promised to his people in the latter day, Isa. 33.24. And the inhabitants
shall not say, I am sick, the people that dwell therein, shall he forgive their
iniquity. Sin is the cause of spiritual sickness. This cause shall be taken
away: for they shall be forgiven their iniquity, i.e, they shall live in the
knowledge and enjoyment of it, and from henceforth they shall not say. I am
sick, and the voice of crying and weeping shall no more be heard in her, for,
the former things are passed away: there shall be no more sin nor sorrow, but
everlasting joy shall be upon her head, and sorrow and sighing shall pass
away, Isa. 35.10.

A third thing that shall make for the Saints spiritual glory is the knowledge
of, and enjoyment of a spiritual Oneness with God in Christ and each with
other; although this be a glorious spiritual truth: yet it is that the Saints
have lived exceeding short in the knowledge of it, the knowledge and enjoyment
of it will be exceeding glorious to the spiritual christian. What this union
is, and wherein it consists, I referr it to what has been said formerly in the
glorious condition of persons in the 2. Adam, above the first. A 4th. thing
that will make for the Saints spiritual glory, is, a living above creatures
and things, in the spiritual enjoyment of God, whom to enjoy is life; when all
things below shall be nothing; when the soul shall be content to suffer the
loss of all things, that Christ may be all and in all; the glorious Lord will
be unto us a place of broad rivers and streams wherein shall go no Gally with
Oars, nor shall gallant Ships pass thereby, Isa. 33.24. no need of rowing in
creatures or things, no need of gallant Ships of any thing to carry the soul
up unto God, of to bring God in Christ, down to the soul; but the glorious
Lord will be all, and in all, and the spiritual Christian shall live in the
enjoyment of him, verse 23 Then shall the tacklings be forsaken, or losed, they
could not strengthen their Mast, they shall not be able who desire it to sail
any further or longer in Ordinances, duties, creatures; but the great spoil
shall be divided, and the lame take the spoil, the lame contemptable ones,
they are the people that are like to enjoy this spiritual glory.

A fifth thing that will make for the Saints spiritual glory, is a spiritual
and internal conformity unto God: they shall live up in the spirit, and walk
after the spirit, Christ will manifest himself spiritually in them: the light
of the Moon, shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall
be seaven-fold as the light of seven days; the light of the Moon, that is, of
the Church, shall be as the light of the Sun, that is, Christ the Son of
righteousness, who is both a Son and a shield; and the light of the Sun shall
be seaven-fold, that is, Christ shall appear in the spirit to his, conforming
them to himself in the spirit, which will appear seven times more glorious,
then formerly when we knew him after the flesh, Zach. 12.8. He that is weak
and feeble amongst them, shall shall be as David; that is, Christ; David shall
be as God even as the Angels of God before him: This is the glorious conformity
that all the Saints shall have unto Jesus Christ in the spirit, and this
glorious unity and conformity unto the Law, of righteousness is that will
appear at the first sight of it very terrible and dreadful to the sons of men,
Cant. 9. v. 10. Who is she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the
Moon, clears as the Sun, terrible as an Army with Banners, such will be the
strangeness of this glorious truth, that it will not only appear terrible and
dreadful to the men of this world, but even Christ sets it forth himself with
a note of admiration, not as if it were strange to him, but rather to discover
her excellent glory; and (indeed) the Church will be worth a looking on, and
her glory a seeking after, of all spiritual ones.

4 Particular, propounded for the clearing of the truth in hand, is; that the
Kingdom of Christ is wholly spiritual, and not of this world, that as
formerly, so in the latter days, the glory of his Kingdom shall be in the
spirit, and not in the flesh; it will be spiritual, and not personal: for
clearing of it, I shall first prove it from testimony of Scripture. Secondly,
By spiritual Arguments grounded upon Scripture. Thirdly, Answer such Questions
and Scripture grounds, which seem to hold it forth.

1. By testimony from Scripture, it is the word of Christ himself. My Kingdom
is not of this world; that is, not a fleshly, and external Kingdom over the
bodies of men; but a spiritual and internal one, The Kingdom of Heaven is
within you: So likewise, 1 Cor. 5, 16. There is no more knowledge of Christ
after the flesh, they are too fleshly thoughts for a spiritual Christian.
Secondly, it will appear by spiritual Arguments likewife.

1. Argument. The spiritual presence of Christ with his Saints, is the most
glorious presence. Christ will be most gloriously present with his people in
the latter days, ergo, his presence, and so his Kingdom, will be a spiritual
presence, and not a personal. The Major Proposition is evident from Scripture,
that the spiritual presence of Christ, is the most glorious presence: This
Christ tells his Disciples when he was personally with them, John 16.7.
Nevertheless it expedient that I go away, for if I go not away, the Comforter
will not come unto you: And therefore, Christ tells his Disciples, John 14.26.
That if they loved him, they would not reason, because he said, he would go
away; because his spiritual presence was the most glorious presence: and we see
it by experience, that the Disciples of Christ were most spiritual, and had
most spiritual enjoyment of God, when Christ was gone from them in person, and
they enjoyed him in the spirit. That the presence of Christ in the latter days
will be most glorious; appears by all that have been formerly spoken, and I
think none of light deny it: then the conclusion holds true, that the presence
of Christ with his people in the latter days, wherein they shall enjoy most
light and glory; will be a spiritual presence.

2. Argument. If Jesus Christ be known of the Saints no more after the flesh,
but after the spirit; then his regne in the latter days of the Gospel will not
be personal, but spiritual: but, he is no more to be known of the Saints
after the flesh, as you have formerly heard, 1 Cor. 5.16. Therefore his
presence, so and his Kingdom will not be a fleshly or personal presence and
Kingdom; but a spiritual.

3. Argument. Spiritual glory, and spiritual enjoyment, is that which most of
all suites with the Majesty and glory of God. John 4.22, 23, 24. Col. 3.1. 1
Cor. 2.9.10.14. The glory of the Saints shall be spiritual, and their
enjoyment spiritual in the latter days; spiritual knowledge, Esa. 11. and
spiritual conformity unto Christ, Zach. 12.8. and spiritual joy and
rejoicing, Esa. 35.10, Ergo, the presence and Kingdom of Christ, in, and with
his Saints, will be a spiritual Kingdom, and not a personal.

4. Ar.g. Christ's Kingdom and presence shall be with all his people, filling
them with spiritual glory, Esa. 25.7. He shall take away the veil spread over
all Nations, and v. 6. And they shall say, Lo, this is the Lord, we have
waited for him, Christ's personal presence cannot be with all his at once:
therefore his presence and Kingdom will be spiritual and not personal.

Objections answered concering the personal reign of Christ.

Obj. 1. That Christ was promised to the Jews to come as a King, and they to
this day expect him to come as a King, to deliver them from their captivity.
Ans. 1. It is is true, he was promised to come as a King, Isa. 9.7. and so he
came King, although not in outward appearance, Mat. 2.2. Where is he that is
borne King of the Jews? we have seen his Star in the East, and are come to
worship him. He was the King of the Jews, when he was born, he was a Child,
and yet a King. 2. he is King of all spiritual Jews, For he is not a Jew,
that is one outwardly, but he is a Jew, that is one inwardly: and Christ
reigns spiritually in all his people, the Kingdom of Heaven is within you. 3.
Christ will appear a spiritual glorious King to the Jews, the natural seed
of Abraham, in the latter days, gathering them from among the Heathen, to
himself in the spirit, and so will reign in and over them in the spirit
gloriously, Ezekiel. 37. throughout: see ver. 24, 25. That they shall be gathered
in with all the beloved of God, by the spiritual working of Christ, and not by
his personal appearing; is clear from this ground: They shall be gathered
unto Christ, from the beholding of Christ crucified, and not from the beholding
of his glorious personal appearing: Therefore Christ shall come a King, in the
spirit, to his people, and not in the flesh: see Zach. 12.10. They shall look
upon him whom they have pierced, and mourn over him, etc. The eying of a
pierced Christ shall be the way of bringing in Jew, as well as Gentile.

Obj. 2. Christ suffered reproach and shame in the flesh from his enemies:
therefore, it is likely he shall be glorified in the flesh before his
adversaries.

Answ. Christ shall without question be glorified in the presence of his
adversaries, and all Nations shall be gathered together before him, when he
shall appear from Heaven in flaming fire, to render vengeance to them that
know not God, and obey not his Gospel; but, whether Christ shall appear
personally, or in any personal form, will be a great question: but with much
spiritual power manifesting himself to the salvation of his people, and to
the confusion of all his, and his Churches enemies, Matt. 5.25.

Obj. 3. It is said, Rev. 20.4. That those that had been beheaded for the
testimony of Jesus, and for the Word of God, that had not worshipped the Beast,
nor his Image, nor received his mark in their fore* heads, and they lived and
reigned with Christ a thousand years, and the rest of the dead lived not
again.

Answ. For clearing the mystery of this Scripture, it will be requisite, first
to set down the things asserted from hence. Secondly, to unfold the mystery
intended, which will answer the things asserted: the things asserted hence are
these. 1. That Christ shall reign a thousand years personally. 2. That all
the Saints departed from the beginning of the world, shall be raised, and come
and reign with him. 3. That the wicked shall not be raised, till after the
thousand years be finished.

For answer unto, and clearing of the truth.

1. I conceive it to be a glorious truth, that Christ shall come and reign a
thousand years, a long time, spiritually in his people; but not personally
amongst his people: that Christ shall reign thus gloriously, see not only
this Scripture, but Rev. 11.15. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there wear
great voices in Heaven, saying the Kingdoms of this world are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord. and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever. Thus,
you see, Christ shall have a Kingdom, and for the time of it, it is said Rev.
20. to be a 1000. years, and in Isa. 60. to be many Generations, I will make
thee an eternal Excellency, a joy of many Generations.

Obj. But its said. Rev. 11.15. That the Nations and Kingdoms of the world,
are become the Nations of Christ, and he shall reign for ever: therefore it
seems that his Kingdom shall be personal.

Answ. The Nations and Kingdoms of the world, may be said to be the Nations
and Kingdoms of Christ, in a two fold respect, and yet Christ not reign
personally; and this the Scripture clearly holds forth.

1. In respect of the abundance shall be converted unto Christ in all Nations,
that in comparison of what has been formerly: the Nations and Kingdoms, shall
become the Kingdoms of Christ, Esa. 66.19, 20.60. chapter from 5. to 12. verse.

2. Christ may be said to be the King of Nations, in respect of the ruling of
his Saints over their enemies, for in this Kingdom of Christ, shall the
enemies of Christ be subjected, and shall serve the Saints, the Nations that
will not serve thee shall perish, and Christ reigning in his Saints over them,
may be said truly to reign over them. Psalm. 149.7, 8, 9. Rev. 2.26, 27. Rev.
5.10. Thus the first assertion in part is truth, Christ shall reign a thousand
years, that is many Generations; but it will be spiritual, and not personal.

2. Assertion from thence is, that all the Saints from the beginning of the
world, shall be raised and come and reign with Christ.

Ans. For the clearing of the truth in this Scripture, which will answer this
assertion, consider, 1. what is meant by the behading for the witness of
Jesus. 2. What is meant by not receiving the mark of the beast. 3. What is
meant by being raised, living, and reigning with Christ. 4. What is meant by
the not living of the rest of the dead, until the thousand years were
finished. 1. What is meant by being beheaded for the witness of Jesus: It is a
spiritual beheading* such a beheading as all the Saints who shake off
Antichrists badge and yoke like to meet withal, Christ is said to be the head
of the Church, and the head of every man, that is, of every Saint, is Christ
now; when the Lord discovers the evil of Antichristian ways to his people,
and they forsake it, they durst not receive either the Image, name, or mark of
the beast, they shall presently be beheaded by the beast, that is, they will
condemn them as those that forsake Christ, and cry out unto them, that they are
revolted, that they are Sectaries, Hypocrites, Heritickes, etc.

And thus they behead the Saints spiritually, and that for the testimony of
Jesus, because they cannot but declare the things that they have seen and heard
from him, which will overthrow and ruin all things contrary to himself in
the. 2. What is meant by a receiving of the Image or mark of the beast?

Answ. By the Image of the beast is meant that likeness that it has unto the
first beast, who seems to receive a deadly wound, being compared with Chap.
13.11. to 16. that is, this beast seems to make a change, he speaks great
words, his look is more stout then his fellows; he thinks to change times and
Laws yet when all is done, it is but the Image of the first beast, the
exercise of the same power, the same wisdom in the things of God, the same
worship for substance, it is all the same in substance, and it is but the
number of a man all of the flesh, it is from below, yet such must the worth,
and the excellency of it be for a time, that whosoever will not receive the
Image of the first beast, and account it something too, is likewise to be
beheaded, and not to be suffered either to buy or sell amongst them, and many a
Saint is like to be given into his hand, and he shall prevail over them, but it
shall be but for a time, times, and the dividing of a time, and then the
Kingdom shall become the Saints. Dan. 7.2. The Image is that internal
spiritual principle from which the beast acts; for none can truly follow the
beast, but those who have received this Image, that is, who act from the same
principl, e those are acted, who act for and from the man of sin, and it is
called an image, because it resembles Christ, both in the internal as well as
the external part; yet acts from his own wisdom, by its own power, according
to its own mind, to its own end, and this in all resembles Christ.

Now these who refuse this Image in the spirit, and cannot be contented with a
wisdom like Christ, a selfe-acting in the room of Christ, a rule short of
Christ; and end besides Christ: from hence casting off this Image, is caerrid
on in another track then before: they come to be beheaded for Christ, because
they cannot receive the Image, who is the Antichrist in the spirit and not
Christ, so that here is not only the Image of the first beast, with relation
to pattern and power, but likewise in relation to holiness; the first will be
for Christ, and so the second, yet are both but Antichrist. 2. What is meant by
the mark of the beast in the forehead, and in the right hand; by the mark in
the forehead, is meant the visible profession of Antichrist in the external
part those that would not visibly profess the ways of Antichrist: or in the
right hand; that is, to act for him, these were denied to buy or sell, Chap.
13.17. to sell, that is, to preach the Gospel; for Antichrist under the notion
of preaching the Gospel, sells his wares, but a time is comeing, that none
will buy their wares any more, so they deny any who own not the Image, name, or
mark, to sell; hence they may examine those who preach upon such and such
intergatories, and if it appear that they deny the Image, name or mark; they
may not sell, that is, give forth freely what God communicates unto them, when
others sell or buy, that is, partake of any spiritual good amongst them, if
they could prevent it, and those were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, but
they were at last raised and lived with Christ 1000. years, that is, raised up
from their low condition, taken up into heaven in the sight of their
adversaries, and lived with Christ in the spirit, reigning triumphantly over
all spiritual enemies, self, satan, world, and those Merchants that sell all
(yea the souls of men too) shall be weeping and crying alas, alas, Rev, 18.
when the Lord shall make good that word of truth, Esa. 66.5. Hear the word of
the Lord, yes that tremble at his word; your brethren that hated you, that
beheaded you, that cast you out for my names sake, said, let the Lord be
glorified; that is, (it tends to the Honor of God to behead and to cast out
these men) but he shall appear to your joy, you shall be raised up with
Christ, and I will give you a new name, but they shall be ashamed.

Obj. John says, the Saints that had not worshipped the Beast (he speaks in
the Preterpluperfectence, therefore it seems not to be the Saints raised who
at present were beheaded in the mystical sense, but the Saints that had been
beheaded in the litterall sense.)

Ans. First, it is the use of the spirit, or the spirits Language, to deliver
it self in dark and mystical terms, so the Apostle says in another case, 1
These. 4.5. that we which are alive and remain till the coming of the Lord,
etc. the Apostle speaks of, we, as if he had intended the Thessalonians and
Himself, which was least intended; but the Saints, who being all one in the
spirit, and but one mystical body in Christ, while there are any Saints in the
world, the Apostle makes it to be all one, as if he and the Thessalonians were
them, and so delivers it in the present tense; when he might have said rather,
to speak after the manner of men, then they which shall be alive at his coming
etc. as in Rev. the word might have run thus; and so questionless, it is to be
understood: then they that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, were raised
or lived, and reigned with Christ, as the sense of the former; then they that
shall be alive at the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are
asleep: so that the spirit of God, might as well deliver a truth, which is in
the Present tense, in the Preterpluperfect tense; as a truth in the Present
tense, which was in the Future; and yet is, all to exercise the mind of him
that reads, and to let us know there is mystery in the Gospel.

Secondly, very few Saints have been beheaded in the litterall sense: those
that have dyed for Christ, have dyed other deaths, and not beheaded; therefore,
we cannot understand it in the Letter, but in the spirit.

The fourth particular propounded, was, what was meant, in that the rest of the
dead were not raised, until the 1000. years were finished; that is, none that
had been bodily dead, Saints, or wicked, good or bad, were raised, till after
the 1000. years were finished, and then you shall see the resurrection of all,
which is called the second resurrection; the first is called a resurrection,
and the first resurrection; because it shall be a resurrection from shame and
disgrace in the world. And secondly, it shall be a glorious resurrection in the
spirit: this first, all the Saints have in some measure been partakers of it.
Thus it appears that Christ shall have a Kingdom, a glorious, a spiritual
One.

Quest. But when shall this Kingdom be?

Ans. It is already begun in the spirits of Saints. The Kingdom of Heaven is
within you.

2. I believe that the time of the 1000 years which is a more glorious estate
in the spirit is not yet begun: but the beginning of that time shall be when
the 7. seals are fully opened, etc. the 7. Trumpets fully sounded, and the 7
vials powered forth, they being but effects of each other; the opening of the
seals, occasions the sound of the Trumpets; the sound of the trumpets
occasions the vials, the opening of the seals the unfolding of the mysteries
of the Gospel, (which have been hid, Rev. 5.1, 2.) As light breaks forth, the
Trumpets sound, the servants of Jesus preach forth the mystery of the Gospel,
in the power and purity of it, occasions the vials of wrath to fall upon the
Antichristian estate, both in the spirit, and in the letter; which work is now
adoing. (Wait the Lords time, and it will come on apace) But first, we are yet
like to be given into the hands of the little horn, who changes times and
laws; the two witnesses are yet like to be slain, and to lie dead 3 days and
a half; and the Woman clothed with the Sun, to be driven into the wilderness
for a little space, a time, times and half a time; the beast with two horns
like a Lamb, has yet a little time to make use of his power; persuading them
that dwell in the earth, to make an Image to the first beast; and that none but
those who own it shall buy or sell with them. the Saints beheaded under the
Alter to wait a little time, before they be raised up to live with Christ 1000.
years: but it is not long, the vision is for an appointed time: in the end, it
will speak and not lie; it will come, and not tarry: the first 1000. is almost
past* the second and third, are coming on apace; and all the Nations and
Kingdoms in the world, will come apace to be the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of
his Christ, and he shall reign for ever; their lives shall be prolonged for a
season, and a time; and other Scriptures are alleged for a personal reign of
Christ, as the stone cut out of the Mountain without hands, Dan. 2. that is,
the glorious power of Christ, by weak means, subduing al Antichristian
enemies, without his Saints, and all Antichristian things, by his spirit,
within them: So that in Dan. 7.10. the glorious company of Saints attending on
Christ in the spirit, which shall be fulfilled at the raising of the two
witnesses up into Heaven, in the sight of their enemies, Rev. 5.10, 11. This is
the first glorious work of the Lord Jesus, in, and amongst the Saints: the Lord
reigns, let the Saints rejoice: the Lord reigns, let the world tremble, see
Zach. 14.5. The Lord our God will come, and all the Saints with him, that is,
Christ will come in the Spirit, and all the Saints shall appear gloriously in
him.

A word of application: First, if this be truth, that the Kingdom of Christ is
a spiritual Kingdom, and not of this world; this may inform us how far,
besides the Gospel in the spirit and truth of it, those men are, who make the
Kingdom of Christ to be merely political and a state-Kingdome, who turn the
world by a humane power into the Church and Kingdom of Christ (as they say)
and Christ must have a worldly carnal Kingdom, no better th n the Kings of
the earth enjoy; or else he shall have none at all: it savours exceedingly of
the earth, and ere long thither it must return. 2. This could encourage the
Saints to pres forward after the knowledge of God in the spirit, that as the
Kingdom of Christ is spiritual, and not of this world; so may the Saints
Kingdom likewise be in the spirit; and so all their enioyments may be
spiritual enjoyments: this is that will make the soul fat, and wel-liking in
the Lord; Il fithe soul with joy and peace, which the world is not acquainted
with; their eyes never saw it, nor their hearts conceived it; neither are they
like to see it, unless the Lord make them spiritual.

SECT. X. Of Death, Resurrection, Judgment, and the state of the Saints after
Iudgemene, eternally with God.
FIrst, of death: It is appointed for all men once to dye; Dust we are, and to
dust we must return; and therefore, it behooves us to to expect it: All the
days of mine appointed time, will I wait, til my change come: Death is
certain, although the time be uncertain: it is, that none are in a common aid
ordinary way exempted from, unless those Saints who are alive* at the last
coming of Christ; they shall be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye, 1. Cor. 15.51.52. and so shall be caught up in the spirit, to meet the
Lord in the air, 1 These. 4.17. Secondly, of the Resurrection.

That there shall be a resurrection of the Body at the last day, is evident,
John 5.28, 29. John 11.24. with 1 Cor. 15. throughout Rev. 20.12.13. although
this truth is by some denied, and by others, too carnally looked upon; some
thinking, that our bodies of flesh shall be raised in the same form, in which
it dyed, others that it shall be spiritual, yet question whether it shall be of
the same substance: therefore, it will be necessary, to consider two
particulars, for the clearing of it. First, by what power we shall be raised,
Secondly, with what bodies.

1 By what Power.

Answ. 1. By the same power, by which Jesus Christ was raised; which was by the
power and spirit of God: he was declared to be the son of God with power by his
resurrection from the dead, Romans 1.4. Secondly, by the same power and spirit
the Saints are enlightened self, which is the same power, by which the body of
Christ was raised; so that when we say we are raised by the resurrection of
Christ in the spirit, that is, by the same power, by which Christ was raised:
therefore the Apostle desires to know the power of the death, and resurrection
of Christ, Phil. 3.10. by the same power and spirit shall our bodies be raised
at the last day. Romans 8.11. 1 Cor. 15.13, 14 15, 16. this being a truth that
they shall be raised by the same power: it may some what direct us to the form
in which they shall be raised, which is the second particular, that is in a
spiritual form, not in a fleshly for as the spirit of Christ raises us up in
the spirit while we are here, so shall it raise up our bodies in the spirit at
the last day, it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body; our
vile bodies shall be changed and made like his glorieus body, he took upon him
our form that so we might be brought into his form for when he shall appear we
shall be made like unto him, the substance of our natural body raised in
spirit.

Of judgment it is appointed to all men once to dye but after this the
judgment; when all men shall be called to an account before him (to wit, the
Lord Jesus) there to give an account for all things done in their bodies,
whether good or bad Mat. 25. and so God in this way will acquit his Saints and
clear them before the world, although this is not their life; neither that in
which they appear Mat. 25.36. to 40.

Fourthly, of the estate of the Saints after Judgment, it is first ever to be
with the Lord, beholding his glory l These. 4.17. John 17.24. and in his
presence will be fulness of joy, and 2. at his right hand everlastingly to be
completed in the same glory, Col. 3.3. when Christ who is our life shall
appear, we shall appear with him in glory, all flesh shall be swallowed up in
spirit, and our bodies shall be changed, and made like his glorious body, all
things that offend shall be done away, and we shall be made eternally one in
the Father and in the Son, and in the Spirit one in eternity, one in
enjoyment, and one in glory this for the Saints is enough to know, besides,
what shall be, we do not know, it is an height and debth, a length and breadth
unsearchable. Oh the unsearchable riches of Christ! what the Saints do enjoy,
what they shall enjoy, swallows up the spiritual Christian in the beholding
of it: hence let us continue searching after an higher measure of the height,
depth, breadth, and length of his love, which passes knowledge: and there shall
we be able to see and say that his wisdom is unsearch able, and his ways past
finding ont.

FINIS.
A brief discovery of Antichrist, both in the Mystery, and in the History.
By THOMAS COLLIER. 1647.
For my more clear proceeding in the discovery of the Man of Sin, five
things are considerable.
1 What Antichrist, or the man of Sin is. 2 What his Reign. 3 What shall be
his discovery. 4 What his ruin. 5 When his ruin shall be.
SECTION 1. What Antichrist, or the Man of sin is?
ANtichrist or the Man of fin, is to be considered either in the spirit, or in
the Letter. 1. in the Spirit, Antichrist signifies one seemingly for Christ,
yet indeed is against him, and so is but a man of sin, a Son of perdition, and
this he will appear to be, both in the Mystery, and in the History.

1. In the mystery, or spirit, and in this he has taken hold of every man,
especially in these latter days; yet it is true, much time has been spent by
many, to find out this man of sin, who he is, and for the most part ascribe it
to some particular man, never looking at the mystery, or root of iniquity,
which is not in the first place, a man, but a wicked thing in man, and this,
for want of a spirit of discerning, we have not seen Antichrist in our selves,
but have cast him upon others, and so miss of the thing, or at least, most
strike at the top boughs, and are ignorant of the root: Now Antichrist in the
mystery, or spiritual and internal part; It is a confederacy between Satan,
and the deceitful heart of man, transforming himself into an Angel of light:
nay into the Son of Light; and while nothing less then Christ, and Christian
will satisfy; he will be the Christ, or at least the Antichrist, in stead of
Christ to deceive souls.

For this was and is the last, the greatest and most deceiving stratagem that
ever Satan made use of to ruin souls; that where he cannot content souls but
they must be Christians, he can be content with that, so he may be the Christ:
hence he is called the man of sin, the Son of perdition, that wicked deceiver,
2 These. 2. It is not Satan acting in a carnal and filthy form of flesh, but in
the most refined part of the first Adam, so he keeps the creature in the first
Adam still, he cares not.

1. There must be a reformation that it shall enjoy, provided it be legally in
the Letter, it must believe or else it cannot be satisfied, and believe it
does; but the ground must be built upon that first: reformation qualification,
etc. wisdom is required to walk in Gods ways, and to the knowledge of the mind
of God: wisdom must and may be obtained; provided it be humane, the wisdom of
the first Adam that is enough: power of acting must likewise of necessity be
obtained a power shall be obtained, but it must be a creature-power, and a
creature-acting under the name and notion of the power of God; that is indeed
and in truth condemned though in name owned there must now sometimes be a
spiritual mind, and that injoyes likewise in its own apprehension, although
hardly obtained and indeed the highest pitch of spirituallnesse is but carnal
to the spiritual man's enjoyment: this is a high pitch of spiritual
mindedness where Satan dwells; to have self thoughts of reformation, thoughts
to pray more; to walk more exactly, and to please God better; never, thoughts
of living out of its self more, and of living in the enjoyment of God in the
spirit more; and spiritual joy it must have sometimes too: why? that it shall
have likewise, but it must arise from enlargement in duties, humiliations,
selfe-actings, reformation and all from self, and thus Satan and the
deceitful heart joins together to the delusion of many a soul, and this is
Antichristian in the mystery; the man of sin spoken of in Scripture that
comes with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness: and well may be called a
man of sin, an Antichrist, a mystery of iniquity; for in this shape he
deceives souls, and they are never sensible of it, drawn in and never know it,
until everlastingly undon, and he has his diversities of forms in this kind.

1. If the name of Christian will serve, and yet live loose and profane; that
they shall have and there he will hold them. If there must be a conformity to
CHRIST, and a more zealous and conscionable walking; to quiet the conscience,
shall have it: he will go as near unto Christ with the soul as may be;
provided it rest it self below: and thus, Christ says many shall come under
this delusion expecting life from duty, and it will apprear to be but works of
iniquity of sin, (why) because acted by the man of sin, acted not from a
right principle, nor by a right power, neither to a right end; acting there
must be, but not Christ acting. Hence it is, that though he will be a
Christian, and so talks much of Christ, yet, he denies Christ to be come in
the flesh* that is, in the flesh of his Saints; the spirit of Christ acting and
working all things in the Saints (and they are sensible of it) and thus this
deceiveable man of sin carries on hood winkt to perdition many and many a
soul. And now it is more wicked and deceiveable, then when in its proper
place, acting after the lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5.19 20.21. then every one
almost is sensible of 1. Hence it is, that Christ says, Mat. 12.45. The
unclean spirit being cast out, that is, cut in its unclean form it can no
longer be owned, he is now content to come in when it is swept and garnished,
profaneness and filthiness is gone, and now be comes in a more refined form,
perhaps legal reformation, as the present Pharisees to whom Christ spoke, or
else the name of Christian or the knowledge of Christ, after the flesh; but
Christ says the latter end of the man thus deceived is seven times worse then
the beginning; he comes in this refined form with seven worse spirits then
himself, and so makes him seven times more, the child of perdition than before.
Oh then, how does it concern every one bearing the name of Christian to look
about themselves, if they are not deceived and deluded, with this Antichrist
under the name of Christ! seeing it is the high way of souls ruin, now in the
days of the Gospel; for herein does Satan declare himself to be the Master
of arts in transforming himself into the son of light, and under the name of
Christ, and Christian to* ruin souls. 2. There is Antichrist in the History
or in the Letter, and this flows from Antichrist in the Spirit: now the soul
being possessed with Antichrist, he grows up into some form, and now not only
in the spirit invisibly, but in the letter: more visible, he appearee sitting
in the seat of God, and he may be descryed principally under these three heads,
as sitting in the seat of Christ, and acting those things which properly belong
to Christ.

1. In making Christians by a humane power, it being the proper work of God in
Christ to make Christians; John 6.37.44. but now here is Antichrist will
undertake the business and so turns the world into Christians or rather
Antichristians, and pretend that they do the work of Christ, too: when, if he
did the work of Christ, he would rather keep of all carnal ignorant ones, and
accept of none, until made willing and spiritual by Jesus Christ; for Christ
does not only own souls when they come, but first gives them a will to come,
and that by a spiritual, and not a humane power. Hence it comes to pass, that
there are so many carnal profane ones under the name of Christian, because
made Christian not by Jesus Christ, but by men.

Oh that the Lord would be pleased to inlighten the understandings of these men
betimes, that they might not walk in a way so directly opposite to the Gospel,
and destructive to their own and millions of souls.

in prescribing rules of worship which is properly only to Jesus Christ, to
prescribe rules, and 10 carry through the soul in acting according to these
rules.

To prescribe rules; this belongs unto Christ, and whosoever undertakes it,
puts themselves in the room of Christ, and is the Antichrist: this is to
exercise-creature wisdom in the things of Jesus Christ and (indeed) to sit in
the seat of God it is the work of Christ in the spirit to help in prayer or
any duty; we know not what we pray for as we ought, but the spirit helps our
infirmities Romans 8. It is Christ that helps both to see our want, and forms
by his spirit, words within accordingly. Therefore those who prescribe forms
and rules of worship put themselves in the room of Christ.

2. It belongs to Christ to give in power to act according to those rules, but
Antichrist gives the command, and so carries on an external acting, and not
according to Christ, but his own mind.

3. Antichrist may be discovered as sitting in the seat of God, not only, 1.
In making Christians, 2. In prescribing rules, but 3. In compelling all unto
those rules whatever Christ says, that matters not; he himself will the
Christ, and must be obeyed, let Christ say what he will, and all that question
his power, must be the Antichrist, for he exalts himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God, sits in the Temple of
God; showing himself that he is God, and in all these particulars, there is a
mystery lies, a mystery of iniquity, that is iniquity hid under the name and
notion of Christ? therefore so much the more to be dreaded.

To bea Christian, is accounted agallant thing; and therefore, not himself
only, but others likewise, look upon it to be a matter of much piety to make
men Christians and cause them to own Christ.

On I but here lies a mystery of iniquity, many souls made Christians by a
humane power, are but Antichristians, and so under the name of Christian, are
likely to be undone for ever, if the Lord prevent it not: an excellent thing
accounted in the world to make creaturs Christians, as soon as they are borne,
by sprinckling a little water upon them, and so in bearing them in hand, that
they are so ever after but here lies a mystery of in quity, and one of the
soule-running mysteries of iniquity as ever came from Hell: Speak England,
speak all Nations called Christian; whether (almost all people of all sorts,
devoutly slain in the spirit under this mystery of iniquity) to have forms of
worships prescribed: that all Priests and People may walk in one form and way
of worship, and all compelled unto it; is accounted an excellent part of
Christianity? but here lies a mystery of iniquity under it. First, it brings
all sorts of people to be acting in something, though worse then nothing, and
so delude themselves in all their actings; it causes them to look to men, and
not to Christ. Secondly, it causes them to bless themselves in their unity,
in forms and worships never questioning their Oneness with Christ in the
spirit, they are as strangers unto it. Hence it is, that uniformity in the
Letter, is so much called for amongst all sorts of People; being wholly
ignorant of unity in spirit.

I could instance in diverse other particulars, as Ministry, Gifts, Church
Ordinances, all have something like Christ in them, but it is all but ths number
of a man, merely humane, carnal Ministry, humane gifts, and anointings in
stead of the Spirit carnal Church, invented Ordinances: but I pass it at
present.

SECTION II. What is his Reign.
ANtichrists reign is likewise in the spirit, and in the Letter; Antichrist or
the man of sin, is as high in his reign, as confident of his good estate.

First his reign in the spirit in the mystery? he shows himself, that he is
God, he persuades souls, that he is the Christ, his wisdom and his
righteousness, his rules and his ordinances, they are of God; and they must
stand, although it has neither Scripture nor reason, I mean in the Spirit,
for it: and thus this mystery of iniquity has reigned a long time; it began to
work in the Apostles days.

Secondly the reign of Antichrist in tste Letter; he also visibly shows
himself, that he is God and must be submitted unto, under penaltyes, fines,
and imprisonments, bitter speaking against the Ordinances of Chrst, than his
Ordinances. And thus he reigns with power, and likewise with much confidence;
for, she sits as QVEEN, and says, she shall see no sorrow, but her sorrows
will come in one day, etc.

SECT. III. The discovery of Antichrist.
THE Revelation of Antichrist may be considered, either first as he openly and
publicly reveals himself to be the Antichrist by his confidence, and
powerful acting as the Christ, or above Christ: of this the Apostle speaks, 2
These. 2.3.

2. It may be considered, as a mystery of iniquity, and so revealed by the
spirit of Christ unto his Servants; and so the revelation or discovery of
Antichrist unto the Saints, shall be by the spirit of Christ in the preaching
of the Gospel; as it is a mystery of iniquity in it self; so it must be that
hidden wisdom in a mystery, 1 Cor. 2. that must discover it. Now where the
Lord works for his discovery, he first discovers him to be the Antichrist;
he helps the soul to find him out: And then secondly, he discovers the evil,
the iniquity of him he lets the soul see that it is the greatest and the
subtlest adversary that ever it had to deal withal; the most dangerous,
because clothed under so fair and Christ-like a Garb, and the hardest to be
discovered; such an adversary, as bears souls in hand that they are going to
heaven when they are in the broad and rode-way to ruin, like a cunning Hoc as
Poc as, that jugleth away a man's Estate before he is awarc of it, and all the
while pretends friendship, and thus it is the spirit of God in the Gospel,
that must discover and reveal Antihrist in the mystery, that same spirit who
revealed it to the Apostle Paul, and the same who revealed both his rising and
falling to John in the Revelations, those who think to attain the discovery of
him by humane industry, historical readings etc. are exceeding low in their
apprehensions and come short of the discovery of him: he may be strongly
working in a man while he is discovering of him.

SECT. IV. What shall be the ruin of Antichrist?
THe consumation of Antichrist shall be by the same means that discovers him
the bright goings forth of Jesus Christ in the Gospel: for as the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ goes up in the spirit; (for the Kingdom of Heaven is within you
etc.) so the Kingdom of Antichrist must go down: this is the means foretold
and prescribed by the Apostle, who foresaw him in his rising. 2 These. 2.8. The
Lord will consume him with the breath of his mouth, and destroy him with the
brightness of his coming, the preaching of the Gospel, and the bright comings
forth of Jesus Christ in the spirits of his people shall both consume and
destroy him: As it is not a humane wisdom that shall discover him, so neither
is it a humane power that must destroy him: for all humanity in the things of
God; whether wisdom or power, it is Antichristian: Therefore, not that which
shall destroy Antichrist; but that which will uphold him until he be
destroyed: the ruin of Antichrist is farther held forth, Rev. 14.6. The Angel
flies through the midst of heaven, preaching the everlasting Gospel; and verse
8. Another Angel follows, saying, That Babylon, is fallen that great City,
etc. The preaching of the Gospel is the means you see, of Antichrists ruin:
and the Sermon is, fear God, and give glory to him. This Sermon is that will
ruin Antichrist both in the letter and in the spirit; give glory to God, that
is, let God be all, and in all: let God be your enjoyment in the spirit; see
you live upon nothing below him, give not glory to Creatures, duties, actings;
any thing either of the first Adam, or Antichrist: give glory to God in the
Letter, give not glory to man, set not up man in the room of God; do not cry
the voice of Man, and not of God, in any of the things of God; and this is the
Sermon that shall ruin Antichrist.

See likewise, Rev. 1 2.9. The Devil and Satan, the mystical Antichrist, was
cast forth of Heaven, to the earth; that is, he shall not be suffered any more
to delude souls, in a heavenly shape: the Devil is now turned Christian, and
he makes war with the Saints, under the name of Christ, both in the Spirit,
as well as in the Letter: And hence the great war is between Christ and Satan
in Heaven, that is between the Heaven of Christ, and the Heaven of Satan under
the name of Christ. But now John says, he saw Satan cast out of Heaven, that
is he shall deceive souls no more, in a Heavenly form: neither persecute the
Saints any more under the name of Christ: (A glorious work and it is coming on
a pace) for the most part of souls in that part of the world called Christans
are ruined in the Devils heaven, and believe it, this is the great work Christ
has to do in these latter days, the consumation of Antichrists, that is,
first of all, Antichrists spiritual delusions by which he has deceived
souls. 2. And all Antichrists, deluding forms and ordinances by which the
common sort of people are generally deluded: the work of Christ is to power
down vials of wrath upon the head of the Man of sin both in the spirit, and in
the letter; look about you therefore all you, whose spiritual life consists in
nothing, but spiritual and Antichristian delusions, with invented and
Antichritian forms and Ordinances. A Vial of wrath is coming on you, which
will shatter to pieces all your confidence, and then if mercy prevent not you
may stand looking on, and crying; alas elas in one hour is so great riches
come to naught? and then when this is fulfilled, there shall be no more War in
Heaven or spiritual delusion under the name of Christ.

A glorious word for those that dwell in Heaven, and that which will cause joy
to the Saints. For, first, they shall be without, and above, all danger of
delusions in the spirit or in the letter,

And secondly, they shall from the same ground be for ever freed from fellowship
with Hypocrites and literal Christians; for their communion shall be more in
the spirit and less in the Letter, and there shall in no wise enter into it
any thing that defiles, neither whatsoaever works abomination that is, lives
earthly carnal, and profane, or makes a lie that is, Hypocritical that
seems to be what he is not.

But they which are written in the Lambs book of life: and there shall be no
more a Canaanite in the house of the Lord for ever. This is the great work
Christ has to do in these latter days, the consumation of the Kingdom of
Antichrist, who has a long time sat in his seat, with the exaltation of his
own Kingdom in the spirit.

SECTION V. Quest. When he shall be ruined?
Answ. FIrst, in the mystery and spirits of the Saints, as Jesus Christ comes
in, and shines gloriously in the spirit; so shall Antichrist be discovered, and
destroyed: and so he has received a great blow already in this Nation, through
the shinings in of Jesus Christ in the spirit amongst many of his Saints, so
that this is the time of Antichrists ruin, when Jesus Christ comes in; and
takes place in the spirit of his people, and the Kingdom of Christ increases,
so the Kingdom of Antichrist decays and consumes.

Secondly, Antichrist shall be destroyed when the everlasting Gospel shall be
preached; that is, when the Angel flies through the midst of Heaven
preaching the everlasting Gospel; that is, when the Ministers of the Gospel
shall come forth with their full, and heavenly discoveries of God in the spirit,
being permitted to preach the Gospel by the earthly power in all places with
liberty: For, much has been don already by the witnesses prophesyng in sack
cloth: that is, almost always in danger of a civil persecution; and much
ignorance of the mystery of the Gospel, which has caused them to prophecy in
sac-cloth; yet they have had power, to cause fire to come from Heaven, as often
as they please, burning up all Antichristian forms, and invented delusions:
And then, what will be done, think you, when the Ministers of the Gospel shall
come forih in the full and bright discoveries of the Gospel, with liberties
here below for the publishing of it.

Thirdly, Antichrist shall be destroyed, when the witnesses have been slain,
and lain dead three days; (that is a short space) then a tenth part of the
City shall fall, and the rest shall have their time prolonged; but, for a time
and a season. The first woe is almost past; behold, a second, and third woe
comes quickly: wait, and it will come apace.

Thus have I from the light of Truth, with as much brevity as may be, in some
measure, hinted at this Man of sin, this mystery of Iniquity, with his reign,
ruin, with the means and time.

FINIS.

