TOWSER THE SECOND A BULL-DOG.
Or a short Reply to ABSALON and ACHITOPHEL.
IN pious times when Poets were well banged
For saucy Satyr and for Sham-Plots hanged,
A Learned Bard, that long commanded had
The trembling Stage in Chief, at last run mad,
And Swore and tore and ranted at no rate.
Apollo and his Muses in debate
What to do with him, one cried, let him Blood,
That says, another will do little good;
His Brains infected sure, under his Nose
We Will burn some Feathers of Peru, who knows
But that may bring him to himself again?
Ay, for some time says Clyo; she was more
For Opiates, others for Hellebore.
Apollo having heard all they could say,
Rose up and thankt them said, he'de try a way
He hoped would do, then called a Noble Friend
Well verst in Men, and begged of him to spend
Some time and pains upon this wretch, which he,
Agreeing to, went presently to work,
Opened his head, saw where the Maggots lurk;
Took many of them out, put them in Sut,
Then Added Mercury and Nitre to it,
Mixed and infused them well, and after all,
Distilled them in a Limbeck Comical,
And drew a Spirit very Sovereign,
For those are troubled with the fitts o'th Brain,
And gave our Poet some, all he could make
The peevish, Squeamish, self-wil'd Coxcomb take.
It did him good and cured him of those Fitts:
But 'twas too little to restore his Wits:
For since he has gin' ore to Plague the Stage
With the effects of his Poetic rage,
Like a mad Dog he runs about the Streets,
Snarling and Biting every one he meets.
The other day he met our Royal CHARLES,
And his two Mistresses, and at them Snarles.
Then falls upon the Ministers of State
Treats them all A-la mode de Billingsgate:
But most of all, the glory of our gown,
He must be bark't at, Drivil'd, pist upon.
He whose soft tongue had charms enough t'asswage
The Tigers fierceness, could not escape the rage
Of this same whifling Cur; poor Cerberous,
That taught the Rogue to bark, was served just thus.
This Vipers brood, contrary to all Laws,
The torn out Entrails of his Parent knaws.
He gives no quarter, spairs no friend, nor foe,
And where he once gets hold, never lets go
Until he breaks a tooth, which he has done
So often of late, that he has few or none
Left in his mouth. Nay which is worst of all
On his Physician he does always fall,
And find him out where e're he is and bawl
Eternally, taking in Evil part
What he good man did by the rules of art,
And for his good, assisted by a Set
Of the most able Leeches he could get;
Apollo vexed to see there was no more
Effect of Medicine, bid his friend give over,
And sent some Chirurgions to him to anoint
The Carcass of the whelp in every Joint
With Oil of Crab-tree, than which nothing fetches
The itching Venom out of Scribbling Wretches
Better or sooner, but I know not how
It came to pass, with him it would not do.
For since his being anointed, he is run
Yelping with Towser up and down the Town,
And crying out against an Absalon
And an Achitophel. The Currs had got
Between them in their Mouths a new Sham-Plot,
The Twentieth of the Kings, some say indeed
It is the same that Mother Celier hid,
Deep in the Meal-tub, only new lick't over
And brought to better shape by half a score
Of Irish Mongrels, newly fetched from thence,
The best in England at an Evidence.
A little bribe will make them swear devoutly,
They Are much more famous for their swearing stoutly,
Then for their fighting so, this kind of Cattle
Are better far at Roguery than Battle.
An Irish man's Antiwood-cock, cares
To venture nothing, but his head Ears.
This Copper coin will never with us pass,
It looks so scurvily, nay it smells of Brass;
How could you think this would be current here,
That is not so at home? It Is cried down there:
What then shall we do now; faith you had best
Try Scotland next, now it has past the Test
Come hither my Dog Towser, come, for I
A new Experiment intend to try,
I Will have thee worm'd, hold out thy Venomed Tongue,
What a huge Worm is here? It Is an inch Long,
And of the Jebusite smells very strong
If this will not do thou shall be fairly hung.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for T. I. 1681.


