A CONFESSION OF FAITH, Published on special occasion.

WHEREIN Is contained the Substance of the most material Principles of the
Gospel, and Christian Faith, in contradistinction to the Errors and Heresies by
some held and maintained, in opposition thereunto.

Whereunto is annexed, A POSTSCRIPT, with brief Animadversions on some things,
contained in a Confession of Faith, lately published in the name of the Elders
and Brethren of many Congregations in London and the Country.

Written by THOMAS COLLIER.

(...) 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony: if they speak (...) according to
this Word, it is because there is no light in them. Tim. 3. 8, 9. Now as Jannes
and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth: Men of corrupt
minds, reprobate (or of no judgment) concerning the faith. But they shall
proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest unto all men, as theirs
also was. LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in
Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange, 1678.

A Confession of Faith.
I. Concerning God.
1. I Believe that there is one only true God, the Great Almighty one, who has
his Being in and of himself, and has given Being unto all things, the great
Creator and Preserver of all things, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Isa. 4. 21. 2 Cor. 8. 6. Genesis
1. 1. Act. 17. 24 to 28. That he is an Infinite Spirit, most Holy, Wise, Just,
Merciful, and Faithful, Joh. 4. 24. 1 Samuel 2. 2. Isa. 6. 3. Psalm. 147. 5. Isa.
40. 28. Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Zeph. 3. 5. Exodus 34. 6. Mic. 7. 8. Tit. 3. 4. Deuteronomy. 7 9.
Tit. 1. 2. Eternal and Omnipresent in all Places, Deuteronomy. 33. 27. Isa. 57. 15.
Psalm. 139. 7 to 12.

2. Yet I do believe according to his Word, that his most glorious Habitation,
Dewlling Place, and Throne is in Heaven, Isa. 57. 15. and 66. 1.

3. I do believe that God made Man upright, in his own Image, and that by Sin
he fell from that Estate, into an Estate of Sin and Death, Eccl. 7. 29. Genesis 1.
27. and 3. 17, 18, 19. Romans 5. 12.

4. I do believe (as the great foundation-principle of Truth and of Faith,)
that God loved the World in the gift of his Son, Joh. 3. 16. 1 John 4. 14.
which was the only means and way designed of God, for the recovery of Man out
of his fallen Estate, Genesis 3. 15. and 22. 18. Act. 4. 12. 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22.

5. As I do believe that God is, so do I believe that he is a Rewarder of them
that diligently seek him, this being one special Article of the Christian
Faith, Heb. 11 6.

II. Concerning Christ Jesus our Lord.
1. That he is the Son of God, and the Son of Man, truly God and Man, made of
the Seed of David according to the Flesh, Romans 1. 3, 4. conceived by the Holy
Ghost, in the Womb of the Virgin Mary, according to the Scriptures, Isa. 17.
14. Jer. 31. 22. Mat. 1. 22, 23.

2. That he was begotten, known, and realized in his whole Person by the
Father, before Time, both God and Man, as he was made Flesh, and dwelt among us
in Time, (yet his Humanity not in Being, till made Flesh of the Seed of David,)
Heb. 1. 6. Col. 1. 15. and therefore he is said to come out from God, and down
from Heaven, Joh. 3. 13. and 6. 51, 62. and 16. 28, 30. and 17. 8. 1 Cor. 15.
47. Ephesians. 4. 9 11. and that it was he by whom all things were made, Joh. 1. 1,
2, 3, 10. and that the Father, Son, and Spirit, are in nature and essence one,
yet in office and relative properties and operations are three, and yet an
unity in nature and concent in Will and Work, Joh. 5. 17, 19.

3. That after he had finished the Work he had to do in the World, by which he
declared himself to be the Son, and sent of God, the Messiah promised, Joh. 5.
36. and 10. 25. and 17. 4. and 20 30, 31. according to the great love of the
Father, and the end for which he sent him into the World, he gave himself a Sin
and Peace Offering to God the Father, for the sins of the World, Joh. 1. 29.
and 6. 51. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Heb. 1. 1. 1 John 2. 2. and as an effect thereof, has
sent forth the Gospel of his Grace, by commission to be preached to the World,
that whoever do believe and obey him therein, may have the saving Benefits
thereof, Mar. 16. 15, 16. and that the Father and the Son in this wonderful
transaction, had real love to the World therein, and hated none. That when God
is said to hate any, it is because of Sin, and not as his Creatures, that in
this sense he is good to all, Psalm. 145. 9. and seeks to save them from their
sins, Joh. 3. 16, 17, 18, 19. and that Jesus Christ crucified is the only
Foundation of Christian Faith, and not in the divine Nature only, 1 Cor. 3. 11.
and 2. 2.

The Reasons why I believe this general love of God and Christ to the World, in
this wonderful Gospel-undertaking, are,

1. Because the Scripture says it, and if I should not so believe, I should
(as many others do) make God and Christ Liars, which is the great and damning
sin, 1 John 5. 10. with Mark 16. 15, 16. But he that believes the testimony
that God has given of his Son, has set to his Seal that God is true, Joh. 3.
33.

2. Because the denial hereof rooteth up the foundation of Gospel-preaching,
there being three things that God has set in unity in this matter, that Man
may not put asunder, without nulling the whole design of God in the Gospel,
viz. of Gospel-preaching, of Life to the World, on the terms thereof.

First, The general love of God to the World in the gift of his Son, Joh. 3.
16, 17.

Secondly, And suitable to this general Love of God to the World, is Christ
giving himself a Sacrifice for the sins of the World, Joh. 6. 51. The Sacrifice
must be as large as the Fathers love, else it answers not his Will and End in
giving his Son, Heb. 10. 7.

Thirdly, Suitable to this general Love, and general Sacrifice, is the general
Commission for publishing thereof to the World, that so they might understand
and believe this Love, and be saved, Mar. 16. 15, 16. These three are as large
one as the other, and stand in unity: take away the general Love of the Father,
and the general Sacrifice of the Son, and the general Commission cease, it
being grounded on the two former; so that deny the two first, and it ends
Gospelpreaching.

3. As an Effect, because the denial hereof rooteth up the Foundation of
Gospel-Faith; for if the Foundation of Gospel-preaching be removed, then
Gospel-Faith must cease, it being no part of the Doctrine of the Gospel, that
Christ was a Sacrifice only for a few, it can be no part of Gospel-Faith so to
believe: if it were, the Doctrine of the Gospel must give a very uncertain
sound, and then who could prepare himself to the Battle? 1 Cor. 14. 8. But it
not being so, an open way is made, and a sure foundation is laid in the Gospel,
to build our Faith upon, Joh. 3. 16. And as this is the Doctrine, so this is
the Faith of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 15. 3, 11. So we preach, and so ye believed, i.
e. that Christ died for our sins, the first Doctrine that is to be preached to
sinners, and so the first that is to be believed.

4. Because the denial hereof leaves all that miscarry through unbelief to
perish for want of a Savior, and not through their own unbelief and
disobedience to the Gospel, as the Scripture affirms, which makes God a Liar,
Joh. 3. 18. Heb. 3. 8. Jude v. 5. For if any such were, for whom Christ died
not, if such should believe, they could not be saved, there being no Salvation
but by this one Sacrifice: If such should believe, they must believe a Lie, and
so could not be saved; nay, but they must damned for believing a Lie, 2 Thessalonians.
2. 11, 12. And it would be their virtue to believe that Christ died not for
them, if it were true; because it is a virtue to believe a Truth, and a vice to
believe a Lie. So that by this Doctrine, all that perish do perish for want of
a Savior, and not through disobedience: but let God be true, and all Men liars
in this matter.

5. Because the special Grace of Life promised in the Gospel is founded in the
general Grace of God in Christ to the World; so that if there be no such
general Grace of God in the Gospel truly propounded to the World, then there is
no Scripture-ground to believe any Gospel Grace to Men at all, Joh. 3. 16, 17.
Mar. 16. 15, 16. Deny this, and Gospel Grace is ended and over, the special
Grace of Reconciliation and Salvation being stated in Scripture as arising out
from, or as an effect of general Grace, Romans 5. 8 9, 10, 11. 2 Cor. 5. 9, 20.
Col. 1. 20, 21. So that, they that will have no such general Grace, as a sure
foundation to encourage Sinners to believe and obey the Gospel that they may be
saved, can assure no special Grace and Salvation to any: so that in denying the
general Grace of God in the Gospel to Men, is in effect (though not
intentionally) a real denying of all Grace, and so a denying of their own
Salvation, in denying the foundation thereof.

6. Because to deny the general Love of God to the World, and the general
Sacrifice and Resurrection of Christ for the World, does in effect really deny
the Resurrection of all, the Restitution of all things, the eternal Judgment,
the World to come, and the glory of Christ's Kingdom therein; all which depend
upon this one Sacrifice given for the life of the World, Joh. 6. 51. 1 Cor. 15
21, 22. Act. 4. 2. and 17. 31. so that the denial of Christ a Sacrifice for the
sins of the World, not only makes God and Christ Liars, ends all
Gospel-preaching and Gospel-Faith, leaving People to perish for want of a
Savior, but likewise ends the Resurrection, Judgment, and Kingdom of Christ in
the World to come; and therefore it is a Principle that in it self is deeply
heretical, meet to be hushed out of all Christian society. Yet I shall not call
those Heretics who do so hold, because I hope they do it ignorantly, in
unbelief, as sometime I my self did, though it is now my grief that I should be
ignorant of so great a Truth, and can say (through Grace) that I have had some
inspection hereinto, for above twenty Years.

7. Because the denial of this great Truth of the general Grace of God to Men
in the Gospel, is not only unscriptural and contrary to it, but likewise
irrational; and for Men to believe irrarational things against Scripture Light,
seems most strange.

1. It Is not only irreligious (being contrary to the Scripture) but irrational,
to believe that God should in this his wonderful. Gospel-undertaking of Love
and Grace to Men, design and determine Salvation to so few, and the Damnation
of the World without all hope and means of help, is irrational to imagine.

2. It Is irrational as well as irreligious, to understand the Scripture so in
this matter, as tends to render it obnoxious, ridiculous, and false, in saying,
That God so loved the World in the gift of his Son, that whosoever do believe
in him, shall not perish; and that the Gospel is the good will of God to Men,
and that Christ gave himself for the Life of the World, and yet intended no
such thing, but the Damnation of the World: for if Christ had not died, and
been raised again, there had been no such thing as Salvation or Damnation to
any, because there had been no Resurrection, and so no Judgment, 1 Cor. 15. 21,
22. and 17. 18, 19. Act. 17. 31. So that this contradicting notion tends really
to render those Scriptures to sound (if what they say were true) that God so
hated the World that he sent his Son to damn the World, and that God sent his
Son to die for the World, for no other end but to raise them up that they might
be damned: which is both irreligious and irrational to imagine.

3. It Is irrational for us to believe (contrary to the Scripture) that God
should have so little respect to the glory of his own Name in so wonderful an
undertaking, it being more glorious to the Name of God, for his Son to die for
a World, to restore a World, to lay a foundation of Faith and Salvation for all
such as fall in with, and glorify him in his wonderful Grace to Men, and
irrational to narrow and limit it to so few, so exceeding contrary to the
Scripture, and derogatory to the glory of so wonderful an Undertaking.

4. It Is irrational (as well as irreligious) to believe that God in his Word
should complement with the World, as if he loved them, to offer them Grace, on
gracious, holy, and honorable terms, to call and invite them with promises of
acceptance, as if he intended good will unto them, and will damn them the
deeper in Hell for their disobedience (as themselves affirm,) and yet never
intended any Grace to them, nor could intend it, if Christ died not for them.
As if God dealt with poor perishing Sinners, as Joab dealt with Amasa, 2 Samuel
2. 9, 10. and as Judas dealt with Christ, to offer them a kiss of love, Psalm.
2. 10, 11, 12. designedly to damn them the deeper in Hell, is both irreligious
and irrational to imagine.

That which is usually objected in this matter, is, Romans 9. 16. to 22. and 11.
7. That God has from his own will reprobated some, and they cannot be saved,
but must perish: That Christ died not for them, nor was any good will in the
Gospel intended to them.

1. To this I say, That we may not understand the Decrees of God, so as may
contradict his revealed Will and Law of Grace to Men, which calls upon all,
and promises life to all that do believe and obey him therein.

2. That it is both irreligious and irrational so to understand one or two
Scriptures, as is contrary to the whole Word of God that speaks of the same
matter, where God says, not only that he loved the World in the gift of his
Son, and that he tasted death for every one, and calls and inviteth all to
accept the Grace, Rev. 22. 17. But also says, that he has no pleasure in the
death of him that dies, and why will ye die? And answers to it, that he has
no pleasure in the death of the Wicked, but that they would turn and live,
Ezekiel. 18, 31, 32. and 33. 11. and that Men by sin destroy themselves, Hos. 13.
9. So 1 Timothy 2. 4. he would have all Men to be saved, etc. And it must needs be
both irreligious and irrational so to understand, Romans 9. as to contradict and
give the lie to all these Scriptures, and many more.

3. We may so understand, Romans 9. as is both Religious, God-like, and Rational,
so as will comport with the whole Scripture and Analogy of Faith, viz. That
when Men have hardened themselves against the Mercy and means of good by God
offered them for their spiritual and eternal welfare, which was the present
case relative to the Jews, and the same of Pharaoh likewise brought as an
instance, and of which the believing Gentiles were (and are) in danger, if they
so sin, Romans 11. 20, 21. and in this case God is at liberty to exercise Justice
and Mercy as he pleases without any derogation to his Gospel-Law of Grace.

Quest. If God wills the good of all, is he not able to effect it? does he
will what he cannot effect?

Answ. This with some is much pleaded, though as wide from truth as weak: We
are to distinguish between his Effecting and his Requiring Will, his revealed
and requiring Will being his absolute Will to us, and contrary to which we may
not suppose any secret Will in God; and it is enough for us to know his absolute
revealed Will, with sufficiency of means and helps for performance thereof, on
neglect of which the Damnation will arise.

The absolute revealed Will of God to his People of old was, that they should
keep his Law, and yet they transgressed it: and dare any say, it was not his
real Will so to have it, but that he had a secret Will contrary thereunto? Let
such read and ponder Psalm. 81. 13. Isa. 48. 18. and the same in the Gospel,
Luke 13. 34. and 19. 41, 42. where they may find the Lord pitying them for
their miscarriage in this matter; unless they will judge him as right at the
Art of dissimulation as some Men are, which is Blasphemy against him so to
imagine.

God has not engaged himself to effect in us what he requires of us, unless
we (by his Grace) close in with his Will made known unto us. God's Grace and
our Duties must unite, if the work be done, Romans 1. 16. Isa. 64. 5. 1 Pet. 4.
19. so that it is most apparent that Men may, and too often do transgress the
absolute Will of God to their own destruction, Hos. 13. 9. Psalm. 81. 11, 12.

4. I do believe that when our Lord Jesus had by himself purged our sins, he
ascended into Heaven, and sat on the right hand of the Majesty on high, Mar.
16. 19. Heb. 1. 3. and is there in performance of his Mediatory-office between
God and Men, 1 Timothy 2. 5. and that he is the alone King, Priest, and Prophet of
his Church; King to rule, Priest to atone, and Prophet to teach; and that there
is no other so, in things of a spiritual and Gospel concern.

5. That he shall come again from thence, at the time appointed, and shall
raise the dead, and judge both the quick and dead at his appearing and Kingdom,
Joh. 28. 29. 2 Timothy 4. 1. and that then all that have been under the doctrine
of the Gospel, shall receive their eternal Judgment either of life or death,
according to the promises and threats thereof in the Gospel, Mar. 16. 15, 16.
Joh. 3. 19. and 5. 28, 29. and that at (and after) his appearing, shall be the
restitution of all things, Act. 3. 21. the new and restored World, 2 Pet. 3.
13. Rev. 21. 1, 5. in and over which with his Saints, shall be his eternal
Kingdom and Glory, Isa. 9. 7. Dan. 7. 14, 17. Mar. 10. 30.

III. Of the Scriptures.
3. I do believe that the Holy Scriptures, the Old and New Testament, is the
Word and Will of God, and especially the doctrine of the Gospel contained
therein, is the alone Ground and Rule both of Faith and Practice, Isa. 8. 20. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. For this more full, see my B. d. Chap. 2.

IV. Of the way in which we may obtain the Life promised in the Gospel.
4. That Faith in (Repentance) and obedience to our Lord Jesus Christ,
according to the doctrine of the Gospel, are the terms of our Interest in the
justification and life therein promised, and that so absolutely the condition
thereof, as that without which none that are capable Subjects can obtain it,
Mar. 16. 15, 16. Heb. 5. 9. Rev. 22. 14. yet not the meritorious or deserving
cause thereof, that being alone in Christ Jesus, as the only atoning Sacrifice
for sin, Col. 1. 20. Ephesians. 5. 2. and that whoever do believe in, love, and obey
the Lord in the Gospel, shall be saved, Mar. 16. 15, 16. Act. 16. 31. Heb. 5. 9.

The Reasons why I believe, that not only Faith but Gospel-obedience and works
are the terms of our Interest in Justification and Life, are,

1. Because the Doctrine of the Gospel so states it, not only in the Scriptures
before mentioned, but likewise in many others, as Mat. 7. 18, 19, 20. Romans 2.
8, 9, 10. Gal. 5. 6. Jam. 2, 14, 17, 20. to 26. 1 John 2. 17. But he that does
the will of God, obideth for ever.

2. Because the Doctrine of Justification by Faith without works, as it is
scriptureless, and so false; so it is a graceless, licentious and vain
Doctrine, that will not, cannot save, Jam. 2. 14, 20.

3. And that both the Faith and Works must be such as the Gospel requires, and
not what Men please; or else the Lord will say at that day, who required these
things at your hands? And among all the virtues and duties required in the
Gospel as concomitants with Faith, Love to God and Men are the chief, Mat. 22.
37, 39. Romans 13. 8. Jam. 2, 8. Ephesians. 6. 24. 1 Cor. 16 22. because, where this is
in truth, it carries on to the right performance of all other Duties both to
God and Men: and where this is wanting, there can be no Religion in Truth, or
acceptable with God: Faith without Love to God, and Love and Mercy to Men, will
never justify nor save, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2. Jam. 1. 27. and 2. 14. and the reason
is, because the Gospel is a Ministration wholly of Love and Mercy, and the Love
and Mercy of God in the Gospel is manifest, especially in giving and forgiving;
and this he expects should be effected by the Power thereof in all his People.
And it is to be feared, that the great failing among Christians in this matter
(much arising from the Doctrine of Justification by Faith without Works) will
occasion many to part with Christ at the last day with Sorrow, as the young Man
did in the Gospel, Mat. 19. 22. because there will then be Judgment without
Mercy, to them that have showed no Mercy, James 2. 12. Read and ponder Mat. 18.
32, to 35. and I do believe, that whatever is stated in the Gospel as the terms
on which Grace and Life is promised, is absolutely necessary thereunto, without
which we cannot rightly claim the Promise, as Mat. 5. 3, to 12. Romans 2. 7, to
10.

V. Of the Power and Will of Man.
I do believe that all Men have a power and liberty of Will, with the means and
helps that God affords (especially under the Gospel,) to refuse the Evil, and
to choose the Good, so far as will render them inexcusable in the Judgment, who
refuse his Counsel, and choose to follow their own Wills and Lusts, Josh. 24.
15, 22. Luke 10. 42. Phil. 2. 12, 13, 14 15. Mat. 11. 28, 29. Romans 1. 20. and
2. 1, 2.

The Reasons of this my Faith: are,

1. Because I do not find that God in his Word, threatens to condemn any for
weakness, but for wilfulness; not because they cannot, but because they will
not believe, Joh. 5. 40. Luke 3. 34. Mat. 22. 4, 5, 6.

2. Because he blames, pities, and bemoans those who refuse his Counsel, and
transgress his Laws, Psalm 81. 11. Luke 13. 34.

3. Because he calls and invites Sinners to come in and accept his Grace, which
we may not imagine, were it impossible for them so to do, Isa. 55. 6, 7. Rev.
22. 17.

4. Because to suppose Men to be incapable to believe and obey the Gospel, with
the helps afforded, without a Miracle (as some say,) is to suppose Men (in this
matter) not to differ from Beasts, who are capable by Miracle to do what God
will have them. God could, and did make Balaam's Ass to speak with man's voice.
But Men shall one day know, that God made them Men and not Beasts, if they make
not themselves so by beastly Principles and Practices. It Is true, that in the
Gospel many were converted to the Faith by the sight of Miracles done without
them, Act. 5. 14. and 13. 12. but the conversion of Sinners is no where called
a Miracle, that I know.

5. Because for us to suppose that God should bring forth so gracious a
dispensation of Love to the World, in the gift of his Son; and Christ to die
for the World; and in love, send the Gospel of this Grace to be published to
the World, with gracious Invitations to accept it, and to state an Interest
therein, on impossible terms to be obtained without a Miracle, and do not
effect this Miracle, and yet will damn People for not obtaining, is not only
dishonorable to God, to Christ, to the Gospel, and to the Publishers thereof;
but renders the whole glorious design of God therein, to be null and void,
discouraging all Men from believing thereof, it rendering them altogether
incapable, and therefore is to be denied by all sober Christians.

VI. That Faith in the Lord Jesus is effected by the Power of God in the Gospel.
Yet 6. I do believe that whoever do obey the Lord, in the Faith of the Gospel,
in Sincerity and Truth, that it is by the Grace, Spirit, and Power of God in
the Gospel, Romans 1. 16. and 5. 5. and 10. 14. by which Grace and Power they are
and shall be kept through Faith, and a holy dependancy upon him unto Salvation,
1 Pet. 1. 5. Joh. 10. 27, 28, 29. and 15. 4, 5, 6, 7, 10. Psalm. 37. 39. and
125. 1. and that without this holy dependancy upon, and cleaving to the Lord,
in the Faith, Love, Hope, and obedience of the Gospel, Believers may possibly,
yea, very probably fail of, and fall from the Grace of God, and so miss of the
Glory promised, Heb. 3. 12. and 12. 15. 2 Pet. 3. 17. Although I do believe,
that some are so known of God, and given to Christ, as that they have been, and
shall be in time called, and supplied with persevering Grace, so as to obtain
the end, Joh. 6. 39. Romans 8. 29, 30. Yet these are only known of God, 2 Timothy 2.
19. and leave no room for any to be high-minded, but to fear an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God, Romans 11. 20. Heb. 3. 12. nor does
it at all derogate from the general Grace of God to Men, Joh. 6. 40.

The Reasons of my believing the danger of Believers failing of, and falling
from the Grace of God, without their careful watch and keeping close with him,
are,

1. Because the Scripture so plentifully speaks and forewarns of the danger
thereof, but never of the impossibility of falling. Besides those already
mentioned, among many see these, Romans 8. 13. and 11. 20. 1 Cor. 10. 12. Col. 1.
23.

2. Because the Scripture mentions some that were fallen, 1 Timothy 1. 19. and
others that were fallen, or would fall, 2 Pet. 2. 1. -- and the rest in danger
of falling, Chap. 3. 17. 1 Cor. 9. 27.

3. Because the Lord himself, and his Apostles best knew the danger, and what
Doctrine was best for our safety, and to prevent the danger, (to whom we ought
to give heed, and not to our own devices) whoever taught the danger, but never
the impossibility of falling from Grace, as before has been proved, Mat. 10.
22. Luke 9. 62.

4. Because the Doctrine of impossibility of falling from Grace, being contrary
to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, must needs be a graceless and
dangerous Doctrine, and that the Lord knew, and therefore has so plentifully
stated the contrary in the Scripture. If we would study a Doctrine tending to
cause People to fail of, and fall from the Grace of God, we cannot study a more
likely, than to teach impossibility of falling. Remove the danger, and the
careful and watchful fear will be over, Romans 11. 20. Heb. 12. 25, 28, 29, and
the watchfulness and Prayer will quickly cease, Luke 21. 36. and it is greatly
to be feared, that many (insensible) grow graceless, whilst pleading
impossibility of falling from Grace.

Object. The Doctrine of possibility of falling from Grace, is an uncomfortable
Doctrine.

Answ. That Doctrine which is most safe, is most truly comfortable. To know the
danger, and to keep on our watch, being the way appointed for our safety: In
that way may we expect safety, and so true and solid consolation, Isa. 64. 5. 2
Cor. 1. 3, 4, 5. with ver. 12. Whatever comfort People may pretend unto,
without the testimony of a good Conscience in a holy walk with God and Men,
they will find no safety therein at last: so that being the best way, that is
most safe, and it being most safe to know the danger, (it is so accounted in all
cases with wise Men) the most safe way must needs be most truly comfortable,
and the other most truly dangerous, and in the end uncomfortable.

VII. And further, to speak of the Restitution of all things, and the World to
come, which in some Cases I have more largely stated in my Answer to Mr. Cox's,
in my 7th Chapter.
And as I do believe the Restitution of all things, the new and restored World,
and the glorious Kingdom and Reign of Christ with his Saints therein, mentioned
in the conclusion of the second Article: so as to the degrees, distinctions,
and times of accomplishing thereof, I do believe,

1. That it shall extend it self to the recovery of all Mankind from the first
Death, fallen into by the first Transgression, Genesis 3. 17, 18, 19. Romans 5. 18.
1 Cor. 15. 22. and all the World out of that Estate it fell into by Man's sin,
Act. 3. 21. Romans 8. 19, 20, 21. Rev. 21. 1, 5.

2. That after the Resurrection and Judgment, it shall extend to the glorious
Salvation of all the Faithful, with Christ in his Eternal Kingdom and Glory,
Joh. 14. 2. Mar. 10. 30.

3. That this Restitution and Glory of the new World in all its parts, shall be
effected by degrees, in the times appointed by the Father, Act. 1. 7. and 3.
21. Ephesians. 1. 10.

4. That at, and after the Judgment, shall be some kind of degrees of blessing
to the Nations in general, by the Seed of the Woman that shall break the
Serpents head, the Seed of Abraham in whom all Nations of the Earth shall be
blessed, (except such as are by the blessed Seed himself excepted) Mat. 12. 31,
32. Prove. 1. 23, to 33. viz. such as wilfully rebel against the Light, and so
sin away their share in this Blessedness promised.

That there shall be some general Blessing for the Nations after they have born
their Judgment: my Reasons for it are,

First, To prove the Truth. Secondly, The Time.
1. Because the Scripture in express terms says it, That in Abraham's Seed
(that is, in Christ, Gal. 3. 16.) all the Nations of the Earth shall be
blessed, Genesis 12. 3. and 22. 18. with many other Scriptures to the same effect,
Psalm. 72. 17. Isa. 66. 18. Though Believers are the Subjects of the special
Blessedness, yet that answers not the general terms of the Promises, nor argues
that none else shall have any blessing in the World to come. When the Scripture
says, All Nations, all the Families, all the Kindreds of the Earth shall be
blessed in him; I shall in this say, as Mr. Increase Mather says, on the
Mystery of Isreal's Redemption, from Romans 11. 26. All Israel shall be saved,
that is, all the Tribes of Israel, in opposition to those that say, It intends
a few of all. He says Page 5, 6. That cannot be the meaning of the Words, for
the note of universality, [all Israel,] will not bear such a particular
restrained interpretation: Surely the Scripture is not wont to use such harsh
improprieties of Speech, as to say All, when not all, but a few only are
intended. And Page 9. All Israel shall be saved, that is, very many Israelits
shall be saved; it notes not only many, but most; it signifies not only a
majority, but a very full and large generality.

So I say, That those large and general Promises to the Nations, of Blessedness
in Abraham's Seed; as, All Nations of the Earth, all the Families, all the
Kindreds of the Earth shall be blessed in him, extends it self far beyond a
few, a very few in comparison of all the Nations, but it signifies not only a
majority, but a very full and large generality, and not a few only.

2. Because there are many other Promises to the Nations in general, as
properly arising from, and answering to those forementioned Promises to
Abraham, and are of like import to the Nations, to be performed in time,
extending far beyond the special saved ones, and distinct from them, as that,
All Nations that God has made, shall come and worship before him, and glorify
his Name, Psalm. 86. 8. and that all the ends of the World shall remember and
turn to the Lord, and all the Kindreds of the Nations shall worship before him,
Psalm. 22. 27. and (...) 66. distinct from the Church. Ver. 18. It shall come,
that I will gather all Nations, and Tongues, and they shall come and see my
Glory. Verse. 23. All Flesh shall come and worship before me, says the Lord:
and this shall be in the time of the new Heavens and new Earth, Verse. 22. and
Mal. 1. 11. From the rising of the Sun, unto the going down of the same, my
Name shall be great among the Gentiles: with multitudes of like import in the
Prophets that might be mentioned; and in the New Testament is the same
confirmed, as the opening and explaining of the Prophecies in the Old, Act. 3.
21. Ephesians. 1. 10. Phil. 2. 9 10. with Rev. 5. 13. 1 Timothy 4. 10. where it is
expressed (for substance) in the terms of general and special Salvation, God is
the Savior of all Men, especially of them that believe.

2dly. The time when this general blessing to Nations, in which they shall
worship and serve the Lord, and his People shall be, i. e. in the World to
come, at and after the Judgment is over, and not before. I believe from these
Scripture-grounds following, which will further confirm the present Truth as
stated, as likewise the time when it shall be.

1. Because that all the Kindreds of the Earth, all the Nations that God has
made, cannot be capable to be blessed by Christ, and to serve and worship him,
till the Resurrection and Judgment is over; for all Nations that God has made,
intends all that ever has been, or shall be, or else it is not all the Nations
that God has made; but all must be raised up, and come and worship and serve
the Lord, and glorify his Name, which will not (cannot) be, till after they are
raised, and have past the Judgment.

2. Because it must be in the times of the Restitution of all things, in the
new and restored World, that this must be accomplished upon the Nations, and
therefore not till after the Resurrection and Judgment, Isa. 66. 18. with verse
22, 23. and the new Heavens and new Earth promised, will not be till after the
dissolution or change of the old, 2 Pet. 3. 13. Rev. 21. 1, 5. and it is in this
time and state, that all the Nations shall worship and serve the Lord, and
therefore it must be after the Resurrection and Judgment.

3. Because the Scripture says, it shall be when the Lord comes to sit upon
his Throne of Judgment, to judge the World in Righteousness, that all the
Nations shall enjoy this Privilege and Blessing, Psalm. 9. 7, 8. with Psalm. 96.
10, 13. and 98. 9. and 82. 8. Arise, O God, judge the Earth: for thou shall
inherit all Nations. His inheriting all Nations must be at, and after he has
judged the Earth, and therefore at and after the Judgment.

4. Because the Scripture not only says, it shall be in the times of the new
Heavens and new Earth, and in and after the Judgment, but in that time when the
great Transgressors shall be suffering, where their Worm shall not die,
neither shall their Fire be quenched, Isa. 66. 18, 23. 24. In this time it is,
that all Nations, and Tongues shall come and see the Glory of Christ, and all
Flesh shall come and worship before him, and go forth and look upon those in
torment; and therefore it must be after the Resurrection and Judgment.

5. Because this worshipping and serving of the Nations, is plainly stated in
Scripture, to be after they have born their Judgment, and that is over and
past, as Rev. 20. The Judgment is past and over, and after that comes the new
Heavens and new Earth, into which comes down the glorious, holy City from God
out of Heaven, Chap. 21. 12. And after this the Nations worshipping and serving
the Lord, v. 24, 26. and to this agrees Zeph. 3. 8, 9. after the gathering of
the Nations, and pouring out upon them the Indignation, even all the fierce
Wrath, which suits with the seven last Plagues, in the very terms thereof, Rev.
15. 1. in which is filled up the Wrath of God, and is to be accomplished at and
after Christ's appearing in the Judgment, that the gathering of the Nations, and
pouring out of all the fierce Wrath must be, Rev. 14. 14-19, 20. and after this
is over, he will turn to the People a pure language, that they may all call
upon the Name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent, Zeph. 3. 9. which
fully agrees with Psalm. 86. 8. and 22. 27. with many other Scriptures to the
same effect.

6. Because the leaves of the Tree of Life are for the healing of the Nations,
after the Judgment is over, in the eternal Estate, Rev. 22. 2, 5. and Isa. 19.
22. and Ezekiel. 47. 11, 12. which are Prophecies of the same time and state, and
to which (very probably) Rev. 22. 2. relates, and therefore it must be after
the Judgment.

7. Because the promise of the peaceable time and state of the World, and of
the Kingdom of Christ therein, in which Nation shall not lift up Sword against
Nation, neither shall they learn War any more, Isa. 2. 4. Mic. 4. 3. Psalm. 46.
8, 9, 10. will not be till the thousand Years are expired, and the Judgment
past, Rev. 20. 7, 8, 9. When the thousand Years are expired, the Nations will
be in a flame of War, therefore the peaceable time promised to the Nations will
not (cannot) be, till this is over, when they shall learn War no more; and in
this time and state it is, that all Nations shall come and worship, therefore
after the Judgment is over, Isa. 2. 2, 3. Mic. 4. 5. Psalm. 46. 10. Mal. 1. 11.

8. Because it is more than probable, that all the Scriptures that promise to
Christ an everlasting Kingdom upon the Throne of David, do relate to his
Kingdom and Reign in the World to come, and that too, after all his Enemies are
subdued, and visibly subjected under him, which will not be till after the
Resurrection and Judgment is over and past, 1 Cor. 15. 23, 24, 25. which
expressly relates to Psalm. 120. 1. and that his right hand Kingdom on his
Fathers Throne, Rev. 3. 21. is an intervening Glory, as a present reward of his
Sufferings, and for performance of his Mediatory-office, till his own Kingdom
take place, which will be his highest visible Glory, and of which he is in
expectation, Heb. 10. 13. And hence it likewise appears, that the service and
worship of the World will not be, till this promised Kingdom take place, in
which all Nations shall serve him, Psalm. 72. 8, 9, 10, 11. It must be when all
Enemies are made his Footstool.

9. Because (as before I said) this general Salvation by Christ in the World to
come, is that which tends so wonderfully to exalt* the glory of his Sufferings,
and Death for the World, and the design of God therein. The more universal the
design was, the more of Grace, and the more glorious to the name of God and
Christ, and the narrowing thereof to a few only; and all the rest of Mankind,
with the whole Creation eternally to perish, not only contradicts the truth of
the whole Volum of the Book of God, but wonderfully derogates from the glory of
God and Christ designed in this wonderful Undertaking, Joh. 13. 30, 32. Isa. 6.
3. with Joh. 12. 41. Psalm. 72. 19.

10. Because it is that in which the Glory of the Kingdom and Reign of Christ in
the World to come is so wonderfully concerned: for the honor of a King is in
the multitude of People, Prove. 14. 28. If a King should have a glorious Queen
(only,) and have no People, no Subjects, where would his honor be? The Church
is (and shall be) the Lord's Queen, the royal and eternal Consort of Christ,
the King and Lord of Glory, Psalm. 45. 9. Upon thy right hand did stand the
Queen in the Gold of Ophir.

It Is true, the Queen is a Subject to the King, yet above all others with the
King, and nearest to him, as his royal Consort, bearing part (at least) of the
honor of Government. But if the King have not his other Attendants, his Royal
Council, with multitude of Subjects in variety of degrees, where will his
honor be?

So the Lord and King Christ Jesus, especially of the new and restored World,
Zech. 14. 9. who then shall be visibly Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, Rev.
19. 16. and shall have all things suitable to such a Kingdom; yea, far
surpassing all the Glory of the most glorious Monarchs that ever were in this
World as Types of this his Glory; yea, Solomon (the most famous Type of Christ,
in this his most glorious reign) in all his glory came infinitely short of him.

For first, His Church, his Spouse, yea, his then married Wife and Queen, Rev.
19. 7. shall keep Court with him in the glorious, holy City, and shall reign
with him for ever, Rev. 22. 3, 4, 5.

Secondly, The glorious holy Angels shall be his and his Queens Attendants,
Heb. 1. 6. Rev. 5. 11. for the Church his Wife and Queen shall be united nearer
to him by far than the glorious holy Angels, Heb. 2. 16. Ephesians. 5. 30. who shall
be his and his Churches Attendants.

Thirdly, All the World shall be raised by him, and be his Subjects, in various
states and degrees, and shall worship and serve him (as before has been
proved,) and all as an effect of giving himself a Sacrifice for the Life of the
World, Joh. 6. 51. 1 John 4. 14. Phil. 2. 6. to 11. and in which consists a
very great part of the glory of his Kingdom in the World to come; for allow him
no Subjects in his Kingdom, besides his married Wife and Queen, you take away a
very great part of his Kingdom and Glory.

11. And finally, this blessing of the Nations in general in their worshipping
and serving the Lord Christ, must and shall be in the World to come, at and
after the Resurrection and Judgment, not only from the former grounds stated,
but because this Glory shall be effected at and after the sounding of the
seventh Trumpet, Rev. 10. 6, 7. when the time of this World shall be no more,
but the mystery of God spoken of by the Prophets shall be finished. And what is
this mystery spoken of by the Prophets, but the Restitution of all things,
spoken of by all the holy Prophets that have been since the World began? Act.
3. 21. the glory of the World to come, and the Kingdom of Christ therein. Which
mystery is more fully explained at the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, Rev.
11. 15. to which Chap. 10 6, 7. refers, And the seventh Angel sounded, and
there were great Voices in Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this World are
become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever
and ever. Here is the finishing of the mystery of God, spoken of by all the
holy Prophets since the World began. The breaking of the Serpents head by the
Woman's Seed, the Blessing promised to all Nations in Abraham's Seed, the
glorious Kingdom of the Seed and Son of David (promised) over the whole World,
shall then be finished, Psalm. 72. 11, 17. when the Glory of the Lord shall fill
the whole Earth, verse. 19. and all Nations shall worship before him, Rev. 15. 4.

That whatever Blessing the Nations in general may obtain at that day, as it
shall be after they have past the Judgment, so their state in general will be a
state of Service, Bondage, and Slavery, compared with the state of the married
Wife, Isa. 60. 14. Zech. 14. 9, 16, to 19. Mic. 7. 16, 17. yet far excelling
those that shall be under the lowest and deepest Judgment, Isa. 66. 24.

That as the World to come, and whole Restitution shall be all effected by the
Death, Resurrection, Life, and Power of Christ; so his Kingdom and Glory
therein (over the World,) with his married Wife the Church, shall be Eternal,
and never have an end; it shall be a Kingdom and World without end, Dan. 7. 14,
27. Isa. 45. 17. Rev. 11. 15. and 22. 5. Luke 11. 33. I shall (nor need) in
this say no more, but only offer three things to serious consideration.

1. Where is any Scripture that does declare an end of the World to come, and
of the Kingdom of Christ therein? If not, but fully the contrary, then it must
needs be man's invention so to imagine.

2. Whether the Eternal Life and Glory promised, be not in the World to come?
Mar. 10. 30. with Mat. 19. 29. and if so, then where is any promise in the
Scripture of Eternal Life in another World? and if not, then whether those that
suppose an end of the World to come, do not withal suppose an end of the
Kingdom of Christ, and of the Life and Glory of the Saints promised in the
Gospel therein?

3. Where is any Scripture that does expressly or impliedly assert the going
away of Christ with all his Saints to Heaven after the Resurrection and
Judgment is over? and if there be none, then whether we may not safely conclude
it to be but the device of Men, and to have no truth in it, it being so
contrary to the Glory of his Kingdom and Government here below in the new and
restored World.

I know but two things, that is, or can be said in this matter.

I. That the Scripture exhorts to lay up for our selves treasure in Heaven,
Mat. 6. 20. to be seeking after, and setting our Affections on things above,
Col. 3. 1, 2. that the incorruptible Inheritance that fades not away, is
reserved in Heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 4. that Christ will come again, and receive his
People to himself, that where he is, there they may be also, Joh. 14. 2, 3.

1. To this I say, It Is true, that our All is in Heaven, our God, our Christ,
and the Glory to come is all in Heaven, is fully granted. But,

2. It shall come down from thence into the new and restored World. Christ
shall come down, and the glorious Holy City shall come down from God out of
Heaven, and the Tabernacle of God shall be with Men, Rev. 3. 12. and 21. 1, 2.
and so the Saints, Heaven, and Glory shall be here below, in the Holy City,
into which Christ will receive them with himself. And this is explained 1 Pet.
1. 5. It Is ready to be revealed in the last time, that is, revealed from
Heaven, coming down from God out of Heaven, as Verse. 13. The coming of Christ
from Heaven, is called the revelation of Jesus Christ, so 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7.

II. It may be, and is objected, that it is said, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 28. That he
must deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, and God shall be all in all, and the
Son himself shall be subject; which seems to import an end of the Son's
Kingdom, and so probably a going away to Heaven with all his Saints.

Answ. 1. We may not understand one Scripture so, as to contradict all others
that speak of the same thing, that can be neither true nor safe; and all other
Scriptures that speak of the Kingdom of Christ in the World to come, say, it
shall be eternal, without end; and therefore we may not understand, 1 Cor. 15.
24, 28. so as is contrary thereunto, that can be neither true nor safe.

Answ. 2. That Scripture rightly understood, explains it self, so as will
comport with all the Scriptures that speak of the same thing, viz. That the
World to come, and the Kingdom of Christ therein, shall be Eternal.

(1.) Because it is the present Kingdom of the Son, as exercised at the
right hand of the Father, that shall be delivered up, and not his own Personal,
Visible Kingdom, as upon the Throne of David, that must be for ever, Isa. 9. 7.
and that it is his present Kingdom at the right hand of God, is clear, v. 24,
25. for he must reign till he has put all Enemies under his feet, herein
alluding to Psa. 110. 1. and this Reign is after his coming from Heaven, and
the first Resurrection, Verse. 23, 24. and is apparent, that it is this Reign and
Kingdom that shall be given up when all his Enemies are his Footstool, of which
he is in expectation, Heb. 10. 13. for in this right hand Kingdom shall he be,
after he is come from Heaven, Mat. 26. 64. and after the first Resurrection, 1
Cor. 15. 23, 24. and till the whole Conquest over all Enemies is over, Psalm.
110. 5, 6, 7. and of Death the last Enemy, which will not be till the thousand
Years Reign and Judgment be over, Rev. 20. 14. for until the whole work is
finished, and the last Enemy destroyed, which is Death, he is still in his
right hand Kingdom, in the proper sense of Psalm. 110. 1. 1 Cor. 15. 24, 28. and
has not given it up to God the Father, for that is not to be done till all is
made subject to him, and then shall he reign over all as the visible King and
Lord of the whole Earth, Heb 2. 8. Isa. 54. 5. Zech. 14. 9.

(2.) It Is apparent that it intends not the giving up of his own visible
Kingdom after all is visibly made subject to him, because it is the highest
Glory mentioned in Scripture that is designed him, of which he is in
expectation, Heb. 2. 8. and 10. 13. for all except the Father himself must be
visibly put under him, but he is excepted that did put all things under him, 1
Cor. 15. 27.

So that the sum of all is, to let us to know, that in this top-glory of the
Son of God, and the Son of David, when all things are put under him, and made
subject to him, and that he is the visible King and Lord of the whole Earth, of
which he is in expectation; that the Father is excepted herein, only himself
will be above him, and the Son subject to him, in this his glorious Kingdom;
that the Father will rule eternally in and by his Son, in this his visible
Glory; and in this sense will the Father be all in his own Kingdom, being
delivered up by the Son, and in all, in his Son's Kingdom, though the Son be
the only visible Lord thereof. And thus God the Father will not lose his Glory
in his Son's Kingdom, but then shall be perfectly performed that saying of
Christ, Joh 5. 22, 23. that all Men shall honor the Son, even as they honor
the Father, and this Glory of the Father in the Son's Kingdom shall be no
diminution at all to the Son's Glory, but rather the augmentation thereof. As
the Son's Kingdom at his Fathers right hand, is no diminution to his Fathers
Glory, so shall not the Father's Kingdom and Glory (as exercised in, by and
with the Son) any whit diminish either the Sons or the Saints Glory, but
increase it rather.

And hence it is, that it is sometimes called the Fathers Kingdom, Mat. 6. 10.
and 13. 43. and 26. 29. and sometimes the Son's Kingdom, Mat. 16. 28. Luke 22.
29. Joh. 18. 36. 2 Pet. 1. 11. All which tends to clear this matrer, viz. That
the Kingdom of Christ, when all is brought under him, in the World to come,
shall be eternal, the Father reigning in and by him. As he now reigns with the
Father on his Throne, and so shall continue till all his Enemies be made
subject to him, so shall his Father reign with him on his Throne. And as the
Father shall be All on his own Throne in Heaven, so shall he be in all in his
Son's Kingdom here below, Phil. 2. 10, 11. and indeed the top-glory, both of
the Father, Son, and Saints, designed in the Restitution by Jesus Christ, will
issue here, 1 Timothy 6. 14, 15, 16. Mat. 19. 28.

And in this Estate shall Christ be both King and Priest upon his Throne for
ever, he being a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck, Heb. 5. 6.
and 7. 17. consecrated so for evermore, verse. 28. The middle Person between God
and Men, between the Father and his Church, as the head thereof, in whom their
standing and service shall be perpetually presented and accepted, and the
service of the Nations shall have acceptance, Isa. 60. 7. And thus shall the
blood of Christ be known to be the Blood of the new and everlasting Covenant,
Heb 13. 20. and on this Mediator and Covenant, the everlasting State, World,
and Kingdom of Christ shall be founded and continued, Rev. 5. 12, 13. and 22.
1, 3.

That as all is founded in the one Sacrifice, so it is and shall be all
effected by a new and everlasting Covenant (in and with the Lord Christ, who
was this one Sacrifice) and not by the old.

1. That with Adam is broken, and could do nothing of this kind, That brought
in Death, and the Curse upon Man, and upon the whole Creation for man's sin,
Genesis 3. 16. to 19. but could not recover from that Estate.

2. The Law could not do it, being but a figurative Ministration, it could do
nothing in this matter, but leave all under Curse and Death still, making
nothing perfect, Heb. 7. 19. and 11. 40. but it must all be effected by a new
Covenant of Grace and Life in the second Man, who is the Lord from Heaven, Genesis
3. 15. and 22. 18. Call. 3. 17. Life and immortality is brought to light through
the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10.

The mystery of Iniquity having gotten very much footing in the World by
confounding the Covenants, making them all but one, and not distinguishing
according to the truth thereof. Much of Gospel Truth, relating to the Church
here in this World, has been clouded thereby, as well as the Glory that is to
come; as likewise many dangerous Errors proceed therefrom, so that it is no
marvel that the great Judgments threatened to come upon the professing part of
the World in the latter days, is for breaking the everlasting Covenant, Isa.
24. 5.

That the Kingdoms of this World are given to the Princes and Powers thereof,
(as subordinate unto Christ) until he come to take to himself his great Power,
and to reign, at which the Nations will be angry, because they must then be
judged, Rev. 11. 17, 18. and that it is the ordinance of God, and duty of his
People, to be subject to them in all lawful things of worldly concern, Romans 13.
1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15. and patiently to bear and suffer whatever they
meet with from Men, for the name and sake of Christ, till that day come, Act.
14. 22. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. Jam. 5. 7, 8.

Thus have I endeavored to give a brief account of my Faith in the great
matters of the glorious Gospel of the blessed God: And if I must be accounted
by some an Heretic herein, I hope I shall gladly bear it, for the sake of
Christ my dear Lord, till the great day of decision come, when all Men's Faith
and Works shall be made manifest, of what sort it is; and then, every one that
has been right for God, shall have praise of him: and so I shall conclude this
with these following Scriptures.

2 Pet. 3. 11. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what
manner of Persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness.

Verse. 14. Wherefore (beloved) seeing ye look for such things, be diligent that
ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless.

Isa. 32. 4. The tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plain, and
the heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge.

Chap. 29. 24. They that erred in spirit, shall come to Understanding; and they
that murmured, shall learn Doctrine. Amen.

Psalm. 116. 10. I believed, therefore have I spoken.

Luke 2. 29, 30, 31. Now, Lord, let thy Servant depart in Peace; for mine eyes
have seen thy Salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of all
People, a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy People Israel.

Mat. 24. 14. And this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the
World, for a witness unto all Nations, and then shall the end come, Rev. 14. 6,
7.

The Church with whom I walk, is united in the substance of this Faith, before
declared. The Postscript.
A Confession of Faith lately published from London, providentially coming to
my hands; and contrary to my expectation, finding such things therein, as was
and is truly grievous to me, it being inconsistent with the true Faith and
Religion of God, I could not in good conscience, both toward God and Man, pass
it by, without saying something thereunto.

In which I find, under the name of fundamental Principles of Faith, no less
than seven things of special note, contrary thereunto, most of which I have
before detected, and them I shall but only name; so that though there are many
good Truths scattered therein, yet these contrary, unsound, and unscriptural
notions contradict and undo them all.

As 1. Absolute Reprobation of the World from Eternity alone from the free Will
of God, though not plainly in terms expressed, but more covertly and hiddenly,
yet absolutely and fully stated; for they say, that God has immutably decreed
all things, whatsoever comes to pass; and that he elected or predestined a
certain number of Angels and Men to Eternal Life, to which there can be no
addition, etc. which states absolute Reprobation to all the World besides, by
an eternal Decree before the World was.

2. Christ dying to redeem the Elect only, and that none else can possibly
obtain; which not only denies the truth of God's Love to the World, and
Christ's giving himself for the life of the World, but contains in it the
absolutest Reprobation of the World that can be stated: for if Christ died not
for them, it is impossible they should be saved, Act. 4. 12.

3. Impossiblity for any to believe, with the Gospel helps that God affords,
without a mighty miraculous power; misunderstanding, and so wronging the
Scripture for its confirmation, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20.

4. Justification by Faith without Works, and not by Faith neither, as the
Scripture states it, viz. as the conditions and terms of our Justification, in
Page 40. Of Justification, they say, it is not by imputing Faith it self, the
act of Believing, or any other Evangelical obedience, as their Righteousness;
Faith is the alone instrument of Justification, as of receiving Christ: whereas
the Scripture says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
Righteousness, Genesis 15. 6. and Romans 4. 3, 5. His Faith is counted for
Righteousness, ver. 23, 24. But they say plainly, No, it is not imputed, but
only an Instrument, and what that is I do not know, nor is the Scripture
acquainted with such language; but I leave the Reader to believe the Scripture,
or them, which he please.

5. Impossibility of falling from Grace, which is contrary to the whole current
of Scripture, as before has been showed.

6. In Chap. 3. of the Decrees of God, That God has from all Eternity decreed
in himself all things whatsoever comes to pass, etc. and that this Decree is
immutable and unchangeable, arising not from knowledge of what would be, but
from his own determinate Will.

7. And in Chap. 5. of Divine Providence, That this his determinate Counsel
extends it self to the first fall, and all other sinful actions, both of Angels
and Men (and that not by a bare permission) which also he most wisely and
powerfully boundeth and otherwise orders and governs, in a manifold
dispensation to his most holy ends, yet so as the sinfulness of their acts
proceed only of the Creatures and not from God, who being most righteous,
neither is nor can be the approver of sin, Psalm. 50. 21. 1 John 2. 16. These
last words are true, and contradict all the rest as most Heretical and false,
for he cannot but approve his own Decrees.

In these Positions the Mystery of Iniquity seems to be perfected, including a
perfection of falsehood, impiety, and abominations in them.

First, The abuse of the Scriptures for proof of this horrid Doctrine, not one
of the Scriptures mentioned having any such thing in them, nor indeed may we
imagine any such thing to be in the holy Word of the holy God, without
blasphemy against him. What, that God has eternally decreed in himself all
things whatsoever comes to pass? the determinate Counsel extending it self to
all the sinful actions, both of Angels and Men? What, the Decreer thereof, and
yet not the Approver of his own Decrees?

Obj. But we have a way to distinguish between the Actions and the sinfulness
of the Actions. God decreed all Actions, and all Actions in themselves are
simply good, because acted in his Power, and according to his Decrees; but the
sinfulness of the Action is the Creatures, of which God is no Approver.

To this I say, I think it will require more Logic and Rhetoric thus rightly
to distinguish, than all the Persons in the World of this opinion will be able
to find out.

Has God decreed the act of Murder and not the sin? and so of Adultery,
Witchcraft, and all other abominations? is not the act it self the sin? if
there were no such act, there would be no such sin; therefore let them divide
the act from the sin if they can, the act to be God's Decree, and the sin the
Creatures, and God no approver thereof, though he decreed it, as they say.

But 1. To prove that God has decreed all things whatsoever comes to pass, all
sinful Actions, both of Angels and Men, Isa. 46. 10. Ephesians. 1. 11. Heb. 6. 17. is
referred to; all which Scriptures speak only of God's own Works, and Counsel
determined, and declared, especially relative to his Gospel-work of Salvation
by Jesus Christ, and not his determining all the sinful actions of Angels and
Men, as a weak capacity may easily discern. So the like of Act. 15. 18.

And as for Act. 2. 23. and 4. 17, 28. First, The Scriptures do not say, that
God decreed them to crucify his Son. But that he was delivered by the
determinate Counsel and foreknowledge of God, for them to do unto him what he
before knew they would do. He determined that his Son should give himself for
the life of the World, and foreknew that the Jews with the rest would do that
Work, and he determined to give him up to them, and they by wicked hands
crucified him. And therein he bounded their actions to his own Counsel before
determined.

But, Secondly, What ever the Divine Decree might be in this matter, is not
material for proof of the thing asserted, if we should suppose that God decreed
them to do it, without respect had to any condition in them as the cause
thereof, which can never be proved.

Yet it being so great a Mystery of Grace, and that on which the Life of the
World depended, I shall choose rather to lose my self in this Mysterious
Decree, leaving it to God alone, than from this Example and bottomless Mystery,
to draw up so impious a Conclusion; that God has from his own Will from all
Eternity, determined, by an immutable Decree, all the wickedness both of Devils
and Men, that ever has been, is, or shall be in the World. And as for the
Scriptures referred to, for proving God's ordering all things by his
Providence, for the accomplishing of his Decrees, relative to the sins of both
Angels and Men, Providence powerfully over-ruleth all things, for the
accomplishment thereof, 2 King. 19. 28. Ps. 76. 10. the prudent may easily
discern how far wide it is from proving this matter. And as for Romans 9. 15, 18,
22, 23. so frequently referred to, I have (I suppose) before said enough to
discover their fallacy in so applying thereof, viz. to understand these several
sayings of the Apostle, contrary to the whole volumn of the Book of God, and
contrary to the very Name, Nature, and Truth of God, must needs be very
impious; and very probably these may be some of the hard things to be
understood, written by the Apostle Paul in his Epistle mentioned, 2 Pet. 3. 15,
16. which they that are unlearned and unstable, wrest to their own destruction.

So that this Principle not only abuses God in his Decrees, to decree all
sinful actions, but likewise in his Providence, and Government, in powerfully
overruling and ordering all things, and to so bad an end, and abusing the holy
Scripture for proof thereof.

2. As it is unscriptural, and so belieth God, so its impious, laying all the
sins and wickedness in the World, both of Devils and Men at God's door: for if
he has decreed all, and that not by a bare permission, but wisely and
powerfully orders it to his own ends; there is (then) no avoiding it, but the
Decree must be accomplished. So that by this Doctrine all the sins in the World
are committed by the unchangeable Decree of God, and powerful overruling
Providence, in order thereunto. And so, as an effect hereof, all the Judgments
and Plagues threatened and inflicted, in this Life and that which is to come, as
a punishment of sin, flows from the eternal and immutable Decree of God, and so
impossible by any means to be prevented: which is most impious to imagine and
contrary to the Scripture, Jer. 18. 7, 8. Isa. 55. 6, 7.

Thirdly, It renders God to take pleasure in the Sin and Judgment of his
Creatures: for in the accomplishing of his own free immutable Will, must be his
supreme and absolute pleasure; that which he has immutably determined, being
done, must needs be well pleasing to him: So that it renders God to take
pleasure in the Sin and Judgment of Men, contrary to his own word. 1. For Sin,
he hates it, and therefore decreed it not, Pro. 6. 16, to 19. Jer. 44 4. ^ 2.
And for Judgment, he pitieth poor sinners who wilfully expose themselves
thereunto, Hos. 11. 8, 9. Luke 19. 41, 42, 43, 44. Lam. 3. 33. He does not
afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men. Therefore he decreed it not,
any otherwise than as a punishment for Sin, which might by repentance have been
avoided, Jer. 18. 8. So that it not only renders God by his Eternal Decree, to
be the first cause of all the Sin, of all the Hatred, Wrath, Murders,
Adulteries, Drunkenness, Treasons, Idolatries, Witchcrafts and Rebellions in
the World, and so of all the Judgments, which are the effect thereof, but that
its well pleasing and delightful to him, it being the effect of his eternal and
unchangeable Decree, which is contrary to his word, most and impious to imagine.

Fourthly, It Is that which renders God to be contradictory and inconsistent to
himself, and uncertain in any part of his Word and Will to Men; it renders it
full of contradiction, to command one thing and has decreed the contrary; to
command Men to believe, repent and be holy, and has decreed the contrary; has
decreed all the Wickedness and Abominations in the World, and yet commands the
contrary; and will damn people for breach of his Commands, which himself
decreed from all eternity that they should not keep, which is most impious to
imagine.

Fifthly, And so it renders his Word (which is his absolute revealed Will to
Men) to be incredible, and so destroys the ground of Faith, which is the
truth and faithfulness of God in his Word: for if it were true, that he
commands one thing, and has decreed another directly contrary to it, by the
same rule and reason, may he promise one thing, when he has decreed the
contrary, especially all his Promises being on condition of doing his Precepts,
and if his Decrees be contrary to his Precepts, so may they be contrary to his
Promises, and so there be no truth, neither in his Precepts nor his Promises:
and it lays a foundation for to teach people so to believe, and therefore its
most impious to be imagined.

Sixthly, It Is that which renders the most wicked and vile, to be the truest
and best Servants of God: for, 1st, (If this were true) they do his Will most
freely, and naturally, and such are reputed to be his best Servants, whereas
(as is by them confessed) Believing, Repenting and Obeying the Lord in his
revealed Will, is hard and difficult, and is attended (at best) with many
weaknesses, and sometimes, in some things unwillingness; whereas the others
serve him in his absolute decreed Will, most freely and voluntarily. 2. They
serve him most perfectly, answering his decreed Will in all things, (whereas
the Saints are attended with many failings and coming short in service) the
others not, and therefore must needs be the best Sarvants of God, if this
Doctrine were true, which is most impious to imagine.

Seventhly, It Is that which renders God in his eternal Will, to take more
pleasure in sin and wickedness, than in holiness, in that he has decreed so
much sin and wickedness to be in the World, and so little holiness, which is
most impious to imagine.

Eighthly, It Is that which renders God to love Judgment more than Mercy, having
from his own Will freely decreed so much Sin, Judgment and Damnation to the
World, and so little Mercy and Salvation to Men; which is contrary to his Word
and Oath, Exodus 34. 6, 7. Ezekiel. 33. 11. Joh. 3. 16. and is therefore most
impious to imagine.

Ninthly, It Is that which tends to end all Christian Religion in the World: for
if God Command one thing, and has Decreed another, it leaves us at a loss in
all things: no Man knows when he does his Will, and when not: He commands all
Men every where to repent; yet by this Doctrine, has decreed the Sin and
Damnation of (almost) all the World; he commands to pray for all Men, yet has
decreed the Sin and Damnation of (almost) all Men. It rationally ends all
repentance for Sin, all reproofs for Sin, all blamings of Men for Sin, none can
be reproveable for any of their actions, either Saints or Sinners, their works
being all decreed of old, it is all the holy Will of God: If his decreed Will be
holy then the keeping thereof must be holy, and so no such thing as Sin in the
World, and so it necessarily turns all those sayings in Scripture, that
manifest God's displeasure against Sin into a lie, as that he is angry with the
wicked every day, Psalm. 7. 11. Yea and angry (and sometimes very angry) with
his own People, because of Sin, Deuteronomy. 1. 31. and 9. 20. Psalm. 74. 1. which if
Sin be the effecting of his absolute decreed Will, it is impossible to be true,
that he should be angry with any for doing his freely decreed Will. So that
this Principle leaves no room for any Religion, and therefore is most impious.

Tenthly, If God immutably determined all sinful acts, it lays a foundation for
Rantism, Atheism, and all manner of filthiness and profaneness in the World.
And indeed had I met with such a Principle from the Ranters, I should not have
marvelled, it being the foundation of their practice, viz. that all is the
decreed Will of God, and therefore all is alike good, and so, no such thing as
Sin in the World; this being the foundation of so horrid a building, it is most
impious to assert or imagine.

Eleventhly, It Is that which renders God to be worse to Men than the Devil, and
that both in respect to Sin and Punishment. 1. Of Sin, the Devil can but tempt
unto it, and may be resisted, Jam. 4. 7. but the eternal Decree of God is
irresistible, that must be done. 2. The Devil can by temptation, but endeavor
by sin to fit Men for Judgment; but by this Doctrine, the eternal immutable
Decree, has destinated the world, both to Sin and Judgment, without all hope
or possible help, which if the Devil believed (which without doubt he dos not,
but knows the contrary) it would make him a very sluggard, his work being
already effected by eternal Decree, he need not go about like a roaring Lion
seeking whom he may devour, if all were devoured by the eternal and
irrefistible Decree! which were it true, O, Woe to the World that they have such
a God! which is most impious to imagine. And as for what they say, that God
does not force any to sin, but leaves them to the liberty of their wills, helps
not, for the Decree must be effected.

Twelfthly, And finally, as an effect of all, It strikes a deadly blow to the
whole Name, Nature and Being of God, as opened to us both in his Word and by
his Works.

As 1. In his Holiness, that he is most holy; that Holy and Reverent is his
name; that he loves Righteousness, and hates Sin and Wickedness, and hates
nothing else but Sin, and for Sins sake: but this asserts all the unholiness,
sins and wickedness in the World, both of Devils and Men, to be his birth from
all eternity, by an eternal and immutable Decree.

2. In his Goodness and Mercy to Men, the Scripture testifies that he is good
to all, that he loved the World in the gift of his Son: but this kills this
Doctrine of Goodness and Mercy to the World, asserting the Sin and Judgment of
the World established by an immutable Decree before the World was, which
renders the great design of God in the Creation, to be the Sin and Judgment of
the World, without all hope or help, and in sending his Son to effect the same,
which is most impious to imagine.

3. In his Justice. The Scripture says, that all his ways are judgment, a God
of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. But this
fastens on him the greatest injustice imaginable, to determine Men by a
forcible and irresistible Decree (before they were) to sin against his Law,
that so he might take Justice on them. Which likewise as much derogates from his
Wisdom in finding no more righteous a way to magnify his Justice, than by
enforcing Men to sin by an irresistible Decree, and overruling Providence in
order thereunto, that so Justice might take place upon them. What such a thing
would be accounted among Men, I need not speak.

But here it will be objected, That God is under no Law, his own Will is his
Law, and whatever he wills is good and righteous; and therefore, what have we
to do to question his Will and Work, or to say unto him, what do thou? Romans
9. 14 to 22. has enough in it to confirm this, and to stop all Mouths in this
matter.

Answ. 1. It Is true, the Will of God is his Law, and whatever he wills is just
and right. Yet 2. It behooves us to understand, that such is the holiness of his
Nature and Name, that he can will nothing which is contrary thereunto. And 3.
That such is his Truth and Faithfulness, that he never did nor can will any
thing that is contrary to his Word, Romans 3. 3, 4. Tit. 1. 2. That though he be
under no Law of Man's making, yet he is under the Law of his own Name and
Nature, of his own revealed Word and Will, and those who say otherwise, end all
ground of Faith and Religion. And as for Romans 9. I have said enough to that
already, it not relating to his eternal Decrees, but his present actings
toward Men, in way of Judgment for former Iniquity; and otherwise to
understand it, is contrary to the Name, Nature, and Truth of God in his Word;
and therefore is impious so to imagine.

4. And it strikes as deeply at the Truth and Faithfulness of God in his Word,
which presents us with his being good to all, and with his love to all, in
which he swears, that he has no pleasure in the death of the Wicked, but
this gives him the lie in all, asserting an eternal Decree both of Sin and
Death, before the World was: But let God be true, and every Man a Liar, in this
matter.

Thus have I endeavored (though very briefly) to open this great Mystery of
Iniquity, and had it not been stated as a Foundation-Principle of Faith (though
tending to end all Faith) and clothed in so fine a dress, as making so much for
the exaltation of God in his Name, and for the consolation of Christians, had
at present said nothing to it; and all arising from, and as the effects of that
untimely born Monster, Absolute Reprobation of the World by an immutable Decree
before ever it had a Being. And from hence, as the Reprobation was decreed, so
must the Sin, to make the Reprobation certain and sure; and from hence comes in
the denial of God's love to the World, and Christ's giving himself a Sacrafice
for the sins of the World; all is to confirm this monstrous Birth, with several
other things that I could name that flows from it, as the effects thereof.

Obj. Some may say, O Sir, you are too rash, you out* run the Bounds of
Moderation, and your own Principle, which is for Moderation, and the
Gospel Spirit of Love and Peace; and besides, the Asserters of this Principle
intend no such things as you say are included therein, but do often declare in
other of their Articles* to be against Sin, and for Holiness.

Answ. 1. I am of the same Mind, and have more Charity toward the Persons
concerned herein, than to think they really intend all that is included in this
Principle, and therefore shall not say they are Heretics, though the
Principles in themselves are as deeply heretical as any can possibly be.

Answ. 2. Their many sayings to the contrary, argues either, 1. Their ignorance
of their own Principles, not understanding the true nature and tendency
thereof, it being truly and really the open door to Rantism. At this very door
it entered (and they have anew set it open again;) They concluded that God
having decreed all things, then all acts must be alike good and pleasing to
God, that there could be no such thing in the World as Sin; and indeed, if it
were true, that all things whatsoever come to pass in the World, were God's
birth, by virtue of his eternal Decree, then all must be good, and the Ranters
in the right Religion, which far be it from any sober Christian to imagine. Or,
2. It argues their contradiction (for indeed, if they held it without
contradiction, it must needs be the most damnable Principle in the World) to
assert God to be Author of all things whatsoever, by an eternal and immutable
Decree, and yet pretend some of those things to be evil* sinful, and damnable,
and God not to be the Approver thereof, yet his own decreed act is the highest
contradiction and irreconcilable to it self; nor will that vain device any whit
help in this matter (as before I showed) that the act is God's, and so good,
but the sin is the Creatures, till they can either religiously or rationally
distinguish between the act and the sin, the act being the sin; were there no
such acts, there could be no such sins, sin being the transgression of the Law;
it will stand as the greatest and most irreconcilable contradiction as can be
imagined, or the greatest Blasphemy that can be against God.

3. It being the overruling Article, stated next to the Being of God. All the
rest must be understood by this, and stoop to it; nothing may be understood in
the rest that is contrary to this, this being the foundation of all, and indeed
undoeth and contradicts all the rest at once: for all decreed acts are good,
and so there can be no Sin, and so no Judgment; and so says the Principle it
self, from whence they learned it; and as I could name, that there is nothing
Sin as it is the Decree of God, that the things which he decreed are most
perfectly good, (which in it self is a great truth, but not that he decreed all
things whatsoever come to pass, then he decreed things that are perfectly evil,
which is contradictory) neither is there any thing of it self absolutely evil,
then it must be absolutely good. This is the bottom of this horrid and impious
Principle of Faith, which indeed tends to end all Religion.

And of this Faith, they would insinuate the Reader, all sound Christians to
be; but I know many more (and I hope there are more Congregations and
Christians) that do abhor it than believe it; and they had done well and
honestly to have distinguished, seeing they could not but know there are more
of a contrary Faith in this matter than themselves, but that they would have
People to believe that they are of the only true sound Faith, whereas, if there
be any Mystery of Iniquity, or Apostasy from the true Faith in the World, it
may be found here, seeing none can be worse.

4. And as for a supposition of rashness, and out-running the Bounds of
Moderation, and a Gospel Spirit in this matter, I say, No; and I doubt not but
it will so appear to unbyassed Persons, the depth of the matter being seriously
pondered, it being not Persons, but things I am contending against, even
spiritual Wickedness in high places: It is for the Name of God, Christ and the
Gospel: it is against this God-dishonouring, Gospel-destroying, Sin-exalting,
and Soul-undoing Principle of Faith that I am contending, I design no wrong to
Men, but their eternal Good, their Repentance.

But as for this horrid Principle, whose birth (as is most manifest) is from
the Prince and Power of Darkness, I cannot spare, and that it is from Satan,
and not from above, is most apparent.

For, 1. It is not of God. What? shall we believe that God decreed things that
are so absolutely contrary to his Name, Nature, and holy Word? shall we believe
that God decreed things which himself calls abominable things, which he hates,
and filthy stinking things, Jer. 44. 4. Psalm. 14. 1, 2, 3. detestible and
abominable things, Jer. 16 18. Ezekiel. 5. 11. and 7. 20. accursed things, Josh.
7. 13, 15. wicked things that provoke him to anger, 2 King. 17 11. horrible
things, Jer. 18. 13. and 23. 14. yea, things that never came into the heart of
God to have done, Jer. 7. 31. I say, shall we believe that God decreed all
these things; it is a Faith to be abhorred of all serious Christians, it turning
the whole Book of God into a lie.

2. As it is not of God, so it is immoral, and never came from the Light of
Nature, that has more honorable thoughts of God, than to father all the
wicked acts of Men upon God himself; we may truly say, as Jer. 18. 13. Ask ye
now among the Heathen, who has heard such things? the Virgin of Israel has
done a very horrible thing: Therefore it must needs be from the Prince and
Power of Darkness thus to belie the Lord, it being contrary to the holy Name,
Nature, and Word of God, and an abhorrency to the Law and Light of Nature.

And therefore I cannot spare this impious Principle of Absolute Reprobation of
the World by an immutable Decree before it was made, as if God had made the
World for no other end but by an eternal Decree to sin and be damned. I would
shame yea set fire on this impious Principle, even the fire of the Word and
Spirit of Truth, to the end (if possible) this prodigious monster, with all its
impious concomitants, might be fired and frighted out of the World, and returned
to its place, and never be named among Men any more, especially as an Article
of Christian Faith, I would if I might, give it its deaths wound, that there
might be no need of another stroke, it having filled the World with iniquity
and contention for many generations; if it might now have its end, God will
have the Glory, and Men the advantage.

Thus, according to the advice therein, having as prudently as I could, and
according to the best light and understanding that God has given me herein,
considered and pondered this matter, and have herein given a very brief account
thereof, to the intent that it may be a word of warning to all, to beware of
being corrupted thereby, and that the asserters thereof may speedily repent and
blot it out of their Creed, and I pray the Lord to grant them Grace so to do.
Amen.

If any should be inquisitive to know my thoughts about the eternal Decrees and
Providence of God.

I Answer, 1. My desire is, not to have any thoughts of God, or of his Decrees,
but such as are holy and honorable to his Name, which that it may so be,

2. I dare not think of any Decree in God, that is contrary to his holy Name
and Nature, nor in it self (distinct from sin as the cause) contrary to the
good of Men, nor contrary to his holy Word, his revealed Will, and Law of Grace
to Men: if I should, I must therein make null and void all his Word, or at best
render it uncertain, and so no ground or rule of Faith.

3. That his revealed Will, both in his Precepts, Promises, and Threats, is his
decreed Will, opened, revealed and made known to Men in his Word, Act. 20. 20,
27.

4. That all his own Works of Creation, Preservation, Redemption by Jesus
Christ, and effecting the Restitution, and World to come, with all the means
tending thereunto, was decreed by him, Act. 15. 18. Ephesians. 1. 11. but not all
nor any of the Sins of Men.

5. That there is, nor never was any secret Decree or Will in God, contrary to
his revealed Word and Will made known to Men, in which our safety is assured,
Mal. 3. 6.

6. That it is my concern, to desire and endeavor to know his revealed Will,
and it to believe, and live to him therein; assuring my self there is no secret
Will in God that is contrary thereunto, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.

But I believe it to be an Abomination to be abhorred, to believe that all the
actions of Angels and Men, are the conception and birth of the eternal Decree
of God. All that is good, being of and from God, and all the evil acts of Sin
being of and from the Devil, and Men themselves; and the evil of punishment
from God, as the just and righteous reward of punishment, or wages of Sin.

2. And as concerning Providence. 1. That God by his Providence orders and
governs all things well, and that Afflictions come not to pass by chance or
fortune (as Men usually understand it) but by the overruling hand of
Providence, Job 5. 6. and that by the same overruling Providence, all the
afflictions of his People shall work for their good. Romans 8. 28.

And that though God decreed not the sinful acts of any, no not the Jews
crucifying Christ, nor Judas betraying him, nor Joseph's Brethren selling him
to Egypt, yet he foreseeing they would do it, left them to the libertiy of
their own wills in the matter: and by overruling Providence brings about his
own designs thereby to his own praise; but that Providence has an overruling
hand in the Sins of Men, for accomplishing thereof, according to his eternal
Decree, (any otherwise than by bare permission, and overruling thereof as
before I said) I protest against, as most unholy to imagine.

To conclude, Let the Reader, prove all things, and hold fast that which is
good, 1 These. 5. 21.

Romans 12. 9. Abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good.

Phil. 4. 8. Finally, Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, if
there be any praise, think on these things.

FINIS.
These Books following have been lately printed for the Author, Thomas Collier.
1. THE Body of Divinity, or a Confession of Faith: being the Substance of
Christianity; containing the most material things relating both to matters of
Faith and Practice.

2. An Additional Word to the Body of Divinity; being the Substance of
Christianity, added on special occasion, about the Doctrine of Election,
Universal and special Grace. Being an Essay for Peace and Union amongst all the
Sons and Daughters of Peace.

3. A sober and moderate Answer to Nehemiah Cox's Invective (pretended)
Refutation (as he says) of the gross Errors and Heresies asserted by Thomas
Collier in his Additional Word: Wherein his Refutation is examined, and found
too light.


