Geometrical DYALLING or, Dyalling by a line of CHORDS only by JOHN COLLINS
Accomptant Philomath

London Printed for Francis Cossinet in Tower Street and for H: Sutton behind
Exchang

General Scheme


Projection of ye Sphere Anno 1659


In a Circle


In a Parralellogram


Chords fitted to ye Schemes in ye Book
ruler

Chords in time fitted to the Book
ruler



Geometrical Dyalling: OR, DYALLING Performed by a Line of CHORDS only, Or by
the PLAIN SCALE. Wherein is contained two several Methods of Inscribing the
Hour Lines in all Plains, with the Substile, Style and Meridian, in their
proper Coasts and Quantities; Being a full Explication and Demonstration of
diverse difficulties in the Works of Learned Mr. Samuel Foster deceased, late
Professor of Astronomy in Gresham College,; Also a Collection of diverse things
from the Works of Clavius and others.

Whereto is added four new Methods of Calculation, for finding the Requisites
in all Leaning Plains, with full directions suited to each Method for placing
them in their proper Coasts, without the help of any Dclinations.

Also how by Projecting the Sphere, to measure off all the Arks found by
Calculation, and to determine what hours are proper to all kind of Plains,
omitting superfluity.

Lastly, the making of Dyals from three Shadows of a Gnomon placed in a Wall at
random, with a Method of Calculation suited thereto, and diverse ways from three
Shadows, to find a Meridian-line.

Written by John Collins of London Accomptant, Philomath.

London, Printed by Thomas Johnson for Francis Cossinet, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the Anchor and Mariner in Tower-street, at the end of Mincinglane,
with other Mathematical Books; Also to be sold by Henry Sutton Mathematical
Instrument-Maker, living in Threed-needle Street behind the Exchange. 1659.

To the Reader.
BEing in conference with my loving friend Mr. Thomas Rice, one of the Gunners
of the Tower, much exercised in making of Dyals in many eminent places of the
City, he was pleased to communicate unto me the knowledge of a General Scheme,
for Inscribing the Requisites in all Oblique Leaning Plains, which he added,
was the useful Invention of the Learned Master Samuel Foster, Professor of
Astronomy in Gresham College London, deceased, from whom he received
Instructions concerning the same, in the year 1640. And the said Mr. Rice not
having his Papers about him, did dictate to me from his Memory the Construction
and Practice of the said Scheme, which I afterward Methodized just as it is
delivered in page 25 and 26. At the same time also I received directions for
Inscribing the Substile and Style in upright Decliners, and East or West
Reclining, or Inclining Plains, but they were of another man's Invention, and
did not seem to be derived from the former general Scheme, and therefore I have
not used them in this Treatise, but derived the performance thereof from the
said general Scheme: Moreover, Mr. Rice added, that in regard of the death of
the Author, and since of his Executor, who had the care and inspection of his
Papers, I should do well to Study out the Demonstration of the former Scheme,
and make it public, the rather, because it has been neglected. The manner of
Inscribing the hour lines being already published in a Treatise of the Authors,
Entitled, Posthumi Posteri; this desire of his, which was also furthered by
Mr. Sutton and others, I am confident is fully effected in the following
Treatise, and much more then was in his Request, and here let me add, that I
have had no other light from the Endeavors of the Learned Author, then what was
as above communicated unto me, all which might be expressed in half a page of
paper, or little more, to which I have made this large Access and Collection,
nam facile est inventis adore; not that I would hereby any thing endeavor to
eclipse the Authors Work, the excellency of whose Inventions in this and other
kinds, will speak forth his Renown to all posterity. And though in probability
I have not performed so much, nor so well, as was obvious to the knowledge of
the Learned Author, yet I am confident when the Reader understands what is
written, he would be as loath to be without the knowledge thereof, as my self;
and I am induced to believe, that the Author left nothing written about many
particulars in this Treatise; throughout which, we suppose the Reader,
furnished with the common Rudiments of Geometry, that he can raise
Perpendiculars, draw Parallels, describe a Parralellogram, bring three points
into a Circle, understands Definitions and Terms of Art, knows what a Line of
Chords is, can prick off an Arch thereby; all which, with Delineations for all
the usual Cases of Triangles, both from Projection and Proportions, the Reader
will meet with in my Treatise, called, The Mariners Plain Scale new plained,
now in the Press. Vale and fruere.

I remain thy friend, and a Well-willer to the Public Advancement of
Knowledge, JOHN COLLINS.

The Contents:
DYals distinguished Page 1, 2 To take the Suns Altitude without Instrument p.
3 To find the Reclination of a Plain p. 4 Also the Declination thereof p. 5 A
general proportion and Scheam for finding the Suns Azimuth or true Coast p. 6
To draw a Horizontal Dyal p. 7 Also a South Dyal p. 8 A new way to divide a
Tangent live into five hours and their quarters p. 10, 11 A direct South Polar
Dyal p. 12 To prick off the Requisites of upright Decliners p. 13 To prick off
an Arch or Angle by Sines or Tangents p. 14 The Scheam for placing the
Requisites of upright Decliners demonstrated p. 15, 16 To inscribe the
hour lines in an upright Decliner p. 17 The Demonstration thereof p. 18 to 21
An East Dyal p. 22 Requisites placed in East or West leaning Plains p. 23 The
Demonstration thereof p. 25 The Construction of the general Scheam for placing
the Requisites in Declining Re-In clining Plains p. 25 to 27 The first Method
of Calculation for Oblique Plains p. 28 to 30 And directions for the true
placing the Requisites suited thereto p. 30, 31 The general Scheam demonstrated
p. 32 to 34 The hour lines inscribed in an Oblique Plain ibid. The general
Scheam fitted for Latitudes under forty five degrees p. 35 To draw the
hour lines in a Declining Polar Plain p. 36 Also how to delineate the
hour lines in Plains having small height of Style p. 37, 38 Another way to
perform the same p. 39 to 41 A second Method of Calculation for Oblique Plains
p. 42 Proportions for upright Decliners p. 43 A third Method of Calculation for
Oblique Plains p. 44 Directions for placing the Requisites suited thereto p. 46
A fourth Method of Calculation for Oblique Plains p. 47 Through any two points
assigned within a Circle to draw an Arch of a Circle that shall divide the
primitive Circle into two Semicircles. p. 49 To measure the Arks of upright
Decliners by Projection p. 50 Also the Arks of leaning East or West Plains
thereby p. 51 To project the Sphere for Oblique Plains -- To measure off all
the Arks that can be found by Calculation With the Demonstration of all the
former Proportions -- from p. 52 to 59
To determine what Hours are proper to all Plains p. 60 to 61 Another Method of
inscribing the Hour Lines in all Plains by a Parallelogram p. 62 To draw the
Tangent Scheme suited thereto p. 63. The Hour Lines so inscribed in a
Horizontal and South Dyal p. 63, 64 As also in an upright Decliner p. 65 With
another Tangent Scheme suited thereto for pricking them down without the use of
Compasses p. 66, 67 A general Method without proportional work, for fitting the
Parallelogram into Oblique Plains that have the Requisites first placed p. 69,
70 By help of three shadows to find a Meridian-line p. 70, 71 Another Scheme
suited to that purpose p. 73 A Method of Calculation for finding the Azimuth,
Latitude, Amplitude, etc. by three shadows p. 75 From three shadows to inscribe
the Requisites and Hour Lines in any Plain p. 77 Which is to be performed by
Calculation also p. 97
Characters used in this Book.
+ Plus, for more, or Addition. - Minus less, or Substraction. = Equal. q For
square. Square. The Rectangle or Product of two terms. for Proportion.

If the Brass Prints in this Book be thought troublesome to bind up, they may
be placed at the end thereof, for the Pages to which they relate, are graved
upon them.

A Quadrant of a Circle being divided into 90d, all that is required in this
Treatise, is to prick off any number of the said degrees with their
Sub-divisions, which may be easily done any where from a Quadrant drawn and
divided into nine equal Parts, and one of those parts into ten sub-divisions,
called degrees, but for readiness the equal divisions of a whole. Quadrant are
transferred into a right line (as in the Frontispiece) called a Line of Chords,
serving more expeditly to prick off any number of degrees or minutes in the
Arch of a Circle.

An Advertisement.
The Reader may possibly desire to be furnished with such Scales to any Radius,
these and all manner of other Mathematical Instruments either for Sea or Land,
are exactly made in Brass or Wood, by Heury Sutton in Threed-needle-street,
behind the Exchange, or by William Sutton in Upper Shadwell, a little beyond
the Church, Mathematical Instrument-Makers.

A direct South Dial Reclining 60d Lat 51d 32
An erect direct North Dial Lat 51d 32
A South Dial Declin 40d East Reclining 60d Lat 51d 32
A North Dial Declin 40d West Reclining 75d Latitude 52d 32


THE DISTINCTION OF DYALS.
THough much of the subject of Dyalling has been wrote already, by diverse in
diverse Languages, notwithstanding the Reader will meet with that in this
following Treatise, which will abundantly satisfy his expectation, as to the
particulars in the Preface, not yet divulged in any Treatise of this nature.

In this Treatise, that we might not be too large, diverse definitions are
passed over, supposing that the Reader understands what a Dyal is, what hour
Lines are, that that part of the Style that shows the hour, ought to be in the
Axis of the World, that the hour Lines being projected on any Regular Flat,
will become straight Lines.

Dyals are by Clavius in the second Chapter of his Gnomonicks distinguished
into Seventeen Kinds.
1. The Horizontal, being parallel to the Horizon. 2. South and North direct,
by some called a Vertical Dyal, because parallel to the prime Vertical or
Circle of East and West. 3. 4. South direct, Reclining or North Inclining less
more then the Pole.


5. 6. South direct, Inclining or North Reclining less more then the Equinoctial


7. South direct Reclining, or North Inclining to the Pole, called a direct
Polar Plain, because Parallel thereto 8. South direct Inclining, or North
Reclining to the Equator, called an Equinoctial Plain, because parallel
thereto. 9. South and North, Declining East or West. 10. East and West direct.
11. East and West direct, Reclining or Inclining. 12. A South North Plain
declining East or West Reclining Inclining to the Pole, called a Polar Decliner.



13. A South North Plain Declining East or West Inclining Reclining to the
Equinoctial, called an Equinoctial Decliner.



14. 15. A South North Plain Declining East or West Reclining Inclining Whereof
are two sorts, the one passing above, the other beneath the Pole



16. 17. A. South North Plain Declining East or West Inclining Reclining
whereof are 2. sorts, the one passing above the Equinoctial, the other beneath
it.




Of each of these we shall say something, but before we proceed, it will be
necessary in the first place to show how to find the Situation of any Plain.

1. To find whether a Plain be Level or Horizontal.
The performance hereof is already showed by Mr. Stirrup, in his Complete
Dyallist, Page 58. where he has a Scheme to this purpose, I shall only
mention it: Get a smooth Board, let it have one right edge, and near to that
edge, let a hole be cut in it for a Plummet to play in; draw a Line cross the
Board Perpendicular, to the straight edge thereof passing through the former
hole; if then setting the Board on its smooth edge, and holding it
Perpendicularly, so that the Plummet may play in the hole, if which way soever
the Board be turned, the thread will fall (being held upright with the Plummet
at the end of it, playing in the former hole) directly on the Perpendicular
Line drawn cross the Board, the said Line no ways Reclining from it, the Plain
is Horizontal, otherwise not.

3. To take the Altitude of the Sun without Instrument.


Upon any Smooth Board, draw two Lines at right Angles, as AB and AC, and upon
A as a Center with 60d of a Line of Chords describe the Arch BC, and into the
Center thereof, at A drive in a Pin or Steel Needle, upon which hang a thread
and Plummet, then when you would observe an Altitude, hold the Board so to the
Sun, that the shadow of the Pin or Needle may fall on the Line AC, and where
the thread intersects the Arch BC, set a mark, suppose at E then measure the
Ark BE on your Line of Chords, and it shows the Altitude sought, for want of a
Line of Chords, you may first divide the Arch BC into 9 parts, and the first of
those Divisions into 10 smaller parts.

3. To draw a Horizontal and Vertical Line upon a Plain.
The readyest and most certainest way to do this, especially if the Plain lean
downwards from the Zenith, will be by help of a thread and Plummet held
steadily, to make two pricks at a competent distance in the shadow of the
thread on the Plain, projected by the eye, and a Line drawn through those, or
parallel to those two points, shall be the Plains perpendicular or Vertical
Line, and a Line drawn perpendicular to the said Line, shall be the Plains
Horizontal Line.

To find the Reclination of a Plain.
The Reclination of a Plain, is the Angle comprehended between the Plains
perpendicular, and the Axis of the Horizon, and the same Definition may serve
for the Inclination, only the upper face of a Plain, leaning from the Zenith,
is said to recline, and the under face to incline. In this sense Mr. Oughtred
in his Circles of Proportion, Mr. Wells in his Dyalling, Mr. Newton in his
Institution, and Mr. Foster in his late writings, understand it, and so it is
to be taken throughout this Treatise; but here it will not be amiss to intimate
that Mr. Gunter, Mr. Wingate, and Mr. Foster in a Treatise of a Quadrant,
published in Anno 1638. account the Inclination from the Horizon; the
complement of the Angle here defined, and accordingly have suited their
Proportions thereto, in which sense, the Reclining side is said to be the upper
face of an Incliner; but for the future it will be inconvenient to take it any
more in that Acception.

Now to find the Reclination of a Plain, apply the straight edge of the Board
we used for trying of Horizontal Plains, to the Plains perpendicular, holding
the thread and plummet so in the grooved hole, that it may intersect the line,
parallel to the straight edge of the Board, and make two pricks upon the Board
where the thread passes, and it will make an Angle with the said Line, equal
to the Plains Reclination, to be measured with Chords, according as was
directed for taking of Altitudes; and if need require, a Line may be drawn
parallel to that drawn on the Board, which represented the thread, which will
make the same Angle with the Plains perpendicular, the former Line did.

The Inclination will be easily got, by applying the straight edge of the
Board, to the Plains perpendicular, and holding the thread and plummet so at
liberty, as that it may cross the Line parallel to the Boards straight edge,
and it will make an Angle therewith, equal to the Plains Inclination.

Of Declining Plains.
A Plain has its Denominations from the Situation of its Poles: by the Poles
of a Plain, is meant a Line imagined to pass through the Plain at right Angles
thereto, the Extremities of which Line on both sides the Plain, are called its
Poles. If a Plain look full South, without swerving, either to the East or
West; it is said to be a direct South Plain, if it swerve toward East or West,
it is said to decline thereto; if it stand upright without leaning, it is said
to be erect Now a South Plain that declines Eastward, the opposite face
thereto, is said to be a North Plain declining as much Westward, by which means
the Declination of a Plain will never exceed 90d, and to which sense the
following directions toroughout this Treatise are suited. Now we may define the
Declination of a Plain to be the Arch of the Horizon, contained between the
true Points of East or West, and the Plain, equal whereto is the Arch of the
Horizon between the true North or South, and that Vertical Circle or Azimuth
that passes through the Plains Poles.

To find the Declination of a Plain.
Upon a Board, having one straight smooth edge, draw a Line parallel thereto,
and thereon describe a Semicircle, with the Radius of the Chords, which
distinguish into two Quadrants by a perpendicular from the Center; then holding
the Board parallel to the Horizon, and applying the straight edge to the Wall,
hold up a thread and Plummet, so that the shadow thereof may pass through the
Center, and in the shadow, make a mark near the Limb, from which a Line drawn
into the Center shall represent the shadow of the thread. In this Scheam, let C
represent the shadow of the thread passing through the Center; at the same
instant, take the Suns Altitude, and by the following directions, find the
Suns true Azimuth. Admit the Sun be 75d to the Eastwards of the South, prick it
from to S, then the distance between P and S shows the quantity of the Plains
Declination, and the Coast is also shown, for if P fall to the Eastwards of S,
the Declination is Eastwards, if to the Westwards of it, it is Westward; in
this Example it is 30d Eastwards.

We may suppose that the Reader knows which way from the Line of shadow to
set of the Suns true Coast, that he may easily do by observing the Coast of his
rising or setting, or whether his Altitude increase or decrease, and needs no
directions.

A General Proportion for finding the Azimuth.
As the Cosine of the Altitude, Is to the Secant of the Latitude,

Or as the Cosine of the Latitude: Is to the Secant of the Altitude;

So is the difference of the Versed Sines of the Suns distance from the
elevated Pole, and of the Ark of difference between the Latitude and Altitude.

To the Versed Sine of the Azimuth from the North in this Hemisphere.

Declination 23d 31, North.

Latitude 51d 32

Altitude 41d: 34

Azimuth 105d from the North



Upon C as a Center, describe the Semicircle EBM, and draw ECM the Diameter,
and CB from the Center perpendicular thereto, from B set off the Declination to
D, the Latitude to L, the Altitude to A; and draw the Line CA continued. The
nearest distance from D to BC when the Declination is North, place from C
toward M when South toward E, and thereto set K, assuming the Diameter EM to
represent the Secant of the Latitude, the Radius of the said Secant shall be
the Cosine of the Latitude doubled; wherefore the nearest distance from L to CM
doubled, shall be the Radius to the said Secant, which prick on the Line of
Altitude from C to Z, then the nearest distance from Z to CM shall be the
Cosine of the Altitude to that Radius, which extent prick from E to F, and draw
the Lines OF and FM; then for the third term of the proportion, take the
distance between A and L, and prick it from M to G, from which point take the
nearest distance to BC, and place it from C to X, so is the distance KX, the
difference of the Versed Sines sought, which prick from F to Q, and draw QR
parallel to FM, so is RM the Versed Sine of the Suns Azimuth from the North
sought, and CR the Sine of it to the Southwards of the East or West, and BP the
measure thereof in the Limb, found by drawing a LIne from R parallel to GB; in
this Example the Suns true Goast is 15d to the Southwards of the East or West.
Note also, that the Point R may be found without drawing the Lines OF, QR by
entering the extent KX, so that one foot resting on the Diameter, the other
turned about, may but just touch FM.

To make a Horizontal Dyal.
A Plain is then said to be Horizontal, when it is parallel to the Horizontal
Circle of the Sphere proper to the place of Habitation; these are such kind of
Dyals as stand commonly upon posts in a Garden.

By the former Directions, a true Meridian Line may be found, let it here be
represented by the Line FM.

A Horizontal Dyal for the Latitude of London, 51 degrees, 32 minutes.
Cross the same with a perpendicular, to wit, the Line of Six, and draw an
Oblong or square figure as here is done, wherein to write the hours, from M to
C set off such a Radius as you intend to draw a Circle withal, which for
convenience may be as big as the Plain will admit, and therewith upon C as a
Center describe a Circle, and set off the Radius of the said Circle from F to
d, from M to k, and draw the right Line Fd, then prick the Poles height or
Latitude of the place from f to L, and from L to S, and through the point S
draw the Line MS, and it shall represent the Cock or Styles height from the
point L, take the nearest distance to FM, and prick that extent from F to N on
the Line Fd, then a Ruler laid from N to k, where it intersects the Meridian is
the Regulating point, or point, then from M divide the Circle into twelve equal
parts for the whole hours, setting the Letters of the Alphabet thereto, and lay
a ruler from the Regulating point to each of those Divisions, and it will
intersect the Circle on the opposite side, from which Intersections, Lines
drawn into the Center at M, shall be the hours Lines required, to be produced
beyond the Center, as many as are needful, which shall be the hours before or
after 6 in the Summer half year, the halfs and quarters are after the same
manner to be inscribed, by dividing each equal division of the Circle into
halfs and quarters.

This Circular Dyalling, was in effect, published and invented by Mr. Foster in
his book of a Quadrant, in Anno 1638. for the demonstration of this Work will
demonstrate the truth of those Circular performances, which he Operates on the
back of that Quadrant, but is more expressly hinted in his Posthuma, the
demonstration whereof shall follow.

Those that have plain Tables with a Frame, may have Tangent Lines put on the
sides of their Frame; and then if a Center be found upon the paper under the
Frame by the Intersection of a Ruler laid over those Tangents, the requisite
Divisions of a Circle to any Radius that can be described upon the paper, will
be most readily given without dividing any Circle or setting of Marks or
Letters thereto, the Frame keeping fast that paper, on which the Draught of the
Dyal is made, which may also be supplied from a Circle divided on Pastboard cut
out, which is to be Laced upon a Board over the paper whereon the Draught is to
be made.

An upright full South Dyal.
This is no other then a Horizontal Dyal, in that Latitude which is equal to
the complement of the Latitude of the place, you are in, only the hours must
not be continued beyond the Center, and the Delineation requires no other
directions then the former.

On a direct North Dyal, in this Latitude, there will not be above two hours
above, and two hours beneath each end of the Horizontal Line to be expressed,
and the Style will have the same Elevation and point upward.

Horizontall Dial
An Upright South Dial




In all upright North and South Plains, the Meridian or hour line of 12 is
perpendicular to the Plains Horizontal line, if the Plain be direct the height
of the Style above the substile, is equal to the complement of the Latitude.

If the Plain be South Reclining, or North Inclining, the height of the Style
above the substile, is equal to the Ark of difference between the complement of
the Latitude and the Ark of Re-Inclination, and if this latter Ark be greater
then the former, the contrary Pole is elevated.

If the Plain be South Inclining, or North Reclining, the height of the Style
above the substile, is equal to the sum of the Colatitude, and of the
Re-Inclination, and when this latter Ark is greater then the Latitude, the
Styles height will be greater then a Quadrant.

Such Horizontal or direct South Dyals, both upright and leaning, whereon the
style has but small Elevation, are to be drawn with a double Tangent Line
without a Center, wherein the following directions for direct Polar plains, and
those for other Oblique plains, whereon the style has but small elevation,
will fully direct you.

All Plains that cut the Axis of the World, have a Center; but if they be
parallel thereto, the style has no Elevation.

Such direct South Reclining, or North Inclining Plains, whose Arch of
Reclination is equal to the complement of the Latitude, are parallel to the
Axis, and are called Polar plains; in these the Hour Lines will be Tangent
Lines of any assumed Radius, and the parallel height of the style above the
plain, must be made equal to the Radius of the Tangent, by which the hours were
set off.



First draw the Tangent line CG, and perpendicular thereto ACB, upon C as a
Center, with any Radius describe the Quadrant of a Circle HB, and prick off the
Radius from C to A, from H to E, from B to D, from D to F, from F twice to G.

A Ruler laid from A to E Finds the point 1 on the Tangent CG for the hour
line of one, and laid from A to D finds the point 2 for the hour line of two,
the hour line of three is at the point H, of four at the point F, of five at
the point G; thus are the whole hours easily inserted.

Now to insert the halfs and quarters.
Divide the Arches BE, ED, DH into halfs, and a Ruler laid from A to those
divisions will find points upon CH, where all the half hours under 45d are to
be graduated; and if a Ruler be laid from B to those respective divisions of
the Quadrant BH, it will find points on the Tangent CG, where the whole hours
and halfs are to be graduated above 45d, after the same manner are the quarters
to be inserted; But in regard the halfs and quarters above 45d will by this
direction be found with much uncertainty, I have added the help following.

First, Divide the halfs and quarters under 45d as now directed, then for those
above make use of this Table.

In a direct South Polar Dyal. The distances of these hour lines. Are equal to
the distances of these hour lines.
3 and 3 3 and 4 2 and 3 4: and 4 4 and 4 4 and 4 and 1 1 and 2 1 and doubled
and 1 3 and 3 doubled: otherwise, 1 and 2 2 and 3
This I do not assert to be absolutely true, but so near the truth, that there
will not arive above one thousandth part of the Radius difference in the
greatest Dyal that is made, and will be more certain then any Sector, though of
a Vast Radius, or then they can with convenience be pricked down the common way,
by a Contingent Line, the meaning of the Table will be illustrated by one or
two examples.

The distance between the hour lines of two and a quarter, and three and three
quarters will be equal to twice the distance between the hour lines of twelve,
and one and a half.

Also the distance between four and a quarter, and four and a half, is equal to
twice the distance between three and a half, and three and three quarters; or
it is equal to the distance between one and three quarters, and two and three
quarters, but the former is nearer the truth.

It will be inconvenient in such plains, as also in direct East or West Dyals,
to express any hour line from the substile beyond 75d or 5 hours.

To these I may add some other observations which were communicated by Doctor
Richard Stern, to Mr. Sutton, which may be of use to try the truth of these
kind of Plains.

1. The distance between the hours of 3 and 4, is equal to the distance between
the hours of 1 and 3.

2. The distance between the hours of 2 and 4, is double to the distance
between the hours of 12 and 2.

3. The distance between the hours of 11 and 4, is doubt to the distance
between 12 and 3, or to that between 9 and 12, and so equal to the distance
between 9 and 3, also equal to the distance between 4 and 5.

4. The distance between the hours of 11 and 5, is double to the distance
between the hours of 11 and 4, as also to the distance between the hours of 4
and 5, and between 9 and 3; and quadruple to the distance between 12 and 9, or
between 12 and 3.

These are absolutely true, as may be found by comparing the differences of the
respective Tangents from the natural Tables.

To draw a Polar direct South Dyal.
Having drawn the Plains perpendicular in the middle of the Plain, let that be
the hour line of 12, then assuming the style to be of any convenient parallel
height, that will suit the plain, making that Radius, divide a Tangent line
into hours and quarters by the former directions, and prick them down on the
Plain, upon a line drawn perpendicular to the Meridian or hour line of 12 on
each side thereof, and through the points so pricked off, draw lines parallel to
the Meridian line, and they shall be the hour lines required, as in the Example.



To describe an Equinoctial Dyal.
Such direct North Recliners, or South Incliners, whose Re-Inclination is equal
to the Latitude, are parallel to the Equinoctial Circle, and are therefore
called Equinoctial Dyals, there is no difficulty in describing of these: Divide
a circle into 24 equal parts for the whole hours, and afterward into halfs and
quarters, and place the Meridian line in the Plains perpendicular, assuming as
many of the former hours as the Sun can shine upon for either face, and then
placing a round Wyre in the Center for the Style, perpendicular to the Plain,
and the Dyal is finished. A South plain Declining 30d East Latitude 51-32
page 13

page 17



A South Dial Declin 30d East Latitude 51-32


To prick off the Substile and Styles height on upright Decliners in their true
Coast and quantity.
On such Plains draw a Horizontal Line, and cross the same with a perpendicular
or Vertical, at the intersection set V at the upper end of the Vertical Line
set S, at the lower end N, at the East end of the Horizontal Line set E, at the
West end W, prick off the Declination of the Plain in its proper Coast from S
or N to D, and draw DV through the Center, the same way count off the Latitude
to L, and from it draw a Line into the Center; in the same quarter make a
Geometrical square of any proportion at pleasure, so that two sides thereof may
be parallel to the Horizontal and Vertical Line, at the intersection of one of
the sides thereof, with the Vertical set A, and of the other side, with the
Horizontal Line, set B, and where the Latitude Line intersects the side of the
square, set F.

To prick off the Substilar.
For Latitudes above 45d take BF, and prick it on the Line of Declination
beyond the Center from V to O, and from the point O, draw the Line OC parallel
to the Vertical Line, and produced beyond O, if need require, and thereon from
C to I prick the side of the Square, and a line drawn into the Center, shall be
the Substilar line; but for Latitudes under 45d prick the side of the square
from V to O, and draw OC as before, and make CI equal to AF, and a line from I
drawn into the Center, shall be the Substilar line.

Styles Height.
From the Point I erect the extent OC perpendicularly to the substilar OI, at
the extremity thereof set K, from whence draw a line into the Center, and the
Angle IVK will show how much the style is to be elevated above the substilar
line.

In order to the Demonstration hereof, let it be observed that an Angle may be
pricked off by Sines or Tangents in stead of Chords.

To prick off an Angle by Sines or Tangents.


As in the Scheme annexed, let BC be Radius, and let there be an arch pricked
off with Chords, as BE; I say, if the Tangent of the said Ark BA be taken out
of a line of Tangents to the same Radius, and be erected perpendicular to the
end of the Radius, as BA, a line drawn from A into the center, shall include
the same Angle as was pricked off by Chords, as is evident from the definition
of a Tangent.

In like manner an Angle may be pricked off by Sines, the nearest distance from
E to BC is the Sine of the Arch BE, so in like manner the nearest distance from
B to EC, is the Sine of the same Arch; wherefore if with the Sine of an Arch
from the end of the Radius be described another Ark, as F, and from the Center
or other extremity of the Radius, a line drawn just touching the same, the
Angle included between the said line, and the Radius shall be an Ark equal to
the Ark belonging to the said Sine; and what is here done by a line of natural
Sines or Tangents, by help of a Decimal line of equal parts, equal to the
Radius' may be done by help of the natural Tables without them.

Any Proportion relating to the sixteen cases of Sphoerical Triangles, amongst
which the Radius is always ingredient, may be so varyed, that the Radius may be
in the third place, and a Tangent or a Sine in the fourth place, and then if
the Ark belonging to the fourth Proportional be known, an Angle equal thereto
may be pricked off by Tangents or Sines according to the nature of the fourth
term, as beforth; if it be unknown, notwithstanding an Angle equal thereto may
be pricked off with Sines or Tangents according to the nature of the fourth
term, from the two first terms of the Proportion, because they are in such
Proportion, the first to the second, as the Radius or third term is to the
fourth; upon this Basis follows the demonstration of this Scheme.

The Demonstration of the former Scheme for upright Decliners.
1. That the Substilar Line is true pricked off.
Assuming VB equal to VA to be Radius, then BF becomes the Cotangent of the
Latitude, whereto VO is made equal, which becoming Radius, OC is the Cosine of
the Declination, and VC the Sine. Now one of the Proportions for finding the
Substile distance from the Meridian is this following: As the Sine of the
Plains Declination, Is to the Tangent of the Latitude:

So is the Radius to the Tangent of the Substiles distance from the Horizontal
Line.



From whence it follows, that if the Sine of the Declination be pricked on the
Horizontal Line from the Center, as VC, and the Tangent of the Latitude,
erected perpendicularly thereto, as CI equal to VA, it shall give a point from
whence a Line drawn into the center, shall be the Substilar Line.

Now I am to prove that VA is the Tangent of the Latitude, thus it is made
good: In a Tangent Line of 45d, if the Tangent of any part or ark of it be
assumed to be Radius (as here FB the Cotangent of the Latitude equal to VO,
which before was made Radius) then does the said whole Tangent line (which in
this case is any side of the Square) become the Tangent of that arks
complement: thus, VA becomes the Tangent of the Latitude, because the Radius is
a mean Proportional between the Tangent of an Ark, and the Tangent of that Arks
complement; For, As the Cotangent of the Latitude BF, Is to the Radius BG,

So is the Radius BF, to the Tangent of the Latitude BG, there being the like
Proportion between the two latter, as the two former terms.



2. That the Styles Height is true pricked off.
To perform this, the Cosine of the Declination OC, to that lesser Radius, was
erected perpendicularly from the point I, in the Substilar (...), and IK made
equal thereto. Now one of the Proportions for calculating the Styles height is:
As the Secant of the Latitude, Is to the Cosine of the Declination:

So is the Radius, To the Sine of the Styles Height.



Consequently the Styles height may be pricked off from the two first terms of
the Proportion, if it can be proved that VK is the Secant of the Latitude; here
let it be remembered that UP is the Tangent of the Latitude, IP the Sine of the
Declination, and IK the Cosine.

By construction the Angles VPI and VIK are right Angles, therefore the square
of VI is equal to the two squares of UP, and IP by 47 Prop. 1 Euclid; again the
square of VK is equal to the two squares of IK and IV, wherefore the square of
VK is equal to the sum of the three squares of IK, IP and UP; but the squares
of PI a Sine, and IK its Cosine are equal to the square of the Radius.

But the square of the Radius, and the square of UP, the Tangent of the
Latitude, is equal to the square of VK, therefore VK is the Secant of the
Latitude, because the square of the Radius, more the square of the Tangent of
any Ark, is equal to the square of the Secant of the said Ark.

3. That VK is equal to VF.
Let VF be an assumed Radius, so will FB be the Cosine of the Latitude. Again
observe that in any line of Sines if the Sine of any Ark be made Radius, the
whole line becomes the Secant of that Arks complement, so here VK being the
Secant of the Latitude is equal to VF the Radius, for let VT be made equal to
VF, I say it holds as VO the Cosine of the Latitude, is to the Radius VT, so is
VO the Radius to VT the Secant of the Latitude, which is therefore equal to VK.

Whence the trouble of raising a perpendicular in this Scheme, because the side
of the square passes through the complement of the Latitude, is shunned the
point K falling in the outward circumference.

Lastly, from all this it unavoidably follows that VI is the Cosine, and IK the
Sine of the Styles height to the Radius VF, which was to be proved.

An upright South Dyal, Declining 30 degrees Eastwards, Latitude 51 degrees, 32
minutes. To draw the hour Lines of the former upright Decliner.
First draw the Plains perpendicular CO, which for upright Plains is the
Meridian line, and with the Radius VF of the former Scheme, draw an occult Ark
upon C as a center, and therein set off NV equal to TN of the former Scheme,
and draw the line IVC for the substile, and with the Radius VC describe a
circle thereon.

1. The first work will be to find the Regulating Point in the Substile,
called the Point Sol.
Prick the Radius of the said Circle from I to P, and from C to Q, and draw the
Line IP, and therein make IK equal to IK in the former Scheme, then a ruler
said from K to Q, where it intersects the Substilar is the Regulating Point.

2. To find a Point from whence the Circle is to be divided into 12 equal
parts.
Lay a Ruler from O to the point, and it intersects the Circle on the Opposite
side, at it set M.

3. To divide the Circle.
From the point M before found, lay a ruler through the Center V, and it will
find a Point on the other side the circle, at it set f, the points Mf divide
the Circle into halfs, and each half is to be divided into six parts, the
Radius VM will easily divide each half into three parts, and then it will be
easy to divide each of those parts into halfs, and so the whole Circle will be
divided into 12 equal parts, and if it be desired to inscribe the half hours
and quarters, then must each of those parts be divided into halfs and quarters.

Having thus divided the Circle into 12 parts, distinguish them with the
Letters of the Alphabet.

4. To draw the hour lines, and to number them.
Lay a Ruler to each of those Letter divisions, and upon the Regulating Point
in the Substile, and it will find points on the Opposite side of the Circle
from which if lines be drawn into the Center at C' they shall be the hour lines
required.

5. An inconvenience shunned.
When the points through which the hour lines are to be drawn, fall near the
Center, the hour lines cannot be drawn from the said points with certainty.

In this case let any hour line near the said point be produced, if need
require, and upon C as a Center with the Radius CV describe the Ark of a Circle
from the produced hour-line, take half the distance between the point, where
the produced hour line, cuts the Circle, and the point through which the hour
line proposed is to be drawn, and prick that extent off in the Arch swept,
setting one foot where the Arch swept cuts the hour line already drawn, from
whence half the distance was measured, and the other foot will find a Point in
the said Arch, through which the hour line desired is to pass: Thus we
inscribed the hour line of three in the former Dyal.

When the North Pole is elevated, the Center of the Dyal must be below, but
when the South Pole is elevated, as in this example, it must be above, and the
Point must be always found in the other part of the Diameter most remote from
the Center.

6. The Styles height may be transferred from the former Scheme into this, by
pricking the Arch TK twice in this Circle, and it finds a point, from whence a
line drawn into the Center, shall represent the Style.

That the hour lines are true Delineated.
The Point Sol found in the Substile, divides the Diameter of the Circle drawn
on the said Substile in such Proportion, as the Radius is to the Sineof the
Styles height, by reason of the equiangled Triangles, whose Bases bear such
proportion as their perpendiculars.

The next work performed by dividing the Circle into 12 equal parts, and
finding points on the opposite side, by laying a ruler over those equal parts
through the point Sol, carries on this Proportion.

As the Radius is to the Tangent of the hour from the substile, So is the Sine
of the Styles height

To the Tangent of the hour line, from the Substile, being the proportion used
in all Dyals, whereby to set off the hours.

In the third figure following, let BA represent the Substile, and let the
Regulating Point be at M, so that BM bears such Proportion to MA, as the Radius
does to the Sine of the Styles height, let the perpendicular BHE represent a
line of Tangents, whose Radius is equal to BC, and the perpendicular AD,
another line of Tangents to the same Radius both infinitely produced, and let
BE represent the Tangent of some particular Arch or hour to be drawn, from E
through the point M draw a right line to D, and the Proportion lies evident in
right lines.

As the Radius BM: Is to the Tangent of the hour line from the Subtle BE So is
the Sine of the Styles height MA

To the tangent of the hour line from the substile AD.

If from every degree of a Tangent line, lines be drawn into the Center of the
Circle proper to that Tangent, they shall divide that Quadrant to which they
belong into 90 equal parts, this follows from the definition of Tangents, but
if the lines be drawn from every degree of the said tangent to the extremity
of the diamer, they shall divide a Semicircle into 90 equal parts by 20 Prop.
3. Euclid. because an Angle in the Circumference, is but half so much as it is
in the Center.

Thus the Semicircle BGA is supposed to be divided into 90 equal parts from the
Tangent BE, by lines drawn to A, as is the line EGA, so is the other Semicircle
from the other Tangent AD, by lines drawn to B, as is BFD; Now if it can be
demonstrated that the points GMF are in a right line, it follows that the same
Proportions may be carried on from the equal divisions of these Semicircles, as
were done in the right Tangent lines BE and AD, this Proposition being very
well Geometrically demonstrated by my loving friend Mr. Thomas Harvy; his
Demonstration thereof shall hereafter follow.

Having found the distance of the hour line, from the subsistle AB, if B be
made the Center of the Dyal, the right line BF drawn into the Center, shall
represent the hour line proposed, making the same Angle with the Substile, as
was found by the proportion; note that no hour can be further distant on one
side or other of the Substile then 90d, and the said Ark of distance will be
found in one of the Semicircles, and if the Center were not placed in the
Circumference, the Angle found would be extended beyond its due quantity, in
all upright Decliners or leaning Plains: The first Proportion carried on, is
this; As the Sine of the Styles height:

Is to the tangent of the distance between the Meridian and substile:

So is the Radius: to the tangent of the inclination of Meridians:



Whereby is found the point from whence the Circle is to begin to be divided
into 12 parts for the whole hours with their halfs and quarters, and those
equal divisions give the Angles between the Meridian of the plain, and the
respective hours, called by some the Angles at the Pole, and then the work is
the same as before: Now to the Proposition.

Construction.
The right lines AD, BE are parallel, and touch the Circle in the extremes of
the Diameter AB, DE is drawn at pleasure, cutting the Tangents in D and E, and
the Diameter in M, BD and AE cutteth the Circumference in F and G, it is
required to be proved that the Points F, M, and G, are in a right line.

Draw the lines MF, MG, first if AD be = BE then AM is = MB, for the Triangles
ADM and BEM are equiangeld, therefore M is the Center. Again AD being = BE and
the Angle DAB = EBA and AB common to both Triangles DAB, EBA therefore the
Angles DBA, EAB are equal, and the double of them FMA, GMB the Angles at the
Center, are also equal, wherefore FM and MG is one and the same right line
which was to be proved.

Secondly, if AD be not equal to BE, as in the second, third, and fourth
Scheams let BE be greater, and make BH = AD and BY = AM, and draw the right
line AH cutting the Circumference in K; draw likewise IK, IH, GK, and extend GK
infinitely both ways, which shall be either parallel to AB (as in the second
figure) or cut it in the point P one side or the other, as in the third and
fourth figures, in each from the points A and B, and the Center C at right
Angles to GK, draw the lines AO, BN, CL lastly draw BG, from which Construction
it willfollow, That 1. HI is parallel to ED for HB is = AD and BY = AM and the
Angles HBI and DAM are equal, therefore the angle AMD = BME is = BIH wherefore
HI is parallel to ED.
2. IK is parallel to MF for HB is = AD and the Angle HBA = DAB, and AB common
to both the Triangles HBA and DAB, therefore the Angles HAB and DBA are equal,
wherefore AK = BF, but AK being = BF and IA = MB, and the Angle KAI = MBF,
therefore KI is parallel to MF.





3. The Triangles AHE and AGK, are equiangled, so also are the Triangles AHB
and AGO, because the Angle AKG = ABG is = AEB and EAH common to both the
Triangles AHE and AGK, therefore they are equiangled; again the Angles AHB and
and AGO being equal, the right Angled Triangles ABH and AOG are also equiangled.

4. NL is equal to LO, because BC is equal to CA and NK is = GO, because KL is
= LG; now in the equiangled Triangles ABH, AOG as BH: HA OG: GA and in the
Triangles AHE, AGK as HA: HE GA to GK, therefore (ex equo) it will be as BH: HE
OG: GK, but as BH: HE BY: IM for IH is parallel to EM, therefore as BY: IM OG:
GK but NK is = OG, therefore BY: IM NK: KG, but IC is half of IM and KL half of
KG, therefore BY: IC NK: KL, therefore by Composition of Proportion, as BC: IC
NL: KL, alternately, as BC: NL IC: KL.

In the second figure BC is = NL, therefore IC is = KL, wherefore (because IC
is also parallel to KL) IK is parallel to CL, by like reason GM is also
parallel to CL, but in the third and fourth figures the sides PC, PL of the
Triangle PCL are cut Proportionally by the parallel BN, and as before, as BC:
NL IC: KL, and as PC: PL BC: NL, therefore PC: PL IC: KL, wherefore IK is
parallel to CL.

Again as before, BC: NL IC: KL, But CM is = IC and IG is = KL, therefore as
BC: NL CM: LG, but as has been said, as BC: NL PC: PL, therefore as PC: PL CM:
LG, wherefore because the sides PM: PG, of the Triangle PMG are cut
proportionally in C and L, CL and MG are parallel one to another.

Now in all the three figures it has been proved that IK and MG are either of
them parallel to CL, therefore they are parallel one to another, wherefore the
Angle GMI is equal to the Angle KIB which before was proved to be equal to AMF,
therefore the Angles GMI and AMF are equal one to another, wherefore FM and MG
is one and the same right line which was to be proved.

To draw an East or West Dyal.
Let the hour line of six, which is also the Substilar line, make an Angle
equal to the Latitude of the place, with the Plains Horizontal line, above that
end of it that points to the Coast of the elevated Pole, then draw a line
perpendicular to the Substilar line, which some call a Contingent line, and
with such a Radius as you determine the Style shall have parallel height above
the Substile: divide a Tangent line of hours and quarters according to the
direction for direct Polar Recliners, then through those divisions draw lines
parallel to the Substile and they shall be the hour lines required; thus the
hours of 5 and 7, are each of them Tangents of 15d from six, and so for the
rest, let them be numbered on each side of six (being the Substile) for an East
dyal with the morning hours, for a West dyal with the afternoon hours, the one
being the complement of the other to 12 hours, and therefore we have but one
example, namely an East dyal for the Latitude of London.

How to fill this or any other Plain, with any determined number of hours,
shall afterward be handled. A West Dial Reclining 50d Latitude 51-32
An East Dial Inclining 40d Latitude 50d




To prick off the requisites of an East or West Reclining or Inclining Dyal in
their true Situation and quantity.
In these Plains, first draw the Plains perpendicular, and cross it with a
Horizontal line, which is also the Meridian line; in any one of the quarters,
make a Geometrical square, as before directed for upright decliners, and from
the Plains Vertical in the said quarter, count off the Latitude to L, and from
the Horizontal line in the said quarter count off the Reclination or
Inclination to R, and from L and R, draw lines into the Center, and where the
Latitude line intersects the side of the square, set F.

1. To prick off the Substile.
For Latitudes above 45d place BF from V the Center in the Horizontal line for
Recliners Northwards, for Incliners Southwards, and thereto set O, and through
the said point, draw a line parallel to the Vertical, and place the nearest
distance from A to RV on the former parallel, from O for Recliners upwards to
I, but for Incliners downwards, and a line thence drawn into the Center, shall
be the Substile.

2. The Styles height.
Place the nearest distance from B to RV on a perdendicular raised from the
point I in the Substile, and it finds the Point K, whence a line drawn into
the Center, shall represent the Style. In the other Hemisphere the words
Northwards and Southwards, must be mutually changed.

For Latitudes under 45
The side of the square must be placed from V to O and AF must be placed on the
line of Reclination or Inclination from V to C, the nearest distance from C to
VA placed on the perpendicular, passing through O for Recliners upwards, but
for Incliners downwards, finds the Point I, through which the Substile is to
pass, and the nearest distance from C to VB raised perpendicularly on the point
I in the Substile, finds the point K for the Style, as before.

Demonstration. 1. For the Substile.
In these Plains VB or VA being Radius FB is the Contangent of the Latitude and
the nearest distance from A to RV, is the Cosine of Reclination or Inclination
to the same Radius, and the nearest distance from B to RV, the Sine thereof;
this for Latitudes above 45, but for lesser Latitudes. AF the Tangent of the
Latitude was made Radius, and thereupon the Radius or side of the square
be-became the Cotangent of the Latitude, and the nearest distance from C to VA
was the Cosine, and from C to VB the Sine of the Reclination or Inclination, so
that the prescribed Construction in both cases erects the Cosine of the
Re-Inclination on the Cotangent of the Latitude, which is made good from this
proportion.

As the Cotangent of the Latitude

Is to the Cosine of the Re-Inclination from the Zenith

So is the Radius: To the tangent of the Substilar from the Meridian.

2. For the Style.
A proportion that will serve to prick it off, is, As the Cosecant of the
Latitude, is to the Sine of the Re-Inclination,

So is the Radius: To the Sine of the Styles height.



Admit the Styles height were calculated, and truly pricked off by Chords, I
say if the Sine of the Latitude be made a Radius, as the side of the square is
in Latitudes above 45d and as AF is in Latitudes under 45d the Radius to the
said Sine will become the Cosecant of the Latitude; now we shall prove that VK
is the Cosecant of the Latitude, the three squares IK, IO, and OV, are equal to
the square of VK, as before asserted, two of these squares IK and IO are equal
to the square of the Radius, the third square, viz. of VO is the square of the
Cotangent of the Latitude, but the square of the Radius, more the square of the
Cotangent of the Latitude is equal to the square of the Cosecant of the
Latitude; I say then, if from K a perpendicular be let fall to VI, so as that
it may be equal to the Cosine of the Re-Inclination shall prick off the Style
true by the directions for pricking off an Angle by Sines, whereto the
proportion for the Styles height is suited and would pass through the point I,
by page 25 A West Dial Reclining 50d Latitude 51 32
A South Plain Declining 40d East Inclining 15 degrees


reason of the equality of the three squares to the square of VK, then by
consequence the contrary follows, having the point I first given, the Point K
may be found according to the prescribed Construction.

A West Plain, Reclining 50 degrees, Latitude 51 degrees, 32 minutes. The Point
Sol, Substile, Style, and hour lines, are all found after the same manner as in
an upright Decliner, the Substile being set off from the Meridian line here,
after the same manner as it was from the Meridian there.

A South Plain Declining East 40 degrees, Inclining 20 degrees, Latitude, 51
degrees, 32 minutes. To prick off the Requisites in all Declining, Reclining,
and Incliing Plains in their true Coast and quantity.
Now follows those Directions enlarged, which as I said in the Epistle, I
received from Mr. Thomas Rice. UPon any Plain first draw a true Horizontal
line, at the East end thereof set E, and at the West end W, cross the said line
with a perpendicular, which may be called the Plains perpendicular, by some
termed the Plains Vertical line, or line of Reclination, at the intersection of
these two lines set V, and upon it as a Center describe a Circle (the Radius
whereof may be equal to 60d of a line of Chords) at the upper end of the
Vertical line set S, and at the lower end N.

As the Declination is, set it off with Chords from S or N toward the true
Coast, and at it set D, from whence draw a line through the Center; also set
off the Latitude of the place the same way and in the same quarter, and at it
set L, from which draw a line to the Center.

From that end of the Horizontal line, toward which the declination was
counted, set the Inclination (which as well as the Reclinais reckoned from the
Zenith, the former being the Denomination of the under, the latter of the upper
face) upwards toward S, and the Reclination downwards toward N, and at it set
R, from whence draw a line through the Center to the other side, of the Circle.

In the same quarter of Declination, draw HA parallel to the Horizontal line,
and FG parallel to the Vertical line, in a Geometrical square, of like and of
any convenient distance from the Center at pleasure, and where the Latitude
line intersects the side of the square, let the letter F be placed.

On the line of Declination beyond the Center, make VO equal to FG, and draw OB
parallel to the Horizontal line, continued till it meet with the side of the
square FG produced, at the point of concurrence, set B, and where it intersects
the Plains perpendicular, set P, and draw OC parallel to the Vertical line
cutting WE at C, and make HA equal to OC or BG, now by help of the three points
A, B, C thus found, the requisites will be easily pricked off.

1. The Substilar line.
The nearest distance from A to RV, set on the line CO (produced if need be)
from C to I the same way the distance was taken from A, that is, if downward or
upward, the other must be so too, will show where VI the Substilar Line is to
be drawn.

2. The Styles height.
The least distance from B to RV, set on a perpendicular raised upon the
Substile from the point I will find the point K, from whence draw a Line into
the center at V, and the Angle IVK will show how much the Style is elevated
above the Substile, and if the work be true, VK and VF will be equal, whence it
follows, that the trouble of raising the mentioned perpendicular may be shunned.

3. The Meridian line.
The least distance from C to RV, set upon the Line OPB, from P on that side,
which is farthest from the Line RV, will find the Point M, from whence a Line
drawn into the Center, shall be the meridian Line.

And I add that on all North Recliners in the Northern Hemisphere, the
meridian Line must be drawn through the center on the other side; and then the
construction of the Scheam will place it below the Plains Horizontal Line,
which is its proper Situation for the said upper face, and for the under face
the Scheam places it true without caution.

4. A Polar Plain how known.
If the line RV fall just into B, the Plain is a Polar Plain, in such a Plain
the Style has no height, but is parallel to the Axis, in this case the
Inclination of Meridians must be known, directions for such Plains must
afterward follow.

But if the line RV fall between the Points B and P, then must the Substile
Style and Meridian be all drawn through the Center, and stand beyond on the
other side.

Annotations on the former Scheam.
1. That for Latitudes under 45d this construction of the Scheam, supposes the
sides of the square produced, which will therefore be liable to large
excursions or other inconveniences, wherefore for such Latitudes, I shall
somewhat vary from the construction prescribed.

2. In finding the Substilar line, in stead of erecting CI upon VC, you may
prick the same on the Vertical line UN, and thereto erect VC, and get the point
I possibly with more certainty by finding the intersection of two Arks where
the said Point is to pass.

3. In pricking off the Meridian line, the distance of C from the Center may be
doubled or tripled, but so must likewise UP, and the nearest distance from C to
RV erected on a line drawn parallel to WE, passing through the Point P so
found, and in stead of drawing such a parallel, the Point M may be found by the
intersection of two Arks.

4. That this Scheam places the requisites of all Dyals in their true coast
and quantity, yet notwithstanding if this Scheam be held before a
Looking-Glass, the Effigies thereof in the Glass shows how the Scheam would
happen and place the Requisites, namely, the Style, Substile and Meridian, for
a Plain of the same Denomination, but declining to the contrary Coast.

And if the face of the said Scheam be laid upon a Window, and the Substile,
Style and Meridian be continued through the Center on the backside thereof, it
shows you how these requisites are to be placed on the opposite side of the
Plain, which being done, may be held before a Looking-Glass as before, and will
be represented for the contrary Declination of that opposite face: the truth of
all which will be confirmed from the Scheam it self.

This Scheam for Declining, Reclining, or Inclining Plains, uses a new method
of Calculation, derived from an Oblique Triangle in the Sphere, wherein there
is two sides with the Angle comprehended, given to find both the other Angles,
which is reduced by a perpendicular to two right Angled Triangles, from which
the following proportions are derived.

I shall therefore first deliver the said method, then demonstrate that the
said proportions are carried on in the Scheam; and lastly, from the Sphere,
show how those proportions do arise.

1. To find a Polar Plains Reclination or Inclination.
As the Radius, Is to the Cosine of the Plains Declination,

So is the Cotangent of the Latitude, To the Tangent of the Reclination or
Inclination sought.

2. To find the distance of the Substile or Meridian line, from the plains
perpendicular for a Polar plain.
As the Radius, Is to the Sine of a Polar Plains Reclination,

So is the Tangent of the Declination, To the Tangent of the Substilar line
from the Plains perpendicular.

3. The Inclination of Meridians.
As the Radius, Is to the Sine of the Latitude,

So is the Tangent of the Declination, To the Tangent of the Inclination of
Meridians.

Affections of a Polar Plain.
The Substilar on the upper face, lies above that end of the Horizontal line,
toward the Coast of Declination, and the Meridian lies parallel to the
Substile beyond it, toward that end of the Horizontal line that is toward the
Coast of Declination.

For Declining, Reclining, or Inclining Plains.
First find a Polar Plains Reclination for the same Declination.

Then for South Recliners and North Incliners, get the difference, but for
North Recliners and South Incliners, the sum of a Polar plains Reclination, and
of the Re Inclination of the plain proposed, and then it holds.

1. For the Substile.
As the Cosine of the said Ark of difference or sum according as the Plain
leans Northward or Southwards,

Is to the Sine of the Polar Plains Reclination,

So is the Tangent of the Declination,

To the Tangent of the Substilar from the Plains perpendicular.

2. For the Styles height.
As the Radius, Is to the Cosine of the Substiles distance from the Plains
perpendicular,

So is the Tangent of the Sum or difference of Reclinations, as before limited,
To the Tangent of the Styles height.

3. Meridians distance from the plains perpendicular.
As the Radius, Is to the Sine of the Re Inclination,

So is the Tangent of the Declination,

To the Tangent of the Meridian from the Plains perpendicular.

4. Inclination of Meridians.
As the Sine of the Styles height,

Is to the tangent of the distance between the Meridian and Substile,

So is the Radius, to the tangent of the Inclination of Meridians.

For South Recliners or North Incliners, the difference between the substiles
distance from the plains perpendicular, and the Meridians distance therefrom,
is equal to the distance between the Meridian and Substile; the like for such
North Recliners or South Incliners, as Recline or Incline more then an
Equinoctial Plain, having the same declination, but if they lean above it, or
have a lesser Reclination, the sum is the distance between the Meridian and the
Substile.

The three first Proportions, besides the finding of a Polar Reclination, are
used in the Scheam for the placing of the Requisites, and the latter proportion
in the Circular Scheam for drawing the hours.

Another proportion for finding the Inclination of Meridians by Calculation,
is: As the Cosine of the Latitude,

Is to the sine of the substiles distance from the Plains perpendicular,

So is the Cosine of the Re Inclination of the Plain,

To the sine of the Inclination of Meridians.



The Reclination of an Equinoctial Plain to any assigned Declination, is
necessary for the determining of diverse affections: The Proportion to find it,
is: As the Radius: Is to the Cosine of the Plains Declination:

So is the Tangent of the Latitude,

To the Tangent of the Reclination sought.



The upper face of an Equinoctial Plain, is called a North Recliner, the
Meridian descends from the end of the Horizontal line opposite to the Coast of
Declination, the Substilar line is the hour-line of six, and makes right
Angles with the Meridian line.

Directions for the true Scituating of the Meridian and Substile suited to the
former method of Calculation.
1. For Plains leaning Northwards.
If a South Plain recline more then a Polar Plain, having the same Declination,
the Plain passes beneath the Pole of the World, the North Pole is elevated
upon the upper face, the Substile and Meridian line lie above that end of the
Plains Horizontal line, toward the Coast of Declination, the Substilar line
being next the Plains perpendicular.

For the under face being a North Incliner, the South Pole is elevated, the
lines lie in the same position below the plains Horizontal line, and on the
contrary side of the plains perpendicular.

If a South Plains Reclination be less then the Polar Plains Reclination, the
Plain passes above the Pole, and the North Pole is elevated on the under face,
being the inclining side.

The Substile and meridian lie above that end of the Plains Horizontal line
that is opposite to the Coast of Declination, the meridian being nearest the
Plains perpendicular, for the upper face being a South Recliner, the South Pole
is elevated, and the lines lie in the same Position below the Plains horizontal
line, but on the contrary side of the plains perpendicular descending below
that end of the Horizontal line, opposite to the Coast of Declination.

2. For Plains leaning Southwards generally on the upper face the North Pole is
elevated on the under face the South Pole. To place the Substile.
Such North Recliners whose Reclination is less then the complement of a Polar
plains Reclination, the Substile is elevated above the end of the Horizontal
line contrary to the Coast of Declination, and on the under face, being a South
Incliner, the Substilar is depressed below the end of the Horizontal line,
opposite to the Coast of Declination.

But when the Reclination is more then the complement of the Reclination of a
Polar plain, the Substile is to lie below the plains Horizontal Line, from that
end opposite to the Coast of Declination.

But for South Incliners, being the under face, the Substile is elevated above
the end of the Horizontal line, opposite to the Coast of Declination.

To place the Meridian.
On all North Recliners the Meridian lies below the Horizontal Line from that
end thereof, opposite to the Coast of Declination, because at noon the Sun
being South, casts the shadow of the Style to the Northwards.

On the under face, being a South Incliner, it must always be placed below the
Horizontal Line, below that end of it toward the Coast of Declination.

These Directions suppose the Declination to be denominated from the Situation
of that face of the plain on which the Dyal is to be made, and the Horizontal
line for all Dyals that have Centers, is supposed to pass through the same.

Now to the Demonstration of the former Scheam.
1. It Is asserted that if RV fall into the point B, the plain is a Polar plain,
in which case the Style is parallel to the Axis of the world.

Demonstration.
Every Declining plain may have such a Reclination found thereto, as shall make
the said plain become a Polar plain, and the proportion to find it, may be
thus:

As the Tangent of the Latitude, Is to the Cosine of the Declination,

So is the Radius, To the Tangent of the Reclination sought.

In the former Scheam. if we make FG the Cotangent of the Latitude Radius, the
side of the square will be the Tangent of the Latitude, now VO equal to FG,
being Radius, OC equal to GB, is the Cosine of the Declination; wherefore a
Line drawn into the Center from B, shall include the Angle of a Polar plains
Reclination agreeable to the two first terms of the proportion, and to the
directions for pricking off an Angle by Tangents.

2. That the substile is true pricked off.
Upon V as a Center with the Radius VB, imagine or describe a Circle then is BG
equal to UP, the Sine of a polar plains Reclination, which is equal to HA, and
the Ark comprehended between A and B, will be a Quadrant.

But in a Quadrant any line being drawn from the Limb passing through the
Center, the nearest distance from the end of one of the Radij will be the Sine
of the Ark thence counted, and the nearest distance from the other Radius
thence counted, will be the Sine of the former Arks complement; so in this
Scheam the nearest distance from B to RV, when a plain Reclines, is the Sine of
the Ark of difference, but when it inclines of the sum of the Reclination of
the Plain proposed, and of the Reclination of a Polar plain, and the nearest
distance from A to RV, is the Cosine of the said Ark.

Make VQ on the plains perpendicular equal to IC, which is equal to the nearest
distance from A to RV, and from the point Q erect the perpendicular QT, whereto
the line PO will be parallel, and consequently there will be a proportion
wrought: Thus it lies,

As VQ the Cosine of the sum of the Polar plains Reclination, and of the
Reclination of the plain proposed,

Is to PV equal to BG, the Sine of a Polar Plains Reclination.

These two terms are of one Radius, namely VB,

So is the tangent of the Declination QT, To the tangent of the substiles
distance from the plains perpendicular PO,

These two terms are to another Radius, namely QV, then if the Tangent of an
Ark be erected on its own Radius, as here is QI equal to CV, and a line be
drawn from the extremity into the Center, the Angle belonging to that Tangent
shall be pricked off agreeable to the general direction.

3. That the styles height is true pricked off.
The Proportion altered to bring the Radius in the third place will be, As the
Secant of the substiles distance from the Plains perpendicular, Is to the
tangent of the sum or difference of Reclinations, as before limited,

So is the Radius, To the tangent of the styles height.



In the Scheam making VQ Radius, VI becomes the Secant of the substiles
distance from the Plains perpendicular, and the nearstdiestance from B to RV,
is the tangent of the difference or sum of the Reclinations, which when VB was
Radius, was but the Sine thereof, the reason why it now becomes a tangent, is
because the Consine of the said Ark VQ, is made Radius: But,

As the Cosine of any Ark, Is to the Radius, So is the Sine of the said Ark, To
the tangent of the said Ark.

Therefore the nearest distance from B to RV equal to IK, being erected
thereon, and a line from the extremity drawn into the Center, shall prick off
the styles height suitable to the two first terms of the former proportion, and
to the general direction for pricking off an Angle by Tangents.

4. That the Meridian is true pricked off, the Proportion to effect it: Is,
As the Cotangent of the Plains Declination,

Is to the Sine of the Re Inclination,

So is the Radius, To the tangent of the Meridian from the Plains perpendicular.

If VC be made Radius, then is CO equal to UP the Tangent of the complement of
the Plains Declination, and the nearest distance from C to RV, is the Sine of
the Re Inclination to the same Radius, which is erected perpendicularly on UP
suitable to the two first terms of the proportion and the General Direction.

Lastly, that VK is equal to VF, these Symbols are used, q signifies square, +
for more or Addition, = equal.

VBq = VQq + IKq, the reason is because VB being Radius, VQ is the Cosine of an
Ark to that Radius, and IK the Sine by construction.

VBq = VGq + GBq, therefore these two squares are equal to the two before.

If to the latter part of each of these Equations, we add QIq or rather its
equal POq, the sum shall be equal to VKq.

I say then VQq + IKq + POq = VKq, this will be granted from the former
Demonstration for upright Decliners.

Again,

VGq + GBq + POq = VFq, therefore VF is equal to VK, this cannot be denied,
because, VGq + FGq = VFq.

And the two squares GBq, or rather VPq + POq are equal to GFq, which is equal
to VOq by Construction.

To draw the hour lines for the former South Plain, Declining Eastwards 40
degrees, Inclining 15 degrees Latitude, 51 degrees, 32 minutes.
First having assigned the Center of the Dyal, through the same draw the plains
perpendicular, represented by the pricked line CN, and with the Radius of the
former Scheam upon C as a Center, describe an Occult Ark, and therein set off
NV equal to the substiles distance from the plains perpendicular, and through
the point V draw the Substilar, and upon V as a Center, describe the Circle,
and prick off the Meridians distance from the the Substile in the former
Scheam, namely YX twice in this Circle from I to O, and draw CO for the
Meridian, after the same manner set off the Style, then find the Regulating
point Sol, divide the Circle, and draw the hour lines according to former
Directions, and when hour lines are to lie both above and below the Center,
they are to be drawn through.

To fit the Dyalling Scheam, for Latitudes under 45 degrees. A South Plain
Declining 50 degrees East, Inclining 20 degrees, Latitude 30 degrees.
The former Construction would serve, if the sides of the square were produced
far enough, but to shun any such excursion, make VO equal to the side of the
square, and through the point F, draw a parallel to the Plains perpendicular,
and where the parallel OP produced interesects it, is the point B, upon V as a
Center, with the extent page 34 A South Dial Declin 40d East Inclin 15 Latit
52-32
A South plain Declin 50d East Inclining 20d Lat 30d


A South plain Declin 30d East Reclining 34-31 Lat 51-32
page 35

A South plain Declin 30d East Reclining 25d Lat 51-32
page 37



VB, draw the Arch ZB, and prick off a Quadrant thereof from the point B, and
it will find the point A, the point C is found no otherwise then before; and
now having these three points, the whole work is to be finished according to
those Directions, to which when the Style has a competent height, nothing need
more be added, unless it be some examples.

How to draw such Dyals whereon the Style has no elevation as Polar Plains, or
but very small elevation, as in upright far Decliners, and many leaning Plains.
These plains are known easily, for if the Re-Inclination pass through the
point B, the plain is a Polar plain, and the Substile is to be found by the
former Construction, which the Scheam makes the same with the Meridian:
moreover, another Ark is to be found, called the Inclination of Meridians: The
proportion to find it, is: As the Radius, Is to the Sine of the Latitude,

So is the tangent of the Declination,

To the tangent of the Inclination of Meridians.



If CO be made Radius, CV will be the Tangent of the Declination, which enter
on VL from V to K, and the nearest distance from K to SV shall be the Tangent
of the Inclination of Meridians, which is to be pricked on its own Radius from P
to M, and draw a line from the Center, passing through M to the Limb, whereto
set F, so is the Arch NF the Inclination of Meridians sought, to wit, the Arch
of time between the substile and Meridian.

To draw the hour lines.
First draw a perpendicular on the Plain UN, and upon V as a Center, describe
the Arch of a Circle, and from the Dyalling Scheam prick off the substiles
distance, and draw IV which shall represent the same, as also the Inclination
of Meridians from I to f, then upon V as a Center, describe as great a Circle
as the plain will admit, and find the point f, therein also, by laying a Ruler
over V the Center, and f in the former Circle, and from the said point divide
the Circle into twenty four equal parts for the whole hours (but we shall not
need above half of them) then determine what shall be the parallel height of
the Style above the Substile, and prick the same on the Substilar line, from V
the Center to I, through which point draw a Contingent line at right Angles to
the Substile, and laying a Ruler from the Center over each of the divisions of
the Circle, through the points where it intersects the Contingent line, if
lines be drawn parallel to the Substile, they shall be the hour lines required,
the hour-line that belongs to the point f being the Meridian-line or hour-line
of 12, after the same manner are the halfs and quarters to be inscribed, if the
Contingent line be too high, the Center V may be placed lower, if it be
required, to fit so many hours precise to the Plain; first draw it very large
upon some Floor, and then it may be proportioned out for a lesser Plain at
pleasure, as was mentioned for East or West Plains.

A South Plain, Declining Eastwards, 30 degrees, Reclining 34 degrees, 31
minutes.


The Scheam places all things right for Equinoctial Reclining Plains, without
any further caution.

To draw the Hour Lines on such Plains, where the Style has but small
elevation. A South Plain Declining 30 degrees Eastwards, Reclining 25 degrees,
Latitude 51 degrees 32 minutes.
In these Plains, because the hour lines will run close together, the Dyal must
be drawn without a Center, by help of two Contingent lines, and first of all
the Inclination of Meridians must be known, thereby is meant the Arch of time
between the Substile and the Meridian line or hour line of 12, and that may be
found several ways; here I shall follow the proportion in Sines before
delivered.

Making VI Radius prick the same on the Latitude line VL, and from the point
found, take the nearest distance to the Horizontal line, place this extent from
V to F, and draw CF; then take the nearest distance from R to the Plains
Vertical SN, which place from V to Q, then draw QT parallel to FC, so is VT the
Sine of the Inclination of Meridians, which may be easily measured in the Limb
by the Arch SY, by drawing a line parallel to the Plains perpendicular from the
point T, or by pricking the same on HA produced, and laying a Ruler thereto, or
by drawing the touch of an Arch with VT upon S as a Center, then a Ruler laid
from V touching the outward Extremity of that Arch, finds the point Y.

Moreover, we need not make VI Radius, but prick the nearest distance from L to
VE, from V upwards, then the nearest distance to the Plains perpendicular from
the Intersection of the Substile, with the Limb must be placed from V toward
W, and from the two points thus found a line drawn, and the rest of the work,
as before.

To draw the Hour Lines.
First draw the Plains perpendicular CN, and draw an Occult Arch, wherein prick
down NY and NK, and draw the Substile and Style as before, making the same
Angles.

Through any two points in the Substile, as at A and B, draw two right lines
continued, making right Angles therewith.

Draw a line parallel to the Style at any convenient distance, which is to
represent the new Style, as here DE.

Take the nearest distance from B to DE, and set it on the Substile from B to
V, also the nearest distance from A to DE, and set it from V to C, through
which point draw another line perpendicular to the Substile.

Upon V as a Center, describe the Arch of a Circle of as large a Radius as the
plain will admit, and from the substile on the same side thereof the Meridian
happened in the former Scheam, set off the Inclination of Meridians, and it
finds the point M, from whence divide the Circle into 24 equal parts, and draw
lines from the Center V through those parts, cutting both the Contingent lines
B and C, the respective divisions of the Contingent line C, must be transferred
into the Contingent line A, and there be made of the like distance from the
substile as in the said line C, then lines drawn through the Divisions of the
two Contingent lines A and B, shall be the respective hour lines required.

A South Plain Declining Eastwards 30 degrees, Reclining 25 degrees, Latitude
51 degrees, 32 minutes.


After the same manner must such East and West Recliners or Incliners, that
have small elevation of the Style, and upright far decliners be pricked down,
and in these plains the Meridian many times must be left out, the proportion to
find the Inclination of Meridians for upright Decliners: Is, As the Radius, Is
to the Sine of the Latitude,

So is the Cotangent of the Plains Declination,

To the Cotangent of the Inclination of Meridians.



In the Dyalling Scheam, making CV Radius, CO is the Cotangent of the
Declination, which enter on the Latitude line VL, and take the nearest distance
to SV, which extent pricked upon CO, and it finds a Point, through which a line
drawn from the Center to the Limb, shall show the inclination of Meridians to
be measured from N.

Otherwise:
That we may not transfer large Divisions on the Contingent line from a small
Circle, and that the Plain may be filled with any determined number of hours,
such as by after Directions shall be found meet, draw any right line on a Board
or Floor that shall represent the Plains perpendicular, as CN, and from the
same set off the Substile and Styles height from the general Scheam as before,
drawing a line parallel to the Style as DE, also a line perpendicular to the
Substile, which I call the Floor Contingent, and that it may be large, let it
be of a good distance from the Center; from the point of Intersection at Y,
take the nearest distance to the parallel Style, which prick from Y to V, and
upon V as a Center describe as large a Circle as may be with convenience, and
from the Substile set off the Inclination of Meridians therein to M (which Ark
refers to V as its Center) and from the said Point divide it into 24 equal
hours (or fewer, no more then are required) and laying a Ruler over V, and
those respective divisions graduate them on the large Contingent line, I say
from this large Contingent line thus drawn and divided, we may proportion out
the Divisions of two (or many) Contingent lines that are lesser, and thereby
fill the Plain with any proper number of hours required.

Then in Order to drawing the hour lines on the Plain.

The first work will be to draw the larger contingent line on the plain, which
may be drawn any where at pleasure: for performing whereof, note, that what
Angle the Substile makes with the Plains perpendicular, the Contingent line is
to make the same with the Horizontal line, and the complement thereof, with the
Vertical line; also draw another Contingent line above this, parallel thereto
at any convenient distance.

In the bigger Contingent line assume any two points to limit the outward most
hours that are intended to be drawn on the Plain, as admit on the former Plain,
I would bring on hours from six in the morning, to two in the afternoon,
between the space A and B of the greater Contingent, take the said extent AB,
and upon the point B at 2 of the Floor Contingent, describe an Ark therewith,
to wit, L, then from A Draw the line AL, just touching the outward extremity
of the said Ark.

I say the nearest distance from D to AL, being pricked on the Plains greater
Contingent from A to D, finds a point therein through which the Style is to
pass.

Also the nearest distance from Y to AL, finds the space AY on the Plains
greater Contingent, and through the point Y a line drawn perpendicular to AB,
shall be the Substilar line.

The Style is to be drawn through the Point D, making an Angle with the Plains
Contingent line equal to the complement of its height above the Substile in
this example 80d 57, to wit, the Arch NY.

The respective nearest distances to AL, from each hour-point, in the Floor
Contingent, being pricked on the Plains greater Contingent from A toward B,
finds Points therein, through which the hour lines are to pass.

The next work will be to limit one of the extreme hours on the Plains lesser
Contingent, and that must be done by proportion.

As the Distance between the parallel style and substile on the Floor
Contingent,

Is to the distance between the style and substile on the Plains lesser
Contingent,

So is the distance between the substile and either of the extreme or outward
hours on the Floor Contingent,

To the distance between the substile, and the said outward hour on the Plains
lesser Contingent.

A South Dial Declining 30d East Reclining 25d Lat 51-32




This proportion is to be carried on in the Draught on the Floor, place DIE from
A to G on the Floor Contingent, and with the extent EG taken from the Plains
lesser Contingent, upon G on the Floor Contingent, draw the Arch O, and from A
draw a line touching the outward extremity of the said Arch, and let it be
produced.

The nearest distance from Y to AO, being pricked on the Plains lesser
Contingent, reaches from G to C, the point limiting the outward hour of six.

Then if the nearest distances to the line AO, be taken from all the respective
hours on the Floor Contingent, and placed on the Plains lesser Contingent from
C toward F, you will find all the hours points required, through which and
the like points on the Plains greater Contingent, the hour lines are to be
drawn.

Here note, that the extent DIE on the Floor Contingent, may be doubled or
tripled; if it be tripled it reaches to H, also the extent EG on the plains
lesser Contingent, is to be increased after the same manner, and an Ark
therewith described on H before found, as Q, and by this means the line AO will
be drawn and produced with more certainty, then by the Ark O near the Center.

And what is here done by help of the Styles distance from the Substile, may be
done by help of the outward hour, if the distance of the said hour-line from
the Substile be found Geometrically or by Calculation, for the said hour-line
will make an Angle with the Plains Contingent lines, equal to the complement of
the Ark of its distance from the Substile.

This Plain is capable of more hours which cannot conveniently be brought on.

After the same manner are upright far Decliners to be dealt withal, and all
other Plains having small height of Style.

But to limit the outward hours on Polar plains, and East or West Plains, the
trouble will not be half so much.

A South Plain Declining Eastwards 30 degrees, Reclining 25 degrees, Latitude
51 degrees, 32 minutes. A second method of Calculation for Oblique Plains.
By the former method the Meridians distance from the Plains perpendicular is
to be found, and the Polar Reclination Calculated.

Then for South Recliners, or North Incliners, get the difference, but for
North Recliners or South Incliners the sum, of the Polar Plains Reclination,
and of the Reclination of the Plain proposed, and it holds.

As the Cosine of the Polar Plains Reclination,

Is to the Sine of the former sum or difference,

So is the sine of the Latitude, To the Sine of the styles height.

Which Pole is elevated is elevated is easily determined, by comparing the
Reclination of the proposed Plain with the Polar Reclination, and all other
affections are to be determined, as in the first Method.

Then for the Substile, and Inclination of Meridians.

As the Cosine of the styles height,

Is to the Sine of the Plains Declination,

So is the Cosine of the Latitude,

To the Sine of the substiles distance from the Plains perpendicular:

And so is the Cosine of the Reclination,

To the Sine of the Inclination of Meridians.

This method arises from the aforementioned Oblique Triangle in the Sphere, in
which by help of two sides, and the Angle comprehended, the third side is first
found, and the other Requisites by the proportions for Opposite sides and
Angles.

Proportions for upright Decliners. 1. To find the Substiles distance from the
Meridian.
As the Radius, Is to the Sine of the Declination,

So is the Cotangent of the Latitude,

To the Tangent of the Substile from the Meridian.

2. Angle of 12, and 6.
As the Radius, Is to the Sine of the Plains Declination,

So is the Tangent of the Latitude,

To the Tangent of the Angle between the Horizontal line and six.

3. Inclination of Meridians.
As the Sine of the Latitude, Is to the Radius,

So is the Tangent of the Declination,

To the Tangent of the Inclination of Meridians:

4. Styles height.
As the Radius, Is to the Cosine of the Latitude,

So is the Cosine of the Plains Declination,

To the Sine of the styles height.

These Arks are largely defined in my Treatise, The Sector on a Quadrant.

For East and West Re-Incliners, The complement of the Latitude of the place,
is such a new Latitude: in which they shall stand as upright Plains, and the
complement of their Re-Inclination is their new Declination in that new
Latitude, having thus made them upright Decliners, the former proportions will
serve to Calculate all the Requisites.

In all upright Plains, the Meridian lies in the plains perpendicular, and if
they Decline from the South (in this Hemisphere) it is to descend or run
downward; if from the North it ascends, and the Substile lies on that side
thereof opposite to the Coast of Declination.

In East or West Re-Incliners, it lies in the plains horizontal line, on the
Inclining side the South Pole is elevated, but on the upper side the North
Pole, and the Substile lies above or below that end of the Meridian line,
which points to the Pole elevated above the Plain.

On all plains whatsoever to Calculate the hour distances.

As the Radius, Is to the Sine of the styles height above the substile,

So is the tangent of the Angle at the Pole,

To the tangent of the hour lines distance from the substilar line.

By the Angle at the Pole, is meant the Ark of difference between the Ark
called the Inclination of Meridians, and the distance of any hour from the
Meridian for all hours on the same side of the Meridian the Substile falls, and
the sum of these two Arks for all hours on the other side the Meridian.

All hours on any Plain go to the contrary Coast of their Situation in the
Sphere, thus all the morning or Eastern hours, go to the Western Coast of the
plain, and all the evening or Western hours, go to the Eastern Coast of the
Plain.

A third Method of Calculation for leaning Plains, that is, for all sorts of
Plains that do both Decline, and also Incline or Recline. They may be referred
to a new Latitude, in which they shall stand as upright Plains, and then they
will have a new Declination in that new Latitude; which two things being found,
the former Proportions for upright Decliners will serve to Calculate all the
Arks required.

How this may be done on a Globe, is not difficult to apprehend, having set the
Globe to your Latitude, let one of the Meridians of the Ecliptic or Longitude
in the heavens, represent a Declining Reclining Plain, this Circle intersects
the Meridian of the place in two Points, the one above, the other beneath the
Horizon: Imagine the Globe to be so fixed, that it cannot move upon its Poles,
then elevate or depress the Globe so in the Meridian that the point of
Intersection above the Horizon may come under the Zenith, then will the Pole of
the world be elevated above the Horizon to the new Latitude sought, and where
the Meridian of Longitude that represents the Plain intersects the Horizon it
shows the new Declination.

Or it may be thus apprehended: The distance between the Pole of the world, and
that point of Intersection that represents the Zenith of the new Latitude, is
the complement of the said new Latitude, and the distance between that point,
and the Equinoctial is the new Latitude it self; the new Declination is the
complement of the Angle between the plain and the meridian of the place, an Ark
usually found in Calculation under this denomination.

To find these Arks by Calculation.
As the Radius, Is to the Cosine of the Plains Declination,

So is the Cotangent of the Re-Inclination from the Zenith,

To the tangent of the Meridional Ark, namely the Ark of the Meridian between
the Plain and the Horizon.

And this is the first thing Master Gunter and others find; for South
Recliners North Incliners the one being the upper, the other the under face,
get the difference between this Ark and the Latitude of the place, the
complement of the said residue, remainder, or difference, is the new Latitude
sought; but for North Recliners or South Incliners, the difference between this
fourth Arch and the complement of the old Latitude is the new Latitude.

To find the new Declination:
As the Radius, Is to the Cosine of the Re-Inclination,

So is the sine of the old Declination, To the sine of the new.

This method is hinted to us in Mr. Fosters Posthuma, also in his Book of
Dyalling in Anno 1638, where he refers leaning plains to such a Latitude
wherein they may become East or West Recliners, but that method is to be
deserted, as multiplying more proportions then this, and does not afford that
instrumental ease for pricking down the hours that this does.

Affections determined.
Such South Recliners, whose meridional Arch is less then the Latitude, pass
beneath the Pole, and have the North Pole elevated above them, but if the
meridional Ark be greater then the Latitude, they pass above the Pole, the
North Pole is elevated on the under face, all other affections are before
determined. If the meridional Arch be equal to the Latitude, the plain is a
Polar plain; for plains leaning Southwards, if the meridional Arch be equal to
the complement of the Latitude, the plain is an Equinoctial plain, if it be
more, the plain has less Reclination then an Equinoctial plain, if it be less
it has more, and all affections necessary for placing (and Calculating) the
meridian line were before determined.

This method of Calculation finds the Substiles distance from the meridian,
not from the plains perpetdicular, wherefore it must be showed how to place it
in Plains leaning Southwards, for plains leaning Northwards use the former
directions.

To place the Substile in North Recliners.
In these plains the Meridian and Substilar are to meet at the Center, and not
being drawn through, will make sometimes an Acute, sometimes an obtuse Angle.

When the Plains Meridional Ark is greater then the Colatitude, they make an
Obtuse Angle, in this Case, having first placed the Meridian line, above it
prick off the complement of the distance of the Substile from Meridian to a
Semicircle.

But when the Meridional Ark is less then the Colatitude, prick off the said
distance it self above the Meridian line.

In South Incliners.
When the Plains Meridional Ark is greater then the Colatitude, the Substile
and Meridian make an Acute Angle, when it is equal to the Colatitude, they make
a right Angle, when it is less then the Colatitude they make an Obtuse Angle,
and must be pricked off by the complement of their distance to a Semicircle, the
Substile always lying on that side of the Meridian, opposite to the Coast of
Declination.

A fourth Method of Calculation for leaning Plains. An Advertisement.
In this method of Calculation for all Plains leaning Northward, both upper and
under side their Declination is the Arch of the Horizon between the North and
the Azimuth of the plains South Pole, so that their Declination is always
greater then a Quadrant; But for all Plains leaning Southwards, both upper and
under face, their Declination is the Arch of the Horizon between the North and
the Plains North Pole, wherefore it is always less then a Quadrant; in this
sense Declination is used in the following Proportions.

As the Sine of half the sum of the complements, both of the Latitude and of
the Reclination, Is to the Sine of half their difference,

So is the Contagent of half the Declination,

To the Tangent of a fourth Arch.

Again,

As the Cosine of half the sum of the former Complements,

Is to the Cosine of half their difference,

So is the Contangent of half the Declination,

To the tangent of a seventh Arch.

Get the sum and difference of the fourth and seventh Arch, then if the
Colatitude be greater then the complement of the Reclination, the sum is the
Substiles distance from the plains perpendicular, and the difference the
Inclination of Meridians.

But if it be less, the difference is the Substiles distance from the Plains
perpendicular, and the sum the Inclinations of Meridians.

To place the Substile.
For Plains leaning Southwards, when the Angle of the Substile from the Plains
perpendicul is less then a Quadrant, it will on the upperface lie above that
end of the Horizontal line that is opposite to the Coast of Declination, and on
the under face lie beneath it, but when it is greater, it will lie below the
said end, on the upper face, and above it on the under face, but this will not
be till the Reclination be more then the complement of the Reclination of a
Polar plain that has the same Declination; for plains leaning Northwards the
Directions of the first Method suffice.

To place the Meridian.
Either Calculate it, and place it according to the directions of the first and
second Method, or else Calculate it by this Proportion.

As the Radius, Is to the Sine of the Styles height,

So is the tangent of the Inclination of Meridians (when it is Obtuse, take its
complement to a Semicircle)

To the tangent of the Meridian line from the substilar.

For Plains leaning Northward, the first directions must serve, but for
Southern Plains the second, because the distance of the Meridian is Calculated
from the Substile supposed to be placed, and here the work is converse to that,
for in that we supposed the Meridian placed, and not the Substile.

For the Styles height.
As the Sine of the fourth Arch, Is to the Sine of the seventh Arch,

So is the tangent of half the difference of the complements both of the
Latitude and Reclination,

To the tangent of an Arch sought.

How much the said Ark being doubled wants or exceeds 90d, is the Styles height.

In South Recliners, if the said Ark being doubled, is less then 90d, its
complement is the elevation of the North Pole, and the Plain falls below the
Pole.

But if the said Arch exceed 90d the Plain passes above the Pole, and the
excess is the elevation of the North Pole on the under face of a South
Recliner, called a North Incliner, and the affections were determined in the
first method where the Declination has its Denomination from that Coast of the
Meridian to which the Plain looks.

These methods of Calculation may not precisely agree one with another, though
all true, unless the parts Proportional be exactly Calculated from large Tables
in every Operation, which to do as to the Examples in this Book, my leisure
would not permit; This last method is derived also from the former Oblique
Triangle, the Proportions here applied, being demonstrated in Trigonometria
Brittanica by Mr. Newton.

The Demonstration of the former Proportions
In projecting the Sphere, it is frequently required to draw an Arch through
any two different Points within a Circle, that shall divide the said Circle
into two equal Semicircles

Construction.
1. Draw a line from one of the given points through the Center, for
convenience through that point which is most remote.

2. From the Center raise a Radius perpendicular to that line.

3. And from the said point draw a line to the end of the Radius.

4. From the end of the Radius raise a line perpendicular to the line last
drawn, and where it intersects the former line drawn through the first point
and Center, is a third point given, describe a Circle through these three
Points, and the Proposition will be effected.

Example.
Let it be required to draw the Arch of a Circle through the two points E and F
that shall divide the Circle BD into two equal parts.



Operation.
From E draw EG, through the Center A, make AD perpendicular thereto, join ED,
and make DG, perpendicular to ED cutting EG in G, through E, F, and G, draw the
Arch of a Circle which will divide the Circumference BDC into two equal parts
in B and C, that is, if CA be drawn, it will pass through B, if not, let it
pass above or below, as let it pass below and cut BFE in H.

Demonstration.
By construction EDG and DAG are right Angles; therefore AD = EAG by 13 Prop. 6
Euclid. because EDG being a right Angle, AD is a mean Proportional between EA
and AG, but EAG should be = CAH by 35. Prop. of 3 Euclid. therefore CAH = AD.

But AD = AI that is = CAI, therefore CAH = CAI which is absurd, therefore CI
cannot pass below B, the same absurdity will follow if it be thought to pass
above it, therefore CA produced, will fall in the point B, wherefore BDC is a
Semicircle, which was to be proved: And hereof I acknowledge I have seen a
Demonstration by the Learned teacher of the Mathematics, Mr. John Leak, to
this effect.

To project the Sphere and measure off the Arks of an upright Decliner.
Upon Z as a Center, describe the Arch of a Circle, and cross it with two
Diameters at right Angles in the Center, whereto set NESW to represent the
North, East, South and West.

Prick off the Latitude from N to L, and lay a Ruler to it from E, and where it
cuts NZ, set P to represent the pole.

Prick off the Declination of the plain from E to A, and from S to D, and draw
the Diameter AZB, which represents the plain, and DZC, which represents the
Poles thereof.

Through the three points CPD, draw the Arch of a Circle, and there will be
framed aright Angled Triangle ZHP right Angled at H, in which there will be
given the side ZP the complement of the Latitude, with the Angle PZH the
complement of the Declination.

Whereby may be found the Styles height represented by the side PH, the
Substiles distance from the plains perpendicular represented by ZH, and the
Angle between that Meridian which makes right Angles with the plain, and the
Meridian of the place represented by the Angle ZPH, showing the Arch of Time
between the Substile and meridian, called the Inclination of Meridians, from
which Triangle are educed those proportions delivered for upright Decliners.

To measure off these Arks. 1. The Substile.
A Ruler laid from D to H, finds the point F in the Limb, and the Arch CF is
the measure of the Substiles distance from the meridian, to wit, 21d 41.

2. The Styles height.
Set off a Quadrant from F to G, lay a Ruler from G to D and where it
intersects BZ, set which is the Pole of the Circle CPD, lay a Ruler from to P,
and it intersects the Limb at I, so is the Arch AI the measure of the Styles
height, to wit, 32d 32

3. Inclination of Meridian.
Lay a Ruler from P to, and it intersects the Limb at T, and A South plain
Declin 30d East Latitud 51d 32
page 51 A West plain Reclining 50d Latitude 51d 32


the Arch WITH is the measure of the Inclination of meridians, to wit, 36d 25.

4. Angle of 12 and 6.
In like manner we may draw a Circle passing through the points WPE, as the
pricked Arch PE does, then in the Triangle ZPQ right Angled at P, we have the
side ZP given, and the Angle PZQ to find the side ZQ, lay a Ruler from D to Q,
and you will find a Point in the Limb, the distance whereof from C is the
measure of the Arch sought, to wit, 57d 49, to be measured by projection as the
Inclination of Meridians.

Lastly the hour lines, these are represented by meridians drawn through the
Poles of the World, as in the Triangle HPQ there will be given the Styles
height PH, and the Angle HPQ, to wit, the Ark of difference between the
Inclination of Meridians and the hour from noon, for all hours on that side of
the meridian the Substile falls, but on the other side the sum of these two
Arks, and this Angle is called the Angle at the Pole; the side required is HQ,
the distance between the Substile and the hour line proposed, which must be any
hour, though in this Scheam it represents the horary distance of six from the
Substile.

To project the Sphere for an East or West Reclining or Inclining Plain,
Latitude 51 degrees, 32 minutes, a West Plain, Reclining 50 degrees.
Having drawn the Fundamental Scheam, and therein set off the Latitude as
before, count the Reclination from N to R, and by laying a Ruler, find the
point A, through it and the North and South points draw the Arch of a Circle
which shall represent the plain, find the pole thereof by setting off a
Quadrant from R to G, then through the pole of that Circle, and the pole of the
World P, draw the Arch PR, then in the Triangle NHP right angled at H, we have
given the side NP the Latitude, and the Angle PNH the Reclination, to find PH
the Styles height, and NH the Substiles distance from the Meridian, and the
Angle NPH the Inclination of Meridians, which is also represented by the Angle
BPS.

1. To measure the styles height.
Set off a Quadrant from B to C, and draw a Line through the Center, and where
it intersects the plain at F, is the Pole of the plains Meridian, lay a Ruler
from F to H, and it cuts the Limb at I.

Also lay it thence to P, and it cuts the Limb at K, the Arch IK is the
measure of the Styles height, to wit, 36d 50

2. The Substile.
A Ruler laid from to H, cuts the Limb at M, and the Arch NM is the measure of
the Substiles distance from the Meridian, to wit, 38d 59.

3. The Inclination of Meridians.
Set off a Quadrant from K to O, and lay a Ruler from it to F, and it
intersects the Meridian of the plain at Q, then a Ruler laid from P to Q,
finds the point T in the Limb, and the Arch ST is the measure of the
Inclination of Meridians, to wit, 53d 26.

Otherwise with less trouble lay a Ruler from P to F, and it intersects the
Limb at V, and the Arch EV is the measure of the Inclination of Meridians, as
before.

To project the Sphere to represent a Declining Reclining Plain. A South Plain
Declining 40 degrees East, Reclining 60 degrees, Latitude 51 degrees, 32
minutes.
Having drawn the fundamental Circle, pricked off the Declination, and found the
pole point as before, prick the Reclination from B to I, and laying a Ruler to
it from A, find the point R, and through the three points BRA describe a
Circle, representing the plain, also from K find the pole thereof, and through
the two points P and draw the Arch of a Circle FG, representing the plains
Meridian, at the intersection of the plain with the Meridian set Z, and draw
the Arch of a polar plain through P to S, and there will be several Triangles
Constituted, from which were derived the several Methods of Calculation.

In the right Angled Triangle ANZ there is given NA the complement of the
Declination, and the Angle NAZ the complement of the Reclination, whereby may
be found ZN the plains meridional Ark, which taken from NP rests ZP the
complement of the new Latitude; also the Angle NZA which is the complement of
the new Declination, and hence were derived the Proportions for the third
Method, likewise in the same Triangle may be found ZA the meridians distance
from the Horizon.

In the Oblique Angled Triangle CP, there is given the side CP, the complement
of the Latitude, the side C, the complement of the Reclination with the Angle
PC, the complement of the Declination from the South to a Semicircle, whereby
may be found the Angle CP, the Inclination of Meridians, and the Angle CP
whereof the measure is RH the distance, of the Substile from the Plains
perpendicular, and the third side P, the complement whereof is PH the Styles
height, and from hence was derived the third method of Calculation suited to
Proportions for finding both the unknown Angles of an Oblique Spherical
Triangle at two Operations, when there is given two sides with the Angle
comprehended between them.

The first method of Calculation is built upon the perpendicular Trigonometrie,
for the perpendicular PS reduces the former Oblique Triangle, to two right
Angled Triangles, to wit, the right Angled Triangle, PSC, and the right Angled
Triangle PS, both right Angled at S.

In the right Angled Triangle PSC, we have CP given the Colatitude, and the
Angle PCS the Declination to find SC a Polar plains Reclination thereto.

Again,

In Oblique Spherical Triangles, reduced to two right Angled Triangles by the
demission of a perpendicular, it is a common inference in every book of
Trigonometry, when two sides with the Angle comprehended are given, to find
one of the other Angles: That,

As the Sine of the Side between the Angle sought and perpendicular,

Is to the Tangent of the given Angle,

So is the Sine of the Side between the Angle given, and perpendicular,

To the Tangent of the Angle sought.

And so in that Oblique Triangle, the difference between the Reclination of the
plain proposed, and the Polar plain is RS, then because R is a Quadrant, S is
the complement of the former Ark, therefore it holds: As s SO: t SCP s SC: t SP
which is the very proportion delivered delivered in the said Method for finding
the Substiles distance.

Then in the right Angled Triangled PS, we have S, and the Angle SP to find
the side P, whereby is got the Styles height; the Inclination of Meridians is
found in the Oblique Spherical Triangle by the proportion of Opposite sides and
Angles.

Lastly, in the right Angled Triangle ZRC, there is given RC, and RCZ to find
RZ the distance of the Meridian from the plains perpendicular.

To measure the respective Arks abovesaid.
1. The New Latitude.
A Ruler laid from W to Z, and P will give you the Arch MO in the Limb, the
complement of the new Latitude, to wit, 27d 40.

2. The New Declination.
The Ruler laid from the Plains Zenith at Z, to its Pole at, finds the point Q
in the Limb, and the Arch SQ is the new Declination, to wit, 18d 56.

3. The Substiles distance from the Plains perpendicular.
A Ruler laid from to H, finds the point T in the Limb, and the Arch CT being
26d 26 is the Substiles distance from the Plains perpendicular.

4. The Meridians distance from the Plains perpendicular.
A Ruler laid from to Z, finds the point V in the Limb, and the Arch DV being
35d 56 is the Meridians distance from the Plains perpendicular.

5. The Styles height.
Set off a Quadrant from G to X, and draw XC, where it intersects the plain as
at Y, is the Pole of the Arch FG, then laying a Ruler from Y to H and P, you
shall find the Styles height in the Limb to be the Arch 2, 3, namely, 26d 6.

A South plain Declin 40d East Reclining 60d Lat 51-32
page 55 A South plain Declin 30d East Reclining 25d Lat 51 32




6. The Inclination of Meridians.
A Ruler laid from P to Y, intersects the Limb at, the Arch W is 20d 58, and
so much is the Inclination of Meridians.

The Polar Reclination CS is 31d 19.
The Scheam determines all the affections of the plain.

1. It shows that H the point of the Substilar lies on that side the plains
perpendicular, that is toward the Coast of Declination.

2. That Z the point for the place of the Meridian, lies toward the same Coast
as before, but below the Substilar Line.

3. The Arch PH shows you that the North Pole is elevated above the upper or
Reclining face.

After the same manner may all the Requisite Arks be measured, and affections
determined for all plains whatsoever.

A South Plain Declining 30 degrees Eastwards, Reclining 25 degrees, or a North
Plain Declining 30 degrees Westwards, Inclining ^^ degrees.
In this Scheam we have the same Oblique Triangle PC reduced to two right
Angled Triangles PSC and PS, SC is the Inclination of a Polar plain, and RC the
Inclination of the plain proposed, the difference is SR, and the complement of
it, is the complement of S to a Semicircle, because S is greater then a
Quadrant, and the proportions are wholly the same, though the Triangle have
sides greater then a Quadrant.

The North Pole is elevated on the Inclining face, the Meridian Z lies from the
plains perpendicular toward that end of the Horizontal Line, opposite to the
Coast of Declination, the same way and beneath it lies the Substilar.

The complement of the new Latitude ZP is 10d 10

The new Declination, viz. the complement of NZA is 26d 57

The meridians distance from the Plains perpendicular RZ 13d 43

The Substiles distance therefrom RH 18d 22

The Styles height PH is -- 9d -- 3

The Inclination of Meridians, to wit, the Angle CP 27d 18

The Polar Reclination -- CS -- 34d 31

A South Plain Declining 40 degrees East, Inclining 15 degrees, or rather a
North Plain Declining 40 degrees West, Reclining 15 degrees.
Here again the Oblique Triangle CP is reduced to two right Angled Triangles
PSC and PS, and SR is the sum of the Polar Reclination SC, and the Re
Inclination of the Plain proposed CR, and S is the complement hereof, because R
is a Quadrant, find the Equinoctial point AE.

The Polar Reclination CS 31d 19.
The new Latitude ZAE is 32d 15.

The new Declination being the complement of NZA is 38d 23

The Meridians distance from the plains perpendicular ZR 12d 33

The Substiles distance from the plains perpendicular RH 32d 16

The Styles height PH is -- 41d 30

The Inclination of Meridians PC rather the Acute Angle PN is 55d 58

The Meridian Z lies from the plains perpendicular toward the Coast of
Declination on the Reclining side, but must be drawn through the Center,
because the Sun at noon casts his shadow Northwards, unless in the Torrid or
Frozen Zone, and the Substile Hlyes on the other side the plains perpendicular.

A North Plain Declining 40 degrees Eastwards, Reclining 75 degrees.
In this plain likewise the Oblique Triangle CP is reduced to two right Angled
Triangles PS and PSC by the perpendicular PS which is part of the Arch of a
polar plain, here CR more CS is equal to the sum of the Plains Reclination
proposed, and of the Polar plains Reclination, which is greater then a Quadrant
for the Arch R is a Quadrant; now the Cosine of an Ark greater then a Quadrant
is the Sine of that Arks excess above a Quadrant, wherefore the Sine of S is
the Cosine of the sum of both the Reclinations, and the Case the same as before.

The Arch RH is the measure of the Substiles distance from the A South plain
Declin 40d East Inclining 15d Lat 51d 72
page 56 A North plain Declin 40d East Reclin 75d lat 51d 32


Plains perpendicular, which being greater then a Quadrant, shows that the
Substile must lie below the end of the Horizontal Line opposite to the Coast of
Declination, to wit, it must be depressed 32d 39 measured by the Arch KNIGHT, the
complement of TA its distance from the plains perpendicular, the point T being
found by laying a Ruler from to H, which may also be measured from F, and will
fall above the Horizontal Line D, but then must be drawn through the Center.

Prick off a Quadrant from G to X, and draw XC, it cuts the plain at Y, a Ruler
laid from Y to H, and P finds the points 2, 3 in the Limb, and the Arch 2, 3
being 61d 31, is the Styles height; orther complement thereof to a Semicircle
might be found by measuring the Arch PF.

A Ruler laid from to Z, finds the point V in the Limb for the Meridian Line,
from which draw a Line through the Center on the other side, and it will be
placed in its true Coast and quantity from the Plains perpendicular at A, to
wit, 39d 2.

The Inclination of Meridians, to wit, the Angle CP is 20d 30,

The new Latitude ZAE 26d 38.

The new Declination is 9d 35 to wit, the complement of KRB.

The Polar Reclination CS is 31d 19.

The truth of this Stereographick Projection is fully handled by Aguilonius in
his Optics, and how to determine the affection of any Angle of an Oblique
Spherical Triangle, I have fully showed in a Treatise, called the Sector on a
Quadrant.

For the Resolution of Spherical propositions, Delineations from proportions or
the Analemma, will be more speedy and certain (though they may also be thus
resolved) which I have handled at large in the Mariners Plain Scale new plained.

To determine what hours are proper to all kind of Plains.
To do this it will be necessary to project upon the Plain of the Horizon, the
Summer and Winter Tropicks.

Get the Sum and difference of the Colatitude, and of the Suns greatest
Declination, so we shall obtain his greatest and least Meridian Altitudes.

The depression of the Tropic of Cancer under the Horizon, is equal to the
least Meridian Altitude, and the depression of the Tropic of Capricorn to the
greatest. Example:

38d 28 Colatitude 23d 31 61d 59 greatest 14d 57 least Meridian Altitude,
having drawn the Primitive Circle, etc. as before.

Prick 14d 15 from S to C, and 61d 59 from S toward W, a Ruler laid from the
points found, will intersect the meridian ZS at the point L for the Winter
Tropic, and K for the Summer Tropic, through which the Circles that represent
them are to pass, to find the Semidiameters whereof, set off their depression
from N toward E, thus 14d 57 the depression of the Summer Tropic terminates
at O, a Ruler laid from E to, finds the point X in the meridian SZN produced,
so is XK the Diameter of the Summer Tropic, which being divided into halfs,
will find the Center thereof whereon to describe it.

In like manner is the Diameter of the Winter Tropic to be found; or if the
Amplitude be given (or found as elsewhere is showed) which at London is 39d 54,
and set off both ways from G and E we shall have three points given through
which to draw each Tropic, and the Centers falling in the Meridian Line will
be found with half the trouble, as to find a Center to three Points.

Also Project the Pole Point P as before, being thus prepared FKG will
represent the Summer and HLI the Winter Tropic.

Let it be required to know what hours are proper for a South plain Declining
30d Eastwards, through the three points BPA describe the the Arch of a Circle
BQP, then laying a Ruler from B to Q, find the point R in the Limb, and from
it set off a Quadrant to M, then a Ruler laid from B to M finds the point the
Pole of the hour Circle BQP, then laying a Ruler from P to, it finds the point
T in the Limb, and the Arch ET being 65d 40 is the measure of the Angle BPS,
which turned into Time is 4 ho. 23 prope, and shows that at no time of the
year the Sun will shine longer on the South side of this plain, then 23 minutes
past 4 in the afternoon.

In like manner if the Arch of a Circle be drawn through the two points PV, we
may find the time when the Sun will soonest in the morning begin to shine on
the South side of this plain.

The Angle QPZ may be found by Calculation in the right Anggled A South plain
Declin 30d East lat 51d 32
page 61 A South plain Declin 60d East Reclining 40d Lat 51-32


triangle PQZ, in which besides the right Angle at Q, the side PZ and the Angle
QZP, are given but to measure it off by Projection will be sufficient for the
Dyallists use.

So if there were a South plain Declining 60d Eastwards, Reclining 40 degrees
here represented by BRA, if it were required to know what hours are proper for
the upper, and what for the under face, then where the plain intersects the
Tropicks as at I and K, draw two Meridians into the Pole at P, to wit, IP and
KP, and first find the Angle IPZ, as was before showed, to wit, 53d 14 which
in time is 3 hours 33 minuutes, showing that the Sun never shines longer on the
upper face of the Plain, then 33 minutes past 3 in the afternoon, which is
capable of receiving all hours from Sun rising to that period of time, and the
Angle KPZ, to wit, 39d 50 in time 2 hours 39 minutes, shows that the Sun never
begins to shine sooner on the under face then 39 minutes past 2 in the
afternoon after, which all the hours to Sunset may be expressed.

To find these Arks of time by Calculation, there must be given the Styles
height above the Plain 15d 22, PH, and the complement of the Inclination of
Meridians to a Semicircle, 136d 32, to wit, HPS, then in the right Angled
Triangle PHI there is given PH the Styles height, PI the complement of the
Declination, besides the right Angle at H, to find the Angle IPH 83d 18 which
taken from the complement of the Inclination of Meridians HPS, there rests the
Angle IPS the Arch of time sought, to wit, 53d 14.

The ascensional difference may be found by drawing the Arch of a Circle
through the three points TPF, and thereby the length of the longest day
determined that no hours be expressed, on which the Sun can never shine.

Another manner of Inscribing the hour lines in all Plains having Centers.
The method here intended, is to do it in a parallelogram from the Meridian
line, whence the hour lines may be pricked down by a Tangent of three hours,
with their halfs and quarters from a Sector, without collecting Angles at the
Pole, or by help of a Scheam which I call the Tangent Scheam, the foundation of
this Dyalling supposes the Axis of the world to be inscribed in a
Parallelipiped on continued about the Axis, the sides whereof are by the plains
of the respective hour Circles in the Sphere divided into Tangent-lines, that
is to say, each side is divided into a double tangent of 45d set together in
the middle, and the said parallelipiped on being cut by any Plain, the end
thereof supposed to be intersected, shall be either a right or Oblique Angled
parallelogram, and then if from the opposite tangent hour points on the sides
of the intersected parallelipipedon, lines be drawn on the Plain, they shall
cross one another in a Center, and be the hour lines proper to the said plain,
but of the Demonstration hereof, I shall say no more at present, the
inquisitive Reader will find it in the Works of Clavius.

To draw the Tangent Scheam.
I have before in Page 10 showed how to divide a Tangent Line into hours and
quarters, which in part must be here repeated; draw any right Line, as MABH,
from any point therein as at B, raise a perpendicular, and upon B as a Center,
describe the Quadrant CH, and prick the Radius from B to A, from C to G, from H
to F, and laying a Ruler from A to F, and G, you will find the points D and E
upon the perpendicular CB, I say the said perpendicular is divided into a
Tangent line of three hours, and the halfs and quarters may be also divided
thereon, by dividing the Arches CF, FG, and GH into halfs and quarters, then
from those subdivisions, laying a Ruler to A, the halfs and quarters may be
divided on, as were the whole hours.

Being thus prepared, draw the Lines MB, LE, KD, and IC, all parallel one to
another, passing through the points B, 1, 2, 3.

In this Scheam they are perpendicular to BC, but that is not material,
provided they pass through the same points, and are parallel one to another,
yet notwithstanding the points A and H must be in a right Line perpendicular to
CB. This Scheam thus prepared, I call the Tangent Scheam, because a Line ruled
any way over it, shall be divided also into a Tangent of the like hours and
quarters, whence it follows that one of these Scheams may serve to inscribe the
hour lines into many Dyals, which I shall next handle.



To inscribe the Hour lines in a Horizontal Dyal.
Having drawn the Meridian line M, XII, and perpendicular thereto the hour-line
of six, Let it be observed that the sides of the Horizontal Dyal in page 8. to
wit VI, IX, and VI, III and IX, III, are a right Angled Parallelogram, the one
side whereof being the Diameter of the Circle being Radius, the other side
thereof must be made equal to the Sine of the Latitude, in that Scheam the
nearest distance from L to MF was the Sine of the Latitude or Styles height,
the Semidiameter of the inward Circle, being Radius, and that extent being
doubled and pricked from M to VI on each side, as also from F twice to IX and
III, by those extents the Parallelogram was bounded, the side III, F IX, being
parallel to the Horizontal Line.

Then take the extent MF from the Horizontal Dyal, and place it in the Tangent
Scheam from M to O, and draw the Line MO, and the respective Divisions of the
said Line being cut by the parallels of the Tangent Scheam are the same with
the Divisions of the hour lines on the inward sides of the Horizontal Dyal VI,
IX, and VI, III, and from the tangent Scheam they are to be transferred thither
with Compasses.

Also place F, IX or F, III from the Horizontal Dyal into the Tangent Scheam
from M to N, and draw the line MN, which being cut by the parallels of the
tangent Scheam, the Distances of those Divisions from M are to be pricked down
in the Horizontal Dyal, the first from F to XI, and I the second from F to X
and II, etc.

To inscribe the hour lines in a direct erect South Dyal.
The Diameter of the Circle in the South Dyal in page 8, is the same as in the
Horizontal, and the nearest distance from L to FM was the Consine of the
Latitude, and was pricked twice on the Horizontal Line from M to VI on each
side, whereby that inward Parallelogram was limited.

Wherefore the divisions of the Line MO in the Tangent Scheam, are the same
with the hour distances in this Dyal on the sides VI, III, and VI, IX; then for
the divisions of the hours on each side of XII, take the extent XII, IX or XII,
III, and because it is less then the outward parallel distance of the sides of
the Tangent Scheam, having therein made MI perpendicular to BM, place this
extent from I to P, and draw the line MP, then prick the extent RL from the
Tangent Scheam, from F to XI and I, and the extent QK, from F in the Dyal, to
X, and II, and from the hour points so found, draw lines into the Center at M,
and they shall be the hour lines required.

To delineate an upright Decliner in an Oblique Parallelogram.
An upright South Dyal Declining 30 degrees West, Latitude 51 degrees, 32
minutes.
First draw the Meridian or Plains perpendicular CN, and upon C as a Center,
with the Radius of the Dyalling Scheam, describe

A South plained Declin 40d East Reclining 60d Lat 51d 32
page 64

A North plain Declin 60 West Inclining 60d Lat 51-32
place this any where





page 65 A South plain Declin 30d West Latitude 51d 32
A South Dial Declin 40d East Inclin 15d Lat 51d 32


an Occult Ark, wherein prick off NT from the aforesaid Scheam, and draw TC for
the Substile; also set off in the said Ark TK equal to TK of the
beforementioned Scheam, and draw KC for the Style; perpendicular to the
Meridian passing through the Center C, draw the Plains Horizontal Line, and
therein from the Center prick down from C to F, the Cotangent of the Latitude,
to wit, BF upon which the Sine of the Declination is to be erected to the same
Radius, and the nearest distance from A to DV in that Scheam, is the Sine of
the declination, which being pricked on the perpendicular FG, draw a Line from
the point G into the Center, and it shall be the hour-line of six.

In Latitudes under 45d the side of the square AV must be assumed to be the
Cotangent of the Latitude, the Radius whereto will be AF the Tangent of the
Latitude, to which Radius being pricked on the side of the square from the
Center, the Sine of the declination must be taken out as before, and erected on
the Cotangent of the Latitude, and this work must be performed on that side of
the Center on which the Substile lies.

To fit in the Parallelogram.
Produce the Lines WE, VD, and VL, in the Dyalling Scheam far enough, then
assuming any extent to be Radius, enter it on the lines VD and VL from the
Center to Y and Z, the nearest distance from Y to VE is the Cofine of the
Latitude to that Radius which enter on the Line of 6 or GC, so that one foot
resting thereon, the other turned about may just touch CN, at the point found
set H, and make CI on the other side equal to CHAPTER

The nearest distance in the Dyalling Scheam from Z to VE, is the Cosine of the
declination to the former Radius, which prick on the Meridian line from C to L.

And draw a Line through L parallel to HI, and therein make LP, LQ each equal
to CH, and draw HP and IQ, and there will be an oblique Parallelogram
constituted, the sides whereof will be Tangent Lines.

Nota, we might assume the point G in the hour-line of six, for the
Parallelogram to pass through, and the nearest distance from D to VE in the
dyalling Scheam, would be the Cosine of the declination to the same Radius to
be pricked on the Meridian Line as before.

To inscribe the hour lines.
In the following Tangent Scheam made as the former, produce CB, and make BQ
equal to BC, then take the extent PQ on the dyal, and upon Q as a Center
describe the Ark Y therewith, and draw the Line YC just touching the
extremity, then you may proportion out the hours in this manner.

The nearest distance from D to YC in the Tangent Scheam, being pricked on the
side of the Parallelogram from P and Q, will find the points 10 and 2, through
which those hour lines are to pass, also the nearest distance from E to YC,
being there pricked, finds the points 11 and 1 as before, otherwise take the
extent PL from the Dyal, and in the Tangent Scheam upon C as a Center, describe
the Ark N therewith, and draw BN just touching the outward extremity of that
Ark, the nearest distance from E to BN, prick in the Dyal from L to 11 and 1,
and the nearest distance from D to BN, place from L to 10 and 2, thus you have
found points through which part of the hour lines are to be drawn into the
Center at C; or having found the points P and Q on the plain, if it be desired
to inscribe the hours without drawing the side of the Parallelogram PQ, which
must also be performed without the help of Compasses, though they be at hand,
then in the Tangent Scheam prick the extents E and D, from B to I and K, and
through the respective points C, D, E, B, I, K, Q, draw lines all parallel one
to another, making any Angle at pleasure with the said Line, I say then that
any line ruled over those parallels, shall be divided into a line of double
tangents, as is LM, which is made equal to PQ, the side of the Parallelogram in
the former Dyal, if therefore you double the Paper in the line LM, and apply
the points L, M to the points QP on the plain, you may by the edge of this
Paper Tangent Scheam so doubled, prick down the hour points on the plain, and
lines drawn through them into the Center, shall be the hour lines required, and
making BO equal to the sides of the Parallelogram HP or IQ, and it shall
contain the hour distances to be transferred into the said sides.

If a line be drawn in the Dyal from H to L, and from L to I, the hour lines
being drawn shall divide each of these lines into a double Tangent, and
consequently the hour lines may also be pricked off on the said lines, after the
method now prescribed.

For upright far Decliners and such plains as have small height of Style,
recourse must be had to former directions for drawing them with a double
Contingent line, each at right Angles to the Substile. The foundation whereof
is this, Any point being assumed in the Substilar line of a Dyal, the nearest
distance from that Point to the Style, is the Sine of the Styles height, the
Radius to which Sine is the distance of the assumed point in the Substilar line
from the Center of the Dyal; Then in all Dyals the hour distances from the
Substilar line are Tangents of the Angle of the Pole, the Sine of the Styles
height being made the Radius thereto, having finished the delineation of the
Dyal, the Style is to be placed directly over the Substilar line, without
inclining to either side of the Plain, making an Angle therewith equal to its
height above the same, for the Substilar line is elsewhere defined to be such a
line over which the Style is to be placed in its nearest distance from the
Plain, therefore if the Style incline on either side, it will be nearer to some
other part of the Plain then the Substilar line, whence it comes to pass in
places near the Equinoctial, if an upright Plain decline but very little, the
Substile is immediately cast very remote from the Meridian.

Another way to prick down the hour lines in Declining leaning Plains.
Every such Plain in some Latitude or other will become an upright Decliner:
First therefore by the former directions prick off the Substile, Style and
Meridian, in their true Coast and quantity, and perpendicular to the Meridian,
draw a line passing through the Center, and A South Dial Declin 40d East
Inclin 15d Lat 51d 32


A North Dial Declin 40d East Reclining 75d Lat 51d 32


it shall represent the Horizontal line of the Plain in that new Latitude as
here US; from any point in the Style as K, let fall a perpendicular to the
Substile at I, and from the point I, in the Substile let fall a perpendicular
to the Meridian at P.

To find the new Declination.
Prick IP on the substilar line from I to R, and draw RK, so shall the Angle
IRK be the complement of the new declination, and the Angle IKR the new
Declination it self.

To find the new Latitude.
Upon the Center V with the Radius VK, describe a Circle, I say then that UP is
the Sine of the new Latitude to that Radius which may be measured in the Limb
of the said Circle, by a line drawn parallel to US, which will intersect the
Circle at F, so is the Arch SF the measure of the new Latitude.

To prick off the Hour-line of Six.
This must be pricked off below the Horizontal line, the same way that the
substilar lies: The proportion, is,

As the Cotangent of the Latitude, Is to the Sine of the Declination, So is the
Radius, To the Tangent of the Angle between the Horizon and six.

If RK be Radius, then is UP the Tangent of the new Latitude, but if we make UP
Radius, then is RK the Cotangent of the new Latitude.

Wherefore prick the extent RK on the Horizontal line from V to N, and thereon
erect the Sine of the Declination to the same Radius perpendicularly, as is NA,
and a line drawn into the Center shall be the hour-line of six; the
proportioning out of the Sine of the Declination to the same Radius, will be
easily done, enter the Radius UP from K to D, and the nearest distance from D
to IK, shall be the Sine of the new declination to that Radius.

To fit in the Parallelogram.
This is to be done as in upright Decliners, for having drawn a line from the
new Latitude at F into the Center, if any Radius be entered on the said line
from V, the Center toward the Limb, the nearest distance from that point to
UP the Meridian line, shall be the Cosine of the new Latitude to that Radius.

Again if the same Radius be entered on RK produced if need be, the nearest
distance to VR (produced when need requires) shall be the Cosine of the new
Declination, and then the hour lines are to be drawn as for upright decliners,
nothing will be doubted concerning the truth of what is here delivered, if the
demonstration for inscribing the Requisites in upright decliners be well
understood, it being granted that Oblique Plains in some Latitude or other will
become upright decliners.

There are two Examples for the Latitude of London suited to these directions,
in both which the Letters are alike, the one for a South Plain declining 40d
Eastwards, Inclining 15d, the other for a North Plain declining 40d East,
Reclining 75d.

To find a true Meridian Line.
For the true placing of an Horizontal Dyal, as also for other good uses it
will be requisite to draw a true Meridian Line, which proposition may be
performed several ways, amongst others the Learned Mathematician Francis van
Schooten in his late Miscellanies demonstrates one, performed by help of three
shadows of an upright Style on a Horizontal Plain, published first without
Demonstration in an Italian book of dyalling by Mutio Oddi.

Let AB, AC, and AD represent 3 shadows made on a Horizontal plain in one day,
by the shadow of the style or wyre AE, erected perpendicularly from the point
A, of which shadows if two be found equal, a line let fall perpendicularly from
the Point A, upon a line joining, the extremities of those two shadows, shall
be a true Meridian line.

But if all three be unequal, as let AC be the least, erect three lines from
the point A, perpendicular to AP, AC, AD as is AF, AG, and AH equal to the
Styles height AE, and draw lines from the extreamities of the three shadows to
these three points as are FB, GC, and HD; then because AC is less then AB,
therefore GC will be less then FB, by the like reason GC will be less then HD,
wherefore from FB and HD cut off or Substract FI and HK equal to GC, and from
the points I and K let fall the perpendiculars IL, KM, upon the Bases AB, AD,
afterward draw a line joining the two points M, L, and from the said points
let fall the perpendiculars LN equal to LI, and MO equal to MK.

Then because the two shadows AB and AD are unequal, in like manner FB and HD
will be unequal; but forasmuch as FI and HK, are equal by construction, it
follows that LI, KM, or LN and MO will be unequal, and forasmuch as these
latter lines are parallel a right line that connects the points O and N, being
produced will meet with the right line that joins M, L produced, as let them
meet in the point P, from whence draw a Line to C, and it shall be a true line
of East and West, and any Line perpendicular thereto shall be a Meridian line,
thus the perpendicular AQ let fall thereon, is a true Meridian Line passing
through the point A, the place of the style or wyre.

Whereto I add that if MO and LN retaining their due quantities be made
parallel it matters not whether they are Perpendicular to ML or no, also for
the more exact finding the Point P, the lines MO and LN, or any other line
drawn parallel to them, may be multipyled or increased both of them the like
number of times from the points M and L upwards, as also from the points O and
N downwards, and Lines drawn through the points thus discovered, shall meet at P
without producing either ML or ON. See 15 Prop. of 5 Euclid. and the fourth of
the sixth Book.

The greater part of van Schootens Demonstration is spent in proving that ML
and ON produced will meet somewhere, this for the reasons delivered in the
construction I shall assume as granted, then understand that the three
Triangles ABF, ACG and ADH stand perpendicularly erect on the plain of the
Horizon beneath them, upon the right Lines AB, AC and AD, whence it will come
to pass that the three points F, G, and H meet in one point, as in E the top of
the Style AE, and that the right lines FB, GC and HD are in the Conique Surface
of the shadow which the Sun describes the same day by his motion, the top of
which Cone being the point E.

Wherefore if from those right Lines we substract or cut off the right Lines
FI, GC and HK being each of them equal to one another, then will the points I,
C and K, fall in the circumference of a Circle, the plain whereof is parallel
to the plain of the Equator; and therefore if through the points K and I such a
Position a right Line be imagined to pass, and be produced to the plain of the
Horizon, it will meet with ML produced in the point P, where ON being produced,
will also meet with it; so that the point P being in the Plain of the Circle,
as also in the plain beneath it, as also the point C being in each Plain, a
right line drawn through the Points P and C will be the Common Intersection of
each plain, and the line PC will be parallel to the Plain of the Equator, and
is therefore a true Line of East and West, which was to be proved.

On all Plains though they Decline, and Recline, or Incline, after the same
manner may be found the Line PC, which will represent the Contingent Line of
any Dyal, and a perpendicular raised upon the Line CP shall be the Substilar
Line, which in Oblique Plains is the Meridian of the Plain, but not of the
place, unless they are both Coincident from this manner of finding a Meridian
Line on a Horizontal plain, nothing else can be deduced without more Scheams:
From the three shadows, may be had the three Altitudes, and the Meridian line
being given, the Azimuths to those three shadows are likewise given, which is
more then need be required in order to the finding of the Latitude of the
place, and the Declination and Amplitude of the Sun, which because this Scheam
does not perform of it self, I shall add another to that purpose.

By three Altitudes of the Sun, and three shadows of an Index on an Horizontal
Plain, to find a true Meridian Line, and consequently the Azimuths of those
shadows, the Latitude of the place, the Suns Amplitude and Declination.

It will be convenient to take two shadows, when the Sun is on one side of the
Meridian, and the third when on the other side* and the performance will be
most exact when the Sun is near the Summer Solstice

Let the three shadows be CA, the Altitude whereto is AF 22d, 28 The second
shadow CB, the Altitude whereto is BG 59d, 21 both these in the morning, The
third shadow in the afternoon CD the -- Altitude whereto is -- DH 18d, 20

Let the Angle ACB be 70d, and the Angle BCD 135d, by following Operations we
shall find that the shadow CA, is 10d to Southwards of the West, that the
shadow CB is 60d to Northwards of the West, that the shadow CD is 15d
Southwards of the East.

Having from the three shadows pricked off the three Altitudes to F, G, and H,
from those points to the shadows belonging to them, let fall the perpendiculars
FI, GK, HL, which shall be the Sines of those Altitudes, and the Bases IC, KC,
and LC shall be the Cosines, from the point K in the greater Altitude, draw
Lines to the points I and L in the lesser Altitudes and produce those lines.

From the points K and I, the Sines of the two Altitudes, are to be erected
perpendicularly, thus KM is made equal to KG, and IN is made equal to IF, then
producing MN and KI, where they meet as at W, is one point, where the plain of
the Suns parallel of Declination intersects the plain of the Horizon; in like
manner on the Base KL, the Sines of two Altitudes KG, and LH, ought to stand
perpendicularly from the points K and L in their common Base, but if they
retain the same height, and are made parallel to one another, a line joining
the points of the tops of those Sines produced, shall meet with the line
joining the points of their Bases produced, in the same point as if they were
perpendicular.

Thus KP and LQ are drawn at pleasure through the points K, and L parallel one
to another, and KG is the Sine of the greater Altitude, and LO is equal to the
Sine of the lesser Altitude, and these two points being joined with the Line OG
produced, meets with the Line KL produced, in the point E, another point where
the plain of the Suns parallel intersects the plain of the Horizon.

Or you may double KG, and find, the point P, as also double LO and find the
point Q, a line drawn through P and Q, finds the point E, as before, but with
more certainty.

If you join EW it shall be a true Line of East and West, and a perpendicular
let fall thereon from C the Center, shall be a true Meridian line to the
perpendicular Style or wire, as is CS.

The Arch SR is the Suns Amplitude from the North 50d 6 the shadow being
contrary to the Sun, casts his parallel toward the South.

Draw KNIGHT parallel to SC, and it shall be the perpendicular distance between the
Sine of the Suns greatest Altitude, and the Intersection of his parallel with
the Horizon.

Upon K erect KV equal to the Sine of the Suns greatest Altitude of the three
KG, and the Angle KTV shall be equal to the complement of the Latitude, for the
Angle between the plain of any parallel of declination and the Plain of the
Horizon, is always equal to the complement of the Latitude, and if upon T as a
Center with the Radius CS, you describe the Ark KX, the said Ark shall measure
the complement of the Latitude in this example 38d 28 which being given
together with the Sine of the Amplitude CY, it will be easy to draw a Scheme
of the Analemma, whereby to find the Suns declination, the time of rising, and
setting, his height at six the Azimuth thereto, the Vertical Altitude and hour
thereto, etc. and many other propositions depending on the Suns motion, as I
have elsewhere showed.

The whole ground hereof is, that a right line extended through the tops of the
Sines of any two Altitudes of the Sun taken the same day before his declination
very, shall meet with the Plain of the Horizon in such a point where the Plain
of the Suns parallel intersects the Plain of the Horizon, and finding of two
such points, a line drawn through them, must needs represent the intersection
of those two Plain; in the former Scheme the Sines of the two Altitudes are KM
and IN, a line drawn through the bottomes of those Sines, as KI extended shall
be in the Horizontal Plain, and the Line MN extended through the tops of those
Sines is in the plain of the Suns parallel, as also in the Horizontal plain;
now whether these Lines stand erect or no is not material, provided they retain
their Parallelisme and due length, and pass through the points of their Bases
I, K, for the proportion of the perpendiculars to their Bases, will be the same
notwithstanding they incline to the Horizon.

To Calculate the Latitude, etc. from three shadows.
A usual and one of the most troublesome propositions in Spherical
Trigonometry, is from three shadows to find the Latitude of the place: thus
Maetius propounds it, and with many operations both in plain and Spherical
Triangles resolves it.

The first operations are to find the Suns 3 Altitudes to those shadows, and
that will be performed by this proportion,

As the Length of the shadow, Is to the perpendicular height of the Gnomon,

So is the Radius, To the Tangent of the Suns Altitude above a Horizontal
Plain, which proportion on other Plains will find the Angle between the Sun
and the Plain or Wall.

Next Maetius gives the distances between the points of the three shadows, and
then by having three Sides of a Plain Triangle, he finds an Angle, to wit, the
differences of Azimuth between the respective shadows, which Angle may be
measured off the Plain with Chords.

But propounding it thus, Three Altitudes of the Sun above a Horizontal Plain,
with the differences of Azimuth between the three shadows belonging to those
Altitudes, being given, let it be required to find the Suns true Azimuth, the
Latitude of the place, and the Suns Amplitude.

And how this may be Calculated from the former Scheme, I shall now show.

In the Triangle ICK of the former Scheme, the two sides IC and CK, represent
two shadows, and the Angle ICK is the Angle or difference of Azimuth between
them, and the said sides IC and CK, are the Cosines of the Altitude proper to
those shadows; now by seven Operations in right lined Triangles, we may find
the proper Azimuth or true Coast of any of those shadows.

1. In the right lined Triangle ICK, having the two sides IC and CK, with the
Angle between them ICK, at one operation may be found both the other Angles CIK
and IKC.

2. In the same Triangle by another operation, may be found the Side IK.

Then to proceed, draw Nf parallel to IK, and fM will be the difference of the
Sines of both the Altitudes belonging to those shadows, whereby may be found KW.

3. The proportion lies,

As fM the difference of the Sines of both those Altitudes,

Is to fN equal to IK before found,

So is KM the Sine of the greater Altitude, to KW sought.

4. 5. 6. By three like Operations may be found in the other shadow Triangle,
the Angles CKL, and KLC, with the Side KE.

Having proceeded thus far to the Angle IKC, add the Angle CKL, the sum is
equal to the Angle WKE.

7. Then in the Triangle WKE, we have the two Sides thereof WK, and KE given,
and the Angle comprehended by them, and at one Operation we may find both the
other Angles EWK, and KEW, the complement of the Angle TWK, is the Angle WKT.
The difference between the Angles WKT, and IKC, is the Angle CKZ, which shows
the Suns Azimuth from the Meridian proper to that shadow, which may be
otherways found, for the difference between EKT and TKC, also shows it.

By two other Operations the Latitude may be found.

1. As the Radius: Is to WK before found So is the Sine of TWK to KNIGHT:

2. As VK the Sine of the greater Altititude, Is to KNIGHT before found,

So is the Radius, To the Tangent of the Latitude.

By another Operation may be found the Amplitude CY, having found the Angle
ZKC, the Angle CKp is the complement thereof, then it holds:

As the Radius, Is to CK the Cosine of the greater Altitude,

So is the Sine of the Angle CKp to CP, the difference between which, and Yp
equal to TK, is YC the Sine of the Amplitude sought.

To make any Dyal from three Shadows.
The Geometrical performance of the former Proposition, is insisted upon by
Clavius in his Book of the Astrolable, but* he mentions no method of
calculation as derivable from it: from this proposition Monsieur Vaulezard a
French Mathematician educeth a general method for making of Dyals, from three
shadows of a Gnomon stuck into a wall at random, whereof he does not so much
as mention any demonstration; I shall endeavor to deliver the method thereof
with as much perspicuity as I can.

Every Plain in some place or other, is an horizontal Plain; admit an Oblique
Plain in our Latitude, the Substilar line represents the meridian of that
place, and any contingent line drawn at right Angles, thereto will represent a
true line of East and West in reference to that horizon, and if the hours did
commence at 12, from each side the substile, the Dyal here would show the true
time of the day there.

In every oblique Plain assuming any Point in the Style, and crossing the Style
with a perpendicular to that Point, which shall meet with the Substile, the
Point so found in the Substile, is the Equinoctial Point, in respect of the
assumed Point in the Style; hence we may infer that if these two Points and
the Substilar line were given the Center of the Dial might be easily found, now
the former construction applied to an oblique Plain, assumed to be an
Horizontal Plain, in respect of some unknown place, will find the Equinoctial
Point and the substilar Line, the Style Point being assumed in the extremity of
a Gnomon any ways placed or stuck in a wall at random.

From the former Scheme it may be observed that the Sine of any of the three
Altitudes being erected on the Perpendicular between the foot of that Sine and
the Suns parallel* gave an Angle equal to the elevation of the Equinoctial
above the Horizon, which is the thing sought in the following work, but the
Sine of the greatest Altitude performs the proposition best.

If a stick or pin be stuck into a wall for this purpose, and does not make
right Angles therewith, a Perpendicular must be let fall from the extremity
thereof into the wall, which is called the perpendicular Style, and the
distances of the shadows; from the foot thereof must be measured thence, in
respect of the tip of this perpendicular Style the Equinoctial Point must be
found, wherefore it will be convenient to assume the said perpendicular Style
to be the Sine of the greatest of the three Altitudes of the Sun above the
Plain, which properly in respect of Us are Angles between the wall and the Sun.
Up on this assumption it will follow, that the shortest shadow will be the
Cosine of that Angle, and the distance between the tip of the Style, and the
extremity of that shadow will be the Radius: now from the lengths of the three
shadows, and the height of the perpendicular Style, it will be easy to find
the Sines and the Cosines of the Angles between the wall and the Sun.

In the following figure, let the Circle be supposed to be described upon a
leaning Plain, on which let AB represent a Style stuck in at random, the
extremity of the three shadows whereto are the points D, E, F, first find the
perpendicular Style thereto CB. and from C draw lines to the three shadows:
now to find the Sines and Cosines of the Angles between the wall and the Sun,
assuming CB to be the Sine of the greatest Altitude, make CB in the second
figure equal thereto, and perpendicular thereto raise the Line CF, wherein
prick down the three shadows CE, CD, and CF, and upon B as a Center with the
extent BE describe the Quadrant GA, drawing lines from the three shadows into
B the Center, and the Arks GE, GI, GH, are the three Angles between the wall
and the Sun, and the nearest fig. 1a
fig. 2a
fig. 3a
fig. 4a


distances from the points E, I, H, being taken to GB, are the Sines thereof,
also the nearest distances from those Points to AB, are the Cosines thereof.

Being thus prepared, draw three Lines elsewhere as in the third figure meeting
in a Center, and making the like Angles as the shadows did, and let them be
produced beyond that Center, and have the same Letters set to them: make CH CG
in this Scheme, equal to the nearest distances from H I to CB, and make CL
equal to EC, in the former Scheme.

Draw the lines IG, IH produced; and make HP GO equal to nearest distances from
I H to BG, and parallel to HP and GO, draw the lines IN, IM, each of them made
equal to CB, then draw the Hipotenusals MO, NP, meeting with the Bases at K and
L, draw the Line KL, and it shall represent the Plains Equinoctial or
contingent Line.

From I, let fall the perpendicular IQ produced, and it shall be the Substilar
line on the Plain and the Point Q is the Equinoctial Point sought.

To place the Substile.
Then repair to the Plain whereon you would make the Dyal represented by the
first Scheme, and place CQ therein, so that it may make the same Angle with the
shadow CE, as it does with the Line IC in the third Scheme, and it shall be the
Substilar Line, which is to be produced, also prick IQ from the third Scheme
from C to Q on the Plain in the Substilar Line, and upon the point C,
perpendicular to the Substile, raise the Line AC, and make it equal to CB,
drawing the Line AQ, then will the Angle AQC be equal to the complement of the
Styles height; for it is the Angle between the plain and the Equinoctial; just
as before in the Horizontal plain, the Sine of the greatest Altitude was
erected on a Line falling perpendicular from the foot of the said Sine, to the
intersection of the plain of the Suns parallel with the plain of the Horizon,
and thereby gave the Angle between the Suns parrallel and the Horizon, equal to
the Complement of the Latitude.

To find the Center of the Dyal and Styles height.
If from the point A you raise the Line AV perpendicularly to AQ, where it cuts
the Substilar Line, as at V, is the Center of the Dial, and he Line AV
represents the Style.

3. To draw the Meridian Line.
If the Plain recline, a thread and plummet hanging at liberty from the Point
B, and touching the Plain, will find a Point therein, suppose K a line drawn
from K into the Center of the Dial, shall be the Meridian line of the place.

A broad ruler with a sharp pin at the bottom of it, being in a right line,
with a line traced through the length of that ruler, whereto the plummet is to
hang, having a hole cut therein for the bullet to play in, will find this Point
in a reclining plain.

On an inclining Plain, if the thread and plummet hang upon the Style at
liberty, to some part of the Style more remote from the Center, fasten another
thread, which being extended thence to the Plain just touching the former
thread and plummet hanging at liberty, will find many Points upon the Plain,
from any of which, if a line be drawn into the Center it shall be the Meridian
line required; See the fourth figure: or in either of these cases hold a thread
and plummet so at liberty that it may just touch the Style, and bringing your
sight so, as to cast the said thread upon the Center at the same by the
interposition of the thread; the eye will project a true Meridianline on the
Plain, for the thread represents the Axis of the Horizon, and the Plain of the
Meridian, is in the said Axis.

If the Center fall inconvenient upon the Plain, it will be necessary to draw
the Plains perpendicular, passing through the foot of the perpendicular Style
C, and measure the Angle of some of the Shadows from it, and accordingly so
place it in the third figure or draught on the floor, on which find the Center,
and afterward assign the Center on the Plain where it may happen convenient,
and from the said draught, by help of the Plains perpendicular, set off the
substile and Styles height; On plains on which probably the Style has but
small height, the perpendicular Style in this work must be assumed the shorter.

4. To draw the Hour Lines.
These may be set off in a Paralellogram after the Substile, Stile' and
Meridian are placed which I have handled before.

Or they may be inscribed by the Circular work, if we assume the perpendicular
Style AC, to be the Sine of the Styles height, the Radius thereto will be AV,
prick the said Radius on the Substile from V the Center to, Z, and upon Z as a
Center, describe the Circle as in the first figure, and find the regulating
point by former directions, over which from O the point where the Meridian of
the place cuts the said Circle, lay a ruler, and it finds M, on the opposite
side, being the Point from whence the Circle is to be divided into 12. parts,
for the hours with subdivisions for the halfes and quarters. Here note that
the arch MV, is the inclination of Meridians, the whole Semicircle being
divided but into 90d, and if that be first given (as hereafter) we may thereby
find the Point O, whence the Meridian Line is to be drawn into the Center.

5. A Method of Calculation suited hereto.
This is altogether the same as for finding the Azimuth of the shadows on the
Horizontal Plain and as easy, whereby in the third figure, the Angle of the
Substile CIQ, must be set off from the shadow ICE, just as the Meridian Line
CP, might be set off from the shadow CK on the Horizontal.

And the complement of the Styles height AQV, in the first figure here, as the
complement of the Latitude KTV, was found there.

Lastly, for placing the Meridian Line of the place by calculation, the
Substiles distance from the plains perpendicular, and the reclination of the
Plain must be found, which may be got easily at any time without dependence on
the Sun, and then in the often-mentioned oblique Triangle in the Sphere, we
have two sides with the Angle comprehended given, to wit, the complement of the
Styles height, the complement of the reclination, and the Substiles distance
from the Plains perpendicular whereby may be found the inclination of
Meridians: and consequently the Meridian line of the place, also the Latitude
thereof, with the Plains declination, if they be required.

To perform all this other wise Geometrically and instrumentally, (but not by
calculation) there was an entire considerable quarto treatise, with many
excellent Prints from brass-Plates thereto belonging, printed at Paris in
France, in An. 1643. by Monsieur Desargues of Lions, which Treatise I have seen
but not perused, a year after was published the small Treatise of Monsieur
Vaulezard before mentioned.

The inscribing of the Signs, Azimuths, parallels of the longest day, etc. are
lately handled by Mr. Leybourn in his Appendix to Mr. Stirrups Dyalling, as
also by Mr. Gibson in his Algebra, who thinks in many cases that they deform a
plain, and are seldom understood by the vulgar, wherefore it will not be
necessary to treat thereof.

The directions throughout this Book are suited to the Northern Hemisphere and
are the same in the Southern Hemisphere, if the words South for North, and
North for South be mutually changed.

Since the Printing of this Treatise, I have not had time to revise it with the
Copy, and so cannot give thee a full account of what faults may have escaped,
which I think are not many; these few following be pleased to correct.

Errata.
Page 17 line 3 upon M read upon C. p. 15 l. 34 for Substilar Sine r. Substilar
Line. p. 25. l. 12 for 20d r. 15d. p. 36 l. 17 for 51. r. 31.

FINIS.

