COUNSEL For the Living, Occasioned from the DEAD: OR, A Discourse on Job III.
17, 18.

Arising from the Deaths of Mr. Fran. Bampfield AND Mr, Zach, Ralphson,

By Hercules Collins, their Fellow Prisoner in Newgate.

The Lord loses the Prisoners, Psalm. 146.7. Precious in the Sight of the Lord
is the Death of his Saints, Psalm. 116.15. And has brought Life and Immo^^ality
to light through the Gospel, whereunto I am appointed a Preacher and an
Apostle, and a Teacher of the Gentiles, for the which Cause I also S^ffer these
things, nevertheless I am not ashamed for I know whom I have believed, 2 Timothy 1
10, 11. LONDON: Printed by George Larkin for the Author, 1684.

Job III. 17, 19. There the Wicked cease from Troubling: and there the Weary be
at Rest.

There the Prisoners Rest together, they hear not the Voice of the Oppressor.


HOly Job, who according to Chronology lived Two Thousand Four Hundred Years
from the Creation, was the Non-such for Affliction, and Patience; none
exceeding him in the former or latter, under the Old or New Testament, except
our Savior. Under his Agony and Anguish the product of his depressing Trials
from God, from Satan his Grand Accuser, Dear Relations, Friends and Enemies,
(for he was the Song and Byword of the Children of fools and base men) he
interrogates verse 11, 12. Why he did not die from the Womb, and why the Knees
did not prevent him, and the Breasts which he did suck, which implies his
desire it had been so; For then I should have lain still, and been quiet with
Kings and Counselors of the Earth, who build desolate places for themselves:
There the Wicked Cease from troubling, there the Weary be at Rest; there the
Prisoners Rest together, they hear not the Voice of the Oppressor.

In these words we consider, first the Subjects; which are Oppressors and
Oppressed: Secondly, The Predicate, They shall Rest: Thirdly, the Receptacle,
or place of Rest, that is the Grave; I shall note a few things by way of
Observation.

The first is, Wicked men are troublesome men. The Original Rashagnim, (...)
translated Wicked, imports as much, and signifies a great degree of Sin;
there are other words which signify a lower degree as Chata, (...)
the lowest Expression, which imports a missing the Mark; (...)
Gods Glory is that we should aim at in all our Undertakings. (...)
Now Sin is a misdoing, and erring from the Rule: There Is another word,
Pashang, signifying Transgression, Leigh Critica Sacra. Ainsworth. on Deuteronomy. 4.8.
prevarication, Prove. 18.19. there taken for an Offense; by Transgression in
Isa. 1.2. Translated Rebellion, much like Marah, which is generally rendered
Rebellion, provoking, irritating, imbittering, and Deuteronomy 1.26.43.
Psalm. 5.10. Neh. 9.17. It has properly the signification of changing and
bitterness, but is applied to Apostasy and Disobedience, Deuteronomy. 1.26. and 43.
The word Rashagnim, Wicked Ones, signifies Wickedness in the highest; it is
used to set forth an Ungodly Man, Psalm. 1.1. For one which departs wickedly
from God, Psalm. 18.21. and also signifies Restless Turbulent; and is opposed
to quietness, Job. 34.29. such are without true peace themselves, and seek to
break the peace of others: the Prophet Isaiah 57. ult. compares them to the
Restless Troubled Sea, which cannot Rest; and because such men for their evil
deeds are often brought to Judgment and Condemned, therefore is this name given
unto Condemned Persons, Psalm. 109.7. (...)
And when he is Judged, let him be Condemned; or as the Original is, go out;
Rashang, Wicked or guilty.

Let us inquire who they are Wicked Men trouble. 1. Themselves; their
Consciences gripe them, galls them, and pincheth them for their oppressive
acts, as David's did, when he Numbered the People; 2 Samuel 24.10.
and albeit they labor to muzle its mouth, and deafen their own ear, and seek
to stifle its Checks, and stop its motions, yet God will have a witness for
himself in all men; and if our hearts condemn us, 1 John 3.20.
God is greater than our hearts, and knows all things: We know more by our
selves, then all the world knows by us, Prove. 18.14.
but God knows more by us, then we know by our selves; Mat. 27.3, 4.
now if a Wounded Spirit be intolerable, what will the scalding hot wrath of a
Sin-revenging God be? If a Persecuting Betraying Judas cannot stand before the
Judgment Seat of his own Conscience, but runs to hang himself under the horror
of it, who then can dwell with Everlasting Burnings.

2. Wicked men are Troublers of Nations: There would be little work for
Magistrates, were it not for them: King Ahab was much out, when by his
interrogation he supposed Elijah the Prophet to be the troubler of Israel; no
says he, I am not the man, 1 King 18.17, 18.
but it is thou and thy Fathers House, 1 Kings 21.20, 21. Chap. 22.8.
in that you have forsaken the Commandments of the Lord, and followed Balaam;
because Elijah denounced the Judgments of God on him and his house for his Sin,
he calls him his Enemy, and declares he hates him; he would have had him
Prophesied Peace, when Elijah's Commission was War; he was all for tidings of
Peace, 2 Kings 9.22.
but the Prophet might say to Ahab, as Jehu to Joram, What Peace so long as the
Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezabel, and her Witchchrafts are so many?

3. Wicked Men are Troublers of the Church of God; and of those we have two
sorts; First, such as are under little or no Profession; of this sort was
Sanballat, Nehemiah 6.1, 2.
Tobiah, Jeshem the Arabian, in Nehemiahs time, who perplexed the Saints while
the Temple was a building; Secondly, there are others under a Profession of
Reliligion, of those are two sorts, First such as are among the Saints in the
true Church of God; Joshua 7.25. 1 Cor. 5. Mat. 26.
Wicked Ones are a great trouble to them; Achan was so to the Church of the
Jews; the incestuous person also to Paul and the Church of Corinth; and Christ
and his Apostles could not be without their trouble, when they knew they had a
Traitor among them. Corah, Dathan and Abiram greatly disturbed, the Church of
old by their Pride, Numb. 16.
supposing the people were all holy, and in their undervaluing Gods Ministers,
Moses and Aaron; but God troubled them as he did Achan, for his Wickedness; one
disorderly Church Member causes more trouble in a Church then one hundred
pious Souls, for such are a Comfort and Blessing where they are.

Phil. 3.5, 6.
2. As those before mentioned were Professors, and Church-disturbers, yet none
of them, except Judas, did it in the way of Persecution; but there are another
sort of strict Professors in some things, who do, and have much molested the
Church by Persecution. Who was a greater Professor then Paul, when he was a
Pharisee? And who a greater Persecutor? So the Devout and Honorable Women of
Old, were stirred up by the Jews, together with the chief men of the City of
Antioch, Acts 13.15.
to raise Persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their
Coasts: The Devout must do this, that their wickedness might be the more latent
and hidden. Who was it that John Bap^ist and Christ called a Generation of
Vipers, but such a sort of people the Devout Pharisees? As a Serpent begets a
Serpent, Mat. 3.
so you are the successors of wicked Parents, ye are the Seed of the Old
Serpent, Crafty, Deceivers, full of poison, and infect others; Ye fulfill the
Measure of your Fathers Wickedn ss; Mat. 23.
as the Viper kills its Mother, so have you the Prophets, by whom ye ought to
have labored to be begotten to God; as the Viper swells with poison, so do you
with Pride and Envy against God and his Children; as this Creature will stick
on a man to his hurt, and kill with his tongue, Job. 20.16. so do you; as it
loves none but his own kind, so you, none but such as will agree with you in
killing the Lords Prophets; and as some write, this Creatures Teeth is buried
in its Gums, that one might think them harmless, so seem you Pharisees, but
full of Cruelty; you will make many and long Prayers, and yet devour Widows
Houses; you Cleanse the outside of the Cup and Platter, but within full of
Extortion and Excess; as the Viper is beautiful without, as it were painted,
yet full of venom within, so you Pharisees; for all your long Robes, your
Phylactaries, your many Prayers, and compassing Sea and Land to make one
Proselyte, all this makes you but as whited Sepulchers, which appear beautiful
outwardly, but within full of dead men's bones and all uncleaness; you are a
company of Hypocrites, For you build the Tombs of the Prophets, and garnish the
Sepulchers of the Righteous, and ye say, If we had been in the days of our
Fathers, we would not have been Partakers with them in the Blood of the
Prophets; yet when I send Prophets and wisemen, and Scribes, some of them you
kill and crucify, some you Scourge, and Persecute from City to City, that upon
you may come all the Righteous Blood shed upon the Earth, from the Blood of
Righteous Abel, to the Blood of Zacharias Son of Barachias, whom ye slew
between the Temple and the Altar.

That wicked men are troublers of the Church, appears from the sad complaint
the Church makes in many places; Psalm. 129.2, 3.
The Plowers have Plowed on our back; as they out up and open the bowels of the
Earth, so wicked men afflict Gods People, sometimes to the opening their very
Bowels; so Asaph, Thou feedest us with the Bread of Tears, Psalm. 80.5.
and give them Tears to drink in great measure; (...)
the Hebrew word is, Shalish, a threefold measure, so that they were fed with
Tears in the Plural, and that in a treble or large measure: As the Church was
in Egypt among the Pots in the midst of the Fire and Smoke, Psalm 69.13.
in extreme heat and burning affliction, as the very brick pots of old was
burnt; yet shall not the Church be scorched, but shall come out of Trouble, as
those did out of Egypt with much beauty and glory; As the Wings of a Dove
covered with Silver, and her Feathers with yellow gold; when God gives but the
word for deliverance, in the conquest of the adversary, Psalm. 68.30.
then many shall publish the praises of God: when he Rebukes the Multitude of
Spear-men, or as the Original, (...)
Chajah Kaneh, the Beast of Reeds; Spearmen, or men of Arms, they are no more
to God, the most valiant company of Spear-men, which the Reeds in the water do
resemble, then those weak Reeds; for God can as easily bow them as a company of
weak Reeds; according to the words of Solomon, All Kings shall bow down before
him, Psalm. 72.11.
and his Enemies shall lick the Dust; so low shall they bow, they shall seem to
lick the dust.

4. Wicked men are troublers of God, God-provoking Sinners; Ezekiel. 16.43.
not that there are passions in God, as that he is capable of joy or grief,
Isaiah 63.10.
as man; but God is said to be Provoked and to Repent, Ezekiel. 6.9.
when he does such things as men do when they are Provoked or Repent; Ephesians. 4.30.
The wicked are said to fret God, elsewhere it is said, they Rebelled, and vexed
his Holy Spirit; and God is said to be broken with an whorish heart; Acts 9.5.
hence the Apostle exhorts, not to grieve the Holy Spirit: It is the hardest
and painfullest work men can go about, to grieve God and his Church; Job. 15.26.
it is worse then to kick our naked Heel against the Pricks, it is to run against
the thick bosses of his Buckler, Job. 9.4.5, 6.
none ever hardened himself against God and prospered, for he shakes the Earth
out of its place, and the Pillars thereof tremble; our hearts cannot endure,
nor our hands be strong, Ezekiel. 22.14.
if God contend with us; Shall we now provoke the Lord to Jealousy? Are we
stronger then he? 1 Cor. 10.22.
That will put fear into the Nations, that they may know they are but men,
Enosh, weak sickly mortal men; Genesis 35.5.
God can put his Enemies in fear as he did the Shechemites, that they pursued
not Jacob: God made a noise in the Ears of the Host of the Syrians, 2 Kings 7
7.6.
like the noise of a great Host of Chariots and Horses, which filled them with
fear, so as they left their Tents, their Horses, their Silver and Gold. Who
will adventure to set the Briars and Thorns against God? he will go through
them all, and burn them together. Wicked Men are compared to thorns, Isaiah
27.4.
He will take them away as with a Whirlwind, as living as wrath, so the
Original. Psalm. 58.9.10, 11.


By way of Use. If Wicked men are troublesome men, then we may be informed such
are Strangers to Gospel Principles, to a Gospel Spirit, and Gospel Teachings;
Romans 12.14.
for that teaches to follow peace with all men, and holiness, Mat. 7.12.
to do by all men as we would they should do to us; the Gospel Spirit is full
of meekness, quietness, Mat 18.3, 4.
humility, like our Lord, who taught us that except we are Converted, and
become as little Children, Luke 9.54, 55, 56.
in peaceableness, humility, and without Revenge, we cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God: Our Lord as readily reproved James and John, when he saw a hot
spirit of Revenge in them against the Samaritans, in desiring fire might come
from Heaven to destroy them; but he turned and rebuked them, and said, You know
not what manner of spirits ye are of, for the Son of Man did not come to
destroy men's lives, but to save them; our Lord does exhort us to love our
Enemies, bless them which Curse us, do good to them which hate us, pray for
them that despitefully use us and Persecute us. Mat. 5.44.
Now if this be the Doctrine of the Gospel to Enemies, how much unlike a Gospel
Spirit are they which are so far from doing this for Enemies, they will not do
it to their Friends, and quiet peaceable Neighbors; but on the contrary
Persecute them who make Conscience to pray for them, because our Lord Commands
it. A Gospel Spirit is a Cool Spirit, a persecuting spirit is a hot spirit,
which predominates in wicked men, and makes them troublesome; as when fire is
put into water, or water thrown on fire, it makes a hissing noise, because of
the Contrariety of their Nature; hence the word for a Persecutor, (...)
Dalak, signifies he was hot, he pursued, he burned; the Gospel teaches us to
be harmless as Doves, 2 Timothy 2.24.25. Mat. 10, 16.
and such a spirit there really is in all gospellized souls: The Servant of the
Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to Teach, patient, or
forbearing, in meekness instructing those which oppose themselves.

Thus you see a persecuting spirit is not of a Gospel-complexion.

To Conclude, let the Reshagnim, or wicked Ones, take these following
Scriptures, as a glass to behold themselves in.

Such shall be made to confess their wickedness in not setting Gods People at
liberty to Worship him; Exodus 9.27. Chap. 5.1, 2, 3. Prove. 24.16. 1 Samuel 2.9.
Psalm. 9.17. Pro. 3.33. Psalm. 9.16. Prove. 10.7.20.
they shall fall into mischief, and be silent in darkness, and turned into
Hell, with the Nations which forget God. Gods Curse is always in that man's
house, and he is snared in the works of his own hands; his Name shall rot, and
his Heart is little worth; God will search out their wickedness till there be
none; Psalm. 10.15. Malachi 4.1. Prove. 29.2.
all of them shall be made as stuble; this is the portion of a wicked Man, and
the heritage of Oppressors, which they shall receive from the Almighty; Job
27.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
if his Children be multiplied, it is for the Sword, and his Offspring shall
not be satisfied with Bread; those that remain of him, shall be Buried in
Death, and his Widows shall not weep; though he heap up Silver as the dust, and
prepare Raiment as the Clay; he may prepare it, but the Just shall put it on,
and the Innocent shall divide the Silver, etc.

Observation. 2. Some will never cease troubling, until they Cease Living.
There the wicked cease from troubling; as if the Spirit should have said, Then,
and not till then, (...)
will many cease from troubling; the Original Chadal, Rendered cease, is
sometimes Translated Leave, as Judges 9.9. Genesis 41.49. So wicked ones must
leave, and give over their troubling the Lords Interest; the same word is
rendered Frail, Psalm. 39.4 Holy David he Prays to know how Frail, how
ceasing he was: Let me know, O Lord! how subject I am to Cease and Dye, and
come to nothing; so the same Man Prays that Gods Enemies might know
themselves, to be what they are: Psalm. 9.20. Let them know themselves to be but
Men; (...)
or Enosh, the proper Name of Adams Nephew, Genesis 4. 26. which signifies
Sorrowful, and is Commonly given to Men, to signify their Doleful State and
Mortality: Hence Holy David admireth in Psalm. 8 5. God should Confer such
Honor and Dignity upon Man; the word in the Original is Enosh, which
signifies Poor, Sorry, Frail, weakly, Mortal, Corrupt Man.

(...)
The word for Troubling, Ragas, is sometimes Translated Rage, 2 Kings 19.28. So
that ungodly ones are Raging ones, especially some of them against the Church
of God; as once Paul, who himself Confesses, being exceeding mad against them
he; Persecuted them even unto strange Cities; sometimes Translated to Vex,
Psalm. 2, 5. There applied unto God, who will vex his and his Peoples Enemies,
who do rage and set themselves against the Lord and against his Anointed; the
same word is rendered Trembling in Deuteronomy. 28.65. Psalm. 18.7. So that those
wicked Men Endeavor by their hard speeches and cruel Actions, to make the
Saints to tremble, as no doubt, but Paul did, when called Saul, in his
unconverted State, Acts 26.11. When he Compelled them to Blaspheme; but this is
more then they can do to all, for some of the Lords Interest are as bold as a
Lion, and though a Converted Paul be informed of his being bound at Jerusalem;
he is not so much as moved at it. Its a Glorious Promise made to the Church.
Psalm. 46. That when the waters roar and are troubled, and the Mountains shake
with the swelling thereof, yet the Church shall not be moved, for God is her
refuge: this is more then many wicked can say: How many trembling Hearts and
Hands? How many Pale-Faces have the wicked had, when they have come to disturb
the Meetings of the Saints? How have some of our Ears heard some of them
Complain of their work, and how full of horror they were in heart for it. There
is a twofold ceasing; First, A Partial Ceasing. Secondly, A Total. A Partial,
as when God lay the Wicked Men upon Beds of Sickness, 1 Kings 13.4.
that though they have a heart, affection, and Principle for Persecution; yet
they want strength of Body: God he may strike one lame in his Limbs, Acts 13.11.
as he did Jeroboam, whose Arm was withered in being wickedly used against the
Lords Prophet; another, God may strike and smite with Blindness, as he did
Elimas the Sorcerer for a season, Genesis 19.10 11.
who sought to turn the Deputy from the Faith, and as he did the Sodomites, who
pressed sore upon Lot, but were smitten so blind that they wearied themselves
to find the Door; others God may strike with fear and Terror in their
Consciences, Genesis 35.5.
as he did the Shechemites, so as they pursued not after Jacob; he restraines
the hot Rage of Men, he girds it, and binds it, as he did Esau's against his
Brother Jacob, and Labans also, who had a charge not to speak Good or Bad unto
him; moreover rather then fail, God can find other work for his Enemies, as he
did for Saul and his Army, Psalm. 67.10.
when they had encompassed David; a Messenger comes and calls off Saul, for the
Philistines had invaded the Land; 1 Samuel 23.25, 26, 27.
upon which they made a retreat: He can set the Egyptians against the
Egyptians, and one Enemy shall set on fire another, He can make the Hearts of
the strong to fail, and be as weak as Women, they shall be afraid because of
the shaking of the hand of the Lord; Isaiah. 21.
they shall Fight every one against his Brother, and City against City, and
Kingdom against Kingdom; Chap. 26.
He can make the Princes of Zoan Fools, the Counsel of the wise Counselors
made Brutish, and this may be only for a time.

But Secondly, there is a Total Ceasing of the wicked, and this is in a twofold
way. First, by Conversion. Secondly, Dissolution. First, Conversion, when that
is once wrought, the Spirit of Persecution Expires; when Paul was unconverted,
he was a great Persecuter, but when he was Converted, he Preached the Faith
which he once destroyed; Gal. 1.23, 24.
and gave the Church Ground to Glorify God on that account; from whence we may
learn, no Persecuter is a Converted Man, Gal. 1.
nor no Converted Man is a Persecuter: this was one of the Charges Paul brought
against himself, and made him admire free Grace in calling him, and putting him
into the Ministry; Who was before a Blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1.12, 13.
a Persecuter, and Injurious, etc.

Secondly, The dissolution of the Body brings in a Total Ceasing of the wickeds
troubling, then a Cains Enmity must cease toward an Innocent Abel; and Joseph's
Brethren then cannot Contrive against him any more, when a Pharaohs
Chariot-wheels begins to fall off, and the Seas meet on him, he can no longer
hinder the Lords People from his Worship, nor Impose hard tasks upon them: Dan.
5.5.
when once the Handwriting comes on the Wall, then a Belshazzar must cease
from his Drinking, and quaffing in the Vess ls of the Temple; his Countenance
will then change, his Thoughts trouble him, the Joints of his Loins will be
loosed, and his Knees smite one against another: When this War comenceth
against a Nero and an Herod, then no more Paul's, nor John Baptists Heads can
they take off, the latter to gratify the Lusts of two sorry Women, an Herodias
and her Daughter. Though God be very long Suffering and Patient, yet sometimes
he is very speedy and swift in his Judgments upon the Wicked; in Psalm. 58.
Judgment is threatened and imprecated upon the violent ones: Let them melt away
as Water which continually runs; Let them melt as a Snail; and be as the
untimely Birth of a Woman; before the Pots can feel the Thorns, he will take
them away, both Living, and in his Wrath, and as a Whirld-Wind; how soon do
Waters pass away, a Snail melt, or an untimely Birth pass away? How soon is a
few dry Thorns under a Pot burnt, or a Whirlwind pass? All which shows the
speediness and switfness of Gods Judgments on the wicked; how soon was an Herod
Eaten with Worms for his Pride and Cruelty? Belshazzar was soon dispacht after
the Handwriting on the Wall: Julian the Apostate was quickly smote, and made
to Confess, The Gallilean was too hard for him. Gods Judgments sometimes are so
Apparent and swift on the Ungodly, that a Man shall be forced to Confess, There
is a God which Judges in the Earth, as well as a Reward, for the Righteous.
God threatened Amalek of Old for the Malice against his People, Desendo (...)
Delebo (...)
that he would utterly put out their Remembrance from under Heaven; the
Original is, in wiping away, I will wipe away; the same Word is Applied to
Gods sweeping away the Old World, Genesis 7.23. And to Gods wiping away of Sin,
Translated Blotted, Isai. 43.25. Those which have the Spirit of Amalek, to
trouble the Church of God, have worse things threatened, for the Wicked and
them which love Violence, God hates; on such he will Rain Snares, Fire, Psalm.
11.^.
and Brimstone, and a Burning Tempest; this shall be the Portion of their Cup.

Observation 3. Many Wicked ones in troubling themselves and others, are
wearied in strength; The Original Coach, which is not in the Translation, (...)
only Noted in some Margents, signifies Strength, Virtue, Power, Might, not
only of Body, but also mind, in Wisdom, Learning, Policy, so Honor and
Estates; but properly the lively vigor and Native moisture of the Body,
whereby Men are made strong, Joshua 14.11. Psalm. 22 15. then there is another
word joined to it, (...)
Iagang signifying Labor, so Translated, Job. 9.29. Eccles. 10.15. It
signifies Toil, Turmoile, sore Labor, of Body or mind, and consequently
fainting and weariness, as in the Text its opposs'd unto Rest: Lam. 5.5. So
that wicked Men are wearied in their greatest strength, through sore Laboring
and Tormoiling in it. Of such People the Prophet Isaiah speaks, Isaiah 57.10.
which were wearied in the greatness of their way, being great in Sin, or great
in Strength, or Power; albeit they were weary, Yet they said not, There is no
Hope: Eccle. 4.1.
We Read of some great in Power which Solomon mentions; I returned and
Considered all the Oppressions which were under the Sun, and behold the Tears
of such as were Oppressed, and they had no Comforter; and on the side of the
Oppressors there was Power. In the Exercise of their Power they might, yea some
many times do weary themselves in Oppressing the Heritage of God: Job. 15.20.
The Wicked, says Job, Travelleth with pain all his Days; not only putting
others to pain, but themselves also, Jer. 9.5.
as the Prophet Jeremiah says of a People, They have wearied themselves to
commit Iniquity; Painful Iniquity! some weary themselves with Lies, trusting in
a false God which cannot help, as Baals Worshipers in Elijah's time, Isai.
44.20.
they Cried, and waited, and cut themselves with Knives and Lances, and no help
came; 1 Kings 18.28.
Yet say they not, there is no Hope, nor, is there not a Lie in our Right Hand?
Though they feed on Ashes, and a deceitful Heart turns them aside: Isai.
47.13.
Some have been wearied in the multitudes of their Counsels, as Babylon of Old
in contriving against Gods Interest, and to prevent Gods Judgments, but all was
in vain: its said in the same Chapter, God gave the People into their Enemies
Hand, but they showed them no Mercy: Upon the Ancients have thou heavily laid
the Yoke: (as now Men of threescore, fourscore Years of Age, hurried to Prison
for nothing else but for Worshipping their God; and how do many in the Exercise
of their Power weary themselves in contriving against the Innocent, in sitting
in Judgment against them, Acts 9.1, 2.
from morning until nine or ten a Clok at night, and then hurry them to Prison,
Old and Young, Male and Female, Bond and Free, Poor and Rich; no doubt but Paul
would have wearyed himself in his Journey from Jerusalem to Damascus, and in
bringing them again back bound unto Jerusalem, from Damascus, had not God
prevented him, by Conversion: How many have wearied themselves to find out the
places where Gods People Worship, and have been like the Men of Sodom, Genesis
19.11.
who wearied themselves to find Lots Door in their blindness? Others that have
been wearyed in strength, in breaking open the Doors of Gods People, and
plundered their Houses afterward, some have been so weary in this work, that
they have been ready to sink in the place. And though the Head has broken
short off from the helve of their sledge; yet have not said, There is no Hope,
God we see is against us; but rather with Pharaoh, will seek to patch on his
Charioth-wheels, when God takes them off; and as it was in literal Babylon,
they laid their Idols upon their Beasts, till they were weary; so the imposing
of Spiritual Babylon's Inventions on the People of God, makes them, or is
designed to make them weary, either in the Penalties inflicted upon them for
Non-Observing them, or else to make them weary of the way and Worship of God,
Dan. 7.25.
as Daniel has it of a certain King that shall speak great Words against the
most High, and shall wear out the Saints of the most High, and shall think to
change times and Laws. He shall Endeavor to wear them out, either to wear out
their Bodies, or make them weary of their Country, or if possible their
Religion; wicked Men weary themselves sometimes in one Sinful way, sometimes in
another, some in gaming, some in uncleaness, some in Drunkeness, some in
Persecuting, as its observed concerning Antiochus Epiphanus, that infamous
troubler of the Church, that he undertook more Troublesome Journeys, and went
more hazardous designs, to trouble, Oppose and vex the Church of the Jews, then
ever any of his predecessors about any other Conquest or Noble Enterprise, he
went further to do mischief, then some Saints to do good; and the story is
concluded with this general Truth, All such Wicked ones go with more Trouble to
Eternal Death, then the Saints to Eternal Life. Now this arises from
inconsiderateness, Prove. 7.22. Chap. 5.11, 12.13.
they go on like an Ox to the Slaughter, and as a Fool to the Correction of the
stocks, till a Dart strike through his Liver; as a Bird hastes to the Snare,
and knows it not that it is for Life: Then he Mourns at the last, when his
Flesh and his Body is consumed, and says, How have I hated Instruction, and my
Heart despised Reproof, and have not Obeyed the Voice of my Teachers, nor
inclined mine Ear to them which instructed me? Then they will say as in the
Apocripha, We Fools accounted his Life madness, Wisd. 5.4.
and his End to be without Honor; but how is he Numbered among the Children of
God, and his Lot is among the Saints: then will they see that word fulfilled in
Habakkuk That they Habak. 2.13, 14.
Labored in the Fire, and wearyed themselves for very Vanity; for
notwithstanding all we have done, the Earth is filled with the knowledge of the
Glory of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea; the Apostle Paul tells us that
he was Injurious, and Persecuted the Church of God, out of Ignorance, Agnoon,
Ignorantly, this with the Seventy is the same with Asham in the Hebrew which
signifies guilt, wickedness; (...)
for Ignorance is an inlet to wickedness; but let all such remember that Christ
will take Vengeance by Flaming Fire, as well on them which are Ignorant, 2
Thessa. 1.8.
as on them which are Disobedient; Psalm. 9.17.
The Wicked shall be turned into Hell and all the Nations which forget God.

Observation 4. Job. 14.1.
The most Rest that ever a Wicked man has, will be in the Grave. All Mankind
are born to Trouble as the Sparks flies upward, naturally; man is naturally
born to trouble, but as he is a wicked man, is obnoxious to more, for not only
while he is alive is he troubled and tormented in Conscience, but after the
Resurrection will be tormented Soul and Body for ever. In the Grave his Body
does rest, Psalm. 16.9.
but it is not in hope as the Bodies of the Saints do, who have hope in their
Death. By Rest here, some understand it of the Saints, whom the wicked have
troubled; but forasmuch as the next verse speaks of the rest or sleep of the
Oppressed, we may well conclude its spoken of the Wicked; for their Bodies do
rest in the Grave also: as if the Spirit should say, The wicked as long as they
live, will never rest, but be always troubling the Godly, they will never be
quiet until I bring them to the Grave, but then they shall leave, and trouble
mine no more, the Root Nuach, here rendered Rest, (...)
is sometimes translated for any thing accepted, as Genesis 8.21. Genesis 8.21.
God smelled a sweet smell in Noah's Sacrifice, or a savor of Rest, as it was
tipical of the Great Sacrifice, Christ our Passover, was sacrificed for us,
this God cannot smell in a wicked man's Death; But Precious in the Sight of the
Lord is the Death of his Saints: 1 Cor. 5.7.
Its also taken for the Churches resting from their Enemies, Esther. 9.22. and
for the Souls resting in God, Psalm. 116.7. Return to thy R^st, Psalm. 116.15.
O my Soul; its opposed to travel and labor, Exodus 23.12. Genesis 8.9. the Bodies
of the Reshagnim, The wicked one, shall rest in the grave, and be quiet; but
how? as an insensible hardened Malefactor, which is bound in Chains, and
secured for Judgment and condemnation: and forasmuch as man's Soul is immortal,
it must have a being, and a place after it is parted from the Body; and to
imagine a wicked man's Soul to be then without any sense of torment, is to be in
a better case then it was in the World, for now and then he had as it were an
Hell within him; and every where the Scriptures of truth Represents a wicked
man after the Death of the Body in a far worse condition then when alive, Luke.
16.
and a good man's far better; and that the Souls of Just men are in glory, is
undeniable, from the first of Col^ssians, verse 20th. And having made peace
through the Blood of his Cross, by him to Reconcile all things unto himself, by
him I say, whether they be things in Earth, or things in Heaven; Mark, it seems
there are some things in Heaven Reconciled by the Blood of Christ; Luke 23.43.
now what can or may those things be; it cannot be the good Angels there, for
they never fell, so needed not to be Redeemed, however they may be Established;
What then can it be in Heaven Redeemed by Christ's Blood? Acts 7.59.
Truly nothing else but the Souls of Believers: If then their Souls be in
Heaven, while their Bodies are in the Grave, it cannot be rationally supposed,
Mat. 10.28.
being Immortal Substances, that they can be without some feeling; if some
feeling, it cannot be of Misery, none suppose that in Heaven; then it must be
capable of some Joy and Blessedness: from the same Purity of Reason the Souls
of the wicked must be in some Misery, and far Separated from that place of Joy,
and under some Impressions of Gods wrath, though not to the full, as it shall
when Soul and Body is Reunited; as a Malefactor, when Apprehended, Imprisoned,
Fettered, and put in some dark Dungeon; this is a part of his Punishment,
though not as yet tried, judged, Condemned, nor Executed, Eccle. 12.7.
only he may have been carried before some Judge or Justice, as the Souls of
all men return to God at Death, Mat. 25.46.
and the wicked receive a Sentence of Commitment to Prison, to be bound in
Fetters and Chains, and put in some dark Dungeon, until his great and Final
Trial and Judgment for Life or Death Eternal.

Observation 5. Death and the Grave puts an End to all Oppressions They hear
not the Voice of the Oppress^r: Mat. 5.27.
There is Oppression in Voice and Oppression in Intention, and Oppression in
Act; Oppression in Intention and Purpose, is accounted so by God; as well as
Adultery, though never Acted; as a good Man's Intentions, though many times
never come into Act, is accepted: It was well, God told Dav^d, 1 Kings 19.2.
it was in his Heart to Build him a Temple; so Jezabels Intention to destroy
Elijah, shall be accounted one day as if it had been done Actually.

The word for Oppression, Nagas, (...)
is sometimes rendered Taskmasters, as in Exodus 2.7. Arias Montanus says,
Exactors, it signifies in a special use one which Exacteth or Extorteth Money
or Tribute, to the grievance of a Person, 2 Kings 23.35. in the 10. Zachariah
4. Its rendered an Oppressor, so Chap. 9.8. No Oppressor shall pass through the
Land any more; Its so used because those Exactors many times impose against
Right and Equity Mulcts and Fines upon the Subjects; as to be sinned for
Worshipping God according to the light of our Conscience, which is Consistent to
a Peaceable and quiet Living in the Land, this is Oppression and Sinful
Exaction, and against the very light of Nature; for no man that owns a God,
Exodus 33.9.
and that he ought to be Worshipped, would be done so by: God prohibited Israel
from Oppressing a stranger, then to Oppress a Native, a Contry-man, a Subject,
yea quiet and Peaceable Subjects, Isai. 5.7.
is far worse. May not God Expect, in a Land of Gospel Light, Judgment and
Justice? But if instead thereof, there should be a Cry, yea, a great Cry of
Oppression, how sad is this? For those Cries to Enter into the Ears of the Lord
of Sabbaoths; James 5.7.
or Lord of Hosts. Let the Oppressor look into these Scriptures, as into a
Glass, to prevent the Sin of Oppression for the time to come.

Isa. 30.12.
Wherefore thus says the Lord, because ye despise this Word, and trust in
Oppression, and perverseness, and stay there, therefore this Iniquity shall be
to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high Wall, whose breaking
comes suddenly, on an Instant: O how many do trust to nothing else but
Oppression, Psalm. 62.10.
and the ruining of honest Families, contrary to that Prohibition, Trust not in
Oppression.

Isai. 49.26.
Such shall be fed with their own Flesh, and made drunk with their own Blood, as
with sweet wine: Zeph. 3.1.
Moreover a Woe is denounced against the Oppressing City; Psalm. 72.1.
yea, Christ shall break in pieces the Oppressor, Isa. 14.2.
in pleading the poors cause; They shall take them Captiv^s whose Captives they
were, and they shall Rule over their Oppressors Let these following Scriptures
be as a Comfortable Cordial to all the Oppressed in this day of Jacob's
Trouble. Psalm. 9.9.


God will be a Refuge for the Oppressed; yea, 103.6.
the Lord will exercise Righteousness and Judgment for all such: 12.5.
For the oppression of the Poor, and sighing of the Needy, Job. 3.18.
now will I arise says the Lord, Isa. 14.4.
and set him in safety from him which puffs at him. Isa. 14.4.
The time is coming God has promised we shall no more hear the voice of the
Oppressor: 51.13.16.4.
Then shall thou take up this Parable against the King of Babylon, Psalm. 146.7.
How has the Oppressor (or Exactor of Gold) Ceased? And where is the fury of
the Oppressor? They are Consumed out of the Land. God Executes Judgment for
the Oppressed, and gives food to the hungry; the Lord loses the Prisoners.

6. Observation, An Arrest by death, brings Rest to Prisoners, There the
Prisoners Rest together: That all must die, is the Statute Law of Heaven; it
was threatened on Adam, Heb. 9.27.
and all his Posterity, Genesis 2.17.
That in the day he did eat of the forbidden fruit, he should surely dye; or as
the Original, in dying thou shall dye, certainly, and all thy Offspring, for
thou art a public head; I spoke in Truth, if thou eatest, thou dyest; and as
thou shall certainly die, so thou shall die perfectly, Soul and Body, as Austin
says, as the Separation of the Soul from the Body is a natural death, Ephesians.
2.1, 2.
so the Separation of the Soul from God is a Spiritual; hence all men by Nature
are said to be dead in Trespasses and Sins, Chap. 2.17, 19.
and to be without God in the World; yea, Strangers and Foreigners, in respect
of any saving Spiritual Acquaintance. Moreover thou shall die, or be in a dying
condition, as soon as thou do eat of the fruit, subject to sickness,
weakness, Corruption, Pain, and Death; yea, thou and all thy Posterity must die
Eternally, except Grace prevent; for as man has an Immortal Soul, if he by Sin
brings a spiritual death on the Soul, and separate it from God, it must for
ever remain under Wrath, 1 These. 1.10.
and at a distance from him unless he bring it near by the Blood of his Son,
Genesis 3.15.
and this God did promise after the Fall; the Messiah, that is, the seed of the
woman, should break the Serpents head; take away his power which he had by the
Fall over Adam, and his Posterity; so that now through Christ, death is no loss
but a gain to Believers. Ye Believing Prisoners, (...)
the word which we translate Prisoner, Asar, signifies one bound and fastened,
confined, Numb. 30.3. there it refers to a being bound by a Vow, Job. 12.18. He
loses the Bonds of Kings, etc. it is taken for that binding which is an act of
coercive Authority, Genesis 40.3.42.17, 19, 24. Numb. 15.34. Levit. 24.12. Death
and the Grave will put an end to all Oppressions, and usher the Body into Rest;
the Bodies of all, bad Prisoners, as well as good, shall hear the Voice of the
Oppressor no more, we shall know no more Apprehendings, under the power of no
more Witnesses, nor hear no more of, Take him Jailer, keep him until he be
cleared by due course of Law; we shall have no more Bolts nor Bars then on us,
no more looking for the Keeper then, nor speaking to Friends through
Iron-grates; death is a debt we owe, and when that is paid, we shall receive an
acquittance, a Quietus est; many Captives and Prisoners will have little Rest
until they go to their Grave; some of Christ's Prisoners have spent the seventh
part of their time, some the sixth in Prison; the word Iashan, (...)
translated Rest here in the Text, properly signifies Sleep; in many places
the word is so used, as Psalm. 3.5. In Ezekiel. 34.25. we find it metaphorically
taken, and used to set forth the Rest the Church should have from their
Oppressors; it is translated Rest in the Text, signifying that as we have Rest
in Sleep, being then out of all sense of care, trouble, pain, and all manner of
distraction, so in like manner shall we be in the Grave.

There are several sorts of Prisoners; there are some justly so, 1 Timothy 1 9,
10. Knowing this, that the Law is not made for a Righteous man, but for the
Lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and sinners, for unholy and profane,
for Murderers of Fathers, and Murderers of Mothers, for Man-Slayers, for
Whoremongers, for them which defile themselves with Mankind, for Men-stealers,
for Liars, for perjured persons, and if there be any other thing contrary to
Sound Doctrine. Secondly, there are Spiritual Prisoners, such as are in the
Bonds, Fetters, Iron-Chains, and Prison of Sin, which Christ has promised to
set free by the Preaching of the Gospel. Thirdly, there are Prisoners for
Christ's sake; Isa. 61.1.
hence says the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.1. For this cause I Paul, the Prisoner of the
Lord, for you Gentiles, chap. 4.1. I therefore the Prisoner of the Lord, (or in
the Lord) beseech you that ye walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith you are
called; Therefore we are not to think strange of a Prison, we are not the first
deprived of Liberty, air, mercies purchased by the Blood of Christ, and no
doubt but an account must be given for depriving the Lords Interest of these
mercies without just cause; should we be hindered of what is our Right by
purchase, we should think it hard, unjust, yea, unmerciful, but we are not
alone; Joseph was in Prison for as little cause, and his feet was hurt with
Fetters, and his Soul, Psalm. 105.18.
as the Hebrew is, came into Irons; Sampson was made to grind in a Prison;
Judge. 16.21.
and says Ahab, of the good Prophet Micaiah, Put this Fellow in Prison, 1
Kings 22.27.
and feed him with the Bread of Affliction, and water of affliction, until I
come in Peace; which indeed never was, for a certain man drew a bow at a
venture the Original is, Jer. 37.16.
in his Simplicity, and God directed the Arrow, for it smote Ahab between the
Joints and Harness or Breast Plate, chap. 38.6.
which was what the Prophet Prophesied of: Good Jeremiah is not without his
share, for he was put into the Cells or Cabines, and let down with Cords into a
dark dungeon, where was no water, but mire, wherein the Prophet sunk. So John
Baptist, because he Reproved Herod for Incest, Mark 6.22.
in Marrying his Brother Philiphs Wife, was Beheaded in Prison, without any
cause assigned, any Witness Judge or Juries, Acts 16.23, 24.
and all for to satisfy the Lust of a vain woman or two. So Paul and Silas was
put into the Inner Prison, and their feet made fast in the stocks, Peter was
bound in Prison, bound with two Chains, but Prayer was made by the Church for
him; chap. 12.6.5, 18.
which proved his deliverance; and the Apostles were put in the Common Prison
among the Abjects; yea many of the Saints were shut up in Prison, probably very
close Prisoners they were, chap. 26.10.
and could not see their nearest Relations; shall we think a Prison much, when
our Lord and Savior was taken from Prison, and from Judgment, in whom was no
guile found.

It Is necessary that we treat a little of Prison-Comforts, as well as Prison
Confinement; Isa. 53.
how much of the Presence of Christ have they had to enable them to bear the
Cross quietly, patiently, contentedly, Jer. 31.18.
not like a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke, and though some cannot boast of
Raptures and Ecstasies, yet they have cause to bless God for making good that
promise to them, John 16. ult. That as in the world they have Tribulation, so
in Christ Peace; as that good man the last that died in Prison, upon a question
I asked him on his Deathbed, what experience he had of Gospel Peace, made this
answer, My way is plain, and Evidences clear; but the former, on his Deathbed,
had a sentence which savoured something of a Rapture or Ecstasy: says he,
Habak. 3.16
The Prophet Habakkuks belly trembled, and his lips quivered in the thoughts
and hearing of the Approaching Judgments which were coming on the Church of the
Jews: but says he, my belly trembles, and my lips quiver in the thoughts of
the Approaching Glory that will be upon the Church of God. Though others dare
not pretend so much to a being in the Mount of Raptures; yet they may bless God
for Contentedness in their Condition, though limited to one Room, which was our
Kitchen, our Cellar, our Lodging-Room, our Parlour, yet through Grace had as
much peace and satisfaction, as when we could walk in our houses, from one Room
to another, from thence into the Garden, Deuteronomy. 33.25.
from thence into more open air, and go from house to house to visit friends.
Blessed be God we have bread for the day; as the day so our strength has been;
God is as good in Prison as out: we are content to be where our Father will
have us be, for that place is best. If God will by his Providence open a door
for Liberty, that is best, Phil. 4.11.
if God will shut the door, that is best; I have learned says the Apostle Paul,
in every State to be Contented: Beloved, it is one thing to Read the Promises,
another thing to trust upon God by them, and experience the truth of them; some
can say, As we have heard, so have we seen in the City of our God. The Promises
God has made to Prisoners, Psalm. 69.13.
the consideration of them are Comfortable; God will not despise his Prisoners;
though men may, and do, yet God will honor them which honor him; the Sighs of
the Prisoners shall be heard, John 12.26.
and God will arise to set him at liberty, from him which puffs at him; let
men and Devils do their worst, Psalm. 12.5.
God will in his own time loose the Prisoners. Gods Church of old was in Egypt
four hundred and thirty years, it is said they came out the very same day, Exodus
12.12.
yea, the very night, according to Gods Determination, a night to be observed
unto the Lord, says the word. We shall none of us stay a night beyond Gods
Determination; rather than we shall stay longer, God will work a Miracle for
his, Acts 12.5. chap. 16.
as of old for Paul and Silas, and Peter, who made all the Prison doors fly
open, and every man's Bands were loosed, yea, God can make our very
Prison-Keepers, to come to us trembling, and fall down, and cry out, Sirs, what
must I do to be saved? our God whom we serve is able to do this, and much more;
and he can, as of old, make his people grow so much the more as their
afflictions abound, thinking people will conclude they must needs be the Lords,
that suffer patiently under such apparent wrong.

Again, let us bless God, though we are in the Prison of man, yet that we are
delivered from the Spiritual Prison of Sin and Satan, into the glorious liberty
of the Children of God, and out of the Kingdom of darkness into the glorious
light of the Gospel; Colos. 1.13.
there is no such Prison as for a man to be bound and fettered by his Lusts and
Corruptions, that stirs not a foot further then his Corrupt Affections suffer
him; a man in liberty, in honor, Zach. 9.11.
may be in worse Bonds then a Bodily Confinement; lets bless God for bringing
us out of this Pit by the Blood of the Covenant, this was the great end of
Christ's coming into the world, and of his Divine Unction to Preach good tidings
unto the meek, to bind up the brokenhearted, Isa. 61.1.
to proclaim Liberty to the Captives, chap. 49.24, 25.
and the opening of the Prison to them which are bound; the Prey shall be taken
from the mighty, and the lawful Captive delivered; or as the Original, the
Captivity of the Just; the Captives of the Mighty shall be taken away, and the
Prey of the Terrible shall be delivered: those that were under the power of
Satan, that Roaring Lion, that great Red Dragon, shall be Rescued; Ephesians. 4.8.
for Christ has led Captivity Captive, Col. 2.15.
Satan and all Evil Angels, Principalities and Powers, the Rulers of the
darkness of this world, and made a show of it openly in his his glorious
Resurrection and Ascension, so that now he having obtained the Conquest over
Satan, Sin, the Grave, he will say to the Prisoners, Isa. 49.9.
Go forth, and to them which are in darkness, Psalm. 1.7.
Show your selves: he has broken the Gates of brass, and cut the Bars of Iron
in sunder; the darkness of a Material Prison is nothing to the darkness of a
Spiritual one; Material Chains to Spiritual Chains; deprivation of the Bodies
Liberty is not to be compared to the Souls being shut up from God, Psalm. 16.11.
this is far worse then to be shut up from friends, being delivered from
Spiritual Bonds: We may have Liberty in Bonds, light in Darkness, Peace in
Trouble; Communion with God by the Spirit is a good Cordial to keep up the
heart from fainting in this valley of tears, until we come to our Mount of Joy,
where there is no limits of Joy and Blessedness; as the greatest Comforts and
Estates of the greatest Monarchs here are; there is no mixture as in this world:
Gods Providential Dealings with his people in this world, is like Chequer-work,
there is the dark, as well as the light side of Providence, the most Refined
and best State and Condition of the best Saints are mixed here, if we have some
peace, we have some trouble; if we have large Comforts one day, we may expect a
great degree of trouble another; least we should be exalted above measure, we
must have a thorn in the flesh now and then; but in Heaven there is no mixture,
2 Cor. 12.7.
for there is all light without darkness, all life without death, all Riches
without Poverty, all Content without the least Dissatisfaction; because we
shall then praise and love God in so perfect a manner, Psalm. 17.15.
as God will not demand more perfect Obedience then they will give, nor
themselves desire to bless God better then they shall, for that were to suppose
a kind of dissatisfaction in Heaven; which is contrary to Holy David's word,
Then shall I be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness; are we sensible of
Gods free grace to our Souls here, in delivering us from Spiritual Bonds? that
is an infallible sign we shall admire free grace hereafter in the glorious
Liberty of the Children of God, and shall be among that Multitude in
Revelations 7.9, 10. which none could number of all Kindreds, Nations, People
and Tongues, that stood before the Throne and before the Lamb, clothed with
white Robes, and Palms in their hands, and cried with a loud voice, Salvation
to our God, which sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb.

Again, This may be a Ground of Lamentation for the Church of God, that his
Ambassadors which did use to bring us glad tidings of Salvation, 2 Cor. 5.20.
are not only shut up in Material Prisons for a time, the Prisons of men, but
some of them are lodged in the Grave, and their mouths totally stopped, so as we
shall not hear them sound the Gospel Trumpet any more. It Is sometimes a sign of
anger when the King calls home his Ambassadors; the Apostle says in 1 Cor.
4.1. Let a man so account of us as the Ministers of Christ; (...)
Vperetes, Ministers, the word imports labor, painful labor, and signifies
an Under-Rower, Gods Ministers are thus called, 1 Cor. 4.15.
because under Christ the chief Master, they do help forward the Ship of the
Church toward the Haven of Heaven, through the many Rocks and Sands, Storms and
Tempests, Temptations and Persecutions which they meet withal: they are called
Fathers, which signifies instrumentally their begetting Souls to God, they are
called Bishops or Overseers, this charge has its name, Pakad in the Hebrew,
(...) Phil. 1.1. (...) Heb. 13.17.
from visiting; and in the Greek EPISKOPVS, from Over-seeing, Applied to any
which has a charge Civil or Ecclesiastical, and they are so called of their
watchfulness, care and labor for the good of his people; for they watch for
their Souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do it with Joy
and not with grief. Again, they are called Pastors POIMVN, this is taken from
Shepherds, (...)
and applied to Teachers, Mat. 9.36. to Christ the good Shepherd, John 10.11,
14, the great Shepherd, (...)
ARCHIPOIMVN, 1 Pet. 5.4. these are some of his honorable Titles, this same
word is applied to Kings, as in Mat. 2.6. Rev. 27.7, 19.15 but a word of a
double signification is to be understood according to the subject matter spoken
of, taken in Mat. 2.6. for Ruling as a King, but in Acts 20.28. for feeding as
a Shepherd, Feed the Flock of God, over which the Holy Ghost has made you
Overseers. Is not there cause of mourning when God takes away our Fathers
which begat us, our Ambassadors, which brings glad tidings and good news of
Reconciliation and Salvation by the death of the Son of God, yea, our
Ministers, which conducts, guides, and Rows the Ship of the Church as it were
under Christ to Heaven? Yea, to lose our Pastors and Shepherds which did use to
feed our Souls, this must needs be ground of mourning: the Jews had their signs
of sorrow upon the death of friends, they Rent their Clothes, Deuteronomy. 14.^.
they cut and pricked and made themselves bald, by plucking, shaving; they went
barefooted and bare-headed, and cast dust upon their heads, also covered their
Lip by casting the Lap of their Cloak over it, Micah 3.7.
they used Ministrils, who with sad tunes inclined the people to mourn, they
had also mourning women, who were skilful for Lamentation; now it is no matter
for those outward signs, Mat. 9.23.
if we are but truly affected with the hand of God; our loss is a Spiritual
Soul-loss, our mourning should be suitable to our loss. God complains that his
dispensation of this nature was not considered, Isa. 57.1. The Righteous
perishes, and no man lays it to heart, it seems God would have such things
laid to heart by those which are alive, and there is reason for it, if we
consider the latter part of the words, none considering the Righteous are taken
from the Evil to come, or, from that which is Evil; the death of good men seems
to be a forerunner of some Judgment, therefore God would have us to lay such
things to heart: Shall a Moses and a Joseph die, and shall we not mourn, but
give God cause to say of us, as of old, The Righteous perishes, and no man
lays it to heart? God forbid.

A Word of Consolation. The time is a coming when the Prisoners of Christ shall
have true Rest, and no more hear the Voice of the Oppressor; though now it may
be said of the Lords Interest, as the Prophet Isaiah once said of Gods
Heritage, Isaiah 42.22.
This is a People Robbed and Spoiled, they are all of them snared in Holes, and
they are hid in Prison-Houses; they are for a Prey, and none delivers; for a
spoil, and none says, Restore. But this shall cease and be over, 1 Samuel 28.14.
the Prisoners shall in Gods time rest together, and then Men or Devils cannot
disturb them, when once in the Grave. From hence we may learn that could not be
the Real body of Samuel which the Witch of Endor brought up before Saul; for
first its very Improbable that God who had denied to Answer Saul by Ordinary
means, should now Answer by Extraordinary: Secondly, Rev. 14.13.
no Witch or Devil can disturb their Bodies or Souls which Dye in the Lord:
Because they Rest from their Labors, as says the Spirit: Thirdly, had this
been Samuel which had been Raised, no doubt but he would have Reproved Saul for
Consulting with a Witch. This Rest in the grave, is a Forerunner of Eternal
Rest in the Saints union of Soul and Body with God.

Its with a godly Man in this Troublesome and uneasy World, as it was with
the Dove, who could find no Rest for the Soul of her foot, because of the
swelling Waters of affliction; what from Sin and hot burning Persecuters, in
dwelling Lusts and Corruptions, Romans 7.24.
which made Holy Paul Cry out, O Wretched Man that I am! and elsewhere says,
We that are in this Tabernacle, do Groan, b^ing Burdened: Add unto all those
the accusations of an accusing tempting Devil; 2 Cor. 5.2.
and its no wonder a believer has little Rest in this World; if Satan will
accuse God to Man, as he did God to Adam, Genesis 3.
in telling him God forbids him Eating of the Tree of knowledge of Good and
Evil for his hurt, to keep him in Ignorance, for if he would but Eat, he would
be as a God, knowing Good and Evil; so also he accuses Man to God; so he did
Job in representing him as an Hypocrite: Hence he is called Satan, (...)
which signifies an Adversary, an accusing Adversary, as Psalm. 109.20. when
this Name is Applied as an Adversary to Gods People, it usually means the
Devil, as Job. 1.6. Mat. 4. but being spoken of an Adversary to the Wicked, and
defender of the Church, its Applied to a g^od Angel, as Numb. 22.22. The LXX
usually Render it Diabolos, (...)
which signifies an accuser; so Job. 1.6. the Septuagint there, Render it so;
Satan is the great Accuser and Callumniator of the People of God, and all that
use this Diabolical work are called by this Diabolical Name, 1 Timothy 3.11.
Women, says the Apostle, must not be Slanderous, Diabolos, not false Accusers;
this great Adversary does not a little break the Peace of Gods People, but the
time is hastening they shall all rest in their Beds, Isaiah 57.2.
each man which has walked in his uprightness, and after the Resurrection
comes the day of Jubilee: in the Jubilee of old, upon the sound of the Trumpet,
they were every man to return to their Possessions; so when the great Trumpet
shall sound, and the Dead in Christ Rise first, we shall take Possession of our
Eternal Inheritance, which Christ is gone to prepare and secure for us: this
Jubilee was to return of old, but once in fifty years, but in Heaven in glory,
it is all Jubilee; in this year of Jubilee, the Jews were not to Sow nor Reap, but
it was to be a year of Rest unto them: O! when we enter upon our spiritual one,
all our laboring under Sin, Suffering, Satanical Temptations, will have an
end, and we shall Rest from our Labors. This Temporary Jubilee continued but a
year, and then to their Toil and labor again; Oh but the Spiritual Jubilee will
be an Everlasting Eternal one, Heb. 4.9.
that Rest which remains for the people of God will know no end: God promised
Israel of old, when they were got over Jordan, he would give them Rest from all
their Enemies; so when we are got well through the Wilderness, and safely
carried through Jordans Swellings, we shall come to the good Land and be at
Rest, where the Inhabitants shall no more say, Isai. 33.24.
I am Sick, for all Tears shall be wiped away from our Ey^s, and we shall
sorrow no more, because Sin no more, Israel of Old thought it a great Mercy to
be quiet and at Rest from their Enemies forty Years, Rev. 7.17.
but what is that to Eternity? To Conclude, let us all take the Counsel of the
Apostle Paul to the Thessalonians, after he had been telling them of the
Resurrection of the Saints, and that they should Rise first, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16,
17.18.
also informing them of the coming of our Lord Christ, and that when he comes
we shall all be caught up in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so be
ever with the Lord, now what is his Exhortation and Conclusion? Comfort one
another with these Words. While Sin, Satan, and an Unkind World is
Discomforting you, do you in a lively Hope of the Resurrection of the Body, the
coming of Christ, your Meeting of him, and continuing with him, cheer up and
Comfort one another with these things.

Reader,
I will here adjoyn an Elegy on the Deaths of Mr. Bampfield and Mr. Ralphson,
which (for the Subst^^ce of it) was first composed by a Friend of Mr.
Ralphsons, designed on him alone; but forasmuch as the preceding Discourse was
occasioned from both their Deaths, I have put it into that Order as the whole
Elegy may be applicable to both, in all Respects; First, As they were Ministers
of Christ. Secondly, As they were Sufferers for Christ. Thirdly, As to their
Zeal against Antichrist. Fourthly, In Respect of their longing for Sions
Welfare, and their mourning under Sions Calamities. Fifthly, In Respect of
Soul-seedings, and Soul-supportings, by all the ways and means they were
capable of in their Confined Estate.

An Elegy on the Deaths of Mr. Bampfield and Mr. Ralphson, who Dyed Prisoners
for Christ, in the Press-yard, Newgate.
May not all fear, when Heaven denounces woes
Aloud by Signal and by Fatal blows,
Smiting the Shepherds, Calling Guides away,
That Flocks are left to wander, starve and stray,
Even when the Wolves, the Foxes, and the Boar,
Rage for the Prey, and harmless Lambs devour.
Was it for naught that Blustering Sparkling Rays
Of strange stupendous Comets did the Eyes
Of Earths Inhabitants so long detain
In times but lately past? who can refrain,
Considering our Strokes, so great, so sad,
Heightened with Circumstances dark and bad,
All saying, Sure these wonders did Presage
Some Future Tragedy to this poor Age?
Its Progress now makes many People think
The following things will make men's Spirits shrink,
Since many splendid Lights Extinguished are,
As now those Stars, those lovely shining Pair;
These are put out, and we Deprived of Light,
And left to stumble in so dark a Night.
By Tongue I cannot, nor by Pen Express
My Thoughts of them, and their great Worthiness.
Of their Refined Zeal, their Heart Contrite,
Of their Compassions, with a public Sp'rit.
Their Liberal Souls were highly to be Prized,
Also their Stedfastness some Magnifies,
O Zealous ones, who in the Gap did stand!
True wrestling Watchmen to preserve the Land,
Striving with all the Gospel to promote,
Whose Trumpet sounds a true and certain Note.
In Faithfulness they duly warned all,
As did that Hand by writing on the wall,
Show Belshazzar his Sacrilege and fall.
Those Seers are both removed from their Station,
A signal Loss both to the Church and Nation,
Leaving now off their Cried, their Sighs and Groans:
Petitions, Pleadings, Tears, Complaints and Moans;
Their sublime Souls, in Prison Languishing,
Groaned for Relief, Cries to their Heavenly King
Help Sio^, Lord, her Controversy Plead,
Remove her Sorrow, and increase her Seed.
How long O Lord? when, when will thou relieve
Thy tossed Church? when will thou Freedom give?
When men those Seers from Preachings did Restrain,
Their Meeting Houses closed up did remain;
Through Watch and Ward then none could entry take;
They thus deprived, by Life and Pen did make
Apologies, and worship true defended,
Which still does Preach, although their Preaching's ended.
After that they to Prison both were sent,
And finding diverse Dishes, were content
To distribute what in their Basket came
From their Kings Table, and divide the same;
Gave through the Grate, that hungry Souls might share
With them, partaking of their Prison-fare.
What double Grief to their Seraphick mind
Was it, to be Imprisoned and Confined,
And so Restrained from serving of their Lord,
From Publishing and Preaching of his word;
While many Souls were crying out aloud,
Starved almost for want of Heavenly Food,
Of Gospel Springs and Ordinances pure,
The sadest loss that any can endure.
Come join and mourn with me; O come, O come,
And help me to express, now sitting dumb,
In Melancholy Muteness, and in Tears,
Sob forth our present loss, and ground of Fears.
But stop a little, though there is Cause to weep,
That those great Seers are both fallen asleep
Yet they Transported in Triumphant Fame,
Rejoicing praise the great JEHOVAHS Name:
Free from all Cares, have now Eternal rest,
With such Delights as cannot be expressed.
Let none grudge this praise to their Memory,
No Pen is fit to write their Elegy:
Their works are finished, they have run their race,
And who is behind for to supply their place!
Since those Elijahs Heaven have ascended,
Convoyed with Holy Angels, who attended
Their Souls to Glory, since they did defend
The Cause of Sion to their very End,
By Tongue and Pen the Deluge sought to stop,
And in ascending did their Mantles drop;
Let all her Children pray, yea plead and call
For some Elishas to appear, who shall
Their Mantles take, and with a double measure
Of Holy Wisdom and Celestial Treasure,
Supply their place; Truth teach, and Truth defend,
And haste the Scarlet Whore to her last end;
That so all these Terrestrial Kingdoms may
Christ's Kingdoms be, let Sions Children pray.
For their work's finished, they are both set free,
Called from a Prison to Felicity.
To Heavens rich Mansions, to Salvations wells,
To Gods right hand, even where all fullness dwells.
Their Gracious Lord, moved by their Sighs and Groans,
Their Grievances, their Tears, and bitter Moanes,
Sends speedy Help, his Prisoners relieves,
And calls them thence out of a Den of theives.
So Graciously Conveys their souls above,
To full fruition of his Matchless Love;
Where they enjoy what no man can express,
Celestial Joy, Perpetual Happiness:
With Living Streams, Solac'd without Cessation,
Triumphant Glory, Endless Consolation.
Joining in Praises, Songs, and Heavenly Hymns,
With Angels, Saints, Archangels, Seraphims.
FINIS.

