THE Weavers POCKETBOOK: OR, Weaving Spiritualized.

In a Discourse, wherein Men employed in that Occupation, are instructed how to
raise Heavenly Meditations, from the several parts of their Work.

To which also are added some few Moral and Spiritual Observations, relating
both to that and other Trades.

By J. C. D. D.

Promissio Sanctificat omnia, et reddit pretiosa in conspectu Dei; neque
quicquam tam minutum fieri potest, in vocatione Divinitas ordinata, quin Deo
placeat. Luther. T. 4. in Genesis in c. 46.

Job. 7.6. My days are swifter than a Weavers Shuttle.

Isa. 38.12. I have cut off like a Weaver my Life.

Printed in the Year, 1695.

To his Honored Friends, Bernard Church Esquire; and John Richars Gentleman,
Aldermen of the City of Norwich.
Worthy and much Honored Friends,
THE design of the following sheets will be so obvious to every Eye upon the
reading of them, that many words to expound it to you will be perfectly
superflous; it will easily be its own interpreter both to you and others
besides: what is needful upon that Subject I shall more fully discourse in my
Epistle unto the Reader. My business to you is, but to give you an account of
my Entituling you unto it. For which it were enough to say. That God has so
blessed you both in that occupation which I make the Theme of the following
discourses, as that it has brought you in not only a Livelihood, but such an
Overplus as has capacitated you not only to serve your Generation, in the
Offices relating to and the principal Conduct of that Trade, but in other great
Employments: The one of you has not only served the City, wherein you are, in
the Offices of Sheriff and Alderman (that you both have done) but also in the
Office of Mayor (and that the other too has not done the same is only from his
own Reluctance) and also represented this famous City in the Highest Court of
parliament. But also, because you are great Examples of that Piety, Sobriety,
and Goodness of Temper, to which (as you will find I have in the following
sheets observed) this course of Life in men's youth does much tutour, and
dispose them, and in being, or having been the heads and conductors of all that
are busied in that Occupation, you have Entitutled your selves to all those
Discourses which may tend to the Moral or Spiriual Improvements of it. You will
by the following discourses see, you have no reason to reflect with any
blushing, upon the way in which you were in your youth trained up; you have
eminently served your Generation before you fall asleep. The employment of your
Lives has not been a making Silvershrines for Diana; it has not been a
service to the Luxury, Pride and Wantoness of the Generation in which you
lived; it has not been an Apocryphal' Employment, it has been the Employment
of a good Dorcas, only you made the Stuff which possibly other pious and
devout Souls made up. It has been an Employment that has had a good end and
design, upon which in the morning you could warantably go, and pray to God for
a Blessing and in the evening say, Prosper thou the work of our hand upon us,
Lord Prosper thou our handiwork. An Employment which has kept you at home
watching over your Families, and which has brought you in a Livelihood, and
given you a Station in the world, if beneath Envy, yet above Pity. What has
enabled you to Employ the poor, to give portions to six and also to seven? you
may look back without a regret and rejoice in the fruit of your Labors; seeing
many a sober Tradesman that you have bred, many a poor person that you have
clothed. Your days (my worthy and honored Friends) are in a great measure
past, and when you look back upon them you will say they are past Swifter than
your Shuttles; your week is almost at an end, and and you who have had many a
piece of Stuff at the end of the week brought home to you, must in a few weeks,
or months, or years; be gathered to your Fathers and be no more. Your works
will follow you and your selves must carry home to the great Lord of Heaven and
earth the Web which you have Weaved. May it please the Lord to bless these
Discourses to you both, that they may but any way conduce either to augment
your comfort in a reflection upon the work which you have already done: or help
you to throw your Shuttles well as to the remnant which you have yet to do;
that when you carry all home you may hear that blessed voice, Well done good and
faithful servant, thou have been faithful in a little, I will make thee a ruler
over much; enter thou into thy masters joy: which is and shall be the prayer of
him, who is,

Your most faithful and affectionat Friend and Servant in the Work of the
Gospel, J. C.

TO THE READER: And more especially, To the Masters, Wardens, and Assistants in
the Corporation of Worsted-Weavers, relating to the City of Norwich, together
with all my worthy Friends, whether Masters or Journey-men, employed in the Art
and Mystery of Weaving.
AT last (my worthy Friends) I have found both leisure and advantage, to
testify both to you, and to the World, the great value and respect which for
more than twenty years (that is, ever since I understood any thing of you) I
have had, as for very many of your Persons, so for that Occupation wherein you
daily are employed: so great (I will assure you) that for these twenty eight
years I have hardly been consulted by any Friend about the disposal of a Child
whom I have not advised to your Trade: and, but that in the Education of a
Child Nihil invita Minerva, the Genius of the Child ought to give a principal
Conduct, I will assure you, next to the immediate service of GOD in his Gospel
(from which these times de^erred me, unless I had had enough to have left them
to have enabled them to do it freely) I had devoted my Sons to your Fellowship;
nor would any thing have more pleased me as to any Son of mine, than to have
seen him fancying one of your Looms. For I have either taken false Measures
(which yet I think I have not) or no Employment which I have in my Eye, has
superior advantages to you, if equal with you, to serve all the Nobler Ends of
Man's Life. Were I so be your Orator, I think I have Topics enough by me to
persuade any Person that nothing can commend a Trade to a VVise-man, but what
is to be found in Yours; some of those things you will find enlarged upon in
the first of my Observations in the following Sheets. My thoughts, that it was
pity that such a number of Persons employed in so excellent an Employment as
you are, should want any Advantages to help you from Looms unto Heaven, is that
which your has engaged me in this Service; a Design which for some years I
have had in my Thought, even ever since I saw Mr. Flavel's Navigation and
Husbandry Spiritualized: But many of you know, that from my Youth upward, my
Hand has been full of Employments, and my latter years more full than my
former. More than forty years of my Life, were spent without much care what to
Eat or Drink; since that time those Cares have also been upon me, and made my
work something more, than to consider what Subject next to Preach upon, and how
to handle it. These few Sheets by reason of this, were taken in hand again and
again, and as often laid aside, at last a very few days have finished the
greater part of them, (and for some of that leisure you may thank some
Informers too:) It is a noble design to instruct People how to Spiritualize
every Object, and a nobler Practice for any to do it. Our Blessed LORD made it
his business to take all Advantages to commend to his Disciples and Hearers
spiritual Meditations on earthly Objects: The sight of Bread, John 6. brings
forth that excellent Sermon about the Bread of Life. His asking of Water of the
Woman of Samaria, gave him an occasion to discourse of the living water, which
whosoever drinks shall thirst no more: And it is more than probable, that his sight
of a Shepherd with his flock of Sheep, and of a Vine, gave occasion to those
excellent Sermons, John 10. John 15. It is the great Disadvantage of most
Worldly Employments, that they have a natural tendency to divert the Soul from
GOD; upon which account I remember it was, that holy Mr. Palmer preferred the
Work of the Ministry to all the Employments of the World, as leading the Soul
directly to the Meditations of GOD, and whose Work ly in a Communion with him;
whereas all other Employments bent the Soul another way. I know no better way
to remedy this Disadvantage from the nature of your Work, than by showing you,
how you may make it an Advantage to you. This is the very business of these few
Sheets. Brethren! give me leave to tell you all, That my Hearts desire and
Prayer to GOD for you, is that you may be saved. Though I have a just regret
and compassion for any Soul, that I see like to perish Eternally; yet methinks,
I have a juster and sadder regret for any industrious Souls. I would not have
one of them perish eternally whom I see so industrious to take pains that they
and their Families might live a few years comfortably in this Life. There is a
Generation of Men that are too lazy to go to Heaven; or to live here, but upon
the Alms and Spoils of others: It had been good for them they had never been
Born, and it had been also good for the World they never had been Born: for
their Lives in it are of no further use, than to defile, and to devour, and to
distrub it. If such Men perish, let them perish, we having given them a due
Warning. But methinks it pities my Soul to think that a Weaver should eternally
perish. A Weaver whom I see before four of the Clock in the Morning and after
8, 9, 10, at night hard at Work, that one so patient of Labor for the Bread
that perishes, so patient of Self-denial in the Sports and Pleasures which
others spend their Life in, and all for a few Shillings at the end of the Week;
I say, that such a one, after the long Toil of his Laborius Life, should at
last lie down in Hell; this goes very near me: And I cannot but say sometimes,
Surely we (who are the Lords Ministers) do not instruct these Men enough; we do
not press the thoughts of Eternity upon them as we ought to do. These are a
People that are not too lazy to be saved, they are Men that can work night and
day in their earthly Masters work for a Livelihood for their Bodies. Surely, if
we could persuade them they had Souls, and those immortal Souls, that they are
Beings ordained to an Eternity; That Eternal Happiness is not to be got by a
Loom, but by Believing, Reading, Hearing, Prayer, Self-denial, taking up
Christ's Cross, Mortification of beloved Lusts, they might be persuaded to spend
some time every day, in Reading, Praying, some time in Hearing; to spend some
time in searching and trying their ways, that they may turn unto the LORD. I
know that when we have done and said what we can, Old Adam (as he said) will be
found too hard for Young or Old Melancthon. The way of Man is not in himself,
neither is it in Man to direct his steps. But show me that person who has done
what in him lies toward his own Salvation, to whom GOD has denied his free,
but effectual Grace. My good Friends! You know I cannot from the Pulpit as
formerly speak unto you; if I could, neither were this a fit Theme to discourse
there; neither would the sound of my words in your Ears abide with you, so as a
printed Book may, I have on purpose contracted my Discourse into a few sheets,
that it may be a burden not too heavy for an ordinary Purse. I propose to my
self nothing of gain in it. If I may but gain one Soul, it is enough; if not, I
have but my Labor for my Pains (as we say in our English Proverb.) I would
willingly help on your Salvation, and show my Love and Kindness to an
industrious People; I have nothing else but my poor Prayers, by which I can
show my self,

Your faithful Friend and Servant, in the work of the Gospel. J. C.

The Art of Weaving Spiritualized.
CHAP. I.
Exodus xxxv. 35. Them has he filled with wisdom of heart, to work all manner
of Work of the Ingraver, -- and of the Weaver, etc.


The Meditations.
Sect.1. THE Work here in Hand was the making a Tabernacle, a moving House for
the Lord God of Israel: The Workmen are nominated by God himself, v. 30. The
Lord has called by Name Bezaleel the Son of Uri, the Son of Hur: and verse 34.
Aholiab the Son of Ahisamach. (It is reasonable the Master of the House should
appoint his own Workmen.) These he filled with his Spirit in Wisdom,
Understanding, Knowledge, and in all manner of Workmanship. God never sends any
to his Work but he first furnishes them with Tools fit to do it. Those who
are busied at works for which they are not spirited and enabled, (whoever sends
them) are not sent by God. As he fitted these workmen with wisdom of Heart to
work all work, so particularly it is said, And of the Weaver.

Sect. 2. The Art of VVeaving then has a Divine Original. Naamah the Sister of
Tubal-cain (mentioned Genesis 4.22. might be the first Spinstress or Weaveress,
(as Genebrard thinks,) the Scripture tells us her Brother was the first workman
in Brass and Iron) if She first learned others, yet it is certain God first
taught her. If Closterus first made Spindles, his God first taught him that
Discretion; and if Naamah first wrought in Looms, yet as the Prophet says of
the Threshers discretion, Isaiah 28.29. This also came from the Lord of Hosts,
who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working: if weaving (as the
Philosopher thinks) were ^earnt from the Spider, yet the Spider has it from
the Lord mighty in counsel. He that teaches the Warriors hands to War, and
his fingers to fight, teaches the Weaver also to mix his Yarns, and to throw
his Shuttle.

Sect. 3. The Weavers Trade then is Canonical. An employment of which God is
not ashamed to be called the Father, as to which he is pleased to employ his
own Spirit. It Is good to be in a Calling as to which we can say, That God has
called us to it. Pious Parents may have a little too much Zeal, in refusing all
but Scripture-Names for their Children, (the Scripture it self borrows
Childrens Names from words significant of Mercy and Duty.) But those Parents
are as much too careless, who think they may give their Children the Names of
Pagan Idols, or otherwise foolish and insignificant. There may be particular
Employments lawful enough, which are not Canonized by holy writ, all things
were not written, (what should the world then have done with the Books!) Trades
are for necessary Uses, and every Employment of that nature not serving to
maintain wickedness, or merely to debauch the World with Wantonness and Luxury,
are doubtless lawful, whether we can derive them from Scripture or no: But
certainly it is a satisfaction to a pious Tradesman, when he can find the Name
of his Trade written in that Book of Life. This you see the Weaver may, if he
cannot derive from Naamah, yet he may derive from Bezaleel and Aholiab, and
they both derived from God.

Sect. 4. These Weavers were working for the Tabernacle. Weaving then does not
only derive from God, but may be useful for God, and that in Services which in
the first degree are acceptable to him. The excellency of a Trade derives from
its usef^lness; the Nobleness of it from the particular use to which it may be
serviceable. A Trade can serve no higher use than that of the Tabernacle. This
the Weavers Trade is here serviceable unto. Your Bodies (says the Apostle) are
the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. The Temple and Tabernacle differs
not in their end, but in their Foundation only and Ornament. The Temple was
fixed; the Tabernacle moving. The Tabernacle in a more traveling Habit than
the Temple. Both Houses for the Lord God of Israel. The Temple is made the
Figure of Christ, Joh. 2. Weaving then may be serviceable unto the Lord Jesus
Christ: yea it is so serviceable. Let not the Eunuch say, I am a dry tree: let
not the Weaver say, I am a poor mean Trade. He who in his Trade serves the
highest Uses, may contend with the noblest Tradesman; let not the Weaver say
then, that he is of a mean Trade in Israel, of a Family lightly esteemed of.
Kings Servants have no contemptible Notion. The Dignity of a Trade is not
beholden to the World's estimate, but to its own usefulness. He that can work
for a Tabernacle, works for the highest end.

Sect. 5. But there is a difference yet betwixt working for the Tabernacle, and
working in the Tabernacle; Bezaleel and Aholiab work for it, but Aaron and his
Sons only must work in it; and No man takes that honor to himself (says the
Apostle) but he who is called of God as Aaron was. Let every man (says the
Apostle) abide in the Calling to which God has called him. When I consider the
composition of the Tabernacle, I find there no work for the Weaver, but in the
making the fine linen, in converting the Wool offered of Blue, Purple and
Scarlet, or working the Goats-hair offered into webs, making the Hangings for
the Court and the Door of the Court, and the Clothes of Service, the Holy
Garments for Aaron the Priest, and for his Sons to Minister in; yet is not this
to be despised: he that makes but a Curtain for the Lords Tabernable, certainly
has as high an Office, as he who is but a Doorkeeper in the House of the
Lord, which David preferred before a dwelling in the Tents of Wickedness.
Surely it is better to make a Garment for Aaron, than a Shrine for Diana. The
lowest Room in Heaven is Heaven (says a grave Author) though it be but behind
the Door. Vzzah must not touch the Ark, (though a Levite) nor Saul nor Vzzah
offer Sacrifices though both great Princes. God's Church is like an Army which
must march in Rank and File: God (says the Apostle) is a God of Order and not
of Confusion. The Weaver shall have his wages working for the Tabernacle,
though he wears not, but only weaves the Holy Garments; if he offers not a
Bullock yet he offers a Turtle-Dove and young Pigeons, he serves the Lord
Christ though it be not at the Altar, and does any serve him for nothing?

Sect. 6. But the House in Shiloh is pulled down, and there is no more going up
to Gibeon; yea there is not one stone left upon another, either in Solomon's, or
Zorobabels, or Herod's Temple: the Curtains are rent in pieces, and the Holy
Garments are worn out, Is then the Weavers Trade antiquated? Or, is the
usefulness of it for the Temple abolished? Or, need we to devise New Holy
Garments for Priests to entitle them to an Employment for God? And must
Hangings of Blue, Purple and Scarlet again be made necessary? No surely, Know
you not (says the Apostle to the Christian Corinthians) that your Bodies are
the Temples of the Holy Ghost; Temples in which the Lord dwells, even he who
dwells not in Temples made with hands. If the Weaver cannot yet see himself at
work for God's Tabernacles, the fault is in his own Eyes, or in the lust of his
own Heart. He that works for the clothing of the Naked, is doubtless at work
for God's Tabernacle, Nay, for that fixed Temple, which he has set up amongst
the Sons of Men; ( For the poor (says our Lord) you have always with you.) The
Weaver that made our Lords Seamless-Coat, understood not what he did, but had a
noble Employment: That Coat was to cover the Person who was the Eternal Son of
God, but he never made more than that one for such an use. Me (says Christ)
you have not always: he who wore that was presently to put on the Garments of
Glory; but he that Weaves for his Members has a more standing work for GOD,
and so seems to be more blessed in his Employment. Our Savior corrected the
devout woman, that cried out, Luke 11.27. Blessed is the Womb that bare thee,
and the Papes which thou have Sucked: by adding verse 28. Yea, rather blessed
are they that hear the Word of GOD and keep it. Does any think, Blessed was
that Weaver which wore the Seamless-Coat for him who was his Savior, who was
an Instrument to cloth him with the Robe in which he was to appear before
Pontius Pilate, who was to cloth all the Elect with that garment of
Righteousness in which they are to appear before their Father in Heaven? Surely
we may say, yea rather Blessed are they, who are employed not in making
Coverings for the Temple that was Destroyed, and in three days raised up
again, but for the living Temples of the Most High GOD; if indeed as they
prepare clothing, so they also clothe the Naked: I was naked, and ye clothed
Me, Mat. 25.36.

Sect. 7. But what is this? God filled them with Wisdom of Heart, to do all
manner of Work -- of the Weaver. How does the Eternal GOD humble himself to
behold, not only the Things done in the Heavens, but upon the Earth? Who is
like unto the Lord who dwells on High? (says the Psalmist upon this very
Argument;) He clotheth the grass of the Field, which to Day is, and to Morrow
is cast into the Oven: and all Flesh is grass (says the Prophet;) this grass
he clotheth also. How low does the lofty Eye descend? The wheel is turned upon
the Cummin, and the Fitches are not threshed out with a threshing Instrument;
but beaten out with a Staff. The bread Corn is bruised because he will not be
ever threshing it, nor break it with the wheel of his Cart, nor bruise it with
Horsemen. This also comes from the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 28.28, 29. This? What?
This Discretion, Verse 26. His GOD does instruct him to Discretion, and teach
him. The Weaver would not have known which way to have fastened his VVarp, or
ordered his VVoof, or directed his Shuttle, or mixed his Yarns, but for a
Discretion taught him by the LORD of Hosts. Blessed GOD! How great art thou in
all things? And never greater than in the least of things: How little do we
know thee, or consider thee, who yet art ever at our fingers ends? What a
Meditation this is for a Weaver at his Loom? Is it the LORD of Hosts, that
influenceth my hand even in this Moment to throw this Shuttle, and influenceth
my Mind with Discretion to order these Threads, to move these several Utensils
of my Trade, so as they serve the end which I design: what a GOD do I serve?
who is present with me while I sit here at my poor contemptible Employment, who
humbles himself to help me to work, and influenceth me to work better than my
Neighbor: have I more Discretion than my Fellow Laborer in the same Chamber?
This also comes from the LORD, who is mighty in Counsel and wonderful in
Working.

Sect. 8. I am therefore (certainly) obliged to be Humble, If I can invent a
New Stuff which another cannot (with all his Industry) hit upon, if I can
better order my Yarns, my Colors, if I can better order my Work, or throw my
Shuttle more Nimbly, and bring a Piece quicker off the Loom; I have no reason
to despise him that cannot be so quick, or sagacious as my self, for what have
I which I have not received from him who is mighty in Counsel? To despise the
diligent Person or my dull Companion, that is not Sottish, and wilfully
Negligent in his work, is but to reproach my Maker; and he was mine as well as
his: I derived no more of my Soul than he did from his Mother, and they are the
nimbler exercises of that, not of my terrene Earthly part, which discovers
this ingenuitie. But I have infinite Reason to be thankful to that GOD who
has thus given me that Power to get Riches, which he that denied to him that
works in the same Chamber with me. Certainly I stand obliged to do more than
others, for that God who has done more for me than for others of my own Trade.
This common Gift obliges me to special Duty, because it is not common to me
with all, though it be common to Me with others who never tasted special and
distinguishing Grace.

Sect. 9. Now what should the Weavers do more? doubtless, Love, Honor, serve
that GOD more: but these are Generals. Of Old the first fruits were to be
offered unto the LORD: To do good and to distribute (says the Apostle) forget
not, for with such Sacrifices GOD is well pleased. Distributions fall under the
two Notions of feeding the Hungry, and clothing the Naked. The Latter of these
directly refers to the Weaver's Trade. I have heard that a late Learned
Lawyer in this Nation, during his whole Life, would lay aside every tenth Fee
for pious and charitable Uses. Our Law obliges the Lawyer to give his pains to
Him or Her that will plead in forma pauperis. If you can think of nothing else
whereby to show your Gratitude to GOD, yet this you cannot overlook because
ever in your Eye. This is to Honor GOD with your Substance, and with your
Increase; your Increase lies in making Clothing for the Naked. Let your
Friends when you are gone be able (as the Friends of Dorcas) to bring forth the
Clothes which when alive She had made for the Poor. Let me tell you, that GOD
is the best Merchant you can part with a Piece of Stuff to: he indeed sometimes
takes day to see if his Weavers can trust him, but as he pays certainly, so he
pays to the best Profit: He that casts his Bread upon many Waters, shall
after many days find it; And so shall he that throws a Piece of Cloth, or
Stuff there: He shall find it in that day when GOD shall say to them on his
right Hand, I was Naked and you Clothed me.

Sect. 10. But if I must be filled with the Wisdom of GOD to work all manner
of Work of the Weaver; if this comes from the LORD, then much more to work
any Spiritual Work. If there must be a special influx of Providence, beyond
what ordinary Souls of Workmen have, (possessed of an understanding and will
of the same species with mine,) upon me to make me a better Workman, to invent
a New Piece of Stuff, to judge of its acceptableness to People the next Year,
better than another of the same Trade with me that has the same understanding
and will that I have; What an influence of GOD must it require to perform a
spiritual Service that shall be acceptable unto GOD? Cannot I mix my Colors as
I would? and may I Repent or Believe if I will? It is not in my Power to make a
Piece of Stuff of which I have the Pattern which lies before me, and for which I
have the Materials? and is it in my Power to do an Action truly and spiritually
good, though I have Paterns before me, though I have the same rational Soul,
that he has that does it? He that denies distinguishing spiritual Habits
referring to truly Spiritual Acts, will be forced to acknowledge a
distinguishing Common Gift given to one Weaver and not to another: The one can
invent, the other cannot; the one can judge better, whether a Piece of Stuff
will next Year take; the one can do his work more neatly and acceptably to
every Eye. Man has not his will so far free, that though he has learned his
Trade, and would fain invent and judge, and mix his Colors, and work up, and
off his ware as well as another; yea though he has the same Yarns, he cannot
do it: Let then the Arminian go and Dispute with the Weaver, and first make
him believe that he may invent as happily as his Neighbor, and make as good
work as he if he will; let him tell him that the reason why he does it not, is
not natural but moral impotency, because he cannot prevail with himself to be
willing to do it; will not the Experience of every poor industrious Weaver
confute him? surely the Experience of a Christian, as to Actions truly
Spiritually and formally good, will confute him much more.

Sect. 11. What an Argument also is this for contentation with the lot which
GOD has given us, and the Station in the World which he has willed us to
take up. The World is but a great Army, set in Rank and File, by the LORD, the
LORD of Hosts: What if one be a Lieutenant General; others Colonels and
Captains and Commission-Officers in it; and others be but Milites gregarii,
ordinary Common Soldiers; it is the Great General that has ordered the one,
and the other to their Stations, and has fitted the one and the other for
their Works. What if GOD will have the Princes, the Nobles, the Judges, to sit
all day on the Throne of Judgment, and to employ themselves in cutting out
right to every Man, whiles he wills me to sit in my Loom and employ my self
all the day in throwing the Shuttle; We both are influenced by the same
Spirit. On them Rests the Spirit of Wisdom and Judgment; on me also (in my
model) the Spirit of Wisdom, from whence I work the Work of the Weaver. As I am
influenced by GOD to my work as well as those that take up higher Stations, and
assisted by GOD in it: So I have also an opportunity in it, to show my self
serviceable to GOD, serviceable to my Generation. The Magistrates work is to
defend; the Rich Man's work is to Feed; Mine is to Cloth the Naked. I can Pray
for a Blessing upon my Loom, because it works for the necessary Uses of
Mankind. Do I work in a lower Orb than some others do? yet I serve no lower
Master; I work for no lower End than they do. Let not the Weaver say then, My
Family is poor in Israel, my Trade is lightly esteemed of. Fools rate things by
appearance, and sacrifice their Judgments to Vulgar applause: Wise Men judge
according to Reality. Can that Trade be contemptible, which the wise GOD
learneth us, in which the Spirit of GOD assisteth us, and which serves one of
the greatest Uses of the Sons of Men? If therefore thou be bred no higher
than to be a Weaver, yet be therewith content. Paul had learnt to be so in
every State. Let thy Mind abide in that Calling to which the LORD has called
you; say not, O if I had been a Merchant, if I had been a Draper, etc. They
both derive from thee; and the Spirit of Wisdom, to work all manner of Work,
even that of the Weaver, does far more Visiblie work in thee, than in the one
or the other of them: There is far less Wisdom exercised by them, in
proportioning Piece, in contriving advantageous Transportations, than in thy
invention of thy Stuff, mixing and contriving thy Yarns, etc. The Spider
certainly shows us more of GOD than the Butterfly. The Silkworm is a far
greater Miracle of Divine Wisdom than any other Insect.

The Poem:
Then Rest my Soul; thou have enough:
Thou servest GOD in VVeaving Stuff.
Shou servest, and may serve him more,
Clothing the good, but naked poor.
Thou servest men: and serv'st them in
Employment, where thou serv'st not sin:
Thou servest not their Luxury,
But only their Necessity.
It Is not my work to improve a mine,
Making Diana's Silver-shrine:
Nor to make Ribbands, no nor Lace,
Nor Patches for a Wanton's Face;
Nor any idle Instrument
Of Pride, which Men may better want.
(If Stuffs may be abused too.
That Tailors, and not Weavers do.
The Weaver is no low-born Trade,
Spiders by GOD at first were made.
It Is GOD that gives a wise Heart
To me, to work in the Weavers Art.
Blessed LORD! let me a Weaver be,
So I may Weave a Piece for thee.
CHAP. II. The Weavers Materials: Wool, Silk, Hair, Hemp, Flax, Cotton, etc.
The Meditations.
Sect. 1. THe Weaver's Trade, is of great Antiquity, yet not coveous to the
Fall of Adam: That first indeed discovered Nakedness (which makes the
Usefulness of this Art) but the Art was not discovered as soon as Shame made a
necessity of Clothes. Our first Parents first Sewed Fig Leaves together, and
made themselves Aprons, Genesis 3.7. [or something to gird about them] here GOD
himself was the Weaver, and Adam and Eve were their own Tailors. We know not
the Dimensions of the Trees, or Leaves, or Fruits of those fruitful Places;
but (be it what it will) the Protection a Fig-leaf could give must necessarily
be very ordinary, and the Covering very scant. The Hebrew therefore says no
more than that they made Garments, covering those Parts which Nature teaches
Us to Hide. The Extremities of Cold and Heat, which Sin had now made more
Afflictive, and the fast coming-up of the Thorns and Thistles, to which the
Earth (for Man's sake) was quickly Condemned, soon discovered need of better
Clothes than Fig Trees could afford. When Weaving certainly began, is hard to
say; but if what some would have, one of the Daughters of Lamech began it, it
must be by that time the world had beed 1651 Years in Being. Be that as it
will, we know within a thousand Years after, Bezaleel and Aholiab were skilled
in it. We know that in the Tabernacle were Curtains of fine twined Linen,
Blue, Purple and Scarlet (which certainly refer to woollen.) We know also there
were Curtains of Goats Hair, Exodus 26.7. Of Silk indeed we read nothing, that
I remember, till Proverbs 31. It should seem by some of the Roman Historians,
that it was a rare Commodity 284 Years after our Savior: Aurelian therefore
the Emperor would wear no Clothes, whose VVarp and VVoof were both Silk; for
(says my Author) a Pound of Silk was then of the same Value with a Pound of
Gold. It was 555 Years after Christ before any great plenty of Silk was
discovered in Europe. Procopius tells us, we were then beholden to two Monks
for it, who brought some Silkworms Eggs from the Indies to Justinian the
Emperor. The Use of the other Materials was much more Ancient. Hemp, Flax and
Cotton-wool, are vegetables: Wool, Silk and Hair are the Product of sensitive
Creatures. The whole Creation is made up of Things that have a mere Being; such
are the Elements, Stars, etc. or such things as have Life and no more added to
Being; such are all Vegetables, Plants, etc. or such as to Being and Life have
also Sense added, and therefore are called Sensitives; such are all Beasts,
whether those that have four feet or more, such are Sheep, Goats, Worms, Flies
and all Infects: or such as have Being, Life and Sense and Reason also; such is
Man. The Angels are a noble part of the Creation too, and have Being, Life, and
Reason, but not sense in that manner as Man, who exercises the Faculties of
his Soul by bodily Organs which they want. Two of those great Hosts of GOD
contribute, and prove little enough to cover Man's Nakedness. The Host of
Vegetables afford Hemp, Flax and Cotton; the sensitives Wool, Hair and Flax.
Both would hide Man's shame. Man has Eaten of the Tree of forbidden Fruit, and
lies Naked in his Tent. The Devils Mock him in his Lapsed Estate: The
Sensitives and Vegetables join together to bring him wherewith to cover his
shame. The poor Worm spins her self to Death; For him the Sheep casts her
Coat; The Goats and Camels suffer themselves to be Clipped; The Tree sends out
Cotton-VVooll; The Plants grow and die. How does the whole Creation freely
serve him, who can hardly find an Heart to serve his or their Maker?

Sect. 2. Thou have (says the Psalmist) made him to have Dominion over the
Work of thy Hands, thou have put all things under his Feet, Psalms 8.6. That
those which merely have Being, are at his Command, or under his Feet, is plain:
He treads upon the Earth, he lets in, or keeps out the Air; He turns the
Water this or that way, as serves his concern; He lets in, or keeps out the
Air. But see also the Vegetables and Sensitives serving him. The Sheep before
the shearers is dumb. Other Beasts are patiently spoiled of their Hair. The
Hemp and Flax are pilled. The Cotton-tree is content to lose its issue every
Year that Man might be Clothed. The Ox, the Sheep, and either of their
Offspring dies that He might be Fed: So do the feathered Fowl and Fish. At
what a Rate to the Consumption of the Creation does Man Live? When tempting our
Savior they brought to Him a Question, Is it lawful to pay Tribute to Caesar,
or is it not? He calls for a Piece of Coin, and querieth whose Superscription
and Image it bare: they say unto him Caesar's. Mark our LORDS Application:
Render therefore unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto GOD the
things that are GODS. Does the Weavers Dispute whether he should pay his Homage
to GOD yea or no? Let him look upon the Parcel of Hair, Wool, Silk, Hemp,
Flax, Cotton, which being first twisted into Yarn, he by and by fastneth to his
Loom, and say whose Image and Superscription is here? his own Heart must make
him answer, GODS. It is not in the Power of all the Sons of Man to make one of
these things; and out of these he gets his Livelihood, and in the use of these
things He and Thousands of others Live. How reasonable a thing is it that he
should serve that great LORD, who makes thus his whole Creation to serve him!
It is his Wool, his Hair, his Flax, his Hemp, his Silk, that the Weaver uses:
Were there not a GOD in the world there could have been no such things. Surely
then he should not Live without a GOD in the World. If there be a GOD that
loadeth us with his Benefits, there is a GOD to receive our Homages; with what
a thankful Heart should the Weaver fasten his Materials to his Loom? with what
fear should he walk lest he should provoke GOD to recover at his Hand his
Wool, and his Flax, which he has given us to Cover our Nakedness? Hosea 2.9.

Sect. 3. The whole Creation (says the Apostle Romans 8.22.) groaneth and
travelleth in Pain until now, verse 20. it was made subject to Vanity, not
willingly, but by reason of him who has subjected the same in hope. Because it
shall be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption into the Glorious Liberty of
the Sons of GOD. P. Martyr says the Creature is subjected to a Fourfold
Vanity. 1. As for Man's Service it is wearied with a daily Labor. 2. As it is
punished for Man's Error. 3. As it suffers together with Man. 4. As it is made
subject to Man's Lust. GOD has put it in the three first mentioned Subjections,
and in them acts Effectively, as to the last he acts but Permissively. The
Silkworm spinneth, and dies for us in compass of a few weeks space; there is
its Vanity: The Plant grows up and dies and rots for us, to make us Threeds for
our Nakedness: The Beast parts with its own Covering for us; there is a part of
their Vanity. They have to none of these a Natural Propension, but GOD has
subjected them in hope; and they are patiently subject; The Sheep before the
Shearer opens not its Mouth. But Man has made it subject to a greater Vanity
than any of these. GOD created these Things and subjected them to serve our
Necessities; it is Man, sinful Man, that has made them to lacquey his Lusts and
Corruptions. The Silkworm never bequeathed the spinning of its Life for the
Maintenance of Pride, and hindrance of good Works. The Sheep never yielded its
Wool to Cover the Nakedness of the Earth, but the Nakedness of Man. This is
one way by which we make even GOD himself to serve with our Iniquities. This is
one thing which makes the Creation groan for the day of Judgment; Romans 8.22.
because it shall then be delivered from this Bondage of Corruption.

Sect. 4. But yet methinks the difference of the Weavers Materials speaks some
order, which is GODS will: amongst Men Wool is Coarser than Silk, Hair is a
medium betwixt them both; Hemp is Grosser than Flax, and Cotton again is
betwixt them both. Our Savior, Matthew 11.8. allows a soft Raiment, to them
that are in Kings Houses. There are some whom GOD himself Covers with Silk and
fine Linen and Broidered Work, Ezekiel 16.13. GOD does no more will a
levelling for Clothes, than Orders of persons or Estates. The Silkworm is GODS
Creature as well as the Goat, Sheep, Camel, Badger, etc. and created for Man's
use. The virtuous Woman may cover her self with Silk and Purple, Proverbs
31.20, 22. These things may be upon our Backs, so they be not in our Hearts;
and certainly the Heart of Man is too noble a thing to receive what a poor Worm
has Vomited out from her Intrails. Mind not high Things (says the Apostle);
let others (if they please) by our Silk, know the Station which GOD has willed
us to take up in the world above them; but let us still remember we are but
Dust and Ashes, and that our Silks remove us from our Neighbors, but some few
steps as to external Order: They are the same Flesh and Blood with us, and have
Souls of the same species equally ordained to an Eternity, and equally capable
of a blessed Eternity. Silk is lawful; but it must be used lawfully. Whether
Dorcas ever wore any, or no, I cannot tell; but whoever wear it will be
concerned, that others may, like her Executrices, Acts 9.39. be able to show
the Coats and Garments which they have made for the Poor. If silken Garments
eat up our Ability for Charity; The Silkworm groans for it, and is by it put
in Bondage to Corruption. And certainly some order is to be observed also: GOD
had never provided us Wool and Hair as well as Silk; Cotton and Hemp as well
as Flax, if he had not intended some difference in our Habits according to our
Stations. As it is an ugly sight to see Princes go on Foot, and Servants Riding
on Horseback; so it is no very comely Spectacle to see the Servant ride cheek
by jole with his Master. Let not Costly Garments devour our good works; And GOD
has not forbidden them. It is Noted of Henry the second King of France, that
he could never be persuaded to wear Silk-stockens, though then in Use in his
Nation. Let us not nourish High Opinions of our Selves; let them be used to
show the Difference which the Providence of GOD has made amongst Men, as to
the place he wills they should take up in the world, and they may be worn
innocently. But the Weaver is not concerned here; he may weave it, let others
take heed how they use it.

Sect. 5. But whence is this Silk I am winding upon my Loom? Let me stand still
a little and see this great Sight. It Is the Product of a Noble Creature, than
which whether the Creation affords ought more stupendous, I cannot say. In the
Spring it is a little Grain, Egg, or Seed, hardly exceeding the quantity of a
small Pinshead, it is enlivened by a strange Generation, in its time; about the
season that the Mulberrytree begins to shoot forth, it grows up by
Degrees, being Fed with the Leaves of Mulberries, till having done its work,
and spun out its Bottom, it Vomiteth it out of its Mouth, and soon after
(having first cast its Seed) dies. Men wind off this Silk thus made, and weave
it into a Web, and of this are made the most Costly, and Ornamental Garments;
Who has despised the day of small things? How great is GOD in the little
Things of Nature? Yea in the least greatest? Methinks this Worm represents to
us Christians, our Great LORD and SAVIOVR. How little was He in the day wherein
he was Born? How did He nothing Himself? (To use the Apostles Expression,) He
made Himself of no Reputation. How was He enlivened into an Humane Life by a
strange Generation? How little a while did He, when He had taken Flesh, Dwell
amongst us? What was His Meat and Drink while He Lived here, but to Feed on
the Mulberry-tree of the Divine Law, first planted in Sinai? to do his Father's
Will, which when. He had done, He Dyed, leaving us a Righteousness to Cover our
Nakedness, a Glorious Robe with which we may Appear in the House of the KING of
GLORY? But as Man has something to do, before the Silkworm's Legacy will be
useful for him; so has the Christian that will be Clothed with this Silk and
Broidered Garment. The Silkworm leaves the Silk upon the Cod; Men may Neglect
or Use it as they please: even CHRIST'S Righteousness profits none without
Faith. It Is true we have no Web to make; no Woof to add to this Warp (as
Papists do in their Linsey-woolsey Righteousness); but we must put it on, and
we must walk therein.

Sect. 6. Whence is this Wool, which twisted into Yarn, I am fastening into my
Loom or Shuttle? was it not the Covering of the Sheep, that loses its Coat to
make Man a Covering? As this Sheep before its Shearers was dumb, so opened not
my LORD his Mouth.

1. LORD, what is vain Man proud of? what has he on his Back but a Coat, that
was upon a pitiful Sheeps Back, before it came upon his, or the Product of a
Silkworms Excrements, or the Clippings of a Camel? why are they so lifted up
for their changeable Suits of Apparel and Ornaments? Are their Clothing of
Silver and Gold? It is yet but a Covering of thick Clay. The Sheep when it had
it on was Meek and Lowly; How comes Man to be Proud and Haughty? What has
made the Difference between a Fleece of Wool, and a Piece of gay Stuff, or
fine Cloth, but the Art of some poor Men?

2. This Sheep before the Shearers opened not its Mouth; it knew not but it was
going to the Shambles, it understood not that it was going to be shorn for the
Use of Men, yet it opened not its Mouth. Upon this Account CHRIST was also
compared to a Sheep. He indeed knew, that He was going to be offered as a
Sacrifice for us, to lay down his Life for us, that we might have a
Righteousness through Him; Yet He (says the Prophet, and twice Repeats it)
opened not his Mouth. What patience should it learn us in the time of GODS
Sheep-shearing; It Is true our wool will make no Garments for Naked Souls, but
it will be encouraging to fearful and faint-hearted Christians. The Sheep is
shorn that it may bear Wool against the next, and further Years. Oh! Let us
Remember that we also are Purged that we may bring forth more Fruit.

Sect. 7. But whence has this Wool this strength? Nothing more feeble than a
single Hair of Wool in the Fleece. Every Child can pull a lock of wool in
Pieces; How comes it to be so strong in Tarn, and much stronger when it is
woven into Cloth or Stuff? It is nothing but the twifting of the Hairs or
Threeds together. O how good a thing it is for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity! Psalms 134.7. The Dying Father's Children could easily break the Arrows
given them singly, but the Sheaf they could not break, though there were
nothing in the Sheaf but the single Arrows: Vis unita forvior. The Weavers Yarn
and his Web, both learn him the great Lesson of Brotherly Love, and cannot but
afford him this Meditation, how strong were Christians were they but all United
in Love. They are all contending for Truth in their several different Forms,
and little paths of Religion; but why should they not, as the Apostle would
have them, (...), Speak the Truth and contend for the Truth and yet in Love?
The Church of GOD will never be perfectly terrible like an Army with Banners,
till Love be the Colors. The Cross has been in her Ensigns a long time, but
it has been in a bloody Field.

Sect. 8. How many differing Acts have been done to this Yarn, before it comes
to the State wherein it is, yet more must be done before it will be a Covering
for Men and Women: It must ^e fastened to a Loom and to a Shuttle, the warp and
woof must be united by the Weavers Industry, it must then be Died, Pressed,
Sealed, etc. before it is fit for a Market; what a work here is! how many Hands
are busied to Repair but one influence of the Fall of Adam, to Cover that
Bodily Nakedness which that unhappy day Discovered? But how much more must be
done to provide that in the Great Day of the LORD the Son of Adam may not walk
Naked. Man is but the Weaver in the Case. CHRIST indeed has provided him
Materials, the wool is from Him, who was as the dumb Sheep before the
Shearers. Yea He was as the Weaver to. All was finished in point of
Satisfaction when He gave his last Groan upon the Cross; and as to that Man
has nothing to do but to put it on, but yet even that Garment must be put on,
nor is it ever truly put on, without another also of diverse Colors. We must
also be Clothed with Humility, put on Charity, Meekness, Long-suffering,
Forgiving and Forbearing one another. CHRIST indeed has Merited for his Elect
the Habits of Grace which Adorn the Saints, but the Acts and Exercise of them
are ours in his strength.

Sect. 9. I cannot in the Variety of the Weaver's Materials, but read how good
a GOD we have who do h not only Consult and Provide for our Necessities, but
our ease and the accommodation of our Infirmities. If the large Heart of our
GOD could have satisfied it self, in showing Love to his Creatures by giving
them Necessaries, it had been enough for Him to have fitted the World with
Sheep, and have afforded us a little coarse Wool that would have Covered our
Nakedness, and secured us from the Violences of VVeather, and is most proper
for it: but this would have been harsh to our tender Skins, He therefore
affords us Hemp and Flax which better suit them for inward Garments. Wool
would have kept us warm, but in Summer too warm; He has therefore provided us
Silk, fine Linen, etc. And for those whose Purses will not reach so far, He
has provided us finer woolls, taught the Spinster to draw it into finer
Threeds, and the Weaver to bring it into a finer web: nay he has not only
provided us for Necessity and Delight, but for Ornament also: with what a
liberal Hand does his Bounty give to us? Shall we now be Narrow-hearted toward
Him? shall we enquire only for the least Degree of Grace (abating only for
hours of Temptations) for a least of good works which may evidence Grace? Look
and see if GOD thus deals with us; we have Food and Raiment for our Delight as
well as for Necessity. Nay, let us strive that all active Grace may abound in
us, that we be Rich in good Works, as all kind of Grace from GOD does abound
to us. If there be a work of Supererogation to be done, surely we stand obliged
to do it: let us never Ask whether we have not done enough for GOD; but still
whether there be no more to be done for him. Does not GOD think it enough to
Cloth our Nakedness, but He will delight us with our Clothes, He will Adorn us
in Clothing? Let not us think it enough to Profess, but let us make it our
Business to Adorn our Profession and the Doctrine of CHRIST; let us not only
please GOD, but labor to come up to that of the Spouse; of which CHRIST says,
Thou have ravished my Heart, my Sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished my Heart
with one of the Chains about thy Neck.

The Poem.
How naked lies man in his tent,
When all these creatures must be spent
To cover him! The Sheep be Shorn,
And Cotton from the plant be torn;
The hemp, and flax be sown, and spring,
And die, and rot; The Silk worm brings
Her contribution too, and all
Too short to cover Adams fall.
The lamb of God must also die,
His fleece our covering must be.
How does the whole Creation pay
Their homage to us every day;
Oh! do we pay our homage thus,
To him that made both them and us?
Shall Sheep and worms, and plants be free,
To serve their end, and shall not we?
While thus they are in boundage to Romans 8.21.
Our Frailty, Let them not be so,
Unto our Lusts; Let them alone
Serving our lawful uses groan.
Mean while how bounteous is he,
Who satisfies necessity,
And frailty too! who thus does please
Us both for needs and also Ease!
For Ornament, and Honor, All
But what the Scripture Sin does call!
Lord let me never narrowed be
In heart for such a God as thee.
CHAP. III.
The Weaver either buyeth his Silk Raw; his Wool, his Cotton, Hair, Hemp, Flax;
or buyeth his Yarn, or Thread made of all or any of these; Some of which he
Scowreth, he mixeth his Colors, sorteth his Yarns, then be fitteth it on to
his Beam.

The Meditations.
Sect. 1. THe Weaver is like to Solomon's Virtuous Woman, who Eats not the
Bread of Idleness, Proverbs 31.27. his hands are not idle, and therefore his
House in probability will not drop through, Ecclesiasticus 10.18. In the Sweat
of thy Face thou shall eat thy Bread; perhaps we Mis-call it when we call it
The first Curse. The Earth indeed was Cursed for Man's sake, Genesis 3.17. But
whether Man in his lapsed Estate was Cursed or Blessed, by having a Law of
Labor laid upon him, I much question; had it been a Law of Idleness, it had
been a most certain Curse; for the lapsed Soul of Man, being alienated from
GOD, had it not been set to work, would doubtless have worse employed it self.
If I would set a Man into the Road to Hell, I would (as to many (ah woeful!)
Parents) breed him up to have nothing to do. Our weaver's Soul has no leisure
to rest, he is always buying, or scowring, or sorting, or mixing, or preparing
his Loom, or working in it; possibly Men may despise it as a low Employment,
but certainly better than Drinking, and Gaming, and working Iniquity with
Greediness: He is not at leisure to be amongst the simple Ones, nor does his
Employment direct him to the youth that are without Understanding; and if
Solomon's virtuous Woman was not degraded, but described by her laying her hand
to the Spindle, and holding the Distaff, Proverbs 31.19. I understand not what
blot, the Beam, and the Shuttle, and the Treddles, make in the Weavers
Scutcheon.

Sect. 2. Let us go out with the Weaver to his Market, we find him there Buying
his Materials, Wool, Yarn, Silk, etc. according to his particular Occupation.
Buy he must, raw, or wrought, for he that cannot make an hair of his own Head
white or black, can much less make a hair either on his own Head, or on the
Sheep or Camels back. It were certainly more easy to make a Quality than a
Substance. Creation is all GODS work, He can make the Sheep to bring forth
wool; the Goats and Camels skins to send forth hairs; Man cannot make one
hair, not on small thread of Silk. What a pitiful thing vain proud Man is in
Power? that cannot give a Being to the least Thing in Nature? has he think we
a power to make all things become New, that cannot make one thing New? can he
make the New Creature, by his own Power, that is not able to create the most
minute Creature? can he make himself a Rohe of Righteousness, wherein to stand
before GOD, that cannot give a Being to a lock of wool? Surely as to a state
of Righteousness, or any habits of Grace, he must also, before he can work any
thing which will be acceptable in GODS sight, go to him who has himself rang
the Market-bell; Isaiah 55.2. Come buy, and Eat. -- without Money and without
Price. Revelation 3.18. I counsel thee to buy of me -- white Raiment that thou
may be Clothed, and all this without Money and Price.

Sect. 3. How cheap is the Grace of GOD that brings Salvation? without Money
and without Price (So runs the Proclamation.) It is the gift of the HOLY GHOST,
and the Apostle has taught us; that nothing of that Nature can be Bought with
Simon-Magus his Money. It were ill called a Gift if it must be purchased; I
cannot Buy a pack of Wool, nor a Bail of Silk, nor a little Hemp, or Flax, or
Hair, without Money: but I may buy CHRIST, his Grace, his Glory without Money,
and without Price. There is no going to the Market without Money, but I may go
to CHRIST, I may have Heaven without parting with any thing unless what is
better parted with than kept. I find by experience that my Materials for my
Trade are bought too dear; I work them out and lose by it, I labor for
nothing, and spend my Money, and my Strength in vain; but did ever any say, he
had served GOD in vain, and waited upon him for nothing? CHRIST will exchange
his Grace for my Lusts, his Glory for my vile Affections: Surely the dear price
of my VVare, should Inhance the study of Heaven, and heavenly Things in my
Soul. If Wares in the Market be dear, it is my Comfort, I can have Heaven
better cheap.

Sect. 4. But what need so many words to a Bargain? In so much chaffering is
there no sinning? Solomon thought otherwise, Proverbs 10.19. In a multitude of
words there wants not sin; but he that refraineth his lips is Wise. It Is true
possibly here are no God-dam-mee's (we are amongst Tradesmen) no Swearing, no
Cursing, but such a floold of words is not without a mixture of dirt: Is there
no lying, no idle words, of which we must give an account also? What need the
Buyer say, It is naught, it is naught, and when he is gone away he boasts?
Proverbs 20.14. Two words we say must go to a Bargain, but what need more? This
is my Price, beneath which I will not sell: This I will give and no more, were
certainly words enough to dispatch the greatest Contract; nothing but
corruption has brought in more. Cannot you afford it cheaper? Indeed I cannot,
I will have so much if I sell it, etc. are words so like those of Ananias and
Sapphira, Acts 5. that I cannot but tremble for that Tradesman that thinks
himself necessitated to use them, and presently at liberty to recede from them.
When the Wares are in their Hand are they not their own? May they not sell and
keep them as they please? Are they obliged to tell their Customer what they
Cost them? What need is there of a Lie then? but to make good that of Solomon,
That the getting of Riches by a lying Tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro by
those that seek Death, Pro. 21.6.

Sect. 5. Ah! what need we have; to pray for pardon of our sins of
inadvertency, and also to advert better upon our ways! we can easily understand
the sin of them who spend their precious time at Taverns, and Alehouses; but
who thinks himself a sinner while he is busy with his Yarnman, or other
Chapman? yet who lives, and thus sins not? who asks himself at night, have
I saved or gained nothing this day by a lying tongue? Have I spoke no evil
words in making my Bargains? A Man may Trade, as well as drink himself to Hell:
Lying will bring one into the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, as well
as swearing and cursing. Dam-mees challenge GOD a a little more boldly, and
will one day understand they have not challenged an Idol, but a Just and Living
GOD: but the Lier merits sufficiently ill at GODS hand, and if others have the
preference to the Devil's right hand, these will not miss the Curse to be
pronounced to those who shall be found at GODS left hand. What need has the
Tradesman to say, I will look to my ways, that I I offend not with my Tongue,
Psalms 39.1. The Tongue of Man has in it a World of Iniquity; It is an unruly
Evil, full of Deadly Poison, James 3.6, 8.

Sect. 6. Our Tradesman at last (after a great many words) has Bought his
Bargain, he brings it home; but it is not yet ready for his Loom. His Yarn is
greasy, and must be scowred, his Wool dirty and mixed, and must be Kembed: the
threeds are too small, and must be twisted. The Color it may be pleases not,
and it must be Dyed, either in the Wool, Yarn, or Piece. It may be his Yarn is
of several sorts, and it must be sorted, or his piece to be several Colors,
they must accordingly be mixed, and disposed. What a work is here? what an
exercise of his head and hands? and all to get 5. 10. 20 s. possibly to get
nothing: yet he does it patiently, he scowrs, he wrings it out, he trudgeth
with it to the Dier, to the Twister; he labors in the night and day, yet the
poor Racket he has in his Eye, exceeds not ordinarily what I have mentioned,
Quantum est in rebus inane! I have read somewhere of a Noble person who coming
to an untimely Death, said, If I had served my GOD with that Faithfulness with
which I have served my Prince, I had not come to this End. May not many a Poor
Weaver say when he comes to die, If I had served God, If I h^d looked after the
concern of my immortal Soul with half that Diligence I attended my Trade, I had
not been now uncertain what shall become of it, I had not labored for the wind
as I have done in my Trade many a Year.

Sect. 7. Whiles the Kember of Woo^l is Kembing, and Weaver is scowring his
Yarn, methinks, he should reflect upon his own best, and most perfect Actions.
We are sometimes in Scripture compared to Sheep; Our Fleeces are our good
works, our Yarn is the thread of our Actions, some of which are all Naught; but
the best must be scowred. We had need to wash them with the Tears of True
Repentance and Godly Sorrow, there is a Grease in the Best of all our Duties, a
Filthiness in our Cleanest Services; We are all as an unclean Thing, and all
our Rightteousness is but a filthy Rag, Isaiah 64.6. As there are some Sheep
whose wool is so Foul and Course that it is good for little, and some
Spinsters who work so ill, and foully, that their Yarn is good for Nothing: So
there ^re Thousands and ten Thousands in the World, whose Actions are wholly
Naught, but none so good that they are perf^ctly Good, Bonum ex causis
integris. Hence our SAVIOVR directs us when we have done all we can, to say we
are unprofitable servants. The Weaver often scowreth the Yarn he Buys, but is
he as careful to scowr the Yarn which he himself makes? It Is not indeed what
must clo^th him in the day of Judgment; That I may be found in him, (says the
Apostle) not having my own Righteousness: But of this must Garments be m^de,
without which in that day he will walk naked, and Men will see his shame. Ah
how useful might some thoughts of this Nature be to our Weaver at his scowring
work! I am here scowring the Yarn I Buy, but have I scowred the Yarn I have
made, have I been humbled for that Corruption which has clave to all my
Actions, this work or this day.

Sect. 8. While I see the Weaver carry his Yarnes to the Dyer, methinks I
cannot but again reflect upon the finest Threeds of Humane Actions, which must
be Dyed too in the Blood of CHRIST, before GOD will look upon them. Some of our
Weavers Pieces will be acceptable in the Native Color of the Wool, but it is
not so with the best of our Duties and Actions. GOD has said to us, Bring your
Brother Benjamin, or see my Face no more; we can only offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable in the Beloved, 1 Peter 2.5. though our sacrifices be
spiritual, yet they are not acceptable in the Beloved. We have not only need
of an Advocat with the Father if we sin, but also if we pray, the reason is,
because we cannot pray without sinning: There Is but one Dye for all our Rags,
all our web must be dipped in the Blood of the Lamb, Revelation 7.14. They have
washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb; and if you
observe it, they were those that had come out of great Tribulation. One would
have thought that if any Actions that we had done, could Merit; or might appear
as they come from us before the Just GOD, what we do in Testimony for the
Truths and Name of CHRIST might; but if you observe these were they whom Saint
John saw having washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the
Lamb. Nothing passes for a Garment in Heaven, but who has Christ's seal,
nothing for coin but what has his stamp.

Sect. 9. But I observe the Weaver carrying his Silk and his Yarnes to the
Twisters; they bring several threeds into one. Methinks I cannot but reflect,
what twisting there must be too in the Christians Trade. 1. There must be a
Twisting in every good and spiritual Action; 1. A true Principal. 2. A right
Manner of Performance: 3. A true End must be all twisted together; or the
Action is but splendidum peccatum, as Augustine was wont to call the Moral
Actions of Heathens. The End must be the Glory of GOD, The Principle must be
Love to GOD, For the Manner it must be done in Faith. Where these three are
twisted together the Action is truly good and spiritual. Secondly, There must
be a twisting of good Actions too. It is not enough to begin well, but we must
go on well and end well; Connectere ultima primis, make our first and last
things agree, twist an Holy Old Age with an Holy Youth. If a Man forsakes his
Righteousness, and commits Iniquity, his Righteousness shall never be
remembered. If any soul draws back, GOD will have no pleasure in him, he
draws back at his own Peril, and to his own Destruction. He that has twisted
GODS Glory, Love to GOD, and Faith in GOD as to every Action, and thus twisted
the Actions of his Life from the time he begins to set out for GOD, will make
himself a strong Cord (like Solomon's triple Cord) of Hope which will not be
easily broken. Lastly, what is twisting but an uniting of several Threeds into
one and is done for strength? We being many, (says the Apostle) are one Bread
and one Body. One Body; there is a twisting of souls, and all Yarns will twist:
or may twist at least. There are indeed some heterogeneous things of another
kind will never twist with them. We are all but as the LORDS Yarn made of his
Fleece, who was led as a sheep to the slaughter, died in his Blood. He intends
us all for a One Body. Why should not we also twist together both in Truth and
Love, thinking the same things, speaking the same things, however being kindly
affectioned one to another in Love. Alas! that we must have a Mill to force us
together, that the Violence of a Persecution must do that which the Love of
CHRIST in us cannot do. We are silly Sheep that will not run together till the
Shepherds Dog be after us. Surely there is more in a joint Union with CHRIST to
Unite us (would our silly Passions let us see it) than there can be in twenty
little particular sentiments to divide us.

Sect. 10. The Weaver must also sort his Yarns, and if his Stuff be to be of
diverse Colors, he must sort his Colors before he be fit to work. All Yarn
will not make the same kind of Stuff, all will not make the Warp, nor the Woof,
of the same Stuff. Every Thread of the Yarn is Yarn, but yet not of the same
sort nor degree of Fineness. Every Christian Action has or should have a
tendency toward Righteousness; It should be levelled at GODS Glory, and have
the other ingredients to every Action which shall please GOD: but yet there is a
great deal of difference in a Christians Actions. His Actions are either
Natur^l, such as Eating and Drinking, etc. Or Moral, such as are his Buying,
his Selling, his working in his Tr^de: or Religious, such are his Reading the
Word, Hearing, Praying, etc. By the two first, GOD is Glorified when we
regulate them according to his Will: and it is our duty to propose GODS Glory
as well as the serving of our own Natures in the doing of them, which should be
a Law upon us to regulate our Measures by the Divine Standard. But our
Religious Actions are our Fine Threeds. From the other GOD has a second^ry
Glory, from these he has a primary Glory; they first terminate in GOD, as they
are an Homage to him. These must be sorted by every judicious Christian. It Is
true there must be an Eye of Religion (as we call it) in all our Actions, short
Praying, Ejaculations become a Christian in all his Moral and Civil Actions,
but our Solemn Religious Duties must not be woven with our Natural, and Moral
Actions. He makes mad Prayers, that never thinks of them but in Drinking
Healths, and he serves GOD woefully slightly, that never reads a Chapter, or
hears one read, but when his hand is employed in some Worldly Business, which
probably has more of his Heart attending that, than his Ear has, which
hears the Word of GOD. There is a time for all things, (says Solomon;) but
he who can find it no otherwise than thus, indeed finds a time for nothing.

Sect. 11. The Weaver mixeth his Colors too (when he has a Piece to make of
several Colors) to the best Advantage for Beauty. Party-colored Garments were
an Old Fashion, 2 Samuel 13.18. Genesis 37.3. now where such a web is to be
made, the Colors must be rightly Ordered, Mixed, and Disposed one in Relation
to another. The Christians active Righteousness is also a Garment of Diverse
Colors, his Duty made up of Various Duties; and he never makes his web, True
or Beautiful if he does not rightly dispose his Duties of several Colors:
Giving to GOD the things that are GODS, and to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, rightly ordering himself in his or her Duty to Husband, Wife,
Servants, Master, Parents, Children, Political Rulers; Or to GOD, if he does
not mix his Prayers with Praises, his Reading with Hearing the Word Preached,
and all with Receiving the Lords Supper. That Is the true Christian that rightly
disposes his Duties of the several Colors, so as there is a due Proportion of
all, and a comely mixture of them all.

Sect. 12. The Weaver has his Warp and his Woof, his warp is the Foundation,
the woof is Superinduced by the Shuttle. Now to make his Piece well, it is
necessary the Warp be first laid and be sound and good, and the woof must bear
a proportion to it too. Men skilled in the affairs of the world will tell us,
that the more of the same kind.
homogeneal they both be, the stronger the web is. They say Webs of Silk and
Yarn mixed, are not so strong as those wholly of either. Be that as it will; a
Christian must have his Warp and his Woof too. His VVarp must be a Knowledge of
the Truths of GOD: His Woof, Action upon that Knowledge. That the Soul be
without Knowledge is not good, says Solomon, Proverbs 19.2. How can they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? Romans 10. As Soon can a Weaver make
a Piece of Stuff without a warp, as a Christian live an Holy Life, without a
skill in the Principles of Faith; Yea and it must be a sound Knowledge too; he
must be skilled in the form of sound words, else he builds without a
Foundation, or upon one that is False. I know GOD in the Methods of his
converting Providence, begins two ways, working sometimes from the Heart to
the Head, first affecting the soul, which being inflamed with a Love to GOD by
and by looks to know the ways of GOD more perfectly: sometimes GOD works from
the Head to the Heart, reflecting Pieces of our Knowledge upon our Consciences;
but both ways wha^ I say is true. A course and series of good and spiritual
Actions, must be directed by a knowing Head, and an Head replenished with a
sound Knowledge in spiritual Propositions. I know that hay and stubble may be
heaped upon a good Foundation; and where it is so the Apostle has told us the
work will suffer Loss, and the workman if he be saved will be said as through
fire; but it will be hard to make a good Building where the Foundation is but
Hay and Stubble. Nor will our spiritual web be strong if there be not a
proportion betwixt the warp of Knowledge and Woof of Action: where Knowledge is
not sanctified, and experimental, the Action will bear a proportion to it, and
not be truly spiritual. But where the Soul is filled with Knowledge, and that of
a spiritual sanctified Nature being turned into Faith, and the Action is truly
Spiritual in its Principal End, as to the Manner of the Performance, there is
the True Piece of Righteousness, there the wrap and woof are both of the same
Kind; that work, and that alone will be accepted, and receive the Crown-Seal of
Well done! Good and Faithful Servant.

The Poem.
Best Trade! which gives least time to sin,
Which souls can least be idle in.
(Metals with which we nothing do
Soon rust, so souls, when idle too.)
The Weaver, has his Market, where
He Buys, and often Pays too dear:
For a good peniworth, he pays
His soul; in needless Yeaes and Nayes,
With which his heart does not agree.
He thinks he puts a fallacy
Upon his Chapman, and does cheat
Himself, whiles for a little meat
Which perishes, Integrity
Is changed for Hypocrisy.
Vain man has parted with his hope,
His souls sheet- anchor, for a rope,
And that of sand; for hope does break
When truth in heart man does not speak
Unto his neighbor, or does ill; Psalm. 15.

Who does such things; and hops still,
To the holy Hill to come, builds on
No promises foundation.
What need so many words? when few
We confess best, because most true,
What if my Chapman will do so
Must I serve his corruption too?
Who grudg^^^ scolds the final word!
Religious souls cannot afford
Giving another Quid pro quo,
When doing it will souls undo,
But do I think the market dear?
Grace-market is not so, for there
I without price buy better ware:
Yet (like ill husbands) will not spare
My time and strength for that, to buy
At a cheap rate Eternity.
Let me dear markets (Lord!) improve,
To raise the price of thy great Love
Within my Heart; to have apace
To the better market of thy Grace;
Which clotheth naked Souls for naught,
But what to nakedness them brought.
Help me my Works Yarns
to Scowr with brine
Of Poenitential tears; Not mine,
But of thy gift too. Let thy Blood
Then Dye them (Blessed Jesus!) These
Foul tears will not cleanse them of Grease.
Let true End, Principles be twined
With a right manner, holy mind:
Let my first and last Actions be
Twisted in like sincerity.
Thus let me live, and still walk on
Twined in Saints Communion;
Sorting my Actions, so that all
May in their proper order fall;
Ordering their Colors, so as I
A Christian Life may beautify.
Lord! give me a right warp. Teach me
What thy Truths what thy Statutes be.
Lord! let me never build upon
What is not thy Foundation:
And help me too as to my woof,
Or I shall never make good stuff.
Thus when my piece comes off my Loom,
I praising thee shall bring it Home.
My GOD shall have it all, and He
For ever shall my Master be.
CHAP. IV.
The Art.
The Yarn being thus prepared, the Weaver fastneth the Warp unto his Beam, and
divides it; his filling Boys prepare the Yarn, for the Woof, winding it on
quils or pieces of reed, which he afterward puts into his Shuttle in order to
his Work.

The Meditations.
Sect. 1. A Christians Web is his Holy Life, made up of the many threeds of
righteous Actions, the Warp of which we have before found to be the Doctrine of
Truth. This too must be fastened about the Beam of the Loom. It Is not enough to
have Truth in our Bible and Books, and a Notion of it in our Heads, it must be
fastened to our Souls (which is always done by Faith) we must be Rooted, and
Grounded in Faith, as well as in Love. Propositions of Truth are many times but
Probationers to the Soul, and never admitted into its Fellowship. A Man may
know that Proposition of Truth from which yet he withholds his Assent; is Men,
may detain the Truth in Unrighteousness not living up to their Principles; so
they may retain the Truth in Unbelief, not fixedly, and steadily agreeing to
those Notions of Truth they have heard and learned. Knowing is one thing,
agreeing to the Truth of what we know, is another; yea agreement is one thing,
and a steady, fixed agreeing to it is another: So that a Christian will strive
earnestly, and contend for it as another thing. The Faith of many Christians is
described by an Heathen ( Tully I mean. Tusc. quest. lib. 1.
) Nescio quomoda dum lego assentior, cum posui librum et mecum ipse de
immortalitate animorum coepi cogitare, assensio omnis illa elabitur. When they
read the holy Scriptures, when they hear the Messengers of GOD interpreting
them, comparing Scripture with Scripture, and from strength of Reason
confirming Propositions in them, they cannot but agree the things to be truth;
but as soon as the Books is out of their hand, and the sound of the Preachers
word is out of their Ears, they begin to doubt whether any thing be Truth which
they have read or heard: and indeed no better is the Assent of any who by the
mighty working of the Spirit of GOD have not Faith wrought in them: hence it is
that their Faith is neither Fruitful by Love and Good Works, nor steady in it
self. There is no need at all that (to secure Holiness of Life) Men should
bring it into the description of Faith; and so make an innovation in Divinity,
which always according to the Scripture distinguished Faith and Love; for
Holiness (which is Love in the Fruit) is a necessary consequent of true Faith,
either respecting the Proposition of the Word, or the Person of the Mediator.
Can he be thought indeed to believe that Arsenick is Poison, who yet freely
takes it into his Belly? Or can any be judged to trust in a Friend for a
kindness who has promised it, but upon the condition of some performance which
he refuses to do? It is I say from this, that the Propositions of truth are
not fastened in the Soul, that Men walk not according to the light of them:
Ephesians 4.14. and that they are tossed to and fro and carried about with
every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of Men, and cunning craftiness, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive. Every breath of wind would disturb the Weaver, and
every idle hand would trouble him if his warp were not fastened to his Loom.
Every wind of Doctrine, and every Ignorant idle Seducer disturbeth that Souls
Profession of Truth, who has not the Proposition thereof by Faith fastened unto
his Soul.

2. The Weaver divides his warp, that it may serve several intendments. The
deliberate Christian divides the Propositions of Truth of which his Soul is
possessed. Some refer to speculation: Some more immediately to Practice. Some
inform him what GOD is, what CHRIST is, what He has done and suffered, what
the holy SPIRIT is, what Heaven and Hell are, etc. others more immediately
refer to Practice, informing the Soul, what it ought to be both toward GOD and
toward Men. These Precepts concern him as a Magistrate; This concerns him as
a Minister. These things concern him as a Father, these as a Child, These
Propositions contain the Will of GOD concerning Him as an Husband; These
concern the Woman as a Wife. These concern him as a Master; The other as a
Subject, or as a Servant. And this is necessary that he may be Holy in all
manner of Conversation. For Holiness is a lovely spotless Fruit, that grows up
from the revealed will of GOD concerning us, as the Root; and as this Root
sends forth many Branches, so the Fruit of Holiness must be seen in every
Bough, in every Relation and Circumstance of his Life.

3. The filling-boys prepare the Yarn for the Weaver by winding it upon several
Reeds and Quills, which being filled, he teaches to the Weaver sitting in his
Loom and ready to go to work. We suppose our spiritual Weaver fixed in his
Loom, ready to say with David, My Heart is fixed, O GOD, my Heart is fixed,
resolved to walk with GOD in all the Duties of Holiness, having s^id with
David, Psalms 119.57. Thou art my Por^ion, O LORD, I have said that I will keep
thy words. We suppose him also to have wound his warp about his Loom, to be not
only possessed of a due Notion of Divine Truths, but to have his Heart rooted
and grounded in them, giving a fixed and steady Assent unto them; and now every
Relation, every Neighbor, every New Providence, every Action of his Life
becomes as a filling-boy to him, affording him matter to work upon, reaching
him a Quill or Reed to work with. The Subject gives the Magistrate an
opportunity to work the work of GOD by Executing Justice and Judgment without
respect of Persons, knowing that he judges not for himself but for the LORD,
etc. The Magistrate does the same for the Subject, giving him an opportunity to
fulfill the will of GOD, by Honoring the King, and being subject to the higher
Powers because ordained of GOD. The Wife gives the Husband advantage for his
spiritual web of Righteousness, by loving Her as CHRIST loved his Church; 1
Peter 3.7. by walking before Her as a Man of Wisdom and Knowledge, Ephesians
5.25. Colosians 3.19. 1 Peter 3.1. And the Husband requires his Wife by giving
her the like advantage to show her self obedient to the Commands of her Father
which is in Heaven, by reverencing her Husband, endeavoring to win him by her
Conversation, by loving him and being subject unto him as her own Husband,
Titus 2.4, 5. 1 Peter 3.1. Ephesians. 5.22, 23. etc. Is he that sits in this
spiritual Loom a Father? how easily may he see every Child he has about him,
with one of these Pipes or Quills in his hand, offering him for his work of
Righteousness, an opportunity to be obedient unto GOD, in bringing him or her
up, in the Nurture and Admonition of the LORD, and not provoking it to wrath?
Ephesians 6.4. in minding it of its Covenant in Baptism made with GOD, in
teaching it, or them, the Statutes of the LORD diligently, when he sits in
the House, when he walks by the Way, when he lies Down, and when he rises
Up, according to the Law of the LORD, Deutronomy 6.7. Is he a Child? he may see
his Parents mutually serving him in his spiritual work; giving him advantage to
please GOD by Obeying his Parents in the LORD for this is right, Ephesians 6.1.
Is he a Master? he may see his Servants thus serving him, with such
opportunities, to give unto them that which is just and equal, knowing that
they also have a Master which is in Heaven; and if he be a Servant his Master
gratifies him with the like opportunity of Obedience unto GOD, while he obeys
in all things his Master, according to the Flesh; not with Eye-service as
Men-pleasers, but in singleness of Heart fearing GOD, doing whatsoever he does
heartily as to the LORD, knowing that of the LORD he shall receive the Reward
of the Inheritance, for he serves the LORD CHRIST, Colossians 3.22. with
good will doing Service as unto the LORD, not to Men, Ephesians 6.7. Not
answering again, not pur^oyning, but showing all good fidelity that they may
adorn the Doctrine of GOD our SAVIOVR in all things. Titus 2.10. Being subject
with all fear, not only to the Gentle, but to the Froward, 1 Peter 2.18. The
like may be said of all Relations: yea every Providence of GOD, every Natural
and Civil Action of Humane Life, supplies the Spiritual Weaver with Pipes to do
his work by.

4. The Weaver puts the Pipes, or Quills (which the Boys have fillell with Yarn
for him) into his Shuttle (the hollow of his Shuttle) in order to his work. My
Son, says Solomon, if thou will receive my Words, and hide my Commandments
with thee, etc. Proverbs 2.1. why should not the hollow of the Shuttle, put me
in mind of the secret places of my Heart, where the Spiritu^l Weaver too must
fasten every Pipe that he makes use of to complete his Web of Righteousness.
It is not for nothing that we have in holy writ, the Man according to GODS own
Heart, so often saying, I will meditate on thy Works, and in thy Word, Psalms
119.78. and 48.23. and 15.148. Psalms 77.12. He that never meditateth about his
Duty, with respect to every Providence, every Relation, is never like to do it.
The Weaver that intends to work puts every Pipe into the hollow of his Shuttle,
and makes it fast there; whosoever intends the performance of his spiritual work
must go, and do likewise. When the Providence of GOD gives him a New Relation,
he must be meditating what now is the will of GOD concerning me, what is my
Duty toward this Wife, this Child, this Servant, and the sense of this Duty
must be upon his Heart. Meditation is the Soul's Stand upon its Object. The
will of GOD in every Circumstance of his Life, must not only be received in
his Understanding, but hid in his Memory, engraven upon his Heart and
Affections, set continually before his Eyes. He will otherwise weave his
Spiritual Web, no better than the Weaver could weave his Cloth, or piece of
Stuff, without a Pipe in his Shuttle. Oh how many are there that neglect this!
they have a Duty to do in every Circumstance of their Lives, a Duty toward
their Relations, a Duty with respect to GODS Providence as it is diversified to
them; but either they know it not, being ignorant of the Scriptures, or they
remember it not, or they love it not; the Pipe is not in the Shuttle, they can
make no work; Their Life is indeed a Life of Action, they are throwing the
Shuttle all the day long, People of busy Heads and Hands; but their time is
spent as Seneca complained, either in doing Nothing, or in sinning, which is a
doing what is worse than Nothing, or in doing other Things, which signify
Nothing either to GOD'S Glory, or their Eternal Happiness; or in doing Things
which though materially Good, are formally Evil, bonum non been, good Things
spoiled in the Doing; and all this for want of putting the Pipes in the
Shuttle, understanding the will of GOD concerning them under these or these
Circumstances, then hiding it in their Hearts, and setting it before them as
the Rule of their Lives and Conversations.

5. Once more, methinks I cannot but observe, how the Wisdom of Divine
Providence has made Work for all the Children of Men, that as there was no
Beggar in Israel, so there need be no Beggars in England. How many does a
single Weaver employ of all both Sexes and Sizes! It must be an adult Man must
VVeave, but Women must Spin for him, and Children must fill his Pipes. It is
the Reproach of England that there are so many Beggars in the Streets thereof;
when GOD has furnished it with one little Beast, whose Profit if improved
would set them all to Work, and afford them Bread in the Sweat of their Face.
That we are full of Scandalous Beggars, is not because the Providence of GOD
has not laid out Work enough, or the Trading of England is so little, that it
will not set them to it; nor because the legislative Power has not provided
sufficient Laws; but because they are so ill executed by inferior Officers,
and Parents are suffered to bring up their Children in Idleness. O England!
spit out thy Phlegm, shake off thy Sloth. Honor GOD in the Substance and
Increase which He has given Thee. It is nothing but Lust and Sloth that fills
Thee with such Prodigious Wickedness and Reggary.

The Poem.
What this poor Child at my Command
Does, reaching Pipes fill to my hand,
Which I first in my Shuttle hide,
Then weave my Web, and am supplied
With new ones by and by, until
I my intended Task fulfill;
That every Providence Divine,
That every Period of Time,
Each new Relation, Actions all
Within my Sphere, what-ere does fall,
Does to my Soul, still offering me
Renewed Opportunity,
To weave my Web of Righteousness,
That Men see not my Nakedness.
LORD give me in my Heart to hide
Thy will, and make it there to abide;
Thy will concerning me in all
Periods of Life, and things that fall
Unto my Shame. Each circumstance
May make me with thy help to advance
In Holiness: Teach me t'improve
All Pipes, whether of frowns or Love,
Watching advantages to do
The whole of what thou call'st me to.
And whiles thy Providence, O GOD,
Brings me Pipes, thy Staff, thy Rod,
All fill them for me: Let them be
Accepted, and wrought out for thee:
I stay not (Lord! for Pipes) O may
My busy Soul make no delay
In work: Work party-colored,
With here a child's, their father's thread;
Here let an Husband's duty run,
And there a Master's thread well spun;
All knit together by the band
Of Love to thee, and thy Command:
That when my Wea^ing time is gone
My LORD may say to me, Well done.
Beyond my Task I can do naught,
Let that but to an end be brought;
Which cannot be without thy skill,
Although thy self my Pipes do fill.
CHAP. V.
The Art.
The Weaver being thus prepared for his Work sets himself to it, swiftly
throwing his Shuttle with one hand, which he catches with the other, not
without some motion and employment of his whole Body. The Shuttle leaving a
thread, (at every Cast of it) betwixt the divided parts of the Warp; which he
uniteth to the other woven threeds by the continual motion of his Slay. In the
mean time his Feet are moving the Treddles, which raising the heavels do part
the Warp, and are continually making a new room for the Shuttle. In the mean
time a pair of Temples spread upon the Web, keep it fixed and extended,
advantaging the Weaver in his Work. Some Webs are of that Breadth, that a
single Person cannot work them, in such Cases two Weavers are employed each at
the Extremities of the Loom, catching and returning the Shuttle which his
Partner throws.

The Meditations.
1. OUR Spiritual Weaver is the good Christian, his f^stening his Warp to his
Beam, is the rooting of his Soul in Faith. To him every diversified Providence
supplies the place of a Filling-boy; offering him matter to work with and upon,
in making his Web of Holiness. We have seen him set in his Loom, fixed to his
Work, resolved to have respect to all GODS Commandments. Now how quick does he
throw his Shuttle from one hand to another? This is that which the Scripture
calls a Running after GOD. Draw me (says the Spouse) and we will run after
thee, Canticles 1. 4. I will run the ways of thy Commandments (says the Man
according to GODS own Heart.) Psalms 119.32. The Weaver works Early and Late,
from Four in the Morning till Eight at Night. The good Christian also
preventeth the Morning-Watches, Psalm. 119.1^8 and medi^ates of GOD in the
Ni^ht-Watches, Psalms 63.6. he awaketh Early in the Morning, and Early seeks
GOD. Psalms 57.8. and 63.1. and 108 2. Isaiah 26.9. he is throwing his Shuttle,
working the work of GOD all the Day long, Evening and Morning and at Noon be
Prays and Cries aloud, Psalms 55.17.

2. The Shuttle m^veth swiftly, and thus also ru^ the Days of the Weavers
Life; my Days (says Job) are swifter than a Weavers Shuttle: As swift as the
Shuttle will run. The Weaver thinks himself concerned to be at his Loom
betimes, that his Task may be done by Night. Because the Christians Days are
swif^er than a Weavers Shuttle, he is highly concerned to be up betimes.
Remembering his Cre^^or in the Days of his Youth. Ecclesiasticus 12.1. and as
he has need in the Morning to be throwing his Shuttle, so in the Evening his
hand must not be slack; not only because he will else not finish his Course,
but because the spiritual work is of that Nature, that as a Piece of Cloth or
Stuff not Finished, is fit for no Use but will all Ravel out; so if a Righteous
Man forsake his Righteousness and commit iniquity, his Righteousness shall
never be remembered, but he shall Die in the Iniquity which he has committed. A
Christians work is like rolling a stone up an Hill, from which if the hand
cease till it be lodged on the Top, it certainly falls back to the Bottom,
and he that has labored about it, has done just nothing but only tired
himself to no purpose, nor shall reap any thing but his Labor for his Pains.

3. The whole of our Weaver is employed in his work. His Head contrives it,
his Eyes observe the Motions of the Shuttle, and the several parts of the Loom,
that they be Regular, and serving his intendment. One hand throws the Shuttle,
the other catches it, in the mean-time his Feet are not idle, they are at work
upon the Treddels moving them. Without these Varicus Operations, of the several
Members of his Body, our Weaver could never dispatch his work in any
desirable or acceptable Manner; nor has the Law of the LORD left our
spiritual Weaver, one Limb or Member of his Body idle as to his spiritual
Work: His Head is employed in meditation, and contrivances for GOD; his Eyes
are lifted up unto the LORD, from whom come all his Mercies; his Hands must
work the Work of Righteousness: with his Feet he walks with GOD. Every Bodily
Member has its Office to a spiritual Work as well as that which is Natural.
GOD made every Member, and not a Member but for himself. Every Member in Man's
Body has a Natural Operation for which it is necessary. In our Civil
Employments we both can and do use them successively; there is none there
useless amongst them. And shall we think that there is any of them of no use to
our spiritual work? Shall I with both my Hands work on my Trade, and have never
an hand at work for GOD? how busy am I at my work, with Hands and Feet, and
Head and all my Body? was I ever so wholly employed in the Work of GOD, though
the wages be highly more. The Fruit of this Work will be but a few Shillings
at the End of the Week, b^th the Work of Righteousness, will be Peace and
Quietness and Assurance for ever. To what purpose are my Knees, and Hands, and
Eyes, and Tongue at Work in Prayer, if presently my Hands be working iniquity?
In the Web of Righteousness, every Member has its Office. It is the Fruit of
the Souls Sanctification in Body and Mind and Spirit. GOD must be served, with
all and every Part, and Faculty; with all our Heart, and Soul and Strength.

4. The Shuttle every time it passes from Hand to Hand, leaves a Thread
behind i^, Good or Bad; thus does every Action of a Christian's Life. All his
Actions make but one Web, according to the Goodness, or Badness of which he
must have his Reward, every particular Action is a Thread in this Web, and so
has an influence upon the Weavers Praise or Dispraise, and upon his Wages at
last. So that as the Weaver may say upon every Cast of his Shuttle, now my
Work is nearer an End than it was before I threw my Shuttle; so a Christian
upon every Action may say; By this Action I am nearer Heaven or Hell; I have
either added a Jewel more to my Crown, or a Coal more to the Fire I must
endure. The Shuttle passes not up and down for nothing. All our Thoughts,
Words, and Actions are of an abiding Nature; Thousands of them slip our Memory,
but none of them escapes the Book of the Divine Omniscience. In thy Book says
David, Psalms 139.16. all my Members are written; and again, Thou tellest my
Wanderings; put my Tears in thy Bottle, are they not in thy Book? It is as true
concerning all our Actions, Are they not in GODS Books? We do them, and GOD
keeps silence some time, Psalms 50.21. but he will let us know that he sees
them, and will set them in order before our Eyes. Every Action makes a part of
our web: we must receive our Eternal Reward, according to what we have done in
the Flesh. Man has an imperfect Eye. A Master may overlook many an ill Thread
in a Piece of Stuff; But the Eye of GOD is Acute and Perfect, nothing slippeth
that, He will set all in order before our Eyes. The Weavers Knowledge, that
his Shuttle leaves every time he throws it something toward his web, makes him
diligent to see it be rightly ordered, and makes him careful and wary how he
throws it. The spiritual Weaver understanding that every Action of his Life
will contribute to his Web, ought to keep a VVatch upon his Heart, his Tongue,
his Hands, his whole Man, to look before he throws his Shuttle, ay and look
back upon it too when he has thrown it; For a Christian works more for
Eternity than Apelles painted for it.

5. A Thread (through the weakness of it) will break sometimes, do the Weaver
what he can: The Weaver lays the Ends together, or knits a Knot to Unite the
Threeds again, then it passes, provided it be not done too often. Iniquities
(says David) prevail against me: Let the spiritual Weaver do what he can, his
Thread will sometimes break, his Course of Righteousness through Corruption
will be interrupted. The good which I would I do not, Romans 7.19.23. I see
another Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me
into Cap^ivity to the Law of Sin: The spiritual Weaver has nothing in this
Case to do, but by Repentance ag^in to lay his Ends together, to make his
former Righteous Actions agree with the latter, to knit the Knot of a renewed
Covenant with GOD, and a new Resolution to keep the LORDS Statutes. This being
done, though the Failures are seen by the Eye of him who sees all Things, yet
the Web passes upon the Covenant of Grace, for which we may give GOD thanks
for our LORD JESUS CHRIST. For we have not an High Priest which cannot forgive
Infirmities, the Apostle tells us, He can have Compassion upon the Ignorant,
and upon them that are out of the way, Hebrews 5.2.

6. The Weaver must have his Temples, which lying upon the Web keep it fixed
and extended, he would otherwise, never work to any Purpose. What the pair of
Temples is to the Weaver, those noble Graces Fear and Faith and Love are to
the Christian. These spiri^ual Habits dwelling in e^^^y Gracious Heart
influence all his Actions, and keep his Web fixed and steady; he walks in the
Fear of the LORD all the day long; he lives in the prospect of a Promise, yea
of many Promises made to them who hold out to the End; he acts not out of
Constraint, but VVi^lingly, from a Principle of Love. The Hypocrite wanting
these Habits of Grace works with no fixedness, but at great Uncertainties;
these Habits keep the Web of Righteousness extended, and the spiritual Soul
fixed; his Heart is fixed, trusting in the LORD, says the Psalmist. Do this
and Live for I fear GOD (says Joseph:) and again in the Case of his Mistress,
How shall I do this great Evil and Sin against GOD! The Sameness and
Immutability of GOD in His Nature and Will, who is the Object of the Souls
Faith and Fear, makes him the same in all times; it keeps his Soul fixed and to
the same extent and dimensions of spiritual Duty, his Eye is always upon him
that is Invisible. Oh what lamentable work does the Hypocrite make in his
spiritual Loom for want of these spiritual Temples! at what incertainties does
he throw his Shuttle? he is fixed and steady in nothing; one thing to day,
another thing to morrow; his Sails are set according to the wind of his
interest, which according to the Varieties of this World one while blows from
the North, another while in the quite opposite Quarter. Whereas the sincere
good spiritual Workman keeping his Temples before him, works Evenly, Steadily,
Fixedly; he sets GOD before his Eyes always as his Fear, thence it is that his
Feet do not slide; he is always Eyeing the Promise, so is ever laboring to
fulfill the Condition, and daily fearing, and taking heed lest having a Promise
of ^ntering into rest he should fail through Unbelief. These Temples move every
day with him and in him, he carries them along with his work, till his Web of
Righteousness be wholly done.

7. Lastly I observe there are some Pieces of Stuff and Cloth, which a single
Person cannot work alone; two sit at the Loom, the one receives the Shuttle
which the other throws, and returns it to the Hand from which it came. The
Spiritual Weaver has Some such Webs too, he has Relative as well as Personal
Duties. The Husband throws his Shuttle to his Wife walking before Her as a Man
of Wisdom and Knowledge, Loving Her and Honoring Her (as the Weaker Vessel.)
She returns it back to him again, Obeying Her own Husband, submitting Herself
to him; he must Love his Wife as CHRIST Loves his Church, and she takes care to
Reverence Her Husband; Both are at work together as meet helps one to another
in the things of GOD and in the things of the World, and this is acceptable in
the sight of GDD. What Rare Hangings for an House do such a Pair of Weavers
make! How much more Excellent than those of Gilded Leather and Tapestry? The
Father throws the Spiritual Shuttle to the Child, bringing him up in the
Nurture and Admonition of the LORD; teaching him the way in his or her Youth
which he shall not forget when he is Old. The Children return it to the Father
or Mother, Obeying them as it is Right in the LORD; Honoring them not Merely
from a Natural Right, but because it is the first Commandment of GOD with a
Promise annexed to it. The Master throws his Shuttle to his Servant, Commanding
him and all within his gates to Remember to keep Holy the Sabbath Day, whetting
the Law of the LORD upon them, when they Lie down and when they Rise up, when
they go out and when they come in, giving unto his Servants that which is just
and equal. The Servant again returns it to his Master, being Obedient to him
that is his Master according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in
singleness of Heart, as unto CHRIST, not with Eye-service as a Man-pleaser, but
as a Servant of CHRIST doing the will of GOD from the Heart, with good will
doing service as to the LORD, and not unto Men; knowing that whatsoever good
thing any Man does, the same he shall receive from the LORD, whether he be Bond
or Free, Ephesians 6.5, 6, 7. not answering again, not purloining, but showing
all good Fidelity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of GOD our SAVIOVR in all
things, Titus 2.9.10. So in Political and Ecclesiastical Relations, the pious
Magistrate throws the Shuttle to his Subjects, ruling them in the fear of the
LORD, commanding the Ministers of the Gospel in his Dominions, to fulfill their
office; commanding all his Subjects to keep the Law of the LORD, forbidding all
deceitful Weights and Balances, not regarding faces in Judgment, not
oppressing the Poor and Fatherless, but regarding the Cries of them, and of the
Widows: The Subject again returns the Shuttle to the Magistrate, being subject
to the higher Powers; knowing there is no Power, but is ordained of GOD, being
subject not only for Wrath but for Conscience Sake; for this cause paying
Tribute also, because they are GODS Ministers, rendering to all their Dues,
Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear,
Honor to whom Honor. The Minister of the Gospel throws his Shuttle to his
People. Preaching the Word of GOD in season, and out of season with all
Faithfulness, Diligence, Boldness; In Meekness instructing those who oppose
themselves; Fleeing also Youthful Lusts, being Vigilant, Sober, of good
Behavior, given to Hospitality, apt to Teach, not given to Wine, no Striker,
not greedy of filthy Lucre, Patient, no Brawler, not Covetous, etc. On the
other side, Their People return the Shuttle, being Obedient in the LORD to
those who have the spiritual oversight of them; Laying apart all filthiness,
and superfluity of naughtiness, and with meekness receiving the engraffed Word,
which is able to save their Souls, being doers of the word, and not hearers
only. Oh what rare and beautiful webs of righteousness are made at these double
Looms, when they thus work according to the divine rule! happy is the people
that is in such case. Men shall certainly say this People have the LORD for
their GOD.

The Poem.
How swiftly does my Shuttle fly
To the other hand? and by and by
Returns to the other hand it first did throw;
Stops not at all, nor yet moves slow;
But as it moves a thread does stay
To be united by the slay
Unto the Web. All our days here
Swifter than Weaver's Shuttles are,
(Says holy Job) souls cannot rest
Idle at all, but work what is best
Or worst. They cannot move, but some
New actions stays upon the Loom,
Adding still to their Web, and must
At last be judged just, or unjust,
According to them all, when done:
So will the Judge's Sentence run
For life, or death. The whole must be
Judged by the All-seeing Eye.
What care had I of thoughts need take,
Of Words, of Actions! all these make
My Web; as it is true, or not
So will the wages I have got
Be unto me at last. Then Watch,
My drowsy soul! Let no sleep catch
Thine Eyes: Let nothing thee betray
To what in the great Judgment-day
Will not abide. My head, my hand,
Mine Eyes, my feet, move at Command
Of my quick soul: Each act their part
While I am in my Weavers Art.
The head contrives, the hand does cast
The Shuttle, feet do move as fast.
All is at work, the nimble Eye
Observes how, the Shuttles fly:
Should I not this work Righteousness
With my whole man? is that work less
In labor, or in price? Then shake
Thy self my soul: Let each power take
It Is part; Command the Members too
That each of them their part may do:
Think not, GOD will be served by
A pious Tongue, or devout Eye,
Nor by a false pretending heart,
He must have all, and every part.
Does a thread break, does thy soul sin,
Do what it can? Oh look back ^hen,
And by Repentance make that good,
Which nothing but thy Saviors Blood
Can expiate; Repentance may
Pardon obtain, bu^ no scores pay,
My soul, see that thy Tempels be
Always before thy face, Oh see,
Thou workst from Faith; love; holy Fear;
These will thee keep, thou shall not Err;
Thy work will straight, and even be,
Nor shall thou move incertainly.
My soul! learn how to work alone
And how with a companion:
Who does not work of every kind
Himself will not approved find.
CHAP. VI.
The Art.
The Weaver in Weaving sometimes finds a Thread defective in the Warp, mostly
through the negligence, or other infirmity of him that wound the Warp on, ^e
not discerning the breach of the Thread. Sometimes also a Thread breaks in
the Striking; if it happens in the former, the Weaver Supplieth it, by
another Thread, in its Room: If it breaks in the Striking, he brings the two
Ends together, and goes on in his work. When he has wrought a Plate then he
looks it over, with an Instrument picks it out and brusheth off the loose
knots: So goes on till he has finished his Web; Then he Cuts it off the Loom.

The Meditations.
1. THE Spiritual We^vers Warp is his Credenda, the several Propositions of
Faith and Truth which are wound upon his Soul, partly by the Exercise of his
Reason upon Natural Principles, partly upon the Revealed will of GOD in his
Word: For the Candle of the LORD in our Souls is dighted both these ways.
Reason working upon Natural Principles, will conclude, That there is a GOD, who
made Heaven and Earth, that he must be Eternal, infinite, just and Holy, etc.
That to him must be given account of our thoughts, words and Actions, That Man
has an Immortal Soul, etc. But there are many more Propositions of Truth,
which Reason (working from Mere Natural Principles) will never Discover; yet
are Concluded from Reason upon this Hypothesis, That those Sacred Books which
we call the Scriptures contain the Revealed Will of GOD, and are the words of
Him who cannot Lie. Now as Na^ural Light is not the same in all, but varieth
according to the Capacity of a Man to Exercise his Reason, and the Helps he
has for it; so also there is a vast difference in Men's Conclusions from
Scripture-Principles: Every Man is not alike able to search the Scriptures, nor
has the like Advantage from Foreign Help; nor is so able as another to compare
spiritual Things wi^h spiritual. There is not a greater Difference in Faces
than there is in the Sentiments and Opinions of Pious Souls, who all have set
up to themselves the same End, viz. the Glory of GOD, who daily Beg of GOD to
Lead them into all Truth, and would not willingly believe a Lie; and
necessarily there must be so unless it would please GOD that all Men should be
Born with the same Wit, Reason, Parts, and Arrive to the same Degrees of
Learning, and have the same Helps of Instruction. Now it is impossible, that
the two Contradictory Parts of the same Proposition should be True. Hence of
Necessity every Spiritual Weaver, will at last be found to have some Threeds in
his Warp defective: Some indeed more some less, but all some. Nemo sine Crimine
vivit; Optimus ille qui minimis urgetur, says Horace. There is none lives,
who has a right Apprehension of every Divine Truth. And this Reflection, were
but Men possessed with Common Humanity, would oblige them to bear each with his
Brother. There will not be found a guiltless Person to throw the first Stone at
his Neighbor. Neither is any M^n Infallible: Nor is there upon Earth any
Infallible Judge; why do I then Judge, and condemn my Brother? may not he by
the same Right Condemn me; Is there not the same Distance from him to me (Stand
where he will) as from me to him? who shall judge betwixt Us? shall the Church,
or any Authority of Men Determine betwixt Us? The Church indeed, yea the Civil
Magistrate, may Determine, that nothing be Published within their Territories
contrary to what they apprehend the will of GOD: But certainly no Man can make
an Hair of Truths Head, White or Black. Truth will be Truth, and Error a Lie
when Men have said what they can; nor is any particular Church more Infallible
than a Pope. My following a Multitude in an Error will no more excuse me than
the following of a Multitude to do Evil. I have no Judge under Heaven as to my
Practice above my Conscience. It is indeed my Duty to Hear the Church
Reverently, to Examine what it says Diligently, and to believe it, as my
Conscience tells me; it does or does not agree with the Holy Scriptures. Our
Spiritual Weaver then may be assured that there are several Threeds Defective
in his Warp; And therefore stands highly concerned to be ever and anon casting
an Eye upon it, Examining the Various Propositions which he has embraced for
Truth, and upon which he Builds and Directs his Practice. But it is very
possible, that he may not be able to put in better Threeds when he has done.
He is a Bruit, no Man, that can Believe what he Lists, or whatsoever his
Neighbor would have him to Believe. All a Christians Duty in this Case is, 1.
To Examine and Prove Propositions, to hear on both sides, to compare Things
Spiritual with Spiritual, etc. 2. To have the Persuasions to himself, in which
he has Faith different from the Church in which he Lives. 3. To Beg of GOD to
Lead him into all Truth, and to Reveal what as yet is not Revealed to him, and
to Pardon his Mistakes, and not to Conceal any Truth Revealed to him in
Unrighteousness. Which doing he may be assured we have an High Priest can have
Compassion our Infirmities, Upon those that are Ignorant, as well as those
otherwise out of the way. Yet I fear some Errors of Faith are Damnable, such as
Infer an Impossibility of the Soul that is Possessed of them, to do those
things which the Scripture makes Necessary to Salvation, Faith and Repentance:
Whether any other or no is more than I know.

2. The Weaver finds many a Thread Break in the Striking, yet is his Web not
spoiled by it; But when it Happens, he stops, looks back, and lays up, and
Re-unites his Threeds, and goes on in his work: Thus doing, though there be
many a Real Breach, yet the piece comes off, is approved, Merchantable and
passes: we have before considered all the Thoughts, Words and Actions of a
Christians Life as our Spiritual Weavers Striking. Infinite are the Threeds
that break in it. The Righteous sins seven times in a day; who can tell how
often he offends? He who thinks he can keep the whole Law of GOD in Thought,
Word and Deed, is not more to be blamed for his Error, than for his Ignorance:
If he knew what Holiness that Holy Rule requires he would never say so. It was
because the Pharisees did not know that GODS Law which says Thou shall not
kill, forbade as well Rash Anger and ill Words, as Bloody Actions; That they
thought they could fulfill it; And if the Popish Doctors, did not give a Jejune
Interpretation of a Divine Law no way Concordant to Holy Writ, they would never
tell us of a possibility of works of Supererogation, or that any has Oil
enough in his Lamp for himself and others, which was what the wise Virgins in
the Parable denied. Our Threeds (the LORD Pardon them,) will break, and do
break every day. What help in this Case, but to cast our Eyes back upon our
Actions; to take care ut ultima respondeant primis, to bring the Ends together
again by Repentance, to make up the Breach by an Exercise of Faith on the LORD
JESUS; to resolve in GODS strength to take more heed for the Future: This
doing, though what is done cannot be undone, yet for the Satisfaction of CHRIST
it shall be reckoned as undone, and our Web of Righteousness accounted as
perfect and accepted of GOD. The Soul is not made one who never sinned, (That
is impossible and imports a Contradiction) but it is made as one that had
never sinned, that is, its Sins shall never hurt it.

3. The Weaver when he has wrought a Plate (so they call so much of the Web
made as can at once lie before his Eye) he looks it over, picks it, Brusheth
off the loose Knots, (so I think they call the little parts of Wool or Yarn
picked off) how fitly does this prompt the Spiritual Weaver to his every day
work of Self Examination? Every days thoughts, words, Actions make him a plate
of Work. Some Unevenness there will be in it, his Conscience Spiritually
Enlightened, is the Instrument he must use to Pick his Work by Something will
be found too much, in his Affections, Passions, Words, Pretenses, etc. even in
his best Actions, to be picked out by a Penitent Heart, Disclaimed, Abhorred,
cast from him as a filthy R^g; Something to be Brusht off as no part of his
Spiritual Web, yea as a Noisome fly, which will make his whole Box of Precious
Ointment to stink. He never proves a good workman, who is not as good and as
Diligent at picking, as at throwing of his Shuttle. He never makes a good
Christian, who is not as good at Examining his ways, as walking in a seeming
Course of Piety and Righteousness. Often Reckoning we say makes long Friends:
Often Reckoning with GOD and our own Conscience, will keep GOD and us long
Friends, and our own Consciences long Friends unto us. Oh that every good
Christian would Remember at the End of every day! My days work is now done but
still I have it to pick, and then retire into his Closet, and use his
Conscience to reflect upon his Actions, and see if it be (so far as his light
will guide him) according to the Divine Rule; How much would this Contribute to
the Evenness of a Christians Web, and help him in the close of his life to say
after Hezekiah, LORD, Remember how I have walked before thee in Truth, and with
a Perfect Heart!

4. This whole work must be done till our piece comes quite off the Loom.
Self-Examination, Repentance, Watchfulness, are not the works of a day, or a
Month, or a Year, but of our whole Life; No work for Lent or Ember-weeks, or
Fasting-days only, but the work of every day, every week: The good Christian
can never find a time for a Carnival. Travelers tell us, that in the Popish
Countries, particularly at Venice, the Week before their Mortifying time of
Lent is called by that Name, a Week given up to all Manner of Lust, Luxury,
Gaming, Lewdness, and Profaneness as a preface to their Mock-fast that is to
follow, which make their Lenton-weeks an undue Proportion of time for the
Disgorging their Polluted Souls of the Preceding Crapula. These are ill
Spiritual Weavers, that spoil more of their work in one week than they can
again make good in many. The workman in the LORDS work who needs not be
ashamed is quite another thing; He is always at work either Weaving or
Picking, either working or looking over, searching or proving what he has
done, whether it be good or well done, yea or no, till his piece comes off the
Loom; His Hands and Eyes never cease, and to him that does thus, GOD will say,
Well done! Good and Faithful Servant, enter into thy Masters joy. The Weaver
cuts his own piece from the Loom, and cease to work when he has made his
Piece to the Length and Breadth, which he or his M^ster has proposed. The good
Christian might do so to, if his Lengths and Breadths proposed by his great
LORD were not such as he can never reach and fulfill; But his Mark to which he
is to press forward, the perfect Man, the measure of the stature of the Fullness
of CHRIST, mentioned, Ephesians ^.13. is such a Length and Breadth as the best
Christian can never hope to Reach, and must therefore die in his work; still
forgetting what is behind, still Pressing Forward to what is before. He cannot
take off his work when he pleases, because he will never have done it; he
cannot finish his Course till GOD has finished his Life: The work which GOD
has given him to do, is not to depart from his Statutes all the Days of his
Life.

The Peom.
Do some Threeds fail in every Warp?
Why do I at my Neighbor Carp,
Because he is not of my Faith,
Nor can I think true what he says?
Who made my soul Judge in his case,
What but my own impudent Face?
Do'nt I from him differ as much
As he from me? Is the case such
The Church must judge? But yet I shall,
To my own Master, stand, or fall.
The Church shall judge what shall be taught
Within her Territories naught.
I must not publish then what she
Does contradict, and not agree:
But shall not still my thoughts be free
From any humane Tyranny?
Shall she determine me to do
What Conscience says will bring me woe?
Must we subscribe what our hearts tell
Us, will but lead us into Hell?
Or, can we believe what we list?
And must we! or our Neighbors fist
Into it buffet us? Where Is gone
The Protestant Discretion?
Rome has the best often, if that we
Must have Infallibility.
Whosoever believes, because the Church
Believes, is in the Romish Lurch:
He for's Religion never will burn,
And waits forth' next wind to turn.
May I mistake? What shall secure
Me, coming to the Churches Lure?
GOD will forgive me, if I slide
Under the Conduct of that guide
Which he has in me set; and in
Foundation-doctrines do not Sin:
Though in my warp, some threeds amiss
Or in my VVoof Infirmities.
If do what I can upon
My Conscience Information,
For what I have, or have not done
I trust CHRIST's Satisfaction.
Only I must both Brush, and Pick
Each plate of work, for it will be sick
Of Imperfection: and this I
Must every day do, till I die.
When GOD my work cuts off the Loom,
Then will my private Judgment come;
And I shall have my Wages given,
Which must be either Hell; or Heaven.
CHAP. VII.
The Art.
When the Weavers Piece, or Cloth, is off the Loom, he brings it to his
Master, who Pays him, according to what he has Earned, to some more to some
less. His Master makes it up, fitteth it for the Merchant, by several Acts,
according to the Nature of the Web, Fulling, Entering, Raising, Pressing them:
Some are only Plainly made up and Pressed; Some are Glozed, some must be
Carried to the Sealing-Hall, and Sealed. Thus they are fitted up for a
Merchant; then Sold.

The Meditations.
1. WHat a work is here before the Poor Laborious Weaver can get a few Pence
or Shillings, what a Variety of Labors and Pains? I have heard as I said
before that a great Peer of this Realm sometimes Condemned to Die thus expressed
himself: If I had Served my GOD with the same Faithfulness, as I have Served my
Prince, I had not come to this un^imely End. Many a Poor Weaver, that sits at
his Loom, from four in the Morning till 8, 9, 10. at Night, but to get 7, 8, or
10 s. a week for a Livelihood, I fear may sadly reflect upon his Soul, and say:
If I wrought half so hard for GOD, as I here Toil for my Master, how much
better Wages should I have? what a lamentable Fool I am to work 9, 10. Hours
in a Day for 7 or 8 or 10 s. and to grudge one or two Hours, to work for a
Crown of Glory, to Read, Hear, Pray that GOD would not Condemn my Soul to an
Eternal Misery? How does many a Poor Industrious Weaver spend his Labor for
that which is not Bread, and his Strength for that which either will not
Profit, or not comparably with the work of Righteousness. Blessed GOD! what
comparison is there, betwixt Thine, and the Worlds Wages, to him that most
faithfully serves it; his Crowns of Gold, and this Crown of Eternal Glory and
Happiness? We hear Men often say, we will rather Play for Nothing than Work
for Nothing; Yet how do the most of Men rather Choose to Work for Nothing, yea
to Work for Hell rather than to Work out their own Salvation, and for the
Glory of GOD? (The greatest some things of this World and of that which is to
come.) The Service of GOD is a perfect Freedom, a Freedom in Comparison of all
the VVo^k in the World. Does GOD require of a Poor Weaver that he might be
Saved, to spend 8 or 10 Hours every Day in Reading, Praying, Hearing,
Sel^-Examination, etc. what lively active Christian is constant to much more
than a third part of that time spent in Devotion to GOD? yet it is for an
Eternity of Glory and Happiness. It is true, he must set GOD always before his
Eyes, that will not slide by his Feet. He must walk in the Fear of the LORD all
the Day-long, that will Enter into his Masters Joy, he must continually direct
his Intention right; whether he Eats or Drinks, or whatever he does, he
must do all to the Glory of GOD; But is Holiness such a Toil, such a Weariness
to the Flesh, such a Bodily Labor as VVeaving is? yet what a Difference is
there in the Wages? Ah what a Slave is Man? that can ^y himself, yea must ty
himself to a Loom all the Day for a Poor Livelihood, and yet cannot ty himself
to a Course of Religion and Holiness to obtain the Promises both for this Life,
and for that which is to come. Shall not the Beams of the Weavers Looms, shall
not his Shuttles and Treddles, be VVitnesses against him another Day, which by
him are kept in continual Motion, and worn out, for a little Portion of Bread?
While in the mean time, not a Cushion is worn out by him in Prayer, not a
Bible with Reading in it what should concern his Everlasting Peace. What but
an Evil Heart of Unbelief, could give Conduct to the Life of most, while
forsaking the Fountain of Living Waters, they thus spend their Time, (their
Precious Time (upon which their Eternity depends) in Digging up to themselves
Cisterns, broken Cisterns, that will hold no Water? Did they Believe there
were a GOD, there were an Heaven, such a Reward as the Scripture speaks for the
Righteous, it were impossible they should move so little for it, while they
work so hard for what is infinitely beneath it.

2. The Weaver's Master pays him according to his Work. The Materials he has
before received from his Master, of Various sorts, and prices, according to the
piece he is to work. Some spoil all, and have in stead of Wages Nothing but a
smart Reproof and Chiding, or an Action brought against them; Others bring it
Home slovenly done: Others bring it done well, and work man like. They are paid
according to their work. The great Master, the LORD of Heaven and Earth,
furnishes every Man with Materials and Instruments, for him to do the work
which he has given him to do. None is without a Reasonable Soul, endued with
several Faculties (the Principles and Instruments of all Humane Operations.)
All indeed have not alike wit, Capacity, Judgment, Reason; But all have some
Materials, some Power's given to them. GOD (as the Prudent Weaver) does not at
first give out to all the best Materials. The Prudent Weaver first tries his
Servant with Coarser Yarn, than with Finer; First with Woollen, then with Silk:
If he works not the Coarser first, well, his Master trusts him not with the
Finer: If he works not his VVoollen Yarn well, his Master will not adventure
Silk into his Hands. If he does work the Coarser well, his Master is not bound,
(otherwise than he may be by a Promise or Covenant) to trust him with his most
Choice and Costly Materials. I must Confess I do much incline to think that in
the day of Judgment, no Soul shall be Condemned for not doing that which it had
not wherewithal to do: As a Man may Sin without the Law, so he may perish
without the Law, being judged without the Law. I can easily acquit the holy GOD
of any Unrighteousness, if in Man's Lapsed Estate, he should Eternally Condemn
a Soul, for not doing what in his present State he cannot do. It Is certain,
that we all had in Adam a Power to do whatsoever in Innocence GOD required of
Man in order to Salvation; If our Forefather spent what we should have lived
upon, it were very absurd to say, GOD has lost his Right to Exact his Debt,
because we have lost our Power to pay it. But I say, I see no need to insist on
this. GOD will find enough to Condemn ^inners for at last, because they have
done it (when he forbade them) and it was in their Power to have forborne it; Or
not done what he Commanded, and was in their power to have done. The
meritorious cause of their Damnation (to whom GOD pleases not to give
Efficacious Grace) will be found, their abuse or not use of their Common Grace.
It is true, did Men use their Common Grace never so well, they could not by
such use of it earn Special Grace, (that is a sacred VVind which blows where
it lists;) The price of it is above all the Pearl, and Coral, and Rubies, and
Diamonds of a Natural Man's work: But I do not think that in the day of
Judgment we shall see the face of one Soul, who did what in him lay; Only GOD
was wanting to him in the Dispensations of Effectual Grace. The Sinner (let him
think what he will to the Contrary) shall never lay his Damnation at GOD'S
door. This great Master will give every one according to his work. Some shall
arise to Shame and Contempt, some to Life Eternal; All shall receive according
to what they have done in the flesh, whether it be Good or Evil. The latter
shall go into Everlasting Punishment, the Righteous into Life Eternal, Matthew
25.46. When CHRIST comes (and it will be quickly) his Reward will be with him,
to give every Man according as his work shall be, Revelation 22.12. When the
Son of Man shall come in the Glory of his Father with his Angels, then shall he
reward every Man according to his works. Matthew 16.27. He whose work has bin
to rise (...) Early to drink Strong Drink, and to sit at the Wine till it
Enflameth him, shall have according to his Work his Portion, where he shall
want a Cup of cold Water to Cool his Tongue. Other sensual Sinners shall also
have according to their work, i. e. the Judgment Threatened in the word of GOD
to such kind of works; And the Child of GOD also shall have according to his
work, Isaiah. 32.17. The work of Righteousness, shall be peace, and the effect
of it Quie^ness, and Assurance for ever. The good man shall receive according
to his work. The King shall say to them on his right Hand, come you Blessed of
my Father, inherit the Kingdom, etc. For I was an Hungry, and you gave me Meat,
etc.

3. As every Christians work is not alike, so neither will his Wages be: 1
Corinthians 3.15. If any Man's Work be Burnt he shall suffer Loss, but he
himself shall be saved, yet so as through Fire; He that Builds upon the True
Foundation shall be Saved, but yet he may so work that much of his work may be
Burnt; and if it be so, he shall suffer Loss, he shall be saved, but as through
Fire. It has been a Question amongst Divines, whether there shall be Degrees
of Glory in Heaven, yea or no: It Is very probable there shall, much Scripture
looks that way; certain it is that in many things all the Glorified Saints
shall be Equal. They shall all be Exempted from Eternal Punishment, they shall
all see GOD, they all shall be for ever with the LORD, but that they shall all
sit on Equal Thrones, and have the same Degrees of Glory and Happiness, we
cannot say; nor yet will describe wherein the Difference shall lie, what
further Degrees of Honor or Pleasure one shall have more than another. This we
know that every Spiritual Weaver shall ^in the Great Day be Paid according to
the Kind of his Work, and according to the Degree of his Work in its Kind, be
it Good or Evil. It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, for Sodom and
Gomorrah, than for Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum. Those that abide with
CHRIST in his Temptations, shall sit upon twelve Thrones Judging the Twelve
Tribes of Israel.

4. Only there will be these Differences betwixt the Earthly and the Spiritual
Weavers payment. 1. The Earthly Weaver has something Due to him from the
Nature of his work as well as from his Masters Promises and Contract: So hat^
not the Spiritual Weaver. The wages of Si^ i^ Death; But the gift of GOD is
Eternal life. A Man may earn Hell, but he must have Heaven freely given him of
GOD; All the pretense of Debt we have is from a free Promise. 2. Again, the
Earthly Weaver may do something beyond his Task, which if he does, he shall be
paid for it: So cannot the Spiritual Weaver, nay, when he has done all he
can, he must say he is an unprofitable Servant; a Servant, so as what he has
done is but his Duty; an unprofitable Servant, so as what he has done comes
short of his Duty. So that indeed our Spiritual Weaver strictly has not
according to his Work not according to the Failures, and Imperfections of it,
but according to the Kind of it, and Degrees of Goodness in it: The Spiritual
Weavers Reward is by no means a Quid pro quo, a proportionable Reward unto hi^
work; but it is a Reward of Grace, according to the Nature and Degree of his
Sincerity in h^ Work.

5. When the Weavers piece comes off the Loom (according to the Nature of the
piece) it i^ either by the Master only made up and pressed and sealed, or else
(as some pieces require) it is Dyed, Fulled, Tentered, Raised, Pressed, Glozed,
and so Exposed to the Merchant. Much of this is only to Deceive or please the
Buyers Eye. Nothing of this is to be done to the Spiritual Web, that goes to
an Eye, which as it cannot be Deceived, so it will not be Pleased with any
Glozings: Only, Dyed it must be, made up and ^ffered unto GOD it must be,
Sealed it must be. The only Dye that can give an acceptable tincture to the
work of Righteousness, is in the Fountain set open to the House of David; and
to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin, and for Uncleanness, Revelation 7.14.
Those that came out of great Tribulation, washed their Robes, and made them
White in the Blood of the LAMB. If we sin (says the Apostle) and who lives,
who works and sins not?) We have an Advocate with the Father, even JESUS
CHRIST the Righteous, ^r John 2.1. It is CHRIST that with his Blood, and
Perfect Satisfaction must dye all our works; It is he who must make them up
Perfect through this Righteousness; It Is he that must set his Seal of
acceptance upon them, who must offer them ^p unto his Father. This is what
Saint John saw. Revelation 8.3. when he saw another Angel standing before the
Altar, having a Golder Censer: And there was given unto him much Incense, that
he should offer it with the Prayers of all Saints upon the Golden Altar, verse
4. which was before the Throne; And the Smoke of the Incense which came with
the Prayers of the Saints, ascended up before GOD out of the Angels Hand. Thus
now has our Spiritual Weaver finished his work, run the Race which GOD set him
to run, finished his Course, and Enters the Paradise of GOD.

6. But I observe, that every Poor VVeave^ cannot stay for his Wages until the
End of the Year, but has it from week to week; Possibly they cannot stay so
long, but must have it from day to day. The good Master Indulgeth him
considering his Necessities and the N^eds of his Family, he gives him not all
but some he gives him. So does our great LORD and Master, Godliness has
Promise both of this Life, and also of that which is to come. Our LORD knows
that we are Necessitous Creatures, and cannot do him Service (while we are in
the Body) without Food and Raiment. Godliness has therefore many Promises
annexed to it, which are fulfilled in this Life; if not to all in the extent of
some Promises, yet to all so far as shall be Food Convenient, and so enough for
them, to Support, Uphold, and Maintain them, while in this world they are at
their LORDS work. Yet not this in Equal Portions; But as many Masters that have
Various workmen not endued all with alike Discretion, sometimes trust one (who
is the discreetest of them) with the portions belonging to three or four: it is
all in trust, that they should distribute to Six and also to Seven. So does our
great LORD and Master in his distributions of the good things of this Life
which are capable to be ill, as well as well used. GOD gives to some Abundance,
to others enough, to others too little. He that has abundance, has with it a
charge to be Rich in good works, to do good, and to distribute: GOD has
provided for all, some have it in their own Hands, others have it in their
Friends Hands. GOD puts for the Poor into the Hand of the Rich, and with a
charge to them, to do good and to distribute it according to his order, and
under and by the Rules, he has set down in his Word. Their great Wages is to
be Paid at the End of their Days, indeed at the End of the World; But they
shall in the mean time have Something to support, and Uphold them while they
are in the Flesh doing and Suffering the will of GOD concerning them.

The Poem.
LORD! how we labor for a piece of Bread,
Which when we have,
It perishes! No sooner are we Fed,
Our Stomachs crave.
We work, and by and by our gettings Spend:
What we before
Were, that we are; Our Labor's without End;
And we still poor.
Still but our Body's fed. Our better Self
Will starved be:
It cannot be maintained with worldly Pelf
TO Eternity.
Is there no better Trade, might not I work
For better pay
If I served GOD? My Soul let it not irk
Thee for to pray,
To Read, to Hear, to spend time every day;
To make that sure,
Which when all these poor things shall melt away,
Shall still endure.
Work how I will, while I am in the Flesh,
My pay will be,
Or Good, or Bad; of Either more, or less,
Eternally.
Why do thou say no Mortal Man can Live
Merely on Prayer?
Did ever GOD unto his Servant give
Nothing but Air?
Cans't trust him for a Crown, and can not trust
Him for thy Bread!
Has he not said unto thy part of dust,
It shall be Fed?
Did ever any him for nothing serve
For nothing here?
If thou do not abound thou shall not starve,
Thou needst not fear.
But do not think, that thou do from thy Maker
Earn the least Good.
All Is free Gift, or because thou art Partaker
Of ^hy LORDS Blood.
His Hand must Seal, his Blood must Dye the Piece;
If he but write
ACCEPTED, it shall pass for Righteousness;
That makes it right.
Out of that Angel's hand, my GOD, let all
My Prayers come
To thee, and whatsoever good I shall
Work in my Loom.
The Art of Weaving Spiritualized. Part. II.
CHAP. I. Of the Excellency of the Trade.
Observations.
HItherto I have only helped our Weaver with some hints for Spiritual
Meditations and Discourse from the several parts of his Work. Let me now give
him some few Observations I h^ve made, upon eight and twenty Years Converse
with many of this Occupation. My Observations, will some of them be more
General, relating to other Trades as well as that; Some more Special, relating
to that Employment. I shall not be curious in distinguishing them each from
other, but take them as my thoughts suggest them to me.

1. In the first place, I observe the Circumstances of that Occupation? Equally
fitted to the Personal advantages of those which are Employed in it, and the
Political good of the place where it is exercised with any other; If not much
exceeding most Employments: Which I shall make out in several particulars.

1. Its End and effect, is the Supply of one of the great wants of Humane Life.
Food and Raiment, are our two great Bodily Needs: The Apostle advises, that if
we have them we should be content. The Weaver supplies the Latter. What sad
Employments have many Persons in the World, the End of which is nothing else
but Luxuary and the Satisfaction of Lusts: Their Trades are but a Factorage for
the Devil, a mere Provision for the sinful flesh, for the fulfilling the Lusts
thereof. Blessed GOD! If men's Consciences where not feared with an hot iron,
upon what an uneasy pillow would they lie down at Night when their Consciences
should tell them, now I have been doing nothing this day, but serving men's
lusts, and helping them on to their Eternal R^ine and Destruction? How many are
thus employed? The Weaver as to this may sleep secure; and work securely in the
daytime, being assured, that he may comfortably abide in the Calling to which
GOD has called him; He may confidently beg GOD'S Blessing upon his Employment,
and say, Prosper thou the work of our Hands upon us, O LORD, Prosper thou our
Handy work. He whose Employment lies in a mere Service of Pride, Luxulry and
Wantonness cannot do so.

2. A Second advantage of this Trade, is The little time that it gives either
Servant or Master, (but Servants especially) for idleness. Idleness (especially
in Youth) is the source and fountain of almost all the Debauchery polluteth the
world, and all the Baggary with which we abound, Solomon tells us,
Ecclesiasticus 10.18. By much Slothfulness the Building decays, and through
idleness of the Hands the Building drops through. This (says Ezekial 16.49.)
was the iniquity of S^dom, Pride, fullness of Bread, and abundance of idleness
was in her Daughters. The Soul of Man i^ an active busy thing, and must be set
on work; if it be not kept in a constant good Employment, it will most
certainly employ it self ill, and undoubtedly the Debauchery of most places
owes it self to the great Leisure that Servants have in Shops, etc. The Weaver
can find no time to be Idle in, a blessed Employment which keeps the Soul out
of the Temptations to which Idleness exposes it. Idle Persons 1 Timothy 5.13.
are not Idle only, but Tatlers, and Busybodies, wandering from House to House,
and speaking things which they ought not: Yea, and doing things too which they
ought not. It is the idle Person that proves the Gamester, the Drunkard, etc.
It is true there may be an Excess in Labor, when it is to that degree that it
wastes the Body, destroys the Health, allows not due time for Devotion, nor
the reasonable Repairs of the Body, by Food or Sleep, or moderate Recreation;
but (these things excepted) the lesser time for Idleness any Trade allows the
better it is. This I am sure this Trade does. I and many times Ashamed of my
own Bed, when I see the Candles in the poor Weavers Chambers, or hear the
Noises of their Looms.

3. Thirdly, It is the Advantage of this above many other Trades, that a Man
may be dealing in it with a little Stock, and from it get a little Livelihood.
It is the Disadvantage of many other Employments, that nothing can be done in
them without several Hundreds of Pounds going: it is otherwise in this, My self
have known many who came to considerable Estates, who have told me they begun
with ten Pound; they passed but with a Staff over Jordan, and at their coming
Back had Great Droves.

4. Fourthly, If GOD blasts the Weaver in his Course of Trade, yet (provided he
has his Health and Limbs,) his Trade affords him a Livelihood. Many Trades do
not this, they are more open, etc. and if the Tradesman fails, he is forced to
fly.

5. If GOD blesses the Weaver in his Trade, he is fitted by it also in a great
measure for the more Noble Employment of a Merchant; He has learned to know
the true making and the prices of most Stuffs, how they may be afforded, etc.

6. It gives a great advantage, for some exercises of Religion to be interwoven
with seculare Employments. It is the great unhappiness of some Employments,
that they so wholly take up the Head and Heart of such as are Engaged in them,
that they hardly allow any intervals for any Spiritual Employment. The Weaver
is not so; But his Trade is very consistent with, 1. Heavenly Ejaculations: He
may have manum in textrino oculos in coelo; his Employment will not hinder his
devout Soul from many a look toward Heaven; he may VVeave and pray. 2.
Spiritual Meditations: If not so continued and fixed, as if wholly at leisure;
yet frequent, and serious. My sense of this has given me the occasion of
helping him in the former part of this Discourse. 3. Spiritual discourse.
Ordinarily three or four are working here together in the same Chamber. If but
one of them will be the Preacher, the others are tied to be the hearers; and
indeed I have often thought (how truly I cannot tell) that this Trade this way
has very much contributed to the Religion of this Town, GOD having a great
number of that Occupation among us, of whom we have Reason to hope very well,
as to their Eternal State.

7. It is a Trade of great ingenuity: No mechanic Trade (if this may be called
so) giving such an advantage to Ingenious Persons to Improve their fancy, by
the invention of new Patterns, or mixing Yarn and Colors too for a new Pattern
laid before them.

8. Lastly, It is a Trade infinitely useful as to the Poor. Females both Women
and Children are employed in preparing their Yarn: Children from their Infancy
almost, in winding their Pipes, Men in Weaving at the Loom. In short I cannot
tell whether there be any one other Employment, that affords so many personal
advantage^ to the Tradesman, or political advantages to the State under whose
Government they are employed. Solomon says, the King is served (...) the
Field: I am sure the King of England is eminently served by the Weaver; and
this is obvious to any one who does but consider, what an innumerable company
of Spinsters, Woolcombers, Filling-boys, Shearmen, Dyers, Pressers, etc. depend
upon them: Besides, the Merchant by them is served with infinite variety of
Stuffs to be transported into all the hotter parts of the world, besides the
great quantities used in our Land, and the Kings adjacent Dominions.

1. This Observation may be of a double use to the Weaver. 1. To Restrain his
Discontent for the Course of Life, in which the Providence of GOD, the Prudence
of his Parents or Governors, and his own Choice in his Younger Years, have
engaged him. It is a great infirmity of our Natures, that not one of many is
content with his portion. The Poet long since complained of it: -- Qui fit
Mecoenas ut nemo quam sibi Sortem,
Seu ratio dederit, seu sors objecerit illa,
Contentus vivat, laudet diversa sequentes.


The Weaver is ready to say, O that I had been an Hosier, a Grosser, a Draper;
any thing but what I am! One great Reason of which is; That we can easily see
the Difficulties which attend our Course of Life, but are not so good ^^dges of
what attend another; which makes another appear to us so far more desirable,
when in very deed there is no Course of Life in this World, but has its
Difficulties attending it, and Sufficient for every Trade are the Evils
thereof: and there is none that makes an option, of another Course, but if he
would give himself the leisure to enquire of some so employed, he would find
them as much wishing they had been something else than what they are. But what
has the Weaver to Complain of? What ca^ commend a Trade which is wanting to
his? The Alehouse-keeper, Vintner, Innkeeper, may lie dow^ many a night with an
^aking heart, to think how many he has been helping on to the bottomless pit.
Others may have sour reflection^ when they come at night to think over what
they have been doing that day, and their Consciences makes them answer, that
they have been serving the World with what is of no use but to serve Pride or
Luxury. The Weaver's Conscience shall never trouble him for this: When the
Weaver reflects upon his Trade, and considers the general End of it approved by
GOD, the profit of it though not so great as others, yet what will afford Food
and Raiment to the industrious Hand, the advantages of it whether GOD pleases
in it to smile or frown upon him, the advantage it gives him for devout
Ejaculations, Pious Meditations, Good Conferences, the Usefulness of it for
all, more especially for the Maintenance of the Poor, he has no Reason to
Murmur at Divine Providence, nor to Blame his Parents Prudence, or reflect upon
his Youthful Indiscretion: GOD has chosen a Good Lot for him, aad he ought
Cheerfully to abide in the Calling to which GOD has called him and to be
Content.

2. Did I say to be Content? yea to be highly than^ful unto GOD; Blessing GOD
that by his Providence directed him to such an Employ in the World, as his
Conscience shall never justly check him for the following of it; such a one as
he can in Faith go to GOD Morning and Evening and beg GODS blessing upon (So
cannot many a jollier Person:) An Employment that fills his H^nd, and diverts
from Idleness which is the Souls rust, and Poison; an Employment in which he
has many advantages, more than in many others, to serve his GOD, himself, his
generation; That he shall not live in the E^rth like a drone, upon the Honey
gathered by others, nor like a Beast of Prey upon Rapine, nor like one who
thinks he is only Born for himself, and whom, both the Good and Sober VV^rld
could a thousand times with less inconvenience mi^s than keep alive. Here is
abundance of matt^r of Praise, that has Overruled our wills in the
indiscretion of our Youth to such a choice as this, the choice of a Trade at
which a Man may sit with so much Satisfaction, and in which he may work with so
much pleasure, and the Exercise of so much Piety, and for so much Public
Profit, as well as Private Advantage. Let then the Weaver reflecting on his
Employment fit and Sing.

The Poem.
My GOD! my Loom's no warehouse, where
Gold-Ore, or Silver-wedges are;
No Goldsmith's Shop glistering with plate,
Nor any other thing of State.
It Is no such thing;
But it is an utensil, by which
The Poor are clothed and the Rich.
What helps to cover Mankinds shame,
And thence has got it self a Name;
To serve the King.
My work is such, as when once over
Will never my Conscience trouble more:
When I have wearied hands and feet,
My sleep upon it will be sweet;
My mind at rest.
It Is what employs me all the day,
And spare's ^r time with Sin to play;
What tire's not quite nor gives leisure,
For any fordid sinful pleasure;
And that Trade's best.
It Is what so takes not up my mind,
But I can in it leisure find
To send a prayer with a Sigh,
Unto my Father that is on high;
And think upon
His works of Power, and of Grace,
And beg the shinings of his face:
There I can sit, and speak his praise,
And others tell, how he displays
Salvation.
There I can tell for me what GOD
Has done, both by his Staff and Rod;
Of my Redeemer I can sing
There, and exalt my LORD, my King;
And him Obey
In doing what he calls me to,
And which he wills me for to do.
There I can set on work the poor,
And keep them from rich Dives door;
And all men pay
With the honest Sweat of a poor brow.
There I can recompense the Plow.
I find it Clothing, that me Bread:
Thus I am clad, and also sed,
In a poor Loom;
Whiles the All-seeing Eye does see
Others Working Iniquity.
My Weavers Loom I will prefer
Before the idle Theater,
For CHRIST will come.
CHAP. II. For the most part those who begin the least Stock raise the best
Estates.
2. Observations.
1. IT is an Observation which will be found to justify it self; as in many
other Trades and Courses of Life, so in this Trade also. Not many who begin
with large Stocks grow rich by Trading, but for the most part the most thriving
part of Tradesmen are those who began with little; Nor does the Reason of this
ly wholly out of ordinary fight, though Possibly something of it may not be so
Obv^ous.

1. What if we should say (what the Comedian long since observed) that the
Nature of all his proclivis a labor ad libidinem. Most person^ Naturally hate
Labor, and do not care to eat their Bread (if they can help it) in the Sweat
of their face. If Men have enough to Live on, they will rather abate the
Ornaments of their Life than endure Labor for them. While on the other side,
those who at first are forced to Labor to supply the Necessities of their
Life, by that time they have done that, are so habituated and inured to it,
that Labor is far more pleasant to them than Idleness, and they now do that
upon choice, which they before did upon force. The diligent Hand makes Rich.

2. But yet this is not all. For the same Divine Author also says, The
Blessing of GOD makes Rich; but why, now the Blessing of GOD, more usually
attends the day of small than of great things, may be a further Enquiry; For
Possiby a farther Reason may be found out than this. That GOD usually annexeth
his Blessing to the diligent Hand; Yet always it is not thus. It was the saying
of Hierome (at least ordinarily ^scribed to him,) Omnis dives est vel iniquies
vel iniqui haeres. Every Rich Man is either an ^nrighteous Man, or the heir of
some unrighteous Man. It was somewhat too harsh to express it by an Universal
affirmative; But if he had said the Major part are so, he had doubtless spoken
much truth. Now where he that begins with a large Stock is iniqui hae^es,
though not himself unrighteous, yet the heir of an Estate ^^t by
Unrighteousness, he is but mal^ fidei possessor, in the Eyes of the just Judge,
and it is no wonder if he neither keeps nor improvet^ what he has. It was an
old saying -- De mal^ quaesit^^ vix gaudet tertius haeres, and agrees with our
English saying, Ill-gotten goods will not thrive* I knew a worthy person in
this Nation to whom GOD had given a plentiful family of Children, and no
plentiful, though a competent Estate, he would ordinarily s^tisfy himself
discoursing with his dear and good Yoke Fellow about the circumstances of his
Family, when he should cease to be; That though his Estate was not great, yet
it had no worm at the Root. Job says of the wicked Man that is Rich, Job
27.17. Though he heap up Silver as the dust, and prepare Raiment as the clay,
he may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide
the Silver; he Builds his House as the Moth, and as a booth that the keeper
makes. Now he that begins with a great Stock that has bi^ thus got, it is
no great wonder if it melts away in his Hands, though they be diligent Hands*
he begins with an Estate upon which a Curse i^ entailed.

3. Further yet. What if GOD will set a period to, and write a Nil Vltra upon
an Estate? Nations, Persons, and so Estates too have their periods. He that
has said to the Waves, hither shall you go and no farther, has also said so
to Persons, Families, Nations, Estates, etc. It is true as to Estates as well
as Time, and Duration of Life: One generation goes and another comes. It is
he who pours contempt upon Princes, and causes them to wander in the
wilderness where there is no way, and sets the Poor on high from affliction,
and makes him Families like a flock, Psalms 107.40, 41. Suppose the Man that
begins with a great Stock, be as diligent as he who begins with a little,
and as well proportioneth his expenses to his heap (which is not often seen:)
Suppose also no rust in his Silver, and that his Stock before he has it, has
not mala Stamina vitae, a consumption in its causes; But be well-gotten, and
left unto him: yet if his Estate be grown up to its measure and come to its
period, it is no wonder if it improveth not; It is arrived at its measure and
come up to its full growth.

2. What is obvious in Worldly Trades, may possibly be observed as to our
Spiritual Trading too. Those that begin with the least stock there, ordinarily
make the best Improvements in Grace. Publicans and Harlots, enter into the
Kingdom of GOD, before the Jews, Matthew 21.13. Oftentimes the last are first,
and the first last; Men coming from the East and West, and from the North and
South, sit down in the Kingdom of GOD, Luke 13.29, 31. And those near it, (in
an humane Eye) come short of it. We shall observe two Sorts of Men, setting up
in the ways of GOD; Some whose former Life has been profane and sensual, who
have been bred up in a great Ignorance of GOD, and the things of GOD; upon some
of these GOD works and makes a change in their Hearts. Others who have been
bred up in the knowledge of the Scriptures, instructed by their Mothers and
Grandmothers in the Nurture and admonition o^ the LORD. These latter may be
Resembled to Men beginning with great S^ocks. Now if you observe it, ordinarily
the former make the greatest Improvements in the Exercise of Grace. I know it
is not Universally true as neither are our Observations as to Trade without an
Exception, but Generally it is so. Paul seems to be an Exc^ption from this
Rule; He began with a great Stock, bred in the knowledge of the L^w, Ze^lous in
the practice of it; touching the Ri^hteousness which is of the Law, blameless
Philippians 3.6. and yet Improved to a great height, labored more abundan^ly
than a^l the rest of the Apostles: But two things are observable in his case;

1. Those things which were gain to him, those he counted loss for CHRIST,
Philippians 3.7. He found himself rather disadvantaged than advantaged by his
legal Righteousness: I Suppose, because they exposed him to a Temptation of
resting in them, and trusting to them rather than in the LORD CHRIST and his
Righteousness.

2. Secondly; Though he had a great Stock of Knowledge and Righteousness; yet
he had much impaired it before his Conversion; for he else where tells us he
was a Persecuter, a Blasphemer, so as he was now to begin again; like a
Tradesman that begins with a great Stock, and cannot thrive, but spends it and
squanders it away, and then comes again to begin the World with nothing and
then he thrives. Our SAVIOR has confirmed this Notion to us, in his Parable
Luke 7.41. of the two Debtors; both which the Creditors forgave frankly, to the
one five hundred pence, to the other fifty. Peter judged that he to whom most
was forgiven would love most, and our SAVIOR told him, he had rightly judged.
You shall ordinarily observe in the world those Christians, whom the LORD has
taken out of a State of sensuality and profaneness more warm for GOD, in all
Acts of Devotion, and Piety, than those whose Conversion is more insensible,
and whose Life has been more like persons Sanctified from the Womb.

3. Nor does the Reason of this lie so deep, but the Eye of Humane Reason may
pierce very far into it; for Gratitude being the great principle of Obedience,
in reason, the greater the Love is which the Soul has experienced, and the
greater the Sense is which the Soul has of that Love, the higher the
obligation in point of Gratitude must rise. Now though every forgiven Soul has
much forgiven, yet it cannot be denied but some have more forgiven to the^ than
others. Sins are not equal either for kin^, or number. Now (says our SAVIOR)
they who have much forgiven will Love much. B^^ besides, the Sense of this
forgiveness, is ordinarily upon that Soul most to whom most has be^^ forgiven.
The change upon the Heart is mo^e evident, and the work of Divine Power a^^
Goodness in it more evident; and ordinarily such persons are made to cry out of
the belly of Hell, before the LORD hears them; they feel more wounds in their
Consciences, more terrors upon their Spirits, which infinitely heighten the
rate of forgiving Mercy in such a soul, and consequently more strongly oblige
them to all the Duty which they owe unto GOD.

4. Certainly, were this Observation (so far as it relates to the Weaver, or
to any other Tradesman) is justified, it ought to lay a great Obligation upon
them to the Service of GOD, and all Acts of Obedience by which their Gratitude
may be manifested. Their Hearts should be taken up with the admiration of the
Divi^e Goodness; for they will find it easier to see the thing that it is so,
than to understand how an^ why it is so. The freedom of Divine Goodness, is not
only seen in the effluxes, and influences of Divine Grace bringing Salvation,
but also in the different Proportions of the morsels of Bread, which GOD
causes in this Life to be carried us. It is not every one that begins with
(...) little Stock that grows rich: though ten for one of those that do wax
Rich raise it from a little. Should not the Rich Man, that is made Rich, look
back and say with Jacob, Genesis 32.10. LORD! I am not worthy of the least of
all the mercies and all thy truth, which thou have shown unto thy Servant for
with my Staff have I passed over this Jordan, and now am I become two hands.
Should not they say, LORD! my Family was small in England, and little esteemed
of? I came to Town a Poor boy; I had not 10, 20, 30 l. to begin with; GOD has
made my ten pounds twenty, my thirty pounds so many Hundreds perhaps: whiles in
the time I have lived in the City, I have seen many a Rich Tradesman melt to
nothing, run the Country, die in Goal; many others are as poor as I was, they
are poor still, want Bread for their Families, I am full and rich and have need
of nothing but a more thankful Heart. What has made the difference but only
free Mercy? To whom possibly GOD has showed Severity, to me Goodness. LORD,
what shall I render to thee? What an Obligation should this lay upon such
persons, to be Rich in good works; to do good and to distribute, to give
portions to Six and also to Seven, in thankfulness to GOD, who has given such
a portion to them. My Heart-akes to see persons so scanty-handed as to Piety
and Charity to whom GOD has been so liberal. Is it not the too ordinary Course
of Men whom GOD has thus exalted, As Soon a^ they get a little estate to think
of nothing but purchasing coats of Arms for their Families, adorning their
Houses with Rich household stuff, providing only great portions for their
Children, and looking out great matches without regard to the Religion of the
persons to whom they Marry them? This is the great vanity of the Son^ of Men (I
tremble to say, such of them as I also hope Grace has made the Sons of GOD)
that when themselves have to an old age used nothing but a rake, to scrape
together a great Estate, their last ambition is to purchase a Fork, for a
Luxurious Child or Children, to scatter abroad all they have got. Oh how does
this unthankful generation requite the liberality and bounty of a good and
gracious GOD toward them! How ill do they requite the GOD of all their mercies!

5. Our wise GOD foresaw this Vanity in the Hearts of his People, and therefore
cautioned his People. Deuteronomy 8.11. Beware lest thou forget the LORD thy
GOD. verse 17. And say in thy Heart; My Power and the might of my Hand has
gotten me this Wealth. But thou shall Remember the LORD thy GOD for it is he
who gives thee power to get Riches. There are three or four Fountains from
which the Riches of all Men flow, Inheritance, Marriage, Gift, Trading. The
Power of GOD is eminently seen in them all; as to the two former they are
confessed in two ordinary English Sayings: 1. GOD makes heirs, 2. Matches are
made in Heaven. Nor I do think the Unsearchable Providence of GOD more seen in
any two things in the world. For that of making Heirs a thousand instances
might be given. My self knows a Person of Honor and great Estate, betwixt whom
and his Estate (if I Remember Right) were 18 or 19. did not GOD make this Noble
Person the Heir? The influence of GOD upon Marriage is a most Unaccountable
Thing; the Heiress, or Woman with a great Estate, can give herself no account
why she Loves and Chooses such a Man, yet she cannot but do it; She must make
him her Husband, though it may be, all her Friends and Neighbors wonder what
she sees in him. Not many grow Rich by Gifts, but they who do so may easily see
the Hand of GOD there too; an Estate is given to one a Stranger, nothing akin,
only because he is of the Rich Testators Name; to another, out of a peculiar
kindness and fancy, of which the receiver can give none, or but a very slender
account. For an Estate got by Trading, the Power of GOD enabling the Tradesman
to get Riches, is, if not more, yet every whit as evident. Who is it that sends
more Customers to one Shop than to another? who gives one a better Judgment, a
better correspondent, a better fancy than another? Now certainly that GOD who
gives me power to get Wealth, has a Reasonable Right also to give me a Law
how to use it when I have gotten it; and it is because we see him not in the
Gift but say in our Heart, Our power, our wit, and he might of our Hand, has
gotten us this great Wealth: O^, our Heart could never be lifted up, and we
forget the LORD our GOD.

Lastly, This Observation (certainly) should deliver us of any anxious
Solicitude for the posterity we shall leave behind us, and reduce it to no
more than a pious and moderate provident care for them. I have desired to make
it my Rule, never to be further sollicitous for my Children, than to give them
a Good Education in Learnin^ Arts and Trades, so as if they will but use their
Diligent Hand by the supervening Blessing of GOD upon them, they may have
whereon to live in the World. I have had many arguments that have induced me to
it: 1. I have said to my self, Who am I who thus labor and am so so^licitous
for my Child? What did I begin the World with? GOD has given me enough and to
spare. It is very probable that had I began with two or three thousand pounds,
I h^d bee^ a worser Man than I am. Why should I distrust GOD for my Child, who
have had so much Experience of him for my self?

2. Secondly, I have observed; That such solicitude in Parents is generally
inconsistent with the performance of those duties which a Man owes to GOD, to
himself and to his neighbor. Men cannot allow themselves Decent Food and
Raiment; they have no Money to lay out upon the most truly Pious and Charit^ble
uses, because they most provide great Estates for their Children. Oh horrible
Vanity! O Miserable Unbelief! 3. Thirdly I have said to my self; For whom do I
thus scrape? For my Child who possibly may never Live to Need it. The German
Story tells us of one Babo Abenspergius (if I Remember his Name right) who
brought into the Presence of the Emperor, Threescore and Ten Sons begotten
from his own Body, who Lived to see them all in their Graves. But if my
Children do Live I do not know whether they will prove Wisemen or Fools,
Frugal Men or Sots; if the Former, let me provide what I will, it will all be
too little; if the Latter, let me leave them Little, if they have Education, it
will certainly bring forth enough, if not abundance. This very Meditation
checked the Toilsome Labor of the VVisest Man under the Sun: Ecclesiasticus
2.18. Yea I Hated all the Labor which I had taken under the Sun, because I
should leave it, unto the Man which should be after me, and (says he) who
knows whether he shall be a Wiseman or a Fool, yet shall he have Rule over
all my Labor; wherein I have Labored, and wherein I have showed my self Wise
under the S^^ (...) This is also Vanity.

4. Again I have argued thus with my self, It is the diligent Hand and the
blessing of GOD added to it, which makes Rich. If my Child b^ bred up to an
honest Occupation or C^lling, and he has GODS blessing, he shall be Rich,
though he begins but with a little; how many examples do I see of it! On the
other side, Let me leave my Child ch^sts of Gold, or Silver; If the blessing of
GOD be not with and upon him, it will all melt away like dew before the Sun: If
he be not provident and diligent it will come to nothing; the leaving of him a
great Est^te to begin the World with, is ordinarily a temptation to Young Men,
to Luxury, which will hinder them of GODS blessing, or at least to L^ziness as
it makes them look on themselves not so much concerned to labor. These thing
have overruled me into a steady resolution; so to live upon what the LORD has
given me, as not to deny my self, my Wife, Children, or Family, what is
Necessary or decent for me or them; and in my expenses to abate nothing as to
Food and Raiment but Luxury. 2. Not to withold my Hand to the full proportion
of my Estate, either as to any use which my Conscience shall tell me is either
Pious or Charitable. For my Children, to neglect nothing to their Education
which may make them necessary to, or Ornaments in the World; above all to
breed them up in the highest degree I can of the Knowledge, and ^dmoni^ion of
the LORD; and without any further care to leave to my Children, what shall
Remain after all these Reasonable and Religious Deductions. I had rather my
Children should not live, than live to the dishonor of GOD, and of no further
use to the World than to eat up the fruits of the Earth. To this I am
encouraged by this Observation, That usu^lly those who begin with l^^st
(especially upon a previous, Religious and sober Education) thrive best in the
World, and dishonor GOD least in their conversations.

The Poem.
False heart! why say my Children cannot live,
Unless I give
Them thousands when I die? Are there not more
Who are made Poor
From great than smaller Stocks? Plenty, often does
But prove a moth.
Heaps left by Cov'tous worldling God turns over,
To pay their Score.
The Young Man's Soul, while's body too high fed,
Choaks in a Bed
Of lazy Down; its native powers, and worth
Sleep; not put forth.
Fury gives arms: Necessity gives wit,
Nor can he sit;
Who has no bread to eat. Nor can he play;
For whom the day
Too little is to get what he must have,
Or else a grave.
In what I have, then let my heart rejoice:
Let not the Voice
Of scraping Churles out from my lips proceed:
There is no need
I should deny my self, or needful Food,
Or decent good:
That I should churlishly drive from my door
The truly Poor;
Or when GODS cause requires, that I should say
I cannot pay;
I shall too little then to Children leave:
GOD may bereave
Me of them all; they may prove such as will
My gettings spill,
And me reproach. I would not leave a groat
For the Drunkards throat.
If they prove good will not my GOD provide?
Who e're espied
A Righteous Father's righteous Son in want?
Sin may him Sc^nt,
(His own, or Fathers Sin;) But if that he
Unrighteous be,
He cannot live on what I leave. GODS Curse
Melts a great purse.
He may have debts of mine to pay, GOD shall
Discharge them all
Out of my Inventory. I am gone,
But my Poor Son
Must whatsoever I Have gotten ill restore
Unto the Poor,
And other Creditors. Oh! let me be
My own Trustee.
My own Executor, before I die:
Let every Cry
Against me satisfied be; Let none
Challenge my Son;
Let me GODS blessing leave him, that is enough;
If he has more, but one Poor piece of Stuff.
CHAP. III. In the Weaving Trade as well as others, Sloth ruins, as well as
Rioting and Luxury.
Observation. 3.
1. I Observe (and this is not peculiar to the Weavers Trade, but common to it
with any other) that there are two great causes of Men's Ruin; Luxury is one,
but Slothfulness is the other; and it may admit a dispute which of these
Ruineth the most. Solomon says, The Slothful Man shall be under Tribute, when
the diligent Man bears rule, Proverbs 12.24. and again; He that is Slothful
in his work is Brother to him that is a great Waster: their Relation is from
the Common tendency, and exit of them both. I have Observed some Tradesmen
never in their shops; they are either on Horseback; Hunting or coursing, or in
Inns, or Taverns, tippling, drinking, or Gaming. Over a few Years I hear of
them in the Go^l, I see over their doors, This Shop is to be let^r, their
places know these fools no more. I have observed others, chargeable with none
of these Enormities; but seldom or never in their Shops, C^reless of their
Business, sleeping till noon, spending much of their time in Idle Discourses,
or prating; soon after I have heard they also changed their habitation for a
Goal. Men wonder, some say such a one was never a bad Husband, he scarce ever
spent a penny at an Alehouse. Inconsiderate Men that do not attend to that of
Solomon; That he who is Slothful in his work, though he be not, yet he is
Brother to a great Waster. There is a waste of Time as well as Silver, and the
Drunkard loses much more by the loss of the Tune he spends at the Alehouse
than of the Money which he there spends. The Sluggard that puts his Hand in his
bosom never pulls it out full of Silver. The World is a thing which will be
attended, a Mistress that can never be had without a Due Courting. Besides, the
idle Person always has the Curse of GOD at his heels: GOD has said, write
this Man a beggar, when he said, In the Sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy
Bread; and the Apostle when he Commanded, That those that would not labor
should not eat, has shut him out of good Christians Charity, and forbade him
the poor Man's basket. The idle Person is the only one for whom the bountiful
GOD has made no provision. GOD has Provided a basket into which every good
Man will put something, for him that cannot live by his Hands. But for the idle
Person GOD has provided nothing, but a bridewell here, and an hell hereafter.

2. And is it not thus in the Spiritual Trade? There are some that cannot go to
Hell without a Drum and Trumpet before them; in proclaiming their Sin as Sodom,
they proclaim their Damnation also, and so as he that can but Read a Line in
Scripture, may Run and Read it. GOD (...) damning them shall but answer their
frequent prayers or imprecation in that pagan dialect. The mischief of it is,
that these Men will no suffer others to go to Heaven if they can help, mere
dogs in the Churches manger, they abhor the Name and thing of Religion; yet
will prescribe to others, and be the Informers against them for Worshipping
that GOD whom their Souls impudently defy and contemn. These now, like profane
Esau, for a mess of pottage despise their birthright. Forlorn and desperate
Souls, how just shall their damnation be! But Oh! that Hell might open its
Mouth for no^e but these prodigies of abominations. There are others Steal
themselves into a Bottomless Pit, they do not so openly Despise: But they
Neglect the great Salvation of the Gospel. The Men are not Drunkards, no
Dammees, no profane Swearers and Cursers, no Adulterers; but there is one no
more belongs to them, they are no Saints, a formal lazy sort of professors,
that have a mind to go to Hell and no Man shall discern it. The voice of
Swearing, Cursing, Blaspheming, is not heard in their Houses; but neither is
the voice of Prayer hard, they do not drink but they will sleep themselves into
Damnation. For the business of Repentance, Faith, New-obedience, Mortifications
of Lusts, Self-denial, taking up the Cross, following of CHRIST, they
Understand none of these things nor Mind them at all. It may be they go to
Church, but it is all one as if they staid at home. The Sermon has no more
taste in their Souls than the white of an Egg. The first are a choleric kind
of Sinners, these a Phlegmatic sort: The End of both will be the same; neither
do the work which GOD has given them to do, nor finish the Course which GOD
has given them to run. They are both going the same Road to a bottomless pit;
only the first gallop, these only ^og on: The first may come to their journey's
End a little sooner but at Night they will both meet

3. Oh, Let the honest Weaver consider this! That as his work in his Loom will
no more be done by sitting still, and sleeping in his Loom, than by breaking
his Threeds and throwing his Shuttle out of the window: So the great business
of his Salvation may as much miscarry, by a neglect, as by doing what is
directly opposite to it; when he sees a Man Undone in hi^ Trade through mere
neglect of it, going loitering up and down and doing nothing. Seneca (if I
Remember right) though he were an Heathen complained of time lost four ways*
Either by doing nothing or doing ill (which is worse than nothing) or by doing
aliud something that is not our business, or by doing that which is good in an
ill Manner. A Meditation worthy of a Christian; he loitereth in his Spiritual
Employ, not only who does what is ill, of who does just nothing, but he also
who does too much of other things, or good things in a slight, Careless,
perfunctory manner. Methinks when the Weaver sees his Neighbor ruined by
Laziness, or perfunctory slovenly doing of his Work, he might Reasonably
Reflect upon his Soul and say; My Soul take heed thou also do not thus
perish.

The Peom.
Two things the ruin of the Tradesman be,
Sloth, Luxury:
One throws away whatever he does gain,
And should maintain
His family, their belly and their back
Smarts for his Sack.
He whores, he plays away his needful food,
And drinks their blood:
After a while, he counts; All he has won
Is, He Is undone.
The other idle at his Shop-door stands
Folding his Hands;
It Is death to him to work, He Will also come
To the same doom.
Both die in Jailes, though these do faster go,
Others more Slow.
It Is but the same case, in the Spiritual Trade:
Some men are made
Heirs of Hell, by an excess of Riot;
Others by Quiet
In Active Negligence; some do proclaim
Their open Shame,
And tell men whither they are bound; They tell
All they are for Hell.
Others (as they think) with some little wit
Steal to the pit.
Some wretches cry GOD damn me; Some would have
GOD them to Save,
But will not ask it; wages they expect
But do Neglect
The work, to which Heaven must be the pay
At the Judgement-day.
My Soul! Shun both those rocks, thou sailest well,
And avoid'st Hell.
If thou come to Hell at last, what ere,
Why thou come there,
Will no refreshing be, to thee to think;
Whether by Drink,
By Cheating, Swearing, Murder, or by less
Unrighteousness
Or by neglect of what thou should have done,
Thou be undone.
Hell will be Hell, both unto the profane
And careless Man.
CHAP. IV. Some work away their living, Some trust it away.
Observation 4.
1. Mill modis morimur. It is an old Observation, that though we all come one
way into the World and that through Difficulties, yet we die many ways. There
are more than one way indeed by which men come by their Trading Stocks, yet not
so many as there are by which men may lose it, and prove Beggars. We have
already considered the two main, Luxury and Laziness, but these are not all. I
observe that some work away what they have. It Is pity, that the industrious
Hand should make poor; but so it is in the World very often: Either they toil
in Stuffs out of fashion, and not vendible, or they do their work slovenly, or
they trust to a Market for their works, and fail; or some other thing Happens
that the Men are undone by working slovenly, or Indiscreetly: VVhen-as there
were no such way to live, as working, did they work the works which are
acceptable in that time, or work Handsomely, and prudently. We by Experience
see many men may be undone, as well by working, as by Rioting and playing.

2. I observe again that many are Undone by Trusting; Either because the
Persons they trust are not Responsal, or because they give longer time than
their Stock will bear, or the Persons they trust are Unfaithful to their
Words.

3. Methinks I see (...), something Analogous to this in our Spiritual
Concerns: Some lose Heaven by a Vain and Groundless trusting, some by an Unwary
and Ill-circumstanced working. Go through a whole City of Professors, and ask
them how they hope hereafter to be saved; they will tell you, they hope, they
rest, they trust in the LORD JESUS CHRIST; whenas too many who say so CHRIST
will be no better than a broken Staff, and a bruised Reed, which if a Man leans
upon it will only run into, and wound his Hand. Not that Our Blessed LORD may
not be Trusted, for He is able to save to the utmost those who by Faith come
unto Him; not that He is not Faithful, For he is Faithful who has Promised
(says the Apostle,) but because they had no ground to trust in him Living, and
being resolved to Live and do as they do. No Man can lay a Natural Claim to
Heaven, no Man can challenge the Salvation of his Soul as a Debt to him: we are
told that Eternal Life is the Gift of GOD, and being so, none has any pretense
of ground to trust in GOD and CHRIST for it, but upon some promise. For upon
this Hypothesis that All men shall not be saved, who can pretend to any lively
Hope, to any justly-sounded Confidence, unless he has our LORDS Word to show,
wherein he has Promised, that though Topheth be prepared of Old for some, yet
it is not for him, he is one for whom the Kingdom is prepared? Now none can
pretend a Right to a limited and condition^l Promise, until he finds
fulfilled (...) him, or that he has fulfilled the Conditio^^ to the
performance of which the Good thing promised is annexed. Were it not
Ridiculous, supposing one of us had promised a great Reward to any that would
do such a Piece of Work, for to talk of trusting in us for the Reward without
any doing of the Work, especially doing the quite contrary; Even those things
to the doing of which we have threatened the greatest severities we can Use? GOD
has indeed made many great and Precious Promises of Eternal Life and
Salvation, to those who believe in JESUS CHRIST, who work Righteousness, who do
the things which please him, etc. he has as planly said; The fearful, the
Unbelieving the Abominable, the Murderers, Whoremongers, Sorcerers,, Idolaters
and all Liars, shall have their part in the lake which burns with Fire and
Brimstone, Revelation 21.8. He has bidden us not be deceived, 1 Corinthians
6.9. neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate
persons, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous
persons, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of GOD. If
notwithstanding any such person will pretend to trust in CHRIST for Salvation,
he abuses his own Soul, and by his presumptuous trusting runs himself upon
Damnation. A presumptuous confidence destroys its ten thousands.

4. And are there not others who work themselves into Hell? what shall we say
to Israel of whom the Apostle testifies, That though they followed after the
Law of Righteousness yet they attained not to the Law of Righteousness:
wherefore? because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the works of
the Law. There was indeed a way to Heaven revealed by mere working, but now
(says the Apostle) the Righteousness of GOD is revealed from Faith to Faith.
Many will not Understand this, and look still for nothing but a Legal
Righteousness. Have you not sometimes seen it thus with a Poor Be, it comes
home where the Hive was, the Hive is removed to another place, the Be knows it
not nor will stir to look for it, but there lies grovelling upon the old place
till it dies. Do not you see it in the Weavers Trade? there were some kinds of
Stuffs heretofore (possibly in the time when this or that Man served his
Apprentiship, that were in Fashion, and there was a great Market for them, and
many grew Rich by them; but they have been out a long time, the dull Tradesman
considers it not, but goes on still making them, and is very busy, but when he
has done, there is no Market for them. GOD of old said to Adam, do this and
live: Salvation was exhited upon the Term of working only; GOD has altered the
case. Now the Promise is to him that believes as well as works, and without
Faith (says the Apostle) it is impossible to please GOD: many heedless souls
consider not this; they work and work themselves into Hell. GOD will hereafter
say unto them, Who has required this at your Hands? though (it may be) GOD
did require and does require still the doing of the things which they do (for
so he did require those Duties considered materially, of which yet he says,
who has required them?) but he has required them to be done in Faith, out of
a principle of Evangelical Love, in a sincerity of Obedience, having a single
Respect and Eye to his Glory; not being done under these circumstances, they
are things he has not required, and no better than cutting off a Dogs Neck and
the Offering up of Swines Blood (as GOD himself speaks of the Jewish services
irregularly performed. There Is no Market in Heaven now for mere Works more than
for an idle inoperative Faith. The Papist the Formalist, all Ruin themselves
by working: who ever looks for a Salvation by a mere legal Righteousness, or by
a Superficial outside performance, will find himself a Beggar at last, when
CHRIST shall say to those that shall plead; They have prayed in his name, and
have prophesied in his name, and in his name cast out Devils; Depart from me, I
know you not, you workers of Iniquity.

5. What then, shall a Man be saved without Works? by no means, nor by mere
works, we are saved by Faith, (says the Apostle) and Faith (says the same
Apostle) works by Love: Works dipped in the Blood of CHRIST must bring a Soul
to Heaven; when we have talked what we can, he that Believes will and must
work, but every one that works does not Believe; and, He that Believes not
is Damned already (says our SAVIOR): Happy is he that can compound both these
as well in Practice as in Judgment, but he is miserable who divides what GOD
has put together. I always thought it a good Rule for all Christians, to
believe as much as if Works had no influence upon his Salvation, and to work as
much as if Heaven were to be earned by mere VVorking. GOD forbid, that we
should say Works are Needless, because we say Faith in CHRIST i^ needful.

The Poem.
May Men by working be undone
How many Hazards do they run,
Who trade for bread?
What needs Solicitude? Then thus,
Let Us trust him more who says to us,
We shall be fed.
But trusting may undo us too;
Say then, what shall poor Tradesmen do?
Trust warily,
And work hard too; for work and trust,
Together make the Tradesman must,
When others fly.
Say not that in the Spiritual trade,
Any by trust are happy made,
By trust alone.
Trust, without ground to trust upon,
Is but a bold presumption,
Men by it undone.
But those who can believe, and do,
Whatever GOD them calls to,
Shall happy be:
And when the Solifidians fail,
And Papists too, he shall Entail
Felicity
Unto his Soul, which neither Faith,
Nor works alone, (so Scripture says)
Can save from Hell.
Faith justifies alone: but yet
Is not alone. Works follow it;
Faith bears the bell,
Because it lies hold on him,
Who justifies the Soul from Sin:
Whose only name
Is that, by which we saved be;
Without whom to felicity
None ever came.
Happy is he who does compound
What in the holy writ is found,
By GOD combined:
But woe to him who dares to part
(To gratify sophistick art,)
What he has joined.
O Let my Soul believe as much,
As if my Faith alone were such,
As could it save:
But let it work as much also,
As if it should for what it can do,
It Is Heaven have.
CHAP. V. Usually those have their Eyes a broad most about them: an^ when
alone, are most happy i^ their Judgments and Inventions and thrive most.
Observations 5.
1. I Observe a twofold Spirit amongst Tradesmen, and as amongst other^ so
particularly amongst Weavers. Some are Men of a Poor private obscure Spirit:
Their Eyes look right before them; that is all: they have been bred to this or
that Trade to be used in this or that method, and they Jog on, and on, as we
say, buy, make, sell, the same Commodities their M^sters did, neither will turn
to the right Hand nor to the left. Such now as these I have seen in the World
with much ado quitting their teeth, and their Tailor, by all their labor.
Others I have observed of brisker Spirits, their Eyes are behind them and
before them, and round about them; they look upon their Apprentiship not as a
seven Years service to their particular Master, but to the World, advantaging
them to a general knowledge. This Spirit in a Weaver, makes him understand
that he was not bound Seven Years to learn to make either, Rashes or Tametts,
or Cheynies, or any other particular kind of Stuff; But the mystery of Weaving,
to know how to make any Stuff. This Man considers the World Rightly, the
whole scheme of it passing away, the surface of it now wearing off, new Eyes,
new fancies daily Rising in it to be pleased, and accordingly accommodates
himself to it, and has his Eyes about him and his Reason within him, his Eyes
observing what Stuffs are most worn, most acceptable to the Eye of the present
Generation, and to them he Sets himself: This Man usually thrives better than
his Neighbor.

2. I Observe again, that in Trades, and more especially in the Weavers Trade,
those who have the best Inventions, and can best compare things with things,
and who have the best Judgments, thrive best: Indeed Judgment is that which
makes a Man excel, let his way and Course of Life be what it will. It is that
which makes the Scholar, that which makes the Tradesman, and the Merchant;
indeed every one, let his Course and way of Life be of what kind it will. The
Weaver must judge of the best Yarns, the best Workman, the most acceptable
Colors, or compositions of Yarns, and Mixtures of Colors; the best Markets,
and of many other things. Invention also has a great influence, though not in
all, yet in many ways and Cours^s of Livelihoods. It has a great influence
upon the Excellency of a Scholar, and so of a Weaver. For there is much to be
found out in VVeaving; indeed in most Trad^s and ways of Livelihood, more than
is already discovered. Every day teaches another, and brings forth new notions
in Philosophy, in Physic, in Mathematics, and so likewise in Methods of
Trading, and dealing in the world: he that will only Run a Round, and go in a
Track, will find that he does but tire himself to little purpose, hunting the
World which in the mean time ^^ieth from him.

3. I obs^rve thirdly, that GOD rarely gives to any one, all those gifts which
make one to excel in any Course of Life. One Man has an excellent fancy and
invention, but possibly no Judgment: another has an excellent Judgment upon
another fancy and invention, but a dull and heavy Invention of his own; a
third has neither, but a nimble Hand at his work; a fourth has a neat Hand,
and does what he does Curiously and Exactly, he has no dexterity, but is
wonderfully slow at it. Some one Man of many has all united, he has a good
fancy and Judgment, he is both neat and quick, etc.

4. I cannot but observe that in the Spiritual Trade, there is something which
bears a Proportion unto this. I know, Truth is of great antiquity, and the
Oldest Proposition is the best, the Old way is the good way. But the Corruption
of ages has been like Snow upon a path; it requires some search, Reason and
Judgment and Pains too, to find out where that same old way lay. New Lights
are derided, and New Truth counted but a Contradiction in ad^e^to. For really
no Truth is new, but co^vous to that GOD who has stil^d himself, the Truth.
There have been two and but two Remarkable Innovations in Religion
warrantable: Warrantable, because made by GOD himself. The one upon the giving
of the Law at Mount Sinai: The other upon the publishing the Gospel; for though
there was a worship of GOD, and that by Sacrifices, before Aaron's time (when
the world was 2000 Years Old and upward) yet he undertakes a great Task that
will undertak^ to prove the whole order of the Judaical Worship in Practice
before that time. CHRIST altere^ nothing at his Coming in the Moral Law, bu^ it
is most certain that he abrogated the Law contained in Ordinances, the whole
ritual Law; and instituted a Gospel-VVorship, which shall never more be
altered. It is certain also that the Canon of Scripture was not sealed till
after CHRIST'S Ascension into Heaven though we s^y he added no new Moral
Precepts. Thus f^r all the Christian World i^ agreed, that the whole Systeme
of Divine Trut^ is revealed in the Scriptures of the Old or New Testament, and
the whole method of VVorshi^ must be found there; though of it something i^ to
be learned from Precept, something from Example, some things are plainly set
down others must be gathered by consequences in the use of our Reason. Hence
the variety of men judgments, and different apprehensions in the things of
GOD. Now there are some Christians, who either have not or will not use their
power in searching out Truth, comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual, but
take it to be enough for them. To believe as the Church believes, and to do
what the Church bid them do; having no regard to the Apostle commanding them,
1. To prove all things, and hold fast that which it Good, and again, to try the
Spirits whether they be of GOD or no, etc. I Observe these Christians little
improving in Knowledge, Faith, (...) Holiness. The woman of Samaria, John 4.
was of this size in Religion. Our Fathers Worshipped in this Mountain (says
she) Sic a parribus accepimus (said he in the Council) and met with a smart
answer -- Immo Errantes ab Errantibus; Erring Children from Erring Parents. But
now there are others who understand their Souls were given them for other
purposes: If Paul preached they will with those well-born Bereans, search the
Scripture, to see if it be Truth which he says; they are iniquisitive after
Truth, and will Examine all their Principles and practices by the touchstone
of Holy Write, bringing them to the Law and the Testimony: These are the
thriving Christians, and these alone have the promise. If thou cryest after
knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for Understanding, if thou seek Her as
Silver, and searches for Her as for hidden treasure: Then shall thou
Understand the fear of the LORD, and find the Knowledge of thy GOD, Proverbs.
2.3, 4, 5. The Promise of Improvement in the Knowledge and Fear of the LORD, is
not made to dull Souls, that believe all that is told them, and Imposed by
confident Persons upon them, but to him that Examines, Seeks, Proves, etc. He
is next doo^ to an Infidel that only believes Divine Propositions, in the
belief, denial, or misbelief of which his Salvation depends, merely because his
Father believed so or so practiced; or because an^ number of Men (call them by
what name you please so long as you allow them fallible Men) so Impose upon
him. Let Men mock so long as they please, though there be no New truth, yet
there are New Revelations and discoveries of Truth made to various Persons in
various ages; and there is New light breaks in, which is but a beam from that
GOD who is light, only before that time eclipsed by the Interpositions of
Ignorance and Superstition, and the other variety of Men's lusts and passions;
and the thriving Christian will spend his time in winnowing the Chaff from the
Wheat.

5. We have Reason to adore the wisdom of GOD in the partial Distribution of
his Gifts. The Apostle admireth it as to the Spiritual Gifts, 1 Corinthians
12.8. To one is given by the Spirit the Word of Wisdom; to another the Word of
Knowledge, by the same Spirit; to another Faith by the same Spirit; to another
the Gifts of Healing by the same Spirit: To another the working of Miracles, to
another Prophesy, to another Discerning of Spirits, to another diverse kinds of
Tongues, to another the Interpetation of Tongues. The Apostle goes on, showing
that this various Distribution of Spiritual Gifts, was it which did or might
convince them, of their usefulness one to another; That as in the natural Body
those members which are more feeble, may appear necessary, the same Divine
Wisdom we may see in GODS Distribution of these Gifts which are of a lower
order: One Weaver has an excellent Fancy to invent, another has a more
excellent Judgment; one works more neatly, another more nimbly: if every
Weaver were Good at all the parts of his work, they would not Understand their
usefulness one to another, nor the need they have one of another; but in the
variety of dispensation of these Gifts each Man is commended, and his
usefulness discovered to his neighbor, so as the head cannot say to the foot,
nor the foot to the Hand, I have no need of thee. If Men would but consider
this, we should not have so many brutes as we have, who control the Wisdom of
GOD in biting and devouring, in seeking advantages to rifle, and plunder one
another, as if this were the way to promove the prosperity of a place, which
indeed is the direct way to turn it into a nettle-bush. GOD so orders his
Gifts, as that one Man has his subordinacy to another: And indeed this is seen
by Men used in Trades generally. The troublers of GODS heritage are generally
such as live in Alehouses, or whose employment is much the same as of
Caterpillars, to eat up every green herb while they are too lazy to plant any;
a Generation from whom as GOD has no honor, so their Country has no further
profit than what arises from an impost upon the Salt, and Spirit of Urine, or
the Beer or Wine from whence it proceeds.

The Poem.
Old Truth, like Wine is always best,
A notion cannot be true,
And also new,
It Is gray-hair'd time which must attest
What-ere is Sacred truth,
Error has Youth
Yet it is not the old, but the oldest age
Alone, can justify
The Antiquity
Of Notions. From the first each page
Has foully blurred been
By Lust, and Sin
When CHRIST and his Apostles were
In our Meridian,
Truth Shined alone.
But since that they did leave our Sphere,
A darkness fell upon
Each Nation.
Though by degrees yet thou began
To rise, the foggy mist
Of Antichrist.
'Twas in the Apostles time. The Man
Whom they called The man of sin,
Did's work begin.
His work was to deform Truth's face,
The good old pathe's to cover
None might pass over;
To blind the ways of Truth and Grace
That none might see or know
Where CHRIST did go.
Hence later ages labored have,
Resisting unto Blood
Those that withstood:
To dig the truth out of its grave,
Desirous but to see
Old Verity.
Hence Truth which in it self's not new;
Yet unto us appears
Not full of years.
The Notions so appearing grew
In the Old paradise,
Where grew no lies
Only the Winter suffered not
There blossoms nor did suits
Their Bearing fruit.
Their lasting root, yet did not,
But watched a better hour
To Bud and Flower.
Whosoever despises Truth, because
It new to him does show,
Shall never grow,
Nor Understand the Sacred Laws,
Which each new day expounds
On better grounds.
CHAP. VI. Of the Various Causes of the Decay of Trade.
Observations 6.
THE Causes of the decay or abatement o^ Trade, is a noble Enquiry, and
especially for us who Live upon a Spot of Earth that is Encompassed with the
Sea. VVhat-ever they may do that Live on a Continent, it is Certain that those
who Live in Islands (if they have not a Sufficiency within themselves) cannot
Live without Trade: nor can any people without it Live happily. The people are
very thin in any place, if they be not too many to be Employed in mere Tilling
the Ground, and making necessaries for one another who are Natives of the
Place: so as either a great number must be Idle (which is the Bane of any
Place) or they must be employed in providing for other Places, which have not
what we have. This makes Tr^de Necess^ry; to say nothing of the Genius of
most, not contenting themselves with bare Food and Raiment. A late Author in
his Compassionate Enquiry, tells us and very truly:

That Trade opens a Passage to the Discovery of other Countries and of the
Works of GOD and Man, page 47.
of Nature and Art. That it is the great Incentive, and Instrument of Humane
Society; it makes all Mankind of one Body, and by mutual Intercourse to serve
the Occasions, Supply the Needs and Minister to the Delight and Entertainment
one of another. It enlarges the Minds of Men, as well as their Fortunes;
insomuch that any Nation is Unpolite, Unbred, and half Barbarous without it. It
inures Men to Hardship and Danger; it instructs them in Subtilty, and all the
Arts of Self-security. It also adds much to the Beauty, Power, and Strengths of
a Nation; and to the Riches, and Revenue of a Prince. -- A Noble Elogium --
After all which, Statists may see reason to enquire, Whether any Religion or
Reason or State ca^ endure the Abatement or Diminution or Destruction of Trade,
by any Impositions in Matters of Religion which the Law of GOD does not
expressly require at their Hands. For amongst the things that have been found
the eminent Causes of the Ruin of Trade:

1. Persecution of Men for their different Apprehensions in the things of GOD,
has been so Universal and Eminent, as all the World hat^ taken Notice of it.
By Persecution I mean a violent Prosecution of Men to the Loss of their Lives,
Liberties or Estates, let it be by the Execution of a Law or not. The Law
excuses the Fact it may be from Oppression or Tyra^^y. An Humane Law in the
case was pleaded in the highest Persecution ever was: We have a Law (say the
Jews) and by that Law he ought to die; (speaking concerning CHRIST.) This has
been so eminently proved by a worthy Hand that nothing need be added to it. Le^
any one but reflect upon those Towns and Citie^ where Liberty is granted in the
things of GOD, and those Places where the Popish Inquisitions take place, and
compare the State of the one with the other, and there needs no further
VVitness. What brought the Trade both of this Place and some others in
England, but D. Alva's Persecution in Flanders? And I dare say this one thing
shall to the End of the World be the Ruin of Trade any Place. The Power of
Conscience is exceeding great: besides that in all Trading there must be such
an intermixing of Men's Estates, such a dependency of the Well-being of one Man
upon another, as necessarily requires the Freedom and Security of all who are
of any considerable Fortunes. In a Persecution none knows who he may trust his
Estate with, nor how far he may adventure: in short it Plucks up all Trade by
the Roots; Dispirits Men from dealing or adventuring, which makes Persecution a
thing, though consonant to the Lusts of some Ill-natured, Peevish, Self-willed
Men, yet, contrary to the true Interest of all Men.

2. A Second Cause (is the Daughter of this Mother,) Transplantation, or
Transmigration: this Persecution causes; Men will endure any thing rather than
Oppression in the Matters of their Conscience. Those who think, that Riches and
a Course of Trade in a Place, will Stake Men down, and Nail them to their Posts
while they Scourge them according to their Malice, forget how many Thousand
Tradesmen under Alva's Persecution removed out of Flanders into England, and
how many Thousands removed from Old into New England, despising their Native
Country and all their Interests here, the Dangers of the Seas, the
Difficulties they could not but foresee of making a Desolate Wilderness
habitable: all these were nothing in their Eyes so they might keep a Conscience
void of Offense toward GOD in the Great Matter of his Worship. Transplantation
or Removal of Tradesmen in any considerable Number from any Place where they
were fixed, is so obvious a Cause of the Decay and Ruin of the Trade of that
Place that it need not be enlarged upon; whosoever sees it not is Blinder than a
Beetle, and deserves to be begged, till he can tell the World how the Channel
can run as full when the Water is let out into several Streams, as when it had
but one Tract.

3. A third Cause of the Abatement of Trade, is the Multiplication of those who
are occupied in it. The World is a finite thing, there is an Enough for it,
and it has but its measure to give: And as it is impossible that supposing a
Father to have ten Sons, and another two, though they both have equal Estates,
that they should both give equal Portions to every Child; so neither can the
World satisfy a Multitude of Beggars as well as if it had but a few. This
Abatement of Trade is not in the General, but as to Particulars in the whole as
much is gotten as ever; but few individuals get so much, nor is it possible
they should, unless we could imagine a proportionable Multiplication of Persons
in the World to be Fed or Clothed, to the effects of the multiplied Tradesmen,
who Work to Feed, Cloth and Adorn them.

4. A fourth Cause of the Decay of Trade, is the False making of Commodities,
and Men's False Dealing one with another in Bargains, etc. A thing for the
repute of which we in England (how justly I know not) infinitely suffer beyond
the Seas. Truth gives all things a Reputation: Falsehood is as constant a Blot,
and will be the Ruin of that Man, or any number of Men that use it. It may
(like Wine in a Fever) seem a little to refresh his Purse at first, but it
will empty it at last. The Reward of the Liar is when once known, never to be
further trusted.

5. A fifth Cause is Men's studious Vnder-selling one another. Saint John told
us long since, that the whole World lies in Wickedness, and truly a great
part of it lies in this piece of Wickedness, being studious to out go one
another: now though this be every one's Duty in that which is Good, and
possibly Lawful, if duly circumstanced, in things which are either Good or Evil
as they are used; yet it may be so pursued as it may be very Evil.

6. Lastly, I observe, that hardly any Trades, will maintain their Glory,
without some Government; every particular Tradesman, having neither Wit nor
Honesty enough to be a Law to himself. In all considerable Trades therefore
prudent Statesmen have thought fit to make Corporations, where the multitude
are under the Inspection, Rule and Government of the most Experienced, Wise,
and Discreet, Men of that Occupation: and most Trades which to any considerable
degree multiply Tradesmen, either have such Governors, or in a short time come
to nothing for want of it.

Let me now come to make some Spiritual Reflections upon these Ordinary
Observations.

1. I cannot but from hence first Observe the mighty Power of Conscience,
awakened to the fear of Sinning against GOD. Quid non mortalia pectora Cogit?
Men of no Conscience may make a Jeer of it, none knows the Power of it but he
that Feels it. It turns a Prison into a Delectable Garden, a Scorching Flame
into a Bed of Roses; and no wonder that it does so, for what is it, but GODS
Vicegerent in the little World of Man? GOD'S Interpreter to every Soul? It is
a great misfortune to a Person if it be suborned, and gives in a false Verdict.
No Man can act against it, though every one is not bound to act according to
every precept, or dictate of it. The Power of its Regrets, and Reflections for
Disobedience, are such as none can stand under, and therefore none is bound to
Humor any in running the Hazard of them.

2. The tenderness of GOD to the tender Consciences of his People, is also as
Obvious an Observation from hence. Men of the World can think of nothing for
them but Gaols and Bridewells. One while they are thinking to Jeer them out of
their Consciences by a Ballad, another-while to rail them out of them by a Foul
Mouth, anon to Cudgel them out of them. GOD does not so with them in his
Providence. If they cannot have a Room in Flanders, he will provide for them in
England; if they cannot have a resting Place in Europe, he will provide them
one in America, making for them a way in the Wilderness, and Hewing them out
an hiding Place through the Rocks, and in a Desert Land; and the Nation, that
will not be a quiet Habitation for them that fear him, GOD will Judge. If they
will have no tender Consciences in their Cities and Ports, they shall have no
Trade; to tell them they shall have no Religion will not trouble them, it may
be the Decay of their Riches and Trade will. Let the Conscience be truly
tender, fearing to sin against GOD; and let the World be as Cruel, as
Hard-Hearted, as Bloody as it will, they will find they have a tender Father.
Never any lost any thing, nor shall lose by being afraid to Sin against the
LORD, that made them, that bought them with his Precious Blood. A Man indeed
may fear too much, but there are few, very few that Err on that Hand; there are
Thousands more that fear too little. The Simple pass on (says Solomon) and are
Punished.

3. What a Vast Difference their is, between the Earthly and the Spiritual
Weaver? The Multiplication of Tradesmen in the former, abates and spoils the
Profit of the Trade. I would all the LORDS People (says Moses) were Prophets:
durst any Poor Weaver in this Town, say I would all the People in this City
were Weavers? the reason is Obvious: The World has not Gold and Silver enough
to give to every one. Hence is the scrambling for it and all the Worlds Game
is, Catch he, who Catch can. But GOD has Grace and Glory enough to give to all
that will Trade for Heaven, so as none by getting hinders another. The World
cannot receive all the Clothes and Stuffs, that would be made if a tenth part
of the Men in it were Weavers: but all the Prayers and Praises, all the Homages
and Exercises of Holiness, which the World can bring forth, are too little for
that GOD to whom they ascend as an Homage. Who would not be in Love with that
Trade that were not capable of being abated by Multiplication of Tradesmen; and
yet would most certainly bring in such Profit as Eye has not Seen, nor Ear
Heard, nor can enter into the Heart of Man to Conceive? such are the Things
which GOD has prepared for them that Love and Serve him.

4. Again; does false making of VVares, and false Dealing with Merchants and
Customers, ruin the Trading of any Place? and what is it that Ruins the
Spiritual Trade but the same thing? when the Power of Godliness, is turned into
a Form, Religion into a mere Formality and outside Show and Appearance. When
Men Glory in Show and not in Reality, when Men are false in their Acts of
Devotion, and false in their Conversation, GOD will deal with them no longer;
but remove his Name and his Gospel from them, to a People that will bring forth
better Fruit.

5. I Observe that in Trading every ones study is to get his Work done Cheaper
than another, and to Vndersell his Neighbor. Have we not too much of this in
the Spiritual Trade too? does not the falseness of our Hearts prompt us, to
come off as Cheap with GOD as we can? long Sermons, long Prayers, are thought
Needless. We would fain put off to GOD that which has cost us Nothing, and
which indeed is little VVorth: but GOD has Cursed him, that has a Male in his
Flock and brings unto him a Female. We are bound to Love, and Serve the LORD
our GOD with all our Heart, and all our Soul, and all our Strength.

6. Lastly I Observe, that in all Trades, when Tradesmen multiply to any great
Number, the Trade never thrives long without a prudent Regulation and
Government, all Men having not (as I said before) either Wit or Honesty enough
to be a Law to themselves; nor does the Trade thrive much, Unless the
Governors, be discreetly Chosen. 2. Unless they justly discharge their Trust.
To this purpose ordinarily such Tradesmen are left to choose their own
Governors as being best acquainted with the Trade, and the Persons that have
most Skill in it, and have best approved their Honesty in the Managery of it.
In those days (says the Scripture, Acts 6.1.) when the number of the Disciples
were multiplied, there arose a Murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews,
because their Widows were neglected in the daily Ministrations. In Multitudes
Corruptions will multiply. This made the Apostles turn them into a Corporation,
authorizing them, to look out seven Men amongst themselves, whom they might set
over that Affair. A Government is necessary in the Church, and Originally it
chose its own Officers. But let a Trade have what Governors it will, if either
they know not their Office, or knowing it wai^ not upon it, or in pretense
waiting upon it, yet act directly contrary to their Trust, winking at False
Weights, or Measures, discouraging the Best Tradesmen, encouraging the VVorst
and most False, the Trade must necessarily be ruined. And thus it will be in
the Church of GOD, that drive the Spiritual Trade. If either it has no
Officers and Government, or if it has such as know not their Work and Duty of
their Place; or though they know it, yet through Laziness, or, Greediness of
filthy Lucre wait not on it Or, though in pretense they wait upon it, yet in
very deed act directly contrary to their Trust, smiting those the Fear the LORD
in stead of those that Hate him, discouraging the best Professors and
Practitioners in Godliness, in stead of the open Enemies of Truth and Holiness;
the Spiritual Trade of that Place that has such a Curse must necessarily
abate, or at best go on but in Corners.

FINIS.
Fly from the wrath to come


