Books printed for Richard Sare, at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn.
A Short View of the Profaneness and Immorality of the English Stage, A second
Defense of the short View, etc. Being a Reply to a Book, Entitled, The Ancient
and Modern Stages surve^ed, etc.

Essays upon several Moral Subjects.

The Emperor Marcus Antonius his Conversation with himself. Together with the
Preliminary Discourse of the Learned Gataker. As also, the Emperor's Life,
written by Monsieur D'acier, and supported the Authorities Collected by Dr.
Stanhope. To which is added the Mythological Picture of Cebes the Theban.
Translated into English from the respective Originals,

All four by Mr. Collier.

A SECOND DEFENSE OF THE SHORT VIEW OF THE Profaneness and Immorality OF THE
English Stage, etc.

BEING A REPLY to a Book, Entitled, The Ancient and Modern Stages Surveyed,
etc.

By Jeremy Collier, M. A.

LONDON: Printed for S. Keble at the Turk's-Head in Fleetstreet, R. Sare at
Gray's-Inn-Gate in Holborn, and G. Strahan against the Exchange in Cornhill.
1700.

ERRATA.
PAge 20. ^ine 5. for of them read of the Poem, p. 21. Margin, for ^sset r.
esset, p. 28. l. 30. Margin, for nempit r. erupit. p. 29. l. 19. Margin, for
immodestiae r. immodestia, p. 50. l. 18. for discourr'd r. discoursed, p. 51.
l. 24. for, r.: p. 53. l. 13. for Epithe r. Epithet, p. 71. l. ^. for this r.
his, p. 72. l. 24. for Poet r. Poet's, Ibid. l. 30. for Promotheus r.
Prometheus, p. 73. l. 1. for Promotheus r. Prometheus, Ibid. for (...) r.
(...), p. 78. l. 33. for Under Character r. Under Characters, p. 88. l. 3. for
Sx r. Six, p. 97. l. 33. dele as I remember, p. 101. l. 23. for Selecism r.
Solecisme, p. 105. l. 29. for Charges r. Charge, p. 120. l. 5. for Dramatists
r. Dramatist, p. 127. l. 5. for L^w r. Laws, p. 128. l. 19. for belongs r.
belong, p. 134. l. 16. for (...) r. (...).

To the Reader.
WHen my Adversary first appeared, I was engaged in Business for the Press,
which I could not well dismiss, till 'twas brought somewhat forward. Besides, I
was sometime at a stand whether to Answer, or not, and, I think, had left my
Book to take its Fate, had it not been for the Charge of false Quotation.

As to the Author of the Survey, etc. his Manner is all over extraordinary, but
in what relates to my Authorities, I think altogether unpresidented; such a
size of Assurance, so unsupported by Proof and Color, is rarely to be met
with. If he continues to cast the Cause thus entirely upon his Courage, he must
Dispute by himself.

His Eagerness to Defend the Stage, has sometimes transported him into plain
Rudeness: To this I shall only observe, That Railing is a scandalous Talent,
and an Argument of an ill Undertaking. When a Man throws Dirt, it is a sign he
has no other Weapon. These are Unchristian and Vngentlemanly Sallies, and not
so much as allowed to Provocation. Having therefore neither Liberty, nor Fancy
for this way, I shall, for the most part, overlook his Misbehaviour.

As for the Stage, I almost despair of doing them any Service: They are more
inclined, I perceive, to Repeat their Faults then amend them: They make no
scruple of coming over again with their Ill Plays; As if Immodesty and
Profaneness were the more valuable for being discovered. But thus to bear up
against Evidence, and go on in Defiance of Religion, is an odd Instance of
Resolution. And besides the ill Color of the Quality, 'twill fail us at the
long Run: Courage without Conscience starts at the other World, and leaves a
Man dispirited when he has most need of Support. To Consider that we have done
our Utmost to Debauch Mankind, will be no Pleasure at such a Iuncture as This.
Unless therefore we could Demonstrate the Grounds of Atheism, Common Sense, if
minded, will put us upon a Provision beyond the Grave.

November. 26. 1699*
AN ANSWER To a BOOK, Entitled, The Ancient and Modern Stages Surveyed, etc.
BEfore I proceed farther with my Adversary, it may not be amiss to observe,
that his Scheme is defective, and the Compass of his Defense much short of the
Charge. For he does not apply his Answer to any Particulars, nor so much as
Vindicate one Passage accused of Indecency and Irreligion. So that were his
whole Book true, the Imputation of Profaneness and Immorality, would still lie
heavy upon the Stage. This Author, to give him some part of his Character,
seems to rely more upon Stratagem and Surprise, than plain Force, and open
Attack. His Business is all along to perplex the Cause and amuse the Reader,
and to Reason, and Represent amiss. In the first place he tells us a Story,
which Mr. Rymer had told before, The Ancient and Modern Stages Surv^yed, etc.
about the Original of Plays; and charges all the Immorality, and Disorders of
the Stage, upon the Head of Idolatry, P. 7, 8 9.
and the Practice of the Mimes and Pantomimes. P. 13, 23.
And when he has thus entangled the Dispute, and like the Scuttle-Fish mudded
the Water, he thinks himself out of Reach; but I shall endeavor to dive after
him, and drag him to the surface.

In his History of Heathenism and the Stage, he lays down several unlucky
Assertions, and ruins himself in his very Defense. He lets us know, The
Ancient and Modern Stages Surveyed, etc.
that Paganism was invented to oblige and captivate the People, and gained its
Authority among them by indulging their Sensuality, and gratifying their Lusts:
That the Games and Shows were the most engaging parts of their Religion, p. 10.
and that the Devotional and Pompous part of their Worship, P. 12, 13.
was ungrateful to the Spectators, who impatiently expected the Show. He
informs us farther, That the Fathers thought it not safe to trust their
Converts to the Temptations of so jolly a Religion, that the Portion of those
that embraced Christianity was Mortification, that their Reward was in
Reversion, and that present Enjoyment is apt to prevail against a remote Hope.

Now if Stage Plays were such Licentious Diversions, if they indulged
Sensuality and Lust, seized so powerfully upon People's Inclinations, and made
them forget the Interests of Futurity; If the Case stood thus, (as the Surveyor
confesses) then there were other heavy Articles against the Stage besides
Idolatry; Then the bold Liberties and Luscious Pleasures of the Place, were
sufficient Reasons why the Fathers declaimed against it; and by consequence
their Censures come strong upon the English Theater.

The Infancy of Christianity and the frequency of Persecutions, P. 14, 15.
don't alter the Measures of Behavior, nor make so great a difference between
the Primitive and Modern Christians, as our Author would suppose. If it is
possible, we have more Reason to be cautious and self-denying, than those who
lived in the first Ages of our Religion. For then the History of our Faith was
fresh, and the Proofs lay nearer to the sense. Then Miracles were frequent to
refresh their Memory, and quicken their Zeal. Besides their very Sufferings
were awakening Circumstances, and a Guard upon their Virtue. Their being so ill
used in this World, was naturally apt to make them take the more care about the
other. Having none of these Advantages, we have more need of Discipline and
Recollect on; and should stand as much aloof from Temptation as ever. And
therefore whatever debauches our Appetites, overheats our Affections, and, as
our Author Phrases it, P. 18.
relaxes the Nerves of our Zeal, ought by all Means to be avoided.

The Surveyor is now going to take off the Censure of the Fathers from the
Stage. And here he begins with St. Augustine, who (says he) absolves their
Comedies and Tragedies from any fault in the Expression, P. 22.
and accuses only the subject Matter.

To this I Answer;

First, That St. Augustine's Charge against the Play Houses runs very high;
View, etc. p. 273, 274, 275.
he looked upon them as no better than the Nurseries of Lewdness and
Irreligion, Defense, etc. p. 85, 86.
and comprehended Comedy amongst the rest of their Performances; as appears by
his Instance in Roscius; but these Testimonies were too troublesome for the
Surveyor to take notice of.

Secondly, St. Augustine, even in this place, blames Comedies and Tragedies for
being very foul and faulty in their Fable and Matter, Multa rerum turpitudine.
and by consequence could not think them proper for Christian Diversion.

Thirdly, St. Augustine does not say that Comedies, etc. N^lla, saltem sicut
alia multa, verborum obscenitate compos^^ae. De ^ivit. Dei Lib. 2 Cap. 8.
were always clean in the Expression. He throws in a Sentence which qualifies
the Proposition, and makes it affirm no farther, than that they were not so
smutty as many other things. It Is probable he might mean they were not so rank
as the Bacchanal and Floral Solemnities.

But these Words, Sicut alia multa, which change the Sense, and make clearly
against him, he is pleased to omit in the English, tho they stand staring in
the Margin, and are part of his own Quotation. To falsify thus in the face of
Conviction, is like Stealing before the Bench: But thus he is pleased to detect
himself, and to give us a noble Discovery of his Honesty and Cunning, at his
first setting out. However he would do well not to rely too much upon an
English Reader for the future.

This Gentleman advances to the Testimonies cited by the View, etc. And here he
is pleased to skip quite over the Councils, and takes no notice of above half
the Fathers, and those he has the Courage to undertake, he does but touch at.
And thus he confutes a Book at the rate that Mice do, only by nibbling a little
at a few of the Leaves. However I must attend him in his Method. Let us
therefore consider that little he can afford us from Clemens Alexandrinus;
where this Father affirms, That the Circus and Theater may not improperly be
called the Chair of Pestilence. Here the Surveyor would know, whence it appears
that the Dramatick Exercises are here aimed at? Were the Mimi and Pantomimi
less concerned with the Stage? P. 24.
etc.

In answer to these Questions the Reader may please to understand, that the
Surveyor makes great use of the Distinction between the Drama, (as he calls it)
and the Mimi; by this means he hopes to perplex the Controversy, and divert the
Censure of the Fathers, as if in their Opinion Comedy and Tragedy were
inoffensive Diversions; but I shall endeavor to make this Evasion
unserviceable to him, by showing,

First, That several of the Fathers, as appears by the View, etc. censure
Tragedy and Comedy by name. Nay, thus much the Surveyor himself confesses, that
Tragedy and Comedy is sometimes condemned for Company. (...)
Now if Comedy is jointly condemned with the other Shows of the Theater, why
does he endeavor to make the Fathers justify or overlook it? Why so much
pains to take off their Censure, and point the Satyr another way? What needs
all this rattling with Mimes, Pantomimes, and Drama, as if there was some Charm
and Mystic Power in the Words? If the Fathers condemn Comedy, etc. expressly,
it is to no purpose to contest their Sense, and pretend their Opinion
undeclared. He must own therefore the Ancients are full against him in the
Point. And since Comedy and Tragedy is thus expressly condemned by the Fathers,
we have reason to believe it always comprehended under their general Censure of
the Stage. Which will appear farther if we consider.

Secondly, That Comedy and Tragedy were the principal and most frequent
Diversions on the Stage.

That they were the principal, I suppose the Surveyor will allow, upon the
account of the Fable, and the Advantage of the Plot and Characters: The Mimi
being formed upon little Subjects, and Vulgar Persons Lilius Gyraldus de Poet.
Hist. Dial. 6.
.

That Comedy, etc. were the most frequent Diversions of the Stage, I prove thus;

First, Because the Mimi, Diomedes libr. 3. in Fragm. Sueton. primis temporibus
ut asserit Tranquillus, Omnia quaein scenaversentur in C^media ag^bantur; nam
and Pantomimus and Choraules in Comaedia Canebant.
Dancing on the Stage, etc. were Originally part of Comedy, as we may learn
from Suetonius; and so in all likelihood they continued a great while.

Secondly, The Poets who wrote the Mimi or Farces were very few, scarcely One
to Ten of the other Dramatists, as appears from Athenaeus, and Lilius Gyraldus.
Now, why were the Comic and Tragic Poets thus over-proportioned to the
Mimographi, but because their Entertainments were much more frequented and
esteemed than the other?

Thirdly, It does not appear that the Mimi were always more Scandalous
Compositions than Comedy. It Is true we have little of this kind of Writing
remaining; But by those Fragments preserved by Macrobius, and cited by Lilius
Gyraldus, Macrob. Lib. 2*
they seem to have been Modest and Sententious. Saturn. cap. 7.
And Plinius Junior mentioning Vergilius Romanus, Gyrald de Po^^.
another Mimiiambick Poet, Hist. D^^al. 8. p. 918.
commends him for his Probity and his Wit, but does not in the least tax him
with any Indecency. Besides, Scaliger in his Chapter De Saltatione, informs us,
That the Dances proper to the Mimi were Apish and Fantastical; but that several
belonging to Comedy had a Wanton and Licentious Movement. S^alig. Poet. Lib. 1.
cap. 18. p. 61, 64.
So that of the Two, one would think these Farces were sometimes the more
inoffensive Performances.

Fourthly, It Is certain that the Mimes and Pantomimes Represented Comedy and
Tragedy in their Gestures, and Dances, as well as they did the Mimi or Farces
properly so called. That the Pantomimes were concerned in the Drama, Macrob.
Saturn. Lib. 2. cap. 10.
is plain from Cassiodorus, etc. who tells us, That they could form their
Gestures into such a significancy, that with the same Limbs and Features they
could Act either Hercules, Gyraldus, p. 690. de Dial. 6.
or Venus; and make the Passions and Character of of a King, or a Common
Soldier, visible in their Postures, and Motions. Now Kings and Heroes, we know,
were only counted proper for Tragedy.

Indeed these sort of Actors were nothing but Mimicks, (tho much farther
improved than the Moderns) and therefore as proper to appear in the Drama as in
any other Stage-Performance. From whence it will follow, that if these
Pantomimi's were foul in their Gestures, the Drama must answer to the
Indictment; It being oftentimes only the Business of these Mimicks to supply
the place of the Dialogue, and express the Passions of the Poem.

And thus I have plainly proved, that when the Fathers pass Sentence against
the Stage, the whole Mystery and Fraternity is included, so that his
Distinction between the Drama, and the Mimi and Pantomimi, will do him no
service. And this may serve to make good not only the Testimony of Clemens
Alexandrinus, but of the rest of the Fathers, all his Objections against the
Strength of their Evidence turning mostly upon this Supposition. But because he
ventures to attack but Two Citations more, a little farther Consideration of
him will be no great matter.

I observed from Theophilus Antiochenus, that the Christians durst not see the
Heathen Shows upon the account of their Indecency and Profaneness, and
particularly that the Stage-Adulteries of the Gods and Hero's were
unwarrantable Entertainments, etc. Here he is positive that the Translator very
well knew, P. 28.
that Tragedy and Comedy were unconcerned and nothing but the Mimi aimed at.
Say you so? Is not the Drama concerned in such Representations as these? What
do you make of Plautus's Amphytrio, and Terence's Eunuchus, of Euripides's and
Seneca's Thyestes, not to mention any more? Here the Adulteries of the Gods and
Hero's are described and acted, and in some of them make part of the main
Argument: And besides all this, (...).
the Expression throws it upon the Drama.

His next Complaint against me is for translating Theatrum a Playhouse: Nihil
nobis cum impudicitia Theatri, etc. Tertul. Apol. cap, 38.
This he very shrewdly calls my old way of Legerdemain; for by all means it
should have been rendered Theater. I have a fine time on it to write against a
Man that does not know what is Latin for a Playhouse! Ancient and Modern Stage
surveyed, p 30.
Truly this is a great Point! But I hope Horace's Authority may satisfy him,
that his Drama's were Acted in the Theater. Now this Poet addressing to Pollio,
Horat. Carm. Lib. 2. Od. 1.
desires him to stop his Tragic Muse till the Commonwealth was better settled:
Paulum severae Musa Tragediae
Desit Theatris.


The Surveyor goes on with his Grievances, and pretends that I wrest
Tertullian's Words, P. 30.
and force him to call Pompey' s Theater a Dramatick Bawdy House. Itaque
Pempe^us magnus, solo Theatro suo minor, cum illam arcem omnium turpitudinum
extruxisset, etc. Tertul. de Spectac. cap. 10.
And here he has very honestly again put the Latin in the Margin to confute the
English: Thither I appeal, and doubt not but the Reader will find the Original
every jot as severe as the Translation. But he complains the State of the Case
is changed, the Drama wrongfully accused, and that Tertullian inveighed only
against the Shows of the Mimi. That Is strange! Were not Comedies and Tragedies
Acted in the Theaters? Not in Pompey's Theater, the most Magnificent in Rome?
Were Farces so much preferred to the Drama, and the Noblest Buildings contrived
only for Drolls, and Strollers? Tertullian, in this very Paragraph, observes,
that the Theater was Dedicated to Bacchus; and this Idol, the Surveyor himself
informs us, P. 9.
was the Patron of the Drama, and had his Altar on the right-side of the Stage.
Besides, it is further evident that Tertullian levelled his Censure against the
Drama (for so I must call it) by the Caution he gives; he warns the Christians
not to be surpised by some of the best-complexion'd Entertainments. Look,
Omnia illic se^^ fortia, seu honesta, seu sonora, seu subtilia proinde have ac
si stillicidia mellis de Libacunculo venenato, etc. De Spectac. cap. 27.
says he, upon all the engaging Sentences of the Stage, their Flights of
Fortitude and Philosophy, the Loftiness of the Style, and the Fineness of the
Conduct, etc. Look upon it only as Honey dropping from the Bowels of a Toad, or
the Bag of a Spider. Now I suppose the Surveyor is not so hardy as to affirm,
That Heroic Fortitude, Lofty Expression, and Moral Sentences, is any way
suitable to his Description of the Mimi. It Is plain therefore, that Comedy and
Tragedy must be struck at in the Testimony above mentioned.

I must not forget the Surveyor's Suggestion, That the Idolatry of the Stage
was the principal Quarrel the Fathers had against it. P. 13.
'Twas for this Reason that they declaimed against it with all their Nerves and
Vehemence, as our Author words it. The Reader may please to take notice, See
View, etc. Chap. 6. Defense, etc. p. 84.
that the Fathers had other Reasons for their Aversion to the Stage, besides
the Charge of Idolatry: However, upon this Occasion I shall pursue the Argument
a little farther, and answer, First, That the Fathers were no less Enemies to
Immorality than to False Worship. Indeed, one great Reason why Paganism was so
very Criminal, was, because 'twas not only an erroneous, but a scandalous
Belief: 'Twas because the Holy Solemnities were Lewd, and not only misled
Men's Understandings, but debauched their Practice. Now nothing in Nature is so
counter to Christianity as Wickedness. Idolatry may sometimes be an effect of
Ignorance; but Immorality lies always open to Conscience and inward Reproof. So
that where Vice is cherished, and Licentiousness is made creditable, there the
worst Part of Heathenism is kept up. The Devil is no less really Worshipped in
Lewdness and Obscenity than he was in Venus and Jupiter. And yet the Surveyor
has the Courage to affirm, That Idolatry is more abhorred and exposed on the
English Stage than any where else. Idolatry exposed! What, by burlesking the
Bible, by Smut and Swearing, and by hooting, as much as in them lies, all
Religion out of the Universe? A most admirable Expedient! Thus Error is cured
by Atheism* and false Religion destroyed, by leaving no Truth to counterfeit!

The Surveyor observes, That the Fathers were alarmed at the Heathen Stage as
at the Approach of an Enemy; they were afraid the indulging these Liberties
would hazard the Interest and Belief of Christianity: They justly apprehended,
P. 18.
that from a Liking of the Entertainments, they might proceed to approve the
Occasion of them. Now those who frequent the Theaters, would do well to
consider this Caution: For from liking the Plays, they may come to like the
Practice, and slide insensibly from the Diversion to the Vice and Profaneness.
I wish this Reasoning were not too well grounded upon Experiment; but nothing
is more natural than the Transition from Pleasure to Imitation. And thus the
Fathers Restraint holds strong against the English Theater. For Lewdness is
more catching than Heathenism; and People are much sooner surpised by their
Appetites, than by their Ignorance. 'Twas this Indulgence to Sensuality which
captivated the World, P. 10.
and gained Credit and Authority to Paganism. Thus Vice gives the main Force to
the Temptation, makes way for Error, and by corrupting the Will betrays the
Understanding. And this may serve to satisfy the Reader, that his Topic of
Idolatry is nothing to the purpose.

Upon the whole; Let us suppose, which is not true, That the Fathers left
Comedy and Tragedy uncensur'd, and planted their Rhetoric against nothing but
the Shows of the Mimi; let us resign our Advantage, and set part of our
Evidence aside; What would the Surveyor gain by it? Alas! unless he can clear
the Innocence, and take off the Imputations upon the English Stage; which he
never so much as attempts: Unless this can be done, his Cavils and his
Confidence, and all his other Pretenses signify nothing. For, can we imagine
the Fathers would ever have endured the Disorders of the Modern Stage? Would
these Holy Men have allowed them their Common Places of Smut, and their Sallies
of Profaneness? Would they have seen Lewdness a Profession, and Religion made
sport with, and said nothing against it? No: Such flaming Provocations as these
would have kindled their Spirits, and pressed them to the Encounter: Their
Satyr would have thundered, and their Discipline been played against the Enemy;
and the Warnings of the Pulpit would have sounded as loud as the Blasphemies of
the Playhouse: Where the Honor of God and the Interests of Eternity suffered
so much, they would have shown a proportionable Concern. For like the Hero's in
Aeschylus, upon such an Occasion, (...) Aeschyl. septem contr. Theb^s.

(...)
Brave in their Zeal, and fired with Resolution,
They looked like Lions roaring to the Combat!


The Surveyor is ^ired with Church-Antiquity, for it seems all my Translations
of the Fathers are of the same Stamp with those he has Examined: P. 32.
Why, so they are; but not a jot to his purpose. For notwithstanding, all his
Clamor about my Corrupt Version, P. 28. 33^
Managing of Evidence, and what not; he has not been able to show that I have
either mistaken the Sense, or misapplied the Meaning in the least Instance; so
that if my main Strength, as he is pleased to say, lay in these Worthies, the
Forces are still entire, there is not so much as a Vein scratched, or a drop of
Blood lost in the Encounter.

But I cannot forget his Character and Commendations of the Fathers. What would
you think St. Cyprian, St. Chrysostom, St. Augustine, and the rest of them
were like? Why it seems they are like Whelps newly entered, P. 32.
they run Riot, have much better Mouths than Noses; make up a great part of the
Cry, but are of no service in the Chase. Nay, then he may well go on with
the other Compliment, Ibid.
and tell us, Their Writings are but the Rub^ish of Antiquity. Bless us! What
strains of Contempt and Distraction are here! Is this all that is due to the
Memory of these Venerable Men? And must Dignity and Merit be thus coarsly
Treated? Must Dogs and Martyrs be coupled, and Patriarchs described by
Similitudes from the Kennel? These great Defenders of the Faith were never
saluted in this manner before: Jews and Heathens, tho they might have had no
less Malice, had (as far as it appears) more Modesty than this comes to. One
would think he learned this Language at the Olympicks (as he calls them) of
Moor-Fields, or rather at the Great House that fronts them. If the Fathers are
thus despicable, why does he solicit for their Votes, and strive to bring them
over to his Party? If he takes them for his Friends, he uses them very
severely; But I suppose he despairs of their Favor, and would therefore
disable their Credit. Well; since the Fathers are thus unmanageable, and will not
be tampered with, it is time to leave them: If the Christians will not do, we must
try if the Heathens will prove any kinder. The Surveyor therefore applying to
the Philosophers, endeavors to bribe them into Silence, and bring them to a
State of Neutrality. But here he is much as untoward in his Objections as
formerly. P. 34.
He pretends Plato does not appear in his own Person: Granting that, Eusebius
is a good Voucher for his Opinion. View, p. 354.
But after all, Plato does appear in his own Person, and stands fairly quoted
in the Margin. Truly I think I Am somewhat to blame for troubling my self with
an Author so very Defective either in Eyes or Honesty. But it seems the
Testimony is not full to the Purpose. Why so? let us hear it. Plays (says Plato)
raise the Passions, and pervert the Use of them, and by consequence are
dangerous to Morality. This I take it is to the Point; the Impeachment runs
high, and the Articles are plainly mentioned. So that to evade the Force of the
Authority, by saying the Nature or Measure of the Danger is not specified,
Surv. p. 35.
is not to Argue, but Trifle, and is in effect to make Blots instead of Letters
with a Man's Ink. My Business in the View, etc. was to sum up the Evidence in
few Words, and not to tire the Reader with unnecessary Lengths of Quotation:
However, since he calls for it, I Will give it him somewhat more particularly.
It Is Plato's Opinion then, that the Diversions of the Stage are dangerous to
Temper and Sobriety; Plat. de (...). lib. 10. p. 756. Ed. Franc.
they swell Anger and Desire too much. Tragedy is apt to make Men boisterous,
and Comedy Buffoons. Thus those Passions are cherished which ought to be
checked, Virtue loses ground, and Reason grows precarious.

From Plato we must go to Xenophon: And here his Exception is, Surv. p. 35.
That the Drama is not mentioned. I grant it: View, etc. p. 234.
But does not this Author commend the Persians for not suffering their Youth to
hear any thing Amorous or Tawdry? And does he not show the Danger of such a
Permission? And is this nothing to the English Stage, where Love and
Indecencies are most of the Entertainment? This Remark not only reaches the
Modern, but likewise the Ancient Dramatists, as far as their Compositions were
any way licentious. At last the Surveyor owns, That Bawdry was indeed forbidden
to be talked to young People in Persia, because of the Heat of the Climate.
Meaning, that in the Latitude of London the case is otherwise: The Elevation of
the Pole has taken off the Restraint, and made Modesty unnecessary: For in
these Northern Regions, and especially in a hard Winter, Smut is a very
harmless Diversion, and a Man may talk as Brutishly as he pleases!

He is now advanced to Aristotle, whose Authority, Survey^r, p* 36.
he says, will do me as great Service as the Two former. Now though this Jest is
a good Answer to all that he offers in earnest, yet possibly he may take it
ill, if his Story is not heard out. He objects then, That the Passage cited by
the View from Aristotle, View, p. 234.
amounts to no more than a General Caution against trusting Youth in
promiscuous Company! To this it may be answered,

First, Aristotle plainly forbids young People the sight of Comedy, as appears
even by the Latin Translation cited by the Surveyor: Comaediarum spectatores
esse Lex prohibeat. Survey^r, p. 37.
This is something more than a General Caution against promiscuous Company: For
let the Reason of the Prohibition be what it will, the Drama is particularly
struck at, and made counterband Goods to one Part of Human Life at least.
However, I did ill to palm the general Term of Debauchery, P. 37.
for the particular one of Drunkenness, which it seems was only instanced in by
the Philosopher. Here the Translation comes hard upon him again; Vel
ebrictatis, vel aliarum inde nascentiunt rerum incommodis disciplina liberos
efficiat.
for not only Drunkenness is mentioned, but all the Disorders consequent upon
it. And is not Lewdness oftentimes the Effect of Intemperance, especially in
young People? (...).


Secendly, The Greek is still more unkind to the Surveyor, and shows that he
has quite mistaken Aristotle's Sense; which in a literal Version runs thus: The
Government should not permit Youth to see Comedies, till Discipline has secured
them from the Impressions and Mischief of such Diversions, and they are
advanced to the Age of being admitted to Feasts and Public Entertainment. This
Translation is warranted by the Original^ and by Heinsius's Paraphrase, Arist.
Polit. lib. 7. cap. 17. Ed. Lugd. Batav.
and justifies the View to the full. And now his other Objection about my
misrepresenting Aristotle, being founded upon his former Mistake, must fall
together with it.

But the Surveyor and Mr. Dennis think it strange, Surveyor, p. 36.
that Aristotle should pronounce thus unkindly upon Comedy, Dennis, p. 74.
and yet leave Rules for the Writing this kind of Poem. Why this, if we
consider it, is no great Mystery: Plays are one thing in the abstracted Idea,
and another in Fact and Practice: He might dislike the common Liberties of the
Poets, without absolutely condemning the Form of them. But that Aristotle did
not allow of Licentious Comedy, is plain by the Instance before us, by what I
cited elsewhere in the View, V^ew, etc. p. 160. P^lit. lib. 7. cap 17.
and by his Advice to Governors, to banish Smut and Indecency from the
Commonwealth. View, p. 235,


Tully's Testimony comes next to be examined, who, as I observed, cries out
upon licentious Plays and Poems, as the Bane of Sobriety and wise Thinking:
That Comedy subsists upon Lewdness, and that Pleasure is the Root of all Evil.
This one would imagine were pretty home: What does the Surveyor say to it? Is
the Testimony miscited? Not at all. What then? Survey^r, p. 42.
Why these Sentences are Ends and Scraps of Authors, and as little to the
purpose as if he had cited so many Propositions out of Euclid* which though true,
are of no use in this place. No! Is Tully's Censure of Licentious Plays,
affirming that Comedy subsists upon Lewdness, and that Pleasure is the Root of
all Evil; is all this nothing to the purpose? This is raging Impertinence; I
almost sweat to take notice of such stuff as this is. As for his calling what I
produced Scraps, I must (...) him, 'twas not for want of Plenty that (...) him
no more; however, till he can (...) off his Stomach, he has no reason to (...)
of Scarcity. The Reader, if he please, may see a whole Page of Declamation to
the same purpose; at the latter end of which he has these Words: O praeclaram
emendatricem vitae Poeticam, quae amorem flagitii, and levitatis auctorem, in
concilio Deorum collocondum putet^ De Comedia loquor quae si haec flagitia non
prob^remus nulla ssset omnino.
These Poets are great Assistances to Virtue, and we have reason to expect most
admirable Cures from the Stage! Yes! Manners must be mightily reformed by those
People who make Love and Lewdness a Deity, and teach Men to worship their own
Folly and Distraction! I speak (says he) of Comedy, which were it not for such
licentious Management could go on no longer. This Passage is quoted by the
Surveyor, according to his customary Policy: Tusc. Quest. Lib. 4.
He is resolved I perceive to make sure Work on it, and to confute himself, for
fear it should be done by some body else. Surv. p. 40.
But if the case stands thus, the Surveyor is positive, that either Tully or
Mr. Collier are extremely mistaken. This is manfully put, I confess; but I Am
afraid 'twon't do: For if Tully should be mistaken, which is very unlikely, it
would signify little; for it is not the Reasoning, but the Authority of Tully
which is now in question. Then as for my self, I cannot be mistaken, unless the
Citation is false, which he does not so much as offer to disprove. He objects
farther, Ibid.
That Pla^tus and Terence are the only Comedians remaining, from whom we can
form any Judgment of the Roman Comedy, before or about Cicero' s time; but
these Mr. Collier assures us are modest to a Scruple, especially Terence. To
this I answer,

First, That what I affirmed of the Modesty of Terence, was in reference to his
Language, not to his Matter or Argument, which is sometimes exceptionable
enough to draw the Censure of Tully upon him. Then as to Plautus, I introduced
him with a Mark of Dislike, and only commended him upon the Parallel with the
English Stage. Now where is the Contradiction of all this? May not Men be very
much to blame, without being the worst of their Kind? Here Is room enough then
for Cicero's Reprimand of Plautus and Terence, without doing the View the least
disservice. But,

Secondly, Plautus and Terence are not the only Poets from whom we can take any
measure of the Roman Comedy about Cicero' s time: For in this very place Tully
cites several Verses from Trabea and Caecilius; Tusc. Quaest. lib. 4.
and blames these Comic Poets for magnifying Love-Adventures, making Cupid a
God, and flourishing too much upon the Satisfactions of Sense; though nothing of
this was done with the Modern Grosness. This Passage being in the same place
with that quoted by the Surveyor, he must needs see it: From whence the Reader
may observe how nicely he keeps up to his usual Exactness. Farther, Tully does
not only complain of Comedy, but of Tragedies too. Tusc. Quaest. lib. 2.
He blames them for representing their Hero's impatient under Misfortune; such
Instances of Weakness and Discomposure were, in his Opinion, of dangerous
Example: So that let but the Stage (says he) strike in with the Prejudices of
Education, and this is enough to baffle the Force of Virtue, and cut the very
Sinews of Fortitude.

The Surveyor, at the Head of his Remarks upon this Testimony, brightens his
Air, and would seem to look kindly upon Modesty: But this Smile, Surv. p. 39.
though unusual, appears angry and disturbed. He supposes no one will defend
licentious Plays; but if some warm-headed Enthusiastic Zealot pretends to find
some Passages really guilty, they are willing to give them up. This is the only
Passage in his Book, as I remember, in which he drops the least Word against
Lewdness: But then he touches the Point very tenderly, clogs the Censure with a
great many kind Proviso's, Ibid.
and is strangely out of Humor with those Enthusiastic Zealots that make any
Discovery. And to make all sure, Ibid.
he lays in for Countenance and Encouragement to the prevailing Merit of the
main Part of the Performance. For Example, if an Apothecary mixes up Poison
with a Receipt, yet if it does not weigh as much in the Scale as the rest of
the Ingredients, all is well enough, and the prevailing Merit of the Dose, though
it murders the Patient, ought to be encouraged.

Livy's Authority comes after Tully, and must be considered. Survey, p. 44.
This Evidence, says the Surveyor, comes not near our Case, were the Credit
on it unexceptionable. His Reason is because Livy speaks of Stage
Representations^^^ general, but the Drama was not known amongst the Romans at
this time when the Ludi Scenici were invented. I Will try to make an Argument
like this. For Instance: The City built upon Seven Hills, and upon the Tyber,
was by no means Rome in the time of Tarquinius Priscus; Why so? Why, because
tho it stood upon the same Ground, it was not near so big as 'twas afterward
in the Reign of Augustus. But for all this fine Reasoning, esse and been esse
are Notions of the same Subject. It Is true, things are not always perfected at
their first Invention; but I thought the Finishing and Improvement they might
afterward receive, would not alter them in their Name and Nature. And as to
the Business in hand, I have already shown, that Comedy and Dancing, and all
the Diversions of the Stage, were performed together at first: And that the
Drama and the Ludi scenici were the same, I shall take for granted at present,
and afterward prove it by the Surveyor's Authority, and by St. Augustine's
too, who mentioning the Original of Plays, explains himself expressly in Comedy,
and Tragedy. De Civit. Dei Lib. 2. cap. 8. His next Undertaking is to Quarrel
with the Translation: To clear this the Historian must be cited. Now Livy
giving an Account of the Original of Plays, assigns this Reason for the
Relation; Dec. 1. Lib. 7.
Vt appareat quam ab sano initio res in hanc vix opulentis regnis toler abilem
insaniam venerit. He affirms the Original of Plays were commendable, because
they were brought in upon the score of Religion; and to remove a Mortality.
This being thus reported by Livy, I Translated the Passage abovementioned as
follows; View, p. 235.
That the Motives are sometimes good, when the Means are stark naught. And
where is the Mistake of this rendering? Don't the Words of the Author, and the
Consequence of the Practice, plainly justify the Construction? Nay, his own
Interpretation makes his Objection unreasonable. For he Translates Vix
tolerabilem insaniam, etc. Survey, p. 45, 46.
An excessive extravagance which scarce the We(...) Nation can bear. Now if the
Profusion at these Shows were ready to break the Back of the Roman Empire, had
not I reason for saying in the Version, That the Means were stank naught, and
the Remedy worse than the Disease? But this puts me in mind of another
Difference to be adjusted. The Surveyor contends, That Livy in this place does
not condemn the Immorality, but the Luxury, and Profu^sion at these Shows. The
Luxury of these Diversions, if it must be called so, I suppose consists in
over-pleasing a Vicious Palate; But let that pass. The Surveyor supports his
Conjecture from the Citations adding, That this Iusania, or Disorder, was
greater than the We(...) Nations V(...)
could well bear. Now says the Surveyor, Wealthy People have as much need of
M^^al^^y as the Poor. No doubt on it; and are in more danger too of miscarrying
in that Matter. For, as my Adversary has observed, a Nation is too apt to grow
Wealthy, Survey, p. 12.
and Wanton together: This made Sal^st complain, That the Riches of the Roman
Empire occasioned the Decay of Discipline, and the Dissolution of Manners.
Without Care, People's Virtue, I mean their Sobriety, is apt to sink with the
Rise of their Fortunes; Their Appetites for Liberty are more awakened by
Opportunity and Temptation: They have more Money to purchase their Pleasures,
and more Leisure to enjoy them. And besides, such Circumstances are farther
within the danger of Flattery, and ill Example; It Is no wonder therefore to
hear Livy affirm, That a Government almost overgrown with Wealth and Power,
should be in greater danger of Playhouse Infection, then when they were Poor,
and more slenderly established: For then their Necessities were some Security;
They could not go to the Expense of Vice, nor had so much time to be Debauched.

Secondly, That Livy by this Distraction, Insania.
meant Licentiousness, will appear by his Censure of the Stage in another
place, which we shall come to by and by.

The Surveyor rages mightily about my Mistranslating the following part of the
Testimony, which runs thus: Cum piaculorum magis conquisitio animos, quam
corpora morbi inficerent.
The Remedy in this case is worse than the Disease, and the Atonement more
infectious than the Plague. Here I confess my Edition mislead me, which, (as I
remember, for I have lost the Book) has inficerent, instead of afficerent, tho
I must own this latter Reading appears the best. But notwithstanding this
accident the Surveyor shall be no loser, for Livy shall make it up to him
another way. And not to defer his Satisfaction, this Historian informs us, That
when a Theater was building by the Censors Direction, Quum locatum a Censoribus
Theatrum extrueretur, p. Cornelio Nasica auctore tanquam inutile, and nociturum
publicis moribus, ex Senatus consulto destructum est. Live. Lib. 48. in Epit.
Scipio Nasica spoke against it in the House, as a Useless and Debauching
Experiment, and got an Act for the pulling it down. Here Livy not only pulls
down the Playhouse, but gives such a Reason for the doing it, that one would
think should have kept it in Rubbish ever after. And if he questions the
Authority of Livy's Epitome, Sigomus, not to mention Vossius, may satisfy him;
who delivers his Opinion in these Words; Nam sive a Livio, sive a Floro, sive
ab alio quo scriptae sunt, (haec enim omnia Traduntur) ad Roman^s certe res
illustrandas accommodatissimae sunt, praesertim vero ubi Liviana Historia
excidit. Qua in part Livianam apud quemque obtinere debent auctoritatem.
Sigon. Schol. p. 6.

We must now proceed to the Testimony of Valerius Maximus; And here the
Surveyor will make sufficient Amends for being somewhat in the Right before.
This Testimony he affirms relates to the Arena, and concerns none but the
Gladiators and Caestiarii: And then very liberally again quotes his own
Confutation in the Margin; Ad Theatra gradus faciendus est: -- Religionem
civili sanguin^ Scenico^um Portentorum gratia macularunt. Valor. Max. Lib. 2.
Cap. 4. Survey. p. 47.
In earnest does this Critic not understand the difference between Theaters,
and Amphitheatres, and that the first were for Plays, and the latter for
Prizes? A little School-Learning would have set him right in this Matter, and
likewise prevented the Misfortune of making Scenica portenta signify
Gladiators; which I think has more of prodigy in the Translation, than in the
Etymology and Story. And now I suppose it may be pretty plain, that either the
Surveyor does not understand Latin, or is not fit to be trusted with it.
Farther, the Surveyor's Mistakes are the more unpardonable, because Valerius
Maximus spends almost this whole Chapter in describing the Rise and Progress of
Plays, the Buildings and Decorations of the Theater, together with the Checks
they received from the Government. He tells us in the very second Paragraph,
That these Play Houses were begun by Messalla, Quaest. (...)
but stopped by Scipio Nasica, who sold all their Materials by the Common Crier.
And that the Senate made a Law, that there should be no Seats or Benches for
the Audience to see Plays at within a Mile of the Town. This Passage is
expressly cited by St. Augustine, August. de (...) Lib. 1. cap. 33. Tertull. de
Spect. cap. 10. At Th^atnali licentia proximo pri^ne anno caepta, gravius tum
nempit. occisis non modo a plebe, etc. Tacit. Annal. Lib.. 1. cap. 77.
and hinted by Tertullian, to show how much the Playhouse was discouraged by
the Roman Magistracy.

As to the Animofae acies which he would fain wrest to the Prizes in spite
both of the Latin and History of his Author, they are to be understood of the
Quarrels and Bloodshed which were not very uncommon at the Playhouse, as
Tacitus informs us. For at one Riot, which was not the first, there were
several Burghers, Soldiers, a Captain, and a Colonel of the Guards killed in
the Fray. Now, I hope, this Company may have more Rom^^ Blood (...)
in their Veins, and may better stand for the State in the Translation,
Surveyor, p.. 48.
than his Rabble of Gladiators, who were generally Slaves and Malefactors. To
return to Tacitus, This Tumult, (...) Annal. Lib. 4. cap. 14.
as he goes on, was brought before the Senate, where the Actors had like to
have come under a very ignominious Discipline: In short, the Playhouse had some
Regulations put upon it, and the Disorders of the Audience were punished with
no less than Banishment. This happened in the Reign of Tiberius; Now the
Theater continuing still out of order, and some of the Magistracy having often
complained of it to no purpose, at last the Emperor himself moved in the House,
that the Lewdness and Riots of these Diversions might be effectually
suppressed: Upon which the Players were banished out of Italy.

There is part of Valerius Maximus his Testimony behind, in which, as I
observed in the View, he concludes the Consequences of Plays intolerable, View,
p. 236.
and that the Massilienses did well in clearing the Country of them. Here the
Surveyor flies to his old Distinction between the Mimi and the Drama, which
having disabled already, I might reasonably call a new Cause; but to give him
farther satisfaction, I shall prove, that the Stage is here meant in all its
Latitude and variety of Diversion.

1. Then Valetius Maximus in the beginning of the Paragraph, commends the
Republic of Marseilles for the Sobriety of their Discipline, and keeping up to
their ancient Customs. Prisci moris, observatia. Val. Max. L. 2. cap. 6.
Now we are to observe, that the Massilienses were a Colony of the Phocenses in
Ionia, who not being willing to submit to the Persian Government, quitted that
Country, and settled in Gaul. Now this Removal was in the Reign of Cyrus, in
the very Infancy of the Stage, when there was nothing but some rude beginnings
of Tragedy at Athens; Lilius Gyraeld. de poet. Hist. Dial. 6.
Besides, the Massilienses came from Phocis, where neither Aristotle or Lilius
Gyraldus mention any thing of the settling or Invention of the Drama: By
consequence, if the Massilienses were so tenacious of their Original Customs,
they could have no such thing as Tragedy and Comedy among them; These
Entertainments being, as far as it appears, posterior to the forming of their
Commonwealth. This will appear farther, if we consider, that, as Suetonius
observes, the Business of the Mimicks was Originally part of Comedy Vid. supra.
; so that let us suppose, which we cannot grant, that the Drama was as ancient
as the Government of the Massilienses, and in use among them, yet we cannot with
any color suppose, that the Mimi were distinct from Comedy at that time of
day; so that if the Massilienses were such Admirers of the first Plan of their
Government, and stood off so nicely from all Innovation, they must exclude the
Drama as well as the Mimi, otherwise the Form of their Stage would be changed,
and their Customs receive an alteration.

2. The Reason Valerius Maximus gives, why the Inhabitants of Marseilles
refused to admit this Entertainment, Nullum aditum in Scenam Mimis dando, etc.
agrees very well with the Drama, Quorum argument a majore ex part stuprorum
continent actus, ne talia spectandi consuetudo, etiam imitandi licentiam sumat.
L. 2. cap. 6.
It was because the Subject and Gross of these Diversions was mostly Intrigne
and Debauchery: These Circumstances the Government were afraid might grow
infectious, and spread from Fiction into Practice. Now this is exactly the
Description which Tully gives of Comedy, which (says he) were it not for Amors
and Lewdness, would have no Matter to proceed upon Tusc. Quest. Lib. 4. vid.
supra.
.

3. The introductive Clause which leads to this Discountenance, points it
clearly on the Drama. The Massilienses (says the Author) were extremely strict
and severe in their Government and Administration Ea civitas severitatis custos
accerrim^ est. Ibid.
. Now by the Surveyor's Account of the Mimes and Pantomimes, this could never
be meant of them. For they, says he, Surveyor, p. 24.
Danced Naked, and were in their Gestures foul to the last Degree of Scandal. I
would gladly know, what Instance of Severity it could be to deny Admission to
such Monsters as these? Is it indeed an Argument of extraordinary Rigor not to
allow the grossest Liberties, and which had often been marked and punished at
Rome? A Government cannot be said to be remarkably Rigid, unless they tie up
their Subjects to particular Restraints, and bar them the Freedoms commonly
practiced elsewhere. The Massilienses therefore having this Character of
Severity, it must be because they would not admit of the more inoffensive
Performances of the Stage; because they refused the Diversions of Comedy and
Tragedy, which were then generally permitted in the Roman Empire.

4. Mimus, the Word which the Surveyor cavils upon, is by other good Authors
taken for a Play, in the sense of the Drama, as this Gentleman loves to speak.
Thus the Learned Thysius upon the place understands it. It (...) Comedi^n
omnesque adeo Scenicos Ludos Republica sua ejecerunt; Vid^bant enim eam esse
lasciviae matrem nequitiae magistram, etc. Thysius in Loc. Su^to^. in August.
The Massilienses, (says he) cleared their Country of Comedy, and all sorts of
Stage Plays. This they did because they looked upon them as the Nurseries of
Lewdness. And Suetonius tells us, That Augustus being at the point of Death,
asked some of his Friends, Ecquid iis videretur mimum vitae commode
transegisse. Now I would ask the Surveyor what he thinks of this Matter? Did
the Emperor enquire whether he had been a good Pantomime in his Life? Whether
he had acted like a finished Debauchee, and been Lewd without Shame or Measure?
Did Augustus affect such a Character as this, or think his Memory would be
obliged by it? Such a Supposition would be a Libel upon Nero, who when he came
to dye had the Justice to be displeased with his own Lewdness.

The meaning therefore of this Question of Augustus must be, Whether he had
behaved himself well in his Station, and acted his Part handsomely, as a good
Player does upon the Stage; From whence it will follow, that Mimus must be
taken for a Play in its usual signification. But it is time to dismiss Valerius
Maximus, Surveyor, p. 50.
and pass on to Seneca, who it seems has but little to say to the Matter. He
should have said, he has but little to say to Seneca: View, etc. p. 236.
However, let the View, etc. decide that Question. Well! if Seneca says but
little, he is resolved to fortify his Testimony, and help him out. For he
frankly confesses, That the Roman youth were generally corrupted by the
Countenance which Nero gave to the Stage, and to all those Arts which gratified
and indulged the Senses, Surveyor, p. 50, 51.
and that this Philosopher's Complaint was not unreasonable. Truly I think so
too, or else I had never cited him. In this place the Surveyor is somewhat
kinder than ordinary, for here he not only quotes, Nihil vero tam damnosa^a
bonis moribus quam in aliquo spectaculo desidere, tunc emm per voluptatem vitia
facilius surrepunt. Senec. Epist. 7.
. but argues for me too, and gives me both Text and Margin to make my best of.
This Knack of Writing and Recanting at the same time, is a good subtle
Expedient: For if ever he should be questioned for publishing a Book to Debauch
the Nation, he can make substantial Proof he has confuted himself, Survey, p.
51.
and that it is to be hoped may stop the Prosecution. I must confess I like an
Author that knocks his own Mischief on the Head, and like the Scorpion is both
Poison and Antidote. But the Surveyor objects, That Seneca's Charge against the
Shows Spectaculum, p. 52.
is general. Why then they are all comprehended: Then he may be sure the most
remarkable Shows, such as the Stage, are concerned in the Caution; especially
since the Author has elsewhere expressly declaimed against (...). View, p. 236.
Well I perceive all this Skirmishing has nothing but feint and false Alarm,
but now he is resolved to come to the Assault in good earnest, and enter upon
the Breach of the Quotation, for there, if you will believe him, I have made a
shift to steal in Two Falsifications. Now to try this Cause, and discover the
foul Play, we must read the Deed in the Court. The Original runs thus. Tunc
enim per voluptatem vitia facilius surrepunt. The Translation thus: For there
Vice makes an insensible approach, and steals upon us in the Disguise of
Pleasure. View, p. 236.
And where is the harm of all this? Harm! Why I have corrupted one of the Eight
Parts of Speech, and suborned the Adverb Tunc to give in false Evidence, by
Translating it There, instead of Then. Nay* that is intolerable! For Seneca, you
must observe, had nothing to say against the Shows, and the Playhouse, the
Diversion or the Company! The Then, the Circumstance of Time was the Bugbear;
All the infection lay in the Clock, or the Sun-Dial: For People may see what
Shows, and go to what Place they please, and be safe enough, provided they do
it at no Time; This is exactly the Surveyor's Reasoning; and thus he proves the
Indictment. Surveyor, p. 53.
The next Falsification is my rendering the words, Per Voluptatem, in the
Disguise of Pleasure; For all that, if he renders them otherwise, I Am satisfied
he will do it worse. Indeed I think these Objections are not made in the Disguise
of Sense. To conclude, if I was so unfair as to steal in Two Falsifications, I
had, it seems the Discretion to steal them out again; for it is plain, there is
none of them to be found at present.

Tacitus and Plutarch appear next, and are given up by him. But then he is
never at a loss, for when he cannot Reason he can Rail, and so the Book goes on
as well as ever.

I produced Ovid and Mr. Wycherley to show that the Audience at the Playhouse
was dangerous, as well as the Entertainment: Surv. p. 55.
Against this the Surveyor insinuates, That if nothing but Solitude and
Retirement will secure us, we must not go to Church; for there is mixed Company,
and bad Designs too sometimes. Under favor, this does not follow. To go to
Church is our Duty: Now a Man's Business, and especially when Religious, is his
Guard: And God will let no Body miscarry for their Obedience. Besides, the
Quality of the Employment, the Solemnity of the Place, and the Majesty of the
Presence, is apt to furnish good Thoughts, and check those which are otherwise.

But at the Playhouse the Case is quite different: This is a Place where
Thinking is out of Doors, and Seriousness Impertinent, Here our Reason is apt
to be surpised, and our Caution disarmed; Here Vice stands upon Prescription,
and Lewdness claims Privilege to Solicit. Nay, the very Parade, the Gaiety, and
Pleasure of the Company, is not without its danger: These Circumstances
heightened with Luscious Dialogue, lively Action, and airy Music, are very
likely to make an unserviceable Impression. And thus we see our standing is but
slippery, and the Tide runs high against Flesh and Blood: And as for the
Protection of Heaven to bring us off, it is Presumption to expect it. If we will
sit in the Seat of the Scornful, and make Wickedness our Diversion, Providence
we may be sure w^ll withdraw, and leave us to the Government of another
Influence.

To do the Surveyer Right, he is somewhat of my Opinion in this Matter. He
will not deny but a promiscuous conflux of People of all Ages, Survey, p. 55, 56.
Sexes, and Conditions, will make the business of Intrigue go forward, and
facilitate Enterprises of this Nature. But he is afraid, if a Restraint were
laid upon People, and they were kept out of Harms way, Ibid.
it would be worse with them: And for the truth of this Conjecture, he appeals
to the Experiment of Italy, and Spain; where he observes there is a great deal
of Care, and yet a great deal of Miscarriage. It may be so; but if they are bad
under Caution, it is to be feared Liberty would never mend them. His reasoning
about the Imagination being vitiated (p. 56.) for want of Freedom is very
slender, for Opportunity makes a Thief; The Temptation rises upon sight, for
Sense is stronger than Memory, and Life, than Painting. If the strength of the
Stream forces the Bank to give way, the making the Breach wider, is not, I
suppose, the proper Method to stop the Torrent. He had best persuade the Dutch
to pull up their Dikes and their Dams; because in several Countries where the
Sea is left to its Course, it does no manner of damage. I confess I never heard
that the Spaniards and Italians were all Fools till now: But it seems so it is
with them: For they are still perfect Strangers to themselves, and know nothing
of the Temper of their People, after so many Ages for Information. But of all
Men, the Surveyor should not have been severe upon the Reservedness of the
Spaniards, Surveyor, p. 35.
because he had allowed it in the Persians before: His Reason was, because the
Heat of the Climate, and the Warmth of their Constitutions, hurried them very
precipitiously (as he Phrases it) into Irregularities. Now Spain is as hot as
Persia; Why then all this Partiality? That that is Sauce for a Goose is Sauce
for a Gander. Why must the Poor Spaniard be mauled for his Caution, and for
preventing his Family from being hurried very precipitiously into
Irregularities?

But after all, the Caffres and Soldanians, the Monsters of Africa both in
Figure and Folly, and which, (as to some of them) whether Men or Munkeys, has
been disputed. These Aequinoctial Sages are much Wiser, it seems, in the Guard
of Virtue, than the Spaniards and Italians! For in many places under the Line,
where the People go constantly naked, the familiarity of the Objects takes away
all Wantonness of Imagination, Surveyor, p. 56.
which the artificial difficulties of some Countries promote. Say you so, must
Spain and Italy be reformed by Africa, and brought up to the Standard of the
Line? Must People go naked to secure their Modesty? These are wonderful
Discoveries, and one would almost conclude by the drift of them, that the Man
had a fancy to turn either Adamite or Pantomime. These Artificial Difficulties
of Clothes spoil all: They disserve the Interest of Virtue, and are an
Impolitick Contrivance. This fine Phrase puts me in mind of his Quareling a
Sentence of mine for want, as he pretends, of Syntax and Grammar: And therefore
upon this occasion I must tell him, That if the Charge was true, Sense without
Grammar, is somewhat better then Grammar without Sense.

Ovid, by the Surveyor's Confession, pleads guilty, Survey, p. 57.
and owns not only the Opportunity, but the Business of the Place promotes
Lewdness. But then he fences against the Testimony with his usual evasion, and
turns it all upon the Representation of the Mimi: Ibid.
but the next Verse to that, in his Margin, will be sufficient to beat him off
his Guard.

Vt tamen hoc fatear, De T^ist. Lib. 2. View, 239.
Ludiquoque semina prebent
Nequitiae tolli tota Theatra jube.
Thus Ovid we see is for quite Levelling the Enemies Works: He is for pulling
down all the Play Houses, and not leaving so much as a Corner of them standing
for Comedy and Tragedy. This Line of the Poet had too much Light to be looked
on, and therefore the Surveyor was resolved to wink hard, and get over it.
There is another Verse likewise in the Citation; which one would have thought
might have put him beside the fancy of his Mimi; View, p. 239. ov. Remed. Amor.
and it is this, Quid caveat Actor, quid juvet art docet.

This Pentameter refers much more to Dialogue than Dancing, to the Methods of
Courtship, and the Mysteries of Intrigue, which are generally the Subject of
Comedy.

And now the Surveyor thinks fit to make a Halt, and seems extremely satisfied
with his performance: P. 57.
I have, says he, at length run through all his private Authorities against the
Stage. Run through them! Yes, like a Bowl that gets nothing; or if you please,
like a Soldier that runs the Gauntlet. Indeed this Author's Method is so very
peculiar, he does so often fall foul upon his own Book, quote away his
Argument, and mortify himself, that one would almost fancy he wrote for a
Penance.

We are now coming up to the Censures of the State; Upon this Head I began with
the Athenians, and observed, that this Republic made a Law, that no Judge of
the Areopagus should write a Comedy. View, p. 240.
Here the Surveyor is surpised to find the Athenians produced against the
Drama, of which they were the greatest Encouragers. Survey, p. 58, 59.
As great Encouragers as they were, their forbidding the Judges writing Comedy,
proves they looked upon it as the most unreputable part of Poetry. Now this was
enough for my purpose. Nay, after a little struggling the Surveyor comes
forward to a Compliance. He grants writing Comedy was likely to engage the
Author in Quarrels and Partialities, and was also an Indignity to the Office of
a Judge. Survey, p. 61.
And is not all this a sign, that there was something untoward and unreputable
in the performance? His objecting, that Aristophanes had the better of
Socrates, is no Argument of the standing Interest of Comedy: For it is pretty
plain Socrates was oppressed by a Faction, and executed in a Hurry: For soon
after, the Government repented, his Memory was honored, and his Prosecutor
Melitus Stoned to Death. (...)
But after all, the Surveyor's being surpised, it is no such News to find the
Drama discountenanced at Athens: For he frankly affirms, there was once a total
suppression of it, Survey, p. 61.
an abdication, as he calls it, of Tragedy and Comedy: However I Am willing to
grant him the Athenians were none of the worst Friends to the Stage; View, p.
240.
I told him as much: But alas, they paid for their fancy at last; for the
Expense of this Diversion, their Sa^ntring at the Playhouse, and minding Poets
more than Field Officers, Justin, Lib. 6. sub. fe^^.
was, as Justin observes, the Ruin of their Government: This Pr^digality and
Sloth made way for Slavery: And Philip of Macedon, a little obscure Prince,
grew Master of the Liberties of Greece.

From Athens we must Travel to Sparta, where I observed the Stage was not
allowed under View, p. 240.
any Form or R^gidation. Here the Surveyor grows angry, because* I gave the
Lacedaemonians a good Word, and after having said they were somewhat of my
Kidney, Survey, p. 64.
falls a railing unmercifully upon them, and calls them Cynical, Proud, and
what not. Well! These Cyni^ks, and he together, put me in mind of old Diogenes,
who trampled on Plato's Pride with a greater of his own. I confess the
Surveyor's* Saty^ has so much of the Rust and Roughness he declaims against,
that, I Am afraid, he will appear much more unlick'd (as he has it) than the
Lacedemonian Laws. But, by this Gentleman's favor, I was far from
over-flourishing upon the Spartan's Character, as appears sufficiently from
Plutarch, to mention no other Author. This great Man commends them for their
Courage, their Discipline, and their Sense; declares, that he could not
perceive any sign of Injustice in their Constitution: Pl^t. in Lyeurg. L^con.
Institut.
He calls them a Nation of Philosophers, and takes notice that the Neighboring
States and Colonies of Greece looked on the City of Sparta as a perfect Model
of good Manners, and Wise Government. To go on; the Surveyor finds fault
because I did not assign the reason of the Spartans Aversion to the Stage.
Survey, p. 65.
To this I must answer, I had no mind to tire the Reader with unnecessary Talk.
Who would imagine, but that so Wise a Government as the Spartans, had a good
Reason for their dislike? However he must garnish his Margin, and have the
Reason out, tho it makes against him. Here it is then: Ut neque joconeque serio
cos q^i Legibus contradicerent audirent. Lacon. Instit.
The Lacedaemonians allowed neither Tragedy nor Comedy, that they might not hear
any thing contradictory to their Laws. No: They had no Palate for the Rapes and
Adulteries, and Buffoning Liberties of the Stage. Survey, p. 65.
They would not suffer the Sobriety of their Discipline, and the Gravity of
their Constitution, to be affronted so much as in jest. Yes, the Surveyor
grants they were afraid the Luxury of the Drama, as 'twas practiced at Athens,
might soften their Youth, and enervate their Minds: Survey, p. 67, 68.
And now had not I great reason to be afraid of inserting the Citation at
length? But the Lacedaemonians were only concerned to preserve the Martial
Spirit of their People. Survey, p. 67.
How does that appear? Were the Lacedaemonians only for one good Quality? Had
they no concern for the Virtues of Peace, and the Securities of good
Correspondence among themselves? That Is strange! Plutarch calls them a Nation
of Philosophers, and makes them strict Observers of Regularity in general. But
for the Surveyor's sake, let us suppose them Ambitious only of Military Glory:
Ibid.
Even this Point could not be gained without Sobriety of Manners. For, if we
observe, we shall find the Persians, Greeks, and Romans, etc. were always best
Soldiers, when they were best Men. Indeed they held their Empire, as it were of
Virtue and Moral Philosophy. For when they came to Debauch, they grew quickly
good for nothing; and dwindled by degrees from Cowardice to Servitude.
Insignificancy, to speak softly, is the Natural Consequence of Lewdness.
Dissolution destroys both the Will and the Power to be Serviceable. It makes
Men impatient of Discipline, Quarrelsom and Mutinous, and unable to bear the
Fatigues of War. A Lewd Soldier often fails in point of Corporal Force, is
deserted even by his Limbs, and has no Constitution to be Brave, tho never so
willing: I mean as to Campaigning, and a Course of War. Thus when the Stage is
suffered to Debauch a Nation, and bring Vice into Credit, People will be in
danger of having more Confidence than Courage. This is the way to soften a
Martial Spirit, and destroy the Principles of Honor. And thus Military Glory,
and Civil Virtue, and every thing else that is worth the owning, must take their
Leave in a short time. This Consequence was Wisely foreseen by the
Lacedaemonians, and guarded against accordingly.

The Surveyor rallies once more, and tells us, That Plutarch says indeed, that
the Spartans did not admit Comedy nor Tragedy, Survey, p. 66.
but says not a syllable of Forms, and Regulations. This is wonderful Civil! If
he grows thus good Natured, I must Dispute with him no longer. I beseech him,
What does he think I argued against in the View, was it not against the
Liberties of Tragedy and Comedy? If he fancies I wrote against Punchianello, or
the Waterworks, he is much mistaken. If the Lacedaemonians refused to admit
Tragedy, or Comedy upon any Condition, they refused to admit them under any
Form. To go farther with him, His old Starting Hole is stopped, for he cannot so
much as pretend, that the Mimi would pass the Test, where the Drama was thus
discouraged. But I am almost to blame for taking notice of these Objections.

We must now take a Turn in Italy. From hence I brought a famous Instance, how
severely the Roman Government treated the Stage under all its Latitude and
Distinctions. The Authority is no less than Tully's, in his Tract de Republica,
cited by St. Augustine with Approbation. Romani, sicut apud Ciceronem idem
Scipio loquitur, cum artem Ludicr am Scenamque totam probr^ ducerent, genus id
hominum non modo honor c^vium reliquorum carere, s^d etiam tribu moveri not at
one Censori^ voluerunt.
To this Testimony the Surveyor returns a surprising Answer. Since Tully does
not appear in his own Person, we shall not (says he) spend any time or
Ammunition upon him. Survey, p. 69.
Well! Tho his Resolution is right, his Reason is wrong. For, What tho Tully's
Books De Republica, are lost, they were extant in the time of St. Augustine? Is
this Father's Credit so low, that he cannot be trusted for a Citation? This
Treatise of Tully was too well known at that time a day to be counterfeited; so
that if St. Augustine St. August de Civ. Dei Lib. 2. cap. 13.
was unfair in the Citation, he wanted both common Honesty, and common Sense.
View, p. 240.
And after all, I cannot perceive that Tully has here deposed more against the
Playhouse, than Livy did after him, who comes next to be Examined. This
Author, to make short work of the Quotation, informs us, Live. Dec. 1. L. 7.
That the Common Players were expelled their Tribe, and refused to serve in
Arms. View, p. 241,
Here the Surveyor makes a miserable Pother; Reasons backwards and forwards,
and makes Might and Main for the old Cover of the Pantomimes: And thus by his
running upon the File, and Doubling, we may perceive he is almost spent. In
answer to what he offers, I shall first take notice of his Concessions: He
grants, in the first place, that the Romans went on the same Grounds with the
Lacedaemonians in discouraging the Stage. They were afraid their Military
Virtue might suffer by it: Surv. p. 70, 71.
Now of this Supposition I have made my Advantage already.

Secondly, Surv. p. 71, 74. Ibid.
He affirms, That the Practice of the Stage among the Romans fell into the
hands of Slaves: From whence one would imagine 'twas pretty plain that the
Romans thought this Business was too coarse for Persons of higher Condition.
Indeed his Reason for this Custom is very pleasant: He says this Profession was
thrown up to the Slaves, Ibid.
upon the account of its being a polite Exercise, and too refined a Diversion
for the rest of the Roman Youth. Now I would gladly know how it comes about,
that Slaves are so much better bred than their Masters, and Mob than Persons of
Quality? Upon the Surveyor's State of the Chronology, this was extremely
unlikely: For if this happened before the Settlement of the Drama, Surv. p. 73.
the time lies against him; for then the Romans had not conquered the Polite
Countries, nor made any Inroads upon Asia or Greece. But let Acting be as
Polite as the Surveyor pleases, it is plain the Romans looked upon it as
unreputable, P. 74.
otherwise they would never have left it wholly in the hands of Slaves and
Mercenary Foreigners. These Concessions one would think were frank enough; but
we shall have more of his Liberality by and by; and in the mean time I shall
consider his Evasions.

In the first place he endeavors to avoid the Blow, Surv. p. 72, 76.
by fencing with the Distinction between the Ludi Senici and the Drama: But
this is mere Supposition and chimerical Fancy, and directly overthrown by a
Quotation of his own from St. Augustine: Surv. p.^ 22.
Et haec sunt Scenicorum tolerabiliora ludorum, De Civ. Dei, Lib. 2.
Comaediae scilicet and Tragediae, etc. The Surveyor should take care to keep
his Margin a little in Order; a bad Memory, and a bad Cause, do very ill
together.

Secondly, He argues, That this Mark of Infamy set upon the Histriones, Surv.
P. 73.
cannot properly stick upon the Actors of Tragedy and Comedy as such, that Law
having been made long before the Drama was brought to Rome. First, with his
Favor, this Mark of Disadvantage must evidently stick upon the Actors of
Tragedy, etc. and that by his own Argument: for they, Surv. p. 76.
and only they, as himself informs us, were called Histriones. He is now got
off the Pin of Demonstration, and falls down to Conjectures, and argues like
any Almanac: Surv. P. 74.
He fancies therefore the Mime's and Pantomime's were aimed at in this Law. To
this I answer, That having proved the Business of the Mime's, V. d. supr^.
etc. to be originally part of the Drama, by consequence if the Mime's were
struck at by this Law, the Drama will be concerned in the Correction: For the
Mime's being, as Suetonius tells us, originally part of Comedy, and Comedy,
Se^l. Poet, Lib. 1. c. 10.
as Scaliger observes, being prior to the Mime's, this Law being an early
Provision, as the Surveyor confesses, could not be made before the Mime's and
the Drama were parted; from whence it will follow, that the Drama must be
affected with the Censure.

And as this Law was an early, so 'twas a lasting Check upon the Stage, being
in force when Livy wrote, Eo institutum manet, etc.
as appears by the Words of the Citation: *And here the Historian speaks in
comprehensive Phrase, and excepting the Fabulae Atellanae, takes in the
Playhouse, with all its Appurtenances; as appears not only from the Term
Histriones, Ab Histri^nibus pollu^. Expertes artis Ludicrae.
but from the other expression of Ars Ludicra, which, Surv. p. 77.
by the Authority of the Civil Law, quoted by the Surveyor, includes all the
Denominations and Distinctions of the Stage.

And now having evidently proved the Dramatick Astors under the Discouragement
of the Roman Constitution, we need not stand to the Courtesy of his
Supposition, for to that, after a little struggling, he is willing to come.
Nay, at last he yields up the Supposition for matter of Fact, and cites a
Praetorian Edict, hinted by the View, in proof of it; and because I suppose he
wont quarrel at his own Translation, it shall serve instead of the Latin:
Whoever (as the Edict runs) appears on the Stage to Speak or Act, is declared
Infamous. Here the Surveyor cannot deny but Comedians and Tragedians are
included. Surv. p. 77, 78.
But then he alleges, Ibid. p. 80.
That their Profession was not branded on the score of Immorality, but because
they exercised it for Hire. This being his last Refuge, I shall endeavor to
drive him out on it, and prove in contradiction to his Assertion, That the
Playhouse was censured by the Romans upon the Charge of Immorality, and
because of the Scandal of their Performances; and that 'twas the Nature of
their Profession, Surv. p. 80.
and not the Mercenary Condition of exercising it, which drew the Censure upon
them.

First then, Artem Ludicram scenamq^ to^am probro discer^nt, De Civ. D^. Lib.
2. c. 13.
We may learn from Tully, as St. Augustine cites him, that the Romans looked
upon the Business of Players as ignominious in all the Parts of it; and as
Gothofred expresses it, View, p. 241.
'twas counted turpe munus, a scandalous Profession. This Mark of Disadvantage
we see comes full upon the Function; there is no Conditions of Favor or
Exceptions for Acting grat^s. This State of Ignominy was not the Punishment of
mere Hire: The Romans were not expelled their Tribe, and thrown out of Common
Privilege only for taking Money for their Labor: No; they Fought for Pay, and
Pleaded for Fees, and Traded for Gain too, without any such Disadvantage to
their Condition. Why then should Metals transmute backwards in the Playhouse,
and Money look so dull and scandalous in the Actors Pockets? Why should the
Consideration of Gain blast their Character, forfeit their Right, and
extinguish the Privileges they were born to? Why, I say, should the Roman
Players have such ill luck with their Money more than other People, unless
because they were thought not to come handsomely by it? This extraordinary Usage
plainly affects the Matter, and proves the Mystery unreputable: And therefore
the latter Law cited by the Surveyor, does nothing of his Business. However, it
shall be transcribed.

Those that appear upon the Stage for Gain, Omnes propter praemium in scenam
prodeuntes, etc. Surv. p. 80.
are Infamous, says Pegasus and Nerva the Son. Now by what I have already
discourr'd, it is plain that these Words were designed to check the Avarice of
the Romans, and to keep them from enriching themselves by a (...) Profession;
and that if they were resolved to live upon the Practice, they should pay for it
in their Character and Credit. In short, the Intention of this Law was to
hinder them from dangerous Business, and to make them more in love with Probity
than Money.

Secondly, That the Playhouse at Rome was censured for Immorality, may be
farther undeniably proved from Valerius Maximus, who mentioning the Rise of
Plays much after the same manner with Livy, gives the Reason why the Actors of
the Fabulae Attellanae had better Quarter than the rest of the Players: And
this was, because this Diversion was clean and inoffensive, and made agreeable
to the Sobriety of the Roman Discipline. It Was formed, as Casaubon observes,
Quod genus delectationis Italica (...) temperatum, ideoque vacuum nota est: nam
neque tribu movetur, neque a militaribus stipendiis repellitur, Valor. Max.
Lib. 2. C. 4. Casaub. in Loc.
upon the Modesty of the Old Satyr, and was much more Merry than Mad. `This
Staunchness, as Maximus goes on, screen'd the Actors from Disgrace, and
purchased their Patent of Indemnity: So that they were neither (like the rest
of the Stage) expelled their Tribe, nor refused to serve in the Field.

The Surveyor proceeds to acquaint us, That Tully, though a Man of great 'Vanity
and Caution, contracted an intimate Friendship with Roscius an Actor, Surv. p.
82.
therefore the Business of the Stage was not unreputable. What Tully's Opinion
was of the Stage, has been sufficiently shown already: As to this Objection,
View, p. 274^. 275.
it is so fully obviated in the View, etc. by Tully himself, that I cannot
imagine why the Surveyor mentioned it, unless to fill up the Page. But Tully
made an Acquaintance with Roscius: Most certainly, Roscius was considerable in
his way, and it seems one of the most Moral in his Profession: And besides,
it is likely Tully might learn something of Gesture and Pronunciation of him. In
short, View, ibid.
Tully liked the Man, Surv. p. 82.
but not his Business. For all that, he defended his Cause. That Is true; he
defended him in an Action of Debt: But what is that to his Profession? Cannot a
Lawyer plead for his Client, without justifying his Practice, and answering for
his Trade? But I Am afraid I have considered this sort of Reasoning too much,
and therefore shall proceed.

The Surveyor urges, Surv. p. 80.
That Scipio Africanus and Laelius were publicly suspected to have assisted
Terence in the Composition of his Plays. Suspected! Then it seems 'twas no very
creditable Business. This is an odd way of Arguing, if positive Evidence from
unexceptionable History and Law, may be set aside by remote Conjectures, which
would signify nothing, if proved; I say, if the best Evidence may be thus
overruled, we must never prove any thing. Usefulness of the Stage, p. 92.
This Objection was made by Mr. Dennis, and is sufficiently answered in my
Defense, by the Counter-evidence of Scipio Nasica and Horace. Defense, etc. p.
85. 86.
But let us suppose, if you please, which the Instance is far from proving,
That Africanus and Laelius believed the Stage not discouraged on the score of
Immorality; the Consequence will only be this, That these two Persons were of
one Opinion, and the Government of another; and thus their Authority is
destroyed by running counter to the Law. This Answer will affect his Objections
from the Two Caesar's and Seneca; which being weaker than the rest, I shall
consider them no farther.

My Instance in the Theodosian Code, (...)
Mr. Dennis gives up for an unreasonable Custom; but the Surveyor, who loves
neither Yielding nor Proving, encounters the Authority with a Banter. He finds
fault indeed with the Translation; but disproves it in no particular: But fails
in his own Version by his own Rule; for he renders Histrio by Droll-Actor,
whereas he has already told us, that this Word is peculiar to the top Function
of the Stage, Surv. p. 76.
and signifies the Players in their best Capacity. Farther, by his citing the
Law at length, it appears, that Histrio, or an Actor in the Drama, has as
little a Character as a Pantomime: Nay, the Language falls rather harder upon
the first; for the Pantomime does not suffer so much in the Addition,
Pantomimum vest humili, aut vil^m offerat Histrionein etc.
nor has that Epithe of Disadvantage which describes the other. And thus by his
Criticisms and Exactness, he has made the Translation worse, and the Case worse.

I have now gone through his Charge against the Testimonies in the last Chapter
of the View, etc. and I hope fully shown that my Authors have been farily
translated and rightly applied. The Objections against the Pagan part of the
Authorities, were most of them made by Mr. Dennis before the Surveyor: The
Answers to the one therefore will hold against the other. Usefulness of the
Stage, p. 90.
But Mr. Dennis has one Exception about St. Augustine particular to himself;
it is this: He says St. Augustine, as I have cited him, Nonne Cicero little cum
Ro^cium quend^^ laudare^ (...) solus esset dignus qui in scenam deberet
intrare: ita virum bonum ^t solus esset dignus qui eo non deberet accedere:
quid aliud apertissime ostendens nisi illam sccnam esse tam turpem, ut tan to
minus ibi ess^ homo debeat, q^^nto magis fuerit vir bon^^. A^g. de Consensu
Evangelist, Lib. 1. View, etc. p. 274.
has done Cicero a great deal of wrong, in the Character of Roscius. In the
first place, my Citation of St. Augustine is right to a tittle; and therefore I
can have nothing to answer for. And that St. Augustine was the least to blame,
we have no just Reason to suspect. For, first, we are to observe, that Tully's
Oration, Pro Roscio, cited by Mr. Dennis, is a great part of it lost, we have
neither beginning nor end of it. But in St. Augustine's time Tully's Works were
entire. Now because a Passage is not in part of an Argument, to conclude it was
not there at all, is an odd way of reasoning. And if 'twas not in this Oration,
there was room enough for it in the rest of Tully's Works, which are now lost.

Secondly, The Words and Sense of this Quotation, and that cited by Mr. Dennis,
are so very different, that it is next to impossible, that St. Augustine, if he
quoted from Memory, should mistake the one for the other: And yet he quotes it
roundly, and Reasons positively upon it. From whence (says this Father) Tully
was most clearly of Opinion, that the better a Man was, the less fit he was to
make a Player. And can we imagine a Person of S. Augustin's Character, could
mistake so marked and memorable a Sentence? He that was so well acquainted with
the Heathen Learning, and particularly with Tully, having publicly taught
Rhetoric in his younger time? To change the Words of an Author to so strange a
Degree, to so very foreign a signification, could be nothing but Design. Now
can we imagine that St. Augustine's Conscience could digest such a Practice as
this? Would he who had wrote a whole Books against Falsehood and Lying, be
guilty of so notorious an Instance himself? What, in an Author so well known as
Tully, in a Sentence so very remarkable, and in a Treatise written for the
Satisfaction of the Heathens? For now we are to observe, that St. Augustine was
encountering some Pagan Objections about the Gospels, and proving the
Consistency of the Evangelists with each other. Besides, there was no necessity
for so wretched and ridiculous an Expedient: The Controversy did not languish
for this Citation; for as pertinent as it was, St. Augustine could easily have
gone on without it. But possibly the Reader may think I have taken too much
notice of a Calumny so much without color: To return therefore to the Surveyor.

And here once for all, I cannot but wonder at his Captiousness and Noise
against the Method of my Quotations: The Authors, says he, were not cited at
length, and in their own Language, which it seems could be nothing but Design.
That my Meaning was fair, I have made good already; and that my Method was
defensible, is no less plain, for I always took care to cite Book, Chapter, or
Page, and sometimes Edition too. Now how could Imposition and foul Play lie hid
under such a Punctuality? When this was done, what need was there of stuff^ing
the Margin with Greek and Latin? Why should I give my self a needless Fatigue,
and trouble the English Reader with a foreign Language to no purpose? All
unnecessary Quoting is either Pedantry or Ostentation. The Surveyor has neither
Reason nor Custom for his Demands. What then would the Man be at? I hope he did
not expect I should get a Certificate, or make Affidavit in proof of my
Authorities? It Is true, his making a squabble about the Testimonies has now
somewhat altered the Case; Insomuch that I am sometimes forced to bring him to
the Test of the Original, to discover his Honesty.

And now having set the Testimonies right, the rest of the Surveyor's Book will
go off apace.

The Surveyor Complains of my Censuring the Music and Gestures of the
Playhouse only upon Report, having never heard of one, nor seen the other.
Surveyor, p. 99.
As to the Playhouse Music, he has given me no occasion to resume that
Argument, neither did I meddle with their Dancing. But here he runs too fast. I
only told him, View, p. 278.
I was no Frequenter of the Playhouse. I must tell him, I have been there, tho
not always for Diversion. I am not so much a Stranger to that place, as not to
have seen the Behavior of their Women bold, and the Gestures lewd sometimes,
witness the Hostess in Bartholomew Fair! His appeal to the Ladies in this Case
is strangely out of the way. He has reproached them too much in the Dedication,
either to expect their Favor, or depend on their Decision. The Outrage is very
gross and comprehensive, as will appear at the first sight. Women, says the
Surveyor to the Earl of Dorset, Epist. Ded.
and weak Men, whose Fears are stronger than their Judgments, will be awed into
a Persuasion before they are convinced of the Truth of it. For such People, in
most Cases, measure the certainty of Assertions by the Confidence of him that
pronounces them. Here Is a Flourish for ye upon the whole Sex! Here Is Decency of
Application, and Strains of Breeding and Conduct! And does the Surveyor call in
the Ladies to Vouch for him after this Usage? After he has disabled their
Character, and thrown them out of Sense and Capacity? His Modesty and Judgment,
I perceive, are much of a size: These Complaints, I suppose, were calculated
for Russia, or rather for Constantinople, where the Women are said to have no
Souls. I asserted in the View, etc. with reference to the English Stage, That
if they have any advantage in their Instrumental Music, they lose it in their
Vocal: Their Songs being often rampantly l^wd, and irreligious to a flaming
excess: View, p. 280.
Now the ancients, as we have seen already, were inoffensive in this respect.
Here the Surveyor falls a railing very liberally, and if his Logic would but
answer his Language, there was no enduring him: But the best on it is, his
Reasoning usually makes amends for his Railing: And so it happens at present,
for at the first opening of the Cause, he does no less than give it up. He
grants the Chorus of the Ancients was harmless enough. Survey, p. 103.
But then the Reason he proves it by is somewhat untoward. This Music, P. 101.
says he, consisted of Hymns and Praises of their Gods, and therefore Lewdness
would have been impertinent. On the contrary, the Pagan Idols were lewd, and
their Worship was lewd, and if the Hymns had been so too, they had been all of
a Piece. Where then was the impropriety? But then this, as St. Paul observes,
was for the most part done in secret: For Nature was not wholly subdued by
Idolatry. 'Twas therefore the force of Modesty, and the regards of Virtue,
which made the Chorus inoffensive, and not Compliance with Religion, as the
Surveyor suggests. And is not the ancient Stage much better than the Modern
upon this account? For they declined Smutt, tho their Religion allowed it. But
these are resolved to charge through their Creed, and to have it at any
purchase of Infamy and Danger. To return to the Chorus, if that was
inoffensive, as the Surveyor truly affirms, then the Vocal Stage Music of the
Ancients was inoffensive, for they had no Songs but in the Chorus; I Challenge
the Surveyor to produce one elsewhere in all the Old Tragedy and Comedy extant:
And does it not follow from hence, that the old Drama was inoffensive, not only
upon the Comparison, but even without it? His running off to the gross
Liberties of the Mimi is a poor relief: For, First, By thus retreating from the
Subject, he quits the Field, and leaves the Ancient Drama in possession of the
Advantage contested.

Secondly, In all his Ramble and Aggravation about the Mimi, he neither offers
to prove his Point by Argument or Testimony: He neither gives any Instance, nor
cites any Author; so that the whole of his Cause lies only in Affirmation and
Assurance. His saying, That all who are acquainted with the Roman Stage, know
his Charge against the Mimi to be true, is like the rest. I must tell him, he
does not know it to be true, and therefore should not object it. Nay, as far as
it appears it is untrue; for the Lewdness of the Mimi consisted more in Gesture,
than Expression. I charged the Stage with encouraging Revenge, View, p. 283.
and mistaking the Notion of Honor: This he denies, and would make us believe,
that a Vindictive Humor is almost always made the Mark of a Tyrant or a
Villain in Tragedy. Survey, p. 108.
But by his Instance in Don Manuel he mistakes the Point: The Disorders of
Princes was not the Dispute in that place: 'Twas private Revenge which was
principally aimed at, as appears by the mention of Duelling. And is not this
Humor encouraged by the Stage? Don't their Characters of Figure quarrel in
Comedy, and Murder in Tragedy? Is it not Honorable to do it, and Infamous to
refuse it? And thus, by these Maxims, a Man is bound to be Damned in Defense of
his Honor, and cannot be a Christian without being reckoned a Poltron. To say
this, Frensy is countenanced in Life, and that a Poet is obliged to draw
according to Nature is a lamentable Plea. At this rate Rapes and Adulteries
must be Acted, and all sort of Blasphemy repeated, View, p. 35, 383.
that Nature may be shown in her Colors: But this I have answered already. And
therefore his saying, Defense, p. 10, 15, etc.
That there can be no Breach of Morality, without offending against the Laws of
the Drama; His saying this, is in effect, to make the Poets Sovereign Judges of
Good and Evil; To give the Stage a Power Paramount to Gospel and Law, and to
make Vice the Standart of Virtue. By this Doctrine they may bring all the
Stench of the Stews upon the Board, and Poison Cum Privilegio. For, what is all
this, but a close Imitation of Life? Now if any Man dislikes these Figures,
Surv. p. 119.
let him do it at his Peril, says the Surveyor, for then he finds fault with
Nature, not with the Poet. Nay, if those Pictures be drawn according to the
Life, he might as well snarl at the Wise Providence which governs the World,
because he meets more ugly Faces then handsome ones, Ibid.
more Knaves and Fools than Honest Men, etc. This is admirable Reasoning! For,
in the first place, to suppose Ugliness so very common, is a Satyr upon
Mankind, and is remote both from Truth, and Decency: But to make Knavery the
effect of Providence, as this Author does by the drift of his Reasoning, and
the force of his Comparison, is next to Blasphemy. To proceed from his
Supposition to his Inference: Does the Surveyor think there is no difference
between Natural Defects and Moral Turpitude, and are Ugly Faces as catching as
Ugly Practices? Certainly, no. The Deformities of Behavior are much more
dangerous than those of Person and Understanding. Lewdness and Atheism are
infectious, but Folly is a disadvantage to none but him that has it. Now, if we
are obliged to guard our Virtue, and avoid ill Discourse, Why not in the
Playhouse, as well as in other places? Unless we will say, that the Wit and
Figure, and Success of a Libertine mortifies his Example, and makes him less
dangerous: And then by the same Rule we may conclude, that the malignity of a
Distemper is a good symptom of Health, and that People are likely to do least
mischief, when they are best prepared for it.

I must now attend the Surveyor in his Examination of the Greek and Roman
Tragedy, in which he pretends the Ancients were defective in the Morality of
their Fable. Survey, p. 126.
And upon the comparison of some few Instances, endeavors to throw the
preference upon the Moderns. In this Enquiry he spends a great part of his
Book, which were it never so lucky, would be but little to his purpose. For, to
say no more at present, this Justification would reach no farther than Tragedy,
Comedy does not enter the Dispute upon this Head, and therefore must be left
defenseless. He throws away abundance of Ammunition upon this place, which if
he could carry it, would not be worth the Storming: This will appear upon the
progress of the Contest; and in the mean time I shall endeavor to repel the
Attack, and disappoint him in the little Advantage.

In pursuing this Point, the Surveyor falls into a mighty Vein of telling
Stories, which by the length and manner of them, one would fancy were told more
for his own Diversion, than the Readers. Here we must take him by Tale, and not
by Weight; measure his Arguments by the Page; And if a Man could be confuted by
the Yard, he might possibly have done my Business.

He begins with the Fable of Sophocles his Oedipus, Survey, p. 131.
and Censures it for being very deficient in the Moral. And yet in the next
Words he owns it may serve to put us in mind of the Lubricity of Fortune, and
the Instability of Humane Greatness. Call you this Moral very deficient! Does
it not hold forth a Lesson of Justice and Moderation to great Men? Does it not
teach the proper use of Prosperity, and prepare us for the Turns of Adversity?
This Moral is so far from being deficient in a Play, that it would make a good
Sermon. But the ground of the Quarrel is, this Moral is too good for such a
Heathen as Sophocles, and therefore he must not have it. Not have it! What,
Survey, p. 131.
tho the Poem uses it expressly as such? that is confessed: For all that the
Surveyor not only finds fault with Mr. Dryden, but wont give Sophocles leave to
understand the Moral of his own Fable. P. 133.
This is very hard. But since he is resolved to refine upon Sophocles and Mr.
Dryden, let us see what he will make on it. Now this Gentleman tells us, that the
genuine Moral of the Fable ought to have been shown in setting forth Oedipus's;
Misfortunes, as a result of his Impiety, in advancing his own Judgment above
that of his Gods; Survey, p. 133. 145.
and thinking by his own Wisdom to reverse the immutable Decrees of Destiny,
and upon this account his Vanity deserved the heaviest Chastisement. To this I
answer,

First, That if this were the Moral, it would not be without Instruction: It
might show the vanity of contesting with Omnipotence, and teach submission to
the Decrees of Heaven, that People should conclude the Punishment just by the
Hand that sent it, and not repine at the Mysteries of Providence.

But Secondly, That this Sense is not the genuine Moral, appears by the
Surveyor's Objection, in which he grants, That Predestination was not so
universal among the Ancient Heathens, but many held the contrary. Ibid.
And if Oedipus was one of this Number, he grants his Moral falls to the
Ground. Now, that Oedipus was no Predestinarian, I think is pretty clear from
his Management: For if he believed a Fatality, he must believe his Misfortunes
irretrievable, and why then was he so weak as to attempt the preventing it? Why
then did he quit his Fortune and his Friends, throw up the Expectations of a
Crown, and run rambling after a known Impossibility? Such a Piece of Pilgrimage
is fitter for a Goose then a Hero, especially one who could look through
Mysteries, untie Riddles, and had a reach of Understanding above the rest of
Mankind. It Is plain therefore, Oedipus did not imagine himself under a
Necessity of of Murdering his Father. He thought the Oracle pronounced no more
then a Conditional Truth; He took it for a fair warning, but believed the Event
might be secured by Care, and Caution.

Farther, By this Scheme of Fatality the reason of Punishment is destroyed, and
by consequence the Moral sinks with it. For, why should Oedipus be punished for
attempting to reverse Destiny, when all his Actions were pre-ordain'd, and he
had not so much as his own Will in his power? Where there is no Choice, there
can be no Fault: Alas! Upon this Supposition his Vanity was unavoidable, and
he could no more help the contesting with Fate, than he could overruled it. For
as the Surveyor has it from Seneca, Quicquid patimur mortale genus,
Quicquid facimus venit ab alto.


To make Oedipus smart for questioning the Oracle in this Case, is against all
Reason and Justice: And the Poet might as well have brought him to Execution,
because he could not fly. And thus we see the Poet will shift much better by
himself than with the Surveyor's Assistance. The Moral of the rest of
Sophocles's Plays is either good, or not bad, by Survey. p. 150, to 165.
his own Confession, and therefore that Dispute is at an end: It Is true he
excepts a little against Hyllus's Expostulation with the Gods. Soph. T^achin.
But this Objection was started, and considered in the View, etc. View, p. 91.


Orestes's killing his Mother, tho not Censured by the Surveyor, lies harder
upon Sophocles than the other. But when we consider, that he was put upon this
Practice by the Oracle, Sophoc. Electr^ Act 1.
to revenge his Father's Murder, and the Abuse of his Bed; This Consideration,
I say, upon the Heathen Theology, seems to excuse the Fact.

We are now to proceed to Euripides, who is blamed by the Surveyor for not
contriving his Fable to the Advantage of his Moral. Survey, p. 164* 178.
To this it may be returned, That his Instances of Mismanagement in this Poet
are but few: And even all of those few Ibid.
will not hold; and where they do, the Plays are defensible upon another Head.

And because he makes Orestes, and the other produced by him, a Sample of the
rest, it may not be amiss to show the Reader in a Word or two, how unfairly
Euripides is represented by the Surveyor.

To begin, Hecuba his first Play, has a Moral sufficiently instructive. For,
here Polydorus comes from the other World to discover Treachery and Murder.
And Polymnestor, King of Thrace, being the guilty Person, is punished with the
loss of his Eyes: This Piece of Revenge is executed by Hecuba, Mother to the
Murdered Person, and being questioned for the Fact, she is acquitted by
Agamemnon; as indeed she well might, having done nothing unjustifiable by the
Principles of Paganism.

The Phaenissae is full of Moral Sentences, and as to the Fable, the Misfortune
of Laius and his Posterity is declared to proceed from his disobedience to the
Oracle: Eurip. Phaeniss. p. 112. Ed. Cantabr.
which holds forth this Lesson, That it is dangerous to go counter to the
Instructions of Heaven; and that our Duty should always overruled our Desires.

Hippolitus Coronatus is taxed by the Surveyor with a defective Moral, because
an inoffensive young Prince of that Name miscarries in it. But this Fable, if we
look farther, has a great deal of good meaning in it. Hipp^l. p. 262, etc.
For Hippolitus is visited in his Misfortunes by a Goddess who clears his
Innocence, undertakes his Quarrel, and promises to immortalize his Memory.

The Surveyor grants Alcestis a Moral Play, and the same may be said of
Andromache: For here Hermione, who injured the Royal Captive Andromache,
Androm. p. 319, 320.
grows almost distracted with her guilt, Androm. p. 329, 330.
and is hardly prevented from dispatching her self.

Menelaus likewise designing to Murder Andromache and her Son Molossus, is
disappointed in his Barbarity by Peleus, who comes in the nick of time to the
rescue of the Innocent. And at the end of the Play, Andromache is left in
possession of the Country, Married to Helenus, Hector's Brother, and the Crown
settled upon her Son Molossus: And to enrich the Moral farther, the Generous
and Compassionate Peleus is Deifyed by Thetis, and transported to the Fortunate
Islands. Androm. p. 329, 330.


The Moral of the Supplices is not amiss. The Case stood thus. Creon King of
Thebes refusing Burial to the Chiefs slain before that Town, Adrastus, the only
surviving Confederate, applies to Theseus King of Athens, for Assistance,
desiring to be put into a Condition to take care of the Funerals of his
Friends. For to have these Solemnities unperform'd, was a sad misfortune among
the Heathens, who believed the Ghosts of the Deceased had no rest, till their
Bodies were burnt, and their Bones buried, according to that of Virgil.

Nec ripas datur horrendas and rauca fluenta
Transportare, prius quam sedibus-ossa quierunt.
The Request being thus reasonable, Theseus complies with it, and having
demanded Justice of Creon by an Embassy to no purpose, he goes against him in
Person, defeats his Forces in the Field, and recovers the dead Bodies of the
Generals.

This Expedition was a generous Instance of Humanity to the Dead, and Living,
and (...) (...)

In the next Play Euristheus smarts for persecuting the Heraclidae. These
injured Persons are assisted by the Athenians, defeat the Usurper, and recover
their Right. To say no more, this Play threatens Pride with Divine Vengeance,
and pleads strongly for Justice and Religion.

The Tragedy of Helena gives Countenance to Probity: For, by the Structure of
the Fable, Helena is a Lady of Virtue, undebauch'd by Paris, and never at Troy:
She is detained Prisoner in Egypt, and proves constant to her Husband Menelaus,
tho courted by Theoclymenus King of that Country. In short, she conceals
Menelaus upon his arrival, makes the King believe he was Wrecked, and desiring
leave to solemnize his Funeral on the Shore, gets an opportunity to escape the
Tyrant, and set sail. Theoclymenus finding himself betrayed, and suspecting his
Sister Theonoe in the Plot, resolves to Murder her; but is persuaded to
desist, and brought to Temper by the Machine of Castor and Pollux. Here the
Moral lies upon the surface, is apparently virtuous, and therefore I shall say
no more about it.

To conclude, Euripides's Electra stands upon the same foot of Excuse with that
of Sophocles, and therefore I shall pass it over.

From this short Survey the Reader may perceive, that much the major part of
Euripides's Plays are unexceptionable in their Moral; And that Poetic Justice
was generally the Poet's Care: Which appears farther by his Apology for his
Ixion. For, some of the Audience censuring the Conduct of this Play, for
suffering Ixion to flourish, and thrive upon this Wickedness; The Poet desires
them to have Patience, for, says he, I broke him upon the Wheel at last, Vit.
Eurip. Ed. Cant^br.
and then he paid for all.

The Surveyor therefore is much mistaken in making the Ancients so negligent in
their Fable: Survey, p. 194.
As if a good Moral from them was rather the effect of Casualty than Choice.
There are four Tragedies of Euripides still unmention'd; that is, his Orestes,
Medea, Hercules Furens, and Ion: Here I confess the Bias of the Fable is not
so well contrived, as in the rest.

But then he may be in a great measure excused upon these Two following
Considerations:

First, Because Euripides takes care to correct the Malignity of his Fable by
Moral Sentences, and Philosophical Advice, Survey, p. 164.
of which, as the Surveyor ^onfesses, he is very liberal. Yes: The Anciens,
says he, delivered their Instructions in Wise Sayings scattered in the
Dialogue, or at the Close; P. 191.
Now these Sentences were possibly more intelligible to a Common Understanding,
than the Mystery of Plots, and the Revolution of Fables: And therefore when the
rest of the Play was not stuffed with Lewdness, might govern in the Minds of an
Audience, and make a significant Impression: But, Secondly, That which goes
farthest in the Justification of Euripides is, that the Disposition of the
Fable was seldom in his power: The Subject was generally History, or received
Tradition; from which 'twas unsafe to vary. For, to cross upon common Belief,
and give Matter of Fact the Lie, was the way to spoil the Probability and
Relish of the Poem. The Ancients therefore, as the Surveyor remarks from
Aristotle, being forced to take the Fable as they found it, Surv. p. 187, 188.
the fault lay in the History, which made the Poet more excusable.

And this may serve to show, that Euripides is much better complexion'd than
the Surveyor was pleased to draw him. He is mistaken likewise in affirming,
That Euripides does not touch the Passions like Sophocles: For, Survey, p. 164
no less a Judge than Quintilian gives him the preference: He had, says he, an
admirable stroke at the Pathos in general; And for raising Compassion, was
clearly superior to Sophocles. In affectibus vero cum omnibus mirus, tum in ^is
qui mis^ratione constant, facile praecipuus. Quintil. Instit. Lib. 10. cap. 1.
And if Quintilian's Authority stood in need of being confirmed, the Poet
Hippolitus Coronatus, to say nothing farther, might vouch for him.

From Euripides the Surveyor goes backward to Aeschylus, but this Poet will
quickly be disengaged, for the whole Attack is made only upon a Sentence or two
in his Promotheus Vinctus. But here he is out again in his Impeachment, Survey,
p. 180
and misrepresents the Reason of Promotheus's Punishment. For 'twas not mere
good Nature that made Promotheus miscarry. 'Twas because he made bold with
Jupiter's Prerogative, broke into his Administration, and disposed of his
Bounty against his Will.

-- (...) Prom. Vinct. p. 6, 8. Ed. Stanl.

(...)
(...)
(...) --
And in the next Page: (...),
(...).


Promotheus pretended it seems to understand what was fit for the World better
than Jupiter, and to love Mankind more than he that made them. Now to do this,
is Arrogance, and Imputation with a Witness. Besides, as appears in the latter
part of the Play, he scorned a release from his Torments, menaced his pretended
Supreme, and rattled his Chains against his Judge. View, p. 87.


But it is high time for the Surveyor to quit the Coast of Greece, having met
with no Prize after all his Cruising. He is now sailing homewards, and trying
to mend his Voyage, by touching at Rome. And, to conclude the Allegory, Seneca
is the Man, to make his Fortunes.

And here he would persuade the Reader, that I took all Seneca' s Plays for the
Work of one Man. Survey. p. 183.
His Reason is, I suppose, because I called them Seneca's Tragedies: Because I
did not distinguish between the Plays written by Marcus, and those by Lucius
Annaeus Seneca; and run out into Pedantry and Foreign Observation. But enough
of this.

The Surveyor remarks, P. 182.
that all Seneca's Tragedies are of Greek Extraction: (for the Octavia is not
worth the naming.) They are so. And so much the better, for then, where they
need it, what I have offered for the Greeks, may serve for their Apology. Then
the Plan of the Fable takes it is refuge in History; and comes down with Excuse
to the Poet. Besides, the Surve^or takes notice, that Seneca refines upon the
Justice of Euripides in his Hippolytus, Survey. p. 189.
and mends his Moral. Why, this is just as one would wish. But then the Man
grows angry, because I did not distinguish the Plays of Seneca the Philosopher
from the rest, and exempt him from Censure. Why, Survey. p. 184.
truly I had no leisure for trifling in Criticisms: And moreover, I could not
wholly excuse him; for his Rants (if they belong to him) are sometimes as
extravagant as may be Senec. Troad. Act. 3.
.

His Parallel of Ajax Oileus with a late Misfortune will not hold. For Ajax was
sunk in his Blasphemy, and had his Breath stopped with a Thunderbolt: Survey. p.
187.
He is no Person of the Drama; But what then? This Instance is sufficient to
show the Poet's Justice, and make an Example of the Crime.

His pretended Division of Tragedy from Aristotle into Moral and Pathetick, is
strangely misrepresented. By this Distinction he would make us believe, that
according to Aristotle, the Pathetick Tragedy had no regard to Morality, and
Poetic Justice. But this is not only contrary to Matter of Fact, but to the
Authority of the Citation.

For, Aristotle makes four Branches of his Division of Tragedy, and not two
only, as this Author quotes him. These four kinds of Tragedy the Philosopher
forms upon the four principal Excellencies relating to this Art.

The first sort he calls (...), or that which turns chiefly upon Intrigue, and
Discovery; The second is the Pathetick, the Beauty of which consists in the
skill of touching the Passions, and awakening Terror and Pity to an unusual
degree. Now if the Fable was well cast, and Poetic Justice observed, as I have
proved it often happened; in this case I say, this sort of Tragedy, Survey. p.
226.
is every jot as instructive, or in other words as Moral, as any other.

The 3d sort was distinguished by a plain and pompous Narration without
surprise of Incidents or Revolution of Affairs. Here the Gods made a great part
of the Dialogue, and the Peculiarity of it lay in the Majesty of the Presence,
of the Subject and Expression.

The fourth is the (...) or Moral, so called because, Aristot. de Poet. cap. 18.
as appears by the Instances, and the learned Paraphrast Goulston, it dealt
chiefly in virtuous Examples, and Characters of Justice and Piety. In a word,
the Distinction goes more upon Person, Character, and Discourse, than upon
Fable and Event. And thus it is plain, that Aristotle was far from having any of
the Surveyor's fancie's in his head: For all these kinds of Tragedy
notwithstanding their Difference, were equally capable of a good Moral, and of
adjusting Rewards and Punishments, And therefore this Philosopher was no such
inexhaustible Spring of Corruption, no such everlasting Source of Infection,
Survey. p. 195.
as this Gentleman and his terrible Rhetoric would make him.

Having now disabled his Instances of Exception, and vindicated the Ancients;
the Design of his Attack is defeated. And his long Declamation, into which he
has ramm'd so many hard words, Survey, p. 196. 197, and deinc.
will recoil upon himself; and discharge nothing but Smoke and Noise, Paper and
Powder.

For by this time I suppose it is pretty clear that my Satyr (as he calls it)
does not come near so full upon the Ancients, Survey. p. 201.
as upon the Moderns.

For first, As we have seen the Old Tragedians were generally unexceptionable
in their Fable; and when they were not, it is because they were tied down to the
Models of History and Religion, Survey p. 187, 188.
upon which account both Aristotle and the Surveyor are willing to make them an
Allowance.

Secondly, The Ancient Tragic Poets were clean in their Expression. And

Thirdly, They are not near so full of Profaneness and Atheistical Rants.

The Surveyor is resolved notwithstanding to produce some Modern Tragedies,
which tho they have little to say, are to look boldly upon the Court, and pass
their Resolution for their Innocence; And here Shakespeare's Hamlet is brought
first, and a great many Words spent to prove the Regularity and Instructiveness
of the Fable. But, what is all this to the Controversy? Survey. p. 201, to 206.
My Exceptions to Hamlet related only to his Indecencies of Language; and how
handsomely the Surveyor justifies that, we shall see afterward. However here
the Surveyor was resolved to set up a King of Clouts of his own making; and
then to fall on and Conquer him with great Bravery: Or, perhaps his Heart being
better than his Sight, he might mistake the Windmill for the Giant.

His next Instance is in the Orphan, against the Fable of which tho I did not
except, yet it is by no means so staunch as he would make it. For here is no just
Distinction of Fate upon the Merit of the Persons; but the good and bad, the
innocent and guilty, fall under a common Misfortune.

Cleomenes comes next under the Surveyor's Examination: This Play he taxes
extremely with the want of a Moral. Survey. p. 212.
And does this prove, that the Fable of the Moderns is preferable to the
Ancients? What makes him argue on my side? How some People's Vanity rides their
Judgment! He must be throwing his Criticisms about, tho he falls upon his
Friends, and weakens his Argument by his Discovery.

The Two remaining Tragedies are Don Sebastian and the Mourning Bride. See View
and Defense.
Now he knows I have made several material Objections against these Plays,
which he does not attempt to remove. I must tell him therefore once for all,
that the Justification of the Fable is no Answer: For I did not charge the
Moderns with being being Infection all over: No, they may do Execution enough
without that.

Besides, the Fable by his own reasoning works least sensibly, Survey. p. 222.
it sleeps as it were in the Veins, and is slow in the Operation. But foul
Images, and profane Discourse, are of a quicker Dispatch, and like the Plague
sudden, and sure. And then the Decency, Moral Sentences, and Gravity of the
Ancients were a sort of Counterpoyson to the Fable: For, as the Surveyor
observes, the Discourse of the Ancient Tragedy was frequently Moral, Survey p.
225.
when the Fable was not. To which I must add, that when the Moderns are staunch
in their main Fable, their Episodes and Under-Character are much out of Order,
and encourage Vice by giving it success. View, 142, 146, and alib.
He would gladly put in still for some Advantages to the Moderns, with respect
to the Moral; but the Claim sticks cruelly in the making out. He mentions Three
Particulars, the Two first of which are no more than one, and that is, that

The Moderns are never at the Expense of a Miracle to bring about a wicked
Design, as the Ancients have notoriously done. Survey. p. 218.


To this I answer,

First, That he has overcharged the Ancients, and multiplied his Instances
beyond Matter of Fact; as appears by what I have proved already.

Secondly, In those few Plays where the Allegation is true, they represented
the History of their Theology, they had Common Belief for their Excuse, so that
it seems rather the fault of the Religion, than the Poet. And as for the
Moderns, their standing off from this Conduct seems to proceed more from
Management than Scruple; By the Liberties they take in other Cases, we have no
reason to believe they declined this ill use of Machine out of Conscience: But
because they know this Expedient will not take: The Method looks unnatural, and
the Credulity of the Audience is not high enough to make it go down.

His Second Advantage for the Moderns is, that their Malefactors are generally
punished. Survey. Ibid.
The Ancients did the same, as I have proved from the Three Greek Tragedians.
But after all, the Moderns are far from being so careful in the execution of
Justice as he pretends. For I Am mistaken if Libertines that expose Virtue, and
droll upon Religion, are not great Malefactors. To steal Property, is not so
bad as to steal Principle; For this latter Practice extinguishes the Notion of
Right, and makes Thieving Universal. He that destroys the Distinction of Good
and Evil, is the worst Tyrant; for he encourages all Men to be like himself.
Now these sort of Malefactors are cherished and rewarded by the Modern Stage.
View, etc. p. 142, 146, and alib.


The Surveyor proceeding in Defense of the Moderns, affirms, that the Fable of
every Play is undoubtedly the Author's own, Survey p. 219.
whencesoever he takes the Story, and he may model it as he pleases; The
Characters are not so, for these the Poet is obliged to take from Nature.

To this I answer,

First, In contradiction to his Assertion, That when the Poet writes from
History, he is in a great measure confined to Matter of Fact, so that the Fable
is not in his own power to model as he pleases. This, besides the Reason of the
thing, is already granted by the Surveyor, Survey. p. 187, 188.
who brought Aristotle's Authority for the Case. To which I shall add that of
Horace, which may be applied both to Fable and Characters.

Aut famam sequere, aut convenientia finge, H^rat de art. poet.
Scriptor. Now it is both Aristotle's and Horace's Judgment, that a Tragic Poet
should rather go upon Fact, Arist. de poet. cap. 9.
and known Tradition, than pure Invention in the choice of his Subject.

Rectius Iliacum Carmen deducis in Actus, Horat. de Art. poet.

Quam si proferres ignota, indictaque primus.
Secondly, It Is very possible to keep an irregular Character under Discipline;
for Terrence's Strumpets don't talk Smut, View, P. 34, 35, 204, 205. Defense,
p. 20, 21, and alib.
and the same Conduct will hold in other Cases. In a word, we must not stretch
Propriety to the prejudice of Virtue, nor make Nature a Plea for Debauchery.
But this pretense I have fully satisfied elsewhere.

His last Effort upon the Fable of the Ancients is, that neither Aristotle nor
Horace, amongst all their excellent Rules for Dramatick Writing, Survey, p. 226.
have taken the least notice of Poetic Justice. But that neither of these
great Men were so regardless of the Fable, as the Surveyor would make them,
will appear from what follows: For,

First, Aristole affirms, That to represent a Person of Probity (...).
unhappy, would not only be Unpoetical, but (...). De poet. cap. 13.
Scandalous, and Detestable: And on the other hand, to make a very Wicked Man
successful, is the most improper Conduct imaginable, (...).
and has not so much as a jot of the due requisites of Tragedy in it. The first
Reason he gives for this Censure is, because such Preposterous Management fails
in a proper Regard to Mankind (...).
. Now, if an Unrighteous Treatment of Virtue and Vice, and Maladministration
upon Merit, is in the Opinion of Aristotle, a Neglect of Humane Nature, a
Scandalous Practice, and a Breach of Dramatick Law, then certainly this
Philosopher did not overlook the Respects of Justice in his Preceps for
Tragedy.

This, if need be, will appear farther from the Qualifications he requires in
his Hero, who is to suffer at the latter end of the Play. This chief Person he
would have of a Middling size for his Morals, neither remarkable one way nor
the other: He would not have him flamingly Wicked, for then no body would be
concerned for his Misfortune, Compassion would sleep, and Tragedy flag.

But then he must fall into some great Indiscretion, and be guilty of
considerable Mismanagement; Ibid.
He must be punished (...), for some notorious failure in his Conduct; For some
Fault which he might have prevented; otherwise you bring him under the
Character of those Virtuous Persons, (...).
whom Aristotle says it is scandalous to make unhappy. Thus we see he suffers
for his Faults, he is made a Malefactor, tho not to the degree of falling
unpitied. And thus the Example works the right way, and the Audience is alarmed
into Caution. Thus they are held to their Good Behavior, and the passion of
Terror is purged; Arist. de poet. cap. 6.
which advantages could never follow if the Hero had no Faults to justify his
Misfortune. For to see a good Man punished for that he cannot help, is the way
to make the Passions of the Tragedy run Riot, and grow mutinous against
Providence; and is rather an Argument for Despair than Circumspection. And this
may serve to show, that Aristotle was not regardless of Poetic Justice.

And that Horace, who goes upon the Plan of the Ancients, was of the same mind,
is evident from his Advice to the Chorus, to appear for Virtue, and perform the
Offices of Friendship; To recommend Justice, and pray the Gods that Fortune
might follow Desert ^*. Ut redeat miseris, abeat fortunae super bis. Horat. de
Art. poet.
Now the Chorus, we know, was to unite with the Subject, to support the Design
of the Play, and represent the Sense of the Poet. If therefore Horace would
have the Chorus solicit thus strongly for Justice; he expected, no doubt, the
Catastrophe should be governed by the same Instructions.

And thus I have endeavored to detect his Calumnies upon the Ancients, to
vindicate their Fable, and to disappoint him in his Project upon the
Comparison. And alas! if the Moderns could have carried this part of the
Preference, it would have done them but little service. A formal Piece of
Justice at the end of a Lewd Play, is nothing but a Piece of Grimace, and a
Politic Hypocrisy. It Is much such a strain of Conduct, as it would be to let a
Mad Dog loose among the Crowd, and then knock him on the Head when he has
bitten a great part of them. And yet this poor Excuse has no pretense in Modern
Comedy, where Libertinism comes generally off with Victory and Flying Colors.

And to this Performance of the Stage the Surveyor now leads me, and begins
with the Definition of Comedy: Defense, p. 6, 7, 8.
But against the Latitude and Construction of his Interpretation, I have argued
in my Defense, of which, according to his Method, he takes no notice. And by
his Description of the Business of Comedy, we have no reason to expect any good
from it.

He says the design of Comedy is rather Civil Prudence than Morality, Survey,
p. 232.
and as he is pleased to go on, we are not to expect it should confer Grace, or
mend Principles. Then as for the Characters, P. 234.
tho he would not have them all Vicious, he means not just to qualify them for
Newgate, or Tyburn; But then especial care must be taken, that there is no
Person of Sobriety amongst them: No, they must be all Men of Pleasure; for if
they are tainted with too much Honesty, they will disagree with the Company,
and spoil the Projects of the Stage. Well! I perceive the Surveyor is resolved,
notwithstanding his Pretenses to the contrary, to make the Modern Writers of
Comedy more Licentious than the Ancient; Rudens. Act. 4. sc. 7.
for Doemones in Plautus informs us, that the Comic Poets in his time used to
pretend to Discipline, and throw in Lectures of Morality. And tho the Surveyor
takes care to get all his Characters of Figure debauched, and will not suffer any
thing of Conscience or Regularity to tread the Stage, for fear the Audience
might suffer by the Example: Yet Plautus was of another mind, for in his
Captivi all the Characters are sober, and well in order, and particularly
Tyndarus and Philochares, Two young Gentlemen, are Men of Virtue; and so is
Lusiteles, another of the same Quality and Age, in his Trinummus. And then as
to Persons farther advanced in years, there are several Instances both in
Plautus and Terence, of Behavior not exceptionable. But our Stage has refined
upon the old Model: Their Characters must be all Libertines, their Diversion
Smut, and their Lectures, Swearing and Profaneness. Their Business is not to
teach Morality, but Lewdness, not to confer Grace, but to Debauch Nature, not
to mend Principles, but to destroy them. Indeed, how can the Consequence of
such Entertainments be otherwise? where the Persons are all Libertines, where
they run such lengths of excess, and balk nothing that makes a Jest. Where
Profaneness is sometimes seasoned with Wit, and Lewdness polished with turns of
Fancy. Where the Infection is made Palatable, the Mischief fortified, and their
Weapons Pointed, to pass the better through a Man's Body. Now, who would learn
Civil Prudence and Management from such Instructions as these? where a Man will
be in danger to bring away much more Vice than Discretion. Is it worth one's
while to get Caution with the loss of Conscience? Or, Have his Pocket Picked
only for the sake of Wit and Dexterity? Who would choose Bedlam for his Seat of
Diversion: Or, see Posture Clark do his Tricks, and Act his Metamorphoses, with
the Plague about him?

It Is true, Survey, p. 336.
the Surveyor is contented, that not only a Gentleman of Wit, but of Honor
too, should be introduced into Comedy; but then he guards again in limitation,
for he must be a Man of wild unreclaim'd Honor: A Man of Wild Honor! Truly, I
think, no Man's Honor can be Wilder then his Notion: Honor without Probity is
next to a Contradiction in Terms, and besides, it is good for very little. For,
to speak plainly, it is nothing more than Pride and Fashion, and Civility to a
Man's self. I don't say but Persons of Figure may be sometimes out of Order in
Comedy, and he misreports me in affirming the contrary Surv. p. 238.
: But then this should not be done without Restrictions, and Guard of
Behavior. Defense, p. 8, 10.
And besides they should be disciplined accordingly. When Dramatick Gentlemen
of Sense are Knaves, or Debauchees, the Poet should take care to make them
Losers by their Liberty: They should mortify them for their Misbehaviour,
treat them with Disappointment, and put them out of Countenance. And here the
Misfortune ought to rise in proportion to the Quality, for fear the Figure
should otherwise recommend the Lewdness.

And to do the Surveyor right, he is himself sensible of the necessity of this
Conduct, at least in some measure. For he grants by implication, that the Poet
is obliged to bring his Libertine to a sense of his Extravagance, Survey, p.
237.
and a resolution of Amendment. But that even this is not done appears
sufficiently in my View, View, p. 242, 246, and alib.
and may be made good much farther from the Plays cited in the Preface of my
Defense.

But before I pass on, I am obliged to take notice of his saying, that Fools of
what Quality soever, Survey, p. 235.
are the proper Goods and Chattels of the Stage, which the Poets may dispose of
as they think fit.

By his favor, to make Weakness of Understanding the Subject of Comic Mirth,
has neither Religion nor good Nature in it: To expose a Man for being born
without Sense, is a Satyr upon the Creation; it is just as reasonable as it
would be to beat a Dwarf for being under S^x Foot high. Thus to make sport with
the Misfortunes of Nature, and insult unavoidable Infirmities, is downright
Barbarity. Beside, such sort of Ridicule can cure no Distemper, nor Recover any
Body; Not the Patient, for he is incapable of Remedy; And as for other People,
they are out of danger of the Disease, and therefore need no Preservative. To
proceed:

The Surveyor finding the Arguments of the View somewhat troublesome, Survey,
p. 239, 105, and alib.
would gladly throw them off upon the score of Declamation: As if they were
only a few noisy glittering Sentences, put together to no purpose. Now, tho I
am no Pretender to the Talent of Haranguing, yet suppose the Allegation was
true, 'twould do him no service. For Oratory is by no means inconsistent with
Logic. No, Perspicuity of Proof, is, as as Longinus observes, one part of the
Sublime. Indeed Rhetoric is nothing but Reason well dressed, and Arguments put
into Order. To affirm, That Sense will not agree with proper and moving
Expressions, is a strange Conclusion. It Is as much as to say, that a good Suit
of Clothes is a very naughty thing: For let it sit never so easy, yet if it
happens to look handsomely, 'twill be sure to weaken a Man's Body, and take away
the use of his Limbs. But I must follow him.

Ben Johnson, I took notice, never scrupled to confess, View, p. 159. 164.
that 'twas the Office of a Comic Poet to imitate Justice, and instruct to
Life. And Mr. Dryden at last came up to the same Opinion. This Rule the
Surveyor was sensible agreed very ill with the English Stage. And thus finding
himself streighten'd moves for new Liberty, and tho he stands by himself, had
much rather bend the Rule, then reform the Practice. Survey. p. 241.
If you will believe him, this sort of Discipline is impracticable: For the
Licentiousness of Men of Fortune, unless it be such as brings their
Understandings into question, must never be censured or exposed in Comedy. That
is, if a Libertine ben't a Fool, he may be as Lewd and Profane as he pleases,
and yet have fair Quarter, and make a good Hand on it. Yes; for, as the Surveyor
continues, Surv. p. 242.
how immoral and offensive this Misbehaviour may be to sober People, the Man
must escape the Censure of Comedy, because he cannot be tried in her way. That Is
hard! Why, then, if she must make Malefactors, and will not punish them, let her
Court be put down. If Sense is a Protection to Debauchery, and the most
offensive Immoralities must not be touched; If Vice must appear only for Favor
and Forage, for Parade and Diversion; If all this Liberty is presumed on by the
the Laws of Comedy, and the Privilege of the Poem? Then, I say, the very
Definition condemns it. It Is a Nuisance in its Nature, and Poison in its
Constitution.

I urged there was no arguing from some View, p. 149.
Instances of Favor to Vicious Young People in Plautus and Terence; That the
Consequence would not hold from Rome to London, because those Pagan Poets had a
greater Compass of Liberty in their Religion. To this his Answer, Surv. p. 242.
to make it short, is, that these Poets, especially Terence, were too great
Masters of their own Art to take an improper Liberty, only because 'twas not
dangerous. Who told him, it was an improper Liberty? The Measures of Practice
are formed upon Rules of Notion, and Schemes of Belief: Now the Directions for
Life and Manners, are strangely different in the Divisions of Heathenism and
Christianity; And therefore those Liberties might be proper enough in the
first, which are intolerable in the latter. But this Objection will be rallied
afterward, and therefore I shall now pursue it no farther. But the Surveyor
has a small Reserve: The Laws of Rome, says he, Surv. p. 24^, 243.
were very severe, and required Regularity of Life; The Magistrates likewise,
and Censors of Manners, would never have suffered Examples of such ill
Consequence to have been produced openly. From whence he would have it follow,
that if Plautus and Terence had suspected the Indulgences abovementioned, had
tended any ways to the Debauching of their Youth, they durst not have ventured
them into public View.

To this I answer in a Word; That the Roman Magistrates notwithstanding the
severity of their Government, suffered the Excesses of the Pantomines, and
therefore might well allow of much lesser degrees of Liberty in their Comic
Poets: I say, they suffered the Pantomimes, against whom the Surveyor Declaims
so heartily, Surv. p. 24, 28, and alib.
and charges so very high with Scandal and Brutality. And if these gross
Entertainments would go down, why should they take check at the more
inoffensive sallies of Gallantry? As the Case stood, it is no wonder if a lucky
Libertine should sometimes pass Muster.

But Plautus and Terence Coppied faithfully from Nature and depicted Humane
Life in its true and just proportion: Let them depict what Survey. p. 243.
they please, they did not Study the worst Likeness; tho their Pencil was
sometimes bold, they shaded many Blemishes, and aimed at the fairest
Resemblance.

The Surveyor rises in his Resolution; and and sticks not to affirm, that if
the Images, answer Life, the foulness of them can never be a Fault. Surv. p.
244.
So far from that, the Crime lies quite on the other Side. For to be displeased
with a true Representation though never so hideous, is no better than to quarrel
with Providence whose Creature Mankind is; Say you so, does providence make
Monsters in Vice, as well as in Figure? Cannot a scandalous Play be disliked
without arraigning of Providence? I thought Wickedness had not been the Work of
Creation, but Misbehaviour; And that God had made the Man, but not the Sinner.
What wretched shifts these Men are put to, to make Lewdness passable!

However, the Surveyor is resolved not to quit his Hold: He will have it that
when Nature is not wronged these Liberties of making Vice successful, and what
you please besides, are an unalienable Right: It seems they are entayl'd upon
the Poets, and descend by course of Law, from the Roman to the English Stage:
Yes, Ibid.
says the Surveyor they have a Right to all the Privileges of their
Predecessors. That is a Christian has a clear Title to imitate all the
wickedness his Heathen Predecessors have practiced before him.

In the course of the Argument, I preferred the precepts of Horace, View, p. 149.
to the Example of Plautus and Terence, and cited him for the contrary opinion.
How can that be replies the Surveyor, Surv. p. 244.
since Horace draws Youth with the same Features and Complexion that those
Comic Poets had done before? And in proof of his Assertion, he produces the
Picture.

Cereus in Vitium flecti Monitoribus asper, etc. This Description, continues
he, is not a bare Character, of the Humors of young People, Surv. p. 245.
but a Rule to draw them by. I agree with him: But then, as they have a Bias
to the Character, they ought to have the Consequences too: The Poet should make
them smart for the Prodigality of their Humor, for their Ungovernable Heats,
and the Folly of their Appetites. And that this was Horace's Opinion appears
from the rest of his Advice (...)
.

But the Surveyor cannot find the Obscenities of Plautus condemned by Horace;
Surv. p. 246.
And yet he is lucky enough to cite the place, so that it might have been his
own Discovery as well as mine.

At nostri proavi Plautinos and numeros, and
Landavere sales; nimium patienter utrumque,
(Nedicam stulte) mirati Quia versus Plauti non satis numerose scripti, and
saepe obscaeni sunt.
si modo ego, and vos
Scimus Inurbanum, Minell. in Lo.
I^civile and scurrile dictum. Id.
lepido seponere dicto,
Legitimumque sonum digitis callemus, and art.
Here the Surveyor was pretty near Horace's meaning, for he grants Plautus's
Raillery was Censured because his Jests were Clownish: And why were they
Clownish? Because they were too often foul, and smutty; They were carried too
far, and pushed to Indecency. Il a des plaisanteries souvent outrees* Dacier in
L^c. Horat. de Art. Poet. View, p. 23.
And that Horace was not for this Broad Liberty, appears farther from his
Disswasive: Aut immunda crepent, ignominiosaque dicta,
Offenduntur enim, quibus est Equus, and pater, and res.


But these Verses belong to the Satyrae, and therefore it is Legerdemain to
apply them to the Drama. Surv. p. 47, 49.
Not at all: It Is plain, Horace condemns Obscenity, and that the Roman Gentry
had no Relish for Smutty Entertainments. And if they would not allow it in
their Rustic Satyrae, where there was some pretense of Character to cover it;
'Twould have gone down much worse, in the more Polite Diversions of Comedy.

I gave a short Character from Horace of the serviceableness of the Ancient
Poets, View, p. 149.
to Government and Private Life, and that by Consequence they aimed more at
Improvement then Pleasure. This, the Surveyor answers, was but a Compliment to
Poetry in general, Surv. p. 249.
and that Comedy was not invented in the time of Orpheus. Granting all that; If
the Compliment was to Poetry in general, one would think it should reach to all
the parts of it. And tho Orpheus might live before Comedy, Horace was long
enough after it. And this is he who informs us, that the Usefulness of the
Ancient Poets, and the Sobriety of their Conduct, gained them their Reputation.

Sic honor and nomen, divinis vatibus, De Art. Poet.
atque
Carminibus venit.
As much as to say, that the Reward was fastened to the Merit: And that if
later Poets would purchase their Fame, they must follow their Pattern.

From the Directions of Horace to the Chorus, I inferred, that this Poet would
allow no Countenance or good Fortune to an immoral Character. And foreseeing it
might be replied, that Tragedy was only concerned, I endeavored to remove the
Objection. To this the Surveyor opposes the Authority of Horace, as if the
Chorus was put down with Old Comedy. For, Lex est accepta Chorusque De Art.
Poet.

Tupiter obticuit sublata jure nocendi.


The Case was thus; Lil. Gyrald.
The Old Comedy in the Chorus had taken too much Liberty with the Government,
De Poet. Hist.
and outrag'd Persons of Condition by Name. Dial. 6. p. 765, 766.
Upon this Alcibiades had Eupolis thrown overboard for his Baptae, and got a
Bill passed, That the Stage should at their Peril name no Body in their Satyr.

This is the Law which Horace refers to; And therefore his Testimony proves no
more, than that the Liberty of the Chorus was silenced, which Restraint was
consistent enough with the Use of it.

And to prove the Chorus did not expire with Old Comedy, View, p. 150.
I produced for Evidence Aristophanes's, Plutus. But against this Instance the
Surveyor starts two objections, for he will neither admit the Plutus for New
Comedy; Surv. p. 153.
nor so much as allow it as Chorus. I must try if I can persuade him out of his
Rigor. In the

First place then, why must not the Plutus pass for New Comedy? It Is plainly not
Old Comedy. Right, the Surveyor grants as much; The deviations, Surv. p. 254,
258.
says he, in it from the former practice, make it lead up the Van of the Middle
Comedy. Now the difference between Middle and New Comedy seemed so
insignificant to the learned Turnebus, Duplex est apud Graecos Comaedia Antiqua
and Nova. Turneb in Lib. 10. Instit. Quintil. cap. 1. Surv. p. 259.
that he branches the Greek Comedy into no more than two Divisions, Old and
New. To which I may add, that the Scholiast upon Aristophanes calls the Plutus,
a sort of New Comedy. Devit. and Script. Aristoph. Ed. Amstel.

His next objection is that the Plutus has no true Chorus: Surv. p. 253.
Just now it had none at all: But I find he flags in his Prosecution. But why
is it no true Chorus? Aristophanes who wrote the Play, I suppose liked it well
enough, and calls it a Chorus; and it is somewhat hard his word cannot be taken;
If he did not make it as he should do, he must answer for it not I. Scalig.
Poet.
Dacier likewise affirms the Chorus was continued in the Middle Comedy. Lib. 1.
cap. 7.
Nay the Surveyor's Scaliger confesses the Chorus was taken out; and if so, one
would think it was in before. But the Chorus seems to be in a Condition to defend
it self, and to have all reasonable Requisites, (...).
and Capacities; For it consists of a Plurality of Persons, Acts in the
Dialogue, and offers to sing in the Parabases. Chor. in Plut. Act. 5. sc. 3.


But after all, the Surveyor will not allow it to be a legitimate Chorus: No! Not
when Aristophanes was the Father on it, and owns the Issue! Well, I cannot
produce the Mother, and therefore if one Side of the Genealogy will not satisfy,
I must leave him. But I Am to blame for talking of these matters, for it seems I
read no more of the Plutus than the List of the Persons of the Drama; Surv. p.
262.
why then, I had a notable guess with me, for I have abstracted the Dialogue
for some Pages together, View, p. 39.
as the Reader may perceive if he pleases: I think a little more Modesty would
do this Author no harm.

My Inference from Aristotle (as oblique as it is) for the Continuance of the
Chorus, Survey. p. 263.
I shall venture with his Exceptions, only observing that where he says the
Magistrates giving the Chorus, P. 265.
means nothing but paying the Actors: He should have said the Actors in the
Chorus; for so Aristotle is interpreted by Petitus and Goulston. And whereas he
affirms it is certain, Menander had no Chorus; p. 267.
He should have given us something better than his bare Word for it, considering
Menander is lost, and there is no appealing to the Author. If he argues, that
Menander had no Chorus because his Imitator Terence has none, the Consequence
is not good. For tho a Chorus is not to be found in the Remains of Plautus and
Terence, yet Dacier is positive, that the Romans made use of it in Comedy,
Remarques sur L' Art Poetique D' Horace Tom. 10. p. 298.
and mentions the Fabulae Attellanae for an Instance. He cannot deny but that
Moliere has revived the Chorus in Comedy: But then he pretends the Poet was in
his second Infancy, and used this Expedient only as Crutches to support the
Infirmity of his Age. Survey. Ibid. and p. 268.
But this Exception goes upon a Mistake, both in the Reason, and the History.
First, Moliere was no such Decrepit Person, for he Acted in his Malade
Imaginaire not many Hours before his Death: And, as I remember, the Writer of
his Life reports him not to have outlived his Four and fiftieth year. And then,
Secondly, That the Chorus is no sign of a languid, declining Muse is clear from
Quintilian, Instit. Or. Lib. 10. cap. 1.
who prefers the Spirit, Vigor, and Elocution of the Old Comedy to that of the
New. Now, the Chorus the Surveyor grants had always a part in the Old Comedy.

He would gladly know to what end I would have a Chorus in the English Comedy:
Survey. p. 268.
To this I can only answer, That I am surpised at his Question, having given
him no manner of occasion for it.

He goes on in his Defense of the Modern Comedy, and alleges, that the success
of Libertines is not given to the Licentiousness, P. 271.
but to the Wit and Sense, etc. which are predominant in the Character. To this
I answer,

First, That to make Lewdness Fortunate and Fashionable, is a dangerous
Representation: For it takes off the Restraints of Shame, gives a Varnish to
the Vice, and heightens the Temptation.

Secondly, Treating loose Characters with Sense and Respect, provokes to
Imitation, and makes the Infection catching. Many People are more inclinable to
talk Wittily, than to act Wisely. Now the Wit is generally not to be come at
without the Libertinism; for the Matter is so contrived, that the Sugar and the
Ratsbane must go together. The Wit, I say, lies generally in Luscious
Indecencies, and Outrages of Virtue and Religion: It Is brisk only because it is
bold, and rather spits than sparkles: Its Spirits are but Lees a little
alembick'd, and like some Wood it shines only in its Rotteness.

Thirdly, P. 272.
As to his Forgers and Pick-pockets he talks of, his Conveyance, I take it, is
not very clean. If he must make use of these Gentlemen, let his Pickpocket be
seated on the Bench, let him appear with Figure and Equipage, swagger in the
Court, ridicule the Judges, and banter the Laws; and always have a Packed Jury
to bring him Honorably off. Let but this be done, and then we need not
question but the Mystery of Cutting a Purse would soon drop its ill Character,
improve into a Creditable Profession; and it may be, as much Studied as Coke
upon Littleton.

I urged in the View, etc. That Horace having expressly mentioned the Progress
of Comedy, View, p. 151.
advised the Poet to form his Work upon the Precepts of Socrates and Plato, and
the Models of Moral Philosophy; and from hence I inferred, that by Horace's Rule
the Poet was obliged to Sobriety of Conduct, etc.

To this the Surveyor replies, That the List of Qualifications mentioned by
Horace, seem prepared only for Tragic and Epick Poetry. Survey, p. 275.
His Reason is, because the Business seems too public, and too much raised for
Comedy. But under favor, there is no need of Buskins: For the Description
descends to private Affairs, to the Regards of Blood, and the Laws of
Friendship: Now these Duties, in the Judgment of Quintilian, were taught no
where better than in the Comedies of Menander; Institut. Lib. 10. cap. 1.
omnibus r^bus, personis, affectibus, accommodatus.
where all the Offices of Life were run through, and every Relation adjusted.
To this I may add the Authority of the Learned Dacier, who understands these
Instructions of Horace, to relate to Comedy. (Tom. 10. p. 57.)

The Surveyor makes another little stand, and fences with the Distinction
between Moral, and Poetical Manners; Survey. p. 277.
affirming, that Horace is to be understood of Manners only in the latter
Sense. But by this Gentleman's favor, it is pretty plain, that Horace must mean
both; To what purpose else should he recommend the Rules, and Writings of
Plato, and Socrates? These great Men gave no Instructions about Poetry, unless
to stand clear on it; Nor treated Manners in any other signification than that
of Philosophy.

The Surveyor, who is extremely eager to find Faults, and apt to make them,
charges my Account of Poetical Manners as deficient. P. 278.
It may be so: However, 'twas sufficient for Purpose and Occasion. And besides,
this place gave him notice of another, where there is a Description much as
full, tho not so tedious as his own.

I complained, View, p. 218, 219.
as I had great reason, That the Stage made Women, single Women, and Women of
Quality talk Smuttily: Here the Surveyor cries, I run upon the wrong Scent,
argue too fast from the Premises, and because Modesty is the Character of
Women, misinfer, Surv. p. 286, 287.
that no Woman must be shown without it. Yes, I stand by the Conclusion, That
no Woman ought to be shown without Modesty, unless she appears for Censure and
Infamy, or, as Mr. Rymer speaks, to be kicked in Comedy. See Defense, p. 10,
11, 16, etc.
And even then, there ought to be a Regard to the Audience; and tho the
Character is foul, the Language should be clean.

But to bring single Women, and Quality fo that Sex, under these Disorders, is
still more unaccountable. It Is a direct crossing upon Nature and Custom, and a
breach of Manners, both Ceremonious and Poetic. For, do Virgins and Bawds.
Discourse in the same Dialect? Is there no difference between Ladies and little
Prostitutes? Or, Is Rampancy and Lewdness the Character of Breeding? If not,
why is Nature thus disguised, and Quality mismark'd, and all to the
Disadvantage of Sobriety? But the Surveyor objects, That tho Courage is the
Characteristick of the other Sex, Survey. p. ^8^.
yet it is neither Solecism nor general Affront, to represent a Man a Coward. To
this I answer,

First, That Courage is not reckoned a Quality so essential to a Man, as
Modesty to a Woman; The Expectation of it is not so general, nor the Failure so
monstrous; and therefore his Instance is not parallel.

Secondly, There are some Circumstances and Conditions of Life, which tie this
Qualification faster, and as it were incorporate it to the Sex* and that is
Breeding, Quality, etc. And to argue upon his own similitude; Tho to represent
Men sometimes as Cowards, may be no Solecism, yet to represent Hercules or
Hector, such, would be great Impropriety. Now, Decency of Language is as much
the Character of Gentlewomen, as Bravery is of Heroes; so that to give a Lady
the nauseous Liberties of a Procuress, degrades her in her Quality, and is both
affronting and improper.

Thirdly, This Practice, as I have proved it, being frequent, and without
Censure upon our Stage, is still more unpardonable.

Fourthly, I observed, that this Freedom was a Breach of good Behavior to the
Audience, of which he is pleased not to take any notice.

The Surveyor urges farther, That the Vices of particular Women, Survey, p. 290.
are no Affront to the Sex in general; But this Excuse, were it true, without
Limitation, would not serve his Turn. For I have proved, That the English Stage
have given the Women a Coarse Character in general, View, p. 171, 172, 173.
and played their Satyr upon the whole Sex.

But before I proceed, I must not forget how the Surveyor takes occasion to
tell us, That in Plays the Characters are neither Universal nor general:
Survey. p. 288.
His first Reason is, because Marks so comprehensive are the Impressions and
Signatures of Nature, which are not to be corrected or improved by us. Now one
would have thought the Characters would have been the better for answering the
truest proportion; and coming up to the Standard. This appears to have been
Horace's Opinion, who recommends it as a Rule to his Stage Poet.

Respicere exemplar vitae morumque jubebo De Art. Poet.

Doctum imitatorem, and ver as hinc ducere voces.
That is, as Dacier interprets him, Nature is the right Plan for Life and
Manners. And therefore a good Poet, who has a mind to bring a Covetous, or
Ambitious Person upon the Stage, will choose to form the Image more upon Idea,
than Example; and Paint him rather from general Notion, than particular Life,
Et ver as hinc ducere voces.

For this is consulting the Original, and the way to give Truth, and Strength
to the Resemblance. Whereas to draw from Particulars in the World, is, as Plato
speaks, no more than a Second-Hand Likeness, and but Copying at the best. In
Individuals a Quality is often cramped and disguised by other Passions, and
does not strike out to its full extent: But an Idea considers the progress of
Inclination, makes way for Fancy and Freedom, and gives a Character its just
Compass and Distinction. And therefore those Images which are fit for Sight,
should be taken from thence.

The Surveyor objects in the next place, That such comprehensive Marks give us
no Idea of the Person Uncharacterized, Ibid.
but what is common to the rest of the Species, and don't sufficiently
distinguish him. But the reason of this Objection stands upon nice Ground, and
will be apt to run off into unwarrantable Practice: To keep the Character
within the Crowd, is the most inoffensive Method. Indeed the Distinction ought
not to turn upon Persons, but Things, The Quality should be marked, but not the
Man; and the Vice exposed, without pointing at the Vicious.

For to descend to Particulars, and fall to Characterizing, is no better than
Libel, and Personal Abuse. In short, the Poet should endeavor to abstract the
Fault from the Subject, to hover in Generals, and fly at the whole Covey: For
if he once comes to single out his Quarry, he discovers himself a Bird of Prey.

His saying the Impresses, and Signatures of Nature, are not to be corrected or
improved, and therefore not to be meddled with, is a great mistake. For if
these Impresses and Signatures, are any better than Iargon, he must mean the
good and bad Qualities incident to Humane Nature. Now take them either way, and
his Proposition is not true. For, First, People's Miscarriages are by no means
inevitable. The Blemishes in Conduct, and Character, are the Consequences of
Choice. The Faults of Nature in this sense, are none of her Necessities, and
therefore very capable of Correction. And then, as for the Virtues, and noble
Qualities, if they are sometimes heightened above Practice, where is the harm
on^t? Example does not reach up to the utmost extent of Power. And therefore if
Nature was shown to the best Advantage, and stretched to the length of her
Capacity, the Pattern might be serviceable, and awaken to Industry, and
Imitation.

We are now coming to the Parallel of the Expressions, and here the Surveyor
gives in a Collection of Smut and Profaneness, in which he pretends the Poets
of Greece and Rome, are more Licentious than ours. He acquaints us besides,
according to his Customary Flourishes, that he has some hundreds of Instances
in Reserve. And yet after all, he desires the Reader to take notice, Survey, p.
292.
that he does not charge these Passages as Faults, or Immoralities upon the
Ancients, etc. How careful he is not to fall foul on Debauchery? He seems
afraid left the Reader should mistake him for a Person that lay under some
faint Prepossessions of Modesty. Yes: The Pedantry of Virtue, and the Pretenses
to Religion, are uncreditable Qualities, and a Man must clear his Reputation of
them as well as he can! He charges the Licentiousness of the Ancients with
Immorality! By no means! That would be sour and Cynical indeed! He understands
himself better than to range Smut, and Profaneness, under Immorality! Such a
Censure would recoyl upon himself. If these Practices are Faults, then his
whole Book is little better than a Defense of Lewdness, and a Plea for
Irreligion. The truth of this Imputation, tho a severe one, is very evident:
For having brought several gross Instances of Indecency out of Plautus he
justifies the Imitation of them; And roundly affirms, That since Ancient, and
Modern Poets, ought to be governed by the same Laws, it is but reason, that one
as well as 'tother, should be allowed the benefit of them: Survey. p. 293.
That is, the benefit of Smut and Lewdness. Thus the English Dramatists are
brought off without the least Blemish or Blot in their Scutcheon. But here is
more Comfort for them behind: For he is pleased to affirm, P. 367.
That if the Passages of the Ancient Poets were compared with those produced by
me out of the Moderns, the comparative Rudeness, and Profaneness of the latter
would vanish. And yet he takes particular care to inform the Reader, That he
does not charge the Ancients with any Faults, or Immoralities upon this score:
Adding withal, That the Moderns ought to have the Benefit of the same Liberty.
From whence it is plain to a Demonstration, That this Author has given the Stage
a greater Latitude, and prompted them to an Improvement in Distraction. They
may, it seems, lard their Plays thicker with Obscenities, discharge their Oaths
faster, and double their Blasphemies. Well! I perceive Wickedness would have a
glorious time on it under this Surveyor!

But is he sure after all, that the Ancient and Modern Poets, as Poets, are to
be governed by the same Laws. Is there no difference between the Doctrines of
Heathenism and Christianity? Are the Objects of Worship the same in both? And
are Knowledge and Ignorance to be treated with the same Allowance? I thought
the Modern Poets, as well as other People, had been under the Jurisdiction of
God Almighty, and tied up to the Laws of the Gospel. But it seems the Stage is
all Franchises, and Privileged Ground: The Muses have a particular Exemption,
and the Christian is dispensed with by the Poet. This is the Surveyor's
Reasoning. However, to give him his due, he has formerly been not altogether of
this Opinion. For elsewhere he tells us, That the main business of a Chorus is
cut off by our Religion, Survey. p. 268, 269.
which is the reason we have no Hymns nor Anthems sung upon the Stage, but make
use of Smutty Songs in stead of them. I find then by his own Confession, that
the change of Religion has some Influence upon the Stage: This was his former
Judgment, but he improves by Writing, and his last Will must stand.

The Surveyor in his Parallel, blackens the Ancients most unmercifully, and
swells their Charge beyond all Truth and Proportion. This is done to make the
Moderns look the more tolerable, and keep them the better in Countenance. But a
little Pains will serve to wipe off most of the Spots, and restore them to
their Complexion. And here I cannot help observing, That let the Ancients be as
faulty as may be, the Surveyor should by no means pretend to discover it: For
he has already fully acquitted the Greek and Roman Dramatists of all
Imputations of Indecency, and roundly pronounced, That tho the Mimi were
scandalously Lewd, Survey. p. 23, 24.
the Drama was not at all. But to return:

Before he draws out upon the Old Poets, he endeavors to defend his Ophelia.
And here he tells us a long Story, how warrantable her Love was, Survey. p.
293, 294
how artfully manured, and strongly forced up; And by his Description, one
would think he was raising a Muskmelon. But then, as ill Luck, and the Poet
would have it, her Humble Servant Hamlet killing her Father by mistake, and
counterfeiting Madness, ruined all. This Misfortune must needs make horrible
Convulsions in a Mind so tender, and, as the Surveyor Compliments the Ladies,
in a Sex so weak. Well: Her Father was killed, etc. But, what then? Must she
needs Lament in Smut, and pay her Respects in Distraction? Are Luscious
Expressions the Natural Effect of Deep Sorrow, and cannot she appear Tender, P.
294
without being Rotten?

However, P. 296.
to do the Surveyor right, he has produced the Exceptionable Lines, for 'twas
the Song which I complained of. And this, if you will believe him, is so innocent,
that there is no fear of offending the Modesty of the most Chaste Ear. P. 295.
I Am sorry he seems to have lost the very Notion of Deceny. He Is more to blame
for transcribing, then Ophelia was for Singing this Ditty, because he wants her
Madness for his Excuse. Now it is but an untoward Business, when a Man is the
worse for being in his Wits.

But now the Surveyor is come to his Dissection of the Old Poets: And here his
Reading upon the Body is admirable; and to magnify his Skill, he spies out
more Diseases then e're the Patient died of. He often arraigns an Innocent
Expression, and when it is not so, his Paraphrase is much grosser than the Text.
For it is generally his way when he lights upon a sore place, to make it much
worse for the Dressing. However, he seems to have gotten a very agreeable
Subject: For his Ink flows amain, and his Invention grows very copious: He
seems to Swim at his Ease, and his Fancy plays down the Stream, and tumbles in
the Mud, with great Satisfaction.

He begins with Sophocles's Antigone: This Lady he pretends makes some
Intemperate Discoveries, and does not keep up to the Decencies of Sex, and
Condition. To understand something of the Fable, this Antigone was by King
Creon her Uncle, sentenced to be shut up in a Cave, and starved to death, only
for burying her Brother Polynices contrary to the King's Order: She was
likewise contracted to his Son Haemon. Now, tho she had stood firm against the
Menaces of Creon, and shown her self Brave and good Natured to an extraordinary
pitch; yet when she comes to be led to Execution, her Fortitude gives way a
little to the Tenderness of her Sex; she breaks out into some natural Starts of
Concern, and according to the Custom of that Age, and the Eastern Countries,
Judge. 11. v. 37.
laments her dying young and single. But she makes a shift to govern her
Language, and keeps her Passion from boiling over. I shall transcribe his most
serviceable Line, in which she Complains of the Disappointment of her Fortune,
and that she must go off.

(...)
(...)
That is, that she must die single, and be crossed in her Love with Haemon:
Upon whom, Survey, p. 300.
tho the Surveyor overlooked it, it is plain she had settled her Affection. For
when Creon threatened to break the Contract, she discovers her Regards to Haemon
in a very intelligible, tho decent Expression.

(...). His next Instance is Electra, who goes a little upon the Complaint of
Antigone.

-- (...) Survey. p. 301.

(...)
(...)
This Lady, we must understand, had seen her Father Murdered, by her Mother
and Aegisthus; She was likewise ill treated in the Family, and had no Body to
take care of her Interest, and make good the Expectations of her Birth: She had
none but her Brother Orestes to depend on, and his long absence made her afraid
she was forgotten. In short, she was impatient for his return, Sophoc. ^lect.
Act. 2. and alib.
and seems rather to wish for Protection and Revenge, than a Settlement. And
were it otherwise, the Expression is perfectly inoffensive. And thus Sophocles
stands disengaged without difficulty; And had the English Stage been thus
reserved, they had saved me the trouble of a whole Chapter.

As for Aeschylus the Surveyor does not so much as offer at him; so that
there is Two of the Three Greek Tragedians secured. But

Euripides is now set to the Bar, and terribly handled for giving this Line to
Polyxena when she was going to be sacrificed. Survey. p. 301.


-- (...)
(...).
That is, she was going to die unmarried, and without being disposed of
according to the Privilege of her Condition. This Complaint is in the
Surveyor's Aggravation very unreasonable. He grows very Tragical upon the
occasion, taxes the Princess with Incontinence, Survey. p. 302.
meanness of Spirit, and an inte^^^rate desire of engaging with the Conqueror
of her Country, tho at the disadvantage of being his Slave. But this Lady is
wronged by the Surveyor, the Case is misreported, and, as it sometimes happens,
the Indictment is set forth with a great deal more noise than Law. Let the Lady
speak for her self. Now in this very Scene, Eurip. Hec. Act. 2.
she laments the Misfortunes of her Family; and lets us understand, that her
Birth gave her just Pretenses to be disposed of to a Monarch: But now the Ruin
of her Country had changed the Prospect, and made Marriage her Aversion: She
could now expect nothing but that some little Slave should be forced upon her.

(...)
(...).
And therefore she goes boldly to the Altar, Eurip. p. 13, 14.
congratulates her Murder, Ed. Cantab.
and is pleased with the Rescue of Death: She is glad not to survive her
Greatness any longer; and says, Life is over-purchas'd upon the Terms of
Ignominy. In a word, she is so far from deserving the Surveyor's Censure, that
when she comes to the Block, she makes Decency her last Care, and expires in
the Character of her Condition.

(...). Ibid. p. 20.
The Surveyor is now for persecuting her Sister Cassandra, and one would almost
think, that he had, like Juno, a spite to the whole Family.

This Lady he blames for being too forward in discovering her Satisfaction at
the Surv. p. 305, 6, 7.
News of her Match with Agamemnon; but,

First, Here is not so much as the least Exceptionable Expression; but the
Language is inoffensive to the most exact Niceness: And therefore he has
blackn'd the Page with Greek to no purpose.

Secondly, Cassandra's forwardness to comply proceeded purely from her Revenge.
Being in a Prophetic Fit, she foresaw this Match would prove fatal to
Agamemnon and his whole Family. And tho she knew her self was shortly to be
Murdered, yet the prospect of revenging her Country, and destroying her
greatest Enemies, made her run into Transport, and desire her Mother to
Congratulate her Happiness.

(...) Troad. p. 145.

(...).
And after having enlarged upon the Misfortunes of the Greeks, and shown how
gloriously the Trojans died in the Defense of their Country, she persuades
Hecuba not to afflict her self; for now, says she, I am going to make the
General a full Return, and to finish his Ruin.

-- (...) Ibid. 146.

(...).
But Cassandra, Survey p. 306. 308.
in the Surveyor's Opinion, should not have been so forward to rush upon her
own Dishonor. To clear this, we must understand, that Cassandra was under
extraordinary Circumstances: she was possessed both by Apollo, and a very
Governing Passion besides: Now it is no wonder if the Transports of Prophecy and
Revenge, should make her a little overlook other Considerations. But this
Reason apart, it does not appear that Cassandra was forced upon any
Dishonorable Engagement; Troad. p. 143.
For the Favor of a Prince was not, as Talthybius tells her Mother,
unreputable at that time of day. Polygamy was then the Practice of several
Countries, and particularly the Custom of her own, as appears from the
Discourse between Hermione, and Andromache Androm. p. 301, 302.
.

As for old Hecuba, I confess Euripedes has given her a Luscious Expression to
make her Interest with Agamemnon. But then it does not come up to the pitch of
Scandal of many Passages of the English Stage: It Is mere Bashfulness to some of
their Songs, and Courtship: And thus out of Nineteen Plays in Euripides, the
Surveyor has made a shift to furnish one passage out of Order. But instead of
producing One out of Nineteen, I could return him Nineteen out of One, from the
Moderns, were it convenient.

But as the Surveyor reports the Case, Euripides has somewhat farther to answer
for. ^Tis true his Tenderness is such that he refuses to give in particulars;
but the Reader is referred in general to the exceptionable Plays. Well: Dolus
latet in Generalibus is a true saying. The Surveyor has hid himself in a Folio,
and now is safe enough: Virg. Aeneid. 8.
He loves like Caeus to make a Smother in his Cave, to conceal his foul Play.
Indeed I think the Smoke is his best Defense, and the finding him out the
hardest part of the Enterprise. To come up with him.

His Instance in Hermione and Andromache, Surv. p. 312. Androm. p. 301, 302,
303.
is altogether short. They chide, it is true, a little too warmly for their
Quality, if we Breed them by our own Times; but nothing foul or disorderly
passes between them: And as for Creusa, his quarrel with her is nothing but
ill will: For she does not in the least run her self a ground in her Story,
Ion. p. 317, 333, 334. P. 351.
but relates her Misfortune with great reservedness. Neither does her Son Ion
put any uncivil Question to her. His Modesty is very defensible, if not his
Manners: Though even in this latter respect the young People upon the Stage are
now more free with their Parents than this comes to. And lastly, Electra is
innocent of the Accusation he brings against her. It Is true, she encourages
Orestes to kill his Mother, but then she stands clear of Indecency, and says
nothing in that respect, misbecoming her Character: So far from that, that she
will not so much as mention the Debaucheries of Aegystus; no not when she was
recounting his other Villainies, and triumphing in his being Dispatched. She
runs over his guilt in Murder and Injustice, but when she came to his
Lewdness, she cuts off her Story, and declares it, no fit Subject for a single
Lady.

(...) Electr. p. 427, 428.

(...).
The Greeks being now dismissed, Seneca comes on for another Hearing. Surv. p.
314.
And Phaedra in Hippolitus is pitched upon for a Character of Misbehaviour: But
the Surveyor knows I excepted against her Management my self; View, p. 25.
And censured the freedom of her Discovery, only with this abatement, that her
Language was under Discipline: And that the latter part of my assertion was no
less true than the former, will easily be understood by any one that reads the
Poet in himself, and not in the Surveyor's Paraphrase. But it seems the Nurse
runs over in her Expression, and does not suit her Language to her Advice;
Survey. p. 317.
And here the force of the Charge lies all in one Word, (for the rest is only
for show;) In an answer to which, we may observe that Words don't always keep
close to their first Signification; but grow sometimes the worse for the
wearing: And that the Old Romans had an Idea different from the Surveyor's, in
the Expression under debate, appears sufficiently from St. Hieroms Epistles,
who uses it without scruple.

I observed that we had no Courting in Seneca, Epist. advers. Helvid. and alib.
except in the Hercules Furens, View, p. 25.
where the Tyrant Lycus addresses Megara very briefly, and in modest remote
Language. This the Surveyor does not deny; but then he pretends to give an
Instance of Ly^us's Misbehaviour to Amphitrio, I shall transcribe his Quotation
for the Reader.

Iovi dedisti conjugem regi dabis.
Et te Magistro non novum hoc discet Nurus, Herc. Fur.

Etiam viro probante meliorem sequi;
Sin copulari pertinax taedis negat,
Vel ex coact a nobilem partum feram.
Now am I at a loss to what purpose these fine Verses were cited. It must be
for the Learning in the Language. Yes: He may possibly, like some Patients,
fancy the Physic Works much the better, for the Latin in the Bill.

But he goes on with wonderful Courage, as if he was resolved to swagger the
Reader out of some part of his Senses: If these Allowances, says he, may be
made, (meaning for the last Citation) I Will engage to prove, Surv. p. 319.
there never was an immodest thing said upon the English Stage. Certainly this
Author has a Taste peculiar to himself! One would think he should be better Read
in Smut, by his Talent in Writing it. I Am afraid this Ignorance is all
affected: And that he has gotten the trick of shrinking up his Understanding,
as they say some Beggars do their Arms upon occasion. He tells me, Survey, p.
319.
I forgot the shameful solicitations which Phraedra used to corrupt Hippolytus.
He knows I took notice of Phraedra's Irregular Freedoms, but then, tho her
Solicitations are shameful, Ibid.
they are not Smutty. He would persuade the Reader, that Seneca's Agamemnon is
stocked with Curiosities of this kind. And yet there is but one Line which
looks the least that way: and that is Clytemnestra's Reproach to Aegystus, in
which she tells him, That his Lewdness was the only Proof of his Manhood.

Quem venere tantum scimus illicita virum. Agam. Act. 2.
Now this Rebuke is so comparatively Civil, that were it in some of our Plays,
the Modesty of it would almost put it out of Countenance, and kill the
Expression.

The Surveyor has hitherto found but small Returns from his Enquiry. He has
ranged over a great deal of Ground, and Quartered the Fields of Greece and
Italy. But all this Questing has sprung but very little Game. However, he seems
extremely busy, and by his motion would make you believe every Butterfly was
worth the setting. Whoever, says he, consults the Passages amiss in Sophocles
or Euripides, Survery, p. 313, 319.
or Censures with the Allowances made to Seneca, will find the most
exceptionable Passages in our Poets, whether Comic or Tragic, very excusable
upon a fair Construction.

The Moderns compared with the Greek Tragedians and Seneca, in Point of
Decency, and Sobriety of Language! He may almost as well compare Aristophanes
with Terenco, and the Sixth Aeneid of Virgil, with the Sixth Satyr of Iuvenal.
The Moderns! who not only glance, but dwell upon an ill Subject, bandy it
between the two Sexes, and keep it up to show their Skill in the Exercise. Yes:
They love to flourish upon Lewdness, to refresh it with Repetition; and beat it
out into Length and Circumstances. Sometimes to distinguish a foul Thought,
they deliver it in Scripture Phrase, and set it in Gold to make it sparkle the
better. In short, they omit nothing to explain the Mystery, and cultivate the
Interest of Debauchery: Nothing that may fortify the Poison, and make it more
Poinant and Palatable. To lay their Disorders before the Reader, were the Sight
proper, would swell into a Book, and be a tedious Undertaking. 'Twould be
Infamy of Bulk, and Voluminous Distraction; not to be scanned by the Line, but
weighed by the Pound. Such Plays are much more fit for the Solemnities of Flora
and Ceres, than the Entertainments of those who are Baptized. It Is almost pity
they have not a set of Pantomimes to do justice to the Subject, and Dance up to
the Spirit of the Dialogue.

The Surveyor pleads for a Distinction between the private Sentiments of the
Man, Survey, p. 327, 328.
and the public ones of the Poet, and that the Liberties of a Character ought
not to be laid to the Charge of the Dramatists that represents them. This
Author must think this pleasure, but Quintilian was of another mind; who lets
us know, that Afranius, a Vicious Comic Poet, discovered his Practice in his
Plays. Mores suos fassus. Instit. Orat. Lib. 10. cap. 1.
Indeed nothing is more natural than for a Man's Fancy to flow into his Ink,
and when he can, to make his Business his Diversion. Father: A Poet that writes
loosely can never be excused, for this is done either out of Inclination, or
Interest: If the first, he is a Person of no Sobriety, if the second, of no
Conscience: As for the Plea from the Nature and Propriety of Characters,
Defense, p. 10, 11, etc.
it is answered already in my Defense, but the Surveyor was resolved to jog on,
and overlook it.

The Surveyor in his Examination of Plautus, says, I may blush for my Defense
of this Poet, for affirming his Censurable Passages are very moderate, Surv. p.
328.
as the World goes, and that several of our single Plays shall far out do all
this put together. Now tho this may be true in the compass he has given it, yet
it is much more than I affirmed. But this Author, according to his custom, has
extended my Assertion to the whole Works of Plautus, which relates only to the
Misbehaviour of Women. View, p. 16.
And in this sense of the Comparison, I still defend Plautus, and in Proof of
the Point appeal to the Old Batchelour, the Soldier's Fortune, and several
other English Plays.

The Surveyor opens the Case farther against Surv. p. 329, 330.
Plautus, and presses the Particulars of the Charge. And first his Amphitruo is
loaded with a heavy Accusation. But the best on it is, here is a mistake of the
Person, which is enough in all Conscience to quash the Indictment. That
Rankness of Language which the Surveyor charges upon Plautus, is all
Interpolation, and belongs to another Author. Now as the Poet has no reason to
answer for what does not belong to him, so these ungenuine Additions were
particularly excepted by me. View, p. 18.
My Adversary, if he writes awake, must needs know these decent Quotations were
nothing to his purpose. But possibly the Nosegay was made up, for a Curiosity
to the Reader, and to oblige his own Smelling: And to make Plautus amends for
giving him more then his due, he is resolved to take something from him: For at
the latter end of Amphytrio, he slides away the word facere, Me^ vi subacta est
facere.
which quite alters the sense, and makes Compliance sound up to obscenity.
Amph. Act. 5. Sc. 2.
But this is no wonder, for I observe the Surveyor is mightily light-finger'd
this way, and generally steals off the Modesty of an Author. And to aggravate
the Theft, the Motive is more Malice, than Necessity: For he does not filch, to
make use of his Neighbors Goods, but to destroy them.

His Objection against the Morality of the Dialogue between Demaenetus and
Argyrippus in the Asinaria, is out of the Question: I warranted no farther than
the Expression, nor that neither, but with reference to the Moderns.

His next Instance is in the Curculio, where Phaedromus and Planesium salute
each other too eagerly: It may be so; But then we may observe, they had not
seen one another for some time, and the Visit was made with difficulty: And
under such Circumstances, had they been both of the same Sex, they might have
discovered some Affection extraordinary. However he cannot say the Expression is
foul, and if it was, it is a Slave that speaks it, (...), p. 16.
and so nothing to his purpose.

To show the Comparative Modesty of Plautus, View, p. 17.
I took notice, that the Slaves and Pandars who had the greatest Liberty,
seldom played their Gambols before Women; that there are, as I remember, but
four Instances to the contrary; and that even there, the Women these Men
discourse with, are Two of them Slaves, and the third a Wench.

Here he is sorry for my want of Memory, S^^v. p. 334.
but I have much more reason to condole with him for the loss of his own. For
Olympio, upon whom he would make his Advantage, will do him no service, the
Liberties of this Slave in the Casina are expressly barred both by Name and
Play, and stand first in the List of the Exception. I grant Cleostrata urges
Olympio to tell the Story, View, p. 17.
but then tho the Drift of her Fancy may be amiss, the Complexion of her
Language is bright, unless in one Line, which, if not interpreted to her
Ignorance, Survey, p 337.
is no more then a double Entendre. Artemona's Allegory in the Asinaria is
somewhat less offensive than this, tho none of the most reserved. Thus he has
made a shift to muster up two exceptionable Sentences of Women of some
Consideration in Plautus. But alas! What are these to the repeated and
Luscious Freedoms of Elvira, Spanish-Friar. Old Batch. Double-Dealer. Fool in
Fashion. Soldiers Fortune.
of the Ladies in the Country Wife, of Belinda, and Lady Plyant, of Narcissa,
and Lady Dunce. Not to mention a great many others. Here the Weeds are
extremely rank, and thick set: And were they worth the gathering, the Reader
might be plentifully furnished for a little pains.

The Surveyor has something farther with Artemona, and pretends her Frankness
gave her Slave Parasitus the boldness to put a very untoward Question to her.
It Is this, Possis si forte accubantem tuum virum conspexeris,
Cum coronae amplexum amicam si vide as cognoscere?


Of these Lines he gives a foul and mistaken Translation, and which is clearly
confuted both by the Text and Notes. Every body knows Beds and Garlards were
for Eating and Public Entertainment. And then Gremio jacuit nova nupta mariti
was usual enough: This was somewhat of the Case of the Husband Demenetus, who
was discovered at Supper with his Son, and his Wench. And that the Appearance
was fair, is evident from the Slaves Advices to his Mistress: He desires her to
stay a little for Information about their Behavior:

Paras: Hem tibi Hominem: Art. perii!
Par. paulisper mane.
Aucupemus ex insidiis clanculum quam rem gerunt.
And upon the immediate progress of the Story, Asimar. Act. 5. sc. 2.
the old Man, the young one, and the Woman, Drink, and Discourse all together.

I observed farther to the Advantage of Plautus, That his Men who talk
intemperately are generally Slaves, View, p. 16.
adding, that I thought Dordalus the Pander, and Lusiteles a young Gentleman,
were the only exception: And this latter was only guilty of one over airy
Expression. But it seems the Surveyor is somewhat sharper at these Enquiries,
and after his rummaging over 20 Comedies has catched Periplectimines tripping
in one Word; Mrl. Glor. Act. 5.
and that too used by way of reproof. Now, that the Expression, tho out of
order, is not so gross as he would represent it, appears from Lambin's Note
upon the Epilogue to the Captivi: And from Chremes's Reprimand of Clitipho in
Terence. Heauton. Act. 3. S. 3. Ed. in usum Delphin.
To conclude this Matter, what Periplectimenes speaks, the Hostess in
Bartholomew Fair Acts, and that, I take it, is somewhat more foul, and
expressive.

Once more and Plautus is dismissed. I affirmed, that this Poets Prologues and
Epilogues were inoffensive. View, p. 17.
This the Surveyor confesses is a great Point, but seems to think it cannot be
carried. But here the Reader may please to observe, Surv. p. 340.
that the Dispute turns only upon Indecency of Language, for I never intended
to vouch the Doctrine, and Morals of Plautus: And thus the Epilogue in the
Asinaria is nothing to the Surveyor's purpose, being perfectly clean in the
Expression. Survey. p. 342.
As for the Epilogue of the Captivi it is all in Defense of Virtue, as well as
the Play; P. 343.
And the Actors urge their Modesty, as an Argument for Favor to the Audience.
It Is true they plead their Merit in one ungoverned Expression; to which, in the
Case of Periplectimenes, I have spoken already. Surv. p. 341.
His remaining Objection is against the Epilogue in the Casina. And here I
grant the Principle is ill enough, but that is foreign to the Question. But for
any other Objection, I cannot perceive the strength of it. For, as to the last
Line, upon which I suppose he founds himself, this Sentence seems rather to
contain an ill Wish, and a Menace of Disappointment, than any thing else. Vid.
Donat. in Loc.
Besides; As to Debauched Principle, the Prologue to the Plot and no Plot, is
as bad as it is possible, and over and above much more scandalous in Language,
than the Epilogue to Plautus's Casina; In which the Disadvantage is shaded, and
the Expression made more remote.

And can the Surveyor now find in his heart to compare the Prologues and
Epilogues of Plautus with those of the Moderns? See View, P. 13.
Is the Decency and Complexion the same in both? A Man must have a great
Command of his Blood, to affirm this without Blushing; And be almost as much a
Master of his Face, as he is of his Conscience.

As for Terence, he is so Staunch and Regular, that there is no meddling with
him: No, The Surveyor does not think fit to attack this Poet; but leaves him as
a standing Reproach upon the English Stage.

I must now follow him in his Remarks upon the Chapter of the Abuse of the
Clergy. Survey, p. 344.


And here his Spleen against the Church disorders him extremely, and indeed
almost throws him into Fits. He would gladly say something to purpose against
the Clergy, but the Subject fails him. This makes him rail most unmercifully;
for Spite and Impotence together are generally very Clamorous and Impertinent.

To show the unreasonableness of the Stage-Scurrilities upon the Clergy, View,
p. 127.
I endeavored to make out the Right this Order had to Regard, and fair Usage.

First, Because of their Relation to the Deity, where I observed that Christian
Priests are the Principal Ministers of God's Kingdom: They Represent his
Person, Publish his Law, Pass his Pardons, and Preside in his Worship.

I thought these things had been so plain that they needed no confirmation, but
since the Surveyor contests the Point, I shall briefly make it good. Now, I
desire to know of the Surveyor, what it is to Represent another? Is it not to
be his Agent, and to Manage his Affairs by virtue of his Authority? And does
not the Priest Seal Covenants in God's Name? St. Math. 28. 19.
Does he not Baptize by Commission, and Exercise part of that Power which our
Savior had upon Earth? St. Ioh. 20. 21.
The Surveyor's Objection upon this Head is amazingly ridieulous: For by his
reasoning no Man can Represent the Person of God, without being possessed of
the Divine Attributes, Survey. p. 346, 347.
and able to sustain the Figure of Omnipotence. As much as to say, That a
Prince cannot send another as his Ambassador, unless his Person, Prerogative
and Appearance, is equal to his own. And therefore if the Ambassador falls
short of his Master in the Advantages of Body, or Mind, in the Extent of his
Dominions, or the Magnificence of his Retinue; If any thing of this happens,
let the Credentials be what they will, the Characters it seems sinks, and the
Representation becomes impossible. This is strong Reasoning, I confess, for it
almost argues the World in Pieces. At this rate Princes must Travel to keep the
Peace, and Transact all their Matters by Interview, and Personal Visit: For a
Plenipotentiary is a dangerous thing: They cannot prefer a Subject to an
Embassy, without communicating their Royalty, and making an Equal to
themselves. And thus the Surveyor has gone a great way toward breaking the
Correspondence of Christendom. Farther, I thought the Surveyor would have
allowed Angels, at least, for their Name sake, to have Represented God
almighty: But by this Reasoning Michael himself is struck out of Capacity, and
the highest Order of Spirits unqualified for the Office: For no Created Being
has any of the Divine Attributes, nor which is more, can have them.

He says the Regards that I insist on for the Survey, p. 347, 348.
Priesthood, belongs to the Governors of the Church. Now, tho he may not know
it, Priests are Governors, within their Precinct; They have Regimen Animarum,
the Guidance of Souls, and the Concerns of Eternity in their Care, and that one
would think were none of the least Interest of the Parish. I grant Theatrum is
a hard Word to construe, but I fancied the Surveyor might have known the
English of Rector well enough. By this time, I hope, the Representation may be
allowed. But then as to the Authority of publishing the Laws of God, passing
his Pardons, and presiding in his Worship, these Privileges, he says, were
peculiar to the Apostles. Survey, p. 348.
But his Affirmation apart, the Holy Scriptures teach us, That the People are
to seek the Law at the Priest's Mouth, for he is the Messenger of the Lord of
Hosts. Malach. 2. 72 Art. 37.
And the Church of England in her Form of Ordination gives the Priest Authority
to preach the Word of God, and to Minister the Holy Sacraments; St. Joh. 20.
21, 23.
And which in her Articles she denies to belong to the Supreme Civil Power: And
as for the Power of Passing Pardons, and giving Absolution, it is founded upon
that Solemn Commission given by our Savior. As my Father has sent me, even so
send I you, whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and
whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained. And can any one imagine that
Words so plain in the Expression, and so solemn in the Occasion, are void of
Weight and Signification? Not to mention the right they imply of Admitting into
the Church, and Excluding from it; Not to mention this, they must amount to
this Meaning at the lowest, That those who neglect this Ordinance of God, and
refuse to apply for Absolution to Persons thus Authorized, shall not have their
Sins forgiven, tho otherwise not unqualified. And thus, to put a resembling
Case, a Malefactor cannot have the benefit of the Prince's Pardon unless it
passes the Seals, and runs through the Forms of Law. And that this Power was
not peculiar to the Apostles, but designed for a standing Advantage, and
settled upon the Successions of the Hierarchy; is plain by the Doctrine, and
practice of our own Church: For at the Ordination of Priests the Authority of
Remitting and Retaining Sin, is conferred in the same Words, Whosesoever Sins ye
remit, etc. And in the Office for the Visitation for the Sick, the Priest
making express mention of his Authority from our Savior, absolves the Penitent
from all his Sins, in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

And as this Authority of the Priest is thus fully maintained by the Church, so
it is no less acknowledged by the State: 1 Eliz.
For the Book of Common Prayer, 14 Car. 2.
with the Form of Ordination, etc. stands upon a bottom of Law, and has Two
Acts of Parliament to defend it. For tho the Spiritual Privileges of the
Priesthood are independent of the Civil Magistrate, yet the Statutes
abovementioned imply an Assent to the Charter delivered by our Savior, and
are a fair Acknowledgment of the Power. And thus, the Surveyor, to make a Blow
at the Clergy, has charged through Gospel and Law, contradicted the Bible and
the Statute-Book, and fallen foul upon the Highest Authority both in Church and
State.

But still he questions, Survey. p. 348.
whether the Commission of every Christian Priest be of equal extent and
validity with that of the Apostles. I grant the first part of his Proposition:
That the Apostles had peculiar Advantages in their Authority, and that their
Jurisdiction was larger than that of succeeding Priests, or Bishops either, is
not denied. But tho their Commission was larger, 'twas not more valid than that
of the present Priesthood. For this stands upon the Authority of the New
Testament, upon the Credit of undoubted Succession, and the known Practice of
Christendom for almost Seventeen hundred years together. What, tho they are not
called immediately by God himself, Ibid.
nor endued with Supernatural and Miraculous Faculties, does this affect the
Credibility of their Credentials? I suppose Princes are the Ministers of God,
and deputed to Govern under him; And must the Proof of their Commission depend
upon Miracles and immediate Designation? Must they be proclaimed from the
Clouds, and Anointed by an Angel from Heaven? And are not their Subjects to own
them till they can make out their Title by Supernatural Evidence; by the Gift
of Tongues, and raising the Dead? The absurdity of these Consequences may
inform the Surveyor, that there is no need of a Miraculous Credential to prove a
Delegation from Heaven.

The Surveyor in stating the Difference between the Ordinary Priests, and the
Apostles, makes several Mistakes: And were he in the right, the Dispute is
foreign to the Controversy. He affirms the Apostles Doctrine had no other
Evidence than their own Affirmation and Survey, p. 349.
the Works that they did: Yes: They had moreover the Completion of Prophecies,
and the Agreement of the Old Testament; And these Corroborating Circumstances,
were extremely considerable. He goes on, and alleges in abatement of the
present Priesthood, That Persons of this Order have no natural Gifts above
other Men, to warrant a Pretense to an extraordinary Mission. P. 349, 350.
Is the Bounty of God then confined to Privilege^ of Nature? Or, Is he not at
liberty to choose what Officers he pleases? I conceive the Surveyor will not deny
this. Had the Apostles then any of these Advantages above others? so far from
that, that they seem rather to fall short of the common Standard. Their
Apprehensions at first were very heavy, and their Reason checked by a low
Education. And which is more, they were rather chosen for these Disadvantages:
For this made their Doctrine the more unquestionable, and the Evidence of their
Inspiration the greater. To see such unpromising Persons so Wise in their
Discourse, so Wonderful in their Actions, and so Unusual in their Success, must
needs convince the World that God was with them. And thus the Surveyor's
Assertion is false both in Fact, and Reasoning.

His saying, That this Commission of the Apostles and their Successors, expired
upon the Conversion of Princes to Christianity, is a great mistake: The Church
is still Independent, her Authority unalterable, neither is she in Things
purely Spiritual, subordinate to the Civil Power. This Truth I have elsewhere
proved at large, Moral Essays, Office Chap.
and thither I refer the Reader.

The Surveyor in speaking to the Importance of the Priests Office, would not
allow him to preside any more in Gods Worship, than a Clerk in Parliament
presides over the House, Survey. p. 352.
because be reads the Bills, and Petitions to them. It seems then the Relation
of the Priest, and the Congregation, is the same with that of the Clerk to the
Parliament. What would this Author be at? Does he mean, that when the Priest
reads the Bible, the People may Debate whether it shall pass or not, and divide
into Yeas and Noes, about saying Amen to the Lord's Prayer. One would think by
his worthy similitude, that the People went to Church to be Worshipped, and that
the Liturgy was only a Parcel of Humble Petitions put up to the Parish.

The Surveyor is extremely desirous to have Survey. p. 356.
a Religious Character exposed on the Stage; Defense, from p. 66, to p. 8^.
But against this Liberty, I have given my Reasons at large; which when the
Surveyor View, etc.
has replied to, he may possibly hear farther from me.

My Adversary is now upon arguing against the Plea of Prescription, and would
gladly make out, that the Heathen Stage has Treated the Priests as Coarsly as
the Christian. And here Aeschylus is as surly as before, and will not so much as
appear in the Cause. However, Sophocles lay in his way, and in he must come;
But then this Poet by his Air and Heaviness, looks more like a Prisoner than a
Witness; Well! We must hear his Depositions in his Ajax Flagellifer, What then
is to be done here? Does the Poet bait a Priest like the Relapse? By no means.
Does he Represent a Priest in his Play? Not that neither. Then I suppose he
spoke ill of him behind his Back? I confess that was not as it should be. The
best on it is, the Mischief lies in a little compass: It Is all in a Line or two
at the end of the Play: Here the Chorus, in regard of the surprising Events
they had observed, are pleased to say, That seeing, was Believing, and that
never a Diviner could tell beforehand, how matters would go.

(...) Ajax. Flag.

(...)
(...)
Now if this Instance must have an answer, I reply; That Prophets or Diviners
held a very small Proportion to the rest of the Priests, so that the Censure,
tho gentle, falls only on the Skirts of the Profession. But then to go even
thus far, looks like straining upon Sophocles. For the natural meaning of the
Moral seems to be thus; That Humane Foresight is short, and the Future
impenetrable; and therefore People ought to Guard accordingly upon the Present.
But I Am afraid I have been too long upon this Matter, and so have used the
Reader a great deal worse, than Sophocles did the Prophet.

His next Instance in Iocasta, Survey. p. 358. View, p. 89, 90.
is obviated, and answered; and so is that following in Creon; who is declared
by the Chorus to be punished for his Haughtiness and Impiety. However, for
once, let us see what the Surveyor will make out of Creon. Now this Prince being
dissatisfied with Tiresias's Discovery in Divination, makes this angry
Reflection;

(...) Sophoc. Antig.
That is, Your Augurs are all a Covetous sort of People. Now, tho the Regard
which Creon showed Tiresias in the preceding Line, (...).
calls for a soft Construction, yet the Surveyor gives the Text a Mobbish Turn,
and foists in some of his own ill Language besides: In his Version it stands
thus. They were all a Pack of Mercenary Corrupt Fellows. This, it seems, is the
English of (...). At this rate, if he were to Turn St. Paul's Citation from
Aratus, the Translation of (...), would run thus: Act. 17. 28.


Mankind are a Pack of Fellows of Heavenly Extraction.

We see what lean Evidence Sophoeles proves, tho under the Surveyor's
Management: I hope I have made him speak a little fuller on the other side;
^View, p. 120.


His first Testimony from Euripides is levelled only against Soothsaying and
Divination.

(...). Iphig. in Aulid.
And yet even here he over-translat^s the Original A vainglorious rascally
Race, Surv. P. 359.
, spoils the Breeding of the Character, and makes Generals rail like Carmen.

And in the same Play he Translates (...) Fellow, and makes the best Word in
the Greek* the worst in the English. Farther, we may take notice, that these
warm Expressions were spoken against Calchas the Augur: And tho one of them was
delivered by Achilles, -- iracundus, inexorabilis acer, jura negat sibi nata,
nihil non arroget armis. Horat. de Art. Poet.
who was all Passion and Violence, yet 'twas in the absence of the Person
Censured. And as for Calchas, his Interest is great, and his Figure creditable
in the Play Eurip. Iphig. in Aulid. p. 44. and alib. View, p. 120, 121.
.

His Instance in Pentheus, and likewise what he offers from Seneca, is answered
in the View, where the Reader may see an overballance of Evidence for the other
side.

But we must leave the Priests, and go on to the Gods their Masters: Now these
the Surveyor pretends were used with great Freedom Survey, p. 360.
by the Ancients.

He begins with Sophocles, and objects the Rants of Ajax, Creon, and
Philoctetes, but here his Charge is somewhat inhumane. These Characters have
smarted severely for their Impiety: View, p. 88, 89, 93.
Now Persons that have suffered the Law, should not be reproached with their
Crimes: And therefore in Scotland they say when a Man is Hanged, he is
Justified. But the Surveyor wants time for a Collection out of this Poet: Not
unlikely: People that have nothing to pay, Surv. p. 360, 361.
are generally in Haste.

Euripides is once more summoned: View, p. 94.
Now this Poet, I granted, had some Profane Passages uncorrected: And it is well
my Concession was thus frank, for I perceive the Surveyor can hardly prove it:
However his Performance must be Examined.

His first Citation from the Hecuba is the best. But here he loses more in his
Skill, than he gains in his Luck. For he quite mistakes the meaning of part of
Talthybiu^'s Expostulation;

(...); Hec. p. 17.

(...)
Which he thus Translates. O Jupiter! What shall I say? Surv. p. 361.
should Mankind address themselves to you? etc. Whereas it should have been
rendered thus. O Jupiter! I Am at a stand whether Humane Affairs are part of your
Administration, or not, etc. But I shall pursue the Advantage no farther. This
might be a Piece of Honest Ignorance for ought I know: And no Man can Play more
then he sees. But then he should be a little cautious not to venture out of his
depth, till he can Swim better.

Polymnestor in this Tragedy is another Instance how far the Surveyor is to be
trusted. The Words must be transcribed; in which this Prince Complains of the
uncertainty of Prosperity, and the sudden Turns of Fate; (...),
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).


Let Us now see what English the Surveyor can afford us to this Greek. Survey.
p. 361*
Oh, what a stippery thing is Humane Grandeur, which is never secure? Thus far
all is well. But then the Remainder is wretchedly wrested into Atheism and
Misconstruction: -- The Gods (says he) perplex and harrass Mankind, that our
Ignorance may support their Altars, and Worship. But the Poet's meaning stands
thus. The Gods make Humane Affairs floating, and uncertain; that so our
Ignorance of Future Events, may prevent the fancy of Independence, and make us
apply to Heaven for a better Protection. Now this is a Sense of Piety, instead
of Profaneness. And to justify the Translation, I appeal not only to the
Text, and Latin Version, but to the Greek Scholiast, who is expressly for it.
Farther: If there had been any thing of Profaneness in this Reflection,
Polymnestor paid dearly for it. For soon after his Eyes are plucked out, and his
Children murdered before him Eurip. Hec. p. 36, 40.


To proceed. Electra's Expostulation is horribly misrepresented. This Lady
seeing Helena upon her return from Troy, and that she brought back her Beauty
with her Infamy, makes this Remark upon it.

(...). Eurip. Orist. p. 51.

(...).
That is, Advantages of Person are a misfortune to some People; But extremely
serviceable to such as make a right use of them. Here the Surveyor bestirs him
notably. He keeps the last Line to himself, maims the Period, and then rigs out
this Pious Translation;

O Nature, Surv. 362.
what a Curse art thou upon Mortals! As much as to say, He has found a Heathen
President for the Blasphemy of the Moderns: Whereas it is notoriously evident,
that here is not the least glance against Providence; And that only the
Endowments and Advantages of Nature are meant by the Expression.

Orestes is no more the Surveyor's Friend than Electra his Sister. For when
Menelaus questioned him about the Murder of his Mother, he pleads the Oracle
in his Excuse. And when the other was surpised at the singularity of the
Order, He replies, (...). Orest. p. 51.


That is, We are not to dispute the Gods Commands, but obey them, for the
Divine Nature is too big for Humane Understandings. And if the Surveyor thinks
this too much a Paraphrase, Orestes shall speak in his own Translation. It Is
thus: Survey. p. 362.
We serve the Gods whatever they be. Why then, it seems, he did not question
their Being, but thought Religion very well worth the minding. Yes: His Piety
appears farther in his next answer, for when Menelaus seemed to wonder why
Apollo did not rescue him from his Misfortune; He tells him,

(...). That is, as the Scholiast interprets, The Gods are not sudden in their
Administrations; But take time in Rewards, and Punishments, to Try the Good,
and Recover the Evil.

His Objection from the Cyclops is fully View, p. 94.
prevented in the View. However the Poet must be cited, and the Giant brought
in, for the sake of the Civil Translation. Survey, p. 362.
Besides, a little Greek, tho nothing to the purpose, has a Face of Learning,
and looks Big upon the English Reader.

In the Ion, Ion. p. 333, 334.
by Translating (...) Rascal, and (...) Whoremaster, he makes Creusa, and her
Servant much coarser than they are in Euripides. It Is true the Servant being
moved with the supposed ill Usage of his Mistress, proposed the firing of
Apollo's Temple; but immediately he recollects himself, and advises her to
another Revenge, more in her Power. Ion. p. 335.


To conclude with Euripides, Hecuba, says the Surveyor, thinks the Gods (...),
bad Friends; He should have said sluggish, and then he had been right. Survey.
p. 362.
As for Seneca he stands barred: Troad. 118.
Why then is his Atheistical Chorus produced, See Vir^, p. 94.
and why in the Version of the Earl of Rochester? Was this Transition made for
the Benefit of the Public, or in Honor of the Deceased? Not the latter, for
that Noble Lord, abhorred such Profane Liberties at his Death. Thus, to Refresh
the Blemishes of his Life, is the greatest Outrage to his Memory: It Is almost
enough to raise him upon the Surveyor, to make his Ghost resent the Usage, and
flash Correction in his Face; But after all, it is highly improbable that the
Chorus spoke the Poet's Opinion, Surv. p. 363.
if, as Heinsius, Scaliger, and others believe, 'twas written by Seneca the
Philosopher: For every Body knows he was far enough from being an Atheist.

And now we have done with Authorities; And here, tho the Surveyor has but very
bad Luck with his Poets, yet he has taken great care to conceal the Misfortune;
For in his Citations he mentions neither Act, nor Page, but refers to the Plays
at large. This, I confess, is the right way to discourage the Reader's Enquiry,
and make him rather Believe, than go Look.

And now I may safely affirm, That several single Plays of the Moderns, See
View, and Defense, ref.
have not only more, but some bolder Passages of Profaneness, than all he has
cited from the Ancients put together. And which is harder still, I have made
but a slender Discovery of the English Stage. Thus some People Refine upon
Heathenism; Thus they improve upon their Creed, and make amends in their Lives,
for the odds of their Understanding!

In the Close of all, Survey. p. 367.
the Surveyor offers Hypothetically, as he calls it, that is faintly, to
justify the Stage-Freedoms with the Nobility. But, by his favor, this
Ridiculous Character must either be drawn for single Persons, or Quality in
general: Now either way his Satyr falls under his own Lash; For from hence it
must follow, that he who makes a Lord of a Fool, Survey. p. 365.
makes a Fool of a Lord, which he grants is no Compliment. But the Surveyor
having not replied to my Reasons against this Liberty, I need say nothing more
upon the Argument.

I have now done with the Surveyor, View, p. 175. Defense. p. 25. to p. 31.
and heartily wish him a better Subject: For a bad Cause, besides its own Evil,
is apt to produce a resembling Defense: It often runs an Author upon Calumny,
Coarse Expedients, and Little Management: Which, as they are no sure Methods to
raise a Character; so, at one time or other, they will certainly displease a Man's
self.

THE END.

