A SHORT VIEW OF THE Immorality, and Profaneness OF THE English Stage, TOGETHER
With the Sense of Antiquity upon this Argument,

By JEREMY COLLIER, M. A.

London, Printed for S. Keble at the Turk's-Head in Fleetstreet, R. Sare at
Gray's-Inn-Gate, and H. Hindmarsh against the Exchange in Cornhil. School.

THE PREFACE.
BEing convinced that nothing has gone farther in Debauching the Age than the
Stage Poets, and Playhouse, I thought I could not employ my time better than
in writing against them. These Men sure, take Virtue and Regularity, for Great
Enemies, why else is their Disaffection so very Remarkable? It must be said,
They have made their Attack with great Courage, and gained no inconsiderable
Advantage. But it seems Lewdness without Atheism, is but half their Business.
Conscience might possibly recover, and Revenge be thought on; and therefore
like Foot-Pads, they must not only Rob, but Murder. To do them right their
Measures are Politickly taken: To make sure work on it, there is nothing like
Destroying of Principles; Practice must follow of Course. For to have no good
Principles, is to have no Reason to be Good. Now it is not to be expected that
people should check their Appetites, and balk their Satisfactions, they don't
know why. If Virtue has no Prospect, it is not worth the owning. Who would be
troubled with Conscience if'tis only a Bugbear, and has nothing in it but
Vision, and the Spleen?

My Collection from the English Stage, is much short of what They are able to
furnish. An Inventory of their Warehouse would have been a large Work: But
being afraid of over charging the Reader, I thought a Pattern might do.

In Translating the Fathers, I have endeavored to keep close to their Meaning:
However, in some few places, I have taken the Liberty of throwing in a Word or
two; To clear the Sense, to preserve the Spirit of the Original, and keep the
English upon its Legs.

There Is one thing more to acquaint the Reader with; It Is that I have Ventured
to change the Terms of Mistress and Lover, for others somewhat more Plain, but
much more Proper. I don't look upon This as any failure in Civility. As Good
and Evil are different in Themselves, so they ought to be differently Marked.
To confound them in Speech, is the way to confound them in Practice. Ill
Qualities ought to bave ill Names, to prevent their being Catching. Indeed
Things are in a great measure Governed by Words: To Guild over a foul
Character, serves only to perplex the Idea, to encourage the Bad, and mislead
the Unwary. To treat Honor, and Infamy alike, is an injury to Virtue, and a
sort of Levelling in Morality. I confess, I have no Ceremony for Debauchery.
For to Compliment Vice, is but one Remove from worshipping the Devil.

March 5th. 1697/8.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
THE Introduction. Page 1 The Immodesty of the Stage. p. 3 The Ill Consequences
of this Liberty. p. 5 Immodesty a Breach of good Behavior. p. 6 The Stage
faulty in this respect to a very Scandalous degree. p. 8 Modesty the Character
of Women. p. 9 The Natural Serviceableness of this Quality. p. 11 Immodesty
much more insufferable, under the Christian, than under the Heathen Religion.
p. 14 The Roman, and Greek Theaters more inoffensive than the English. p. 15
This proved from Plautus. Ibid From Terence. p. 20 From Seneca 's Tragedies. p.
25 The Comparison carried on to the Theater at Athens. Ibid. A short Character
of Aeschylus. p. 26 The Cleaness of his Expression. p. 27 The Genius and
Conduct of Sophocles. p. 28 The Sobriety of his Plays. p. 29 Euripides 's
Character distinguished from the two former. p. 30 The Reserv'dness of his
Style. p. 31 All Humors not fit for Representation. p. 35 A Censure of
Aristophanes. p. 36 Aristophanes his Testimony against himself. p. 48 The
Authorities of Ben. Johnson. p. 51 Beaumont and Fletcher. p. 52 And Corneille.
against the present Stage. p. 53

CHAP. II. The Profaneness of the Stage.
THis Charge proved upon them, I. By their Cursing and Swearing. p. 57 The
English Stage formerly less hardy in this respect. Ibid The provokingness of
this Sin. p. 58. This Offense punishable by Law, and how far. p. 59 Swearing in
the Play House an Un-Gentlemanly, as well as an Un-Christian practice. A Second
Branch of the Profaness of the Stage, consisting in their Abuse of Religion,
and the Holy Scriptures. p. 60 Instances of this Liberty in the Mock
Astrologer. Ib. In the Orphan. p. 62 In the Old Batchelour, and Double Dealer.
p. 63, 64 In Don Sebastian. p. 65 Brief Remarks upon a Passage or two in the
Dedications of Aurenge Zebe, and the Translation of Juvenal. p. 66, 69 Farther
Instances of Profaneness in Love Triumphant. p. 72 In Love for Love. p. 74 In
the provoked Wife. p. 77 And in the Relapse. p. 78 The Horrid Impiety of this
Liberty. p. 80 The Stage guilty of down right Blasphemy. This Charge made good
from several of the Plays above mentioned. p. 82 The Comparative Regularity of
the Heathen Stage, exemplyfied in Terence, and Plautus. p. 86 And in the Greek
Tragedians. p. 87 Seneca more exceptionable than the Greeks, but not so faulty
as the Modern Stage. p. 94 This outraging of Religion Intolerable. p. 95
CHAP. III.
THE Clergy abused by the Stage. p. 98 This Usage both Unpresidented. p.112 And
Unreasonable.p. 127
The Misbehaviour of the Stage upon this account. p. 138
CHAP. IV.
IMmorality encouraged by the Stage. p. 140 The Stage Poets make Libertines
their Top-Characters, and give them Success in their Debauchery. p. 142 A
Character of their fine Gentleman. p. 143 Their fine Ladies Accomplished much
after the same manner. p. 146 The Young People of Figure in Plautus and
Terence, have a greater regard to Morality. Ibid The Defense in the Preface to
the Mock-Astrologer, not sufficient. p. 148 The Christian Religion makes a
great difference in the Case. p. 149 Horace of a Contrary Opinion to the
Mock-Astrologer. p. 150 The Mock-Astrologer's Instances from Ben Johnson
Unserviceable. p. 151 The Authority of Shakespeare against the Mock-Astrologer.
p. 154 His Maxim founded on the difference between Tragedy, and Comedy, a
Mistake. p. 155 Delight not the Chief-End of Comedy p. 157 This Assertion
proved against the Mock-Astrologer from the Testimonies of Rapin. Ibid And Ben
Johnson. p. 158 Aristotle, and Quintilian, cited to the same purpose p. 159,
161 To make Delight the main Business in Comedy, dangerous, and unreasonable.
p. 162 The improper Conduct of the Stage with respect to Poetry, and Ceremony.
p. 165 Extravagant Rants. p. 167 Gingles in the Spanish Friar, King Arthur, and
Love Triumphant. p. 169 Women roughly treated by the Stage. p. 171 Their coarse
Usage of the Nobility. p. 173 These Freedoms peculiar to the English Stage. p.
175
CHAP. V.
SECT. I.
REmarks upon Amphytrion. p. 177 The Machines profane, smutty, and out of
Character. p. 178 The singularity of the Poet in this point. p. 180 Blasphemy
in Absalom and Achitophel. p. 184 A Poem upon the Fall of the Angels, called a
Fairy way of Writing. p. 189 The Punishment of the Damned ridiculed. p. 192
SECT. II.
REmarks on the Comical History of Don Quixot. p. 196 The Poets horrible
Profaneness. p. 197 His want of Modesty, and Regard to the Audience. p. 202
All Imitations of Nature not proper for the Stage. p. 204 The Poets Talent in
Raillery, and Dedication. p. 205
SECT. III.
REmarks on the Relapse. p. 209 A Misnommer in the Title of the Play. p. 210
The Moral Vicious. p. 211 The Plot ill Contrived. p. 212 The Manners or
Characters out of Order. p. 218 The three Dramatick Unities broken. p. 228

CHAP. VI.
THE Opinion of the Heathen Philosophers, Orators, and Historians, concerning
the Stage. p. 233 The Stage censured by the State. This proved from the
Constitutions of Athens, Sparta, and Rome. p. 240 Farther Instances of this
public Discountenance in the Theodosian Code. p. 241 In our own Statute Book.
p. 242 And in the late Order of the French King. p. 243 An Order of the Bishop
of Arras against Plays. p. 245 The Stage Condemned by the Primitive Church. p.
250 The Councils of Illiberis, Arles, etc. cited. Ibid The Testimony's of the
Fathers against the Stage, particularly, of Theophilus Antiochenus. p. 252 Of
Tertullian. p. 253 Of Clemens Alexandrinus. p. 260 Of Minutius Foelix. p. 261.
Of St. Cyprian. Ibid. Lactantius. p. 265 St. Chrisostom. p. 267 St. Hierom. p.
272 And St. Augustine cited to the same purpose. p. 273 The Censure of the
Fathers, and Councils etc. applicable to the English Stage. p. 276 The
Conclusion. p. 280
ERRATA.
PAge 31 Margin for (...), r. (...). p. 37. l. 1. for by his, r. his. l. 2. for
other, r his other. l. 25. for praeetr, r. praeter. p. 39. l. 18. for Poets,
Knaves, r. Poets Knaves. p. 44. l. 14. for Concianotores, r. Concionatores. p.
45. l. 25. for Debaush, r. Debauchee. p. 46. l. 9. for Enterprises, r.
Enterprise. p. 47. l. 9. for ridicules, r. ridiculous. p. 52. l. 1. for
justifying, r. and justify. p. 60. l. 2. for tempestinous, r. tempestuous. l.
31. for pray, r. should pray. p. 80. for executed, r. exerted. p. 108. l. 4.
for Antarkick. r. Antartick. p. 117. l. 12. for Angitia. r. Angitiae. p. 121.
l. 24. for Auger, r. Augur. p. 135. margin, for Heglins Cogmog, r. Heylins
Cosmog. p. 154. l. 22. dele up. p. 163. l. 28. for then, r. therefore. p. 183.
l. 6. for to, r. too. p. 186. l. 6. dele And. p. 191. l. 18. for Circumstance,
r. Circumstances. p. 222. l. 9. for Cup, r. a Cup. p. 237. l. 2. for apon't, r.
upon it. 245. l. 25. for Le, r. Les. p. 257. l. 28. for Correspondence r. this
Correspondence. p. 272. l. 9. for himself. r. themselves.

The Litteral mistakes the Reader is Desired to Correct.

Essays upon several Moral Subjects in two parts the Second Edition Corrected
and Enlarged by Jeremy Collier, M. A.

Human Prudence, or the Art by which a man may raise himself and his Fortune to
Grandeur, the Seventh Edition.

An Answer to all the Excuses and Pretenses that men usually make for their not
coming to the Holy Communion, by a Divine of the Church of England: Fitted for
the meanest Capacity, and proper to be given away by such Persons as are
Charitably Inclined. Price 3 pence.

THE INTRODUCTION.
THE business of Plays is to recomend Virtue, and discountenance Vice; To show
the Uncertainty of Humane Greatness, the sudden Turns of Fate, and the Unhappy
Conclusions of Violence and Injustice: It Is to expose the Singularities of
Pride and Fancy, to make Folly and Falsehood contemptible, and to bring every
Thing that is Ill Under Infamy, and Neglect. This Design has been oddly pursued
by the English Stage. Our Poets write with a different View, and are gone into
an other Interest. It Is true, were their Intentions fair, they might be
Serviceable to this Purpose. They have in a great measure the Springs of
Thought and Inclination in their Power. Show, Music, Action, and Rhetoric,
are moving Entertainments; and rightly employed would be very significant. But
Force and Motion are Things indifferent, and the Use lies chiefly in the
Application. These Advantages are now, in the Enemies Hand, and under a very
dangerous Management. Like Cannon seized they are pointed the wrong way, and by
the Strength of the Defense the Mischief is made the greater. That this
Complaint is not unreasonable I shall endeavor to prove by showing the
Misbehaviour of the Stage with respect to Morality, and Religion. Their
Liberties in the Following Particulars are intolerable. viz. Their Smuttiness
of Expression; Their Swearing, Profainness, and Lewd Application of Scripture;
Their Abuse of the Clergy; Their making their Top Characters Libertines, and
giving them Success in their Debauchery. This Charge, with some other
Irregularities, I shall make good against the Stage, and show both the Novelty
and Scandal of the Practice. And first, I shall begin with the Rankness, and
Indecency of their Language.

CHAP. 1. The Immodesty of the Stage.
IN treating this Head, I hope the Reader does not expect that I should set
down Chapter and Page, and give him the Citations at Length. To do this would
be a very unacceptable and Foreign Employment. Indeed the Passages, many of
them, are in no Condition to be handled: He that is desirous to see these
Flowers let him do it in their own Soil: It Is my business rather to kill the
Root than Transplant it. But that the Poets may not complain of Injustice; I
shall point to the Infection at a Distance, and refer in General to Play and
Person.

Now among the Curiosities of this kind we may reckon Mrs. Pinchwife, Horner,
and Lady Fidget in the Country Wife; Widow Blackacre and Olivia in the Plain
Dealer. These, though not all the exceptionable Characters, are the most
remarkable. I Am sorry the Author should stoop his Wit thus Low, and use his
Understanding so unkindly. Some People appear Coarse, and Slovenly out of
Poverty: They cannot well go to the Charge of Sense. They are Offensive like
Beggars for want of Necessaries. But this is none of the Plain Dealer's case;
He can afford his Muse a better Dress when he pleases. But then the Rule is;
where the Motive is the less, the Fault is the greater. To proceed. Jacinta,
Elvira, Dalinda, and Lady Plyant, in the Mock Astrologer, Spanish Friar, Love
Triumphant and Double Dealer, forget themselves extremely: And almost all the
Characters in the Old Batchelour, are foul and nauseous. Love for Love, and the
Relapse, strike sometimes upon this Sand, and so likewise does Don Sebastian.

I don't pretend to have read the Stage Through, neither am I Particular to my
Utmost. Here is quoting enough unless 'twere better: Besides, I may have
occasion to mention somewhat of this kind afterward. But from what has been
hinted already, the Reader may be over furnished. Here is a large Collection of
Debauchery; such Pieces are rarely to be met with: It Is Sometimes painted at
Length too, and appears in great Variety of Progress and Practice. It wears
almost all sorts of Dresses to engage the Fancy, and fasten upon the Memory,
and keep up the Charm from Languishing. Sometimes you have it in Image and
Description; sometimes by way of Allusion; sometimes in Disguise; and sometimes
without it. And what can be the Meaning of such a Representation, unless it be
to Tincture the Audience, to extinguish Shame, and make Lewdness a Diversion?
This is the natural Consequence, and therefore one would think 'twas the
Intention too. Such Licentious Discourse tends to no point but to stain the
Imagination, to awaken Folly, and to weaken the Defenses of Virtue: It was upon
the account of these Disorders that Plato banished Poets his Common Wealth: And
one of the Fathers calls Poetry, Vinum Daemonum an intoxicating Draught, made
up by the Devils Dispensatory.

I grant the Abuse of a Thing is no Argument against the use of it. However
Young people particularly, should not entertain themselves with a Lewd Picture;
especially when it is drawn by a Masterly Hand. For such a Liberty may probably
raise those Passions which can neither be discharged without Trouble, nor
satisfied without a Crime: It Is not safe for a Man to trust his Virtue too far,
for fear it should give him the slip! But the danger of such an Entertainment
is but part of the Objection: It Is all Scandal and meanness into the bargain:
it does in effect degrade Human Nature, sinks Reason into Appetite, and breaks
down the Distinctions between Man and Beast. Goats and Monkeys if they could
speak, would express their Brutality in such Language as This.

To argue the Matter more at large.

Smuttiness is a Fault in Behavior as well as in Religion. It Is a very Coarse
Diversion, the Entertainment of those who are generally least both in Sense,
and Station. The looser part of the Mob, have no true relish of Decency and
Honor, and want Education, and Thought, to furnish out a gentile Conversation.
Barrenness of Fancy makes them often take up with those Scandalous Liberties. A
Vicious Imagination may blot a great deal of Paper at this rate with ease
enough: And it is possible Convenience may sometimes invite to the Expedient.
The Modern Poets seem to use Smut as the Old Ones did Machines, to relieve a
fainting Invention. When Pegasus is jaded, and would stand still, he is apt
like other Tits, to run into every Puddle.

Obscenity in any Company is a rustic uncreditable Talent; but among Women
it is particularly rude. Such Talk would be very affrontive in Conversation, and
not endured by any Lady of Reputation. Whence then comes it to Pass that those
Liberties which disoblige so much in Conversation, should entertain upon the
Stage. Do the Women leave all the regards to Decency and Conscience behind them
when they come to the Playhouse? Or does the Place transform their
Inclinations, and turn their former Aversions into Pleasure? Or were Their
pretenses to Sobriety elsewhere nothing but Hypocrisy and Grimace? Such
Suppositions as these are all Satyr and Invective: They are rude Imputations
upon the whole Sex. To treat the Ladys with such stuff is no better than taking
their Money to abuse them. It supposes their Imagination vicious, and their
Memories ill furnished: That they are practiced in the Language of the Stews,
and pleased with the Scenes of Brutishness. When at the same time the Customs
of Education, and the Laws of Decency, are so very cautious, and reserved in
regard to Women: I say so very reserved, that it is almost a Fault for them to
Understand they are ill Used. They cannot discover their Disgust without
disadvantage, nor Blush without disservice to their Modesty. To appear with any
skill in such Cant, looks as if they had fallen upon ill Conversation; or
Managed their Curiosity amiss. In a word, He that treats the Ladys with such
Discourse, must conclude either that they like it, or they do not. To suppose
the first, is a gross Reflection upon their Virtue. And as for the latter case,
it entertains them with their own Aversion; which is ill Nature, and ill
Manners enough in all Conscience. And in this Particular, Custom and
Conscience, the Forms of Breeding, and the Maxims of Religion are on the same
side. In other Instances Vice is often too fashionable; But here a Man cannot be
a Sinner, without being a Clown.

In this respect the Stage is faulty to a Scandalous degree of Nauseousness and
Aggravation. For

1 st. The Poets make Women speak Smuttily. Of This the Places before mentioned
are sufficient Evidence: And if there was occasion they might be Multiplied to
a much greater Number: Indeed the Comedies are seldom clear of these Blemishes:
And sometimes you have them in Tragedy. For Instance. The Orphans Monimia makes
a very improper Description; And the Royal Leonora in the Spanish Friar, runs a
strange Length in the History of Love p. 50. And do Princesses use to make
their Reports with such fulsom Freedoms? Certainly this Leonora was the first
Queen of her Family. Such raptures are too Lascivious for Joan of Naples. Are
these the Tender Things Mr. Dryden says the Ladys call on him for? I suppose he
means the Ladys that are too Modest to show their Faces in the Pit. This
Entertainment can be fairly designed for none but such. Indeed it hits their
Palate exactly. It regales their Lewdness, graces their Character, and keeps up
their Spirits for their Vocation: Now to bring Women under such Misbehaviour is
Violence to their Native Modesty, and a Mispresentation of their Sex. For
Modesty as Mr. Rapin observes, is Reflect upon Aristot. etc.
the Character of Women. To represent them without this Quality, is to make
Monsters of them, and throw them out of their Kind. Euripides, who was no
negligent Observer of Humane Nature, is always careful of this Decorum. Eurip.
Hippolit.
Thus Phaedra when possessed with an infamous Passion, takes all imaginable
pains to conceal it. She is as regular and reserved in her Language as the most
virtuous Matron. It Is true, the force of Shame and Desire; The Scandal of
Satisfying, and the difficulty of parting with her Inclinations, disorder her
to Distraction. However, her Frensy is not Lewd; She keeps her Modesty even
after She has lost her Wits. Had Shakespeare secured this point for his young
Virgin Ophelia, the Hamlet.
Play had been better contrived. Since he was resolved to drown the Lady like a
Kitten, he should have set her a swimming a little sooner. To keep her alive
only to sully her Reputation, and discover the Rankness of her Breath, was very
Cruel. But it may be said the Freedoms of Distraction go for nothing, a Feavour
has no Faults, and a Man non Compos, may kill without Murder. It may be so:
But then such People ought to be kept in dark Rooms and without Company. To
show them, or let them loose, is somewhat unreasonable. But after all, the
Modern Stage seems to depend upon this Expedient. Women are sometimes
represented Silly, and sometimes Mad, to enlarge their Liberty, and screen
their Impudence from Censure: This Tolitick Contrivance we Don Quixot. Relapse
Love for Love.
have in Marcella, Hoyden, and Miss Prue. However it amounts to this
Confession; that Women when they have their Understandings about them ought to
converse otherwise. In fine; Modesty is the distinguishing Virtue of that Sex,
and serves both for Ornament and Defense: Modesty was designed by Providence as
a Guard to Virtue; And that it might be always at Hand, it is wrought into the
Mechanism of the Body. It Is likewise proportioned to the occasions of Life, and
strongest in Youth when Passion is so too. It Is a Quality as true to Innocence,
as the Senses are to Health; whatever is ungrateful to the first, is
prejudicial to the latter. The Enemy no sooner approaches, but the Blood rises
in Opposition, and looks Defyance to an Indecency. It supplys the room of
Reasoning, and Collection: Intuitive Knowledge can scarcely make a quicker
Impression; And what then can be a surer Guide to the Unexperienced? It teaches
by sudden Instinct and Aversion; This is both a ready and a powerful Method of
Instruction. The Tumult of the Blood and Spirits, and the Uneasiness of the
Sensation, are of singular Use. They serve to awaken Reason, and prevent
surprise. Thus the Distinctions of Good and Evil are refreshed, and the
Temptation kept at proper Distance.

2 ly. They Represent their single Ladys, and Persons of Condition, under these
Disorders of Liberty, This makes the Irregularity still more Monstrous and a
greater Contradiction to Nature, and Probability: But rather than not be
Vicious, they will venture to spoil a Character. This mismanagement we have
partly seen already. Jacinta, and Belinda Mock Astrologer. Old Batchelour.
are farther proof. And the Double Dealer is particularly remarkable. There are
but Four Ladys in this Play, and Three of the biggest of them are Whores. A
Great Compliment to Quality to tell them there is not above a quarter of them
Honest! This was not the Roman Breeding, Terence and Plautus his Strumpets were
Little people; but of this more hereafter.

3 dly. They have oftentimes not so much as the poor refuge of a Double Meaning
to fly to. So that you are under a necessity either of taking Ribaldry or
Nonsense. And when the Sentence has two Handles, the worst is generally turned
to the Audience. The Matter is so Contrived that the Smut and Scum of the
Thought rises uppermost; And like a Picture drawn to Sight, looks always upon
the Company.

4 ly. And which is still more extraordinary: the Prologues, and Epilogues are
Mock Astrologer. Country Wife. Cleomenes. Old Batchelour.
sometimes Scandalous to the last degree. I shall discover them for once, and
let them stand like Rocks in the Margin. Now here properly speaking the Actors
quit the Stage, and remove from Fiction into Life. Here they converse with the
Boxes, and Pit, and address directly to the Audience. These Preliminaries and
concluding Parts, are designed to justify the Conduct of the Play, and bespeak
the Favor of the Company. Upon such Occasions one would imagine if ever, the
Ladys should be used with Respect, and the Measures of Decency observed, But
here we have Lewdness without Shame or Example: Here the Poet exceeds himself.
Here are such Strains as would turn the Stomach of an ordinary Debauchee, and
be almost nauseous in the Stews. And to make it the more agreeable, Women are
Commonly picked out for this Service. Thus the Poet Courts the good opinion of
the Audience. This is the Desert he regales the Ladys with at the Close of the
Entertainment: It seems He thinks They have admirable Palats! Nothing can be a
greater Breach of Manners then such Liberties as these. If a Man would study to
outrage Quality and, Virtue, he could not do it more Effectually. But

5 thly. Smut is still more insufferable with respect to Religion. The Heathen
Religion was in a great Measure a Mystery of Iniquity. Lewdness was Consecrated
in the Temples, as well as practiced in the Stews. Their Deitys were great
Examples of Vice, and worshipped with their own Inclination. It Is no wonder
therefore their Poetry should be tinctured with their Belief, and that the
Stage should borrow some of the Liberties of their Theology. This made Mercurys
Procuring, and Jupiters Adultery the more passable in Amphitrion: Upon Plant.
this Score Gymnasium is less Monstrous in Praying the Gods to send her store
of Gallants. And thus Chaeraea defends his Adventure Cistellar.
by the Precedent of Jupiter and Terent. Eunuch.
Danae. But the Christian Religion is quite of an other Complexion. Both its
Precepts, and Authorities, are the highest discouragement to Licentiousness. It
forbids the remotest Tendencies to Evil, Banishes the Follies of Conversation,
and Obliges up to Sobriety of Thought. That which might pass for Raillery, and
Entertainment in Heathenism, is detestable in Christianity. The Restraint of
the Precept, and the Quality of the Deity, and the Expectations of Futurity
quite alter the Case.

But notwithstanding the Latitudes of Paganism, the Roman and Greek Theaters
were much more inoffensive than ours. To begin with Plautus. This Comedian,
though the most exceptionable, is modest upon the Comparison. For

1 st. He rarely gives any of the above mentioned Liberties to Women; And when
these are any Instances of the contrary, it is only in prostituted and Vulgar
People; And even these, don't come up to the Grossness of the Modern Stage:
Asinar.


For the Purpose. Cleaereta the Procuris borders a little upon Rudeness: Lena
Cistellar.
and Bacchis the Strumpet are Airy Bacchid.
and somewhat over-merry, but not A l'Anglois obscene. Chalinus in Woman's Casin.
Clothes is the most remarkable. Pasicompa Market. Act. 3.
Charinus his Wench talks too freely to Lysimachus; And so does Sophroclidisca
Slave to Lamnoselene. And lastly: Persa.
Phronesiam a Woman of the Town uses a Trucul.
double entendre to Stratophanes. These are the most censurable Passages, and I
think all of them with relation to Women; which considering how the World goes
is very moderate. Several of our Single Plays shall far outdo all This put
together. And yet Plautus has upon the matter left us 20 entire Comedies. So
that in short, these Roman Lasses are mere Vestal Virgins, comparatively
speaking.

2 ly. The Men who talk intemperately are generally Slaves; I believe Dordalus
Persa.
the Pandar, and Lusiteles will be found the only exception: And Trinum.
this latter young Gentleman; drops but one over airy expression: And for this
Freedom, the Poet seems to make him give Satisfaction in the rest of his
Character. He disputes very handsomely by himself against irregular Love; The
Discourse between him and Philto is instructive and well managed. And
afterward he gives Lesbonicus a great Act. 2. 1.
deal of sober advice, and declaims heartily Act. 2. 2.
against Luxury and Lewdness! Now by confining his Rudeness to little People,
the Fault is much extenuated. For First, the representation is more Naturally
this way; And which is still better, it is not so likely to pass into Imitation:
Slaves and Clowns are not big enough to spread Infection; and set up an ill
Fashion. It Is possible the Poet might contrive these Pesants Offensive to
discountenance the Practice. Thus the Heilots in Sparta were made drunk to keep
Intemperance out of Credit. I don't mention this as if I approved the
Expedient, but only to show it a circumstance of Mitigation and Excuse.

Farther, These Slaves and Pandars, Seldom run over, and play their Gambols
before Women. There are but Four Instances of this Kind as I remember, Olympio,
Palaestrio, Dordalus, and Casin Mil. Glor. Pers. Trucul.
Stratilax are the Persons. And the Women they discourse with, are two of them
Slaves, and the third a Wench. But with our Dramatists, the case is otherwise.
With us Smuttiness is absolute and unconfined. It Is under no restraint, of
Company, nor has any regard to Quality or Sex. Gentlemen talk it to Ladies, and
Ladies to Gentlemen with all the Freedom, and Frequency imaginable. This is in
earnest to be very hearty in the cause! To give Title and Figure to Ill Manners
is the utmost that can be done. If Lewdness will not thrive under such
encouragement it must even Miscarry!

4 ly. Plautus his Prologues and Epilogues are inoffensive. It Is true, Lambinus
pretends to fetch a double entendre out of that to Poenulus, but I think there
is a Strain in the Construction. His Prologue to the Captivi is worth the
observing.

Fabulae huic operam date.
Pray mind the Play. The next words give the reason why it deserves regarding.

Non enim pertractate facta est
Neque spurcidici insunt versus immemorabiles.
We see here the Poet confesses Smut a scandalous Entertainment. That such
Liberties ought to fall under Neglect, to lie unmention'd, and be blotted out
of Memory.

And that this was not a Copy of his Countenance we may learn from his
Compositions. His best Plays are almost always Modest and clean Complexion'd.
His Amphitrio excepting the ungenuine Addition is such. His Epidicus the
Masterpiece of his whole Collection is inoffensive Throughout: And so are his
Menechmi, Rudens, and Trinummus, which may be reckoned amongst some of his next
Best. His Truculentus another fine Play (though not entire) with a Heathen
Allowance, is pretty Passable. To be short: Where he is most a Poet, he is
generally least a Buffoon. And where the Entertainment is Smut, there is rarely
any other Dish well dressed: The Contrivance is commonly wretched, the Sense
lean and full of Quibbles. So that his Understanding seems to have left him
when he began to abuse it.

To conclude, Plautus does not dilate upon the Progress, Successes, and
Disappointments of Love, in the Modern way. This is nice Ground, and therefore
He either stands off, or walks gravely over it, He has some regard to the
Retirements of Modesty, and the Dignity of Humane Nature, and does not seem to
make Lewdness his Business. To give an Instance. Silenium is much gone in Love,
but Modest withal, though formerly Cistellar. A. 1.
debauched.

She is sorry her Spark was forced from her, and in Danger of being lost. But
then she keeps within compass and never flies out into Indecency. Alcesimarchus
is strangely smitten with this Silenium, and almost distracted to recover her.
He is uneasy and blusters, and Ibid. A. 2.
threatens, but his Passion goes off in Generals. He Paints no Images of his
Extravagance, nor descends to any nauseous particulars.

And yet after all, Plautus wrote in an Age not perfectly refined, and often
seems to design his Plays for a Vulgar Capacity. 'Twas upon this view I suppose
his Characters exceed Nature, and his ill Features are drawn too large: His old
Men over credulous, his Misers Romantic, and his Coxcombs improbably singular.
And it is likely for this reason his Slaves might have too much Liberty.

Terence appeared when Breeding was more exact, and the Town better polished;
And he manages accordingly: He has Heauton
but one faulty bordering Expression, which is that of Chremes to Clitipho.
This single Sentence apart, the rest of his Book is (I think) unsullied and fit
for the nicest Conversation. I mean only in referrence to the Argument in Hand,
for there are things in Him, which I have no intention to warrant. He is
Extremely careful in the Behavior of his Women. Neither Glycerium in Andria,
Pamphila in Eunuchus, or Pamphila in Adelphi, Phanium in Phormio, or Philumena
in Hecyra, have any share of Conversation upon the Stage. such Freedom was then
thought too much for the Reservedness of a Maiden-Character. It Is true in
Heautontimoroumenos the Poets Plot obliged Antiphila to go under the Disguise
of Bacchis her Maid. Upon this Occasion they hold a little Discourse together.
But then Bacchis though she was a Woman of the Town, behaves her self with all
the Decency imaginable. She does not talk in the Language of her Profession.
But commends Antiphila for her Virtue: Antiphila only says how constant she has
been to Chinia, seems surprised at his Arrival, and salutes him civilly upon it,
and we hear no more from her. Mr. Dryden seems to refer to this Conduct in his
Dramatick Poesy. He censures the Romans for making Mutes of their single
Women. This He calls the Breeding of the Old Elizabeth way, which was for Maids
to be seen and not to be heard. Under Favor the old Discipline would be very
serviceable upon the Stage. As matters go, the Mutes are much to few. For
certainly it is better to say nothing, than talk out of Character, and to ill
purpose.

To return. The Virgin injured by Chaerea does nothing but weep, and will not so
much as speak her misfortune to the Eunuch.
Women. But Comedy is strangly improved since that time; For Dalinda has a
great deal more Courage, though the loss of her Virtue was her own Love Triump.
Fault.

But Terence has that regard for Women, that he will not so much as touch upon an
ill Subject before them. Thus Chremes was ashamed to mention any thing about
his Sons Lewdness when his Wife was present.

Heauton. A. 5. 4.
Pudet dicere hac praesente verbum turpe.
The Slaves in this Comedian are kept in order and civilly bred. They Guard and
Fence when occasion requires, and step handsomely over a dirty place. The Eunuch
A. 5. 4. 5. Adelph. A. 2. 3.
Poet did not think Littleness and low Education a good Excuse for Ribaldry. He
knew Infection at the weakest, might seize on some Constitutions: Besides, the
Audience was a Superior Presence, and ought to be considered. For how Negligent
soever People may'be at Home, yet when they come before their Betters it is
Manners to look wholesome.

Now though Plautus might have the richer Invention; Terence was always thought
the more judicious Comedian. His Raillery is not only finer, and his style
better polished; but his Characters are more just, and he seems to have reached
farther into Life than the other. To take Leave of this Author, even his
Serumpets are better behaved than our honest Women, than our Women of Quality
of the English Stage. Bacchis in Heautontimoroumenos, and Bacchis in Hocyra,
may serve for example. They are both modest, and converse not unbecoming their
Sex. Thais the most accomplished in her way, has a great deal of Spirit and
wheadling in her Character, Eunuch.
but talks no Smut.

Thus we see with what Caution and Sobriety of Language Terence manages. It Is
possible this Conduct might be his own Modesty, and result from Judgment and
Inclination. But however his Fancy stood, he was sensible the Coarse way would
not do. The Stage was then under Discipline, the public Censors formidable,
and the Office of the Choragus was originally to prevent the Excesses of
Liberty.

To this we may add that Nobless had Casaub. Annot, in Curcul Plauti.
no Relish for Obscenity; 'twas the ready way to Disoblige them. And therefore
it is Horaces Rule.

Nec immunda crepent ignominiosaque dicta. De A te Poet.

Ossenduntur enim quibus est Equus and Pater, and res.
The Old Romans were particularly careful their Women might not be affronted
in Conversation: For this reason the Unmarried kept off from Entertainments for
Var. apud. Nonium.
fear of learning new Language. And in Greece no Woman above the degree of a
Slave, was treated abroad by any but Corn. Nep.
Relations. It Is probable the old Comedy was silenced at Athens upon this
Score, as well as for Defamation. For as Aristotle observes the new Set of
Comedians Arist. Lib. 4. de Mor. cap. 14.
were much more modest than the former. In this celebrated Republic, if the
Poets wrote any thing against Religion or Good Manners, They were Vit. Eurip.
ed Cantab. 1694.
tried for their Misbehaviour, and liable to the highest Forfeitures.

It may not be amiss to observe that there are no Instances of debauching
Married Women, in Plautus, nor Terence, no nor yet in Aristophanes. But on our
Stage how common is it to make a Lord, a Knight, or an Alderman a Cuckold? The
Schemes of Success are beaten out with great Variety, and almost drawn up into
a Science. How many Snares are laid for the undermining of Virtue, and with
what Triumph is the Victory proclaimed? The Finess of the Plot, and the Life of
the Entertainment often lies in these Contrivances. But the Romans had a
different sense of these Matters, and saw through the consequences of them. The
Government was awake upon the Theater, and would not suffer the Abuses of
Honor, and Family, to pass into Diversion. And before we part with these
Comedians we may take notice that there are no Smutty Songs in their Plays; in
which the English are extremely Scandalous. Love for Love. Love Triump. etc.
Now to work up their Lewdness with Verse, and Music, doubles the Force of the
Mischief. It makes it more portable and at Hand, and drives it Stronger upon
Fancy and Practice.

To dispatch the Latins all together. Seneca is clean throughout the Piece, and
stands generally off from the point of Love. He has no Courting unless in p.
14. Ed Scriv.
his Hercules Furens: And here the Tyrant Lycus addresses Megara very briefly,
and in Modest and remote Language. In his Thebais, Oedipus's Incest is reported
at large, but without any choking Description. It Is granted Phaedra speaks her
Passion plainly out, and owns the strength of the Impression, and is far less
prudent than in Euripides. But though her Hippol.
Thoughts appear too freely, her Language is under Discipline.

Let us now Travel from Italy into Greece, and take a view of the Theater at
Athens. In this City the Stage had both its beginning and highest Improvement.
Aeschylus was the first who appeared with any Reputation. His Genius seems
noble, and his Mind generous, willing to transfuse it self into the Audience,
and inspire them with a Spirit of Bravery. To this purpose his Style is
Pompous, Martial, and Enterprizing. There is Drum and Trumpet in his Verse.
It Is apt to excite an Heroic Ardour, to awaken, warm, and push forward to
Action. But his Metal is not always under Management. His Inclination for the
Sublime; carrys him too far: He is sometimes Embarrass'd with Epithites. His
Metaphors are too stiff, and far fetched; and he rises rather in Sound, than in
Sense. However generally speaking, his Materials are both shining and solid,
and his Thoughts lofty, and uncommon. This Tragedian had always a nice regard
to Good Manners. He knew corrupting the People was the greatest disservice to
the Commonwealth; And that Public Ruin was the effect of general Debauchery.
For this reason he declines the Business of Amors, and declares expressly
against it. Now here we cannot expect any length of Testimony. A^^^^oph. Ran.
His aversion to the subject makes him touch very sparingly upon it. But in
this case there is no need of much citation. His very Omissions are Arguments,
and his Evidence is the stronger for being short. That (...) I meet with shall
be produced.

1 st. Orestes was obliged by the Oracle Xonpop. 263. Ed. Steph.
to revenge his Fathers Death in the Murder of his Mother. When he was going
to kill her, he Mentions her Cruelty, but waves her Adultery. Euripides Orest.
48. Ed Cantab.
approved this Reservedness and makes his Electra practice it upon the same
occasion Aeschylus in his next Play complements his Country with a great deal
of Address in the Persons of the Eumenides. They are very Gentile and Poetical
in their Civilities: Among other things They wish the Virgins may all Marry and
make the Country Populous: Here the Poet does but just glance upon the Subject
of Love; and yet he governs the (...). 305.
Expression with such care, that the wishes contain a Hint to Sobriety, and
carry a Face of Virtue along with them.

The Double Dealer runs Riot upon such an Occasion as this; and gives Lord
Touchwood a mixture of Smut and p. 79.
Pedantry to conclude with, and yet this Lord was one of his best Characters:
But Poets are now grown Absolute within themselves, and may put Sense and
Quality upon what Drudgeries they please. To return. Danaus cautions his
Daughters very handsomely in point of Behavior. They were in a strange Country,
and had Poverty and Dependence to struggle with: These were circumstances of
Danger, and might make him the more pressing. He leaves therefore a solemn
Charge with them for their Security, bids them never to subsist upon Infamy,
but to prefer their Virtue to their Life.

(...).
(...). 340.
(...).
Our Poets I suppose would call this Preaching, and think it a dull Business.
However I cannot forbear saying an honest Heathen is none of the worst Men: A
very indifferent Religion well Believed, will go a great way.

To proceed. Sophocles appeared next upon the Stage, and was in earnest an
Extraordinary Person. His Conduct is more Artificial, and his Style more just,
than that of Aeschylus. His Characters are well drawn, and Uniform with
themselves: His Incidents, are often surprising, and his Plots unprecipitated.
There is nothing but what is Great, and Solemn Throughout. The Reasoning is
well Colored. The Figures are sometimes Bold, but not Extravagant. There are
no Flights of Bombast, no Towering above Nature and Possibility: In short, Don
Sebast. p. 12.
nothing like Don Sebastians Reigning in his Atoms.

This Tragedian like Aeschylus does not often concern himself with Amors, and
when he does, nothing can be more temperate, and decent. For example where the
Incest of Oedipus is described, the Offensiveness of the Idea is screen'd off
and broken by Metaphorical and distant Expressions. Oedip. Tyran. Ed Steph.
In another Play Creon resolves to put Antigone to Death for presuming to bury
Polynices. This Lady and Haemon Creons Son were very far engaged; Haemon
endeavors to dissuade his Father from Antigones Execution: He tells him the
burying her Brother though against his Order, was a popular Action. And that the
People would resent her being punished: Antig 242. 244.
But never so much as mentions his own Concern unless in one Line; which was so
obscure that Creon misunderstood him. Antigone amongst her other Misfortunes
laments her dying Young and Single, but says not one word about Haemon. The
Poet takes care not to bring these two Lovers upon the Stage together, for fear
they might prove unmanagable? Had They been with us, they had met with kinder
treatment. They might have had Interviews and Time and Freedom enough. Enough
to mud their Fancy, to tarnish their Quality, and make their Passion
Scandalous. In the Relation of Haemons Death, his Love is related too, and that
with all the Life and Pathos imaginable. But the Description is within the
Terms of Honor: The tendernesses are Solemn, as well as Soft: They move to
Pity and Concern, and go no farther. Ibdi. 264,
In his Trachiniae the Chorus owns the Force of Love next to irresistible;
gently hints the Intrigues of the Gods, and then passes on to a handsome Image
of the Combat Teach, 348.
between Achelous and Hercules. We see how lightly the Poet touches upon an
amorous Theme: He glides along like a Swallow upon the Water, and skims the
Surface, without dipping a Feather.

Sophocles will afford us no more, let us therefore take a view of Euripides.
It Is the Method of this Author to decline the Singularities of the Stage, and
to appear with an Air of Conversation. He delivers great Thoughts in Common
Language, and is dressed more like a Gentleman than a Player. His Distinction
lies in the perspicuity of his Style; In Maxim, and Moral Reflection; In his
peculiar Happiness for touching the Passions, especially that of Pity: And
lastly, in exhausting the Cause, and arguing pro and Con, upon the streach of
Reason. So much by way of Character. And as for the Matter before us He is
entirely Ours. We have had an Instance or two already in Electra and Phaedra:
To go on to the rest. In his Hippolitus He calls Whoring, stupidness and
playing the Fool. And to be Chaste and regular, is with him, as well as with
Aeschylus, (...). As muchas to say it is the Consequence of Sense, and right
(...). Ed Cant. 241: 250. 252.
Thinking. Phaedra when her Thoughts were embarrass'd with Hippolitus,
endeavors to disentangle her self by Argument. She declaims with a great deal
of Satyr against intemperate Women; she concluded rather to die then dishonor
her Husband and Stain her Family. The Blemishes of Parents, as she goes on,
often stuck upon their Children, and made them appear with Disadvantage. Upon
this, the Chorus is transported with the Virtue of her Resolution and cries out

(...) Ibid. 232. 233.

(...).
How becoming a Quality is Modesty in all Places.
How strangly does it burnish a Character, and oblige ones Reputation?
The Scholiast upon these verses of Hippolitus.

(...)
(...), etc.
Makes this Paraphrase. The Mind should be clean and unsulli^ that the Muses
being Virgins their Performances should agree with their Condition.

To proceed. Hermione complains against Andromache because she was entertained
by her Husband: For this Andromache tells her she talked too much for a Androm.
p. 303.
Young Woman, and discovered her Opinion too far. Achilles at the first Sight
of Clytemnestra, lets her understand he was as much taken with the Sobriety of
her Air, as with the rest of her fine Face and Person. Jphig in Aulid. p. 51.
She receives the Complement kindly, and commends hint for commending Modesty.
Menelaus and Helen after a long Absence manage the surprise of their good
Fortune handsomely. The Most tender Helen. 277, 278.
Expressions stands clear of ill Meaning. Had Osmin parted with Almeria as
civilly as these Two met, it had been much better. That Rant of smut and
profainness Mourning. Bride. p. 36.
might have been spared. The Reader shall have some of it.

O my Almeria;
What do the Damned endure but to despair,
But knowing Heaven, to know it lost for ever.
Were it not for the Creed, these Poets would be crampt in their Courtship, and
Mightily at a loss for a Simile! But Osmin is in a wonderful Passion. And truly
I think his Wits, are in some danger, as well as his Patience. You shall hear.

What are all Wracks, and Whips, and Wheels to this;
Are they not soothing softness, sinking Ease,
And wasting Air to this?
Sinking Ease, and Wasting Air, I confess are strange comforts; This Comparison
is somewhat oddly equipped, but Lovers like sick People may say what they
please! Almeria takes this Speech for a Pattern, and suits it exactly in her
return.

O I am struck, thy words are Bolts of Ice?
Which shot into my Breast now melt and chill me.
Bolts of Ice? Yes most certainly! For the Cold is struck up into her Head, as
you may perceive by what follows.

I chatter, shake, and faint with thrilling Fears.
By the way it is a mighty wonder to hear a Woman Chatter! But there is no
jesting, for the Lady is very bad. She will not be held up by any Means, but Cries
out:

-- lower yet, down down;
One would think she was learning a Spanel to Set. But there is something
behind.

-- no more we'll lift our Eyes,
But prone and dumb, Rot the firm Face of Earth,
With Rivers of incessant scalding Rain.
These Figures are some of them as stiff as Statues, and put me in mind of
Sylvesters Dubartas.

Now when the Winters keener breath began
To Crystallize, the Baltic Ocean,
To glaze the Lakes, to bridle up the Floods,
And periwig with Snow the bald pate woods.
I take it, the other Verses are somewhat of Kin to These, and shall leave them
to Spanish Fiyar. Ep. Ded.
Mr. Dryden's Reflection. But then as for Soothing Softness, Sinking Ease,
Wasting Air, thrilling Fears, and incessant scalding Rain; It puts me to
another stand. For to talk a little in the way of the Stage. This Litter of
Epithetes makes the Poem look like a Bitch overstock'd with Puppies, and sucks
the Sense almost to skin and Bone. But all this may pass in a Playhouse: False
Rhetoric and false Jewels, do well together. To return to Euripides.
Cassandra in reporting the Misfortunes of the Greeks stops at the Adulteries of
Clytemnestra and Aegiala And gives this handsome reason for making a Halt.

(...)
(...). Troad. p. 146.

Foul Things are best unsaid, I am for no Muse,
That loves to flourish on Debauchery.
Some Things are dangerous in report, as well as practice, and many times a
Disease in the Description. This Euripides was aware of and managed
accordingly, and was remarkably regular both in style, and Manners. How
wretchedly do we fall short of the Decencies of Heathenism! There Is nothing
more ridiculous than Modesty Plain Dealer. p. 21.
on our Stage. It Is counted an ill bred Quality, and almost shamed out of Use.
One would think Mankind were not the same, that Reason was to be read Provoked
Wife. p. 41.
Backward, and Virtue and Vice had changed Place.

What then? Must Life be huddled over, Nature left imperfect, and the Humor of
the Town not shown? And pray where lies the Grievance of all This? Must we
relate whatever is done, and is every Thing fit for Representation? is a Man
that has the Plague proper to make a Sight of? And must he needs come Abroad
when he breaths Infection, and leaves the Tokens upon the Company? What then
must we know nothing? Look you! All Experiments are not worth the making. It Is
much better to be ignorant of a Disease then to catch it. Who would wound
himself for Information about Pain, or smell a Stench for the sake of the
Discovery? But I shall have occasion to encounter this Objection afterward,
Remarks upon Quixot.
and therefore shall dismiss it at present.

The Playhouse at Athens has been hitherto in Order, but are there no
Instances to the contrary? Does not Aristophanes take great Liberties and make
Women speak extraordinary Sentences? He does so. But his Precedent fignifies
nothing in the case. For

1 st. We have both the Reason of the Thing, and all the Advantage of Authority
on the other side. We have the Practice and Opinion of Men of much greater
Sense, and Learning then Himself. The best Philosophers and Poets, Critics and
Orators, both Greek and Latin, both Ancient and Modern, give the Cause against
him. But Aristophanes his own Plays are sufficient to ruin his Authority. For

1 st, He discovers himself a downright Atheist. This Charge will be easily
Made good against him by his Comparing his Nubes with other Plays. The Design
of his Nubes was to expose Socrates, and make a Town jest of him. Now this
Philosopher was not only a Person of great Sense and Probity, but was likewise
supposed to refine upon the Heathen Theology, to throw off the Fabulous part of
it, and to endeavor to bring it back to the Standard of Natural Religion. And
therefore Justin Martyr and some others of the Fathers, looked on him as a
Person of no Pagan Belief, and thought he suffered for the Unity of the
Godhead. This Man Aristophanes makes fine sport with as he fancies: He puts
him in a Fools Coat, and then points at him. He makes Socrates instruct his
Disciple Strepsiades in a new Religion, and tell him that he did not own the
Gods in the vulgar Notion. He brings him in elsewhere affirming Nub. Act. 1. Sc.
3. p. 104. Ed. Amstel.
that the Clouds are the only Deities. Which is the same Lash which Juvenal
gives the Jews, because they worshipped but one single Sovereign Being.

Nil praeetr Nubes and Coeli numen adorant. Sat. 14.

Socrates goes on with his Lecture of Divinity and declares very roundly that
there is no such thing as Jupiter. Afterward p. 106.
he advances farther, and endeavors to get Strepsiades under Articles to
acknowledge no other Gods, but Chaos, the Clouds, Nub. p. 110.
and the Tongue. At last the Poet brings the Philosopher to public Penance
for his Singularities. He sets fire to his School for teaching Young People (as
he pretends) to dispute against Law and Justice; for advancing Atheistick
Notions, and burlesquing the Religion of the Country. Act. 5. p. 176.


That Socrates was no Atheist is clear from Instances enough. To mention but
one. The Confidence he had in his Demon, or Genius by which he governed his
Affairs puts it beyond all dispute. However (...).
it is plain Aristophanes was not of his Religion. The Comedian was by no means
for correcting the Common Persuasion. So that he must either be an Orthodox
Heathen or nothing at all. Let us see then with what Respect he treats the
Received Divinities. This Play, where one would not expect it, discovers
somewhat of his Devotion. In the beginning of it Phidippides, who was a sort of
New Market Spark, swears by Jocky Neptune, that he had a Nub. p. 86
strange Kindness for his Father Strepsiades. upon this the old Man replies; No
Jocky, if you love me; that Deity has almost undone me. This was making
somewhat bold with Neptune who was Jupiters Brother, Sovereign of a whole
Element, and had no less than the Third Share of the Universe! Certainly
Aristophanes had no Venture at Sea, or else must think the Trident signified
but very little. But this is mere Ceremony to what follows. In his first Play
Plutus pretends he had a mind to oblige only Men of Probity, but Jupiter had
made him blind on purpose that he might not distinguish Honest men from Knaves:
For to be plain Jupiter had a Pique against Good people. Toward the end of
this Comedy Mercury is abused by Cario, and Plut. A. 1. Sc. 2.
acts a ridiculous, and lessening part himself. Afterward he complains heavily
that since Plutus was cured of his Blindness, the business of Sacrifing fell
off, and the Gods were ready to starve. This Mercury has the same ill Usage
with the Poets, Knaves, Informers, and Lewd Women; From all this stuff put
together, his meaning is pretty plain, viz. That Religion was no better than an
Imposture supported by Art, and Ignorance: And that when Men's Understandings
were awake, and their Eyes a little open, they would have more discretion than
to be at any expense about the Gods.

This I take to be part of the Moral of his Fable. If we look farther into him
we shall see more of his Mind. His Ranae makes Merry with theHeathen Scheme of
Heaven and Hell. Here Charon and the Stygian Frogs are brought in Comically
enough. And that you may understand his opinion more perfectly we are told,
that He that Bilks his Catamite after a Sodomitical Abuse, is thrown into the
Common shore of Hades. And what Company do you think he is lodged with? Why
with those who Perjure themselves, with those who Kick their Fathers and
Mothers? It seems in the Poets Justice a Man Ram. p. 188.
might as good be false to his Oath, as to his Lewdness. To disappoint the
Stews, is every jot as great a Crime; as to fly in the Face of Nature, and
outrage our Parents. His Quartering his Malefactors thus critically, was
without question on purpose to Banter the persuasion of future Punishment. In
the same Play Xanthias bids Aeacus answer him by Jove, (...). This little
Scoundrel of a Slave has the Manners to make Jupiters Quality no better than
his own. To go on with him: In his Aves he speaks out to purpose. Here
Pisthetaerus tells Epops that if the Birds would build a Castle in the Air,
they might intercept the Fumes of the Sacrifices, and starve the Gods unless
they would come too, and be Tributary. It seems the Birds had very good
Pretenses to execute this project; for they were ancienter than Jupiter and
Saturn, and Governed before the Gods. And to speak truth were more capable of
the Function. Their Adviser goes on to inform 536. 538. 546.
them, that after they had built their pensile City, and fortifyed the Air,
their next business was to demand their ancient Soveragnity: If Jupiter refused
to quit, they were to declare a Holy War against Him, and the rest of the
Confederate Gods, and to cut off the Communication between Heaven and Earth.
Pisthaeterus grows very warm in his 542.
new Interest, and swears by Jove that Men ought to Sacrifice to the Birds, and
not to Jupiter. And if things came to a Rupture, and Jupiter grew Troublesome,
582.
he undertakes to send a Detachement of Eagles against Him; with Orders to
storm his Palace with Flambeaux, and fire it about his Ears. At last to prevent
the Calamities of a War, Hercules Ibid.
proposes an Accommodation, and is willing Jupiter should Resign. Neptune calls
him a Block-head for his pains, because he was Heir at Law, and after Jupiters
Decease was of Course to succeed in his Dominions: Once more, and I have done:
In Eirene, Trygaeus speaks in a menacing 602.
way. That unless Jupiter gave him Satisfaction in his business, he would
inform against Him as a disaffected Person, and a betrayer of the Liberties of
Greece. I Eiren. 616.
might add many other Instances, and some more Scandalous than any I have
mentioned; But these are sufficient to show the Authors Sentiment: And is it
any wonder an Atheist should misbehave himself in point of Modesty? What can we
expect less from those who laugh at the Being of a God, at the Doctrines of
Providence, and the Distinctions of Good and Evil? A Sceptick has no notion of
Conscience; no Relish for Virtue, nor is under any Moral restraints from Hope
or Fear. Such a one has nothing to do but to consult his Ease, and gratify his
Vanity, and fill his Pocket. But how these Ends are compassed, he has no
squeamishness, or Scruples about it. It Is true when the Methods of Lewdness
will Take, they are generally most agreeable. This way suits their Talent, and
screens their practice, and obliges their Malice. For nothing is a greater
Eyesore to these Men, then Virtue and Regularity. What a pleasure is it then
to be admired for Mischief, to be revenged on Religion, and to see Vice prosper
and improve under our Hands! To return: Beside Aristophanes; Atheism, I have a
Second objection to his Authority, and that is want of Judgment. If we examine
his Plays we shall find his Characters improper, or ununiform; either wrong at
first, or unsteady in the Right. For the purpose. In his Nubes. A. 3. S. 3. p.
146. 150. He puts dirty expressions in the Mouth of his Man of Probity, makes
him declaim vitiously against Vice, and Corrects scurrility with Impudence; Now
what can be more idle and senceless, than such Conduct as this? Epecially when
this Justus as he calls him had told them in the beginning of his speech, that
People used to be well slashed for such Fooling, when Government and Discipline
were in their due Force. The Chorus of his Ranae slides p. 142. p. 200.
into the same Inconsistency of Precept, and Practice. Farther, in the Progress
of this Play; Aeschylus falls a rallying contrary to his Humor, and jests away
his own Arguments at a very unseasonable Juncture, when he was disputing for no
less prize than the Laureatship. This Tragedian after he had played 242.
a little with the Story of Bellerophon, goes on in the same strain; And
charges Euripides that he had furnished all sorts of People with Saweiness and
Prattle. The Schools and Academies were spoiled by this means; So that the Boys
were often whipped, and the Boatswains drubb'd, for their Chattering. These
Comical Levities P. 244.
come with an ill Grace from Aeschylus. His Character was quite different both
in Reality, and in the Play before us. He is all along represented as a Person
of a serious Temper, of a reserved Loftiness, Choleric, and tender of his
Honor to an Excess, and almost in a rage at the Affront of a Rival, and being
forced to enter the Lists with Euripides. The case standing thus, neither the
Man, nor the Business, would admit of Drolling. Another Instance of his want of
Conduct we have in his Concianotores. Here Blepyrus and some others of his
Legislative Assembly, talk at a very dirty insipid rate. The Lowest of the Mob,
can hardly jest with less Wit, and more Lewdness. And to make their Discourse
more remarkable; These douty Members were just going to the House, and had
their Heads full of the Good of the Nation, when they entertained themselves
thus decently. And are these little Buffoons fit to consult de Arduis Regni,
etc. to (...)
give Authority to Law, and Rules for public Life? Does Ribaldry and Nonsense
become the Dignity of their Station, and the Solemnity of their Office? To make
his Parliament Men play the Fool thus egregiously, must needs have a great deal
of Decorum, and State Policy in the Contrivance; And is just as wise as if a
Painter should have Drawn them in the Habit of Jack-Puddings, and
Merry-Andrews. But Aristophanes has still higher Flights of Absurdity. He will not
so much as spare the Gods but makes them act these little Parts of Clownishness
and Infamy. Bacchus and Hercules in his Ranae are forced to talk Smut and rally
like Link-boys, and do almost all the Tricks of Bartholomew-Fair. To mention
something that will bear the quoting. Bacchus enquires of Hercules the readiest
way to Hades, or the other World. He bids him either Hang, or Poison himself,
and he cannot miss the Road. This is Hercules's Humor to a Tittle! And
represents him as much to the Life, as an Ape would do the Grand Ranae p. 186.
p. 182.
Signior at a public Audience! This with a short Sentence or two of Lewdness,
is the hardest of Hercules his Usage: And it is well he escaped so; for Bacchus
is treated much worse. He appears under the disadvantages of a Clownish
Debaush, and a Coward. And is terribly afraid of a Spectre. When p. 192. 194,
196.
he comes before Aeacus, this Judge is very rough with him; and tries his
pretenses to a Deity by Bastinado: Bacchus howls in the drubbing and had almost
spoiled all. Act 2. Sc. 6.
Now does this paultry Behavior agree with the Heathen Theology, with the
Common Opinion concerning Bacchus and Hercules? Does a Blew-Cap and a Ladle,
become the Sons of Jupiter and the Objects of Religious Worship? Those who at
the lowest, were counted the Conquerors of the World, and more than Men both by
Birth and Enterprises? Sophocles and Euripides make these two Persons manage at
a quite different rate of Decency. It Is no defense to say Aristophanes wrote
Comedy, and so was obliged to make his Scenes more diverting. This excuse I say
is defective; for a Comedian ought to imitate Life and Probability, no less
than a Tragedian. To Metomorphose Characters, and present Contradictions to
Common Belief, is to write, Farce instead of Plays. Such Comedians like Thespis
ought to have a traveling Stage, and take the Air with Porcupines and
Dromedaryes. If it is said that Gravity and greatness does not suit the
Complexion and Entertainment of Comedy. To this I answer, that therefore the
Persons should be chosen accordingly. They should have nothing in their known
Humor, and Condition too Noble, and solemn for Trifling. It Is Horaces advice.

Aut famam sequere, aut convenientia finge Scriptor. De. Art. Poet.

Let us remember that Operations always resemble the Nature from whence they
flow. Great Persons should therefore have a correspondent Behavior assigned
them. To make Beings much Superior to the Biggest of Mankind, talk below the
Least, is absurd and ridicules. This Aristophanes seems sensible of in his
defense of Aeschylus. Here Euripides objects Ranae p. 242.
to Aeschylus, that he was too rumbling, noisy, and bombastick, over affecting
that which Horace calls

Ampullas, and sesquipedalia Verba.

To this Aeschylus Answers, that the Thoughts, and Designs of Heroes must be
delivered in Expressions proportioned to their Greatness. It being likely that
the Demigods spoke up to their Dignity and Stature: And as they were
distinguished by the richness of their Habit, so they had a more Magnificent
Language than other Mortals. To this Euripides replys nothing; from whence you
may conclude the Poet thought the Apology not unreasonable. In short
Aristophanes had Sense but he does not always use it. He is not equal, and
uniforme. Sometimes you have him flat and foolish a good while together. And
where he has Spirit, it is oftentimes lavished away to little purpose. Ranae A
1. Sc. 1. Concionat.
His Buffoonery is commonly too strong for his Judgment. This makes him let sly
his jests without regard to Person or occasion: And thus by Springing the Game
too soon, the Diversion is lost. I could make several other Material Objections
against the Conduct of his Plays; But this being not necessary I shall observe
in the

3 d. Place. That notwithstanding the scandalous Liberty for which Aristophanes
is so remarkable; yet in his Lucid Intervalls, when Sense and Sobriety return
upon him, he pronounces against his own Practice. In the contest between
Aeschylus and Euripides, Bacchus is made the Umpire of the Controversy.
Aeschylus begins Ranae p. 238.
with a Question, and asks Euripides what it is which makes a Poet admired? He
answers. It Is for the address of his Conduct, and the handsome Turns of
Morality in his Poems. It Is because his performance has a tendency to form the
Audience to Virtue, and Improvement. Aeschylus demands of him farther; But
suppose you debauched the Age, and made an Honest and a brave People Lewd, and
good for nothing, what do you deserve then? Here Bacchus interposes, and cries
out, what does he deserve? A Halter! pray don't ask so plain a question. And
afterward we are told, that Poets are valuable only for describing Things
useful, in Life and Religion, for polishing Inventions, and setting off great
Examples with Luster, and Advantage. In the progress p. 240.
of the Dispute, Aeschylus taxes Euripides with being too uncautious in his
Representations; And tells him that Poets ought to conceal that which is
vicious in Story; And entertain with nothing but Virtue, and Sobriety: He goes
on reprimanding Euripides for his Dramatick incests, Strumpets, and Amors: And
as for himself, to his best remembrance, He never brought any Love-Intrigues
upon the p. 242. 244.
Stage.

This is very significant expostulation: and contains very good Rules for the
Trial of the Muses: But if the English Stage, should be obliged to this Test;
Aristophanes must set fire to it, and that with much more reason than to
Socrates his School. Now that Aeschylus spoke Aristophanes's Sense is pretty
plain: For first; As to the Business of Love, Aristophanes always declines it;
He never patches up a Play with Courtship, and Whining, though he wrote nothing
but Comedy. In the next place the Chorus which is usually the Poets
Interpreter, speaks honorably of Aeschylus even to a Preference; And at last
255. 267.
Judge Bacchus gives Sentence for him.

Thus we see Aristophanes Confutes his own Lewdness, and comes in Evidence
against himself. This with the other two Exceptions I have made good against
him, are sufficient to take off the Force of the Precedent, and make him an
insignificant Authority.

To what I have observed from the Stage of the Ancients, I could add the
Authorities of Aristotle, and Quintilian, both extraordinary Persons, but I
shall reserve their Testimony till Afterward.

To come Home, and near our own Times: The English Theater from Queen Elizabeth
to King Charles II. will afford us something not inconsiderable to our purpose.

As for Shakespeare, he is too guilty to make an Evidence: But I think he gains
not much by his Misbehaviour; He has commonly Plautus's Fate, where there is
most Smut, there is least Sense.

Ben. Johnson is much more reserved in his Plays, and declares plainly for
Modesty in his Discoveries, some of his Words are these.

A just Writer whom he calls a True Artificer, will avoid Obscene and
Effeminate Phrase. Where Manners and Fashions Discov. p. 700.
are Corrupted, Language is so too. The excess of Feasts and Apparel, are the
Notes of a Sick State, and the Wantonness of Language p. 701.
of a sick Mind. A little after he returns to the Argument, and applies his
Reasoning more particularly to the Stage. Poetry, (says he) and Picture, both
behold Pleasure, and profit, as their common Object, but should abstain from
all base Pleasures, least they should wholly Err from their End; And while they
seek to better Men's Minds, Destroy their Manners, Insolent and obscene
Speeches, and Jests upon the best Men, are most likely to excite Laughter. But
this is truly leaping from the Stage to the Tumbrill again, reducing all Wit to
the Original Dung-Cart. More might p. 706. 717.
be cited to this purpose, but that may serve for an other Occasion: In the
mean time I shall go on to Beaumont and Fletcher.

Fletchers Faithful Shepheardess is remarkably Moral, and a sort of
Exhortation to Chastity. This Play met with ill Judges, 'twas Hissed before
half Acted, and seems to have suffered on the account of its Innocence. Soon
after Ben. Johnson Beauments, etc. Works.
and Beaumont appear justifying the Author in a Copy of Verses. And as Beaumont
commends Modesty in Fletcher, so he is commended himself by Mr. Earl for the
Ibid.
same Quality.

Such Passions, Such Expressions meet my Eye,
Such Wit untainted with Obscenity.
And as I remember Jasper Main has some strokes to the same purpose. Fletcher
is Ibid.
still more full for the Cause. Indeed nothing can be more express. He delivers
himself by way of Prologue; where the Poet speaks in his own Person. The
Prologue to the Woman-Hater, very frankly lets the Audience know what they are
to expect. If there be any amongst you, (says he) that come to hear Lascivious
Scenes, let them depart; For I do pronounce this, to the utter discomfort of
all two-penny Gallery Men, you shall no Bawdry in it. We find in those days
Smut was the expectation of a Coarse Palate, and relished by none but two-penny
Customers. In the Knight of the Burning Pestle, part of the Prologue runs thus.
They were banished the Theater at Athens, and from Rome hissed, that brought
Parasites on the Stage with Apish Actions, or Fools with uncivil Habits, or
Courtezans with immodest words. Afterward Prologue, who represents a Person,
gives us more to the same purpose.

-- -- Fly far from hence
All private taxes, immodest phrases,
Whatever may but look like Vicious.
For wicked mirth, never true Pleasure brings;
For honest Minds, are pleased with honest things.
I have quoted nothing but Comedy in this Author. The Coronation is another.
And the Prologue tells you there is

No Undermirth such as does lard the Scene,
For Coarse Delight, the Language here is clean,
And confident our Poet bad me say,
He Will bate you but the Folly of a Play.
For which although dull Souls his Pen despise;
Who think it yet too early to be wise.
The Nobles yet will thank his Muse, at least
Excuse him, cause his Thought aimed at the Best.
Thus these Poets are in their Judgments clearly ours. It Is true their Hand was
not always steady. But thus much may be aver'd, that Fletcher's later Plays are
the most inoffensive. This is either a sign of the Poets Reformation; or that
the exceptionable Passages belonged to Beaumont, who dyed first.

To these Authorities of our own Nation, I shall add a considerable Testimony
out of Mr. Corneille. This Author was sensible that though the Expression of his
Theodore. Ed. Roven. Ep. Ded.
Theodore was altogether unsmutty, Yet the bare Idea of Prostitution
uneffected, shocked the Audience, and made the Play miscarry. The Poet protests
he took great care to alter the natural Complexion of the Image, and to convey
it decently to the Fancy; and delivered only some part of the History as
inoffensively as possible. And after all his Screening and Conduct, the Modesty
of the Audience would not endure that little, the Subject forced him upon. He
is positive 'the Comedies St. Augustine declaimed against, were not such as the
French. For theirs are not spectacles of Turpitude, as that Father justly calls
those of his Time. The French generally speaking, containing nothing but
examples of Innocence, Piety and Virtue.

In this Citation we have the Opinion of the Poet, the Practice of the French
Theater, and the Sense of that Nation, and all very full to our purpose.

To conclude this Chapter. By what has been offered, it appears that the
Present English Stage is superlatively Scandalous. It exceeds the Liberties of
all Times and Countries: It has not so much as the poor plea of a Precedent, to
which most other ill Things may claim a pretense. It Is mostly mere Discovery
and Invention: A new World of Vice found out, and planted with all the Industry
imaginable. Aristophanes himself, how bad soever in other respects, does not
amplyfie, and flourish, and run through all the Topics of Lewdness like these
Men. The Miscellany Poems are likewise horribly Licentious. They are sometimes
Collections from Antiquity, and osten, the worst parts of the worst Poets. And
to mend the Matter, the Christian Translation, is more nauseous than the Pagan
Original. Such stuff I believe was never seen, and suffered before. In a word,
If Poverty and Diseases, the Dishonor of Families, and the Debauching of
Kingdoms, are such valuable Advantages, then I confess these Books deserve
encouragement. But if the Case is otherwise, I humbly conceive the Proceeding
should be so too.

CHAP. II. The Profaness of the Stage.
AN other Instance of the Disorders of the Stage is their Profaness: This
Charge may come under these two particulars.

1st. Their Cursing and Swearing. 2dly. Their Abuse of Religion and Holy
Scripture.
1st Their Cursing and Swearing.

What is more frequent then their wishes of Hell, and Confusion, Devils and
Diseases, all the Plagues of this World, and the next, to each other? And as
for Swearing; it is used by all Persons, and upon all Occasions: By Heroes, and
Paltroons; by Gentlemen, and Clowns: Love, and Quarrels, Success, and
Disappointment, Temper, and Passion, must be varnished, and set off with Oaths.
At some times, and with some Poets Swearing is no ordinary Relief. It stands up
in the room of Sense, gives Spirit to a flat Expression, and makes a Period
Musical and Round. In short, it is almost all the Rhetoric, and Reason some
People are Masters of: The manner of performance is different. Some times they
mince the matter; change the Letter, and keep the Sense, as if they had a mind
to steal Gad for God.
a Swearing, and break the Commandment without Sin. At another time the Oaths
are clipped, but not so much within the Ring, but that the Image and
Superscription are visible. These expedients, I conceive are more for variety,
then Conscience: For when the fit comes on them, they make no difficulty of
Swearing at Length. Instances of all these kinds may be met with in the Old
Batchelour, Double Dealer, and Love for Love. And to mention no more, Don
Quixot, the Provoked Wife, and the Relapse, are particularly rampant and
scandalous. The English Stage exceed their predecessors in this, as well as
other Branches of immorality. Shakespeare is comparatively sober, Ben Jonson is
still more regular; And as for Beaument and Fletcher, In their Plays they are
commonly Profligate Persons that Swear, and even those are reproved for it.
Besides, the Oaths are not so full of Hell and Defiance, as in the Moderns.

So much for matter of Fact: And as for point of Law, I hope there needs not
many words to prove Swearing a Sin: For what is more provoking than contempt,
and what Sin more contemptuous than common Swearing? what can be more Insolent
and Irreligious, than to bring in God to attest our Trifles, to give Security
for our Follies, and to make part of our Diversion? To Play with Majesty and
Omnipotence in this manner, is to render it cheap and despicable. How can such
Customs as these consist with the belief of Providence or Revelation? The
Poets are of all People most to blame. They want even the Plea of Bullies and
Sharpers. There Is no Rencounters, no starts of Passion, no sudden Accidents to
discompose them. They swear in Solitude and cool Blood, under Thought and
Deliberation, for Business, and for Exercise: This is a terrible Circumstance;
It makes all Malice Prepence, and enflames the Guilt, and the Reckoning.

And if Religion signifies nothing, (as I am afraid it does with some People)
there is Law, as well as Gospel against Swearing. 3 d, Jac. 1. cap. 21. is
expressly against the Playhouse. It runs thus.

FOR the preventing and avoiding of the great abuse of the holy Name of God, in
Stage Plays, Enterludes etc. Be it enacted by out vereign Lord etc. That if at
any time, or times, after the End of this present Session of Parliament; any
Person or Persons do, or shall, in any Stage Play, Interlude, Show etc.
Ieastingly or Profanly, speak or use the Holy Name of God, or of Christ Jesus,
or of the Holy Ghost, or of the Trinity, which are not to be spoken, but with
Fear and Reverence; shall forfeit for every such offense, by him or them
committed, ten pounds: The one Mosty thereof to the King's Majesty, his heirs;
and Successors, the other Mosty thereof to him, or them, that will sue for the
same in any Court of Record at Westminster, wherein no essoin, protection, or
wager of Law shall be allowed.

By this Act not only direct Swearing, but all vain Invocation of the Name of
God is forbidden. This Statute well executed would mend the Poets, or sweep the
Box: And the Stage must either reform, or not thrive upon Profaness.

3 dly Swearing in the Playhouse is an ungentlemanly, as well as an unchristian
Practice. The Ladies make a considerable part of the Audience. Now Swearing
before Women is reckoned a Breach of good Behavior, and therefore a civil
Atheist will forbear it. The custom seems to go upon this Presumption; that the
Impressions of Religion are strongest in Women, and more generally spread. And
that it must be very disagreeable to them, to hear the Majesty of God treated
with so little respect. Besides: Oaths are a boistrous and tempestiuous sort of
Conversation; Generally the effects of Passion, and spoken with Noise, and
Heat. Swearing looks like the beginning of a Quarrel, to which Women have an
aversion: As being neither armed by Nature, nor disciplined by Custom for such
rough Disputes. A Woman will start at a Soldiers Oath, almost as much as at the
Report of his Pistol: And therefore a well Bred Man will no more Swear, than
Fight in the Company of Ladies.

A Second Branch of the Profaness of the Stage is their Abuse of Religion, and
Holy Scripture. And here sometimes they don't stop short of Blasphemy. To cite
all that might be Collected of this kind would be tedious. I shall give the
Reader enough to justify the Charge, and I hope to abhor the Practice.

To begin with the Mock-Astrologer. In the First Act the Scene is a Chapel;
And that the Use of such Consecrated places may be the better understood, the
time is taken up in Courtship, Raillery, and ridiculing Devotion. Jacinta takes
her turn among the rest. She Interrupts Theodosia, and cries out: why Sister,
Sister -- will you pray? what injury have I ever done you that you pray in my
Company? Wildblood Swears by Mahomet, rallies smuttily upon the other World,
and gives the preference to the Turkish Paradise! This p. 31.
Gentleman to encourage Jacinta to a Compliance in Debauchery, tells her Heaven
p. 37.
is all Eyes and no Tongue. That is, it sees Wickedness but conceals it. He
Courts much at the same rate a little before. When a Man comes to a great Lady,
he is fain to approach her with Fear, and Reverence, methinks there is something
of Godliness p. 24.
in it. Here you have the Scripture burlesqu'd, and the Pulpit Admonition
applied Hebr. 12.
to Whoring. Afterward Jacinta out of her great Breeding and Christianity,
swears by Alla, and Mahomet, and 34. 36.
makes a Jest upon Hell. Wildblood tells his Man that such undesigning Rogues
as he, make a Drudge of poor Providence. And Maskall to show his proficiency
under his Masters, replies to Bellamy, who would have had him told a Lie. Sir
upon the 55.
Faith of a Sinner you have had my last Lie already. I have not one more to do
me Credit, as I hope to be saved Sir.

In the close of the Play, They make sport with Apparitions and Fiends. One of
the Devils sneezes, upon this they give him the Blessing of the Occasion, and
conclude he has got cold by being too long out of the Fire. 59.


The Orphan lays the Scene in Christendom, and takes the same care of Religion.
Castalio Complements his Mistress to Adoration.

No Tongue my Pleasure and my Pain can tell: Orph. p. 20.

It Is Heaven to have thee, and without thee Hell.
Polydor when upon the attempt to debauch Monimia puts up this ejaculation.

Blessed Heaven assist me but in this dear Hour: p. 31.

Thus the Stage worships the true God in Blasphemy, as the Lindians did
Hercules by Cursing and throwing stones. This Lactan.
Polydor has another Flight of Profaness, but that has got a certain
Protection, and therefore must not be disturbed.

In the Old Batchelour, Vain-love asks Belmour, could you be content to go to
Heaven?

Bell. Hum, not immediately in my Conscence, not heartily. -- This is playing I
p. 19.
take it with Edge-Tools. To go to Heaven in jest, is the way to go to Hell in
earnest. In the Fourth Act, Lewdness is represented with that Gaity, as if the
Crime was purely imaginary, and lay only in ignorance and preciseness. Have you
thoroughly considered (says Fondlewife) how detestable, how Heinous, and how
crying a Sin the Sin of Adultery is? have you weighed I say? For it is a very
weighty Sin: and although it may lie -- yet thy Husband must also bear p. 28.
his part; For thy iniquity will fall on his Head. I suppose this fit of
Buffoonry and profaness, was to settle the Conscience of young Beginners, and
to make the Terrors of Religion insignificant. Bellmour desires Laetitia to
give him leave to swear by her Eyes and her Lips: He kisses the Strumpet, and
tells her, Eternity was in that Moment. p. 31.
Laetitia is horibly profane in her Apology to her Husband; but having the
Stage-Protection of Smut for her Guard, we must let her alone. Fondlewife
stalks under 38.
the same shelter, and abuses a plain Text of Scripture to an impudent Meaning.
p. 39.
A little before, Laetitia when her Intrigue with Bellmour was almost
discovered, supports her self with this Consideration. All my comfort lies in
his impudence, and Heaven be praised, he has a Considerable Portion. p. 39.
This is the Playhouse Grace, and thus Lewdness is made a part of Devotion!
There Is another Instance still behind: It Is that of Sharper to Vain-Love, and
lies thus.

I have been a kind of God Father to you, yonder: I have promised and vowed
something in your Name, which I think you are bound Id. 49.
to Perform. For Christians to droll upon their Baptism is somewhat
extraordinary; But since the Bible cannot escape, it is the less wonder to make
bold with the Catechism.

In the Double Dealer, Lady Plyant cries out Jesu and talks Smut in the same
Sentence. Sr. Paul Plyant whom the Poet Double Dealer. 34.
dubbed a Fool when he made him a Knight, talks very Piously! Blessed be
Providence, a Poor unworthy Sinner, I am mightily beholden 36.
to Providence: And the same word is thrice repeated upon an odd occasion. 55.
The meaning must be that Providence is a ridiculous supposition, and that none
but Blockheads pretend to Religion. But the Poet can discover himself farther
if need be. Lady Froth is pleased to call Jehu a Hackney Coachman. Upon this,
Brisk replies, p. 40.
If Jehu was a Hackney Coachman, I am answered -- you may put that into the
Marginal Notes though, to prevent Criticisms -- only mark it with a small
Asterisme and say, -- Jehu was formerly a Hackney Coachman. This for a heavy
Piece of Prosaness, is no doubt thought a lucky one, because it burlesques the
Text, and the Comment, all under one. I could go on with the Double Dealer but
he will come in my way afterward, and so I shall part with him at present. Let
us now take a veiw of Don Sebastian. And here the Reader cannot be long
unfurnished. Dorax shall speak first.

Shall I trust Heaven
With my revenge? then where is my satisfaction? Sebast. p. 9.

No, it must be my own, I scorn a Proxy.
But Dorax was a Renegado, what then? He had renounced Christianity, but not
Providence. Besides; such hideous Sentences ought not to be put in the Mouth of
the Devil. For that which is not fit to be heard, is not fit to be spoken. But
to some Peoplean Atheistical Rant is as good as a Flourish of Trumpets. To
proceed. Antonio though a professed Christian, mends the matter very little. He
is looking on a Lot which he had drawn for his Life: This proving unlucky,
after the preamble of a Curse or two, he calls it,

As black as Hell, an other lucky saying!
I think the Devils in me: -- good again,
I cannot speak one syllable but tends Id. p. 10.

To Death or to Damnation.
Thus the Poet prepares his Bullies for the other World! Hell and Damnation are
strange entertaining words upon the Stage! Were it otherwise, the Sense in
these Lines, would be almost as bad as the Conscience. The Poem warms and rises
in the working: And the next Flight is extremely remarkable:

Not the last sounding could surprise me more,
That summons drowsy Mortals to their doom,
When called in have they fumble for their Limbs: p. 47.

Very Solemnly and Religiously expressed! Lucian and Celsus could not have
ridiculed the Resurrection better! Certainly the Poet never expects to be
there. Such a light Turn would have agreed much better to a Man who was in the
Dark, and was feeling for his Stockings. But let those who talk of Fumbling for
their Limbs, take care they don't find them too fast. In the Fourth Act
Mustapha dates his Exaltation to Tumult, from the second Night of the Month
Abib. Thus you have Id. p. 83. Exodus, 12, 13.
the Holy Text abused by Captain Tom; And the Bible torn by the Rabble! The
Design of this Liberty I cannot understand, unless it be to make Mustapha as
considerable as Moses; and the prevalence of a Tumult, as much a Miracle as the
Deliverance out of Egypt. We have heard this Author hitherto in his
Characters, let us hear him now in his own Person. In his Dedication of Aurenge
Zebe he is so hardy as to affirm that he who is too lightly reconciled after
high Provocation, may Recommend himself to the World for a Christian, but I
should hardly trust him for a Friend. And why is a Christian not fit to make a
Friend of? Are the Principles of Christianity defective, and the Laws of it Ill
contrived? Are the Interests and Capacities of Mankind overlooked? Did our
Great Master bind us to Disadvantage, and make our Duty our Misfortune? And did
he grudge us all the Pleasures and Securities of Friendship? Are not all these
horrid Suppositions? Are they not a flat Contradiction to the Bible, and a
Satyr on the Attributes of the Deity? Our Savior tells us we must forgive
until Seventy times Seven; That is, we must never be tired out of Clemency and
Good Nature. He has taught us to pray for the Forgiveness of our own Sins, only
upon the Condition of forgiving others. Here is no exception upon the
Repetition of the Fault, or the Quality of the Provocation. Mr. Dryden to do
him right, does not dispute the Precept. He confesses this is the way to be a
Christian: But for all that he should hardly trust him for a Friend. And why
so? Because the Italian Proverb says, He Ibid.
that forgives the second time is a Fool. This Lewd Proverb comes in for
Authority, and is a piece of very pertinent Blasphemy! Thus in some Peoples
Logic one proof from Atheisin, is worth Ten from the New Testament. But here
the Poet argues no better than he Believes. For most certainly, a Christian of
all others is best qualifyed for Friendship. For He that loves his Neighbor as
himself, and carries Benevolence and Good Nature beyond the Heights of
Philosophy: He that is not governed by Vanity, or Design; He that prefers his
Conscience to his Life, and has Courage to Maintain his Reason; He that is thus
qualified must be a good Friend; And he that falls short, is no good Christian.
And since the Poet is pleased to find fault with Christianity, let us examine
his own Scheme. Our Minds (says he) are perpetually wrought on by the
Temperament of our Bodies, which makes me suspect they are nearer Allied than
either our Philosophers, or School Divines will allow them to be. The Ibid.
meaning is, he suspects our Souls are nothing but Organized Matter. Or in
plain English, our Souls are nothing but our Bodies. And then when the Body
dies you may guess what becomes of them! Thus the Authorities of Religion are
weakened, and the prospect of the other World almost shut up. And is this a
likely Supposition for Sincerity and good Nature? Does Honor use to rise upon
the Ruins of Conscience? And are People the best Friends where they have the
least Reason to be so? But not only the Inclinations to Friendship must
Languish upon this Scheme, but the very Powers of it are as it were destroyed.
By this Systeme no Man can say his Soul is his own. He cannot be assured the
same Colors of Reason and Desire will last. Any little Accident from without
may metamorphose his Fancy, and push him upon a new set of Thoughts. Matter and
Motion are the most Humorsom Capricious Things in Nature; and withal, the most
Arbitrary and uncontrolled. And can Constancy proceed from Chance, Choice from
Fate, and Virtue from Necessity? In short a Man at this rate must be a Friend
or an Enemy in spite of his Teeth, and just as long as the Atoms please and no
longer. Every Change in Figure and Impulse, must alter the Idea, and wear off
the former Impression. So that by these Principles, Friendship will depend on
the Seasons, and we must look in the Weather Glass for our Inclinations. But
this it is to Refine upon Revelation, and grow wiser than Wisdom! The same
Author in his Dedication of Juvenal and Persius, has these words: My Lord, I am
come to the last Petition of Ded. p. 51.
Abraham; If there be ten Righteous Lines in this vast Preface, spare it for
their sake; and also spare the next City because it is but a little one. Here
the Poet stands for Abraham; and the Patron for God Almighty: And where lies
the Wit of all this? In the Decency of the Comparison? I doubt not. And for the
next City he would have spared, he is out in the Allusion. It Is no Zoar, but
much rather Sodom and Gomorrah, Let them take care the Fire and Brimstone does
not follow: And that those who are so bold with Abraham's Petition, are not
forced to that of Dives. To beg Protection for a Lewd Book in Scripture Phrase,
is very extraordinary! It Is in effect to Prostitute the Holy Rhetoric, and
send the Bible to the Brothell! I can hardly imagine why these Tombs of
Antiquity were raked in, and disturbed? Unless it were to conjure up a departed
Vice, and revive the Pagan Impurities: Unless it were to raise the Stench of
the Vault, and Poison the Living with the Dead. Indeed Juvenal has a very
untoward way with him in some of his Satyrs. His Pen has such a Libertine
stroke that it is a Question whether the Practice, or the Reproof, the Age, or
the Author, were the more Licentious. He teaches those Vices he would correct,
and writes more like a Pimp, than a Poet. And truly I think there is but little
of Lewdness lost in the Translation. The Sixth and Eleventh Satyrs are
Particularly remarkable. Such nauseous stuff is almost enough to debauch the
Alphabet, and make the Language scandalous. One would almost be sorry for the
privilege of Speech, and the Invention of Letters, to see them thus wretchedly
abused. And since the Business must be undertaken, why was not the Thought
Blanched, the Expression made remote, and the ill Features cast into shadows?
I Am mistaken if we have not Lewdness enough of our own Growth, without
Importing from our Neighbors. No. This cannot be. An Author must have Right
done him and be shown in his own shape, and Complexion. Yes by all means! Vice
must be disrobed, and People poisoned, and all for the sake of Justice! To do
Right to such an Author is to burn him. I hope Modesty is much better than
Resemblance. The Imitation of an ill Thing is the worse for being exact: And
sometimes to report a Fault is to repeat it.

To return to his Plays. In Love Triumphant, Garcia makes Veramond this
Compliment:

May Heaven and your brave Son, and above Love Triumph. p. 3.
all,
Your own prevailing Genius guard your Age.
What is meant by his Genius, in this place, is not easy to Discover, only that
it is something which is a better Guard than Heaven. But it is no Matter for the
Sense, as long as the Profaness is clear. In this Act, Colonel Sancho lets
Carlos know the old Jew is dead, which he calls good news.

Carl. What Jew?

Sanch. Why the rich Jew my Father, He is gone to the Bosom, of Abraham his
Father, and I his Christian Son am left sole Heir. Id. p. 11.
A very mannerly Story! But why does the Poet acquaint us with Sanchos
Religion? The case is pretty plain: it is to give a luster to his Profaness, and
make him burlesque St. Luke with the better Grace. Alphonso complains to
Victoria that Nature doats with Age. His reason is, because Id p. 11.
Brother and Sister cannot Marry as they did at first: It Is very well! We know
what Nature means in the Language of Christianity, and especially under the
Notion of a Lawgiver. Alphonso goes on, and compares the Possession of
Incestuous Love to Heaven. Yes, it is Eternity in Little. p. 34.


It seems Lovers must be distracted or there is no diversion. A Flight of
Madness like a Faulcons Lessening, makes them the more gazed at! I am now
coming to some of the Poets Divinity. And here Vengeance is said to be so sweet
a Morsel,

That Heaven reserves it for its proper Taste. 58.

This belike is the meaning of those Texts, that God is good and Gracious, and
slow to anger, and does not willingly afflict the Children of Men! From
expounding the Bible he goes to the Common Prayer. And as Carlos interprets the
Office of Matrimony, For Better; for Worse, is for Virgin for Whore; And that
the Reference might not be p 62.
mistaken, the Poet is careful to put the Words in Italick, and great Letters.
And by the way, He falls under the Penalty of the Is It. Eliz. cap. 2.
Statute for Depraving the Common Prayer.

Sancho upon reading a Letter which he did not like, cries Damn it, it must be
all p. 63.
Orthodox. Damn and Orthodox clapped together, make a lively Rant, because it
looks like Cursing the Creed. The most extraordinary Passage is behind; Sancho
was unhappily Married: Carlos tells him, For your Comfort, Marriage they say is
Holy. Sancho replies: Ay, and so is Martyrdom as they say, but both of them are
good for just nothing, but to make an end of a Man's Life. p. 72.
I shall make no Reflections upon This: There needs no Reading upon a Monster:
It Is shown enough by its own Deformity. Love for Love has a Strain like this,
and therefore I shall put them together: Scandal solicits Mrs. Foresight; She
threatens to tell her Husband. He replys, He will die a Martyr rather then
disclaim his Passion. Here we have Adultery Love for Love. p. 4^.
dignified with the style of Martyrdom: As if 'twas as Honorable to perish in
Defense of Whoring, as to dye for the Faith of Christianity. But these Martyrs
will be a great while in burning, And therefore let no body strive to grace the
Adventure, or increase the Number. And now I am in this Play the Reader shall
have more. Jeremy who was bred at the University, calls the Natural
Inclinations to Eating and Drinking, Whoreson Appetites. This is strange
Language! The Manicheans who made Creation the work of the Devil, could
scarcely have been thus Coarse. But the Poet was Jeremy's Tutor, 26.
and so that Mystery is at an end. Sr. Samson carries on the Expostulation,
rails at the Structure of Human Bodies, and says, Nature has been Provident
only to p. 27.
Bears, and Spiders; This is the Authors Paraphrase on the 139 Psalm; And thus
he gives God thanks for the Advantage of his Being! The Play advances from one
wickedness to another, from the Works of God, to the Abuse of his Word.
Foresight confesses it is Natural for Men to mistake. Scandal replies, You say
true, Man p. 47.
will err, mere Man will err -- but you are something more -- There have been
wise Men; but they were such as you -- Men who consulted the Stars, and were
observers of Omens -- Solomon was wise but how? -- by his Judgment in
Astrology. It Is very well! Solomon and Foresight had their Understandings
qualified alike. And pray what was Foresight? Why an Illiterate Fellow. A
pretender to Dreams, Astrology, Palmistry etc. This is the Poets account Vid.
Person. Dram.
of Solomon's Supernatural Knowledge! Thus the wisest Prince is dwindled into a
Gypsy! And the Glorious Miracle resolved into Dotage, and Figure-flinging!
Scandal continues his Banter, and says, the wise Men of the East owed their
Instruction to a Star; which is rightly observed by Gregory the Great in favor
of Astrology. This was the Star which shone at our Savior's Birth. Now who
could imagine by the Levity of the occasion, that the Author thought it any
better than an Ignis Fatuus, or Sydrophel's Kite in Hudibras? Sr. Sampson and
the fine Angelica, after some lewd raillery continue the Allegory, and drive it
up into Profaness. For this reason the Citation must be imperfect.

Sr. Samps. Sampson 's a very good Name for -- your Sampsons were strong Dogs
from the Beginning.

Angel. Have a care -- If you remember p. 80.
the strongest Sampson of your Name, pulled an old House over his Head at last.
Here you have the Sacred History burlesqu'd, and Sampson once more brought into
the House of Dagon, to make sport for the Philistines! To draw toward an end
of this Play. Tattle would have carried off Valentine's Mistress. This later,
expresses his Resentment in a most Divine manner! Tattle I thank you, you would
have interposed between me and Heaven, but Providence has laid Purgatory in
your way. Thus Heaven is debased into an Amor, p. 91.
and Providence brought in to direct the Paultry concerns of the Stage!
Angelica concludes much in the same strain. Men are generally Hypocrites and
Infidels, they pretend to Worship, but have neither Zeal, nor Faith; How few
like Valentine would persevere unto Martyrdom? etc. Here you have the Language
of the Scriptures, and p. 92.
the most solemn Instances of Religion, prostituted to Courtship and Romance!
Here you have a Mistress made God Almighty, Adored with Zeal and Faith, and
Worshipped up to Martyrdom! This if 'twere only for the Modesty, is strange
stuff for a Lady to say of her self. And had it not been for the profane
Allusion, would have been cold enough in all Conscience.

The Provoked Wife furnishes the Audience with a Drunken Atheistical Catch:
It Is true this Song is afterward said to be Full of Sin and Impudence. But why
Prove. Wife p. 38.
then was it made? This Confession is a miserable Salvo; And the Antidote is
much weaker than the Poison: It Is just as if a Man should set a House in a
Flame, and think to make amends by crying Fire in the Streets. In the last Act
Rasor makes his Discovery of the Plot against Belinda in Scripture phrase. I Will
give it the Reader in the Authors Dialogue.

Belind. I must know who put you upon Id. p. 77.
all this Mischief.

Rasor. Satan and his Equipage. Woman tempted me, Lust weakened, -- And so the
Devil overcame me: As fell Adam so fell I.

Belind. Then pray Mr. Adam will you make us acquainted with your Eve?

Rasor unmasks Madamoselle and says, This is the Woman that tempted me: But
this is the Serpent (meaning Lady Fanciful) that tempted the Woman; And if my
Prayers might be heard, her punishment for so doing should be like the Serpents
of old, etc. This Rasor in what we hear of him before, is all Roguery, and
Debauch: But now he enters in Sackcloth, and talks like Tribulation in the
Alchemist. His Character is changed to make him the more profane; And his
Habit, as well as Discourse, is a Jest upon Religion. I am forced to omit one
Line of his Confession. The Design of it is to make the Bible deliver an
obscene Thought: And because the Text would not bend into a Lewd Application;
He alters the words for his purpose, but passes it for Scripture still. This
sort of Entertainment is frequent in the Relapse. Lord Foplington laughs at the
public Solemnities of Religion, as if 'twas a ridiculous piece of Ignorance,
to pretend to the Worship of a God. He discourses with Berinthia and Amanda in
this manner: Why Faith Madam, -- Sunday is a vile Day, I must confess. A man
must have Relapse. p. 32, 33.
very little to do at Church that can give an account of the Sermon. And a
little after: To Mind the Prayers or the Sermon, is to mind what one should not
do. Lory tells young Fashion, I have been in a lamentable Fright ever since
that Conscience had the Impudence to intrude into your Company. His Master
makes him this Comfortable Answer. Be at peace, it will come no more: -- I have
kicked it down stairs. A little before he breaks out into this Rapture. Now
Conscience I defy thee! By the way p. 44, 45.
we may observe, that this young Fashion is the Poets Favorite. Berinthia and
Worthy, Vid. I fra.
two Characters of Figure, determine the point thus in defense of Pimping.

Berinth. Well, I would be glad to have no Bodies Sins to answer for but my
own. But p. 51.
where there is a necessity --

Worth. Right as you say, where there is a Necessity; a Christian is bound to
help his Neighbor.

Nurse, after a great deal of ProfaneStuff concludes her expostulation in these
words: But his Worship (Young Fashion) over-flows with his Mercy and his
Bounty; He is not only pleased to forgive us our Sins -- but which is more than
all, has prevailed with me p. 96, 97.
to become the Wife of thy Bosom: This is very heavy, and ill dressed. And an
Atheist must be sharp set to relish it. The Virtuous Amanda makes no scruple to
charge the Bible with untruths.

-- What Slippery stuff are Men composed of? Ibid.

Sure the Account of their Creation's false,.
And 'twas the Woman's Rib that they were formed of.
Thus this Lady abuses her self, together with the Scripture, and shows her
Sense, and her Religion, to be much of a Size.

Berinthia, after she has given in a Scheme for the debauching Amanda, is thus
accosted by Worthy: Thou Angel of Light, let me fall down and adore thee! A
most Seraphick Compliment to a Procuress! p. 91.
And it is possible some Angel or other, may thank him for it in due time.

I am quite tired with these wretched Sentences. The sight indeed is horrible,
and I am almost unwilling to show it. However they shall be Produced like
Malefactors, not for Pomp, but Execution. Snakes and Vipers, must sometimes be
looked on, to destroy them. I cannot forbear expressing my self with some warmth
under these Provocations. What Christian can be unconcerned at such intolerable
Abuses? What can be a juster Reason for indignation than Insolence and Atheism?
Resentment can never be better shown, nor Aversion more seasonably executed!
Nature made the Ferment and Rising of the Blood, for such occasions as This. On
what unhappy Times are we fallen! The Oracles of Truth, the Laws of
Omnipotence, and the Fate of Eternity are Laughed at and despised! That the
Poets should be suffered to play upon the Bible, and Christianity be Hooted off
the Stage! Christianity that from such feeble beginings made so stupendous a
progress! That over-bore all the Oppositions of Power, and Learning; and with
Twelve poor Men, outstretch'd the Roman Empire. That this glorious Religion so
reasonable in its Doctrine, so well attested by Miracles, by Martyrs, by all
the Evidence that Fact is capable of, should become the Diversion of the Town,
and the Scorn of Buffoons! And where, and by whom is all this Outrage
committed? why not by Julian, or Porphirie, not among Turks or Heathens, but in
a Christian Country, in a Reformed Church, and in the Face of Authority! Well!
I perceive the Devil was a Saint in his Oracles, to what he is in his Plays.
His Blasphemies are as much improved as his Style, and one would think the Muse
was Legion! I suppose the Reader may be satisfied already: But if he desires
farther proof, there is something more flamingly impious behind.

The Christian Almeida when Sebastian was in danger, Raves and Foames like one
Possessed,

But is there Heaven, for I begin to doubt? Don. Sebastian. p. 31.

Now take your swing ye impious Sin unpunished,
Eternal Providence seems over watched,
And with a slumbring Nod assents to Murder
In the next page, she bellows again much after the same manner. The Double
Dealer to say the least of him, follows his Master in this Road, Passibus
aequis. Sr. Paul Plyant one would think had done his part: But the ridiculing
Providence will not satisfy all People: And therefore the next attempt is
somewhat bolder.

Sr. Paul. Hold your self contented my Double Dealer. p. 19.
Lady Plyant, -- I find Passion coming upon me by Inspiration. In Love
Triumphant, Carlos is by the Constitution of the Play p. 17.
a Christian; and therefore must be construed in the sense of his Religion.
This Man blunders out this horrible expression. Nature has given me my Portion
in Sense with a P -- -- to her. etc. The Reader may see the Hellish Syllable at
Length if he pleases. This Curse is borrowed for Young Fashion in the Relapse.
The Double Dealer is not yet exhausted. Cynthia p. 44.
the Top Lady grows Thoughtful. Upon the question she relates her
Contemplation. Cynth. I am thinking (says she) that though Double Dealer. p. 18.
Marriage makes Man and Wife one Flesh, it leaves them two Fools. This Jest is
made upon a Text in Genesis, and afterward Genesis 2. St. Math. 9.
applied by our Savior to the case of Divorse. Love for Love will give us a
farther account of this Authors Proficiency in the Scriptures. Our Blessed
Savior affirms himself to be the Way, the Truth, and the Light, that he came
to bear witness to the Truth, and that his Word is Truth. These expressions
were remembered to good purpose. For Valentine in his pretended Madness tells
Buckram the Lawyer; I am Truth, -- I am Truth. -- Who Is that, that is out of his
way, I am Truth, Love, etc. p. 59. 61.
and can set him right. Now a Poet that had not been smitten with the pleasure
of Blasphemy, would never have furnished Frensy with Inspiration; nor put our
Saviors Words in the Mouth of a Madman. Lady Brute, after some struggle
between Conscience and Lewdness, declares in Favor of the later. She says the
part of a downright Wife is to Cuckold her Husband. And though this is against
the Provoked Wife.
strict Statute Law of Religion, yet if there p. 3.
was a Court of Chancery in Heaven, she p. 4.
should be sure to cast him.

This Brass is double guilt. First, It supposes no Equity in Heaven. And
Secondly, If there was, Adultery would not be punished! The Poet afterward
acquaints us by this Lady, that Blasphemy is no Woman's Sin. Why then does she
fall into p. 65.
it? Why in the midst of Temper and Reasoning? What makes him break in upon
his own Rules? Is Blasphemy never unseasonable upon the Stage, And does it
always bring its excuse along with it? The Relapse goes on in the same strain.
When Young Fashion had a prospect of cheating his Elder Brother, he tells Lory,
Providence thou see at last takes care of Men of Merit. Berinthia who has
engaged Relapse. p. 19.
to corrupt Amanda for Worthy; attacks her with this Speech, Mr. Worthy used
you like a Text, he took you all to pieces, and p. 96.
it seems was particular in her Commendation, Thus she runs on for several
Lines, in a Lewd, and Profane Allegory. In the Application she speaks out the
Design, and concludes with this pious Exhortation! Now consider what has been
said, and Heaven give you Grace to put it in practice; that is to play the
Whore. There are few of these last Quotations, but what are plain Blasphemy,
and within the Law. They look reeking as it were from Pandaemonium, and almost
smell of Fire and Brimstone. This is an Eruption of Hell with a witness! I
almost wonder the smoke of it has not darkened the Sun, and turned the Air to
Plague and Poison! These are outrageous Provocations; Enough to arm all Nature
in Revenge; To exhaust the Judgments, of Heaven, and sink the Island in the
Sea! What a spite have these Men to the God that made them. How do They Rebel
upon his Bounty, and attack him with his own Reason? These Giants in
Wickedness, how would they ravage with a Stature Proportionable? They that can
Swagger in Impotence, and Blaspheme upon a Molehill, what would they do if
they had Strength to their Good Will? And what can be the Ground of this
Confidence, and the Reason of such horrid Presumption? Why the Scripture will
best satisfy the question. Because sentence against an Evil work is not
excuted speedily, therefore the heart Eccles. 8. 11.
of the Sons of Men, is fully set in them to do Evil.

Clemency is weakness with some People; And the Goodness of God which should
lead them to Repentance, does but harden them the more. They conclude he wants
Power to punish, because he has patience to forbear. Because there is a Space
between Blasphemy and Vengeance; and they don't perish in the Act of Defiance;
Because they are not blasted with Lightning, transfixt with Thunder, and
Guarded off with Devils, they think there is no such matter as a day of
Reckoning. But let no Man be Deceived, God is not mocked; Gal. 6.
not without danger they may be assured. Let them retreat in time, before the
Floods run over them: Before they come to that place, where Madness will have
no Music, nor Blasphemy any Diversion.

And here it may not be amiss to look a little into the Behavior of the
Heathens. Now it is no wonder to find them run riot upon this Subject. The
Characters of their Gods were not unblemished. Their prospect of the other
World, was but dim; neither were they under the Terrors of Revelation. However,
they are few of them so bad as the Moderns.

Terence does not run often upon this rock. It Is true Chaerea falls into an ill
Eunuch.
Rapture after his Success. Chremes bids his Wife not tire the Gods with
Thanks: Heautell. A. 5. 1. Adelp. A. 5. 7.
And Aeschinus is quite sick of the Religious part of the Weding. These
Instances; excepting his Swearing, are the most, (and I think near all the)
exceptionable Passages of this Author.

Plautus is much more bold. But then his sally's are generally made by Slaves
and Pandars.

This makes the Example less dangerous, and is some sort of extenuation. I
grant this imperfect excuse wont serve Lyconides. Aulu^^^. A. 2. 4. Palaestra.
Rud. A. 1. 3. (...). obus. Trucul. A. 2. 4.
him always. There are some Instances where his Persons of better Figure are
are guilty of lewd Defenses, Profane Flights, and Saucy Expostulation. But the
Roman Deities were Beings of ill Fame, it is the less wonder therefore if the
Poets were familiar with them. However, Plautus has something good in him, and
enough to condemn the Practice. Pleusides would gladly have had the Gods
changed the method of Things, in some Particulars. He would have had frank good
Humored People long live'd, and close-fisted Knaves die Young. To this
Periplectimenes Gravely answers, That it is great Ignorance, and Misbehaviour
Mil. Glor.
to Censure the Conduct of the Gods, or speak dishonorably of them. In his
Pseudolus the Procurer Ballio talks Profanely. Upon which Pseudolus makes this
Reflection. This Fellow makes nothing of Religion, how can we trust him in
other matters? For the Gods whom all People have the greatest reason to fear,
are most slighted by him. Pseud. A. 1. 3.


The Greek Tragedians are more staunch, and write nearer the Scheme of Natural
Religion. It Is true, they have somebold expressions: But then they generally
reprove the Liberty, and punish the Men. Prometheus in Aeschylus blusters with
a great deal of Noise, and Stubborness. He Prom. vinct. 57.
is not for changing Conditions with Mercury: And chooses rather to be
miserable, than to submit even to Jupiter himself. The Chorus rebuke him for
his Pride, and threaten him with greater Punishment. And the Poet to make all
sure brings him to Execution before the end of the Play. He discharges Thunder
and Lightning at his Head; shakes his Rock with an Earthquake, turns the Air
into Whirlwind, and draws up all the Terrors of Nature to make him an example.
In his Expedition against Thebes, Eteocles expects Capaneus would be destroyed
for his Blasphemies. Which happened accordingly. p. 92.
On the other hand; Amphiaraus being a person of Virtue, and Piety, they are
afraid least he should succeed. For a Religious Enemy is almost invincible.
Darius's Ghost p. 101.
lays Xerxes's ruin upon the excess of his Ambition. 'Twas, because he made a
Bridge over the Hellespont, used Neptune contumeliously, and thought himself
Superior to Heaven. This Ghost tells the Chorus that the (...). 161.
Persian Army miscarried for the outrages they did to Religion, for breaking
down the Altars, and plundering the Gods. 164.


Ajax's Distraction is represented as judicial in Sophocles. 'Twas inflicted
for his Pride and Atheism. When his Father Ajax. plagell.
bid him be brave but Religious withal, he haughtily replied that 'twas for
Cowards to beg the Assistance of the Gods; as for his part, he hoped to Conquer
without them. And when Minerva encouraged him to charge the Enemy.

(...),
He made her this Lewd and insufferable Answer. Pray withdraw, and give your
Countenance elsewhere, I want no Goddesses to help me do my Business. This
Insolence made Minerva hate him; and was the cause of his Madness and self
Murder. To proceed. The Chorus condemns the Liberty of Jocasta, who obliquely
charged a Practice upon the Oracle: Oedip. Tyran. p. 187.
Though after all, she did not tax Apollo, but his Ministers.

The same Chorus recommends Piety, and Relyance upon the Gods, and threatens
Pride and Irreligion with Destruction. In Antigone, Tiresias advises Creon to
wave p. 188.
the Rigor of his Edict, And not let the Body of Polynices lie unburied, and
exposed. He tells him the Altars were already polluted with Humane Flesh. This
had made the Language of the Birds unintelligible, Antig. p. 256.
and confounded the marks of Augury. Creon replies in a rage, and says he would
not consent to the Burial of Polynices: No, though 'twere to prevent the Eagle's
throwing part of the Carcass in Jove's Chair of State. This was a bold Flight;
but it is not long before he pays for it. Soon after, his Son, and Queen, kill
themselves. And in the close the Poet who speaks in the Chorus, explains the
Misfortune, and points upon the Cause, and affirms that Creon was punished for
his Haughtiness and Impiety. To go on to his Trachiniae. Hercules in all the
extremity of his Torture does not fall foul upon Religion. It Is true, He shows
as much Impatience as it is possible. His Person, his pain, and the Occasion of
it, were very extraordinary. These circumstances make it somewhat natural for
him to complain above the common rate. The Greatness of his Spirit, the Feavour
of his Blood, and the Rage of his Passion, could hardly fail of putting Force,
and and Vehemence into his Expressions. Though to deal clearly he seems better
furnished with Rhetoric, than true Fortitude. But after all, his Disorders are
not altogether (...).
ungoverned. He is uneasy, but not impious, and profane.

I grant Hercules Oeteus in Seneca, swaggers at a strange Rhodomontading rate.
But the Conduct of this Author is very indifferent. He makes a mere Salamander
of his Hero, and lets him declaim with too much of Length, Curiosity and
Affectation, for one in his Condition: He harangues it with great plenty of
Points, and Sentences in the Fire, and lies frying, and Philosophizing for near
a hundred Lines together. In fine, this Play is so injudiciously managed, that
Heinsius is confident 'twas written by neither of the Seneca's, but by some
later Author of a lower Class. To return to Sophocle's Trachiniae. Hyllus
reproaches the Gods with Neglect, because they gave Hercules no Assistance, and
glances upon Jupiter himself. This Trach. p. 375.
sally is not so thoroughly corrected as formerly. It Is true the Chorus make
some little satisfaction immediately after. They resolve all surprises of
Misfortune, all Revolutions of States or Families, into the will and Permission
of Jupitur. This by implication, They make an argument for acquiescence.
Besides, the Poet had laid in a sort of caution against Misconstruction before.
For the Messenger tells Dejaneira that we ought not to Murmur at Trach. p. 340.
the Conduct of Jupiter.

-- (...)
(...).
This for a Heathen is something though not enough, Cleomenes's Rant seems an
imitation of Hyllus, Only it is bolder, and has nothing of the rashness of Youth
to Cleom. p. 54.
excuse it. Besides Sophocles throws in somewhat by way of Preservative.

Whereas in Cleomenes the Boy Cleonidas has the better on the wrong side, and
seems to carry the cause of Atheism against his Father. This Scene of a Famine
Id. p. 55.
Mr. Dryden calls a Beauty; and yet Methinks Cleora is not very Charming! Her
part is to tell you the Child sucked to no purpose.

It pulled and pulled but now but nothing came,
At last it drew so hard that the Blood followed.
And that Red Milk I found upon its Lips,
p. 54.
Which made me swoon for Fear.
There Is a Description of Sucking for you! And truly one would think the Muse
on it were scarsely weaned. This Lady's fancy is just Slip-Stocking-high; and
she seems to want Sense, more than her Breakfast. If this Passage would not
shine, the Poet should have let it alone. It Is Horace's advice.

-- et quae
De. Act. Poet.
Desperes tractata nitescere posse relinquas.
The greatest part of the Life of this Scene is spent in impious Rants, and
Atheistical Disputes. To do the Author right, his Characters never want Spirits
for such Service, either full or Fasting. Some people love to say the worst
Things in the best manner; To perfume their Poisons, and give an Air to
Deformity.

There is one ill Sentence in Sophocles behind. Philoctetes calls the Gods
(...), Philoet. 402.
and Libells their Administration. This Officer we must understand was left
upon a Solitary Island, ill used by his Friends, and harrass'd with Poverty and
Ulcers, for Ten years together. These, under the Ignorance of Paganism, were
trying Circumstances, and take off somewhat of the Malignity of the Complaint.
Afterward He seems to repent, and declares 419.
his Assurance that the Gods will do Justice, and prays frequently to them. The
Conclusion of this Play is remarkably Moral. Here Hercules appears in Machine;
aquaints Philoctetes with his own glorious Condition; That his Happiness was
the Reward of Virtue, and the Purchase of Merit. He charges him to pay a due
regard to Religion; For Piety would recommend him to Jupiter more than any
other Qualification. It went into the other World with People and they found
their Account in it both Living and Dead. p. 431.


Upon the whole; The Plays of Aeschylus and Sophocles are formed upon Models of
Virtue: They join Innocence with Pleasure, and design the Improvement, of the
Audience.

In Euripides's Bacchae, Pentheus is pulled in pieces for using Bacchus with
Disrespect. And the Chorus observes that God never fails to punish Impiety, and
Contempt Act. 2.
of Religion. Polyphemus blusters Atheistically, and pretends to be as great as
Jupiter: But then his Eye is burnt out in the fifth Act. And the Chorus in
Heraclidae affirm it next to Madness not to p. 295.
worship the Gods. I grant he has some profane Passages stand uncorrected, and
what wonder is it to see a Pagan Miscarry? Seneca, as he was inferior in
Judgment to the Greeks, so he is more frequent, and uncautious, in his Flights
of extravagance. His Hero's and Heroines, are excessively bold with the
Superior Beings. They rave to Distraction, and he does not often call them to
an account for it. It Is true Ajax Oileus is made an Example for Blaspheming in a
Storm. He is first struck with Thunder, and then carried to Agam. Act. 3.
the Bottom: The Modern Poets, proceed upon the Liberties of Seneca, Their
Madmen are very seldom reckoned wirh. They are profane without Censure, and
defy the Living God with success. Nay, in some respect they exceed even Seneca
himself. He slies out only under Impatience; And never falls into these Fits
without Torture, and hard Usage. But the English Stage are unprovoked in their
Irreligion, and Blaspheme for their Pleasure. But supposing the Theaters of
Rome, and Athens as bad as possible, what Defense is all This? Can we argue
from Heathenism to Christianity? How can the practice be the same, where the
Rule is so very different? Have we not a clearer Light to direct us, and
greater Punishments to make us afraid. Is there no Distinction between Truth
and Fiction, between Majesty and a Pageant? Must God be treated like an Idol,
and the Scriptures banter'd like Homers Elysium, and Hesiods Theogonia? Are
these the Returns we make Him for his Supernatural Assistance? For the more
perfect Discovery of Himself, the stooping of his Greatness, and the Wonders of
his Love. Cannot we refuse the Happiness without affronting the Offer? Must we
add Contempt to Disobedience, and Outrage to Ingratitude? Is there no
Diversion without Insulting the God that made us, the Goodness that would save
us, and the Power that can damn us? Let us not flatter our selves, Words will not
go for Nothing. Profaness is a most Provoking Contempt, and a Crime of the
deepest dye. To break through the Laws of a Kingdom is bad enough; But to make
Ballads upon the Statute-Book, and a Jest of Authority, is much worse. Atheists
may fancy what they please, but God will Arise and Maintain his own Cause, and
Vindicate his Honor in due time.

To conclude. Profaness though never so well corrected is not to be endured. It
ought to be Banished without Proviso, or Limitation. No pretense of Character
or Punishment, can excuse it; or any Stage-Discipline make it tolerable. It Is
grating to Christian Ears, dishonorable to the Majesty of God, and dangerous
in the Example. And in a Word, It tends to no point, unless it be to wear off
the horror of the Practice, to weaken the force of Conscience, and teach the
Language of the Damned.

CHAP. III. The Clergy abused by the Stage.
THE Satyr of the Stage upon the Clergy is extremely Particular. In other
cases, They level at a single Mark, and confine themselves to Persons. But here
their Buffoonry takes an unusual Compass; They shoot Chain'd-shot, and strike
at Universals. They play upon the Character, and endeavor to expose not only
the Men, but the Business. It Is true, the Clergy are no small Rub in the Poets
way. It Is by their Ministrations that Religion is perpetuated, the other World
Refreshed, and the Interest of Virtue kept up. Vice will never have an
unlimited Range, nor Conscience be totally subdued, as long as People are so
easy as to be Priest-ridden! As long as these Men are looked on as the
Messengers of Heaven, and the Supports of Government, and enjoy their old
Pretentions in Credit and Authority; as long as this Grievance continues, the
Stage must decline of Course, and Atheism give Ground, and Lewdness lie under
Censure, and Discouragment. Therefore that Liberty may not be embarrass'd, nor
Principles make Head against Pleasure, the Clergy must be attacked, and rendered
Ridiculous.

To represent a Person fairly and without disservice to his Reputation, two
Things are to be observed. First He must not be ill used by others: Nor
Secondly be made to Play the Fool Himself. This latter way of Abuse is rather
the worst, because here a Man is a sort of Felo de se; and appears Ridiculous
by his own fault. The Contradiction of both these Methods is practiced by the
Stage. To make sure work on it, they leave no stone unturned, The whole Common
place of Rudeness is run through. They strain their Invention and their Malice:
And overlook nothing in ill Nature, or ill Manners, to gain their point.

To give some Instances of their Civility! In the Spanish Friar, Dominick is
made a Pimp for Lorenzo; He is called a parcel of Holy Guts and Garbage, and
said to (...) 20.
have room in his Belly for his Church steeple.

Dominick has a great many of these Compliments bestowed upon him. And to make
the Railing more effectual, you have a general stroke or two upon the
Profession. Would you know what are the Infiallible Church Remedies. Why it is
to Lie Impudently, and Swear Devoutly. A p. 37.
little before this Dominick Counterfits himself sick, retires, and leaves
Lorenzo and Elvira together; And then the Remark upon the Intrigue follows. You
see Madam (says Lorenzo) it is Interest governs p. 23.
all the World. He Preaches against Sin, why? Because he gets by it: He holds
his Tongue; why? because so much more is bidden for his Silence. It Is but
giving a Man his Price, and Principles of Church are bought off as easily as
they are in State: No man will be a Rogue for nothing; but Compensation must be
made, so much Gold for so much Honesty; and then a Churchman will break the
Rules of Chess. For the Black Bishop, will skip into the White, and the White
into the Black, without Considering whether the remove be Lawful.

At last Dominick is discovered to the Company, makes a dishonorable Exit, and
is pushed off the Stage by the Rabble. This is great Justice! The Poet takes
care to make him first a Knave, and then an Example: But his hand is not even.
For Lewd Lorenzo comes off with Flying Colors. It Is not the Fault which is
corrected but the Priest. The Authors Discipline is seldom without a Biass. He
commonly gives the Laity the Pleasure of an ill Action, and the Clergy the
Punishment.

To proceed. Horner in his general Remarks upon Men, delivers it as a sort of
Maxim, that your Churchman is the greatest Atheist. In this Play Harcourt puts
on Country Wife p. 6.
the Habit of a Divine. Alithea does not think him what he appears; but
Sparkish who could not see so far, endeavors to divert her Suspicion. I tell
you (says he) this is Ned Harcourt of Cambridge, you see he has a sneaking
College look. Afterward his Character is sufficiently abused by p. 35.
Sparkish and Lucy; but not so much as by Himself. He tells you in an Aside he
must Ibid.
suit his Style to his Coat. Upon this wise Recollection, He talks like a
servile, impertinent Fop,

In the Orphan, The Young Soldier Chamont calls the Chaplain Sr. Gravity, and
treats him with the Language of Thee, and Thou. The Chaplain instead of
returning the Contempt; Flatters Chamont in his Folly, and pays a Respect to
his Pride. The Cavalier encouraged I suppose by this Sneaking, proceeds to all
the Excesses of Rudeness,

-- is there not one p. 25.

Of all thy Tribe that is Honest in your School?
The Pride of your Superiors makes ye Slaves:
Ye all live Loathsome, Sneaking, Servile lives:
Not free enough to Practice generous Truth,
'Tho ye pretend to teach it to the World.
After a little Pause for Breath, the Railing improves.

If thou would have me not contemn thy Office,
And Character, think all thy Brethren Knaves,
Thy Trade a Cheat, and thou its worst Professor, p. 26.

Inform me; for I tell thee Priest I Will know.
The Bottom of the Page is downright Porters Rhetoric.

Art thou then
So far concerned in it? --
Curse on that formal steady Villains Face!
Just so do all Bawds look; Nay Bawds they say;
Can Pray upon Occasion; talk of Heaven;
Turn up their Gogling Eye Balls, rail at Vice;
Dissemble, Lie, and Preach like any Priest, Ibid.

Art thou a Bawd?
The Old Batchelour has a Throw at the Dissenting Ministers. The Pimp Setter
provides their Habit for Bellmour to Debauch Laetitia. The Dialogue runs thus.

Bell. And have thou Provided Necessaries? Setter. All, all Sir, the large
Sanctified Hat, and the little precise Band, with a Swingeing long Spiritual
Cloak, to cover Carnal Knavery, -- not forgetting the black Patch which
Tribulation Spintext wears as I Am informed upon one Eye, as a penal Mourning
for the Old Batch. p. 19. 20.
-- Offenses of his Youth etc.

Barnaby calls another of that Character Mr. Prig, and Fondlewife carrys on the
Humor lewdly in Playhouse Cant; And to hook the Church of England into the
Abuse, he tacks a Chaplain to the End of the Description.

Lucy gives an other Proof of the Poets p. 27.
good Will, but all little Scurilities are not p. 41.
worth repeating.

In the Double Dealer the discourse between Maskwell and Saygrace is very
notable. Maskwell had a design to cheat Mellifont of his Mistress, and engages
the Chaplain in the Intrigue: There must be a Levite in the case; For without
one of them have a singer in it, no Plot public, or private, can expect to
prosper.

To go on in the order of the Play. p. 71.


Maskwell calls out at Sagraces door, Mr. Saygrace Mr. Saygrace.

The other answers, Sweet sir I will but pen the last line of an Acrostick, and
be with you in the twingling of an Ejaculation, in the pronouncing of an Amen.
etc.

Mask. Nay good Mr. Saygrace do not prolong the time, etc.

Saygrace. You shall prevail, I would break off in the middle of a Sermon to do
you Pleasure.

Mask. You could not do me a greater -- except -- the business inhand -- have
you provided a Habit for Mellifont?

Saygr. I have, etc.

Mask. have you stich'd the Gownsleeve, that he may be puzzled and wast time in
putting it on?

Saygr. I have; the Gown will not be endued without Perplexity. There is a
little more profane, and abusive stuff behind, but let that pass.

The Author of Don Sebastian strikes at the Bishops through the sides of the
Mufti, and borrows the Name of the Turk, to make the Christian ridiculous. He
knows the transition from one Religion to the other is natural, the Application
easy, and the Audience but too well prepared. And should they be at a loss he
has elsewhere given them a Key to understand him.

For Priests of all Religions are the same. Absal. and Achi.

However that the Sense may be perfectly intelligible, he makes the Invective
General, changes the Language, and rails in the style of Christendom.

Benducar speaks,

-- Churchmen though they itch to govern all,
Are silly, woeful, awkard Politicians,
They make lame Mischief though they mean it well.
So much the better, for it is a sign they are not beaten to the Trade. The next
Lines are an Illustration taken from a Tailor.

Their Intrest is not finely drawn and hid,
But seams are coarsly bungled up and seen. p. 24.

This Benducar was a rare Spokesman for a first Minister; And would have fitted
John of Leyden most exactly!

In the Fourth Act the Mufti is Deposed and Captain Tom reads him a shrewd
Lecture at parting. But let that pass.

To go on, Mustapha threatens his great Patriark to put him to the Rack. Now
you shall hear what an answer of Fortitude and Discretion is made for the Mufti.

Mufti. I hope you will not be so barbarous to torture me. We may Preach
Suffering to others, but alas holy Flesh is too well pampered to endure
Martyrdom. By the way, if flinching p. 96.
from Suffering is a proof of Holy Flesh, the Poet is much a Saint in his
Constitution, witness his Dedication of King Arthun.

In Cleomenes, Cassandra rails against Religion at the Altar, and in the midst
of a public Solemnity.

Accursed be thou Grass-eating fodderd God! p. 32.

Accursed thy Temple! more accursed thy Priests!
She goes on in a mighty Huff, and charges the Gods and Priesthood with
Confederacy, and Imposture. This Rant is very unlikely at Alexandria. No People
are more bigoted in their Superstition than the Egyptians; Nor any more
resenting of such an Affront. This Satyr then must be strangely out of Fashion,
and probability. No matter for that; it may work by way of Inference, and be
serviceable at Home. And it is a handsome Compliment to Libertines and Atheists.

We have much such another swaggering against Priests in Oedipus.

Why seek I Truth from thee?
The smiles of Courtiers and the Harlots tears,
The Tradesmens Oaths, and Mourning of an Heir,
Are Truths to what Priests tell.
O why has Priesthood privilege to Lie, Oedip. p. 38.

And yet to be believed!
And since They are thus Lively, I have one word or two to say to the Play.

When Aegeon brought the News of King Polybus's Death, Oedipus was wonderfully
surpised at the Relation.

O all ye Powers is it possible? what, Dead! p. 48.

And why not? was the Man invulnerable or immortal? Nothing of that: He was
only Fourscore and Ten years old, that was his main security. And if you will
believe the Poet he

Fell like Autumn Fruit that mellow'd long,
Even wondered at because he dropped no sooner. Ibid.

And which is more, Oedipus must be acquainted with his Age, having spent the
greatest part of his time with him at Corinth. So that in short, the pith of
the Story lies in this Circumstance. A Prince of Ninety years was dead, and one
who was wondered at for dying no sooner. And now why so much Exclamation upon
this occasion? Why must all the Powers in Being be Summoned in to make the News
Credible? This Posse of Interjections would have been more seasonably raised if
the Man had been alive; for that by the Poets Confession had been much the
stranger Thing. However Oedipus is almost out of his Wits about the Matter, and
is Urgent for an account of Particulars.

That so the Tempest of my joys may rise
By just degrees, and hit at last the Stars. Ibid.

This is an empty ill proportioned Rant, and without warrant in Nature or
Antiquity. Sophocles does not represent Oedipus in such Raptures of Extravagant
surprise. In the next page there is another Flight about Polybus his Death
somewhat like This. It begins with a Noverint Universi. You would think Oedipus
was going to make a Bond.

Know, be it known to the limits of the World;
This is scarce Sense, be it known.

Yet farther, let it pass yon dazzling roof
The Mansion of the Gods, and strike them deaf
With Everlasting peals of Thundering joy.
This Fustian puts me in mind of a Couplet of Tailors the Water Poet, which for
the Beauty of the Thought are not very unlike.

What if a Humble Be should chance to strike,
With the But-End of an Antarkick Pole.
I grant Mr. Dryden clears himself of this Act in his Vindication of the Duke
of Guise. But then why did he let these crude Fancies pass uncorrected in his
Friend? Such fluttering ungoverned Transports, are fitter for a Boys
Declamation then a Tragedy. But I shall trouble my self no farther with this
Play. To return therefore to the Argument in Hand. In the Provoked Wife Sir
John Brute puts on the Habit of a Clergyman, counterfeits himself drunk;
quarrels with the Constable, and is knocked down and seized. He rails, swears,
curses, is lewd and profane, to all the Heights of Madness and Debauchery: The
Officers and Justice break jests upon Provoked Wife. p. 45, 46, 51, 52.
him, and make him a sort of Representative of his Order.

This is rare Protestant Diversion, and very much for the Credit of the
Reformation! The Church of England, I mean the Men of Her, is the only
Communion in the World, that will endure such Insolences as these: The Relapse
is if possible more singularly abusive. Bull the Chaplain wishes the Married
couple joy, in Language Relapse. p. 74.
horribly Smutty and Profane. To transcribe it would blot the Paper to much. In
the next Page Young Fashion desires Bull to make have to Sr. Tun-belly. He
answers very decently, I fly my good Lord. p. 75.
At the end of this Act Bull speaks to the Case of Bigamy, and determines it
thus. I do confess to take two Husbands for the Satisfaction of -- is to commit
the Sin of Exorbitancy, but to do it for the peace of the Spirit, is no more
then to be Drunk by way of Physic; besides to prevent a Parents wrath is to
avoid the Sin of Disobedience, for when the Parent is Angry, the Child is
froward: The Conclusion is insolently Profane, and let it lie: The spirit of
this Thought is borrowed from Ben Johnsons Bartholomew-Fair, only the Profaness
is mightily improved, and the Abuse thrown off the Meeting House, upon the
Church. The Wit of the Parents being angry, and the Child froward, is all his
own. Bull has p. 86.
more of this Heavy stuff upon his Hands. He tells Young Fashion Your Worships
goodness is unspeakable, yet there is one thing seems a point of Conscience;
And Conscience is a tender Babe. etc. p. 97.


These Poets I observe when They grow lazy, and are inclined to Nonsense, they
commonly get a Clergyman to speak it. Thus they pass their own Dullness for
Humor, and gratify their Ease, and their Malice at once. Coupler instructs
Young Fashion which way Bull was to be managed. He tells him as Chaplains go
now, he must be bribed high, he wants Money, Preferment, Wine, and a Whore. Let
this be procured for him, and I Will warrant thee he speaks Truth like an Oracle.
89.


A few Lines forward, the Rudeness is still more gross, and dashed with Smut,
the common Playhouse Ingredient. It Is not long before Coupler falls into his
old Civilities. He tells Young Fashion, Last Night the Devil run away with the
Parson of Fatgoose Living. Afterward Bull is plentifully p. 94.
railed on in down right Billings-gate: made to appear Silly, Servile, and
Profane; and treated both in Posture and Language, with the utmost Contempt. p.
95, 97. 105.


I could cite more Plays to this purpose; But these are sufficient to show the
Temper of the Stage,

Thus we see how hearty these People are in their Ill Will! How they attack
Religion under every Form, and pursue the Priesthood through all the
Subdivisions of Opinion. Neither Jews nor Heathens, Turks nor Christians, Rome
nor Geneva, Church nor Conventicle, can escape them. They are afraid least
Virtue should have any Quarters undisturbed, Conscience any Corner to retire
to, or God be Worshipped in any Place. It Is true their Force seldom carries up
to their Malice: They are too eager in the Combat to be happy in the Execution.
The Abuse is often both gross and clumsey, and the Wit as wretched as the
Manners. Nay Talking will not always satisfy them. They must ridicule the Habit as
well as the Function, of the Clergy. It Is not enough for them to play the Fool
unless they do it in Pontificalibus. The Farce must be played in a Religious
Figure, and under the Distinctions of their Office! Thus the Abuse strikes
stronger upon the sense; The contempt is better spread, and the little Idea is
apt to return upon the same Appearance.

And now does this Rudeness go upon any Authorities? Was the Priesthood always
thought thus insignificant, and do the Ancient Poets palt it in this Manner?
This Point shall be tried, I shall run through the most considerable Authors
that the Reader may see how they treat the Argument. Homer stands highest upon
the Roll, and is the first Poet both in Time, and Quality; I shall therefore
begin with him. It Is true he wrote no Plays; but for Decency, Practice, and
general Opinion, his Judgment may well be taken, Let us see then how the
Priests are treated in his Poem, and what sort of Rank they hold.

Chryses Apollo's Priest appears at a Council of War with his Crown and guilt
Scepter. He offers a valuable Ransom for his Daughter; and presses his Relation
to Apollo. All the Army excepting Agamemnon are willing to consider his
Character, and comply with his Proposals. But this General refuses to part with
the Lady, and sends away her Father with disrespect. Apollo thought himself
affronted with this Usage, and revenges the Indignity in a Plague.

Hom. Il. (...). p. 3. and dein. Ed. Screvel.
(...)
(...).
Adrastus and Amphius the Sons of Merops a Prophet, commanded a considerable
extent of Country in Troas, and brought Il. B. p. 91.
a Body of Men to King Priam's Assistance. And Ennomus the Augur commanded the
Ibid. p. 92.
Troops of Mysia for the Besieged.

Phegeus and Idaeus were the Sons of Dares the Priest of Vulcan. They appear
Il. E p. 154. 155.
in an Equipage of Quality, and charge Diomedes the third Hero in the Grecian
Army. Idaeus after the Misfortune of the Combat, is brought off by Vulcan.
Dolopion was Priest to Scamander, and regarded Il. E. p. 154, 155.
like the God he Belonged to,

(...). Ibid. p. 158.

Ulisses in his return from Troy, took Ismarus by Storm, and makes Prize of the
whole Town, excepting Maron, and his Family. This Maron was Apollo's Priest,
and preserved out of respect to his Function: He presents Ulisses nobly in
Gold, Plate, and Wine; And this Hero makes an honorable Mention of him, both
as to his Quality, and way of Living. Odyss. I p. 174. 181.


These are all the Priests I find Mentioned in Homer; And we see how fairly the
Poet treats them, and what sort of Figure they made in the World.

To the Testimony of Homer, I shall join that of Virgil, who though He follows at
a great distance of Time, was an Author of the first Rank, and wrote the same
kind of Poetry with the other. Now Virgil though he is very extraordinary in his
Genius, in the Compass of his Learning, in the Music and Majesty of his Style;
yet the exactness of his Judgment seems to be his peculiar, and most
distinguishing Talent. He had the truest Relish imaginable, and always
described Things according to Nature, Custom, and Decency. He wrote with the
greatest Command of Temper, and Superiority of good Sense. He is never lost in
smoke and Rapture, nor overborn with Poetic Fury; but keeps his Fancy warm and
his Reason Cool at the same time. Now this great Master of Propriety never
Mentions any Priests without some Marks of Advantage. To give some Instances as
they lie in Order.

When the Trojans were consulting what was to be done with the Wooden-Horse,
and some were for lodging it within the Walls; Laocoon appears against this
Opinion at the Head of a numerous Party, harangues with a great deal of Sense,
and Resolution, and examines the Machine with his Lance. In fine, He advised so
well, and went so far in the Discovery of the Stratagem; that if the Trojans
had not been ungovernable, and as it were stupefied by Fate and Folly, he had
saved the Town. Aenid. 2.


Trojaque nunc stares Priamique arx alta maneres.

This Laocoon was Neptunes Priest, and either Son to Priam, or Brother to
Anchises, who was of the Royal Family. Ruaus. in Loc.
The next we meet with is Pantheus Apollo's Priest. He is called Pantheus
Otriades, which is an argument his Father was well known. His acquaintance with
Aeneas to whose House he was carrying his little Grandson, argues him to be a
Person of Condition. Pantheus after a Aeneid 2.
short relation of the Posture of Affairs, joins Aeneas's little Handful of
Men, charges in with him when the Town was seized, and fired, and at last dies
Handsomely Ibid.
in the Action.

The next is Anius King of Delos, Prince and Priest in one Person.

Rex Anius, rex idem hominum Phaebique Sacerdos. Aeneid. 3.


When Aeneas was outed at Troy, and in quest of a new Country, he came to an
Anchor at Delos; Anius meets him in a Religious Habit, receives him civilly,
and obliges him with his Oracle. In the Ibid.
Book now Mentioned we have another of Apollo's Priests, his name is Helenus,
Son of Priam and King of Chaonia. He entertains Aeneas with a great deal of
Friendship, and Magnificence, gives him many material Directions, and makes him
a rich Present at parting. To this Prince if you Please we may join a Princess
of the same Profession; and that is Rhea Silvia Daughter to Numitor King of
Alba, and Mother to Romulus, and Remus. This Lady Virgil calls -- regina
Sacerdos a Royal Priestess. Farther. When Aeneas made a Aenead. 1st.
Visit upon Business to the shades Below, He had for his Guide, the famous
Sibylla Cumaea, Aen. 6.
who Belonged to Apollo. When he came thither amongst the rest of his
Acquantance he saw Polybaetes a Priest of Ceres. This Polybaetes is mentioned
with the three Sons of Antenor, with Glaucus, and Thersilochus, who Commanded
in Chief in the Trojan Auxiliaries: So that you may know his Quality by his
Company. When Aeneas had passed on farther, he saw Orpheus in Elysium: The Poet
calls him the Thracian Priest. There needs not be much said of Orpheus; He is
famous for his skill in Music, Poetry, and Religious Ceremonies, He was one
Ibid.
of the Hero's of Antiquity, and a principal Adventurer in the Expedition for
the Golden-Fleece.

In the Seventh Aeneid the Poet gives in a List of the Princes, and General
Officers who came into the Assistance of Turnus; Amongst the rest he tells you,

Quin and Marrubia venit de gente Sacerdos,
Archippi regis missu fortissimus Umbro.
This Priest he commends both for his Courage and his skill in Physic, Natural
Magic, and Phlosophy. He understood the Virtue of Plants, and could lay
Passions and Poisons asleep. His death was extremely regretted by his Country,
who made a Pompous and Solemn Mourning for him.

Te nemus Angitia vitrea te Fucinus unda
Te liquidi flevere lacus. Aeneid. 7.

The Potitij, and the Pinarij Mentioned Aeneid 8. were as Livy observes, chosen
Lib. 1.
out of the first Quality of the Country, and had the Priesthood hereditary to
their Family. To go on, Aemonides, and Chloreus make a glistering Figure in the
Field, and are very remarkable for the Curiosity of their Armor, and Habit.
Aemonides's Finery is passed over in general.

Totus collucens vest atque insignibus armis. Aeneid. 10.

But the Equipage of Chloreus is flourished out at Length, and as I remember
admired by Macrobius as one of the Master pieces of Virgil in Description. In
short; He is all Gold, Purple, Scarlet, and Embroydery; and as rich as Nature,
Art, and Aeneid. 11.
Rhetoric can make him. To these I might add Rhamnes, Asylas, and Tolumnius,
who were all Persons of Condition, Aeneid. 9. 10. 11.
and had Considerable Posts in the Army.

It may be these last were not strictly Priests. Their Function was rather
Prophetic. They interpreted the Resolutions of the Gods, by the voice of
Birds, the Inspection of Sacrifices, and their Observations of Thunder. This
made their Character counted Sacred, and their Relation to the Deity
particular. And therefore (...).
the Romans ranged them in the Order of the Priests.

Thus we see the admired Homer, and Virgil, always treat the Priests fairly,
and describe them in Circumstances of Credit: If it is said that the Instances I
have given are mostly in Names of Fiction, and in Persons who had no Being,
unless in the Poets fancy. I answer, I am not concerned in the History of the
Relation. Whether the Muster is true or false, it is all one to my purpose. This
is certain, had the Priests been People of such slender Consideration as our
Stage Poets endeavor to make them; they must have appeared in a different
Figure; or rather have been left out as too little for that sort of Poem. But
Homer and Virgil, had other Sentiments of Matters: They were governed by the
Reason of Things, and the common usage of the World. They knew the Priesthood a
very reputable Employment, and always esteemed as such. To have used the
Priests ill, They must have called their own Discretion in question: They must
have run into impropriety, and fallen soul upon Custom, Manners, and Religion.
Now 'twas not their way to play the Knave and the Fool together: They had more
Sense than to do a silly Thing, only for the Satisfaction of doing an ill one.

I shall now go on to enquire what the Greek Tragedians will afford us upon the
present Subject. There are but two Plays in Aeschylus where the Ministers of
the Gods are represented. The one is in his Eumenides, and here Apollo's
Priestess only opens the Play, and appears no more. The other is in his Seige
of Thebes. In this Tragedy the Prophet Amphiaraus is one of the Seven
Commanders against the Town. He has the Character of a Modest, Brave Officer,
and of one who rather affected to be great in Action, than Noise.

In Sophocle's Oedipus Tyrannus. Jupiter's Priest has a short part. He appears
at the Head of an Address, and delivers the Harangue by the King's Order.
Oedipus in his Passion treats Tiresias ruggedly; Tiresias Oedip. Tyr. p. 148.
replies with Spirit and Freedom, and plainly tell him he was none of his
Servant but Apollo's.

(...). Ibid. 169.

And here we may observe that all Oedipus his reproaches relate to Tiresias's
person, there is no such Thing as a general Imputation upon his Function: But
the English Oedipus makes the Priesthood an Imposturous Profession; and rails
at the whole Order. In the next Tragedy, Creon p. 38.
charges Tiresias with subornation; and that he intended to make a Penny of his
Prince. The Priest holds up his Character, speaks to the ill Usage with an Air
of Gravity, calls the King Son, and Ant^^. p. 250, 258,
foretells him his Misfortune.

To go on to Euripides, for Sophocles has nothing more. This Poet in his
Phaenissae brings in Tiresias with a very unacceptable report from the Oracle.
He tells Creon that either his Son must die, or the City be lost. Creon keeps
himself within Temper, and gives no ill Language. And even when Moenecius had
killed himself, he Eurip. Phaeniss. p. 158, 159.
neither complains of the Gods, nor reproaches the Prophet.

In his Bacchae, Tiresias is honorably used by Cadmus; And Pentheus who
threatened him, is afterward punished for Bacch. Act. 1. Act. 4. Jon. Act 5.
his Impiety. In another Play Apollo's Priestess comes in upon a creditable
account, and is respectfully treated. Iphigenia Iphig. in Aulid. and in Taur.
Agamemnon's Daughter is made Priestess to Diana; and her Father thought
himself happy in her Employment. These are all the Priests I remember
represented in Euripides. To conclude the ancient Tragedians together: Seneca
seems to follow the Conduct of Euripides, and secures Tiresias from being
outraged. Oedipus carries it smoothly with him and only desires him to out with
the Oracle, and declare the Guilty Person. This Tiresias excuses, Oedip.
and afterward the Heat of the expostulation falls upon Creon. Calchas if not
strictly a Priest, was an Auger, and had a Religious Relation. Upon this
account Agamemnon calls him interpres Deorum; The Reporter of Fate, and the
God's Nuntio; And gives him an honorable Troad. A. 2. p. 193.
Character.

This Author is done; I shall therefore pass on to the Comedians. And here,
Aristophanes is so declared an Atheist, that I think him not worth the citing.
Besides, he has but little upon the Argument: And where he does engage it, the
Priests have every jot as good Quarter as the Gods. As for Terence, he neither
represents any Plut. Ran. Aves.
Priests, nor so much as mentions them. Chrysalus in Plautus describes
Theotimus Diana's Priest, as a Person of Quality, and Baccl id. Act. 2. 53.
Figure. In his Rudens we have a Priestess upon the Stage, which is the only
Instance in this Poet. She entertains the two Women who were wrecked, and is
Rud. A. 1. 5. A. 2. 3.
commended for her hospitable Temper. The Procurer Labrax swaggers that he will
force the Temple, and begins the Attack. Demades a Gentleman, is surprised at
his Insolence, and threatens him with Revenge. The report of so bold an attempt
made him cry out. Quis homo est tanta Confidentia; (...). 2. 5.
qui sacerdotem audeat Violare? It seems in those Days 'twas very infamous to
affront a Holy Character, and break in upon the Guards of Religion! Thus we see
how the Ancient Poets behaved themselves in the Argument. Priests seldom appear
in their Plays. And when they come it is Business of Credit that brings them.
They are treated like Persons of Condition. They Act up to their Relation;
neither sneak, nor prevaricate, nor do any thing unbecoming their Office.

And now a word or two of the Moderns.

The famous Corneille and Moliere, bring no Priests of any kind upon the Stage.
The former leaves out Tiresias in his Oedipus: Though this Omission balks his
Thought, and maims the Fable. What therefore but the regard to Religion could
keep him from the use of this Liberty? As I am informed the same Reservedness
is practiced in Spain, and Italy: And that there is no Theater in Europe
excepting the English, that entertains the Audience with Priests.

This is certainly the right method, and best secures the Outworks of Piety.
The Holy Function is much too Solemn to be played with. Christianity is for no
Fooling, neither the Place, the Occasion nor the Actors are fit for such a
Representation. To bring the Church into the Playhouse, is the way to bring the
Playhouse into the Church. It Is apt to turn Religion into Romance; and make
unthinking People conclude that all Serious Matters are nothing but Farce,
Fiction, and Design. It Is true the Tragedies at Athens were a sort of Homilies,
and designed for the Instruction of the People. To this purpose they are all
Clean, Solemn, and Sententious. Plautus likewise informs us that the Comedians
used to teach the People Morality. The Rud. A. 4. S. 7.
case standing thus it is less suprizing to find the Priests sometimes Appear.
The Play had grave Argument, and Pagan Indulgence, to plead in its behalf. But
our Poets steer by an other Compass. Their Aim is to destroy Religion, their
Preaching is against Sermons; and their Business, but Diversion at the best. In
short, Let the Character be never so well managed no Christian Priest
(especially,) ought to come upon the Stage. For where the Business is an Abuse,
and the place a Profanation; the demureness of the Manner, is but a poor
excuse. Monsieur Racine is an Exception to what I have observed in France. In
his Athalia, Joida the High Priest has a large part. But then the Poet does him
Justice in his Station; he makes him Honest and Brave, and gives him a shining
Character throughout. Mathan is another Priest in the same Tragedy. He turns
Renegado, and revolts from God to Baal. He is a very ill Man but makes a
considerable Appearance, and is one of the Top of Athaliahs Faction. And as for
the Blemishes of his Life, they all stick upon his own Honor, and reach no
farther than his Person: In fine the Play is a very Religious Poem; It Is upon
the Matter all Sermon and Anthem. And if it were not designed for the Theater,
I have nothing to object.

Let us now just look over our own Countrymen till King Charles the Second.
Shakespeare takes the Freedom to represent the Clergy in several of his Plays:
But for the most part he holds up the Function, and makes them neither Act, nor
Suffer any thing unhandsom. In one Play or two He is much bolder with the
Order. Measure for Measure. Much a do about Nothing. Twelf-Night. Henry 4th pt.
1 st Hen, 6, pt. 3 d. Romeo and Juliet.
Merry Wives of Windfor.
Sr. Hugh Evans a Priest is too Comical and Secular in his Humor. However he
understands his Post, and converses with the Freedom of a Gentleman. I grant in
Loves Labor lost the Curate plays the Fool egregiously; And so does the Poet
too, for the whole Play is a very silly one. In the History of Sr. John
Old-Castle, Sr. John, Parson of Wrotham Swears, Games, Wenches, Pads, Tilts,
and Drinks: This is extremely bad, and like the Author of the Relapse etc. Only
with this difference; Shakespears Sr. John has some Advantage in his Character.
He appears Loyal, and Stout; He brings in Sr. John Acton, and other Rebels
Prisoners. He is rewarded by the King, and the Judge uses him Civilly and with
Respect. In short He is represented Lewd, but not Little; And the Disgrace
falls rather on the Person, then the Office. But the Relapsers business, is to
sink the Notion, and Murder the Character, and make the Function despicable:
So that upon the whole, Shakespeare is by much the gentiler Enemy.

Toward the End of the Silent Woman, Ben Johnson brings in a Clergyman, and a
Civilian in their Habits. But then he premises a handsome Excuse, acquaints the
Audience, that the Persons are but borrowed, and throws in a Salvo for the
Honor of either profession. In the Third Act, we have another Clergyman; He
is abused by Cutberd, and a little by Morose. But his Lady checks him for the
ill Breeding of the Usage. In his Magnetic Lady, Tale of a Tub, and Sad
Sheapherd, there are Priests which manage but untowardly. But these Plays were
his last Works, which Essay of Dramat. etc.
Mr. Dryden calls his Dotages. This Author has no more Priests, and therefore
we'll take Leave.

Beaumont and Fletcher in the Faithful Shepheardess, The False one, A Wife for
a Month, and the Knight of Malta, give, us both Priests and Bishops, part
Heathen and part Christian: But all of them save their Reputation and make a
creditable Appearance. The Priests in the Scornful Lady, and Spanish Curate are
ill used. The first is made a Fool, and the other a Knave. Indeed they seem to
be brought in on purpose to make sport, and disserve Religion. And so much for
Beaumont and Fletcher.

Thus we see the English Stage has always been out of Order, but never to the
Degree it is at present.

I shall now take Leave of the Poets, and touch a little upon History and
Argument.

And here I shall briefly show the Right the Clergy have to Regard, and fair
Usage, upon these Three following Accounts. I. Because of their Relation to the
Deity. II. Because of the Importance of their Office. III. They have
prescription for their Privilege. Their Function has been in Possession of
Esteem in all Ages, and Countries.


I. Upon the account of their Relation to the Deity.

The Holy Order is appropriated to the Divine Worship: And a Priest has the
peculiar Honor to Belong to nothing less then God Almighty. Now the Credit of
the Service always rises in proportion to the Quality and Greatness of the
Master. And for this Reason it is more Honorable to serve a Prince, than a
private Person. To apply this. Christian Priests are the Principal Ministers of
Gods Kingdom. They Represent his Person, Publish his Laws, Pass his Pardons,
and Preside in his Worship. To expose a Priest much more to burlesque his
Function, is an Affront to the Diety. All indignities done to Ambassadors, are
interpreted upon their Masters, and revenged as such. To outrage the Ministers
of Religion, is in effect to deny the Being, or Providence of God; And to treat
the Bible like a Romance. As much as to say the Stories of an other World are
nothing but a little Priestcraft, and therefore I am resolved to Lash the
Profession. But to droll upon the Institutions of God; To make his Ministers
cheap, and his Authority contemptible; To do this is little less than open
defyance. It Is a sort of Challenge to awaken his Vengeance, to exert his
Omnipotence; and do Right to his Honor. If the Profession of a Courtier was
unfashionable, a Princes Commission thought a Scandal, and the Magistracy
laughed at for their Business; the Monarch had need look to himself in time; He
may conclude his Person is despised, his Authority but a Jest, and the People
ready either to change their Master, or set up for themselves. Government and
Religion, no less than Trade Subsist upon Reputation. It Is true God cannot be
Deposed, neither does his Happiness depend upon Homage. But since he does not
Govern by Omnipotence, since he leaves Men to their Liberty, Acknowledgment
must sink, and Obedience decline, in proportion to the Lessenings of Authority.
How provoking an Indignity of this kind must be, is easy to imagine.

II. The Functions and Authorities of Religion have a great Influence on
Society. The Interest of this Life lies very much in the Belief of another. So
that if our Hopes were bounded with Sight, and Sense, if Eternity was out of
the Case, General Advantage, and Public Reason, and Secular Policy, would
oblige us to be just to the Priesthood. For Priests, and Religion always stand
and fall together; Now Religion is the Basis of Government, and Man is a
wretched Companion without it. When Conscience takes its Leave, Good Faith, and
Good Nature goes with it. Atheism is all Self, Mean and Mercenary. The Atheist
has no Hereafter, and therefore will be sure to make the most of this World.
Interest, and Pleasure, are the Gods he Worships, and to these he will Sacrifice
every Thing else.

III. The Priesthood ought to be fairly treated, because it has prescription
for this Privilege. This is so evident a Truth, that there is hardly any Age or
Country, but affords sufficient Proof. A just Discourse upon this Subject would
be a large Book, but I shall just skim it over and pass on. and

I st. For the Jews. Josephus tells us the Line of Aaron made some of the best
Pedigrees, De Bell. Judaic.
and that the Priests were reckoned among the Principal Nobility.

By the Old Testament we are informed that the High Priest was the Second
Person Deuteronomy 17. 9. 10. 2 Chronicles. 19. 8.
in the Kingdom. The Body of that Order had Civil Jurisdiction. And the Priests
continued Part of the Magistracy in the time of our Savior. Jehoiada the Math.
27. Act. 4. Vid seldon de Synedr.
High Priest was thought an Alliance big enough for the Royal Family. He
Married the Kings Daughter; His Interest and Authority was so great that he
broke the Usurpation under Athalia; and was at the Head of the Restoration.
And lastly the 2. Cbron. 22. 23.
Assamonean Race were both Kings and Priests. Joseph.


To Proceed. The Egyptian Monarchy was one of the most ancient and best
polished upon Record. Here Arts and Sciences, the Improvement of Reason, and the
Splendour of Life had its first Rise. Hither 'twas that Plato and most of the
Celebrated Philosophers traveled for their Learning. Now in this Kingdom the
Priests made no vulgar Figure. These with the Military Men were the Body of the
Nobility, and Gentry. Besides the Business of Religion, the Priests were the
Public Annalists and kept the Records of History, and Government. They were
many of them bred in Courts, formed the Education of their Princes, and
assisted at their Councils. When Joseph Diod. Sici
was Viceroy of Egypt, and in all the height of his Pomp, and Power, the King
Married him to the Daughter of Potipherah Priest of On. The Text says Pharaoh
Genesis 41.
gave him her to Wife. This shows the Match was deliberate Choice, and Royal
Favor, no stooping of Quality, or Condescensions of Love, on Joseph's Side.

To pass on. The Persian Magi, and the Druids, of Gaul were of a Religious
Profession, and consigned to the Service of the Gods. Now all these were at the
upper End of the Government, and had a great share of Regard and Authority.
Porph. de Abstin. Lib. 4. Caesar de Bell. Gall. Lib. 6
The Body of the Indians as Diodorus Siculus reports is divided into Seven
parts. The first is the Clan of the Bramines, the Priests, and Philosophers of
that Country. This Division is the least in Number, but the first in Degree.
Their Privileges are extraordinary. They are exempted from Taxes, and Live
Independent of Authority. They are called to the Sacrifices, and take care of
Funerals; They are looked on as the Favorites of the Gods, and thought
skillful in the Doctrins of an other Life: And upon these accounts are largely
considered in Presents, and Acknowledgment. The Priestesses of Argos were so
Considerable, that Time is dated from them, and they stand for a Reign in
Chronology. The Brave Romans are commended by Polybius Lib. 6.
for their Devotion to the Gods; Indeed they gave great Proof of their being in
earnest; For when their Chief Magistrates, their Consuls themselves, met any of
the Vestals, they held down their Fasces, and stooped their Sword and Mace to
Religion. Sen, in Controv.


The Priesthood was for sometime confined to the Patrician Order, that is to
the Upper Nobility. And afterward the Emperors were generally Highpriests
themselves. The Romans in distress endeavored to make Friends with Coriolanus
whom they had banished before. To this purpose they furnished out several
Solemn Embasayes. Now the Regulation of the Ceremony, and the Remarks of the
Historian; plainly discover that the Body ^^
of the Priests were thought not inferior to any other. One Testimony from
Tully and I have done. It Is in his Harangue to the College of the Priests. Cum
multa divinitus, Pontifices, a majoribus nostris inventa atque instituta sunt;
tum nihil preclarius ProDom ad Pontif.
qaum quod vos eosdem et Religionibus Deorum immortalium, and sum Rei
publicae praeesse voluerunt. etc. i. e. Amongst the many laudable Instances of
our Ancestors Prudence, and Capacity, I know nothing better contrived then
their placing your Order at the Helm, and setting the same Persons at the Head
both of Religion, and Government. Thus we see what Rank the Priesthood held
among the Jews, and how Nature taught the Heathen to regard it. And is it not
now possessed of as fair pretenses as formerly? Is Christianity any
disadvantage to the Holy Office. And does the Dignity of a Religion lessen the
Public Administrations in it? The Priests of the most High God and of Idolatry,
cannot be compared without Injury. To argue for the Preference is a Reflection
upon the Creed. It Is true the Jewish Priesthood was instituted by God: But
every Thing Divine is not of Equal Consideration. Realities are more valuable
than Types; And as the Apostle argues, the Order of Melchizedeck is greater
than that of Aaron. The Author, (I mean the immediate Hebr. 7.
one,) the Authorities, the Business, and the End, of the Christian
Priesthood, are more Noble than those of the Jewish. For is not Christ greater
than Moses, Heaven better than the Land of Canaan, and the Eucharist to be
preferred to all the Sacrifices, and Expiations of the Law? Thus the Right, and
the Reason of Things stands. And as for Fact, the Christian World have not been
backward in their Acknowledgments. Ever since the first Conversion of Princes,
the Priesthood has had no small share of Temporal Advantage. The Codes,
Novels, and Church History, are Sufficient Evidence what Sense Constantine and
his Successors had of these Matters. But I shall not detain the Reader in
remote Instances.

To proceed then to Times and Countries more generally known. The People of
France are branched into three Divisions, of these the Clergy, are the First.
And in consequence of this Privilege, at Davila Filmers Freeholders Grand Irq.
the Assembly of the States, they are first admitted to Harangue before the
King.

In Hungary the Bishops are very Considerable, and some of them great Officers
of State. In Poland they are Senators that Miraeus De Statu (...)
is part of the Upper Nobless. In Muscovy the Bishops have an Honorable
Station: and the Present Czar is descended from the Patriarchal Line. I suppose
I Fletchers Embassy. Puffenderf Introduction. a l' Histoire.
need say nothing of Italy. In Spain the Sees generally are better endowed than
elsewhere, and Wealth always draws Consideration. The Bishops hold their Lands
by a Military Noble Tenure, and are excused from Personal Attendance. And to
come toward an end; They are Earls and Dukes Heglint Cogmogk.
in France, and Sovereign Princes, in Germany. In England the Bishops are Lords
of Parliament: And the Law in plain words distinguishes the Upper House into
the Spiritual and Temporal Nobility. And several 2, Hen. 8. cap. 22. 26, Hen. 8
cap. 2. 1. Edw. 6. cap. 12, etc. Preamb.
Statutes call the Bishops Nobles by direct Implication. To mention nothing
more, their Heraldry is regulated by Garter, and Blazoned by Stones, which none
under the Nobility can pretend to. In this Country of ours, Persons of the
First Quality have been in Orders: To give an Instance of some few. Odo Brother
to William the Conqueror was Bishop of Baieux, and Earl of Kent. King Stephens
Brother was Bishop of Winchester. Nevill Archbishop of York was Brother to the
Great Earl of Warwick, and Cardinal Pool was of the Royal Family. To come a
little lower, and to our own Times. And here we may reckon not a few Persons of
Noble Descent in Holy Orders. Witness the Berklyes, Comptons, Montagues, Crews,
and Norths; The Annesleys, Finches, Grayhams etc. And as for the Gentry, there
are not many good Familes in England, but either have, or have had a Clergyman
in them,

In short; The Priesthood is the profession of a Gentleman. A Parson
notwithstanding the ignorant Pride of some People, is a Name of Credit, and
Authority, both in Religion, and Law. The Addition of Clerk is at least equal
to that of Gentleman. Were it otherwise the Profession would in many cases be a
kind of Punishment. But the Law is far from being so singular as to make Orders
a Disadvantage to Degree. No, The Honor of the Family continues, and the Her
aldry is every jot as safe in the Church, as 'twas in the State. And yet when
the Laity are taken leave of, not Gentleman but Clerk is usually written. This
Custom is an argument the Change is not made for the worse, that the Spiritual
Distinction is as valuable as the other; And to speak Modestly, that the first
Addition is not lost, but Covered. Did the Subject require it, this Point might
be farther made good. For the style of a higher Secular Honor is continued as
well with Priesthood as without it. A Churchman who is either Baronet, or
Baron, writes himself so, notwithstanding His Clerkship. Indeed we cannot well
imagine the Clergy degraded from Paternal Honor without a strange Reflection
on the Country; without supposing Julian at the Helm, the Laws Antichristian,
and Infidelity in the very Constitution. To make the Ministers of Religion less
upon the score of their Function, would be a Penalty on the Gospel, and a
contempt of the God of Christianity. It Is our Saviors reasoning; He that
despises you, despises S. Luke. 10.
Me, and he that Despises Me, Despises Him that sent me.

I hope what I have offered on this Subject will not be misunderstood. There is
no Vanity in necessary Defense. To wipe off Aspersions, and rescue Things from
Mistake, is but bare Justice: Besides, where the Honor of God, and the Public
Interest are concerned, a Man is bound to speak. To argue from a resembling
Instance. He that has the Kings Commission ought to Maintain it. To let it
suffer under Rudeness is to betray it. To be tame and silent in such cases, is
not Modesty but Meanness, Humility obliges no Man to desert his Trust; To throw
up his Privilege, and prove false to his Character. And is our Saviors
Authority inferior to that of Princes? Are the Kingdoms of this World more
Glorious than that of the next? And can the Concerns of Time be greater than
those of Eternity? If not, the reasoning above mentioned must hold in the
Application.

And now by this time I conceive the ill Manners of the Stage may be in some
measure apparent; And that the Clergy deserve none of that Coarse Usage which
it puts upon them. I confess I know no Profession that has made a more
creditable Figure, that has better Customs for their Privileges, and better
Reasons to maintain them. And here setting aside the point of Conscience, where
lies the Decency of falling foul upon this Order? What Propriety is there in
Misrepresentation? In confounding Respects, disguising Features, and painting
Things out of all Color and Complexion? This crossing upon Nature and Reason,
is great Ignorance, and out of Rule. And now what Pleasure is there in
Misbehaviour and Abuse? Is it such an Entertainment to see Religion worryed by
Atheism, and Things the most Solemn and Significant tumbled and tossed by
Buffoons? A Man may laugh at a Puppy's tearing a Wardrobe, but I think 'twere
altogether as discrect to beat him off. Well! but the Clergy mismanage
sometimes, and they must be told of their Faults. What then? Are the Poets
their Ordinaries? Is the Pulpit under the Discipline of the Stage? And are
those fit to correct the Church, that are not fit to come into it? Besides,
What makes them fly out upon the Function; and rail by wholesale? Is the
Priesthood a crime, and the service of God a Disadvantage? I grant Persons and
Things are not always suited. A good Post may be ill kept, but then the Censure
should keep close to the Fault, and the Office not suffer for the Manager. The
Clergy may have their Failings sometimes like others, but what then? The
Character is still untarnish'd. The Men may be Little, but the Priests are not
so. And therefore like other People, they ought to be treated by their best
Distinction.

If it is Objected that the Clergy in Plays are commonly Chaplains, And that
these Belonging to Persons of Quality they were obliged to represent them
servile and submissive. To this I Answer

1 st. In my former remark, that the Stage often outrages the whole Order,
without regard to any particular Office. But were it not so in the

2 d. Place, They quite overlook the Character, and mistake the Business of
Chaplains. They are no Servants, neither Moral Essays.
do they Belong to any Body, but God Almighty. This Point I have fully proved
in another, Treatise, and thither. I refer the Reader

CHAP. IV. The Stage-Poets make their Principal Persons Vicious, and reward
them at the End of the Play.
THE Lines of Virtue and Vice are Struck out by Nature in very Legible
Distinctions; They tend to a different Point, and in the greater Instances the
Space between them is easily perceived. Nothing can be more unlike than the
Original Forms of these Qualities: The First has all the sweetness, Charms, and
Graces imaginable; The other has the Air of a Post ill Carved into a Monster,
and looks both foolish and Frightful together. These are the Native Appearances
of good and Evil: And they that endeavor to blot the Distinctions, to rub out
the Colors, or change the Marks, are extremely to blame. It Is confessed as
long as the Mind is awake, and Conscience goes true, there is no fear of being
imposed on. But when Vice is varnished over with Pleasure, and comes in the
Shape of Convenience, the case grows somewhat dangerous; for then the Fancy may
be gained, and the Guards corrupted, and Reason suborned against it self. And
thus a Disguise often passes when the Person would otherwise be stopped. To put
Lewdness into a Thriving condition, to give it an Equipage of Quality, and to
treat it with Ceremony and Respect, is the way to confound the Understanding,
to fortify the Charm, and to make the Mischief invincible. Innocence is often
owing to Fear, and Appetite is kept under by Shame; But when these Restraints
are once taken off, when Profit and Liberty lie on the same side, and a Man can
Debauch himself into Credit, what can be expected in such a case, but that
Pleasure should grow Absolute, and Madness carry all before it? The Stage seem
eager to bring Matters to this Issue; They have made a considerable progress,
and are still pushing their Point with all the Vigor imaginable. If this be
not their Aim why is Lewdness so much considered in Character and Success? Why
are their Favorites Atheistical, and their fine Gentleman debauched? To what
purpose is Vice thus preferred, thus ornamented, and caressed, unless for
Imitation? That matter of Fact stands thus, I shall make good by several
Instances: To begin then with their Men of Breeding and Figure. Wild-blood sets
up for Debauchery, Ridicules Marriage, and Swears by Much Astrol. p. 3. etc.
Mock Astrol. p. 57, 59. Spanish Friar. p. 61. Country Wife. p. 25. Old Batch.
Double Dealer. p. 34.
Mahomet. Bellamy makes sport with the Devil, and Lorenzo is vicious and calls
his Father Bawdy Magistrate. Horner is horridly Smutty, and Harcourt false to
his Friend who used him kindly. In the Plain Dealer Freeman talks coarsely,
cheats the Widow, debauches her Son, and makes him undutiful. Bellmour is Lewd
and Profane, And Mellefont puts Careless in the best way he can to debauch Lady
Plyant. These Sparks generally Marry up the Top Ladys, and those that do not,
are brought to no Penance, but go off with the Character of Fine Gentlemen: In
Don-Sebastian, Antonio an Atheistical Bully is rewarded with the Lady Moraima,
and half the Muffty's Estate. Valentine in Love for Love is (if I may so call
him) Love for Love. p. 90.
the Hero of the Play; This Spark the Poet would pass for a Person of Virtue,
but he speaks to late. It Is true, He was hearty in his Affection to Angelica.
Now without question, to be in Love with a fine Lady of 30000 Pounds is a great
Virtue! But then abating this single Commendation, Valentine is altogether
compounded of Vice. He is a prodigal Debauchee, Love for Love. p. 6, 7. 25. 61.
89. 91.
unnatural, and Profane, Obscene, Saucy, and undutiful, And yet this Libertine
is crowned for the Man of Merit, has his Wishes thrown into his Lap, and makes
the Happy Exit. I perceive we should have a rare set of Virtues if these Poets
had the making of them! How they hug a Vicious Character, and how profuse are
they in their Liberalities to Lewdness? In the Provoked Wife, Constant Swears
at Length, solicits Lady Brute, Confesses himself Lewd, and prefers Debauchery
to Marriage. He handles the last Sybject very notably and worth the Hearing.
There is (says he) a poor sordid Slavery in Marriage, that turns the flowing
Tide of Honor, and sinks it to the lowest ebb of Infamy. It Is a Corrupted
Soil, Ill Nature, Avarice, Sloth, Cowardice, and Dirt, are all its Product. --
But then Constancy (alias Whoring) is a Brave, Free, Haughty, Generous, Agent.
This is admirable stuff both for the Rhetoric and the Reason! The p. 35.
Character of Young Fashion in the Relapse is of the same Staunchness, but this
the Reader may have in another Place.

To sum up the Evidence. A fine Gentleman, is a fine Whoring, Swearing, Smutty,
Atheistical Man. These Qualifications it seems complete the Idea of Honor.
They are the Top-Improvements of Fortune, and the distinguishing Glories of
Birth and Breeding! This is the Stage-Test for Quality, and those that cannot
stand it, ought to be Disclaimed. The Restraints of Conscience and the Pedantry
of Virtue, are unbecoming a Cavalier: Future Securities, and Reaching beyond
Life, are vulgar Provisions: If he falls a Thinking at this rate, he forfeits
his Honor; For his Head was only made to run against a Post! Here you have a
Man of Breeding and Figure that burlesques the Bible, Swears, and talks Smut to
Ladies, speaks ill of his Friend behind his Back, and betraies his Interest. A
fine Gentleman that has neither Honesty, nor Honor, Conscience, nor Manners,
Good Nature, nor civil Hypocricy. Fine, only in the Insignificancy of Life, the
Abuse of Religion and the Scandals of Conversation. These Worshipful Things are
the Poets Favorites: They appear at the Head of the Fashion; and shine in
Character, and Equipage. If there is any Sense stirring, They must have it,
though the rest of the Stage suffer never so much by the Partiality. And what can
be the Meaning of this wretched Distribution of Honor? Is it not to give
Credit and Countenance to Vice, and to shame young People out of all pretenses
to Conscience, and Regularity? They seem forced to turn Lewd in their own
Defense: They cannot otherwise justify themselves to the Fashion, nor keep up
the Character of Gentlemen: Thus People not well furnished with Thought, and
Experience, are debauched both in Practice and Principle. And thus Religion
grows uncreditable, and passes for ill Education. The Stage seldom gives
Quarter to any Thing that is serviceable or Significant, but persecutes Worth,
and Goodness under every Appearance. He that would be safe from their Satir
must take care to disguise himself in Vice, and hang out the Colors of
Debauchery. How often is Learning, Industry, and Frugality, ridiculed in
Comedy? The rich Citizens are often Misers, and Cuckolds, and the Universities,
Schools of Pedantry upon this score. In short; Libertinism and Profaness,
Dressing, Idleness, and Gallantry, are the only valuable Qualities. As if
People were not apt enough of themselves to be Lazy, Lewd, and Extravagant,
unless they were pricked forward, and provoked by Glory, and Reputation. Thus
the Marks of Honor, and Infamy are misapplyed, and the Idea's of Virtue and
Vice confounded. Thus Monstrousness goes for Proportion, and the Blemishes of
Human Nature, make up the Beauties of it.

The fine Ladies are of the same Cut with the Gentlemen; Moraima is
scandalously rude to her Father, helps him to a beating, and runs away with
Antonio. Angelica talks sawcily to her Uncle, and Belinda Don Sebist. Love for
Love. p. 20 Provoked Wife. p. 64. Chap. 1. and 2.
confesses her Inclination for a Gallant. And as I have observed already, the
Toping Ladies in the Mock Astrologer, Spanish Friar, Country Wife, Old
Batchelour, Orphan, Double Dealer, and Love Triumphant, are smutty, and
sometimes Profane.

And was Licentiousness and irreligion, always a mark of Honor? No; I don't
perceive but that the old Poets had an other Notion of Accomplishment, and bred
their people of Condition a different way. Philolaches in Plautus laments his
being debauched; and dilates upon the Advantages of Virtue, and Regularity.
Lusiteles another Young Gentleman disputes Mostel. A. 1. 2.
handsomely by himself against Lewdness. And the discourse between him and
Philto is Trinum. A. 2. 1.
Moral, and well managed. And afterward he lashes Luxury and Debauching A. 2.
2.
with a great deal of Warmth, and Satir. Chremes in Terence is a modest young
Gentleman, he is afraid of being surpised by (...). A. 3. 3.
Thais, and seems careful not to sully his Reputation. And Pamphilus in Hecyra
resolves rather to be governed by Duty, than Inclination. Hecyr. A. 3. 4.


Plautus's Pinacium tells her Friend Panegyric that they ought to acquit
themselves fairly to their Husbands, though These should fail in their Regards
toward them. For all good People will do justice though they don't receive it.
Lady Brute in the Stich. A. 1. 1.
Provoked Wife is governed by different maxims. She is debauched with ill
Usage, says Virtue is an Ass, and a Gallant's worth p. 3.
forty on it. Pinacium goes on to another Head of Duty, and declares that a
Daughter can never respect her Father too much, and that Disobedience has a
great deal of scandal, and Lewdness in it. The Lady Stich. A. 1. 2.
Jacinta as I remember does not treat her Father at this rate of Decency. Let
us hear a little of her Behavior. The Mock Astrologer makes the Men draw, and
frights the Ladys with the Apprehension of a Quarrel. Upon this; Theodosia cries
what will become of us! Jacinta answers, we'll die for Company: nothing vexes
me but that I am not a Man, to have one thrust at that malicious old Father of
mine, before I go. p. 60.
Afterward the old Gentleman Alonzo threatens his Daughters with a Nunnery.
Jacinta spars again and says, I would have thee to know thou graceless old Man,
that I defy a Nunnery: name a Nunnery once more and I disown thee for my
Father. I could carry on the Comparison between the old Ibid.
and Modern Poets somewhat farther. But this may suffice.

Thus we see what a fine time Lewd People have on the English Stage. No
Censure, no mark of Insamy, no Mortification must touch them. They keep their
Honor untarnish'd, and carry off the Advantage of their Character. They are
set up for the Standard of Behavior, and the Masters of Ceremony and Sense.
And at last that the Example may work the better, they generally make them
rich, and happy, and reward them with their own Desires.

Mr. Dryden in the Preface to his Mock-Astrologer, confesses himself blamed for
this Practice. For making debauched Persons his Protagonists, or chief Persons
of the Drama; And for making them happy in the Conclusion of the Play, against
the Law of Comedy, which is to reward Virtue, and punish Vice. To this
Objection He makes a lame Defense. And answers

1st. That he knows no such Law constantly observed in Comedy by the Ancient or
Modern Poets. What then? Poets are not always exactly in Rule. It may be a good
Law though it is not constantly observed, some Laws are constantly broken, and yet
never the worse for all that. He goes on, and pleads the Authorities of
Plautus, and Terence. I grant there are Instances of Favor to vicious young
People in those Authors, but to this I reply

1st. That those Poets had a greater compass of Liberty in their Religion.
Debauchery did not lie under those Discouragements of Scandal, and penalty,
with them as it does with us. Unless therefore He can prove Heathenism, and
Christianity the same, his precedents will do him little service.

2ly. Horace who was as good a judge of the Stage, as either of those
Comedians, seems to be of another Opinion. He condemns the obscenities of
Plautus, and tells you Men of Fortune and Quality in his time; would not endure
immodest Satir. De Art. Poet.
He continues, that Poets were formerly admired for the great services they
did. For teaching Matters relating to Religion, and Government; For refining
the Manners, tempering the Passions, and improving the Understandings of
Mankind: For making them more useful in Domestic Relations, and the public
Capacities of Life. This is a demonstration that Vice was not Ibid.
the Inclination of the Muses in those days; and that Horace believed the chief
business of a Poem was, to Instruct the Audience. He adds farther that the
Chorus ought to turn upon the Argument of the Drama, and support the Design of
the Acts. That They ought to speak in Defense of Virtue, and Frugality, and
show a Regard to Religion. Now from the Rule of the Chorus, we may conclude his
Judgment for the Play. For as he observes, there must be a Uniformity between
the Chorus and the Acts: They must have the same View, and be all of a Piece.
From hence it is plain that Horace would have no immoral Character have either
Countenance or good Fortune, upon the Stage. If it is said the very mention of
the Chorus shows the Directions were intended for Tragedy. To this

I answer, that the Consequence is not good. For the use of a Chorus is not
inconsistent with Comedy. The ancient Comedians had it. Aristophanes is an
Instance. I know it is said the Chorus was left out in that they call the New
Comedy. But I cannot see the conclusiveness of this Assertion. For Aristophanes
his Plutus is New Comedy with a Chorus in it. And Aristotle (...). Schol.
who lived after this Revolution of the Stage, mentions nothing of the Omission
of the Chorus. He rather supposes its continuance by saying the Chorus was
added by the Government long after the Invention of Comedy. It Is true Plautus
and Terence Libr. de Poet. cap. 5.
have none, but those before them probably might. Moliere has now revived them;
(...).
And Horace might be of his Opinion, for ought we know to the contrary.

Lastly. Horace having expressly mentioned the beginning and progress of Comedy,
discovers himself more fully: He advises a Poet to form his Work upon the
Precepts of Socrates and Plato, and the Models of Moral Philosophy. This was
the way to preserve Decency, and to assign a proper Fate and Behavior to every
Character. Now if Horace would have his Poet governed by the Maxims of Ibid.
Morality, he must oblige him to Sobriety of Conduct, and a just distribution
of Rewards, and Punishments.

Mr. Dryden makes Homewards, and endeavors to fortify himself in Modern
Authority. He lets us know that Been Johnson after whom he may be proud to Err,
gives him more than one example of this Conduct; That in the Alchemist is
notorius, where neither Face nor his Master are Fref Mock-Astrol.
corrected according to their Demerits. But how Proud soever Mr. Dryden may be
of an Error, he has not so much of Ben Jonson's company as he pretends. His
Instance of Face etc. in the Alchemist is rather notorious against his Purpose
then for it.

For Face did not Council his Master Lovewit to debauch the Widow; neither is
it clear that the Matter went thus far. He might gain her consent upon Terms of
Honor for ought appears to the contrary. It Is true Face who was one of the
Principal Cheats is Pardoned and considered. But then his Master confesses
himself kind to a fault. He owns this Indulgence was a Breach of Justice, and
unbecoming the Gravity of an old Man. And then desires the Audience to excuse
him upon the Score of the Temptation. But Face continued in the Cousenage till
the last without Repentance. Under favor I Ibid.
conceive this is a Mistake. For does not Face make an Apology before he leaves
the Stage? Does he not set himself at the Bar, arraign his own Practice, and
cast the Cause upon the Clemency of the Company? And are not all these Signs of
the Dislike of what he had done? Thus careful the Poet is to prevent the Ill
Impressions of his Play! He brings both Man and Master to Confession. He
dismisses them like Malefactors; And moves for their Pardon before he gives
them their Discharge. But the Mock-Astrologer has a gentler Hand: Wild-Blood
and Jacinta are more generously used: There is no Acknowledgment exacted; no
Hardship put upon them: They are permitted to talk on in their Libertine way to
the Last: And take Leave without the least Appearance of Reformation. The
Mock-Astrologer urges Ben Johnson's Silent Woman as an other Precedent to his
purpose. For there Dauphine confesses himself in Love with all the Collegiate
Lady's. And yet this naughty Dauphine is Crowned in the end with the Possession
of his Uncles Estate, and with the hopes of all his Mistresses. Ibid.
This Charge, as I take it, is somewhat too severe. I grant Dauphine Professes
himself in Love with the Collegiate Ladies at first. But when they invited him
to a private Visit, he makes them no Promise; but rather appears tired, and
willing to disengage. Dauphine therefore is not altogether so naughty as this
Author represents him.

Ben Johnson's Fox is clearly against Mr. Dryden. And here I have his own
Confession for proof. He declares the Poets Essay of Dramatick Poetry.
end in this Play was the Punishment of Vice, and the Reward of Virtue. Ben was
forced to strain for this piece of Justice, and p. 28.
break through the Unity of Design. This Mr. Dryden remarks upon him: How ever
he is pleased to commend the Performance, and calls it an excellent Fifth Act.

Ben Johnson shall speak for himself afterward in the Character of a Critic;
In the mean time I shall take a Testimony or two from Shakespeare. And here we
may observe the admired Falstaff goes off in Disappointment. He is thrown out
of Favor as being a Rake, and dies like a Rat behind the Hangings. The
Pleasure he had given, would not excuse him. The Poet was not so partial, as to
let his Humor compound for his Lewdness. If it is objected that this remark is
wide of the Point, because Falstaff is represented in Tragedy, where the Laws
of Justice are more strickly observed To this I answer, that you may call Henry
the Fourth and Fifth, Tragedies if you please. But for all that, Falstaff
wears no Buskins, his Character is perfectly Comical from end to end.

The next Instance shall be in Flowerdale the Prodigal. This Spark
notwithstanding his Extravagance, makes a lucky Hand on it at last, and marries
up a rich (...).
Lady. But then the Poet qualifies him for his good Fortune, and mends his
Manners with his Circumstances. He makes him repent, and leave off his
Intemperance, Swearing etc. And when his Father warned him against a Relapse,
He answers very soberly,

Heaven helping me I Will hate the Course of Hell.

I could give some instances of this kind out of Beaumount and Fletcher, But
there is no need of any farther Quotation; For Mr. Dryden is not satisfied with
his Apology from Authority: He does as good as own that this may be construed
no better than defending one ill practice by another. To prevent this very
reasonable objection he endeavors to vindicate his Precedents from the Reason
of the Thing. To this purpose he makes a wide difference between the Rules of
Tragedy and Comedy. That Vice must be impartially prosecuted in the first,
because the Persons are Great etc.

It seems then Executions are only for Greatness, and Quality. Justice is not
to strike much lower than a Prince. Private People may do what they please.
They are too few for Mischief, and too Little for Punishment! This would be
admirable Doctrine for Newgate, and give us a general Jail-delivery without
more ado. But in Tragedy (says the Mock Astrologer.) the Crimes are likewise
Horrid, so that there is a necessity for Severity and Example. And how stands
the matter in Comedy? Quite otherwise. There the Faults are but the sallies of
Youth, and the Frailties of Human Nature. For Ibid.
Instance. There is nothing but a little Whoring, Pimping. Gaming, Profaness
etc, And who could be so hard hearted to give a Man any Trouble for This? Such
Rigours would be strangely Inhumane! A Poet is a better natured Thing I can
assure you. These little Miscarrages move Pity and Commiseration, and are not
such as must of necessity be Punished. Ibid.
This is comfortable Casuistry! But to be Serious. Is Dissolution of Manners
such a Peccadillo? Does a Profligate Conscience deserve nothing but
Commiseration? And are People damned only for Humane Frailties? I perceive the
Laws of Religion and those of the Stage differ extremely! The strength of his
Defense lies in this choice Maxim, that the Chief End of Comedy is Delight. He
questions whether Instruction has any thing to do in Comedy; If it has, he is
sure it is no more then its secondary end: For the business of the Poet is to
make you laugh. Granting the Truth of this Principle, Ibid.
I somewhat question the serviceableness of it. For is there no Diversion to be
had unless Vice appears prosperous, and rides at the Head of Success. One would
think such a preposterous, distribution of Rewards, should rather shock the
Reason, and raise the Indignation of the Audience. To laugh without reason is
the Pleasure of Fools, and against it, of something worse. The exposing of
Knavery, and making Lewdness ridiculous, is a much better occasion for
Laughter. And this with submission I take to be the End of Comedy. And
therefore it does not differ from Tragedy in the End, but in the Means.
Instruction is the principal Design of both. The one works by Terror, the other
by Insamy. It Is true, they don't move in the same Line, but they meet in the
same point at last. For this Opinion I have good Authority, besides what has
been cited already.

1st. Monsieur Rapin affirms That Delight is the End that Poetry aims at, but
not the Principal one. For Poetry being an Art, ought to be profitable by the
quality of it is own nature, and by the Essential Subordination that all Arts
should have to Polity, whose End in General is Rapin Reflect. etc. p. 10.
the public Good. This is the Judgment of Aristotle and of Horace his chief
Interpreter. Ben Johnson in his Dedicatory Epistle of his Fox has somewhat
considerable upon this Argument; And declaims with a great deal of zeal,
spirit, and good Sense, against the Licentiousness of the Stage. He lays it
down for a Principle, That it is impossible to be a good Poet without being a
good Man. That he (a good Poet) is said to be able to inform Young Men to all
good Discipline, and inflame grown Men to all great Virtues etc. -- That the
general complaint was that the Writers of those days had nothing remaining in
them of the Dignity of a Poet, but the abused Name. That now, especially in
Stage Poetry, nothing but Ribaldry, Profanation, Blasphemy, all License of
Offense to God and Man, is practiced. He confesses a great part of this Charge
is over-true, and is sorry he dares not deny it. But then he hopes all are not
embarked in this bold Adventure for Hell. For my part (says he) I can, and from
a most clear Conscience affirm; That I have ever trembled to think toward the
least Profaness, and loathed the Use of such foul, and unwash'd Bawdry, as is
now made the Food of the Scene. -- The increase of which Lust in Liberty, what
Learned or Liberal Soul does not abhor? In whole Enterludes nothing but the
Filth of the Time is uttered -- with Brothelry able to violate the Ear of a
Pagan, and Blasphemy, to turn the Blood of a Christian to Water. He continues,
that the Insolence of these Men had brought the Muses into Disgrace, and made
Poetry the lowest scorn of the Age. He appeals to his Patrons the Universities,
that his Labor has been heretofore, and mostly in this his latest Work, to
reduce not only the ancient Forms, but Manners of the Scene, the innocence and
the Doctrine, which is the Principal End of Poesy, to inform Men in the best
Reason of Living. Lastly he adds, that 'he has imitated the Conduct of the
Ancients in this Play, The goings out (or Conclusions) of whose Comedies, were
not always joyful but oft-times the Bawds, the Slaves, the Rivals, ye and the
Masters are multed, and fitly, it being the Office of a Comic Poet (mark
that!) to imitate Justice, and Instruct to Life etc. Say you so! Why then if
Ben Johnson knew any thing of the Matter, Divertisment and Laughing is not as
Mr. Dryden affirms, the Chief End of Comedy. This Testimony is so very full and
clear, that it needs no explaining, nor any enforcement from Reasoning, and
Consequence:

And because Laughing and Pleasure has such an unlimited Prerogative upon the
Stage, I shall add a Citation or two from Aristotle concerning this Matter. Now
this great Man calls those Buffoons, and Impertinents, who rally without any
regard to Persons or Things, to Decency, or good Manners. That there is a great
difference between Ribaldry, and handsome Rallying. He that would perform
exactly, must keep within the Character of Virtue, and Breeding. He goes on,
and tells us that the old Comedians entertained the Audience with Smut, but the
Modern ones avoided that Liberty, and grew more reserved. This latter way he
says was much more proper and Gentile then the other. That in his Opinion
Rallying, no less than Railing, ought to be under the Discipline of Law; That
he who is ridden by his Jests, and minds nothing but the business of Laughing,
is himself Ridiculous. And that a Man of Education and Sense, is so far from
going Libr. 4. de. Morib. cap. 14.
these Lengths that he wont so much as endure the hearing some sort of
Buffoonry.

And as to the point of Delight in general, the same Author affirms, that
scandalous Satisfactions are not properly Pleasures. It Is only Distemper, and
false Appetite which makes them palatable. And a Man that is sick, seldom has
his Taste true. Besides, supposing we throw Capacity out of the Question, and
make Experiment and Sensation the Judge; Granting this, we ought not to chop at
every Bait, nor Fly out at every Thing that strikes the Fancy. The mere
Agreableness must not overbear us, without distinguishing upon the Quality, and
the Means. Pleasure how charming soever, must not be fetched out of Vice. An
Estate is a pretty thing, but if we purchase by Falsehood, and Knavery, Knavery,
we pay too much for it. Some Pleasures, are Childish and others abominable; And
upon the whole, Pleasure, absolutely speaking, is no good Thing. De Mor. Lib.
10. cap. 2.
And so much for the Philosopher. And because Ribaldry is used for Sport, a
passage or two from Quintilian, may not be unseasonable. This Orator does not
only Condemn the grosser Instances, but cuts off all the Double-Entendre's at a
Blow. He comes up to the Regularity of Thought, and tells us that the Meaning,
as well as the Words of Discourse must be unsullied. Institut; Lib. 6. c. 3.
And in the same Chapter he adds that A Man of Probity has always a Reserve in
his Freedoms, and Converses within the Rules of Modesty, and Character.And that
Mirth at the expense of Virtue, is an Over-purchase, Nimium enim risus pretium
est si probitatis impendio constat.

Thus we see how these great Masters qualify Diversion, and tie it up to
Provisoes, and Conditions. Indeed to make Delight the main business of Comedy
is an unreasonable and dangerous Principle. It opens the way to all
Licentiousness, and Confounds the distinction between Mirth, and Madness. For
if Diversion is the Chief End, it must be had at any Price, No serviceable
Expedient must be refused, though never so scandalous. And thus the worst Things
are said, and the best abused; Religion is insulted, and the most serious
Matters turned into Ridicule! As if the Blindside of an Audience ought to be
caressed, and their Folly and Atheism entertained in the first Place. Yes, if
the Palate is pleased, no matter though the Body is Poisoned! For can one die of
an easier Disease than Diversion? But Raillery apart, certainly Mirth and
Laughing, without respect to the Cause, are not such supreme Satisfactions! A
man has sometimes Pleasure in losing his Wits. Frensy, and Possession, will
shake the Lungs, and brighten the Face; and yet I suppose they are not much to
be coveted. However, now we know the Reason of the Profaness, and Obscenity of
the Stage, of their Hellish Cursing, and Swearing, and in short of their great
Industry to make God, and Goodness Contemptible: It Is all to Satisfy the
Company, and make People Laugh! A most admirable justification! What can be
more engaging to an Audience, then to see a Poet thus Atheistically brave? To
see him charge up to the Canons Mouth, and defy the Vengeance of Heaven to
serve them? Besides, there may be somewhat of Convenience in the Case. To fetch
Diversion out of Innocence is no such easy matter. There Is no succeeding it may
be in this method, without Sweat, and Drudging. Clean Wit, inoffensive Humor,
and handsome Contrivance, require Time, and Thought. And who would be at this
Expense, when the Purchase is so cheap another way? It Is possible a Poet may
not always have Sense enough by him for such an Occasion. And since we are
upon supposals, it may be the Audience is not to be gained without straining a
Point, and giving a Loose to Conscience: And when People are sick, are they not
to be Humored? In fine, We must make them Laugh, right or wrong, for Delight
is the Chief End of Comedy. Delight! He should have said Debauchery: That Is the
English of the Word, and the Consequence of the Practice. But the Original
Design of Comedy was otherwise: And granting 'twas not so, what then? If the
Ends of Things are naught, they must be mended. Mischief is the Chief end of
Malice, would it be then a Blemish in Ill Nature to change Temper, and relent
into Goodness? The Chief End of a Madman it may be is to Fire a House, must we
not then bind him in his Bed? To conclude. If Delight without Restraint, or
Distinction, without Conscience or Shame, is the Supreme Law of Comedy, 'twere
well if we had less on it. Arbitrary Pleasure, is more dangerous than Arbitrary
Power. Nothing is more Brutal than to be abandoned to Appetite; And nothing
more wretched than to serve in such a Design. The Mock-Astrologer to clear
himself of this Imputation, is glad to give up his Principle at Last. Least any
Man should think (says He) that I write this to make Libertinism amiable, or
that I cared not to debase the end, and Institution of Comedy. (It seems then
Delight is not the Chief end.) I must farther declare that we make not Vicious
Persons Happy, but only as Heaven makes Sinners so. etc. If this will hold,
all is well. But Heaven does not forgive without Repentance. Let us see then
what Satisfaction he requires from his Wild-Blood, and what Discipline he puts
him under. Why, He helps him to his Mistress, he Marries him to a Lady of Birth
and Fortune. And now do you think He has not made him an Example, and punished
him to some Purpose! These are frightful Severities! Who would be vicious when
such Terrors hang over his Head? And does Heaven make Sinners happy upon these
Conditions? Sure some People have a good Opinion of Vice, or a very ill one of
Marriage, otherwise they would have Charged the Penance a little more. But I
have nothing farther with the Mock-Astrologer.

And now for the Conclusion of a Chapter, I shall give some Instances of the
Manners of the Stage, and that with respect to Poetry, and Ceremony. Manners in
the Language of Poetry, is a Propriety of Actions, and Persons. To succeed in
this business, there must always be a regard had to Age, Sex, and Condition:
And nothing put into the Mouths of Persons which disagrees with any of these
Circumstances. It Is not enough to say a witty Thing, unless it be spoken by a
likely Person, and upon a Proper occasion. But my Design will lead me to this
Subject afterward, and therefore I shall say no more of it at present, but
proceed to apply the Remark.

One Instance of Impropriety in Manners both Poetical and Moral, is their
making Women, and Women of Quality talk Smuttily. This I have proved upon them
already, and could cite many more places to the same Purpose were it necessary.

But I shall go on, and give the Reader some other examples of Decency,
Judgment, and Probability. Don-Sebastian will help us in some measure. Here the
Mufti makes a foolish Speech to the Rabble, and jests upon his own Religion. He
tells them, though your Tyrant is a Lawful Emperor, yet your Lawful Emperor is
but a Tyrant, -- That your Emperor is a Tyrant is most Manifest, for you were
born to be Turks, out he has played the Turk with you. And now is not this Man
p. 85
sit to Manage the Alcoran, and to be set up for on Oracle of State? Captain
Tom should have had this Speech by right: But the Poet had a farther Design,
and any thing is good enough for a Mufti.

Sebastian after all the violence of his Repentance, his grasping at self
Murder, and Resolutions for the Cell, is strangely pleased with the
Remembrance of his Incest, and wishes the Repetition of it: And Almeida out of
her Princely Modesty, and singular Compunction, is of the same mind. This is
somewhat surprising! (...).
Oedipus and Jocasta in Sophocles don't Repent at this rate. No: The horror of
the first Discovery continues upon their Spirits: They never relapse into any
fits of Intemperance, nor entertain themselves with a lewd Memory. This sort of
Behavior is not only more Instructive but more Natural too. It being very
unlikely one should wish the Repeating a Crime, when He was almost Distracted
at the thoughts on it, At the thoughts on it, though 'twas committed under all the
Circumstances of excuse. Now when Ignorance and mere Mistake are so very
disquieting, it is very strange if a Man should plague his Mind with the
Aggravations of Knowledge; To carry Aversion, and Desire, in their full
strength upon the same Object; To fly and pursue with so p. 32.
much eagerness, is somewhat Unusual.

If we step to the Spanish Friar He will afford us a Flight worth the
observing. It Is part of the Addresses of Torrismond to Leonora.

You are so Beautiful
So wondrous Fair, you justify Rebellion;
As if that faultless Face could make no Sin,
But Heaven by looking on it must forgive.
These are strange Compliments! Torrismond calls his Queen Rebel to her head,
when he was both her General and her Lover. This is powerful Rhetoric to Court
a Queen with! Enough one would think to have made the Affair desperate. But he
has a Remedy at hand. The Poets Nostrum of Profaness cures all. He does as good
as tell Her, she may Sin as much as she has a mind to. Her Face is a Protection
to her Conscience. For Heaven is under a necessity to forgive a Handsome Woman.
To say all this ought to be passed over in Torrismond on the score of his
Passion, is to make the Excuse more scandalous than the Fault, if possible.
Such Raptures are fit only for Bedlam, or a place which I shall not name. Love
Triumphant will furnish another Rant not altogether inconsiderable. Here
Celadea a Maiden Lady when she was afraid her Spark would be married to
another, calls out presently for a Chaos. She is for pulling the World about
her ears, tumbling all the Elements together, and expostulates with Heaven for
making Humane Nature otherwise than it should have been.

Great Nature break thy chain that links together p 52.

The Fabric of this Globe, and make a Chaos,
Like that within my Soul. --
Now to my fancy, if she had called for a Chair instead of a Chaos, trip'd off,
and kept her folly to her self, the Woman had been much wiser. And since we
have shown our Skill in vaulting on the High Ropes, a little Tumbling on the
Stage, may not do amiss for variety.

Now then for a jest or two. Don Gomez Spanish Friar. p. 36.
shall begin: And here he will give us a Gingle upon the double meaning of a word.

I think, says Dominick the Friar, it was my good Angel that sent me hither so
opportunely. Gomez suspects him bribed for no creditable business and answers.

Gom. Ay, whose good Angels sent you hither, that you know best Father.

These Spaniards will entertain us with more of this fine Raillery. Colonel
Sancho in Love Triumphant has a great stroke at it. He says his Bride Dalinda
is no more Dalinda, but Dalilah the Philistine. p 70.
This Colonel as great a Soldier as he is, is quite puzzled at a Herald. He
thinks they call him Herod, or some such Jewish Name. Here you have a good
Officer p 61.
spoiled for a miserable jest. And yet after all, this Sancho though he cannot
pronounce Herald, knows what it is to be Laconick, which is somewhat more out of
his way. Thraso in Terence was a man of the same Enuch.
size in Sense, but for all that he does not quibble. Albanact Captain of the
Guards, King Arth. p. 2.
is much about as witty as Sancho. It seems Emmeline Heiress to the Duke of
Cornwall was Blind. Albanact takes the rise of his Thought from hence; And
observes that as Blind as she is, Coswald would have no blind Bargain of her.
Carlos tells Sancho he is sure of his Mistress, Love Trium. p. 26.
and has no more to do but to take out a License.

Sancho replies, Indeed I have her License for it. Carlos is somewhat angry at
this Gingle, and cries, what quibling too in your Prosperity? Adversity it
seems is the only time for punning. Truly I think so too. For it is a sign a Man
is much Distressed when he flies to such an Expedient. However, Carlos needed
not to have been so touchy: For He can stoop as low himself upon occasion. We
must know then that Sancho had made Himself a Hunch'd Back, to counterfeit the
Conde Alonzo. The two Colonels being in the same Disguise, were just upon the
edg of a Quarrel. After some Preliminaries in Railing, Sancho cries, Don't
provoke me; I am mischeivously bent.

Carlos replies, Nay, you are Bent enough in Conscience, but I have a Bent Fist
for Boxing. Here you have a brace of Quibbles started in a Line and a half. And
which is worst of all, they come from Carlos, from a Character of Sense; And
therefore the Poet, not the Soldier, must answer for them.

I shall now give the Reader a few Instances of the Gourtship of the Stage, and
how decently they treat the Women, and Quality of both Sexes. The Women who are
secured from Affronts by Custom, and have a Privilege for Respect, are
sometimes but roughly saluted by these Men of Address. And to bar the Defense,
this Coarseness does not always come from Clowns, and Women-haters; but from
Persons of Figure, neither singular, nor ill Bred. And which is still worse,
The Satir falls on blindly without Distinction, and strikes at the whole Sex.

Enter Raymond a Nobleman in the p. 47.
Spanish Friar.

O Virtue! Virtue! What art thou become?
That men should leave thee for that Toy a woman,
Made from the dross and refuse of a Man;
Heaven took him sleeping when he made her too,
Had Man been waking he had never consented.
I did not know before that a Man's Dross lay in his Ribs; I believe sometimes
it lies Higher. But the Philosophy, the Religion, and the Ceremony of these
Lines, are too tender to be touched. Creon Oedip. p. 3.
a Prince in Oedipus, railes in General at the Sex, and at the same time is
violently in Love with Euridice. This upon the Matter, is just as natural, as
it is Civil. If any one would understand what the Curse of all tender hearted
Women is, Belmour will inform him. What is it then?

It Is the Pox. If this be true, the Women Old Batch. p. 41.
had need lay in a stock of ill Nature betimes. It seems it is their only
preservative. It guards their Virtue, and their Health, and is all they have to
trust to. Sharper another Man of Sense in this Play, talks much at the same
rate. Belinda would know of him where he got that excellent Talent of Railing?

Sharp. Madam the Talent was Born with me. -- I confess I have taken care to
improve it, to qualisie me for the Society of p. 35.
Ladies. Horner, a Topping Character in the Country Wife, is advised to avoid
Women, and hate them as they do him. He Answers.

Because I do hate them, and would hate them yet more, I Will frequent them; you
may see by Marriage, nothing makes a Man hate a Woman more than her Constant
Conversation. There is still something more Coarse p. 22.
upon the Sex spoken by Dorax but it is a Don Sebast. p 5.
privileged Expression, and as such I must leave it. The Relapse mends the
Contrivance of the Satir, refines upon the Manner, and to make the Discourse
the more probable, obliges the Ladies to abuse themselves. And because I should
be loath to tire the Reader, Berinthia shall close the Argument. This Lady
having undertook the Employment of a Procuress, makes this remark upon it to
her self.

Berinth. So here is fine work! But there was no avoiding it. -- Besides, I
begin to Fancy there may be as much Pleasure in carrying on another Bodies
Intrigue, as ones own. This is at least certain, It exercises almost all the
Entertaining Faculties of a Woman. For there is Employment for Hypocrisy,
Invention, Deceit, Flattery, Mischief, and Lying.

Let us now see what Quarter the Stage gives to Quality. And here we shall find
them extremely free, and familiar. They dress up the Lords in Nick Names, and
expose them in Characters of Contempt. Double Dealer. Person. Dram. Relapse.
Provoked Wife.
Lord Froth is explained a Solemn Coxcomb; And Lord Rake, and Lord Foplington
give you their Talent in their Title. Lord Plausible in the Plain Dealer Acts a
ridiculous Part, but is with all very civil. He tells Manly he never attempted
to abuse any Person, The other answers; What? p. 4.
you were afraid? Manly goes on and declares He would call a Rascal by no other
Title, though his Father had left him a Dukes. That p. 2.
is, he would call a Duke a Rascal. This I confess is very much Plain Dealing.
Such Freedoms would appear but odly in Life, especially without Provocation. I
must own the Poet to be an Author of good Sense; But under favor, these jests,
if we may call them so, are somewhat high Seasoned, the Humor seems
overstrain'd, and the Character pushed too far. To proceed. Mustapha was
selling Don Alvarez for a Slave. The Merchant asks what Virtues he has.
Mustapha replies. Don Sebast. p. 16.
Virtues quoth ah! He is of a great Family and Rich, what other Virtues
would thou have in a Nobleman? Don Carlos in Love Triumphant stands for a
Gentleman, and a Man of Sense, and out-throws Mustapha a Bars Length. He tells
us Nature has given Sancho an empty Noddle, but Fortune in revenge has filled
his Pockets: p. 17.
just a Lords Estate in Land and Wit. This is a handsome Compliment to the
Nobility! And my Lord Salisbury had no doubt of it a good Bargain of the
Dedication. Don Quix. part. 2. p. 37.
Teresa's general Description of a Countess is considerable in its Kind: But
only it is in no Condition to appear. In the Relapse, Sir Tunbelly who had
Mistaken Young Fashion for Lord Foplington, was afterward undeceived; and
before the surprise was quite over, puts the Question, is it then possible that
this should be the true Lord Foplington at last? The Nobleman removes the
scruple with great Civility and Discretion! Lord Fopl. Why what do you see in
his Face to make you doubt of it? Sir without presuming to have an
extraordinary Opinion of my Figure, give me leave to tell you, if you had seen
as many Lords as I have done, you would not think it Impossible a Person of a
worse Taille then mine might be a Modern Man of Quality. Relapse. p. 84.


I Am sorry to hear Modern Quality degenerates so much. But by the way, these
Liberties are altogether new. They are unpractised by the Latin Comedians, and
by the English too till very lately, as the p. 24.
Plain Dealer observes. And as for Moliere in France, he pretends to fly his
Satir no higher than a Marquis. L' Ombre de Moliere


And has our Stage a particular Privilege? Is their Charter enlarged, and are
they on the same Foot of Freedom with the Slaves in the Saturnalia? Must all
Men be handled alike? Must their Roughness be needs played upon Title? And
cannot they lash the Vice without pointing upon the Quality? If as Mr. Dryden
rightly defines it, a Play ought to be a just Image of Humane Nature; EssayDram
poet. p. 5.
Why are not the Decencies of Life, and the Respects of Conversation observed?
Why must the Customs of Countries be Crossed upon, and the Regards of Honor
overlooked? What necessity is there to kick the Coronets about the Stage, and
to make a Man a Lord, only in order to make him a Coxcomb. I hope the Poets
don't intend to revive the old Project of Levelling, and Vote down the House of
Peers. In earnest, the Playhouse is an admirable School of Behavior! This is
their way of managing Ceremony, distinguishing Degree, and Entertaining the
Boxes! But I shall leave them at present to the Enjoyment of their Talent, and
proceed to another Argument.

CHAP. V. Remarks upon Amphytrion, King Arthur, Don Quixote, and the Relapse.
SECTION I.
THE following Plays, excepting the Last, will fall under the same Heads of
Commendation with the Former. However, since the Poets have here been prodigal
in their Expense, and dressed themselves with more Curiosity then ordinary,
they deserve a proportionable Regard. So much Finery must not be Crowded. I
shall therefore make Elbow-Room for their Figure, and allow them the Compass of
a distinct Chapter.

To begin with Amphytrion. In this Play Mr. Dryden represents Jupiter with the
Attributes of the supreme Being: He furnishes him with Omnipotence, makes him
the Creator of Nature, and the Arbiter Amphit. p. 1, 2, 3, 8, 9.
of Fate, puts all the Functions of Providence in his Hand, and describes him
with the Majesty of the true God. And when he has put Him in this glorious
Equipage, he brings him out for Diversion. He makes him express himself in the
most intemperate Raptures: He is p. 8. 17.
willing to Renounce his Heaven for his Brutality, and employ a whole Eternity
in Lewdness. He draws his Debauch at its full Length, with all the Art, and
Heightings, and Foulness of Idea immaginable. This Jupiter is not contented
with his success against Amphitrion, unless he brings Alcmena into the
Confederacy, and makes her a Party ex post Facto. He would not have her think
of her Husband, but her Lover, that is, her Whoremaster. It Is not the success,
but the manner of gaining it which is all in all. It Is the Vice which is the
charming Circumstance. Innocence and Regularity, are dangerous Companions; They
spoil Satisfaction, and make every Thing insipid! Unless People take care to
discharge their Virtue, and clear off their Conscience, their Senses will
vanish immediately! For Jupiter, says he, would owe nothing to a Name so dull
as p. 18.
Husband. And in the next Page.

That very name of Wife and Marriage,
Is poison to the dearest sweets of Love. 19.

I would give the Reader some more of these fine Sentences, but that they are
too much out of Order to appear. The truth is, Our Stage-Poets seem to fence
against Censure by the excess of Lewdness; And to make the overgrown size of a
Crime, a Ground for Impunity. As if a Malefactor should project his Escape by
appearing too scandalous for Public Trial. However, This is their Armor of
Proof, this is the Strength they retreat to. They are fortified in Smut, and
almost impregnable in Stench, so that where they deserve most, there is no
coming at them. To proceed. I desire to know what Authority Mr. Dryden has for
this extraordinary Representation? His Original Plautus, is no President.
Indeed Plautus is the only bold Heathen that ever made Jupiter tread the Stage.
But then he stops far short of the Liberties of the English Amphitrion. Jupiter
at Rome, and London, have the same unaccountable Design; but the Methods of
pursuit are very different. The First, does not solicit in scandalous Language,
nor flourish upon his Lewdness, nor endeavors to set it up for the Fashion.
Plautus had some regard to the Height of the Character, and the Opinion of his
Country, and the Restraints of Modesty. The Sallies of Aristophanes do not come
up to the case; And if they did, I have cut off the Succors from that Quarter
already. Terence's Chaerea is the Eunuch.
next bold Man: However, here the Fable of Jupiter and Danae are just glanced
at, and the Expression is clean; and He that tells the Story, a Young
Libertine. These are all circumstances of extenuation, and give quite another
Complexion to the Thing. As for the Greek Tragedians and Seneca, there is no
Prescription can be drawn from them. They mention Jupiter in Terms of
Magnificence and Respect, and make his Actions, and his Nature of a piece. But
it may be the Celebrated Homer, and Virgil may give Mr. Dryden some
Countenance. Not at all. Virgil's Jupiter is always great, and solemn, and
keeps up the port of a Deity. It Is true, Homer does not guard the Idea with
that exactness, but then He never sinks the Character into Obscenity. The most
exceptionable passage is that where Jupiter relates his Love Adventures to
Juno. Here this pretended Deity is charmed with Venus's Girdle, is in the
height of his Courtship, and under the Ascendant of his Passion. This it is
confessed was a slippery Place, and yet the Poet makes a shift to keep his
Feet. His Jupiter is Little, but not nauseous; The Story, though improper, will
bear the telling, and look Conversation in the Face. However; These Freedoms of
Homer were counted intolerable: I shall not insist on the Censures of Justin
Martyr, or Clemens Alexandrinus: Even the Heathen could not endure them. The
Poets are lashed by Plato upon this Score; For planting Vice in Heaven, and
making their Gods infectious; If Mr. Eusebius. praepar. Evarg.
Dryden answers that Jupiter can do us no Harm. He is known to be an Idol of
Lewd Memory, and therefore his Example can have no Force: Under Favor this is
a mistake: For will not Pitch daub when a dirty Hand throws it; or cannot a Toad
spit Poison because she is ugly? Ribaldry is dangerous under any Circumstances
of Representation. And as Menander and St. Paul express it, Evil Communications
corrupt good Manners. I mention them both, because if the Apostle should be
disliked, the Comedian may pass. But after all, Mr. Dryden has not so much as a
Heathen President for his Singularities. What then made him fall into them? Was
it the Decency of the Thing, and the Propriety of Character, and Behavior? By
no means. For as I have observed before, Nature and Operations, ought to be
proportioned, and Behavior suited to the Dignity of Being. To draw a Monkey in
Royal Robes, and a Prince in Antic, would be Farce upon Colors, entertain
like a Monster, and please only upon the score of Deformity. Why then does Mr.
Dryden cross upon Nature and Authority, and go off as he Confesses, from the
Plan of Plautus, and Moliere? Though by the way, the English Amphitryon has
borrowed most of the Libertine Thoughts of Moliere, and improved them. But to
the former question. Why must the beaten Road be left? He tells us, That the
difference of our Stage from the Roman and the French did so require it. That
is, our Stage must be much Ep. Ded
more Licentious. For you are to observe that Mr. Dryden, and his Fraternity,
have helped to debauch the Town, and Poison their Pleasures to an unusal
Degree: And therefore the Diet must be dressed to the Palate of the Company.
And since they are made Scepticks, they must be entertained as such. That the
English Amphitryon was contrived with this View is too plain to be better
interpreted. To what purpose else does Jupiter appear in the shape of Jehovah?
Why are the incommunicable Attributes burlesqu'd, and Omnipotence applied to
Acts of Infamy? To what end can such Horrible stuff as this serve, unless to
expose the Notion, and extinguish the Belief of a Deity? The Perfections of
God, are Himself. To ridicule his Attributes and his Being, are but two words
for the same Thing. These Attributes are bestowed on Jupiter with great
Prodigality, and afterward execrably outrag'd. The Case being thus, the Cover
of an Idol, is to thin a pretense to Screen the Blasphemy. Nothing but Mr.
Dryden's Absalom and Achitophel can outdo This. Here I confess the Motion of
his Pen is bolder, and the Strokes more Black'd. Here we have Blasphemy on the
top of the Letter, without any trouble of Inference, or Construction. This Poem
runs all upon Scripture Names, Upon Suppositions of the true Religion, and the
right Object of Worship. Here Profaness is shut out from Defense, and lies open
without Color or Evasion. Here are no Pagan Divinities in the Scheme, so that
all the Atheistick Raillery must point upon the true God. In the beginning we
are told that Absalom was David's Natural Son: So then there is a blot in his
Scutchcon, and a Blemish upon his Birth. The Poet will make admirable use of
this remark presently! This Absalom it seems was very extraordinary in his
Person and Performances. Mr. Dryden does not certainly know how this came
about, and therefore enquires of himself in the first place,

Whether inspired with a diviner Lust,
His Father got him -- p. 1.

This is down right Defiance of the Living God! Here you have the very Essence
and Spirit of Blasphemy, and the Holy Ghost brought in upon the most hideous
Occasion. I question whether the Torments and Despair of the Damned, dare
venture at such Flights as these. They are beyond Description, I Pray God they
may not be beyond Pardon too. I cannot forbear saying, that the next bad Thing
to the writing these Impieties, is to Suffer them. To return to Amphitryon.
Phoebus and Mercury have Manners assigned very disagreeable to their Condition.
The later abating Propriety of Language, talks more like a Water-man than a
Deity. They rail against the Gods, and call Mars and Vulcan the two Fools of
Heaven. Mercury is pert upon his Father Jupiter, makes jests upon his
Pleasures, and his Greatness, and is horribly smutty and profane. And all this
Misbehaviour comes from p. 3. 16. etc.
him in his own shape, and in the sublimity of his Character. Had He run Riot
in the Disguise of Sosia, the Discourse and the Person had been better
adjusted, and the Extravagance more Pardonable. But here the Decorum is quite
lost. To see the Immortals play such Gambols, and the biggest Beings do the
least Actions, is strangely unnatural. An Emperor in the Grimaces of an Ape,
or the Diversions of a Kitten, would not be half so ridiculous. Now as Monsieur
Rapin observes, without Decorum there can be no probability, nor without
Probability any true Beauty. Nature must be minded, otherwise Things will look
forced, tawdry, and chimerical. Mr. Dryden discourses very handsomely on this
occasion in his Preface to Albion and Albanius. He p. 1.
informs us, That Wit has been truly defined a propriety of Words and Thoughts.
-- That Propriety of Thought is that Fancy which arises naturally from the
Subject. Why then without doubt, the Quality, of Characters should be taken
care of, and great Persons appear like themselves. Yes, yes, all this is
granted by implication, and Mr. Dryden comes still nearer to the present case.
He tells us, that Propriety is to be observed, even in Machines; And that the
Gods are all to manage their Peculiar Provinces. He instances in some of their
respective Employments; but I don't find that any of them were to talk Lewdly.
No. He plainly supposes the contrary. For as he goes on, If they were to speak
upon the Stage it would follow of necessity, that the Expressions should be
Lofty, Figurative, and Majestical. It seems then their Behavior should be
agreeable to their Greatness. Why then are not these Rules observed, in the
Machines of Amphitrion? And as I take it, Obscenity has not the Air of Majesty,
nor any Alliance with the Sublime. And as for the Figurative Part, it is
generally of the same Cut with the Lofty: The Smut shines clear, and strong,
through the Metaphor, and is no better screen'd than the Sun by a Glass Window.
To use Mercury thus ill, and make the God of Eloquence speak so unlike himself,
is somewhat strange! But though the Ancients knew nothing of it, there are
Considerations above those of Decency. And when this happens, A Rule must
rather be trespassed on, than a Beauty left out. It Is Mr. Dryden's opinion in
his Cleomenes, where he breaks the Unity of Time, to describe the Beauty of a
Famine. Pref.
Now Beauty is an arbitrary Advantage, and depends upon Custom and Fancy. With
some People the Blackest Complexions are the handsomest. It Is to these African
Critics that Mr. Dryden seems to make his Appeal. And without doubt he
bespeaks their Favor, and strikes their Imagination luckily enough. For to
lodge Divinity and Scandal together; To make the Gods throw Stars, like
Snow-balls at one another, but especially to Court in Smut, and rally in
Blasphemy, is most admirably entertaining! This is much better than all the
Niceties of Decorum. It Is handsomely contrived to slur the Notion of a Superior
Nature, to disarm the Terrors of Religion, and make the Court Above as
Romantic as that of the Fairies. A Libertine when his Conscience is thus
relieved, and Atheism sits easy upon his Spirits, cannot help being grateful
upon the Occasion. Mere Interest will oblige him to cry up the Performance, and
solicit for the Poets Reputation! Before I take leave of these Machines, it may
not be amiss to enquire why the Gods are brought into the Spiritual Court. Now
I suppose the p. 1.
Creditableness of the Business, and the Poets Kindness to those Places, are
the principal Reasons of their coming. However, He might have a farther Design
in his Head, and that is, to bring Thebes to London, and to show the Antiquity
of Doctors Commons. For if you will believe Mercury, this Conference between
him and Phoebus was held three thousand years 19. Troil. and Cressid.
ago. Thus Shakespeare makes Hector talk about Aristotle's Philosophy, and calls
Sr. John Old Castle, Protestant. I had not The Hist. of Sr. John Old Castle.
mentioned this Discovery in Chronology, but that Mr. Dryden falls upon Ben
Johnson, for making Cataline give Fire at the Face of a Cloud, before Guns were
invented.

By the Pattern of these pretended Deities, we may guess what sort of Mortals
we are likely to meet with. Neither are we mistaken. For Phaedra is bad enough
in all Conscience, but Bromia is a mere Original. Indeed when Mr. Dryden makes
Jupiter, and Jupiter makes the Women, little less can be expected. So much for
Amphitrion.

I shall pass on to King Arthur for a King Arthur.
word or two. Now here is a strange jumble and Hotch potch of Matters, if you
mind it. Here we have Genii, and Angels, Cupids, Sirens, and Devils; Venus and
St. George, Pan and the Parson, the Hell of Heathenism, and the Hell of
Revelation; A fit of Smut, and then a Jest about Original Sin. And why are
Truth and Fiction, Heathenism and Christianity, the most Serious and the most
Trifling Things blended together, and thrown into one Form of Diversion? Why is
all this done unless it be to ridicule the whole, and make one as incredible as
the other? His Airy and Earthy Spirits discourse of the first state of Devils,
of their Chief of their Revolt, their Punishment, and Impostures. This Mr.
Dryden very Religiously calls a Fairy way of Writing, which depends only on the
Force of Imagination. Ep. Ded.
What then is the Fall of the Angels a Romance? Has it no basis of Truth,
nothing to support it, but strength of Fancy, and Poetic Invention? After He
had mentioned Hell, Devils, etc. and given us a sort of Bible description of
these formidable Things; I say after he had formed his Poem in this manner, I
am surprised to hear him call it a Fairy kind of Writing. Is the History of
Tophet no better proved than that of Styx? Is the Lake of Brimstone and that of
Phlegeton alike dreadful? And have we as much Reason to believe the Torments of
Titius and Prometheus, as those of the Devils and Damned? These are lamentable
Consequences! And yet I cannot well see how the Poet can avoid them. But setting
aside this miserable Gloss in the Dedication, the Representation it self is
scandalously irreligious. To droll upon the Vengeance of Heaven, and the
Miseries of the Damned, is a sad Instance of Christianity! Those that bring
Devils upon the Stage, can hardly believe them any where else. Besides, the
Effects of such an Entertainment must needs be admirable! To see Hell thus
played with is a mighty Refreshment to a lewd Conscience, and a biased
Understanding. It' heartens the Young Libertine, and confirms the well-wishers
to Atheism, and makes Vice bold, and enterprizing. Such Diversions serve to
dispel the Gloom, and guild the Horrors of the Shades below, and are a sort of
Ensurance against Damnation. One would think these Poets went upon absolute
Certainty, and could demonstrate a Scheme of Infidelity. If they could, They
had much better keep the Secret. The divulging it tends only to debauch
Mankind, and shake the Securities of Civil Life. However, if they have been in
the other World and find it empty, and uninhabited, and are acquainted with all
the Powers, and Places, in Being; If they can show the Impostures of Religion,
and the Contradictions of Common Belief, they have something to say for
themselves. Have they then infallible Proof and Mathematick Evidence for these
Discoveries? No Man had ever the Confidence to say This: And if He should, he
would be but laughed at for his Folly. No Conclusions can exceed the Evidence
of their Principles; you may as well build a Castle in the Air, as raise a
Demonstration upon a Bottom of Uncertainty. And is any Man so vain as to
pretend to know the Extent of Nature, and the Stretch of Possibility, and the
Force of the Powers Invisible? So that notwithstanding the Boldness of this
Opera, there may be such a Place as Hell; And if so, a Discourse about Devils,
will be no Fairy way of Writing. For a Fairy way of Writing, is nothing but a
History of Fiction; A subject of Imaginary Beings; such as never had any
existence in Time, or Nature. And if as Monsieur Rapin observes, Poetry
requires a mixture of Truth and Fable; Mr. Dryden may make his advantage, for
his Play is much better founded on Reality than He was aware of.

It may not be improper to consider in a word or two, what a frightfull Idea
the Holy Scriptures give us of Hell. It Is described by all the Circumstance of
Terror, by every Thing dreadful to Sense, and amazing to Thought. The Place,
the Company, the Duration, are all Considerations of Astonishment. And why has
God given us this solemn warning? Is it not to awaken our Fears, and guard our
Happiness; To restrain the Disorders of Appetite, and to keep us within Reason,
and Duty? And as for the Apostate Angels, the Scriptures inform us of their
lost Condition, of their Malice and Power, of their active Industry and
Experience; and all these Qualities Correspondent to the Bulk of their Nature,
the Antiquity of their Being, and the Misery of their State. In short, They are
painted in all the formidable Appearances imaginable, to alarm our Caution, and
put us upon the utmost Defense.

Let us see now how Mr. Dryden represents these unhappy Spirits, and their
Place of Abode. Why very entertainingly! Those that have a true Taste for
Atheism were never better regaled. One would think by this Play the Devils were
mere Mormo's and Bugbears, fit only to fright Children and Fools. They rally
upon Hell and Damnation, with a great deal of Air and Pleasantry; and appear
like Robin Good Fellow, only to make the Company laugh. Philidel: Is called a
Puling Sprite. And why so? For this pious reason, because

He trembles at the yawning Gulf of Hell,
Nor dares approach the Flames least he should Singe
His gaudy silken Wings. p. 6.

He sighs when he should plunge a Soul in Sulphur,
As with Compassion touched of Foolish Man.
The answer is, What a half Devil's he.

You see how admirably it runs all upon the Christian Scheme! Sometimes they
are Half-Devils, and sometimes Hopeful-Devils, and what you please to make
sport with. Grimbald is afraid of being whooped through Hell at his return, for
miscarrying in his Business. It seems there is great Leisure for Diversion!
There Is Whooping in Hell, instead of Weeping and Wailing! One would fancy Mr.
Dryden had Daylight and Company, when these Lines were written. I know his
Courage is extraordinary; But sure such Thoughts could never bear up against
Solitude and a Candle!

And now since he has diverted himself with the Terrors of Christianity, I don't
wonder he should treat those that Preach them with so much Civility! enter Poet
in the Habit of a Peasant.

We have cheated the Parson we'el cheat him again,
For why should a Blockhead have one in ten?
For prating so long like a Booklearned Sot,
Till Pudding, and Dumpling burn to pot.
These are fine comprehensive strokes! Here you have the Iliads in a Nutshell!
Two or three courtly words take in the whole Clergy: And what is wanting in
Wit, is made up in Abuse, and that is as well. This is an admirable Harvest
Catch, and the poor Tith-stealers stand highly indebted. They might have been
tired with Cheating in Prose, had not they not been thus seasonably releiv'd in
Doggrell! But now there is Music in playing the Knave. A Countryman now may
fill his Barn, and humor his ill Manners, and sing his Conscience asleep, and
all under one. I don't question but these four Lines steal many a Pound in the
year. Whether the Muse stands indictable or not, the Law must determine: But
after all, I must say the Design is notably laid. For Place and Person, for
Relish and Convenience, nothing could have been better. The Method is very
short, clear, and Practicable. It Is a fine portable Infection, and costs no
more Carriage than the Plague.

Well! the Clergy must be contented: It might possibly have been worse for them
if they had been in his favor: For he has sometimes a very unlucky way of
showing his Kindness. He commends the Earl of Leicester for considering the
Friend, Ep. Ded. (...)
more than the Cause; that is, for his Partiality; The Marquess of Halifax for
quitting the Helm, at the approach of a Storm; Ded. King Arthur.
As if Pilots were made only for fair Weather. It Is Presumed these Noble
Persons are unconcerned in this Character. However the Poet has shown his skill
in Panegyric, and it is only for that I mention it. He commends Atticus for his
Trimming, Sebast. K. Arth.
and Tully for his Cowardice, and speaks meanly of the Bravery of Cato.
Afterward he professes his Zeal for the Public welfare, Ibid.
and is pleased to see the Nation so well secured from Foreign Attempts etc.
However he is in some pain about the Coming of the Gauls; It Is possible for
fear they should invade the Muses, and carry the Opera's into Captivity, and
deprive us of the Ornaments of Peace.

And now He has served his Friends, he comes in the last place like a modest
Man, to commend Himself. He tells us there were a great many Beauties in the
Original Draught of this Play. But it seems Time has since tarnish'd their
Complexion. And He gives Heroic Reasons for their not appearing. To speak
Truth, (all Politics apart,) there are strange Flights of Honor, and
Consistencies of Pretention in this Dedication! But I shall forbear the Blazon
of the Atcheivment, for fear I should commend as unluckily as Himself.

SECT. II. Remarks upon Don Quixot, etc.
MR. Durfey being somewhat particular in his Genius and Civilities, I shall
consider him in a word or two by himself. This Poet writes from the Romance of
an ingenious Author: By this means his Sense, and Characters are cut out to his
Hand. He has wisely planted himself upon the shoulders of a Giant; but whether
his Discoveries answer the advantage of his standing, the Reader must judge.

What I have to object against Mr. Durfey shall most of it be ranged under
these three Heads. I. His Profaness with respect to Religion and the Holy
Scriptures. II. His Abuse of the Clergy. III. His want of Modesty and Regard to
the Audience.


I. His Profaness, etc.

And here my first Instance shall be in a bold Song against Providence.

Providence that formed the Fair
In such a charming Skin, Part 1 st. P. 20.

Their Outside made his only care,
And never looked within.
Here the Poet tells you Providence makes Mankind by halves, huddles up the
Soul, and takes the least care of the better Moiety. This is direct blaspheming
the Creation, and a Satir upon God Almighty. His next advance is to droll upon
the Resurrection.

Sleep and indulge thy self with Rest,
Nor dream thou e're shall rise again. 20.

His Third Song makes a jest of the Fall, rails upon Adam and Eve, and
burlesques the Conduct of God Almighty for not making Mankind over again.

When the World first knew Creation, p. 37.

A Rogue was a Top-Profession,
When there was no more in all Nature but Four,
There were two of them in Transgression.
He that first to mend the Matter,
Made Laws to bind our Nature,
Should have found a way,
To make Wills obey,
And have Modeled new the Creature:
In this and the following page, the Redemption of the World is treated with
the same respect with the Creation. The word Redeemer, which among Christians
is appropriated to our Blessed Savior, and like the Jewish Tetragrammaton
peculiarly reserved to the Deity; This adorable Name (Redeemer and Dear
Redeemer,) is applied to the ridiculous Don Quixote. These Insolences are too
big for the Correction of a Pen, and therefore I shall leave them. After this
horrible abuse of the Works, and Attributes of God, he goes on to make sport
with his Vengeance. He makes the Torments of Hell a very Comical Entertainment:
As if they were only Flames in Painting, and Terrors in Romance. The Stygian
Frogs in Aristophanes are not represented with more Levity, and Drolling. That
the Reader may see I do him no wrong, I shall quote the places which is the
main Reason why I have transcribed the rest of his Profaness.

Appear ye fat Feinds that in Limbo do groan,
That were when in Flesh the same souls with his own:
You that always in Lucifers Kitchen reside,
Amongst Sea-coal and Kettles, and Grease newly tried:
That pampered each day with a Garbidge of Souls,
Broil Rashers of Fools for a Breakfast on Coals.
In the Epilogue you have the History of Balaam's Ass exposed, and the Beast
brought upon the Stage to laugh at the Miracle the better;

And as it is said a parlous Ass once spoke,
When Crab-tree Cudgel did his rage provoke.
So if you are not civil, -- I fear
He'el speak again. --
In the second Part the Devil is brought upon the Stage. He cries as he hopes
to p. 13.
be Saved. And Sancho warrants him a good Christian. Truly I think he may have
more of Christianity in him than the Poet. For he trembles at that God, with
whom the other makes Diversion.

I shall omit the mention of several outrages of this Kind, besides his deep
mouthed swearing, which is frequent, and pass on to the Second Head, which is
His Abuse of the Clergy. And since Revealed Religion has been thus horribly
treated, it is no Wonder if the Ministers of it have the same Usage.

And here we are likely to meet with some passages extraordinary enough. For to
give Mr. Durfey his due, when he meddles with Church men he lays about him like
a Knight Errant: Here his Wit and his Malice, are generally in extremes, though
not of the same Kind. To begin. He makes the Curate Perez assist at the Part.
1. p. 13.
ridiculous Ceremony of Don Quixots Knighting. Afterward Squire Sancho
confessing his mistake to Quixote, tells him, Ah consider dear Sir no man is
born wise. And what if he was born wise? He may be Bred a Fool, if he has not a
care. But how does he prove this Memorable Sentence? Because a Bishop is no
more than another man without Grace und Good Breeding. I must needs say if the
Poet had any share of either of these Qualities, he would be less bold with his
Superiors; and not give his Clowns the Liberty to droll thus heavily upon a
solemn Character. This Sancho Mr. Durfey takes care to inform us is a dry
shrewd Country Fellow, The reason of this Character is for the strength of it
somewhat surprising. It Is because he blunders out Proverbs upon all person.
Dram.
Occasions, though never so far from the purpose. Now if blundring and talking
nothing to the purpose, is an argument of Shrewdness; some Peoples Plays are
very shrewd Performances. To proceed. Sancho complains of his being married,
because it hindered him from better offers. Perez the Curate is sorry for this
Misfortune. For as I remember says he 'twas my luck to give Teresa and you the
Blessing. To this Sancho replies. A Plague on your Blessing! I perceive I shall
have reason to wish you hanged for your Blessing -- Good finisher p. 51.
of Fornication, good Conjunction Copulative. For this irreverence and
Profaness Perez threatens him with Excommunication. Sancho tells him, I care
not, I shall lose nothing by it but a nap in the Afternoon. In his Second Part,
Jodolet a Priest is called a Holy Cormorant, and made to dispatch half a
Turkey, and a Bottle of Malaga for his Breakfast. Here one Country Girl p. 3.
chides another for her sawcyness. Do You (says she) make a Pimp of a Priest?
Sancho interposes with his usual shrewdness: A Pimp of a Priest, why is that
such a Miracle? In the Second Scene the Poet Provides himself another Priest to
abuse. p. 7.
Mannel the Steward calls Bernardo the Chaplain Mr. Cuff-Cushion, and tells him
a Whore is a Pulpit he loves. -- In settling the Characters Mannel is given out
for a witty pleasant Fellow. And now you see he comes up to Expectation. To the
Blind all Colors are alike, and Rudeness, and Raillery are the same thing!
Afterward, Bernardo says p. 10.
Grace upon the Stage; and I suppose Prays to God to bless the Entertainment of
the Devil. Before they rise from Table, the Poet contrives a Quarrel between
Don Quixot and Bernardo. The Priest railes on the Knight, and calls him Don
Coxcomb etc. By this time you may imagine the Knight heartily Provoked, ready
to buckle on his Basin, and draw out for the Combat, Let us hear his Resentment.

Don Quix. Oh thou old black Fox with a Fire brand in thy Tail, thou very
Priest: Thou Kindler of all Mischeifs in all Nations. De'e hear Homily: Did not
the Reverence I bear these Nobles -- I would so thrum your Cassock you Church
Vermin.

At last he bids Bernardo adieu in Language p. 41.
too Profane and Scandalous to relate. In the Fourth Act His Song calls p. 47.
the Clergy Black Cattle, and says no Body now minds what they say. I could
allege more of his Courtship to the Order, but the Reader might possibly be
tired, and therefore I shall proceed in the

Third, place to his want of Modesty, and Regard to the Audience. As for Smut
part. 1^. p. 7, 8. (...). p. 57.
Sancho and Teresa talk it broad, and single sens'd, for almost a page
together. Mary the Buxsom has likewise her share of this Accomplishment. The
first Epilogue is Garnished with a Couplet of it; pt. 2d. p. 60.
Marcella the Maiden Shepherdess raves in Raptures of Indecency; And sometimes
you have it mixed up with Profaness, to pt. 1st. p. 38. pt. 2d. p. 14.
make the Composition the stronger. But this entertainment being no Novelty, I
shall pass it over; And the rather because there are some other Rarities which
are not to be met with else where.

Here he diverts the Ladies with the pt. 1st. p. 7, 8. pt. 2d. p. 52. pt. 2d.
p. 36. 49. pt. 2d. p. 37. 44.
Charming Rhetoric of Snotty-Nose, filthy Vermin in the Beard, Nitty Jerkin,
and Louse Snapper, with the Letter in the Chamber Pot, and natural Evacuation;
with an abusive description of a Countess, and a rude story of a certain Lady,
and with some other varieties of this Kind, too coarse to be named. This is
rare stuff for Ladies, and Quality! There is more of Physic, than Comedy in
such Sentences as these. Crocus Metallorum will scarce turn the Stomach more
effectually. It Is possible Mr. Durfey might design it for a Receipt. And being
Conscious the Play was too dear, threw a Vomit into the Bargain. I wonder Mr.
Durfey should have no more regard to the Boxes and Pit! That a Man who has
studied the Pref. pt. 3d.
Scenes of Decency and Good Manners with so much Zeal, should practice with so
little Address! Certainly indefatigable Diligence, Care and Pains, was never
more unfortunate! Ibid.
In his third Part, Buxsome swears faster, and is more scandalous, and
impertinent, than in the other two. At these Liberties, and some in Sancho, the
Ladies took Check. This Censure Mr. Durfey seems heartily sorry for. He is
extremely concerned that the Ladies, that Essential part of the Audience,
should think Pref.
his Performance nauseous and undecent. That is, he is very sorry they brought
their Wits, or their Modesty along with them. However Mr. Durfey is not so
Ceremonious as to submit: He is resolved to keep the Field against the Ladies;
And endeavors to defend himself by saying, I know no other way in Nature to do
the Characters right, but to make a Romp, speak like a Romp, and a clownish
Boor blunder Ibid.
etc.

By his favor, all Imitations though never so well Counterfeited are not proper
for the Stage. To present Nature under every Appearance would be an odd
undertaking. A Midnight Cart, or a Dunghill would be no Ornamental Scene.
Nastyness, and dirty Conversation are of the same kind. For Words are a Picture
to the Ear, as Colors and Surface are to the Eye. Such Discourses are like
dilating upon Ulcers, and Leprosies: The more Natural, the worse; for the
Disgust always rises with the Life of the Description. Offensive Language like
offensive Smells, does but make a Man's Senses a burden, and affords him
nothing but Loathing and Aversion. Beastliness in Behavior, gives a
disparaging Idea of Humane Nature, and almost makes us sorry we are of the same
Kind. For these reasons it is a Maxim in Good Breeding never to shock the
Senses, or Imagination. This Rule holds strongest before Women, and especially
when they come to be entertained. The Diversion ought to be suited to the
Audience; For nothing pleases which is disproportioned to Capacity, and Gust.
The Rudenesses and broad Jests of Beggars, are just as acceptable to Ladies as
their Rags, and Cleanliness. To treat Persons of Condition like the Mob, is to
degrade their Birth, and affront their Breeding. It levells them with the
lowest Education. For the size of a Man's Sense, and Improvement, is discovered
by his Pleasures, as much as by any thing else.

But to remove from Scenes of Decency, to Scenes of Wit. And here Mannel and
Sancho, two pleasant sharp Fellows, will divert Person. Dram
us extremely. Mannel in the Disguise of a Lady addresses the Duchess in this
manner. Illustrious Beauty -- I must desire to know whether the most
purifidiferous Don Quixote of the Manchissima, and his squireiferous Panca, be
in this Company or no. This is the Ladies speech! Now comes Sancho. Why look
you Forsooth, without any more Flourishes, the Governor Panca is here, and Don
Quixotissimo too; therefore most afflictedissimous. Matronissima, speak pt. 2d.
p. 31.
what you willissimus, for we are all ready to be your Servilorissimus.

I dare not go on, for fear of overlaying the Reader. He may cloy himself at
his Leisure. The Scene between the Tailor and Gardener, lies much in the same
Latitude p. 51.
of Understanding.

The Third Part presents a set of Poppets, which is a Thought good enough; for
this Play is only fit to move upon Wires. It Is pity these little Machines
appeared no sooner, for then the Sense, and the Actors had been well adjusted.
In explaining the Persons, He acquaints us that Carasco is a Witty Man. I cannot
tell what the Gentleman might be in other Places, but I Am Satisfied he is a
Fool in his Play. But some Poets are as great Judges of Wit, as they are an
instance; And have the Theory and the Practice just alike.

Mr. Durfeys Epistles Dedicatory are to the sull as diverting as his Comedies.
A little of them may not be amiss.

In his first, He thus addresses the Duchess of Ormond. It Is Madam from your
Graces Prosperous Influence that I date my Good Fortune. To Date from time and
Place, is vulgar and ordinary, and many a Letter has miscarried with it: But to
do it from an Influence, is Astrological, and surprising, and agrees extremely
with the Hemisphere of the Playhouse. These Flights Pref. pt. 1st.
one would easily imagine were the Poor Offspring of Mr. Durfey's Brain, as he
very judiciously phrases it. Ibid.


One Paragraph in his Dedication to Mr. Montague is perfect Quixotism; One
would almost think him enchanted. I Will give the Reader a Taste.

Had your Eyes shot the haughty Austerity upon me of a right Courtier, -- your
valued pt. 3d.
minutes had never been disturbed with dilatory Tristes of this Nature, but my
Heart on dull Consideration of your Merit, had supinely wished you prosperity
at a Distance. I Am afraid the Poet was under some Apprehensions of the Temper
he complains of. For to my thinking, there is a great deal of Supiness, and
dull Consideration in these Periods. He tells his Patron his Smiles have
emboldened him. I confess I cannot see how He could forbear smiling at such
Entertainment. However Mr. Durfey takes Things by the best Handle, and is
resolved to be happy in his Interpretation. But to be serious. Were I the
Author, I would discharge my Muse unless she proved kinder. His way is rather
to cultivate his Lungs, and Sing to other Peoples Sense; For to finish him in a
word, he is Vox, and praeterea nihil. I speak this only on Supposition that the
rest of his Performances are like These. Which because I have not perused I can
judge of no farther than by the Rule of ex pede Herculem. I shall conclude with
Monsieur Boileau's Art of Poetry. This citation may possibly be of some service
to Mr. Durfey; For if not concerned in the Application, he may at least be
precaution'd by the Advice.

The Translation runs thus.
I like an Author that Reforms the Age;
And keeps the right Decorum of the Stage:
That always pleases by just Reasons Rule: p. 53.

But for a tedious Droll a Quibbling Fool,
Who with low nauseous Baudry fills his Plays;
Let him be gone and on two Tressells raise
Some Smithfield Stage, where he may act his Pranks,
And make Jack-puddings speak to Mountebanks.
SECT. III. Remarks upon the Relapse.
THE Relapse shall follow Don Quixot, upon the account of some Alliance between
them. And because this Author swaggers so much in his Preface, and seems to
look big upon his Performance, I shall spend a few more thoughts than ordinary
upon his Play, and examine it briefly in the Fable, the Moral, the Characters,
etc. The Fable I take to be as follows.

Fashion a Lewd, Prodigal, younger Brother, is reduced to extremity: Upon his
arrival from his Travels, he meets with Coupler, an old sharping Match-maker;
This Man puts him upon a project of cheating his Elder Brother Lord Foplington,
of a rich Fortune. Young Fashion being refused a Sum of Money by his Brother,
goes into Couplers Plot, bubbles Sir Tunbelly of his Daughter, and makes
himself Master of a fair Estate.

From the Form and Constitution of the Fable, I observe

1 st. That there is a Misnommer in the Title. The Play should not have been
called the Relapse, or Virtue in Danger: Lovelace, and Amanda, from whose
Characters these Names are drawn, are Persons of Inferior Consideration.
Lovelace sinks in the middle of the Fourth Act, and we hear no more of him till
toward the End of the Fifth, where he enters once more, but then it is as Cato
did the Senate house, only to go out again. And as for Amanda she has nothing
to do but to stand a shock of Courtship, and carry off her Virtue. This I
confess is a great task in the Playhouse, but no main matter in the Play.

The Intrigue, and the Discovery, the great Revolution and success, turns upon
Young Fashion. He without Competition, is the Principal Person in the Comedy.
And therefore the Younger Brother, or the Fortunate Cheat, had been much a more
proper Name. Now when a Poet cannot rig out a Title Page, it is but a bad sign of
his holding out to the Epilogue.

2 ly. I observe the Moral is vicious: It points the wrong way, and puts the
Prize into the wrong Hand. It seems to make Lewdness the reason of Desert, and
gives Young Fashion a second Fortune, only for Debauching away his First. A
short view of his Character, will make good this Reflection. To begin with him:
He confesses himself a Rake, swears, and Blasphemes, Curses, and Challenges his
Elder Brother, cheats him of his Mistress, and gets him laid by the Heels in a
Dog-Kennel. And what was the ground of all this unnatural quarrelling and
outrage? Why the main of it was only because Lord Foplington refused to supply
his Luxury, and make good his Extravagance. This Young Fashion after all, is
the Poets Man of Merit. He provides, a Plot and a Fortune, on purpose for him.
To speak freely, A Lewd Character seldom wants good Luck in Comedy. So that
when ever you see a thorough Libertine, you may almost swear he is in a rising
way, and that the Poet intends to make him a great Man. In short; This Play
perverts the End of Comedy: Which as Monsieur Rapin observes ought to regard
Reformation, and public Improvement. But the Relapser Reflect, etc. p. 131.
had a more fashionable Fancy in his Head. His Moral holds forth this notable
Instruction.

1 st. That all Younger Brothers should be careful to run out their
Circumstances as Fast, and as Ill as they can. And when they have put their
Affairs in this posture of Advantage, they may conclude themselves in the high
Road to Wealth, and Success. For as Fashion Blasphemously applies it,
Providence takes care of Men of Relapse. p. 19.
Merit.

2 ly. That when a Man is pressed, his business is not to be governed by
Scruples, or formalize upon Conscience and Honesty. The quickest Expedients are
the best; For in such cases the Occasion justifies the Means, and a Knight of
the Post, is as good as one of the Garter. In the

3 d. Place it may not be improper to look a little into the Plot. Here the
Poet ought to play the Politician if ever. This part should have some strokes,
of Conduct, and strains of Invention more then ordinary. There should be
something that is admirable, and unexpected to surprise the Audience. And all
this Finess must work by gentle degrees, by a due preparation of Incidents, and
by Instruments Reflect. p. 133.
which are probable. It Is Mr. Rapins remark, that without probability every
Thing is lame and Faulty. Where there is no pretense to Miracle and Machine,
matters must not exceed the force of Belief. To produce effects without
proportion; and likelihood in the Cause, is Farce, and Magic, and looks more
like Conjuring than Conduct. Let us examine the Relapser by these Rules. To
discover his Plot, we must lay open somewhat more of the Fable.

Lord Foplington a Town Beau, had agreed to Marry the Daughter of Sir.
Tun-belly Clumsey a Country Gentleman, who lived Fifty miles from London.
Notwithstanding this small distance, the Lord had never seen his Mistress, nor
the Knight his Son in Law. Both parties out of their great Wisdom, leave the
treating the Match to Coupler. When all the preliminaries of Settlement were
adjusted, and Lord Foplington expected by Sir Tun-belly in a few days, Coupler
betrays his Trust to Young Fashion. He advises him to go down before his
Brother: To Counterfeit his Person, and pretend that the strength of his
Inclinations brought him thither before his time, and without his Retinue. And
to make him pass upon Sir Tun-belly, Coupler gives him his Letter, which was to
be Lord Foplingtons Credential. Young Fashion thus provided, posts down to Sir
Tunbelly, is received for Lord Foplington, and by the help of a little Folly
and Knavery in the Family, Marries the young Lady without her Fathers
Knowledge, and a week before the Appointment.

This is the Main of the Contrivance. The Counterturn in Lord Foplingtons
appearing afterward, and the Support of the main Plot, by Bulls, and Nurses
attesting the Marriage, contain's little of Moment. And here we may observe
that Lord Foplington has an unlucky Disagreement in his Character; This
Misfortune sits hard upon the credibility of the Design. It Is true he was
Formal and Fantastic, Smitten with Dress, and Equipage, and it may be vapour'd
by his Perfumes; But his Behavior is far from that of an Idiot. This being
granted, it is very p. 27.
unlikely this Lord with his five Thousand pounds per annum, should leave the
choice of his Mistress to Coupler, and take her Person and Fortune upon
Content. To court thus blindfold, and by Proxy, does not agree with the Method
of an Estate, nor the Niceness of a Beau. However the Poet makes him engage
Hand over Head, without so much as the sight of her Picture. His going down to
Sir Tunbelly p. 79.
was as extraordinary as his Courtship. He had never seen this Gentleman. He
must know him to be beyond Measure suspicious, and that there was no Admittance
without Couplers Letter. This Letter which was, the Key to the Castle, he
forgot to take with him, and tells you 'twas stolen by his Brother Tam. And for
his part he neither had the Discretion to get another, nor yet to produce that
written by him to Sir Tun-belly. Had common Sense been consulted upon this
Occasion, the Plot Ibid.
had been at an End, and the Play had sunk in the Fourth Act. The Remainder
subsists purely upon the strength of Folly, and of Folly altogether improbable,
and out of Character. The Salvo of Sir John Friendly's appearing at last, and
vouching for Lord Foplington, will not mend the matter. For as the Story informs
us, Lord Foplington never depended on this Reserve: p. 81.
He knew nothing of this Gentleman being in the Country, nor where he Lived.
The truth is, Sir John was left in Town, and the Lord had neither concerted his
journey with him, nor engaged his Assistance. p. 83.


Let us now see how Sir. Tun-belly hangs together. This Gentleman the Poet
makes a Justice of Peace, and a Deputy Lieutenant, and seats him fifty Miles
from London: But by his Character you would take him for one of Hercules's
Monsters, or some Giant in Guy of Warwick. His Behavior is altogether Romance,
and has nothing agreeable to Time, or Country. When Fashion, and Lory, went
down, they find the Bridge drawn up, the Gates barred, and the Blunderbuss
cocked at the first civil Question. And when Sir Tun-belly had notice of this
formidable Appearance, he Sallies out with the Posse of the Family, and marches
against a Couple of Strangers with a Life Gaurd of Halberds, Sythes, and
Pitchforks. And to make sure work, Young Hoyden is locked up at the first
approach of the Enemy. Here you have prudence and wariness to the excess of
Fable, and Frensy. And yet this mighty man of suspicion, trusts Coupler with
the Disposal of his only Daughter, and his Estate into the Bargain. And what
was this Coupler? Why, a sharper by Character, and little better by Profession.
Farther. Lord Foplington and the Knight, are but a days Journey asunder, and
yet by their treating by Proxy, and Commission, one would Fancy a dozen Degrees
of Latitude betwixt them. And as for Young Fashion, excepting Couplers Letter,
he has all imaginable Marks of Imposture upon him. He comes before his Time,
and without the Retinue expected, and has nothing of the Air of Lord
Foplington's Conversation. When Sir Tun-belly asked him, pray where are your
Coaches and Servants my Lord? He makes a trifling excuse. Sir, that I might
give you and your Fair Daughter a proof how impatient I am to be nearer akin to
you, I left my Equipage to follow me, and came away Post, with only one
Servant. To be in such a Hurry of Inclination p. 59.
for a Person he never saw, is somewhat strange! Besides, it is very unlikely
Lord Foplington should hazard his Complexion on Horseback, out ride his Figure,
and appear a Bridegroom in Deshabille. You may as soon persuade a Peacock out
of his Train, as a Beau out of his Equipage; especially upon such an Occasion.
Lord Foplington would scarsely speak to his Brother just come a Shore, till the
Grand Committee of Tailors, Seamtresses, p. 11.
etc. was dispatched. Pomp, and Curiosity were this Lords Inclination; why then
should he mortify without necessity, make his first Approaches thus out of
Form, and present himself to his Mistress at such Disadvantage? And as this is
the Character of Lord Foplington, so it is reasonable to suppose Sir Tunbelly
acquainted with it. An enquiry into the Humor and management of a Son in Law,
is very natural and Customary. So that we cannot without Violence to Sense,
suppose Sir Tunbelly a Stranger to Lord Foplington's Singularities. These
Reasons were enough in all Conscience to make Sir Tunbelly suspect a Juggle,
and that Fashion was no better then a Counterfeit. Why then was the Credential
swallowed without chewing, why was not Hoyden locked up, and a pause made for
farther Enquiry? Did this Justice never hear of such a Thing as Knavery, or had
he ever greater reason to guard against it? More wary steps might well have
been expected from Sir Tunbelly. To run from one extreme of Caution, to another
of Credulity, is highly improbable. In short, either Lord Foplington and Sir
Tunbelly are Fools, or they are not. If they are, where lies the Cunning in
overreaching them? What Conquest can there be without Opposition? If they are
not Fools, why does the Poet make them so? Why is their Conduct so gross, so
part colored, and inconsistent? Take them either way, and the Plot miscarries.
The first supposition makes it dull, and the later, incredible. So much for the
Plot. I shall now in the

4 th. Place touch briefly upon the Manners.

The Manners in the Language of the Stage have a signification somewhat
particular. Aristotle and Rapin call them the Causes and Principles of Action.
They are formed upon the Diversities of Age, and Sex, of Fortune, Capacity, and
Education. The propriety of Manners consists in a Conformity of Practice, and
Principle; of Nature, and Behavior. For the purpose. An old Man must not
appear with the Profuseness and Levity of Youth; A Gentleman must not talk like
a Clown, nor a Country Girl like a Town Jilt. And when the Characters are
feigned it is Horace's Rule to keep them Uniform, and consistent, and agreeable
to their first setting out. The Poet must be careful to hold his Persons tight
to their Calling and pretentions. He must not shift, and shuffle their
Understandings; Let them skip from Wits to Blockheads, nor from Courtiers to
Pedants. On the other hand. If their business is playing the Fool, keep them
strictly to their Duty, and never indulge them in fine Sentences. To manage
otherwise, is to desert Nature, and makes the Play appear monstrous, and
Chimerical. So that instead of an Image of Life, it is rather an Image of
Impossibility. To apply some of these remarks to the Relapser.

The fine Berinthia, one of the Top-Characters, is impudent and Profane.
Lovelace would engage her Secrecy, and bids her Swear. She answers I do.

Lov.By what?

Berinth. By Woman.

Lov. That Is Swearing by my Deity, do it by your own, or I shall not believe you.

Berinth. By Man then. p. 47.


This Lady promises Worthy her Endeavors to corrupt Amanda; and then They make
a Profane jest upon the Office. p. 51.
In the progress of the Play after a great deal of Lewd Discourse with
Lovelace, Berinthia is carried off into a Closet, and p. 74.
Lodged in a Scene of Debauch. Here is Decency, and Reservedness, to a great
exactness! Monsieur Rapin blames Ariosto, and Tasso, for representing two of
their Women over free, and airy. These Poets Reflect. p. 40.
says he, rob Women of their Character, which is Modesty. Mr. Rymer is of the
same Opinion: His words are these. Nature knows nothing in the Manners which so
properly, and particularly distinguish a Woman, as her Modesty. Tragedies of
the last Age considered, etc. p. 113, 114.
-- An impudent Woman is fit only to be kicked, and exposed in Comedy.

Now Berinthia appears in Comedy it is true; but neither to be kicked, nor
exposed. She makes a Considerable Figure, has good Usage, keeps the best
Company, and goes off without Censure, or Disadvantage. Let us now take a Turn
or two with Sir Tun-belly's Heiress of 1500 pounds a year. This Young Lady
swears, talks smut, and is upon the matter just as ragmanner'd as Mary the
Buxsome. It Is plain the Relapser copyed Mr. Durfey's Original, which is a sign
he was somewhat Pinched. Now this Character was no great Beauty in Buxsome; But
it becomes the Knights Daughter much worse. Buxsome was a poor Pesant, which
made her Rudeness more natural, and expected. But Deputy Lieutenants Children
don't use to appear with the Behavior of Beggars. To breed all People alike,
and make no distinction between a Seat, and a Cottage, is not over artful, nor
very ceremonious to the Country Gentlemen. The Relapser gives Miss a pretty
Soliloquy, I Will transcribe it for the Reader.

She swears by her Maker, it is well I have a Husband a coming, or I Would Marry p.
59.
the Baker I would so. No body can knock at the Gate, but presently I must be
locked up, and here is the Young Gray-hound -- can run loose about the Hoase all
day long, she can, it is very well! Afterward her Language is too Lewd to be
quoted. Here is a Compound of Ill Manners, and Contradiction! Is this a good
Resemblance of Quality, a Description of a great Heiress, and the effect of a
Cautious Education? By her Coarsness you would think her Bred upon a Common,
and by her Confidence, in the Nursery of the Playhouse. I suppose the Relapser
Fancies the calling her Miss Hoyden is enough to justify her Ill Manners. By
his favor, this is a Mistake. To represent her thus unhewn, he should have
suited her Condition to her Name, a little better. For there is no Charm in
Words as to matters of Breeding, An unfashionable Name will not make a Man a
Clown. Education is not formed upon Sounds, and Syllables, but upon
Circumstances, and Quality. So that if he was resolved to have shown her thus
unpolished, he should have made her keep Sheep, or brought her up at the
Wash-Boul.

Sir Tun-belly accosts Young Fashion much p. 61.
at the same rate of Accomplishment. My Lord, -- I humbly crave leave to bid
you Welcome in Cup of Sack-wine. One would imagine the Poet was overdozed
before he gave the Justice a Glass. For Sackwine is too low for a Petty
Constable. This peasantly expression agrees neither with the Gentleman's Figure,
nor with the rest of his Behavior. I find we should have a Creditable
Magistracy, if the Relapser had the Making them. Here the Characters are
pinched in Sense, and stinted to short Allowance. At an other time they are
over-indulged, and treated above Expectation.

For the purpose. Vanity and Formalizing is Lord Foplingtons part. To let him
speak without Aukwardness, and Affectation, is to put him out of his Element.
There must be Gumm and stiffening in his Discourse to make it natural. However,
the Relapser has taken a fancy to his Person, and given him some of the most
Gentile raillery in the whole Play. To give an Instance or two. This Lord in
Discourse with Fashion forgets his Name, flies out into Sense, and smooth
expression, out talks his Brother, and abating the starched Similitude of a
Watch, discovers nothing of Affectation, for almost p. 42.
a Page together. He relapses into the same Intemperance of good Sense, in an
other Dialogue between him and his Brother. I shall cite a little of it.

Y. Fash.Unless you are so kind to assist me in redeeming my Annuity, I know no
Remedy, but to go take a Purse.

L. Fopl.Why Faith Tam -- to give p. 43.
you my Sense of the Thing, I do think taking a Purse the best Remedy in the
World, for if you succeed, you are releiv'd that way, if you are taken -- you
are relieved to'ther.

Fashion being disappointed of a supply quarrels his Elder Brother, and calls
him p. 44.
the Prince of Coxcombs.

L. Fopl.Sir I am proud of being at the Head of so prevailing a party.

Y. Fash.Will nothing then provoke thee? draw Coward.

L. Fopl.Look you Tam, your poverty makes your Life so burdensome to you, you
would provoke me to a Quarrel, in hopes either to slip through my Lungs into my
Estate, or else to get your self run through the Guts, to put an end to your
Pain. But I shall disappoint you in both. etc.

This Drolling has too much Spirit, the Air of it is too free, and too
handsomely turned for Lord Foplingtons Character. IN grant the Relapser could
not aford to lose these Sentences. The Scene would have suffered by the
Omission. But then he should have contrived the matter so, as that they might,
have been spoken by Young Fashion in Asides, or by some other more proper
Person. To go on. Miss Hoyden sparkles too much in Conversation. The Poet must
needs give her a p. 64. At top.
shining Line or two, which serves only to make the rest of her dullness the
more remarkable. Sir. Tun-belly falls into the same Misfortune of a Wit, and
rallies above the force of his Capacity. But the place having a mixture of
Profaness, I p. 85.
shall forbear to cite it. Now to what purpose should a Fools Coat be
embroidered? Finery in the wrong place is but expensive Ridiculousness.
Besides, I don't perceive the Relapser was in any Condition to be thus liberal.
And when a Poet is not overstock'd, to squander away his Wit among his
Block-heads, is mere Distraction. His men of Sense will smart for this
prodigality. Lovelace in his discourse of Friendship, shall be the first
Instance. Friendship (says he) is said to be a plant of tedious growth, its
Root composed of tender Fibers, nice in their Taste, etc. By this Description
the Palate of a Fiber, should be somewhat more nice and distinguishing, then
the Poets Judgment. Let us examine some more of his Witty People. Young Fashion
fancies by Misses forward Behavior, she would have a whole Kennel of Beaux
after her at London. And then Hey to the Park, and the Play, and the Church,
and the p. 64.
Devil. Here I conceive the ranging of the Period is amiss. For if he had put
the Play, and the Devil together, the Order of Nature, and the Air of
Probability had been much better observed.

Afterward Coupler being out of Breath in coming up stairs to Fashion, asks
him why the -- can thou not lodge upon the p. 94.
Ground-floor?

Y. Fash.Because I love to lie as near Heaven as I can. One would think a Spark
just come off his Travels, and had made the Tour of Italy and France, might
have rallied with a better Grace! However if he lodged in a Garret, it is a good
Local jest. I had almost forgot one pretty remarkable Sentence of Fashion to
Lory. I p. 15.
shall show thee (says he) the excess of my Passion by being very calm. Now
since this Gentleman was in a vein of talking Philosophy to his Man, I Am sorry
he broke of so quickly. Had he gone on and shown him the Excess of a Storm and
no Wind stirring, the Topic had been spent, and the Thought improved to the
utmost.

Let us now pass on to Worthy, the Relapsers fine Gentleman. This Spark sets up
for Sense, and Address, and is to have nothing of Affectation or Conscience to
spoil his Character. However to say no more of him, he grows Foppish in the
last Scene, and courts Amanda in Fustian, and Pedantry. First, He gives his
Periods a turn of Versification, and talks Prose to her in Meeter. Now this is
just as agreeable as it would be to Ride with one Leg, and Walk with the other.
But let him speak for himself. His first business is to bring Amanda to an
Aversion for her Husband; And therefore he persuades her to Rouse up that
Spirit Women ought to bear; p. 99.
and slight your God if he neglects his Angel. He goes on with his Orisons.
With Arms of Ice receive his Cold Embraces and keep your Fire for those that
come in Flames. Fire and Flames, is Metal upon Metal; It Is false Heraldry.
Extend the Arms of Mercy to his Aid. His zeal may give him Title to your Pity,
although his Merit cannot claim your Love. Here you have Arms Ibid.
brought in again by Head and shoulders. I suppose the design was to keep up
the Situation of the Allegory. But the latter part of the Speech is very Pithy.
He would have her resign her Virtue out of Civility, and abuse her Husband on
Principles of good Nature. Worthy pursues his point, and Rises in his Address.
He falls into a Fit of Dissection, and hopes to gain his Mistress by Cutting
his Throat. He is for Ripping up his Faithful Breast, to prove the Reality of
his Passion. Now when a Man Courts with his Heart in his Hand, it must be great
Cruelty to refuse him! No Butcher could have Thought of a more moving
Expedient! However, Amanda continues obstinate, and is not in the usual Humor
of the Stage. Upon this, like a well bred Lover he seizes her by Force, and
threatens to Kill her. Nay struggle not for all is in vain, or Death, or
Victory, I am determined. In this rencounter p. 100.
the Lady proves too nimble, and slips through his Fingers. Upon this
disappointment, he cries, there is Divinity about her, and she has dispensed
some Portion on it to me. His Passion is Metamorphos'd in the Turn of a band: He
is refined into a Platonic Admirer, and goes off as like a Town Spark as you
would wish. And so much for the Poets fine Gentleman.

I should now examine the Relapser's Thoughts and Expressions, which are two
other Things of Consideration in a Play The Thoughts or Sentiments are the
Expressions Rapin Reflect, etc.
of the Manners, as Words are of the Thoughts. But the view of the Characters
has in some measure prevented this Enquiry. Leaving this Argument therefore, I
shall consider his Play with respect to the

Three Unities of Time, Place, and Action.

And here the Reader may please to take notice, that the Design of these Rules,
is to conceal the Fiction of the Stage, to make the Play appear Natural, and to
give it an Air of Reality, and Conversation.

The largest compass for the first Unity is Twenty Four Hours: But a lesser
proportion is more regular. To be exact, the Time of the History, or Fable,
should not exceed that of the Representation: Or in other words, the whole
Business of the Play, should not be much longer than the Time it takes up in
Playing.

The Second Unity is that of Place. To observe it, the Scene must not wander
from one Town, or Country to another. It must continue in the same House,
Street, or at farthest in the same City, where it was first laid. The Reason of
this Rule depends upon the First. Now the Compass of Time being strait, that of
Space must bear a Correspondent Proportion. Long journeys in Plays are
impracticable. The Distances of Place must be suited to Leisure, and
Possibility, otherwise the supposition will appear unnatural and absurd. The

Third Unity is that of Action; It consists in contriving the chief Business of
the Play single, and making the concerns of one Person distinguishably great
above the rest. All the Forces of the Stage must as it were serve Under one
General: And the lesser Intrigues or Underplots, have some Relation to the
Main. The very Oppositions must be useful, and appear only to be Conquered, and
Countermin'd. To represent Two considerable Actions independent of each other,
Destroys the beauty of Subordination, weakens the Contrivance, and dilutes the
pleasure. It splits the Play, and makes the Poem double. He that would see more
upon this subject Discourse des Trois Unitez. pt. 3d.
may consult Corneille. To bring these Remarks to the Case in hand. And here we
may observe how the Relapser fails in all the Rules above mentioned.

1 st. His Play by modest Computation takes up a weeks Work, but five days you
must allow it at the lowest. One day must be spent in the First, Second, and
part of the Third Act, before Lord Foplington sets forward to Sir Tun-belly.
Now the Length of the Distance, the Pomp of the Retinue, and the Niceness of
the Person being considered; the journey down, and up again, cannot be laid
under four days. To put this out of doubt, Lord, Foplington is p. 88.
particularly careful to tell Coupler, how concerned he was not to overdrive,
for fear of disordering his Coach-Horses. The Laws of Place, are no better
observed than those of Time. In the Third Act the Play is in Town, in the
Fourth Act it is stroll'd Fifty Miles off, and in the Fifth Act in London again.
Here Pegasus stretches it to purpose! This Poet is fit to ride a Match with
Witches. Juliana Cox never Switched a Broom stock with more Expedition! This is
exactly

Titus at Walton Town, and Titus at Islington.

One would think by the probability of matters, the Plot had been stolen from
Dr. O -- s.

The Poet's Success in the last Unity of Action is much the same with the
former. Lovelace, Amanda, and Berinthia, have no share in the main Business.
These Second rate Characters are a detatched Body: Their Interest is perfectly
Foreign, and they are neither Friends, nor Enemies to the Plot. Young Fashion
does not so much as see them till the Close of the Fifth Act, and then they
meet only to fill the Stage: And yet these Persons are in the Poets account
very considerable; Insomuch that he has misnamed his Play from the Figure of
two of them. This strangness of Persons, distinct Company, and inconnexion of
Affairs, destroys the Unity of the Poem. The contrivance is just as wise as it
would be to cut a Diamond in two. There is a loss of Luster in the Division.
Increasing the Number, abates the Value, and by making it more, you make it
less.

Thus far I have examined the Dramatick Merits of the Play. And upon enquiry,
it appears a Heap of Irregularities. There is neither Propriety in the Name,
nor Contrivance in the Plot, nor Decorum in the Characters. It Is a thorough
Contradition to Nature, and impossible in Time, and Place. Its Shining Graces
as the Author Pref.
calls them, are Blasphemy and Baudy, together with a mixture of Oaths, and
Cursing. Upon the whole; The Relapser's Judgment, and his Morals, are pretty
well adjusted. The Poet, is not much better than 'the Man. As for the Profane
see Chap. 2d.
part, it is hideous and superlative. But this I have considered elsewhere. All
that I shall observe here is, that the Author was sensible of this Objection.
His Defense in his Preface is most wretched: He pretends to know nothing of the
Matter, and that it is all Printed; Which only proves his Confidence equal to
the rest of his Virtues. To outface Evidence in this manner, is next to the
affirming there is no such Sin as Blasphemy, which is the greatest Blasphemy of
all. His Apology consists in railing at the Clergy; a certain sign of ill
Principles, and ill Manners. This He does at an unusual rate of Rudeness and
Spite. He calls them the Saints with Screwed Faces, and wry Mouths. And after a
great deal of scurrilous Abuse too gross to be mentioned, he adds; If any Man
happens to be offended at a story of a Cock and a Bull, and a Priest and a
Bull-dog, I Pref.
beg his Pardon, etc. This is brave Bear-Garden Language! The Relapser would do
well to transport his Muse to Samourgan An Academy in Lithuania, for the
Education of Bears. Pere Auvill Vorage en Diverse E'tats, etc. p, 240.
There it is likely he might find Leisure to lick his Abortive Brat into shape;
And meet with proper Business for his Temper, and encouragement for his Talent.

CHAP. VI. The Opinion of Paganism, of the Church, and State, concerning the
Stage.
HAving in the foregoing Chapters discovered some part of the Disorders of the
English Stage; I shall in this Last, present the Reader with a short View of
the Sense of Antiquity, To which I shall add some Modern Authorities; From all
which it will appear that Plays have generally been looked on as the Nurseries
of Vice, the Corrupters of Youth, and the Grievance of the Country where they
are suffered.

This proof from Testimony shall be ranged under these three Heads.

Under the First, I shall cite some of the most celebrated Heathen
Philosophers, Orators, and Historians; Men of the biggest Consideration, for
Sense, Learning, and Figure. The

Second, Shall consist of the Laws and Constitutions of Princes, etc. The

Third, Will be drawn from Church- Records, from Fathers, and Councils of
unexceptionable Authority, both as to Persons, and Time.

I st. I shall produce some of the most celebrated Heathen Philosophers etc. To
begin with Plato. This Philosopher tells us that Plays raise the Passions, and
pervert Plat. de Repub. Lib. 10. Eusebius. Praepar. Evarg.
the use of them, and by consequence are dangerous to Morality. For this Reason
he banishes these Diversions his Commonwealth.

Xenophon who was both a Man of Letters and a great General, commends the
Persians for the Discipline of their Education. Cyropaed. p. 34.
They will not (says he) so much as suffer their Youth to hear any thing that is
Amorous or Tawdry. They were afraid want of Ballast might make them miscarry,
and that 'twas dangerous to add weight to the Bias of Nature.

Aristotle lays it down for a Rule that the Law ought to forbid Young People
the seeing of Comedies. Such permissions Polit. Lib. 7. cap. 1^
not being safe till Age and Discipline had confirmed them in sobriety,
fortified their Virtue, and made them as it were proof against Debauchery. This
Philosopher who had looked as far into Humane Nature as any Man, observes
Polit. Lib. 8.
farther. That the force of Music and Action is very affecting. It commands
the Audience and changes the Passions to a Resemblance of the Matter before
them. So that where the Representation is foul, the Thoughts of the Company
must suffer.

Tully cries out upon Licentious Plays Tusc. Quest. Lib. 4. De Leg. Lib. 1.
and Poems, as the bane of Sobriety, and wise Thinking: That Comedy subsists
upon Lewdness, and that Pleasure is the Root of all Evil.

Livy, reports the Original of Plays among the Romans. He tells us they were
brought in upon the score of Religion, to pacify the Gods, and remove a
Mortality. But then He adds that the Motives are sometimes good, when the Means
are stark naught: That the Remedy Dec. 1. Lib. 7.
in this case was worse than the Disease, and the Atonement more Infectious
then the Plague.

Valerius Maximus, Contemporary with Livy, gives much the same Account of the
rise of Theaters at Rome. 'T was Devotion which built them. And as for the
Performances of those Places, which Mr. Dryden calls the Ornaments, this Author
censures as the Blemishes of Peace. And which is more, He affirms They were the
Occasions of Civil Distractions; And that the State first Blushed, and then
Bled, for the Entertainment. He Lib. 2: cap. 4.
concludes the consequences of Plays intolerable; And that the Massilienses did
well cap. 6.
in clearing the Country of them. Seneca complains heartily of the Extravagance
and Debauchery of the Age: And how forward People were to improve in that which
was naught. That scarce any Body would apply themselves to the Study of Nature
and Morality, unless when the Playhouse was shut, or the Weather foul. That
there was no body to teach Philosophy, because there was no body to Learn it:
But that the Stage had Nurseries, and Company enough. This Misapplication of
time and Fancy, made Knowledge in so ill a Condition. This was the Cause the
Hints of Antiquity were no better pursued; that some Inventions were sunk, and
that Humane Reason grew Downwards rather than Natural Quest. Lib. 7. cap. 32.
otherwise. And elsewhere he avers that there is nothing more destructive to
Good Manners then to run Idling to see Sights. For there Vice makes an
insensible Approach, Epist. 7.
and steals upon us in the Disguise of pleasure.

Tacitus relating how Nero hired decayed Gentlemen for the Stage, complains
A^^al. Lib. 14. cap. 14.
of the Mismanagement; And lets us know 'twas the part of a Prince to relieve
their Necessity, and not to Tempt it. And that his Bounty should rather have
set them above an ill practice, than driven them apon't.

And in another place, He informs us that the German Women were Guarded against
danger, and kept their Honor De Mor. German! cap. 19.
out of Harms way, by having no Play Houses amongst them.

Plays, in the Opinion of the Judicious Symposiac. Lib. 7. De Audiend Poet. p.
15. Ed. par.
Plutark are dangerous to corrupt Young People; And therefore Stage Poetry when
it grows too hardy, and Licentious, ought to be checked. This was the Opinion of
these Celebrated Authors with respect to Theaters: They Charge them with the
Corruption of Principles, and Manners, and lay in all imaginable Caution
against them. And yet these Men had seldom any thing but this World in their
Scheme; and formed their Judgments only upon Natural Light, and Common
Experience. We see then to what sort of Conduct we are obliged. The case is
plain; Unless we are little enough to renounce our Reason, and fall short of
Philosophy, and live under the Pitch of Heathenism.

To these Testimonies I shall add a Couple of Poets, who both seem good Judges
of the Affair in Hand.

The first is Ovid, who in his Book De Art Amandi, gives his Reader to
understand that the Playhouse was the most likely Place for him to Forage in:
Here would be choice of all sorts: Nothing being more common than to see Beauty
surpised, Women debauched, and Wenches Picked up at these Diversions.

Sed tu praecique curvis venare Theatris, Lib. 1.

Haec loca sunt voto fertiliora tuo.
-- ruit ad celebres cultissima Faemina Ludos;
Copia judicium soepe morata meum est.
Spectatum veniunt, veniunt Spectentur ut ipsae;
Ille locus casti damna pudoris habet.
And afterward relating the imperfect beginning of Plays at the Rape of the
Sabine Virgins, he adds,

Silicit exillo solennia more Theatra
Nunc quoque formosis insidiosa manent.
This Author sometime after wrote the Remedy of Love. Here he pretends to
Prescribe for Prudence, if not for Sobriety. And to this purpose, He forbids
the seeing of Plays, and the reading of Poets, especially some of them. Such
Recreations being apt to seed the Distemper, and make the Patient relapse.

At tanti tibi sit non indulgere Theatris
Dum been de vacuo Pectore cedat amor.
Enervant animos Citharoe, Cantusque, lyr aque
Et vox, and numeris brachia mota suis. Remed. Amor.

Illic assidue ficti saltantur amantes,
Quid caveas, actor, quid juvet, art docet.
In his De Tristibus, He endeavors to make some Amends for his scandalous
Poems, and gives Augustus a sort of Plan for a Public Reformation. Amongst
other Things, he advises the suppressing of Plays, as being the promoters of
Lewdness, and Dissolution of Manners.

Vt tamen hoc fatear ludi quoque semina praebent Lib. 2.

Nequitiae, tolli tota Theatra jube.
To the Testimony of Ovid, I could add Plautus, Propertius, and Juvenal, but
being not willing to overburthen the Reader, I shall content my self with the
Plain-Dealer as one better known at Home.

This Poet in his Dedication to Lady B, some Emiment Procuress, pleads the
Merits of his Function, and insists on being Billeted upon free Quarter. Madam
(says he) I think a Poet ought to be as free of your (...) Play Houses: since
he contributes to the support of both, and is as necessary to such as you, as
the Balladsinger to the Pick-purse, in Convening the Cullies at the Theaters to
be picked up, and Carried to a supper, and Bed, at your Houses. Ep. Ded.
This is franck Evidence, and never the less true, for the Air of a Jest.

I shall now in the Second

Place proceed to the Censures of the State; And show in a few Words how much
the Stage stands discouraged by the Laws of other Countries and our own.

To begin with the Athenians. This Plut. De Glor. Atheniens.
People though none of the worst Friends to the Playhouse thought a Comedy so
unreputable a Performance, that they made a Law that no Judge of the Ariopagus
should make one.

The Lacedaemonians, who were remarkable Plut. Lacon Institut.
for the Wisdom of their Laws, the Sobriety of their Manners, and their
Breeding of brave Men. This Government would not endure the Stage in any Form,
nor under any Regulation.

To pass on to the Romans. Tully informs Cic. de Repub. Lib. 4. cited by, St.
Augustine. Libr. 2. de. ci^. dei. cap. 13.
us that their Predecessors counted all Stage Plays uncreditable and
Scandalous. In so much that any Roman who turned Actor was not only to be
Degraded, but likewise as it were disincorporated, and unnaturalized by the
Order of the Censors.

St. Augustine in the same Book, commends L^ 2. cap. 29.
the Romans for refusing the Jus Civitatis to Players, for seizing their
Freedoms, and making them perfectly Foreign to their Government.

We read in Livy that the Young People Dec. 1. Libr. 7.
in Rome kept the Fabulae Attellanae to themselves. They would not suffer this
Diversion to be blemished by the Stage. For this reason, as the Historian
observes, Ab Ilistrionibus Pollui.
the Actors of the Fabulae Atellanae were neither expelled their Tribe, nor
refused to serve in Arms; Both which Penalties it appears the Common Players
lay under.

In the Theodosian Code, Players are called Personae inhonestae; that is, to
Translate it XV. Cod. Theod. Tit. vii. p. 375.
softly, Persons Maimed, and Blemished in their Reputation. Their Pictures
might be seen at the Playhouse, but were not permitted to hang in any
creditable Place of the Town, Upon this Text Gothofred tells us the Function of
Players was counted scandalous in loco Honesto.
by the Civil Law. L. 4. And turpe munus.
that those who came upon the Stage to divert the people, had a mark of Infamy
set upon them. Famosi sunt ex Edicto. L. 1.. 6. de his qui notantur infamia.
Gothofred. Ibid. p. 376.


I shall now come down to our own Constitution. And I find by 39. Eliz. cap. 4.
1. Jae. cap. 7. That all Bearwards, Common Players of Enterludes, Counterfeit
Egyptians etc. shall be taken, adjudged and deemed Rogues, Uagabonds, and
slurdy beggars, and shall sustain all pain and Punishment, as by this Act is in
that behalf appointed. The Penalties are infamous to the last degree, and
Capital too, unless they give over. It Is true, the first Act excepts those
Players which belong to a Baron or other Personage of higher Degree, and are
authorized to Play under the hand and Seal of Aims of such Baron, or
Personage. But by the later Statute this Privilege of Licensing is taken away:
And all of them are expressly brought under the Penalty without Distinction.

About the Year 1580, there was a Petition made to Queen Elizabeth for
suppressing of Play Houses. It Is somewhat remarkable, and therefore I shall
transcribe some part of the Relation.

Many Godly Citizens, and other well disposed Gentlemen of London, considering
that Play Houses and Dicing-Houses, were Traps for Young Gentlemen and others,
and perceiving the many Inconveniences and great damage that would ensue upon
the long suffering of the same, not only to particular Persons but to the whole
City; And that it would also be a great disparagement to the Governors, and a
dishonor to the Government of this Honorable City, if they should any longer
continue, acquainted some Pious Magistrates therewith, desiring them to take
some Course for the suppression of Common Play Houses, etc. within the City of
London and Liberties thereof; who thereupon made humble suit to Queen Elizabeth
and her Privy Council, and obtained leave of her Majesty to thrust the Players
out of the City, and to Rawlidge his Monster, lately found out, etc. p. 2, 3, 4.
pull down all Play Houses, and Dicing-Houses within their Liberties, which
accordingly was effected. And the Play Houses in Grace Church Street etc. were
quite put down and suppressed.

I shall give a Modern Instance or two Gazett Roterdam: Dec. 20. Paris.
from France, and so conclude these Authorities.

In the Year 1696. we are informed by a Dutch Print, M. L' Archeveque appuye
etc. That the Lord Archbishop support'd by the interest of some Religious
Persons at Court, has done his utmost to suppress the Public Theaters by
degrees; or at least to clear them of Profaness.

And last Summer the Gazetts in the Paris Article affirm. That the King has
ordered the Italian Players to retire out French Amsterdam Harlem Gazetts.
Paris, May. 17. 1697.
of France because they did not observe his Majesty's Orders, but represented
immodest Pieces, and did not correct their Obscenities, and indecent Gestures.

The same Intelligence the next week after, acquaints us that some Persons of
the first Quality at Court, who were the Protectors of these Comedians, had
solicited the French King to recall his Order against them, but their Request
had no success.

And here to put an end to the Modern Authorities, I shall subjoyn a sort of
Pastoral Letter published about two years since by the Bishop of Arras in
Flanders. The Reader shall have as much of it as concerns him in both Languages.

MANDEMENT DE MONSEIGNEUR L' Illustrissime Et Reverendissime EVE QUE D' ARRAS
CONTRE LA COMEDY.
GUY DE SEVE DE ROCHE CHOUART par la grace de Dieu and du Saint Siege
Apostolic Eveque d' Arras, A tous fideles dela Ville d' Arras Salut and
Benediction. Il faut ignorer sa Religion pour ne pas connoitre l'horreur
qu'elle a marquee dans tous les temps des Spectacles, and de la Comedy en
particulier. Les saints Peers la condamnent dans leurs ecrits; Ils la regardent
comme un rest du paganism, and Comme une ecole d' impurete. L' Eglise l' a
toujours regardee avec abomination, and si elle n'a pas absolument rejette de
son sein ceux qui exercent ce metier infame and seandaleux, elle les prive
publiquement des Sacremens, and n' oublie rien pour marquer en toutes
rencountres son aversion pour cet etat and pour l' inspirer a ses Enfans. Des
Rituels de Dioceses tres regles les mettent au nombre des persons que les
Cures sont obliges de traiter comme excommunies; Celui de Paris les joint aux
Sorciers, and aux Magiciens, and les regard comme manifestement infames; Le
Eveques les plus saints leur font refuser publiquement, les Sacremens; Nous
avons veu un des premiers Eveques de France ne vouloir pas par cette raison
recevoir au marriage un homme de cet etat; un autre ne vouloir pas leur accorder
la terre Saint; Et dans les Statuts d' un prelat bien plus illustre per son
merit, par sa Piete, and par l' austerite^ de sa vie que par la pourpre don't
il est revestu, on les trouve avec les concubinaires, les Usuriers, les
Blasphemateurs, les Femmes debauchees, les excommunies denonces, les Infames,
les Simoniaque's, and autres persons scandaleuses mis au nombre de ceux a qui
on doit resuser publiquement la Communion.

Il est donc impossible de justifyer la Comedy sans vouloir condamner l'
Eglise, les saints peers, les plus saint Prelates, mais il ne l' est pas moins
de justifier ceux qui par leur assistance a ces spectacles non seulement
prennent part au mal qui s'y fait, mais contribuent en meme temps a retenir ces
malheureux ministres de Satan dans une profession, qui les separant des
Sacremens de l' Eglise les met dans un etat perpetuel de peche and horse de
salut s'ils ne l' abandonnent. --

Et a egard des Comediens and Commediennes, Nous defendons tres expressement a
nos pasteurs and a nos Confesseurs des les recevoir aux Sacremens si ce n'est
qu' ils aient fait Penitence de leur peche, done des Trois Lettres Pasterales
De Monseigneur L' Eveque D' Arras etc.
preuves d'amendment, renonce a leur Etat, and repare pat une satisfaction
public tell que nous jugerons a propos de leur ordonner, le Scandale public
qu'ils om done. Fait and ordonne a Arras le quatrieme jour de Decembre mil six
cent quatre-vingt quinze. A Delf. 1697.


Guy Eveque d' Arras

Et plus bas

Par Monseigneur

CARON.

In English thus, An Order of the most Illustrious and most Reverend Lord
Bishop of Arras against Plays.
GUY DE SEVE DE ROCHE CHOUART by the grace of God, etc. Bishop of Arras. To all
the Faithful in the Town of Arras Health and Benediction. A man must be very
ignorant of his Religion, not to know the great disgust it has always declared,
for Public Sights, and for Plays in particular. The Holy Fathers condemn them
in their writings; They look upon them as relics of Heathenism, and Schools
of Debauchery. They have been always abominated by the Church; And
notwithstanding those who are concerned in this Scandalous Profession; are not
absolutely expelled by a Formal Excommunication, yet She publicly refuses them
the Sacraments, and omits nothing upon all occasions, to show her aversion for
this Employment, and to transfuse the same sentiments into her Children. The
Rituals of the best governed Dioceses, have ranged the Players among those whom
the Parish Priests are obliged to treat as Excommunicated Persons. The Ritual
of Paris joins them with Sorcerers, and Magicians, and looks upon them as
notoriously infamous; The most eminent Bishops for Piety, have publicly denied
them the Sacraments: For this reason, we our selves have known one of the most
considerable Bishops in France; turn back a Player that came to be Married; And
an other of the same order, refused to bury them in Consecrated Ground: And by
the Orders of a Bishop, who is much more illustrious for his worth, for his
Piety, and the Strictness of his Life, than for the Purple in his Habit; They
are thrown amongst Fornicators, Usurers, Blasphemers, Lewd Women, and declared
Excommunicates, amongst the Infamous, and Simoniacal, and other Scandalous
Persons who are in the List of those who ought publicly to be barred Communion.

Unless therefore we have a mind to condemn the Church, the Holy Fathers, and
the most holy Bishops, it is impossible to justify Plays; neither is the
Defense of those less impracticable, who by their Countenance of these
Diversions, not only have their share of the Mischief there done, but
contribute at the same time to fix these unhappy Ministers of Satan in a
Profession, which by depriving them of the Sacraments of the Church, leaves
them under a constant necessity of Sinning, and out of all hopes of being
saved, unless they give it over. --

From the general Unlawfulness of Plays, the Bishop proceeds to argue more
strongly against seeing them at times which are more particularly devoted to
Piety, and Humiliation: And therefore he strickly forbids his Diocese the
Playhouse in Advent, Lent, or under any public Calamity. And at last
concludes in this Manner.

As for the Case of Players both Men, and Women, we expressly forbid all our
Rectors, Pastors, and Confessors, to admit them to the Sacraments, unless they
shall repent them of their Crime, make proof of their Reformation, renounce
their Business, and retrieve the Scandal they have given, by such public
Satisfaction as we shall think proper to enjoin them. Made and Decreed at Arras
the fourth day of December 1695.

Guy Bishop of Arras. etc.

I shall now in the Third

Place, give a short account of the sense of the Primitive Church concerning
the Stage: And first I shall instance in her Councils.

The Council of Illiberis, or Collioure in Ann. 305. Can. 67.
Spain, decrees,

That it shall not be lawful for any Woman who is either in full Communion or a
probationer for Baptism, to Marry, or Entertain any Comedians or Actors;
whoever takes this Liberty shall be Excommunicated.

The First Council of Arles, runs thus, Ann. 314. Can. 5.
Concerning Players, we have thought fit to Excommunicate them as long as they
continue to Act.

The Second Council of Arles made their Ann. 452.
20 th Canon to the same purpose, and almost in the same words.

The Third Council of Carthage, of which Ann. 397. Can. 11.
St. Augustine was a Member, ordains,

That the Sons of Bishops, or other Clergymen should not be permitted to
furnish out Public Shows, or Plays Secularia spectacula, which manifestly
comprehends the Stage.
or be prelent at them: Such sort of Pagan Entertainments being forbidden all
the Laity. It being always unlawful for all Christians to come amongst
Blasphemers.

This last branch shows the Canon was Principally levelled against the
Playhouse: And the reason of the Prohibition, holds every jot as strong
against the English, as against the Roman Stage.

By the 35th Canon of this Council it is decreed,

That Actors or others belonging to the Stage, who are either Converts, or
Penitents upon a Relapse, shall not be denied Admission into the Church. This
is farther proof, that Players as long as they kept to their Employment were
barred Communion.

Another African Council declares,

That the Testimony of People of ill Ann. 424. Can. 96.
Reputation, of Players, and others of such scandalous Employments, shall not
be admitted against any Person.

The Second Council of Chaalon sets Council. Cabilon. Ann. 813. Can. 9.
forth,

That Clergy men ought to abstain from all over-engaging Entertainments in
Music or Show. (oculorum auriumque illecebris.) And as for the smutty, and
Licentious Insolence of Players, and Buffoons, let them not only decline the
Hearing it themselves, but likewise conclude the Laity obliged to the same
Conduct.

I could cite many more Authorities of this Kind, but being conscious of the
Niceness of the Age, I shall forbear, and proceed to the Testimony of the
Fathers.

To begin with Theophilus Bishop of Antioch, who lived in the Second Century.

It Is not lawful (says he) for us to be Libr. 3. ad Autol.
present at the Prizes of your Gladiators least by this means we should be
Accessaries to the Murders there committed. Neither dare we presume upon the
Liberty of your other Shows, Spectacula.
least our Senses should be tinctured, and disobliged, with Indecency, and
Profaness. The Tragical Distractions of Tereus and Thyestes, are Nonsense to
us. We are for seeing no Representations of Lewdness. The Stage-Adulteries of
the Gods, and Hero's, are unwarrantable Entertainments: And so much the worse,
because the Mercenary Players set them off with all the Charms and Advantages
of Speaking. God forbid that Christians who are remarkable for Modesty, and
Reserv'dness; who are obliged to Discipline, and trained up in Virtue, God
forbid I say, that we should dishonor our Thoughts, much less our Practice,
with such Wickedness as This!

Tertullian who lived at the latter end of this Century is copious upon this
subject; I shall translate but some Part of it. In his Apologetick. He thus
addresses Chap. 38.
the Heathens.

We keep off from your public Shows, because we cannot understand the Warrant
of their Original. There Is Superstition and Idolatry in the Case: And we
dislike the Entertainment because we dislike the reason of its Institution.
Besides, We have nothing to do with the Frensies of the Race-Ground, the
Lewdness of the Playhouse, or the Barbarities of the Bear-Garden. The
Epicureans had the Liberty to state the Notion, and determine the Object of
Pleasure. Why cannot we have the same Privilege? What Offense is it then if we
differ from you in the Idea of Satisfaction? If we will not understand to brighten
our Humor, and live pleasantly, where is the harm? If any body has the worst
on it, it is only our selves.

His Book de Spectaculis was wrote on purpose to diswade the Christians, from
the public Diversions of the Heathens, of which the Playhouse was one. In his
first Chapter He gives them to understand, That the Tenor of their Faith, the
Reason of Principle, and the Order of Discipline, had barred them the
Entertainments of the Town. And therefore He exhorts them to refresh their
Memories, to run up to their Baptism, and recollect their first Engagements.
For without care, Pleasure is a strange bewitching Thing. When it gets the
Ascendant, 'twill keep on Ignorance for an Excuse of Liberty, make a man's
Conscience wink, and suborn his Reason against himself.

But as he goes on, some peoples Faith Chap. 3.
is either too full of Scruples, or too barren of Sense. Nothing will serve to
settle them but a plain Text of Scripture, They hover in uncertainty because
it is not said as expressly thou shall not go to the Playhouse, as it is thou
shall not Kill. But this looks more like Fencing than Argument. For we have the
Meaning of the prohibition though not the sound, in the first Psalm. Blessed is
the Man that walks not in the Council of the Ungodly, nor stands in the way of
Sinners, nor sits in the Seat of the Scornful.

The Censors whose business 'twas to Ibid. Cap. 10.
take care of Regularity and Manners, looked on these Play Houses as no other
than Batteries upon Virtue and Sobriety, and for this reason often pulled them
down before they were well built so that here we can argue from the Precedents
of mere Nature, and plead the Heathens against themselves. Upon this view
Pompey the Great, when he built his Dramatick Bawdy House, clapped a Chapel a
Top on it. He would not let it go under the Name of a Playhouse, but convened
the people to a Solemn Dedication, and called it Venus's Temple; Giving them to
understand at the same time that there were Benches under it for Diversion. He
was afraid if he had not gone this way to work, The Censors might afterward
have razed the Monument, and branded his Memory. Thus a Scandalous pile of
Building was protected: The Temple, covered the Playhouse, and Discipline was
baffled by Superstition. But the Design is notably suited to the Patronage of
Bacchus The Play Houses were dedicated to Baccbus.
and Venus. These two Confederate Devils of Lust and Intemperance, do well
together. The very Functions of the Players resemble their Protectors, and are
instances of Service and Acknowledgment. Their Motion is effeminate, and their
Gestures vicious and Significant: And thus they worship the Luxury of one
Idol, and the Lewdness of the other.

And granting the Regards of Quality, Ibid. cap. 15.
the Advantages of Age, or Temper, may fortify some People; granting Modesty
secured, and the Diversion as it were refined by this Means: Yet a Man must not
expect to stand by perfectly unmoved, and impregnable. No body can be pleased
without Sensible Impressions. Nor can such Perceptions be received without a
Train of Passions attending them. These Consequences will be sure to work back
upon their Causes, solicit the Fancy, and heighten the Original Pleasure. But
if a Man pretends to be a Stoic at Plays, he falls under another Imputation.
For where there is no Impression, there can be no Pleasure: And then the
Spectator is very much Impertinent, in going where he gets nothing for his
Pains. And if this were all; I suppose Christians have something else to do
than to ramble about to no purpose. Ibid. cap. 22.


Even those very Magistrates who abet the Stage, discountenance the Players.
They stigmatize their Character, and cramp their Freedoms. The whole Tribe of
them is thrown out of all Honor and Privilege. They are neither suffered to be
Lords, nor Gentlemen: To come within the Senate, or harangue the People, or so
much as to be Members of a Common Council. Now what Caprice and Inconsistency
is this! To love what we punish, and lessen those whom we admire! To cry up the
Mystery, and censure the practice; For a Man to be as it were eclipsed upon the
score of Merit is certainly an odd sort of Justice! True. But the Inference
lies stronger another way. What a Confession then is this of an Ill Business;
when the very Excellency of it is not without Infamy?

Since therefore Humane Prudence has thought fit to degrade the Stage,
notwithstanding the Divertingness of it. Since Pleasure cannot make them an
Interest Here, nor shelter them from Censure. Ibid. cap. 23.
How will They be able to stand the shock of Divine Justice, and what Reckoning
have they Reason to expect Hereafter?

All things considered it is no wonder such People should fall under Possession.
God knows we have had a sad Example of this already. A certain Woman went Ibid.
cap. 26.
to the Playhouse, and brought the Devil Home with Her. And when the Unclean
Spirit was pressed in the Exorcism and asked how he durst attack a Christian. I
have done nothing (says he) but what I can justify. For I seized her upon my
own Ground. Indeed, how many Instances have we of others who have apostatized
from God, by Correspondence with the Devil? What Communion has Light with
Darkness? No Man can serve two Masters, nor have Life and Death in him at the
same time.

Will you not then avoid this Seat of Ibid. cap. 27.
Infection? The very Air suffers by their Impurities; And they almost Pronounce
the Plague. What though the performance may be in some measure pretty and
entertaining? What though Innocence, yes and Virtue too, shines through some part
of it? It Is not the custom to prepare Poison unpalatable, nor make up Ratzbane
with Rhubarb and Sena. No. To have the Mischief speed, they must oblige the
Sense, and make the Dose pleasant. Thus the Devil throws in a Cordial Drop to
make the Draught go down; And steals some few Ingredients from the Dispensatory
of Heaven. In short, look upon all the engaging Sentences of the Stage; Their
flights of Fortitude, and Philosophy, the Loftiness of their Style, the Music
of the Cadence, and the Finess of the Conduct; Look upon it only I say as Honey
dropping from the Bowels of a Toad, or the Bag of a Spider: Let your Health
overruled your Pleasure, and don't die of a little Liquorishness.

In earnest Christian, our time for Entertainment is not yet: you are two
craving Ibid. cap. 28.
and ill managed if you are so violent for Delight. And let me tell you, no
wiser than you should be, if you count such Things Satisfaction. Some
Philosophers placed their Happiness in bare Tranquillity. Easiness of Thought,
and Absence of Pain, was all they aimed at. But this it seems will not Satisfy
Thee. Thou lie sighing and hankering after the Playhouse. Prithee recollect
thy self: Thou know Death ought to be our Pleasure, And therefore I hope
Life may be a little without it. Are not our Desires the same with the
Apostles, To be Dissolved and to be with Christ. Let us act up to our
pretentions, and let Pleasure be true to Inclination.

But if you cannot wait for Delight; if Ibid. cap. 29.
you must be put into present Possession, we will cast the Cause upon that Issue.
Now were you not unreasonable, you would perceive the Liberalities of
Providence, and find your self almost in the midst of Satisfaction. For what
can be more transporting than the Friendship of Heaven, and the Discovery of
Truth, than the Sense of our Mistakes, and the Pardon of our Sins? What greater
Pleasure can there be, than to scorn being Pleased? To contemn the World? And
to be a Slave to Nothing? It Is a mighty satisfaction I take it, to have a clear
Conscience; To make Life no Burden, nor Death any Terror! To trample upon the
Pagan Deities; To batter Principalities and Powers, and force the Devils to
Resign! By Exorcisms
These are the Delights, these are the noble Entertainments of Christians: And
besides the advantage of the Quality, they are always at hand, and cost us
nothing.

Clemens Alexandrinus affirms That the Lib. 3. Paedag. Ann. 204. cap. 11.
Circus and Theater may not improperly be called the Chair of Pestilence. --
Away then with these Lewd, Ungodly Diversions, and which are but Impertinence
at the Best. What part of Impudence either in words or practice, is omitted by
the Stage? Don't the Buffoons take almost all manner of Liberties, and plunge
through Thick and Thin, to make a jest? Now those who are affected with a
vicious satisfaction, will be haunted with the Idea, and spread the Infection.
But if a man is not entertained to what purpose should he go Thither? Why
should he be fond where he finds nothing, and court that which sleeps upon the
Sense? If it is said these Diversions are taken only to unbend the Mind, and
refresh Nature a little. To this I answer. That the spaces between Business
should not be filled up with such Rubbish. A wise man has a Guard upon his
Recreations, and always prefers, the Profitable to the Pleasant.

Minutius Felix delivers his Sense in Ann. 206.
these Words:

As for us, who rate our Degree by our Virtue, and value our selves more upon
our Lives, than our Fortunes; we decline your Pompous Shows, and public
Entertainments. And good Reason we have for our Aversion. These Things have
their Rise from Idols, and are the Train of a false Religion. The Pleasure is
ill Descended, and likewise Vicious and ensnaring. For who can do less than
abominate, the Clamorous Disorders of the Race-Ground, and the profession of
Murder at the Prize. And for the Stage, there you have more Lewdness, though not
a jot less of Distraction. Sometimes your Mimicks, are so Scandalous and
Expressing, that it is almost hard to distinguish between the Fact and the
Representation. Sometimes a Luscious Actor shall whine you into Love, and give
the Disease that he Counterfeits.

St. Cyprian or the Author de Spectaculis, will furnish us farther.

Here this Father argues against those who thought the Playhouse no unlawful
Diversion, because 'twas not Condemned by express Scripture. Let mere Modesty
(says he) supply the Holy Text: And let Nature govern where Revelation does not
reach. Some Things are too black to lie upon Paper, and are more strongly
forbidden, because unmention'd. The Divine Wisdom must have had a low Opinion
of Christians, had it descended to particulars in this Case. Silence is
sometimes the best Method for Authority. To Forbid often puts People in mind of
what they should not do; And thus the force of the Precept is lost by naming
the Crime. Besides, what need we any farther Instruction? Discipline and
general Restraint makes up the Meaning of the Law; and common Reason will tell
you what the Scripture has left unsaid. I would have every one examine his own
Thoughts, and inquire at Home into the Duties of his Profession. This is a good
way to secure him from Indecency. For those Rules which a Man has worked out
for himself, he commonly makes most use of. -- And after having described the
infamous Diversions of the Playhouse; He expostulates in this Manner.

What business has a Christian at such Places as these? A Christian who has not
the Liberty so much as to think of an ill Thing. Why does he entertain himself
with Lewd Representations? Has he a mind to discharge his Modesty, and be
fleshed for the Practice? Yes. this is the Consequence. By using to see these
Things, he will learn to do them. -- What need I mention the Levities, and
Impertinence in Comedies, or the ranting Distractions of Tragedy? Were these
Things unconcerned with Idolatry, Christians ought not to be at them. For were
they not highly Criminal, the Foolery of them is egregious, and unbecoming the
Gravity of Beleivers. --

As I have often said these Foppish, these pernicious Diversions, must be
avoided. We must set a Guard upon our Senses, and keep the Sentinal always upon
Duty. To make Vice familiar to the ear, is the way to recommend it. And since
the mind of Man has a Natural Bent to Extravagance; how is it likely to hold
out under Example, and Invitation? If you push that which totters already,
whether will it tumble? In earnest, we must draw off our Inclinations from
these Vanities. A Christian has much better Sights than these to look at. He
has solid Satisfactions in his Power, which will please, and improve him at the
same time.

Would a Christian be agreeably Refreshed? Let him read the Scriptures: Here
the Entertainment will suit his Character, and be big enough for his Quality.
-- Beloved, how noble, how moving how profitable a pleasure is it to be thus
employed? To have our Expectations always in prospect, and be intent on the
Glories of Heaven?

He has a great deal more upon this Subject in his Epistles to Donatus and
Eucratius, which are undoubtedly genuine. The later being somewhat remarkable,
I shall Translate part of it for the Reader.

Dear Brother, your usual Kindness, together with your desire of releiving Ad
Euvcrat.
your own Modesty and mine, has put you upon asking my Thoughts concerning a
certain Player in your Neighborhood; whether such a Person ought to be allowed
the Privilege of Communion. This Man it seems continues in his Scandalous
Profession, and keeps a Nursery under him. He teaches that which 'twas a Crime
in him to learn, sets up for a Master of Debauch, and Propagates the lewd
Mystery. The case standing thus, it is my Opinion that the Admission of such a
Member would be a Breach of the Discipline of the Gospel, and a Presumption
upon the Divine Majesty: Neither do I think it fit the Honor of the Church
should suffer by so Infamous a Correspondence.

Lactantius's Testimony shall come next. This Author in his Divine
Institutions, Lib. 6. cap. 20.
which he Dedicates to Constantine the Great, cautions the Christians against
the Playhouse, from the Disorder, and danger of those places. For as he
observes.

The debauching of Virgins, and the Amors of Strumpets, are the Subject of
Comedy. And here the Rule is, the more Rhetoric the more Mischief, and the
best Poets are the worst Common-Wealths-men. For the Harmony and Ornament of
the Composition serves only to recommend the Argument, to fortify the Charm,
and engage the Memory. At last he concludes with this advice.

Let us avoid therefore these Diversions, least somewhat of the Malignity
should seize us. Our Minds should be quiet and Composed, and not overrun with
Amusements. Besides a Habit of Pleasure is an ensnaring Circumstance. It Is
Ibid. cap. 21.
apt to make us forget God, and grow cool in the Offices of Virtue.

Should a Man have a Stage at Home, would not his Reputation suffer extremely,
and all people count him a notorious Libertine? most undoubtedly. Now the Place
does not alter the Property. The Practice at the Playhouse is the same thing,
only there he has more Company to keep him in Countenance.

A well worked Poem is a powerful piece of Imposture: It masters the Fancy, and
hurries it no Body knows whither. -- If therefore we would be governed by
Reason let us stand off from the Temptation, such Pleasures can have no good
Meaning. Like delicious Morsels they subdue the Palate, and flatter us only to
cut our Throats. Let us prefer Reality to Appearance, Service, to Ibid. cap. 22.
Show; and Eternity to Time.

As God makes Virtue the Condition of Glory, and trains men up to Happiness by
Hardship and Industry. So the Devils road to Destruction lies through
Sensuality and Epicurism. And as pretended Evils lead us on to uncounterfeited
Bliss; So Visionary Satisfactions are the causes of Real Misery. In short,
These Inviting Things are all stratagem. Let us, take care the softness and
Importunity of the Pleasure does not surprise us, nor the Bait bring us within
the snare. The Senses are more than Outworks, and should be defended
accordingly.

I shall pass over St. Ambrose, and go In Psalm. 119.
on to St. Chrysostom. This Father is copious upon the Subject, I could
translate some Sheets from him were it necessary. But length being not my
Business, a few Lines may serve to discover his Opinion. His 15 Homily ad
Populum Antiochenum, runs thus.

Most People fancy the Unlawfulness of going to Plays is not clear. But by
their favor, a world of Disorders are the Consequences of such a Liberty. For
frequenting the Playhouse has brought Whoring and Ribaldry into Vogue, and
finished all the parts of Debauchery.

Afterward he seems to make the supposition better than the Fact, and argues
upon a feigned Case.

Let us not only avoid downright Sinning, but the Tendencies to it. Some
Indifferent Things are fatal in the Consequence, and strike us at the Rebound.
Now who would choose his standing within an Inch of a Fall; or swim upon the
Verge of a Whirlpool? He that walks upon a Precipice, shakes tho'he does not
tumble. And commonly his Concern brings him to the Bottom. The Case is much the
same in reference to Conscience, and Morality. He that will not keep his Distance
from the Gulf, is oftentimes sucked in by the Eddy; and the least oversight is
enough to undo Him.

In his 37 Homily upon the Eleventh Chapter of St. Matthew he declaims more at
large against the Stage.

Smutty Songs (says he) are much more abominable than Stench and Ordure. And
which is most to be lamented, you are not at all uneasy at such Licentiousness.
You Laugh when you should Frown; and Commend what you ought to abhor. -- Hark
you, you can keep the Language of your own House in order: If your Servants or
your Childrens Tongues run Riot, they presently smart for it. And yet at the
Playhouse you are quite another Thing. These little Buffoons have a strange
Ascendant! A luscious Sentence is hugely welcome from their Mouth: And instead
of Censure, they have thanks and encouragement for their Pains. Now if a Man
would be so just as to wonder at himself, here is Madness, and Contradiction in
Abundance.

But I know you will say what is this to me, I neither sing nor pronounce, any of
this Lewd stuff? Granting your Plea, what do you get by it? If you don't repeat
these Scurrilities, you are very willing to hear them. Now whether the Ear, or
the Tongue is mismanaged, comes much to the same reckoning. The difference of
the Organ, does not alter the Action so mightily, as you may imagine. But pray
how do you prove you don't repeat them? They may be your Discourse, or the
Entertainments of your Closet for ought we know to the contrary. This is
certain; you hear them with pleasure in your Face, and make it your business to
run after them: And to my Mind, these are strong Arguments of your Approbation.

I desire to ask you a Question. Suppose you hear any wretches Blaspheme, are
you in any Rapture about it? And do your Gestures appear airy, and obliged? Far
from it. I doubt not but your blood grows chill, and your Ears are stopped at the
Presumption. And what is the Reason of this Aversion in your Behavior? Why it is
because you don't use to Blaspheme, your self. Pray clear your self the same
way from the Charge of Obscenity. We Will then believe you don't talk Smut, when
we percieve you careful not to hear it. Lewd Sonnets, and Serenades are quite
different from the Prescriptions of Virtue. This is strange Nourishment for a
Christian to take in! I don't wonder you should lose your Health, when you feed
thus Foul. It may be Chastity is no such easy Task! Innocence moves upon an
Ascent, at least for sometime. Now those who are always Laughing can never
strain up Hill. If the best preparations of Care will just do, what must become
of those that are dissolved in Pleasure, and lie under the Instructions of
Debauchery? -- Have you not heard how that St. Paul exhorts us to rejoice in
the Lord? He said in the Lord; not in the Devil. But alas! what leisure have
you to Mind St. Paul? How should you be sensible of your Faults, when your Head
is always kept Hot, and as it were intoxicated with Buffooning? -- He goes on,
and lashes the Impudence of the Stage with a great deal of Satir and Severity;
and at last proposes this Objection.

You Will say, I can give you many Instances where the Playhouse has done no
Harm. Don't mistake. Throwing away of Time and ill example, has a great deal of
Harm in it; And thus far you are guilty at the best. For granting your own
Virtue impenetrable, and out of Reach, Granting the Protection of your Temper
has brought you off unhurt, are all. People thus Fortified? By no means.
However, many a weak Brother has ventured after you, and miscarried upon your
Precedent. And since you make others thus Faulty, how can you be Innocent your
self? All the People undone There, will lay their Ruin at your Door. The
Company are all Accessory to the Mischief of the Place. For were there no
Audience, we should have no Acting. And therefore those who join in the Crime,
will never be parted in the Punishment. Granting your Modesty has secured you,
which by the way I believe nothing of; yet since many have been debauched by
the Playhouse, you must expect a severe Reckning for giving them
Encouragement. Though after all, as Virtuous as you are, I doubt not, you would
have been much Better, had you kept away.

In fine, Let us not dispute to no purpose; The practice will not bear a Defense!
Where the Cause is naught it is in vain to rack our Reason, and strain for
Pretenses. The best excuse for what is past, is to stand clear from the danger,
and do so no more.

One citation more from St. Chrysostom, and I take Leave. In the Preface of his
Commentary upon St. John's Gospel speaking of Plays and other Public Shows, he
has these words.

But what need I branch out the Lewdness of those Spectacles, and be particular
in Description? For what is there to be met with but Lewd Laughing, but Smut,
Railing, and Buffoonry? In a word. It Is all Scandal and Confusion. Observe me,
I speak to you all; Let none who partake of this Holy-Table, unqualifie himself
with such Mortal Diversions.

St. Hierom on the 1 st. Verse 32 Psalm. makes this Exposition upon the Text.

Some are delighted with the Satisfactions of this World, some with the Circus,
and some with the Theater: But the Psalmist commands every good Man to delight
himself in the Lord. -- For as Isaiah speaks, woe to them that put bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter. And in his Epistles he cautions the Ladies against
Ep. 9. 12. Advers. Jovinian. Lib. 2. cap, 7.
having any thing to do with the Playhouse, against Lewd Songs, and Ill
Conversation. Because they set ill Humors at work, Caress the Fancy, and make
pleasure a Conveyance for Destruction.

In the 6 th. Book of his Comentary on Ezechiel he lets us understand; That
Chap. 20.
when we depart out of Egypt we must refine our Inclinations, and change our
Delights into Aversion. And after some other Instances, He tells us we must
decline the Theaters, and all other dangerous Diversions, which stain the
Innocence of the Soul, and slip into the Will through the Senses.

St. Augustine in his 5 th. Epistle to Marcellinus will afford us something
upon the same Argument.

The prosperity of Sinners is their greatest Unhappiness. If one may say so,
They are most Punished when they are overlooked. By this means their bad Temper
is encouraged, and they are more inclined to be false to themselves; And we
know an Enemy within, is more dangerous than one without. But the perverse
Reasonings of the Generality, make different Conclusions. They fancy the World
goes wonderfully well when People make a Figure. When a Man is a Prince in his
Fortune, but a Beggar in his Virtue; Has a great many fine Things about him,
but not so much as one good Quality to deserve them. When the Play Houses go
up, and Religion go's down. When Prodigality is admired, and Charity laughed
at. When the Players can revel with the Rich Man's purse, And the Poor have
scarce enough to keep Life and Soul together. -- When God suffers these Things
to flourish, we may be fure he is most Angry. Present Impunity, is the deepest
Revenge. But when he cuts off the Supplies of Luxury, and disables the Powers
of Extravagance, then as one may say, he is mercifully severe.

In his 1 st. Book de consensu Evangelistarum, cap. 33.
He answers an objection of the Heathens, and comes up to the Case in Hand.

Their Complaint as if the Times were less happy since the Appearance of
Christianity is very unreasonable. Let them read their own Philosophers: There
they will find those very Things censured, which they now are so uneasy to part
with; This Remark must shut up their Mouths, and convince them of the
Excellency of our Religion. For pray what Satisfactions have they lost?
Nonethat I know of, excepting some Licentious ones, which they abused to the
Dishonor of their Creator. But it may be the Times are bad because the
Theaters are Tumbling almost every where. The Theaters those Cages of
Uncleaness, and public Schools of Debauchery. -- And what is the Reason of
their running to Ruin? Why it is the Reformation of the Age: It Is because those
Lewd Practices are out of Fashion, which first built and kept them in
Countenance. Their own Tully's Commendation of the Actor Roscius is remarkable.
He was so much a Master (says he) that none but himself was worthy to Tread the
Stage. And on the other hand, so good a Man, that he was the most unfit Person
of the Gang to come There. And is not this a plain Confession of the Lewdness
of the Playhouse; And that the better a Man was, the more he was obliged to
forbear it?

I could go on, much farther with St. Augustine, but I love to be as brief as
may be. I could likewise run through the succeeding Centuries, and collect
Evidence all along. But I conceive the best Ages, and the biggest Authorities,
may be sufficient: And these the Reader has had already. However, one Instance
more from the Moderns may not be amiss. Didacus de Tapia an eminent Spaniard,
shall close the Evidence. This Author in debating the Question whether Players
might be admitted to the Sacrament, amongst other things encounters an
Objection. Some People it seems pretended there was some good to be learned at
the Playhouse. To these, he makes this reply.

Granting your Supposition, (says He) your Inference is naught. Do People use
to send their Daughters to the Stews for Discipline? And yet it may be, they
might meet some there lamenting their own Debauchery. No Man will breed his Son
upon the Highway, to harden his Courage; Neither will any one go on board a
Leaky Vessel, to learn the Art of shifting in a Wreck the better. My conclusion
is, let no body go to the Infamous Playhouse. A place of such staring
Contradiction to the Strictness and Sobriety of Religion: A Place hated by God,
and haunted by the Devil. Let no man I say learn to relish any thing that is
said there; Didac, etc. in D. Thom. p. 546.
For it is all but Poison handsomely prepared.

Thus I have presented the Reader with a short View of the Sense of
Christianity. This was the opinion of the Church for the first 500 Years. And
thus she has Censured the Stage both in Councils, and Single Authorities. And
since the Satir of the Fathers comes full upon the Modern Poets, their Caution
must be applicable. The parity of the Case makes their Reasons take place, and
their Authority revive upon us. If we are Christians, the Canons of Councils,
and the Sense of the Primitive Church must have a weight. The very Time is a
good argument of it self. Then the Apostolical Traditions were fresh, and
undisputed; and the Church much better agreed than she has been since. Then,
Discipline was in Force, and Virtue Flourished, and People lived up to their
Profession. And as for the Persons, they are beyond all exception. Their
Station, their Learning, and Sufficiency was very Considerable; Their Piety and
Resolution, extraordinary. They acted generously, and wrote freely, and were
always above the little Regards of Interest or Danger. To be short; They were,
as we may say the Worthies of Christendom, the Flower of Humane Nature, and the
Top of their Species. Nothing can be better established than the Credit of
these Fathers: Their Affirmation goes a great way in a proof; And we might
argue upon the strength of their Character.

But supposing them contented to wave their Privilege, and dispute upon the
Level. Granting this, the Stage would be undone by them. The Force of their
Reasoning, and the bare Intrinsic of the Argument, would be abundantly
sufficient to carry the Cause.

But it may be objected, is the Resemblance exact between Old Rome and London,
will the Parallel hold out, and has the English Stage any Thing so bad as the
Dancing of the Pantomimi? I don't say that: The Modern Gestures though bold, and
Lewd too sometimes, are not altogether so scandalous as the Roman. Here then we
can make them some little Abatement.

And to go as far in their Excuse as we can, it is probable their Music may not
be altogether so exceptionable as that of the Ancients. I don't say this part
of the Entertainment is directly vicious, because I am not willing to Censure
at Uncertainties. Those who frequent the Playhouse are the most competent
Judges: But this I must say, the Performances of this kind are much too fine
for the Place. 'Twere to be wished that either the Plays were better, or the
Music worse. I Am sorry to see Art so meanly Prostituted: Atheism ought to have
nothing Charming in its Retinue. It Is great Pity Debauchery should have the
Assistance of a fine Hand, to whet the Appetite, and play it down.

Now granting the Play-House-Musick not vicious in the Composition, yet the
design of it is to refresh the Idea's of the Action, to keep Time with the
Poem, and be true to the Subject. For this Reason among others the Tunes are
generally Airy and Gailsiardizing: They are contrived on purpose to excite a
sportive Humor, and spread a Gaity upon the Spirits. To banish all Gravity and
Scruple, and lay Thinking and Reflection a sleep. This sort of Music warms the
Passions, and unlocks the Fancy, and makes it open to Pleasure like a Flower to
the Sun. It helps a Luscious Sentence to slide, drowns the Discords of
Atheisni, and keeps off the Aversions of Conscience. It throws a Man off his
Guard, makes way for an ill Impression, and is most Commodiously planted to do
Mischief. A Lewd Play with good Music is like a Loadstone Armed, it draws much
stronger than before.

Now why should it be in the power of a few mercenary Hands to play People out
of their Senses, to run away with their Understandings, and wind their Passions
about their Fingers as they list? Music is almost as dangerous as Gunpowder;
And it may be requires looking after no less than the Press, or the Mint. It Is
possible a Public Regulation might not be amiss. No less a Philosopher than
Plato seems to be of this Opinion. He is clearly for keeping up the old grave,
and solemn way of Playing. He lays a mighty stress upon this Observation: He
does not stick to affirm, that to extend the Science, and alter De Repub. L. 4.
the Notes, is the way to have the Laws repealed and to unsettle the
Constitution. I suppose He imagined that if the Power of Sounds, the Temper of
Constitutions, and the Diversities of Age, were well studied; If this were
done, and some general Permissions formed upon the Enquiry, the Commonwealth
might find their Account in it.

Tully does not carry the Speculation thus Cic. de Leg. L. 3.
high: However, he owns it has a weight in it, and should not be overlooked. He
denies not but that when the Music is soft, exquisite, and airy, it is
dangerous and ensnaring. He commends the Discipline of the ancient Greeks, for
sencing against this Inconvenience. He tells us the Lacedaemonians fixed the
number of Strings for the Harp, by express Law. And afterward silenced
Timotheus, (...).
and seized his Harp, for having One String above public Allowance. To return.
If the English Stage is more reserved than the Roman in the Ibid.
Case above mentioned: If they have any advantage in their Instrumental Music,
they loose it in their Vocal. Their Songs are often rampantly Lewd, and
Irreligious to a flaming Excess. Here you have the very Spirit and Essence of
Vice drawn off strong scented, and thrown into a little Compass. Now the
Ancients as we have (...)
seen already were inoffensive in this respect.

To go on. As to Rankness of Language we have seen how deeply the Moderns stand
charged upon the Comparison. And as for their Caressing of Libertines, their
ridiculing of Virtue, their horrible Prosaness, and Blasphemies, there is
nothing in Antiquity can reach them.

Now were the Stage in a Condition to wipe off any of these Imputations, which
(...) are not, there are two Things be^^^^ (...) which would stick upon them,
and (...) an ill Effect upon the Audience.

The first is their dilating so much upon the Argument of Love.

This Subject is generally treated Home, and in the most tender and passionate
manner imaginable. It Is often the governing Concern: The Incidents make way, and
the Plot turns upon it. As matters go, the Company expect it: And it may be the
Poets can neither Write, nor Live without it. This is a cunning way enough of
stealing upon the Blind Side, and Practicing upon the Weakness of humane
Nature. People love to see their Passions painted no less than their Persons:
And like Narcissus are apt to dote on their own Image. This Bent of self
Admiration recommends the Business of Amors, and engages the Inclination. And
which is more, these Love-representations oftentimes call up the Spirits, and
set them on work. The Play is acted over again in the Scene of Fancy, and the
first Imitation becomes a Model. Love has generally a Party Within; And when
the Wax is prepared, the Impression is easily made. Thus the Disease of the
Stage grows Catching: It throws its own Amors among the Company, and forms
these Passions when it does not find them. And when they are born before, they
thrive extremely in this Nursery. Here they seldom fail either of Grouth, or
Complexion. They grow strong, and they grow Charming too. This is the best
Place to recover a Languishing Amor, to rowse it from Sleep, and retrieve it
from Indifference. And thus Desire becomes Absolute, and forces the Oppositions
of Decency and Shame. And if the Misfortune does not go thus far, the
consequences are none of the best. The Passions are up in Arms, and there is a
mighty Contest between Duty, and Inclination. The Mind is overrun with
Amusements, and commonly good for nothing sometime after.

I don't say the Stage Fells all before them, and disables the whole Audience:
It Is a hard Battle where none escapes. However, Their Triumphs and their
Tropheys are unspeakable. Neither need we much wonder at the Matter. They are
dangerously Prepared for Conquest, and Empire. There Is Nature, and Passion, and
Life, in all the Circumstances of their Action. Their Declamation, their Mein
their Gestures, and their Equipage, are very moving and significant. Now when
the Subject is agreeable, a lively Representation, and a Passionate way of
Expression, make wild work, and have a strange Force upon the Blood, and Temper.

And then as for the General Strains of Courtship, there can be nothing more
Profane and extravagant. The Hero's Mistress is no less than his Deity. She
disposes of his Reason, prescribes his Motions, and Commands his Interest. What
Sovereign Respect, what Religious Address, what Idolizing Raptures are we
pestered with? Shrines and Offerings, and Adorations, are nothing upon such
solemn Occasions. Thus Love and Devotion, Ceremony and Worship are Confounded;
And God, and his Creatures treated both alike! These Shreds of Distraction are
often brought from the Playhouse into Conversation: And thus the Sparks are
taught to Court their Mistresses, in the same Language they say their Prayers.

A Second Thing which I have to object against the Stage is their encouraging
Revenge. What is more Common than Duels and Quarrelling in their Characters of
Figure? Those Practices which are infamous in Reason, Capital in Law, and
Damnable in Religion, are the Credit of the Stage. Thus Rage and Resentment,
Blood and Barbarity, are almost Deified: Pride goes for Greatness, and Fiends
and Hero's are made of the same Metal. To give Instances were needless,
nothing is more frequent. And in this respect the French Dramatists have been
to blame no less than the English. And thus the Notion Vid. Corneille Cid.
Cinna and Pompee.
of Honor is mistated, the Maxims of Christianity despised, and the Peace of
the World disturbed. I grant this desperate Custom is no Original of the Stage.
But then why was not the Growth of it checked? I thought the Poets business had
not been to back false Reasoning and ill Practice; and to fix us in Frensy and
Mistake! Yes. They have done their endeavor to cherish the Malignity, and keep
the Disorder in Countenance. They have made it both the Mark, and the Merit of
a Man of Honor; and set it off with Quality, and Commendation. But I have
discoursed Moral Essays.
on this Subject elsewhere, and therefore shall pursue it no farther.

To draw toward an End. And here I must observe that these two later
Exceptions are but Petty Mismanagements with respect to the Former. And when
the best are thus bad, what are the worst? What must we say of the more soul
Representations, of all the Impudence in Language and Gesture? Can this Stuff
be the Inclination of Ladies? Is a Reading upon Vice so Entertaining, and do
they love to see the Stews Dissected before them? One would think the Dishonor
of their own Sex, the Discovery of so much Lewdness, and the treating Human
Nature so very Coarsly, could have little Satisfaction in it. Let us set
Conscience aside, and throw the other World out of the Question: These
Interests are far the greatest, but not all. The Ladies have other Motives to
confine them. The Restraints of Decency, and the Considerations of Honor, are
sufficient to keep them at Home. But hoping They will be just to themselves I
shall wave this unacceptable Argument. I shall only add, that a Surprise ought
not to be Censured. Accidents are no Faults. The strictest Virtue may sometimes
stumble upon an Ill Sight. But Choice, and Frequency, and ill Ground, conclude
strongly for Inclination. To be assured of the inoffensiveness of the Play is
no more than a Necessary Precaution. Indeed the Players should be generally
discouraged. They have no relish of Modesty, nor any scruples upon the Quality
of the Treat. The grossest Dish when 'twill down is as ready as the Best. To
say Money is their Business and they must Live, is the Plea of Pick pockets,
and High way men. These later may as well pretend their Vocation for a Lewd
practice as the other. But

To give the Charge its due Compass: To comprehend the whole Audience, and take
in the Motives of Religon.

And here I cannot imagine how we can reconcile such Liberties with our
Profession. These Entertainments are as it were Literally renounced in
Baptism. They are the Vanities of the wicked World, and the Works of the Devil,
in the most open, and emphatical Signification. What Communion has Light with
Darkness, and what concord 2 Cor. 6. 14.
has Christ with Belial. Call you this Diversion? Can Profaness be such an
irresistible Delight? Does the Crime of the Performance make the Spirit of the
Satisfaction, and is the Scorn of Christianity the Entertainment of Christians?
Is it such a Pleasure to hear the Scriptures burlesqu'd? Is Ribaldry so very
obliging, and Atheism so Charming a Quality? Are we indeed willing to quit the
Privilege of our Nature; to surrender our Charter of Immortality, and throw up
the Pretenses to another Life? It may be so! But then we should do well to
remember that Nothing is not in our Power. Our Desires did not make us, neither
can they unmake us. But I hope our wishes are not so mean, and that we have a
better sense of the Dignity of our Being. And if so, how can we be pleased with
those Things which would degrade us into Brutes, which ridicule our Creed, and
turn all our Expectations into Romance.

And after all, the Jest on it is, these Men would make us believe their design
is Virtue and Reformation. In good time! They are likely to combat Vice with
success, who destroy the Principles of Good and Evil! Take them at the best,
and they do no more than expose a little Humor, and Formality. But then, as
the Matter is managed, the Correction is much worse than the Fault. They laugh
at Pedantry, and teach Atheism, cure a Pimple, and give the Plague. I heartily
wish they would have let us alone. To exchange Virtue for Behavior is a hard
Bargain. Is not plain Honesty much better than Hypocrisy well Dressed? What Is
Sight good for without Substance? What is a well Bred Libertine but a well bred
Knave? One that cannot prefer Conscience to Pleasure, without calling himself
Fool: And will sell his Friend, or his Father, if need be, for his Convenience.

In short: Nothing can be more disserviceable to Probity and Religion, than the
management of the Stage. It cherishes those Passions, and rewards those Vices,
which it is the business of Reason to discountenance. It strikes at the Root of
Principle, draws off the Inclinations from Virtue, and spoils good Education:
It Is the most effectual means to baffle the Force of Discipline, to emasculate
peoples Spirits, and Debauch their Manners. How many of the Unwary have these
Sirens devoured? And how often has the best Blood been tainted, with this
Infection? What Disappointment of Parents, what Confusion in Families, and What
Beggary in Estates have been hence occasioned? And which is still worse, the
Mischief spreads daily, and the Malignity grows more envenomed. The Feavour
works up toward Madness, and will scarcely endure to be touched. And what hope
is there of Health when the Patient strikes in with the Disease, and flies in
the Face of the Remedy? Can Religion retrive us? Yes, when we don't despise it.
But while our Notions are naught, our Lives will hardly be otherwise. What can
the Assistance of the Church signify to those who are more ready to Rally the
Preacher, than Practice the Sermon? To those who are overgrown with Pleasure,
and hardened in Ill Custom? Who have neither Patience to hear, nor Conscience to
take hold of? You may almost as well feed a Man without a Mouth, as give Advice
where there is no disposition to receive it. It Is true; as long as there is Life
there is Hope. Sometimes the Force of Argument, and the Grace of God, and the
anguish of Affliction, may strike through the Prejudice, and make their way
into the Soul. But these circumstances don't always meet, and then the Case is
extremely dangerous. For this miserable Temper, we may thank the Stage in a
great Measure: And therefore, if I mistake not, They have the least pretense to
Favor, and the most need of Repentance, of all Men Living.

THE END.

