THIRTEEN SERMONS UPON Several Useful Subjects.

Two of them Being Funeral Discourses, occasioned by the Death of the Reverend
Mr. Nathanael Mitchel, Minister of the Gospel.

I. The Crown of Righteousness, and for whom prepared. Upon 1 Timothy 4.7.1. 2
Sermon. II. The Influence of God upon getting wealth. Upon Deuteronomy. 8.18. 1 Sermon.
III. The small influence that abundance has upon man's life. Upon Luke 12.15. 1
Sermon. IV. The nature of that Testimony, which Christians are bound to give to
the Lord Jesus Christ. Upon 2 Timothy 1.8. 4 Sermon. V. The nature of Persecution
for Righteousness sake, and the blessedness of those so persecuted. Upon Matthew.
5.10. 3 Sermon. VI. The Riddle of a persecuted Believers life. Upon 2 Cor. 4.9. 1
Sermon. VII. How Persecution turns to Believers, for a Testimony. From Luke
21.13. 1 Sermon.
By John Collinges, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Edward Giles, Bookseller in Norwich, near the
Market place. And sold at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1684.

To my Dear Sister, Mrs. Mary Mitchel.
Dearest Sister,
WHen I composed the following Discourses, it was in the same streights of time
which usually are allowed for Meditations of that nature, nor did I ever think
of a further Publication, then to those that heard me, nor do I see any thing
in them worthy of a more public remark, unless the great President of Divine
Grace, which it pleased God to show you in the Man of your Bosom, by the Power
of which Grace, he was saved in a Battle, wherein few escape. I know not what
particular fancy it is that some Persons have to Sermons made upon Funeral
Occasions, that has obtained of me the Copy of these Notes. I hope it is their
desires of many remembrances of their latter end, which we have all sufficient
need of. Our Prophets are gone, Our Fathers, where are they? When once I had
agreed the Publication of them, I needed no deliberation to whom I should
inscribe them. You Dear Sister! had the greatest share in him, to whose memory
they were designed, you had the nearest view of his Conversation, for more then
twenty years, you were the greatest sharer in his long trial of affliction.
These things considered, with my Relation to you, made me quickly determine
that thing. I shall think my labor not lost in transcribing these Papers, if
any thing in them, as well as the Example of your late dear Husband may
encourage you, or be any ways helpful to you, in fighting the good fight, and
finishing your course. The decays we find in our selves, the deaths of our
Friends, the daily Bells we hear telling us that such or such Persons (our
Neighbors) are removed to their long homes, mind us of our mortality. Our
Bones are not of Brass, nor our Sinews of Iron, which yet if they were, both
the one and the other we see are daily diminishing, by the influence of the ill
air, in which we breath. Our very breath is no such inheritance as does not
corrupt, and fade away. Our dearest Friends that are dissolved, have only got
the start of us, we are in the same race, and must stop at the same post. Death
is the End of all. It is more then forty years that he who was the common
Father both to you and me, left this world. Some of whose last words to me
were, Dear Child! Learn to die, Fear God, and keep his Commandments, so shall
thou learn to die. We have been since that more then forty years at School in
the world, to learn (amongst others) this one great thing to Die. We have had
many Friends, many dear Relations since that time, who have by their dying
Examples, been speaking over the same thing to us: Learn to die. This discourse
is of that tendency to learn us this great Lesson; That the Lord would bless it
to my self, to you, to all that shall read it, is the Prayer of

Your most Affectionate Brother, John Collinges.

TO THE Christian Reader.
Reader,
THou have here put together Thirteen Sermons, of very heterogeneous Subjects.
I desire thou should understand that the Composition pleased the Bookseller,
not the Author, who upon that account has nothing to say to thee, but that he
hopes there is none of these discourses, but may be useful to any Persons. He
that is Rich, had need know, and remember, That it is the Lord that gives to
man a power to get wealth. He that is Poor, had need not only to know that, but
that a man's life lies not in the abundance of what any one possesses. Both
Rich and Poor had need understand how to finish their course, fight the good
fight, and keep the faith. When men complain of Persecution, they had need
understand what it is, and when they speak of giving Testimony to Christ and
his Gospel, they had need know what kind of Testimony that should be, that they
may not suffer in vain. Thou art Reader to expect nothing in these discourses,
but what was proper to discourse to a plain Country Auditory, which came to
hear out of love to Gods Word, and the truths in it revealed (at least I hope
so) not to hear a lovely Song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play
well on an instrument. If any thing in these discourses may do thee good, I
shall rejoice, and be exceeding glad, and that all in them may, shall be the
hearty prayer of one that wishes well to every Soul, and is

Thy Friend, J. C.

An Account of the Crown of Righteousness.
SERMON I, II.
2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Righteous Judge shall give unto me in that day and not
unto me only, but to all those also who love his appearance.
HE who speaks these words, is the great Apostle of the Gentiles, one who had
been in deaths often, who had been for Christ's sake killed all the day long
(as he speaks,) Romans 8.36. who died daily (as he elsewhere tells us) yet was
not wearied out of his life) and was willing to be dying still; so that Christ
might be magnified in his body by life or death. Phil. 1.20.
And though he desired to be dissolved, yet it was upon better motives than the
taedium or burden of his dying life, that he might be with Christ, which was
best of all. v. 23.
Not that he might be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be
swallowed up of life (as he speaks, 2 Cor. 5.4.) nor was he so fond of glory,
but he prefers his service to Christ before a present entrance into it; and
was willing to wait God's time. I am, says he, in a strait betwixt two, having
a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better; nevertheless,
to abide in the flesh is more needful for you. And having this confidence, I
know I shall abide, and continue with you all. But a time must come when Israel
must die. Do our Prophets live for ever? And it pleases God to give some of
his People notices of this time. Paul's time was now come. He tells Timothy in
the verse before the Text, I am now ready to be offered, the words in the Greek
are, I am now already offered. Paul was ready, as that term in our Language
signifies prepared, but the Greek word is (...), which rather signifies already
than prepared (into which sense it cannot be interpreted) the next words
interpret it, The time of my departure is at hand. Nor certainly does the
Apostle speak this merely upon the prospect that all Christian Prisoners
(especially Teachers amongst them) might reasonably have of their fate, under
such a Pagan Tyrant and Butcher as Nero (under whose Government and Power he
was at this time) was, but upon some more special and particular notice which
God had given him, that his time was at hand. He speaks of it without
trembling, and faith not to Death, (tho it was to be violent) Have thou found
me O mine Enemy! but with confidence and cheerfulness he entertaineth the
thoughts and prospect of it. This Text tells you the grounds of his
cheerfulness. 1. His work was done. 2. He had wages to take. The first he
opens by 3 phrases. 1. I have fought a good fight, (...), that excellent
fight (as Beza well translates it.) 2. I have finished my course. 3. I have
kept the Faith. 2. He had wages to take, which he could not receive upon Earth.
And now is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, etc. I shall only turn the
Text into a Proposition, concluding from Paul's work, and confidence, the duty
of all.

Prop. Those who would at death have the Crown of Righteousness, which is laid
up for, and which God the Righteous Judge will one day give out unto some
persons, must fight the good fight, finish their course, keep the faith, and
love the appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ; and those who do these things may
know that there is such a Crown of Righteousness laid up for them, which the
Righteous Judge will give out to them.

Here are two Propositions put together.

1. That there is a Crown of Righteousness, which God has laid up, and will
one day give out as a Righteous Judge to some amongst the Sons of men.

2. That it shall be given out to such, and such only, as fight the good fight,
finish their course, keep the faith, and love the Appearance of Christ.

I shall discourse them severally, then apply them together.

1. There is a Crown of Righteousness, which is laid up, and God as a Righteous
Judge will one day give out to some amongst the Sons of men.

1. That this Crown of Righteousness, is no other than the Crown of glory,
Eternal life and happiness, is out of doubt, the Blessed state of the Saints in
Heaven is set out in Scripture unto us under a variety of Metaphors, importing
the satisfaction of the whole Soul there, and all the powers and faculties of
it. It is sometimes set out under the Notion of a Feast, 1 Pet. 5.4.
a Banquet, sometimes under the Notion of seeing God, (...) 1.12.
sometimes under the Notion of an Inheritance, immortal, incorruptible, etc.
sometimes under the Notion of a Kingdom, a Crown, sometimes under Notions of
profit, the riches of glory, sometimes under Notions of pleasure; here it is
called a Crown. So 1 Pet. 5.4. it is called a Crown of glory, and a Crown of
life, Jam. 1.12. But 1. Why a Crown? 2. Why is it called a Crown of
Righteousness. 3. How is it laid up? 4. How does, or shall God show himself a
Righteous Judge in giving it out?

1. Possibly it is called a Crown with reference to the Combatants in the Roman
Games, in which the Victors had not only Prizes for which they ran, but also
Crowns of Bays, or Laurel, or some green things. If a man strive for Masteries,
says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.5. he is not crowned except he strive lawfully. As
the Conquerours were enriched with a (...) a prize for which they ran, or
wrestled, or fought, so they were honored with a (...), a Crown which was set
on their heads; and thus it lets us know, 1. That Heaven will be a place of
great honor and dignity. 2. That those who obtain it, must strive, fight,
wrestle, and that lawfully (as the Apostle speaks) yea and they must conquer.
None but the Conquerours in those Games were crowned. The consideration of
Heaven as a Crown, ought to mind us of our duty, to strive, and fight. It is
not compared to an ordinary King's Crown, which it may be comes to him by
Election, or Inheritance, but a Combatants Crown, which is never put on his
head till he be declared Victor.

2. Secondly, This Notion is expressive of the high reward of the Saints in
Heaven. A Crown is the highest dignity; hence it is called also a Kingdom; Come
ye blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. Thus the Metaphor
is used, I am. 5.16. The Crown is fallen from our heads (that is) we have lost
our greatest honor and dignity. Such shall be the honor of all the Saints, it
shall not be only a Penny, a reward of their labor, but it shall be a Crown,
the highest and greatest reward, such a one as no Eye has seen, no Ear has
heard, neither can it enter into the heart of man to conceive; we can fancy no
higher honor and dignity, than that of a Crown, and therefore it is expressed
by that, but it will be no ordinary Crown, but a Crown of Life, a Crown of
Glory.

3. Possibly it may be thus expressed, to signify the fullness of the Saints
happiness in Heaven. The figure of a Crown lets you know that it incompasseth
the whole head, not a part of it only. Psa. 16.11.
At thy right hand (says the Psalmist) there are pleasures, and a fullness of
pleasures, and that for evermore. The glory of the Saints in Heaven shall
incompass them as a Crown does the head. God in this life incompasseth his
People with favor, as a shield (as the Psalmist speaks) in the life to come
he will incompass them with glory as with a Crown. In this life we have our
good things but in part. Nemo est ex omni part beatus, there is scarce any to
be found, who is every way happy. One has an head at ease, but an aching heart;
another has an heart at ease, but an aching head; but in Heaven the Saints
shall be crowned, perfectly happy, on all sides blessed.

2. Qu. But why is this called a Crown of Righteousness, not only a Crown of
life, and a Crown of Glory but a Crown of Righteousness?

1. I answer, Not because it is the merit of our Righteousness. Our
Righteousness is all a rag, a filthy Rag. The next words are enough to Satisfy
us as to this, Which the Lord, the Rig^teous Judge, will give, to them who love
his appearance, if it be a guilt it is not paid for; nor can it be thought that
the love of Christ's appearance should be judged a proportionable price to a
Crown. A Crown is a thing above a Purchase.

2. But it may be called so with reference to Christ's Righteousness. By his
Righteousness (says the Prophet) or, By his knowledge shall my Righteous
Servant justify many, Isa. 53.11. Romans 8.30.
for he shall bear their iniquities, and whom he justified them he also
glorified (says the Apostle:) The Heavens were to be Sprinkled with his blood
before we could have any entrance into them. He dyed as well as ascended, that
he might prepare a place for us in those blessed Mansions. The Saints Crowns
are the Purchase of Christ's Righteousness.

3. Thirdly, It may be so called with reference to Gods Righteousness, and that
whether we take Righteousness as signifying Justice, or Truth and faithfulness.
If we take Righteousness, as signifying Justice: If (says the Apostle) we
confess our sins, he is faithful, and just, 1 John 1.9.
to forgive us our sins. God is just to give his Son, the Travel of his Soul:
The fruit of his purchase. If we take it as signifying Truth or faithfulness:
So also the glory of Heaven is a Crown of Righteousness, as it is a promised
reward, what the truth of God in many promises stands engaged for.

4. Lastly, It is also a Crown of our Righteousness. That is, the noble, and
ample reward of our Righteousness. The reward not of debt, but of grace, Estius
would have it called the Crown of Righteousness because purchased or merited by
our works, or our Righteousness, but that place, Psalm. 103.4. much troubles
him; Psalm. 103.4.
Who crowns thee with loving kindness, he pretends some answer to it, but
that is the least we have to say against the merit of works, God uses not to
Crown menstruous Clothes, or filthy Rags. He uses not to Crown our works, but
his own works in us, yea he himself is the Crown of his people, Isaiah 28.5.
The Lord himself shall be a Crown of glory, and a diadem of beauty for the
residue of his people.

3. Qu. How is this Crown said to be laid up? (...).

The same word is used to the same Sense, Colos. 1.5. For the hope which is
laid up for you in heaven. Critics observe, That it is used to express such a
laying aside, or laying up: as when a thing is laid up for a future use or a
future provision, as when men lay up for their Children: So we shall find it
used in Mat. 25. in the parable of the Talents, to express the action of him
who having but one Talent laid it up in a napkin. Once in Scripture, I find it
used in another sense, Heb. 9.27. (...) It is appointed for all men once to
dye, and that (by the way) gives some further light into this Text, the Crown
of Righteousness is laid up for the Saints in the Eternal Counsels of God; in
this sense it is called, The Kingdom prepared for them, Matthew. 25.34. before
the foundation of the world. The word imports,

1. The Preparation, or designation of something for the use of some particular
person.

2. The Reservation of it or the safe keeping of it for those persons for whom
it is so designed and prepared. There is a Crown of Righteousness, designed by
God for some, laid up in Gods decree, and eternal thoughts for them from before
the foundation of the World, and laid up, that is, safely reserved and kept for
them, secured by the immutability of Gods will and counsel, for he is not as
man that he should lie, nor as the Son of man that he should repent.

I have now done with the first Proposition. I pass to the second.

Prop. 2. That those to whom the Righteous Judge will give this Crown must be
such who have fought the good fight, Finished their course, kept the faith, and
who love the appearance of our Lord Jesus.

We must inquire into the meaning of all these.

Q. 1. What is this to fight the good fight?

Here are two things.

1. What is this good fight? 2. What fighting is here meant?
1. The calling of it the good fight, imports that there are some bad fights.

1. There is a fighting against God. This is a bad fight in all senses. It is
that Rebellion which Samuel said is as the sin of Witchcraft. It is the
Rebellion of the Creature against the Creator, of the Clay against the Potter,
of the Child against the Father. It is a bad fight in the nature of it, and it
is always bad in the issue of it. It is a setting of briars and thorns against
God in battle, a kicking against the pricks, (as our Lord told Paul, Acts 9.)
yet the world was always full of Hectors, hardy enough to engage in this
fight; there are such as are fighters against God, and indeed all sinners are
such in heart, though they some of them keep their hands in their pockets; but
such Persecutors, and such as set themselves in opposition to the Gospel, and
the Interest of God in the world, in opposition to the Truth, and True Worship
and Ordinances of God; such as set themselves against a Gospel Ministry, and
against Holiness; these are all fighters against God. This now is the bad
fight, materially bad, and what will be found so Eventually.

2. There is also a fighting against men on civil accounts, which is a bad
fight; indeed most Wars are so (at least on one side.) Wars are State Physic,
and when they are so used and made they are good, otherwise they are bad. In
all Wars, one Army is made up of Murderers: Both sides cannot be right. We are
commanded to seek Peace, and ensue it, as much as in us lies to have peace
with all men. Wars are not to be used as sports. The word which is here
translated good, signifies fair, wholesome, noble, excellent. Thus you read of
the Tree that brings forth good fruit, Mat. 7.17. And Christ says, that the
woman which had spent her box of Ointment upon him, had done (...), a good
work, Mat. 26.10. that is, an excellent, noble, praiseworthy work, as our
Savior in the next words expounds himself, saying, That wheresoever the Gospel
should be preached, that which she had done should be told for a memorial of
her. But what is this good fight which Paul says he had fought? He expounds
himself, 1 Timothy 6.12. Fight the good fight of faith. Faith is the combatant
grace, it is that by which we get the Victory. But who are the Enemies with
which this good fight is to be fought? Who can they be but the three great
Enemies of our Souls the World, the Flesh, and the Devil? Paul fought them all,
and so must every one fight them all, who will put in his claim to the Crown of
Righteousness.

1. He must manage his good fight against the World; the men of it, and the
things of it. Paul had fought this good fight, 1 Cor. 15.32. he fought with
Beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men, and he tells us, 1 Cor. 11.24. he
had had stripes above measure, he had been in Prisons frequent, in deaths
often; five times he had of the Jews received forty stripes save one; thrice he
was beaten with Rods; once he was stoned; all this in maintenance and defense
of the Gospel. Thus must every Christian duly of God called to it, do in
defense of the holy Truths and Ways of the Lord Jesus Christ. The World, the
Men of the World were always peevish to God's holy ones. Our Savior gives us
the reason, Joh. 15.19. because they are not of the world, but God has chosen
them out of the world. Wisdom was never justified in the world of any more than
her Children. Now those who ever hope to come in the Kingdom of Heaven, must
look to manage this part of the good fight, not fearing those who can kill the
body, and when they have done that; can do no more, but fearing him alone, who
can cast body and soul into Hell fire; taking up their Cross, and following of
Christ, bearing up against all the opposition the world can give or make
against them, walking according to the holy Commandment.

2. But this good fight is not only to be managed against the men of the
world, setting themselves in opposition to the Truths and Ways of God; but
also against the things of the world, the deceitfulness of pleasures, riches,
honors, whatsoever may be to us a bait alluring us to sin against God. Moses
by Faith did fight the World in this manner, refusing the pleasures of
Pharaoh's Court, and choosing rather to suffer with the People of God, Heb.
11.25, 26.
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; and esteeming the Reproach of
Christ greater Riches than the Treasures in Egypt. But indeed this rather
belongs to the second piece of the good fight which is to be managed.

2. Against our own Lusts. By lusts we understand those motions, and
inclinations, to sin which are from our fleshly part, for Lusts are nothing but
unlawful desires in our Souls. Paul fought this part of the good fight, he
tells us, Romans 7.23
That he saw a law in his members warring against the law of his mind and
bringing him into captivity to the law of sin which is in his members. Gal.
5.17.
And again, That the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
the flesh, for those two are contrary. Paul fought this part of the good fight,
1 Cor. 9.27. I keep under my body and bring it unto Subjection. This is, that
Mortifying of our members, mentioned, Ccl. 3.5. Mortifying the deeds of the
body through the Spirit mentioned, Romans 8.13. The Apostle Peter tells us that
Fleshly lusts war against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. and James tells us that Lust
war in our members, James 4.1. Paul fought this part of the good fight, and
overcame; I thank God (says he) through Jesus Christ our Lord. Indeed this is
the hardest battle that a Christian has to fight the Enemy is within, those of
his own house and all the advantage which either the World, or the Devil has
against us is from that party of lusts which are in our own hearts. Though the
Prince of the World came against Christ, yet finding nothing of this nature in
our blessed Lord he could do nothing against him.

3. Our third great adversary is the Devil. For we (faith the Apostle,) Ephesians.
6.12. Do not wrestle against flesh and blood, but against Principalities, and
powers, and the Rulers of the darkness of this World. The Devil is called the
adversary and the Apostle tells us, that he goes about like a roaring Lion
seeking whom he may devour, and calls upon us to Resist him. He fights us
sometimes by his commanders, and underofficers, those are the sinful men of
the World; sometimes he fights us in person, by his more immediate impressions
and Suggestions, 2 Cor. 12.7. Paul had a messenger of Satan sent to buffet him,
for which thing he prayed thrice, v. 8.

4. A Christian has yet a fourth Enemy; That is Death. I should not have
called Death an Enemy, but that I find the Apostle so calling it, 1 Cor. 15.26.
The last Enemy that is to be destroyed is Death. And indeed our flesh says
both concerning death, and Trials of afflictions leading to it; All these
things are against us. There is a victorious Song which every good Christian
must learn to sing, O Death where is thy sting? O hell where is thy Victory?
Thus now I have showed you the Enemies to be fought in this good fight.

The word translated fight is a very Emphatical word (...) It is the same word
which is used, Luke 13.24. strive to enter in at the stra^t gate, and Col.
4.12. Where we translate it Laboring fervently, we translate it striving in
Col. 1.29. fighting, John 18.36. and 1 Timothy 6.12. The word seems to signify
four things, 1. A laboring against opposition. A man cannot fight unless he
has an Enemy to fight against. What these Enemies are I have showed you. 2. A
strong vehement, earnest labor, where all the strength, and power of a man is
put out, as is usual in all combats, and fightings, 3. An inward labor, from
this word comes our English word Agony which we use to signify the conflict of
the mind, and signifies more then the Scuffling of the hands and more exterior
members: Thus it signifies, Col. 4.12. Laboring fervently for you in Prayer.
4. It signifies a strife for mastery, such as were the strifes in the Roman
games, where the strife was who should overcome, and have the Victory. It is
observed by Aquinas that the fight is called a good fight because it is for
good things, and in a good manner and because it is difficult and the Apostle
tells us, that he who striveth is not crowned except he strive lawfully. Thus
I have opened the first thing requisite for him who would have the Crown of
Righteousness; he must fight the good fight.

2. The Second condition required of those, who expect this Crown of
Righteousness to be given them is their finishing their course. I have says
the Apostle finished my course, or my race. There is nothing more ordinary in
Scripture, then for a series or course of actions to be called a way. Thus we
read of the way of God, the way of the wicked and the way of the righteous.
Holiness is called a way, the way of God's Commandments, and the exercises of
Holiness are a Christian's walking or running in this way in the language of
holy Writ. John fulfilled his course, Acts. 13.25. Neither (says our Apostle)
do I count my life dear to me so that I may finish my course with joy. It is
the same with that of our Savior, John 17. I have finished the work which thou
have given me to do. This course must not be only entered, and some Progress
made in it, but it must be finished and brought to an end. If any man's soul
draw back Gods soul will have no pleasure in him. We must not only begin to run
well, but we must take heed that nothing hinders us, or turns us back; it
is he who indureth to the end, that shall be saved: He that draws back does
it to destruction. Every Christian has a double course, both must be finished.

1. The first is his more general course, common to him with all Christians;
this lies in the discharge of those duties which concern him as a Creature,
with reference to God as his Creator, or as a Christian, with reference to
Christ as his Redeemer. There is a great deal of such common duty, which
belongs to every one under these circumstances. Thus every one is obliged to
the Commandments of God respecting all his creatures; the Commands of Christ
respecting them as bought with a price. This is that course which David
promises God to run, when God should enlarge his heart; and we are commanded
to run, so as we may obtain, This St. Paul ran not incertainly, not as one that
did beat the Air. This, to note the certainty and steadiness of our endeavors,
is compared to a walk, to denote the alacrity, and cheerfulness, and readiness
of our spirits to it, is compared to a Race; we are not to sit still and take
our rest, nor to move slowly, but to run, making have, and not delaying (as
David speaks) to keep God's Precepts; pressing hard after God, as he in another
place expresses it; forgetting what is behind, and pressing forward to what is
before, as Paul speaks to his Philippians.

2. The Second is a Christians more particular course, which comprehends
those actions of a man which are by the law of God his duty, as fixed in such,
or such an Orb, and clothed with such or such circumstances. Thus Paul's course
was his duty as an Apostle, and a Minister of Jesus Christ. Another man's course
is his duty as a Magistrate or in any degree of Superiority to others, for
there is no Relation but has a particular duty annexed to it, and he must
finish his course with reference to that. Paul here speaks with reference to
both, both his duties as a Christian and his duty as an Apostle The Christians
reward in heaven is sometimes compared to a Crown, and a Victory, to let us
know that we must fight for it, sometimes to a rest, to teach us that we must
labor for it, Heb. 4.11. sometimes to a mark, a goal a prize, to let us know
that we must run if we will obtain, and so run that we may obtain, striving
after Perfection (as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6.1.) the finishing of our
course signify the two things. 1. That we must do the whole work which God has
given us to do. 2. That we must not give over until it be all done, we must not
be weary of well doing, the promise of Victory is to him who overcomes, the
promise of reaping is to him that is not weary, that faints not. Thus I have
opened the 2d thing.

3. Qu. What is meant hy keeping the faith?

The third thing is keeping the faith. I have (says the Apostle) kept the
faith. The term faith signifies several things in holy Writ. But there are
three more famous, and usual acceptions of it.

1. Sometimes it is of the same import with faithfulness, Romans 3.3. shall their
unbelief make the faith of God of none effect? That is, the faithfulness of
God. Gods truth to his word, his faithfulness to his promise; so Matthew. 23.23.
where Christ charge the Pharisees for omitting the great things of the law
Judgment Mercy, and Faith, while they were strict as to little things, but I
shall not enlarge on this which I do not take to be any part of the sense of
this Text.

2. Faith in Scripture does very often signify the Doctrine of faith. Thus you
read, Acts 6.7. Acts 6.7.
a great company of the Priests were obedient to the faith: That is, to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, the Doctrine of faith. so Romans 12.6. Romans 12.6.
Let us Prophecy, according to the Proportion of faith, that is, of our
knowledge of the Doctrine of faith. I take this to be a great part of the sense
of these words; Paul elsewhere speaks of the Gospel as of a thing committed
to his trust, now says he, I have kept the faith. He had kept his own heart
from erring, or warping as to it, and he had kept it so as he had not suffered
corruptions as to it to break in, and prevail upon those Churches, which he had
planted, or which had been under his watering, he had kept it personally, so
that in his own Judgment he had not warped from it, and he had kept it
ministerially, keeping others in the faith of the Gospel. This was a piece of
his good fight and a piece of his course as a Minister. And this must be the
business of a Christian, contending earnestly for the faith, Jude 3.
which was once delivered to the Saints.

3. Faith sometimes signifies the habit, and grace of faith: That power of the
Soul by which it either gives a fixed, and steady assent to the Proposition of
the Gospel: or receives, commits it self unto, rests upon the Person of
the Mediator, which in Scripture is called a believing in him, and in his name.
Thus the Apostle often uses it, To. 5.1. Being justified by faith we have
peace with God, and so in a multitude of other texts in holy Writ. This that
Christian that hopes for the Crown of righteousness must also keep, he must dye
in the faith, not only steadily assenting to the Doctrine of the Gospel, but in
a steady affiance and recumbency upon the Lord Jesus Christ. This is now the
third condition annexed to the obtaining of the Crown of righteousness. The 4th
is a loving of Christ's appearing. Here arise two Questions.

1. What appearing is here meant? 2. What is this to love the appearance of the
Lord Jesus Christ?
The Orginal word here translated appearing, is (...), it signifies a bright,
and glorious appearance, it is used to express Christ's first coming into the
world, his manifestation in the flesh, -- But is now made manifest by the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 1.10. That first coming of his was
attended with a great deal of glory, proclaimed by Angels, ushered in by a
Messenger, sent as an harbinger before his face to prepare his way, declared by
a new Star conducting the wise men from the east to Jerusalem, and then to
Bethlehem, to inquire for him. But the glory of his first appearing was not
like the glory which shall attend his second coming, when he shall descend from
Heaven with a shout, with the voice of an Archangel and with the trump of God,
1 Thessal. 4.26. with ten thousands of his Saints, Jud. 14. This is by the
Apostle called a glorious appearance as, 1 Pet. 1.7. Looking for that blessed
hope, and the glorious appearance of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ.
Whether his first or second appearing be here meant I doubt. If it be
understood of the first, the sense is much the same with that, Rejoicing in
Christ Jesus in opposition to an having a confidence in the flesh, mentioned 3
Philip. 3. In this sense the loving his appearing, is the loving of him, as God
manifested in the flesh, the accepting, and receiving of him, as our Savior
and the Mediator betwixt God and man, a breathing after him, and delighting in
him: if we understand it of the latter, that appearing of Christ which is yet
to come, we shall further open the duty by opening the 2d thing.

2. What this is to love his appearing.

Love is nothing else but a pleasant motion of the Soul of man toward an
Object, by which discerning some goodness and excellency in it, it takes a
secret complacency in the meditations, and speculations of it: By desire moves
toward it, if it has not obtained a full fruition, and enjoyment of it, and
rejoices, and delights in it if it have. A love toward the second appearing
of Jesus Christ cannot at present discover it self in the embraces of joy, and
delight by which love in a Soul, discovers it self to an object to which it is
united, but only. 1. In desires after it while the Soul cries out, I desire to
be dissolved and to be with Christ! or rather come Lord Jesus, come quickly. 2.
In a joy and delight arising from the certain belief, speculation, and
contemplation of a thing yet future. There is a rejoicing of hope as well as of
fruition, for hope (especially that hope which is the daughter of that faith
which is the evidence of things not seen) gives the Soul an union (though of
the lowest degree) with its object, and so is productive of a proportionable
joy. Now my text says, that for all those who thus fight the good fight,
finish their course, keep the faith, and love the appearance of Christ, there
is laid up a Crown of righteousness which the Lord, the righteous judge, will
in that day give out. In that day; there is another little question what that
day is.

1. In the day of death. Paul indeed had been speaking in the verse before of
the time of his departure, which he had told us was at hand, and it is certain
that at the day of death the Souls of believers do immediately pass into glory
but yet this seems not to be the day here mentioned.

2. Rather the day of Christ's second appearing, Emphatically called that day,
because there never was nor ever will be any day like unto that day, the People
of God shall in the day of their departure, be taken into glory, that is, their
Souls shall, but their bodies rest in their graves until that day, so as the
glory of the Saints before that day, the day of Christ's coming to Judgment,
shall be imperfect, but in that day they shall be Crowned.

If any man asks from whence this shall be, the text gives us a double
account of it.

1. In saying it shall be given, it is not the price of our combat, but it is
the consequent of it from the free grace and gift of God. The gift of God is
eternal life, Romans 6. Fear not little flock (says our Savior) it is your
Fathers will to give you a kingdom. My sheep faith he, hear my voice, and
follow me, and I give unto them eternal life. The Lord has given Christ power
over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to whomsoever he pleased, Joh.
17.2.

2. The text calls it a Crown of Righteousness, and says the righteous judge
will give it. God in all his acts of grace has a care to declare his
righteousness. In the justification of a sinner, he so declares his grace that
he also declares his righteousness, Romans 3.25.26, speaking of Christ whom
(says he) God has set forth to be a propitiation through his blood, to
declare his Righteousness for the Remission of sins that are past through the
forbearance of God: To declare, I say, at this time his Righteousness, that he
might be just, and the Justifier of him who believes in Jesus. So in the
glorifying of Souls God will not act only as a gracious God, rich in mercy,
communicating his goodness to his creatures, but he will also act as a
righteous judge, in his giving out of the Crowns of glory he has so ordered
things that they are also crowns, as of glory, and favor, so of Righteousness.
1. Of Christ's Righteousness being the price, and purchase, and of the Fathers
Righteousness as it is but a just and righteous thing, that he should satisfy
the Covenant of Redemption and fulfill the eternal contract made with the Son of
his love, and it is also a righteous thing that God should fulfill his promises
of life, made to them who believe in him whom God has sent, and be obedient to
his Commandments.

1. The reasonableness and Righteousness of God in giving out of this crown
then appears, from Gods designation, Covenant, and promise. The Crown of
Righteousness is Christ's to give, he has purchased it, the Father has given
it to his disposal; and he has so willed, that those who have it should first
fight for it, first run the race and course which he has in his word lined out
for them. The promises of the new name, the white stone, the hidden manna are
all made unto those who overcome, those who will obtain must run, 1 Cor. 9.24.

2. There is a great relation between a fight, a conquest, and a crown; I
observed to you before that the promises of Heaven are made to such as
overcome, Rev. 2.17. chapter 3.12. chapter 3.21. Rev. 21.7. There is a relation also
betwixt running in a race, and getting of the prize, Gal. 2.2. Gal. 5.7. 1 Cor.
9.24. Again, there is always a relation betwixt the means, and the end. The
means in this case must not be natural but instituted, now these are the means
which (as I have showed you) God has appointed in order to the obtaining of
this blessed end. But I have spoken enough Doctrinally and shall now come to
the application of this discourse.

This (as indeed all other Gospel Propositions) to the consideration of the
transcendent Love of God, to poor Creatures. 1. In providing for us a Crown. 2.
Making it a Crown of Righteousness. 3. Laying it up for us. 4. Giving it to us.

1. In his providing for us a Crown. God in Scripture is said to have prepared
for us Mansions, Rest, a better Country, a more enduring Substance, but this is
not all, he has also prepared for us a Crown. If those who are tickled with
honor, and so inamoured with dignity, and preferment, as some men are, that
they will go over hedge, and ditch, go through thick, and thin for it, had but
faith as a grain of mustard seed to believe this notion of Heaven, the Kingdom
of Heaven would again suffer violence, 1 John 2.27.
and the violent would storm it. The head of the meanest Saint in the day of
Judgment, will be a Crowned Head. They have an anointing now, they will be
crowned then, when they dye they shall enter into rest, but in the Resurrection
they shall be crowned. O the Love of God to the Sons and Daughters of men!
There is love in the providing a reward, so high, so great, so full a reward,
and there is love in the proposing of this reward under this notion, as a bait
to allure us who are tickled with honor, and prone to seek great things for
our selves, to invite us first to seek the Kingdom of God, and the
Righteousness thereof. Who would labor for dust, and pebles, when he may
labor for pearls, and those of great price? Who would sweat for a penny when he
may for a little sweating have a crown? How should this notion of our future
blessed state, send us all home this day with David, to sit down in our houses
before the Lord and say, 2 Samuel 7.18.
Who are we O Lord God, that thou have brought us hitherto? And this was yet a
small thing. 1 John 2.2.
Beloved! (says the Apostle) now we are the Sons of God, but it does not yet
appear what we shall be. In this day the Saints are called with an holy
calling, they are justified, adopted, in that day they shall be crowned, that
the Lord should not only speak of a reward for us, but of a Crown, such, so
great, so noble a reward; nor is it an earthly Crown which is clogged with
care, encumbered with thorns, but a Crown of life, a Crown of glory. Surely a
less thing then a Crown might have been enough for the worms of the earth, for
all the homage they do or can pay, all the duty they do or can do, for all they
can suffer for Christ. This God must give as a King, the reward is too great
for us to conceive, too great for us to receive, only it is not too great for
God to give, which of us can think any more of merit when he hears the reward
of Heaven called a Crown? The notion of a Crown sets it above the Proportion of
merit.

2. That the Lord should not only provide a Crown for us, but also make it a
Crown of Righteousness, thereby giving us the greatest security imaginable for
our receiving of it. Had it been only a Crown of grace and favor we might have
doubted concerning it, whether it should have been ours or no. But it being a
Crown of Righteousness we cannot doubt our one day wearing of it without
calling the truth, and Righteousness of God in question.

3. It is a Crown laid up, prepared for us, says our Savior, Math. 25. Laid
up for us (says our Apostle) a Crown not in our own keeping, laid up in the
inalterable Counsels of God, laid up in the promises of the Gospel, laid up in
the hands of Christ. Gods People are kept by faith through the power of God for
this Crown, and the Crown is in safe keeping for them, John 10.27, 28. My sheep
hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. And I give unto them
eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out
of my hand. God has blessed them and they shall be blessed.

4. And lastly to put us out of all doubt by reason of the disproportion of our
works, when we have done our most to this reward it is said, The righteous
judge shall give it. After all our fighting the good fight, running the race,
keeping the faith, there is yet a room for a gift in the disposal of this Crown
to the Saints; where there is no purchase nor any natural claim, what can give
us a title to Heaven save only gift and Righteousness? If it be righteous for
God to give it, because Christ has purchased, and God has promised, yet God
was free as to the promise, and free in giving to us the purchase of another.
It is a Crown of gift, free gift, though at the same time also it is but a
Crown of Righteousness upon other considerations.

admitting the truth of the latter Proposition that the Crown of Righteousness
shall be given to none but such as fight the good fight, such as finish their
course, as keep the faith, as love the appearance of Christ; How vain must the
hopes of the greatest number of expectants of this nature be? Would the
generality of men and women in our Parishes admit us to come so near them, as
to ask them, sufficiently possessed of this that they must dye, what they think
will become of their Souls at death? And of their bodies and souls in the
resurrection from the dead. Their reasonable nature will not suffer them to
think of an annihilation in death; they cannot think that their souls melt into
air, and abhor the thoughts of an eternal misery, so as certainly their answer
would be, We hope to be saved, we hope for a Crown of glory, of life, and
immortality, which God will give us; but can a rush grow up without mire? Or a
flag without water, says Job? He is a righteous judge, that gives out this
Crown, and the Crown it self must be a Crown of Righteousness as well as a
Crown of life, glory and immortality. It is given out as a Crown of Christ's
Righteousness to those who are clothed with it; what is this to Souls out of
Christ? To Souls that have not believed, that so his Righteousness might be
imputed to them for Righteousness, to those who are not by faith united to
Christ? Admit it to be the Crown that is the free reward of man's Righteousness,
his holy, and pure and sincere, though not perfect conversation, what claim can
they lay to it, that live impure, unholy, filthy and unrighteous conversations?
How shall the Crown (which is the Crown of Righteousness) be given to him that
is unrighteous? Admit it to be the Crown of Gods Righteousness (that is, his
faithfulness to his word, and promise) how shall it be given to those, to whom
God has in his whole book not made so much as one promise of any such thing,
nay against whom he has denounced many threatenings as to the contrary (as to
the fulfilling of which his truth is as much concerned as it is as to his
promises? He has promised it, and his word is a sure word, he cannot as to it
lie, he cannot repent, but this promise is to those that fight the good fight,
that finish their course, that keep the faith, etc.

Ah how many are there that fight indeed, but is it the good fight? They are
fighters against God, opposers of his interest, they would (if possible) root
the very name of of God, and profession of Godliness out of the world. They
have such an antipathy to piety, that (as they say of the Basilisk) it has
such an emnity to man that it will fly upon his picture: so they have such an
enmity to Christ, and holiness that they fly upon any Persons, or things who
have any thing of Christ's Image and Superscription upon them: others are
fighters, great disturbers of humane societies with their quarrels. But now for
the good fight which is to be managed against our passions and exorbitant
affections, and all the motions of the Soul, that are contrary to the will of
God, how few of those are to be found that fight this fight? How few are those
that will manage an opposition for the glory of God against the temptations of
the world? How few are there that can glory in this, that they have finished
either their more general course as Christians, or more particular Course as
Christians under such or such circumstances. How full is the world of those who
have yet their first step to take in the way of Gods Commandments, their life
is a mere walking in the counsels, and Imaginations of their own hearts, a mere
gratification of their sensitive appetite, not only as moving contrary to the
law of Christ, but to the very law of reason? Living beneath the better sort of
heathens. How many more, whose only business is to heap up gold as dust, and
silver as thick clay, but the way of Religion and holiness they have not known?
How few are there that mind the duties of their particular relation, but as
they use their own Souls as if they were the mere condiment of their bodies, so
they behave themselves to their Wives, Husbands, and Children, as if they had
no trust of their Souls committed to them. How many that have lost the faith
first delivered to the Saints, and are fallen into pernicious and damnable
heresies, making Shipwreck both of faith, and a good conscience? Can these men
possibly love the appearan^e of Jesus Christ?

But leaving others, let us take the advantage inquiring whether we be such
Persons as when we shall be ready to dye, and shall by any Providence of God be
made apprehensive that the time of our departure is at hand, shall be able to
say that henceforth there is laid up for us a Crown of Righteousness, which the
righteous Judge shall in that day give out to all such, as love the appearance
of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ. To satisfy us as to these things, we
have heard in the explication of this text that we have several things to
inquire upon, they may be reduced to six or seven heads.

1. What opposition we have made to the carnal desires and motions of our own
hearts contrary to the revealed will of God. You shall observe, that a sinful
walking in holy Writ is very ordinarily expressed by a walking according to the
counsels, and imaginations of our own hearts; so contrary are the natural
desires, counsels, and imaginations of the heart of man to the revealed will of
God, there is no surer sign of a wicked man, then for him to walk after his own
imaginations or for him (to use Jobs expression) to suffer his heart to walk
after his Eyes. Hence self-denial is by our Savior made the condition, and
character, of being one of his disciples, and we are often in Scripture
Commanded to mortify our members, and the deeds of our bodies. This kind of
conversation, which lies in the gratifying of our sensitive appetites, is the
broad way, in which many walk, but it is the high way to eternal destruction.

2. What opposition we have made to the world, either the men of the world, or
the things of it, attemping either to frown, or flatter us out of the duty
which we owe unto God. He who is at the worlds beck cannot be at the Command of
Christ. If we be the Servants of men we cannot be the Servants of God. As
Christ pleased not himself, so neither did he please the men of the age wherein
he lived in their oppositions to the will of his Father. It is most certain
that the generality of the men of the world love no Child of God as such, they
are two different seeds betwixt which there ever was, and ever will be an
emnity. If they take us by the chin, and kiss us, it is but that they may have
the better opportunity to smite us under the fifth rib. The truth is their open
war is better than their dissembled amity, but that also requires in us wisdom,
when to oppose so as not to suffer as evil doers, and courage and resolution
that we may be able to stand.

3. How we walk as to our more general conversation. It is certainly a true
saying, grande est Christianum esse, non dici. It is a great thing, not to be
called, but to be a Christian, and in Christianity, Tantum es, quantum agis, a
man is just so much as he acts in an uniform obedience, having a regard to
all the Commandments of God. He that wilfully breaks any of Gods Commadments
is guilty of all, for there is the same reverence due to God as to one Precept
as unto another. We have also further to enquire,

4. How we discharge the duties of our particular Relations. Not only how we
run that race, which we have to run in Common with others, but that particular
course which God has set us, how we have managed our duties as parents,
Children, Husbands, Wives, Masters, Servants, Magistrates or Subjects,
Ministers or People, etc.

5. What steadiness we keep as to the faith once delivered to the Saints, It
is true every warping in opinion from the truth is not damnable, but we must
take heed of warping in such points as a warping in is inconsistent with the
exercise of repentance and faith. I will not undertake punctually to determine
what things are to be believed upon pain of damnation, but I am sure every one
that does not repent and believe in, or close with the Lord Jesus Christ is in
an ill condition, and from thence it follows, that such opinions drank in, as
hinder the exercise of repentance or faith, must needs be pernicious unto Souls.

6. What particular faith and dependence we keep up in God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ. The Scriptures are so full of texts giving testimony to the necessity
of faith in Christ in order to eternal salvation, that I need not instance in
many, see John 3.18, 36. the Scripture says expressly, that he that believes
not shall be damned, God has made an inseparable connection betwixt faith in
the Mediator, in him whom God has sent, and eternal life and salvation; this
indeed cannot be without obedience, but faith and obedience are two things, and
must neither be separated, nor confounded.

7. Lastly, What love have we to the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ? How
Christ's second appearance is the object of our love, and wherein our love to it
is discernable, I have already opened.

Fourthly, This notion affords a great deal

1. Concerning all the labors, and difficulties, and pressures of this life.
The good Christian you have described in the text. He is one who fights the
good fight, who not only runs but finisheth his course, who not only
receives but keeps the faith, etc. The labors of such persons, their
difficulties, their pressures are usually not a few, not light, but yet they
are not such but a Crown, a Crown of life, and glory, will compensate. Let them
therefore keep their Eye upon the recompense of reward, Jacobs prospect of a
Rachel made his fourteen years hard service seem to him but as a few days. What
should the prospect of this mighty reward, this glorious crown do? The Apostle
having his thoughts upon the exceeding weight of glory, calls the afflictions
of this life light and momentany. Let this crown promised in the text alleviate
all our troubles, if we suffer from God, or for God, how little must it be to
him that considers he shall also be glorified with Christ?

Secondly, It relieveth us against all our doubts, and fears, about our eternal
state, the promise is made to, pious affections and actions, not to Spiritual
enjoyments; a man may love both the first, and second appearance of Christ, he
may fight the good fight, finish his course, keep the faith, and yet walk in
the dark and see no light, but be troubled with his own dark, and melancholic
thoughts, molested with Satan's temptations, want the witnessings of the Spirit
with his Spirit. The promise is not made to those who here enjoy much of God,
but to those who love God, to those, who do, and suffer much for God. We have
therefore to uphold our hopes nothing to inquire upon, but the faithful
discharge of our duty, and then to believe that he is faithful who has
promised.

bad fights of the world, let them if they will be found fighters against God,
against his truths, ways, ordinances, people, his interest and whole concern in
the world, let others be finishing their courses of sin and wickedness till
their sins being finished shall bring forth death. Let others be engaged in the
feuds, and quarrels of the world. This Sirs is not your fight, this is not the
good fight, this is not your course, it is not that for which God sent you into
the world for, not the work which he has given you to do, let others who have
begun well in all appearance, be weary, and faint, and turn back with the dog
to the vomit, and the swine to the wallowing again in the mire, remember you
that God has promised you shall reap if you faint not.

1. Let me speak first to such as are strangers to God, and hold up this Crown
(this glorious Crown) to reasonable Souls, while I sound a retreat to them from
that bad fight wherein they are engaged, did ever any man fight against God and
prosper? How happy might you be if you would be persuaded to understand your
true enemies, and to engage against the world, the flesh and the Devil, if you
that are fighting for your lusts, and for the Devil, would turn and fight
against those lusts which war against the Soul; will all the victories which
you can get over the people and and interest of God in the world, or over your
Brethren, bring you to this Crown of Righteousness? Will your eager pursuit of
the world, and out running of others in worldly business and concerns (think
you) bring you to it? If not, cease that race, and turn into the right path as
of Gods Commandments, run that race the winning of which will bring you to this
prize, why should you spend your strength for naught, and your time for that
which will not profit you in your latter end?

2. Let what you have heard engage you who have begun well to go on. If the
Righteous man forsake his Righteousness, and Commit iniquity his righteousness
shall never be remembered, but he shall dye in the iniquity which he has
committed. O let not your hands be weary with holding up the Spiritual weapons,
nor your feet be weary of running the spiritual race, and do not forget your
particular course; you can hardly be good Christians if you in some tolerable
measure answer not the duties of your particular Relation. God has set all of
us in some particular Relation or other, scarce any amongst us but have more
then the charge of our own Souls upon us, some of us are set in Conjugal
Relations, some in Parental Relations, some in a Despotick Relation as
Governors of Servants. O let us be all able to say, As to these we have
finished our course, we have done the work which (as to them) God has given us
to do, we shall find it an hard matter cheerfully to look upon the day of our
departure as at hand, or to love, or cheerfully think upon the appearance of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, till this be done.

Use 6. In the last place, This notion affords us a great deal of Consolation
to those who are mourners for their near and dearest Relations; and are not
mourners without hope; I must confess there are some mourners, to whom
something may be said to satisfy them, from the Revelation of the good, and
irresistible will of God, and such other Topics, but little to comfort them
concerning those that are gone. But if any have lost an Husband, a Wife, a
Parent, a Child, a Friend of whom they can judge that while they were alive,
They fought the good fight, and finished their course, and kept the faith, and
loved the appearance of our blessed Lord. We have no reason to mourn, there is
a Crown of Righteousness, which the Righteous Lord has in part already set
upon their heads (their Souls are in Abraham's Bosom) and with which he will
further incompass their heads, dignify both their Souls and Bodies in that day,
that glorious day, in the expectation of which we live, when he shall come to
judge the quick and the dead, and this leads me to a more particular
discourse for the end, for which I have this day turned out of the common road
of my discourse to take notice of Gods Providence to us in taking from us a
Servant of his in the great work of the Gospel: Who has left a Widow without
an Husband, a Child without a Parent, alas! that I cannot also say a particular
flock without a Pastor, but the whole flock of Christ I can say he has left
deprived of one labourer more, and that in a time, when the Harvest truly is
great, and the laborers too too few. But it is no part of love for our own
good to envy the more exceeding good, and happiness of our friends, and our
sorrow for him as a public loss, is much alleviated, by that useless condition
(as to public service) into which the wisdom of the Divine Providence had
brought him for some years, before it pleased God to take him to himself.

His conversation from his youth was better known to many of you then to my
self, he being born, and bred up amongst you, I shall limit my discourse
concerning him by my Text, having nothing in further design then to show you,
that we who believe that there is a Crown of Righteousness laid up for some,
which the Righteous Judge will one day give out to all such as love his
appearance, have no reason for any dissatisfaction at this dispensation of
Divine Providence, because we have reason to hope that he was one of those who
fought the good fight, who finished his course, who kept the faith, who loved
the appearance of our Lord Jesus.

1. For fighting the good fight: It respects the World, the Flesh, or the
Devil; as to the World, there was none who knew him, who can accuse him of any
pursuit of it, none who saw not his neglect of it, he contented himself with a
competency of it, and could not be tempted to mend his commons in it, by a
compliance in any thing which he judged sinful, he was no man of pleasure, none
of those who sought great things for himself. He did not neglect the work of
the Ministry while he had a liberty to exercise it, and withal to exercise
(what he judged) a good conscience, but when he saw he could not do that, the
profits of such service was no temptation to him, he rather chose to live upon
the little God had given him, and occasionally to preach the Gospel where he
had an opportunity offered for near twenty years before God took him from us
(though indeed for 5 or 6 of those years) he was not fit for any public
service of that nature. The good fight with the flesh is a more secret combat,
of which we can make no judgment, but from a mortified conversation to sensible
satisfactions, as to which I need say nothing to you, you know how he walked
in, and out before you, dying daily to the contentments of this life, and
bringing his body under, and keeping it in subjection. But it was his managery
of this good fight with the Grand Adversary that was to us (to me at least) the
most perspicuous, and as to which I was the most competent witness, in regard
of my frequent converse with him. It was in the year 1673. (if I remember
right) when it pleased God to take from him his only Son, a Child in which he
much delighted, and whose life (probably by giving him some diversion) kept him
from those depths of Melancholy, into which he soon after fell, and c^ntinued
to his dying day, though under some different circumstances. It were infinite
to recount all his doubts and fears, some respecting his Spiritual and Eternal
State: Some, with reference to the Actions of his life, so as there was not the
most lawful action of his life, which he was not at one time, or other
questioning the lawfulness of. He had the assistance of Divines, whose success
with him, was but what is usual in those cases, they could easily silence him,
and answer the Objections he made against himself, and give him a little relief
at present, but his troublesome thoughts would return again, and renew upon
him; yet we observed God blessing our endeavors so far, as to drive the Enemy
from one Post to another. But still there came on new supply from those
Principalities, with which he was engaged, and this continued so long, that his
life grew a burden to him, and he seemed weary of it, not desirous to live
always, when in living he did not live. His Adversary brought forth all those
usual fiery Darts, which he commonly throws at persons under his
circumstances. Temptations to Blasphemous thoughts, Despair, Self-Murder; as to
the first and second, it so far pleased God to bless our Brotherly assistances
to him, advantaged by his own knowledge of the things of God, and acquaintance
with the Covenant of Grace, (which he was observed almost always to make the
subject of his Sermons in later years) that he was not many months in those
combats; but under the latter he labored some years, indeed so long, as in
the whole course of my Ministry, I never knew any who was infested with those
Temptations, but was overthrown by them (if they continued) in much shorter
times. He has often affrighted his nearest Relation, and my self, with telling
us. He must put an end to his days, he was not able to bear the impetus of the
Temptation. Both my self and others would speak what we judged proper in the
cause, and for a time were successful to divert him, but the Tempter came on
again, and that with that violence as I scarce ever knew, I learned in my daily
converse with this good man, the great advantage which true faith in any gives
a Minister of the Gospel in such an hour of temptation: over what he has
toward one who has no such root of Grace. In my discourses with him, I used a
much different method from what others would have thought proper in the case,
and in the midst of these Paroxysms, commonly made the eternal misery of damned
Souls, and the desperate state of persons dying in the commission of known sins
the subjects of my discourse; Knowing that if God would bless my discourses, to
revive his faith in such Revelations of Holy Writ, I should countermine his
adversary, whose design was to blow up his Soul, by the hopes of a freedom from
a temporary affliction and misery. In the mean time, many prayers were put up
to God for him, many were made to God with him, and himself (if out of his bed)
was almost always alone upon his knees, such was his condition, that his
friends durst not have trusted him the twentieth part of that time alone, but
they knew he was not alone while he was with God, and they found that he was
safe, because in his company. After the spending of some years in this degree
of deep affliction, it pleased God in a great degree to rebuke the Tempter,
that although his bodily distemper yet continued, and by this time it had bred
more, yet his mind was much more free from these desperate Temptations, and
impetuous assaults, that if at all any thing of them returned at any time, yet
they were not a continual dropping upon his Soul; thus he fought the good
fight, and indeed in this piece of it was more a Conqueror then I ever knew
any who was so long engaged in it, and at last died the ordinary death of men,
quietly in his Bed, surrendering his Soul into the hands of him that gave it.

2 For the finishing of his course; how he walked in, and out before you, I
need not tell you, you knew the man, and observed his conversation. For the
duties of his Relation, as a Minister, while he had a public liberty, he was
no indiligent Preacher; when he was restrained as to that, you were also some
witnesses of his readiness to that work. For his Domestic Relations, let his
Widow rise up and call him blessed, let his Daughter praise him. He spent no
small proportion of time in opening Scripture, and praying with his Family, and
other exercises of Religion proper to a Family. He rather erred by excess, then
by a defect in those exercises.

3. As to his keeping the faith. As he was known to all that conversed with him
to be sound in the Doctrine of faith. So two things spoke the exercise of the
habit of that Grace in him.

1. He was much in prayer. It was almost his whole work, for some years before
he died, he did little else but read and pray. When he could no longer Pray
himself, he would continually be soliciting others to the performance of it,
and when he hardly regarded either Wife or Child coming to him, yet he was so
regardful of this, that he missed Prayer, if at any time any of us had come to
him, and gone away, having not prayed with him.

2. Much holiness speaks faith. His scrupulosity in his actions, lest he
should by any of them sin against God, was such as indeed was a great part of
his Affliction. Indeed the latter part of his life being very Melancholic, and
that disposing him to too many fears, and God having for some weeks before he
died, allowed him but a very uncertain use of his reason, and much deprived him
also of a liberty of speech, we had not that lightsome evidence of his desire
to be dissolved, which we might have expected from such a conversation. But his
quiet bearing Gods severe hand upon him, his free submission to his will
without any murmuring, or repining, added to the former spending of his life in
a constant preparation for death, may satisfy us, that he was one who loved the
appearance of our Lord Jesus. Now I say, if we have a sufficient evidence to
hope, that he was indeed one who fought the good fight, who had finished his
course, who kept the faith, and who loved the appearance of our Lord Jesus;
what reason have we to mourn? Nay, if we consider what a man of griefs and
sorrows he was in his latter time, what an ill habit of body he had contracted,
what a variety of diseases he was encumbered with, and how improbable it was
that by the use of any art, his body should be recovered to a state of comfort
to himself, or usefulness to others. We have great cause to rejoice in hope.
That he is crowned with that Crown of Righteousness, which the Righteous God
has prepared, laid up, and will give out to those who love his appearance.

In ordinary cases where there is no cause of sorrow from a reflection upon the
eternal state of the deceased, yet there may be some cause of sorrow upon the
account of the Churches loss; and never was there a greater cause of mourning
for Godly Ministers, then at this day. We have cause upon all such losses, to
cry out, as Psalm. 12.1. Help Lord! for the Godly man cease, and the faithful
fail from the children of men: But in the present case we have not that cause.
God by his Providence had made him dead to us, before he died, and except in a
miraculous way, we could not reasonably have expected a Resurrection, (a
recovery I mean to any degree of usefulness.)

So then if there remains no cause of mourning, either from the consideration
of our friends eternal state, or our own loss. What remains but that we should
lay our hands upon our mouths, or if we will open them, bless God who has
granted us to see him (after so long a scuffle with the great Enemy of Mankind)
depart in peace; that he might see the Lords Salvation, and be ever with the
Lord, as the Apostle expresses the state of those that sleep in Jesus in
another life. I shall conclude, as the Apostle does that Chapter, wherefore
comfort yourselves with these words.

SERMON III.
Deuteronomy 8.18. -- For it is he that gives thee power to get wealth.
THis fifth Book of Moses is called Deuteronomy, qu. (...): a second law,
because it for the most part contains a repetition of the law of God,
formerly given unto this people by Moses; Moses having in the former Chapter
given them an account of some precepts that God formerly delivered to them, he
here presses them to obedience, and to make reflections upon what God had done
for them, he declares a great tenderness for this people, who had been brought
up by him, and lived upon his hand, and an exceeding jealousy, lest when they
came into the land of Canaan, they should forget the great God who had done so
much for them, and lest they should say in their hearts, my power, and the
might of my hand has gotten me this wealth, but (says he in the words I have
read unto you,) Thou shall remember the Lord thy God, for it is he that gives
thee power to get wealth.

The Doctrines of the Text are two.

Doct. 1. That it is the Lord who gives unto people a power to get wealth.

Doct. 2. That the consideration of this should oblige men when they have
gotten estates, not to forget, but to remember the Lord their God.

Prop. That it is the Lord who gives unto a people a power to get wealth.
There is nothing in the Doctrine that needs any explication; we all know what
is meant by wealth, my whole business will lie upon the demonstration of this
truth, that it is the Lord that gives men power to get wealth, and to show
what influence God has upon men, as to their gaining of outward estates, 1 Samuel 2.7. The Lord makes poor, and makes rich, Eccl. 6.2. A man to whom God
has given riches, wealth, and honor -- chap. 9.11. -- the race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong; and 2. By way of Application, to show what
influence this meditation should have upon us; I shall spend all my time in
answering these two Questions.

Qu. 1. What influence has God upon men as to their gaining or keeping their
outward estate.

All wealth and outward estate, comes to a man, by inheritance, or marriage,
or by gift, or by labor; let me show you a little the influence God has upon
all these. I will join the two first together.

1. It is the Lord that makes Heirs, and who makes Matches; we have two
Proverbs in this case, which are very true, we use to say, God makes Heirs,
and Matches are made in heaven, both are true; the Woman marries the Husband,
and the Husband marries that Wife which God has created for him, and that man
inheriteth the estate which God had created for him.

Let us consider the influence the Lord has upon Heirs, and this will easily
be confessed by whosoever acknowledges that the issues of life and death are
from the Lord, the fruit of the Womb is from the Lord, and the issues of life
and death are in the hand of the Lord; you shall find an expression to this
purpose, Mic. 1.15. Yet will I bring an heir unto thee, Oh inhabitant of
Mareshah; Maresha was a City in Judah, it is mentioned also, Josh. 15.44.
Abraham told God, Genesis 15.3. One born in his house was his heir, God tells him,
v. 4. -- This shall not be thine heir, one born of thy bowels, shall be thy
heir, Psalm. 30.22. For such as be blessed of him shall inherit the earth --
Sometimes a handmaid is heir to her Mistress, which is one of the three things
for which the earth groaned, and which it could not bear (says Solomon) Prove.
34.23. One may be heir to his enemy by natural death, oftentimes it so
happens; at what a distance does God sometimes throw an estate, both in a
direct line, and in a collateral line? who would have said that Mephibosheth
should have been heir to his Grandfather Saul, as, 2 Samuel 9.7. And David said
unto him, fear not, for I will surely show thee kindness, for Jonathan thy
Fathers sake, and will restore thee all the Land of Saul thy Father -- or who
would have thought the Israelites should have been heirs unto the Canaanites?
It is the Lord that thus gives a power to get wealth; the influence of God
upon conjugal affection is also as strange. I know nothing wherein the strange
power and providence of God is more seen, then in uniting the affections of
that man and woman together, whom he has ordained each for other, a man or
woman shall bestow their Estates upon persons whom they never knew, never heard
of; nay. possibly upon those against whom they were prejudiced; who would have
thought Esther (a person of mean and obscure extraction) should have been
Ahasuerus his Queen; or that Ruth should have Married Boaz.

2. It is the Lord who raises up friends; this is another fountain head of
riches; he it was that gave the Israelites favor in the sight of the
Egyptians, Exodus 11.3. And the Lord gave the People favor in the sight of the
Egyptians; He gave Joseph favor in the sight of Pharaoh, Acts 7.10. -- and
gave him favor and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh King of Egypt -- Dan. 1.9.
Now God had brought Daniel into favor and tender love -- whosoever lightly
observes the course of the world, will find this verified every day, you may
see friends raised up of strangers, yea, of enemies, even to the amazement of
them who behold them, but there is yet another fountain of wealth, and that is
labor and industry, Pro. 10.4 -- the hand of the diligent makes rich. But you
must take in another Text. v. 22. The blessing of the Lord, it makes rich --
and to this purpose, let us consider what influence God has upon that. In the
third place therefore,

3. It is the Lord that enclineth our minds unto business, and to that
particular employment which brings in our estate; I say it is the Lord that
enclineth the mind to business, and directs the mind in business.

1. I say he enclineth the mind to business; you see some men are of dull,
sluggish and lazy spirits, fit for no business, nor do they mind any, but
others are men of activity, they are never well but when their hands are full
of employment; who is it that has made this difference in the spirits of men;
have they not all Souls of the same species; have they not all bodies, though
not of the same strength, yet of the same mould? this is the Lord.

2. It is the Lord that directs a man's mind and inclination to this or that
particular employment: there are some ways of employment in the world, that are
of more gain and advantage then others; some trades that are poorer, some
richer; some that bring in great, some smaller returns; whence comes it that
this man is directed to choose a meaner, and poorer trade that brings in
little return another to a trade that brings in greater, is it not from the
Lord? That has this influence upon the heart of man and disposes, it which
way soever he will.

3. It is the Lord that gives dexterity in business, you observe in the world,
that some men are more dexterous and happy in their employment by far then
others are, they can do more in their business, they can do it to better
advantages; whence is this? see but one instance, Exo. 31.2. See, I have called
by name Bezaleel, the Son of Uri, the Son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah. v. 3.
And I have filled him with the Spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding,
and in knowledge and in all manner of workmanship. v. 4. To Devise cunning
works, to work in Gold, and Silver and in Brass. So add v. 6. -- In the hearts
of all that are wise hearted I have put wisdom; again, Exodus 35.35. Them has
he filled with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of work -- Hence you may
observe in almost all employments a fagacity given to one which he cannot
communicate to another, so that the power and influence of God is evidently
seen; you may observe that a power to get wealth does very much depend, not
only upon the kind of the employment wherein a man is engaged, but upon the
wisdom and cunning of the man, upon his dexterity and sagacity in his
employment; now all this is from the Lord.

4. It is the Lord who gives success in business; there is nothing more
ordinary in the world, then to find two men, whose profession, trade and way of
living possibly is the same; whose industry and diligence is as much as can be
imagined, equal whose wisdom and cunning also is not much unlike, yet the one
thriveth, and grows rich, the other does not, the one vendeth his
commodities, and makes safe and great returns, the other cannot vend his
commodities, he cannot secure his return; whence is this but from the Lord? It
is the Lord who makes our way prosperous, Deuteronomy. 2.7. For the Lord thy God has
blessed thee in all the works of thy hand -- It is God that blesses in the
city, and blesses in the field, Deuteronomy. 28.3. -- Thou have blessed the work of
his hands, says the Devil to Job, chapter 1.10. Hence the Psalmist teaches us to
pray unto God, to prosper the works of our hands unto us.

5. Lastly, It is the Lord who keeps off those things from us which would
make us poor. Riches are subject to accidents; a man's getting an estate
depends upon another keeping his estate; the fire may burn, the Thief may
break through and steal, Ships may be broken at Sea; infinite many accidents
may happen, and we daily see and hear of accidents that happen to the ruin and
impoverishing of men, and is not thy estate as subject to accidents; who is it
that keeps the fire from thee which consumes thy Neighbor? and who keeps
the Thief from thee, who plundereth thy Neighbor, and leaves him nothing?
that upholdeth the estate of him who deals with thee, while he lets the
estate of another man who deals with another to sink? who can ascribe this to
any thing but to the influence that God has upon the world? Now all this
justifies this truth, that it is the Lord who gives power to get wealth; I
shall add no more in the explication of this Doctrine; I shall spend the
remaining part of my time in the application of it; I shall apply this to the
two sorts of people that divide the world.

1. To such as are poor and mean in the world. 2. To those that are rich.
Use 1. Let me speak unto such to whom the Lord has not given a power to get
wealth; that they would be content to eye the will and good pleasure of God
concerning them; some of you are no heirs, you have not been enriched by any
matches, you have not been made rich by friends, you have been laborious, but
it has not pleased God to bless the works of your hands; yet be content.

1. Consider, It is the dispensation of the Lord; thou do not thrive, because
it pleases not God to give thee a power to get wealth; we ought in every thing
to be satisfied with the will of God: the earth is the Lords, and the fullness
thereof, and God may do with his own what he pleases; if he will give much to
one, and little to another, or something to one, and nothing to another, he
does thee no wrong at all; thou have therefore no reason to murmr, no reason
to repine against him; especially considering what I shall further add.

2. Consider, Wealth is none of Gods Covenant Mercies; there were two outward
afflictions, which to the Jews were far more justifiable causes of disturbance,
than they are to Christians, Poverty and Barrenness; the reason was, because
the promises of God to the Jews ran much upon outward things; it follows
after the words of the Text, -- For it is he that gives thee power to get
wealth, that he may establish his covenant, which he swear unto thy fathers, as
at this day. But the new Covenant reaches most unto Spiritual mercies, Jer
32.40. And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn
away from them, to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that
they shall not depart from me.

3. Consider, Oftentimes a power to get wealth, prejudiceth us in our
privilege to obtain, and our duty to act grace, James 2.5. Hearken my beloved
brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs
of the Kingdom -- Therefore the Apostle Paul gave it in charge, 1 Timothy 6.17.
That the rich should not be high-minded, but fear; Our Savior does pronounce a
woe to them that are rich, Luke 6.24 -- For you have received your consolation;
it must be understood of them that are not rich toward God; but only lay up
treasures for themselves. So St. James, Jam. 1.9. would have the Brother of low
degree rejoice that he is exalted; he would also have the rich rejoice. v. 10.
In that he is made low -- but I shall enlarge no further upon this branch of
application, but come to that which is more proper, and speak a word to those
that are rich.

Exhort. 2. Is it the Lord who gives you power to get wealth? Then remember
the Lord your God, who has given you power to get wealth; It is the
Exhortation of the Text, upon which I shall enlarge a little. Thou shall
remember the Lord thy God, who gives thee power to get wealth; this term
remember, is a very comprehensive word; Remember thy Creator in the days of thy
youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall
say, I have no pleasure in them; it is also used in many other texts; I must
therefore open this generally, and show you,

1. What duty this calls to you for, in reference to your getting wealth.

2. What duty it calls to you for, when you have gotten it.

In reference to the getting of your wealth,

1. That you would apply your self to the getting of wealth in the Lords way.

By the Lords way, I mean two things.

1. An honest course of life justifiable unto God.

2. A managing this honest course in an honest manner.

Apply your selves and your children to the getting of wealth in an honest
course of life; I shall not here undertake to determine concerning Trades,
which are honest, which are dishonest; but there are two sorts of Trades, or
Professions, or ways of life, which I shall not commend, nor should choose.

1. Such as serve merely to maintain Superstition or Idolatry.

2. Such as serve merely for Idleness and Luxury.

1. Such as serve merely for Superstition and Idolatry, like the Silver-Smith,
whose craft was to make shrines for Diana; I remember Tertullian inveighing
against Idolaters, makes all makers of Idols and Statues, to be guilty of the
same sin with them that worship them.

2. There is another sort of Trades that serve merely for Luxury and Idleness;
such kind of ways of living as these, are by no means to be chosen, because we
cannot expect that the Lord should in them, with his blessing give us power to
get wealth.

2. It calls to you for the managing of your callings in an honest manner;
that is, in short, with truth and justice, Prove. 21.6. The getting of treasures
by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death. David
prays, that the Lord would remove from him the way of lying -- a lying tongue
is one of those things which God hates; and again, Pro. 12.22. Lying lips are
abomination to the Lord

3. It calls to all you that are employed in getting wealth, to manage all
your conversation in such a course of religion, as you may expect Gods blessing
to go along with you, especially it calls to you for prayers; it is the
blessing of the Lord that makes rich; who can expect the blessing of the Lord
in the day, that does not beg it in the morning, and in the evening; he that
chooses to live as if there were no God in the world, what wonder is it, if
God leaves him to take his course, that he shall live as if there were no God
in the World, if he will not live as to duty, as if there were a God in the
world, what wonder is it if the Lord leaves him to live so as to his mercy, as
if there were no God in the World.

Obj. But may some say, do not we see that many grow rich in the world, that
yet live without a God in the world, making no conscience of such a course of
Religion as you prescribe?

Sol. I answer, it is one thing for God to give a power, another thing for men
to have a permission; that Text is worth your noting, Prove. 10.22. The blessing
of the Lord makes rich, and adds no sorrow with it. There is a great deal of
difference in Gods giving outward blessings, and much lies, whether he gives
them with his blessing, or with his curse; it is said of the Israelites, That
the Lord gave them quails, and while the flesh was betwixt their teeth, the
anger of the Lord smoaked against them. God gave the Israelites a King in his
wrath; and so the Lord sometimes gives riches and honor; but the blessing of
the Lord adds no sorrow with it, There was a great difference betwixt the
riches of Solomon, and the riches of Gehazi; no man can expect the blessing of
the Lord upon his riches and getting wealth, without this course of life which
I have directed.

Qu. 2. What duty does this call to us for, when we have gotten our wealth?

I answer, it calls to you for an acknowledgment of this truth; in such a
using of your estates, as you may thereby testify, that you do not say that
you by your own hand have gotten this wealth, but the Lord gave you power to
get it.

1. It calls to you for a cordial acknowledgment.

2. It calls to you for a verbal acknowledgment.

3. It calls to you for a real acknowledgment.

1. It calls to you for a cordial acknowledgment.

1. Take heed your hearts be not lifted up, Deuteronomy. 14.17. Then thine heart be
lifted up -- And thou say in thy heart, my power, and the might of my hand has
gotten me this wealth. We are ready to be lifted up, for any thing that we have
more then others; but consider what the Apostle says, Who has made thee to
differ, and who has given thee power to get wealth; what reason have thou to
be proud?

2. Take heed that in your hearts you acknowledge God the donor and author of
it; do not say that by your own power, and by your own wisdom you have gotten
this wealth, the Lord delights to do good, but he also loves to be
acknowledged and owned, then is God honored when you acknowledge the mercy
which you have to be received from him.

3. In your hearts acknowledge Gods mercy, and give him thanks, keep your Souls
in a thankful frame, that when you look upon the houses which you did not
build, and your fields which you did not plant; your Soul may presently be
lifted up to Heaven, and say, God I thank thee, Josh. 24.13.
thou have given me land for which I did not labor, and houses which I did not
build.

4. Be thinking in your hearts, what you should do for God; thus was David,
What shall I render unto the Lord? I will take the cup of Salvation, and praise
his holy name.

2. Give the Lord a verbal acknowledgment.

1. Be not ashamed to own before men that God is gracious; I have often
observed, and that not without some blushing, that even good people, such as
fear God, have had a kind of a shame upon them to acknowledge their low
beginning in the world, and used all arts to hide it; we should never be
ashamed to own what God has done for our Souls, or for our Bodies, that others
may be quickened to serve God, and to trust in him; it argues much of a
thankful heart in a Christian, when he is ready upon all occasions to
acknowledge, I was such a poor creature, so mean in the world, God has done
thus for me, all these are what God has given me.

2. Take heed of being ashamed to own it before the Lord, Genesis 32.10. -- With
my staff passed I over this Jordan, and now I am become two hands. You may
observe in Scripture, it is one part of our duty in thanksgiving, to give God
the acknowledgment of what he has done for us.

3. Remember to give the Lord a real acknowledgment, that it is he who has
given thee power to get wealth; you will say how shall that be? I answer two
ways.

1. If thou do watch thy self, that the increase of thy wealth does not prove
the increase of thy lust and corruption; this is too common. Jeshurun waxed
fat, and kicked up the heel; I would have you watch your selves chiefly as to
five things.

1. That your Spirits do not heighten with your estates; the Apostle, 1 Timothy
6.17. commands Timothy to charge those that are rich in this world, that they
be not high-minded -- thereby hinting us, that riches have a malign quality to
swell our minds, and elevate our Spirits, they are things whereby a man in the
view of the world, differs from his Neighbor, and seems to excel him, now
pride takes advantage of every such thing, be it never so little, to make the
Soul to swell, and to think of itself above what it ought to think; Solomon I
think somewhere tells us, that the rich man answers roughly, when the poor
uses entreaties; this we see in the experience of every day; now there is
nothing more defiles the Soul than pride; no Soul is lower in Gods Eyes, then
that Soul that is highest in its own Eyes; hence you shall observe; that a
wicked man is often in Scripture set out under the notion of a proud man, and a
godly man under the notion of an humble man; and God is said, to resist the
proud, and to give grace to the humble; the word translated to resist,
signifies to set himself in the order of a battle against persons, and it is
observable that God is not said any where so to resist any but the proud.

2 Take heed of oppression; -- Do not rich men oppress you -- (says St. James)
and call you before the Judgment Seats; This is a sin proper to the rich, for
it supposes power, no man can do wrong to another, that has not a power
greater then his, and power must be maintained by riches; there are diverse
species of oppression; there is an oppression in Judgment, this is the sin of
unjust Judges; in short, the withholding of the hire from the labourer, of the
wages from the Servant, or any thing from another who has a right to it, by
force and power, is this sin of oppression; which indeed is the effect both of
pride and covetousness, and the proper sin of those who have much of this
worlds goods, and it is one of the crying sins against any Nation, a worm that
lies at the root of great estates, in so much as the Heathen could say, De
male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres.
that an estate ill gotten, seldom passed to the third generation.

3. Beware of Covetousness; Covetousness is an irregular desire of more than we
have, it is something strange, but an old observation, that the most of men,
the more they have, the more greedy they are to have more; the Apostle tells
us, the love of money is the root of all evil, none are under greater
temptations to love it, then those that have the most considerable portions of
it; there is a kind of bewitching quality in the good things of this life, and
our heart naturally cleaves to them, and in regard that when we have a
competent portion, we have the better foundation, and are at better advantages
to get more, commonly as our estates increase, so our love to things of this
life does more increase, and covetousness is so great an evil, that the Apostle
calls it Idolatry.

4. Beware of Luxury; Luxury is an excess in meat, drink, or apparel,
buildings, household stuff, or any thing of that nature, an affectation of an
undue use of them; the poor man has no temptation to it, being exercised
sufficiently in getting his daily bread, they are only men of estates that are
exposed to, and ordinarily brought under the power of this temptation; this is
that which the Apostle often cautioneth us against, that we should beware of
Chambering and Wantonness, that we should not mind high things, etc. Our
Savior pressing Christians duty to watch and pray, expounds it by a taking
heed we be not overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness.

5 Beware of Cowardliness in the cause of God, it is an usual Observation, that
Cities, though never so populous, yet if full of riches, seldom make any good
defense against an enemy, their love of riches prevailing against the love of
their liberties, and they are very rarely men of great estates, that will
venture themselves in the cause of God, though this be to prefer the love of
riches before the love of Christ, which whosoever does, our Savior says, is not
worthy of him, these are those ordinary temptations to sin, to which men of
great estates are exposed, and by which many often fall; I shall only say unto
you, let him that stands take heed lest he fall.

2. If you look upon your selves as Stewards of these good things, and make use
of them to the end for which God has given them to you; God has betrusted him
that is rich with many talents, not to be hid up in a Napkin, but to be laid
out, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives
us richly all things to enjoy. That they do good, that they be rich in good
works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate. This is the best
acknowledgment that we can make unto God, that by his power we have gotten our
wealth, when we are willing to lay it out at his command, when we are ready to
do good, and distribute; for with such sacrifice the Lord is well pleased; and
certainly if the Heathen, who knew nothing of the mind and will of God, yet
thought themselves concerned to look upon their estates as given them for other
uses then merely their own; Christians that have so many directions from God in
the case, should know much more.

SERMON IV.
Luke 12.15. -- For a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things
which he possesses.
THE words are the words of our Savior, brought by him as an argument against
Covetousness; you have the exhortation, take heed, and beware of Covetousness;
these words are the reason, -- For a man's life consists not in the abundance
of the things which he possesses. The whole discourse, as you may see, comes
in upon occasion of one that came to our Savior, desiring him to divide his
inheritance, as v. 13. Or to speak to his Brother to divide his inheritance
with him, which our Savior refused, v. 14. As having no call from God to be a
Civil Magistrate, a Ruler, or a Judge; from whence we may learn two things.

1. That the business of meum and tuum, of dividing and settling inheritances,
is the work of Rulers, not of the Ministers of Christ; they may have commission
from men for such employments, but they have no commission from God; it is a
work that belongs unto the Ruler.

2. That the Disciples of Christ should be afraid of meddling with things out of
their callings, it has pleased the Lord to establish an order in the world; as
an order in Creatures, that they do not enter into one another station and
works; so an order amongst men appointing unto every man what his work is; and
he ought to keep to that, and not to turn aside from it; but this impertinent
soliciting of our Savior, to this eccentrick work, gives him a fair
opportunity to press a spiritual exhortation upon them; and that is, to beware
of covetousness; the reason is in the Text, for a man's life lies not in the
abundance of the things which he possesses. I shall need no other Doctrine
then the words of the Text.

Doct. A man's life does not lie in the abundance of what he possesses. This
Doctrine will need, 1. Explication. 2. Confirmation. I will open it in two
things.

1. The continuance and preservation of a man's life, does not lie in the
abundance of what he possesses; In this sense life is taken, Genesis 45.5. -- For
God did send me before you to preserve life, Genesis 42.2. -- and buy for us from
thence, that we may live, and not die. And so often in Scripture, life
signifies the preservation and continuance of life; the continuance of the
life of man does not lie in the abundance of what he possesses; abundance is
not necessary to preserve life; the greatest abundance that we have, will not
lengthen out our lives beyond the bounds God has set; Natura paucis contenta;
we see the lives of those preserved, to whom God has not given such an
abundance in this life; and preserved to as great an advantage, as they who
have the most; Daniel, fares as well with pulse, as those that did eat of the
Kings meat.

2. Oftentimes we see it, that those who have the greatest abundance of the
things of this life, do not only die, (as it is appointed for all men) but also
they die sooner, and preserve their lives but a little; while the continuance
of this life does not lie in the abundance of that which a man possesses.

2. Life, sometimes signifies happiness; because the most of men count their
great happiness to lie in this life; therefore you shall find frequently in
Scripture, life is taken for a state of felicity, Prove. 4.23. Keep thy heart
with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life, Prove. 6.23. Reproofs
and instruction are the way of life, Prove. 16.15. In the light of the Kings
countenance is life -- that Text is to be understood of happiness, for to
understand it strictly of life, it is not true, Prove. 18.21. Death and life are
in the power of the tongue -- Ezekiel. 33.15. That walk in the Statutes of life --
Thus in Scripture sense a man is said to live, with whom it is well; I take
much of the sense to lie here; for a man's life lies not in the abundance of
the things which he possesses. The happiness of a man does not lie in the
abundance that he possesses; In the abundance, it cannot be denied but
something of a man's happiness as to this lies in some possession, by what we
have, we are kept from those anxieties from those labors which would make our
lives uncomfortable, but it does not lie in the abundance of that which he
possesses; thus you see I have dispatched the Proposition in two things.

1. An abundance of this life is not necessary to the maintenance of it; it
has been proved to you by a double proof.

1. Showing you, that those who have but little, yet may enjoy much in this
life.

2. That those who have much, are often shorter lived, and more encumbered then
others who have but little.

2. That the felicity of a man's life; the chief felicity of this life does not
lie in the abundance that he possesses; this is that which I shall endeavor
as briefly as I can to demonstrate unto you; the demonstration of it will
appear upon a due consideration, wherein the happiness of a man lies, wherein
the happiness of a man's life lies.

Reason shows that happiness must needs lie in the greatest immunity from
evil, and in the freest enjoyment of the best good, whether we take happiness
relating to this life, or to that which is to come, the nature of happiness
lies in a fruition of good, and a freedom from evil, and according to the
degree of the good we enjoy, or of the evil we are freed from, so is our
happiness; now good and evil is judged according to the differing lives that
men live; there is a natural life, and there is a spiritual life; the greatest
good of a natural life is comfort and satisfaction of mind, a contented frame
of spirit; the greatest good of a spiritual life is the enjoyment of God; so
that take it in which sense you will, it will easily be demonstrated to you,
that a man's life, the comfort and happiness of it, does not lie in the
abundance he possesses; I remember a story I have read of Pyrrhus a great
Prin. who going to Italy to fight against the Romans; Rainoldi Orat. p. 35.
Cneus Thessalus had a mind to dissuade him, he tells him; my Lord! the
Romans are Valiant and Warlike; but if we should overcome, what shall we do
then? what shall we do, says Pyrrhus? then we will conquer all Greece, and all
other Nations will yield to us; well, says Cneus, and what then? then, (says
Pyrrhus) we will go and conquer Sicily, a rich Country; that is well, says he,
but what shall we do then? then (says he) we will fall upon Africa and
Carthage; says he, but what shall we do then? Hilaritati nos trademus, and
facetis, colloquiis nos oblectabimur (says he;) Cneus replieth, but may we not
let all these things alone, which will cost much blood, and be happy without
them?

1. The abundance that a man possesses, will not give him any quiet and
satisfaction in his mind, Prove. 14.14. -- a good man shall be satisfied from
himself. The satisfaction of a man's mind is from nothing without himself, it is
in the internal content and acquiescence of his mind; this is a matter of every
days demonstration, it is plain that no man is happy that wants content and
satisfaction. Haman is a man advanced to great honor, yet he is not satisfied,
so long as Mordecai sits in the Kings Gate; so long as the desires of a man
are not filled, so long a man is not happy; now a man may have abundance, and
yet be ambitious, and yet be covetous, and looking after, and getting more, and
crying still, give, give, hence it is, that even in this world you shall see a
poor man that has little or nothing to live upon, yet live a more sweet, a
more comfortable life, then he who has a great estate.

2. A man may possess abundance as to the things of this life, and yet enjoy
nothing of God; the happiness of a natural life, lies in the satisfaction of
the mind, in a moderate enjoyment of the things of this life, but the happiness
of a spiritual life lies not here; it is possible that a man may be filled
with wind, and satisfied with that which ought not to give him any
satisfaction, though the appearing happiness of a man lies in this, and his
sensible happiness be in the rest and acquiescing of his mind in what he has;
yet the true happiness of the mind lies higher, in the enjoyment of that good
which commensurate, and adequate to the necessities of the Soul, now nothing of
good is commensurate to the necessity of the Soul, but God alone, the reason of
this lies, because a man is created under an Ordination to an eternal
existence, in a life which is beyond this life; and a man cannot be said to be
truly and perfectly happy, till he be either secured in his hope, or in his
possession of this; the possession of this is referred to another life, but the
securing of this, is in this life, by a lively hope, and by an assurance; now
every one sees that the happiness of a man's life as to this cannot lie in the
abundance of the things which he possesses; a man may possess abundance here,
and yet come short of Heaven, yea, says the Scripture; Not many rich, not many
noble. There are not many to whom the Lord gives a portion here and hereafter
too. Son (says Abraham to Dives) remember thou had thy good things in thy
lifetime, some indeed in this world are the Lords Benjamins, he serves them
with a double mess; they have much of the Creature, and much of the Creator
too, but I say this is the portion of but very few; but this is enough to have
spoken as to the opening of the point, and proving it, showing you that the
happiness of a man's life, does not lie in the abundance which he possesses; I
come now to apply it; and the great use of this point, shall be that which our
Savior makes of it.

Use 1. Take heed-therefore, and beware of Covetousness; It is an exhortation
that is much pressed upon Christians in Scripture, Heb. 13.5. Let your
conversation be without covetousness; Ephesians. 5.3. -- let it not be once named
amongst you -- Col. 3.5. -- and covetousness, which is Idolatry, Psalm. 10.3. --
the covetous whom the Lord abhors. You shall find it joined with the vilest
sins, Romans 1.29. Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication,
wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, murder, debate, deceit,
malignity, whisperens, Prove. 28.16. -- he that hates covetousness, shall
prolong his days. Ephesians. 5.5. For this you know, that no Whoremonger, nor
unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an Idolater, has any inheritance in
the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. So also 1 Cor. 6.10. Nor thieves, nor
covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the
Kingdom of God. In the further prosecution of this use, I shall do 2 things.

1. I will open to you the true notion of Covetousness.

2. I will show you by what Arguments you shall arm your selves against it, and
in particular show you the force of this argument.

There are two words in the Greek, which comprehend much of the nature of
covetousness, (...) a love of money, a love of silver, and a desire still of
having and getting in the world; Covetousness may be shortly described thus: It
is an immoderate desire of riches, and the enjoying the things in this life; a
desire of riches duly moderated and regulated, is not sinful, riches are
subsidia vitae, they are the aids of this life, as God has allotted us a time
to live in this world, and has subjected our life to many necessities, and
has created the inferior Creatures for the use and service of man, to supply
his necessities, so for a man under due circumstances to desire a share in
them, is not sinful, and cannot come under the name of Covetousness; but when
this desire exceeds its due bounds, then it becomes sinful and degenerateth
into this vice of Covetousness; in short, this corrupt habit of Covetousness
does discover itself in our hearts, by five things.

1. It discovers itself by immoderate cares, thinking and contriving how a
man should get the things of this life; there is a covetous care, and there is
a pious care, Phil. 4.6. Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer
and supplication, let your requests be made known unto God. There is a great
difference betwixt carefulness and immoderate care; we are bid in Scripture to
cast all our care upon God, 1 Pet. 5.7. Casting all your care upon him, for he
cares for you. God allows us a provident care, but he forbids a
distracting, dividing care, a Christian has better things to take care for, 1
Cor. 7.32. But I would have you without carefulness -- immoderate care argues
an immoderate desire.

2. Covetousness discovers itself by immoderate labor, we ought to labor;
In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread, it is a reproach to eat the
bread of idleness; and it is the Apostles precept, that he who will not labor,
should not eat; yet we are commanded not to labor; John 6.27. Labor not for
the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures unto everlasting
life -- So that it is only an excessive, undue labor which God forbids; but
now you will say, what is that you call immoderate care, and immoderate labor?
I answer in short, both care and labor are immoderate when they turn to the
prejudice of the body, or to the prejudice of the Soul.

1. When they turn to the prejudice of the body; there is nothing so eats a
man up, as care and solicitude, they do as it were divide the man; and what
influence labor has upon the body, the same influence care has upon the
mind; care is then immoderate, and so is labor, when it turns to the
prejudice of the Soul or Body; for in reason the Soul is better then the Body,
and the life is better then raiment; God has commanded us in the first place
to look after our Souls, and we are bound to care for them.

2. When they turn to the prejudice of the Soul, by hindering its communion
with God.

1. Either in the more inward exercises of meditation, faith, and trusting in
God.

2. Or more outward exercises, such as Prayer, and those religious duties which
God requires of us; that a man cannot find time to pray or hear the Word of
God, or to perform any religious duty which the Lord requires of him.

3. Covetousness discovers itself by using of undue means; when men will get
riches by lying, by cheating, by defrauding, by oppressing, this is a great
argument to a covetous mind; for the desire must be immoderate, which prompteth
a man to such irregular and immoderate actions as these are.

4. By an immoderate fear, when we have them, of losing them; the Apostle
speaks of some who through fear of death, were all their lives subject to
bondage, truly there are in the world men so covetous, as through fear of
poverty, and through fear of want are all their lifetime subject to bondage,
never enjoying any thing of what they have.

5. A fifth thing, which discovers a covetous mind, is a dissatisfaction in
the midst of our enjoyments, when the mind is not filled, God has given one
man more then he has given perhaps to some Families, yet his mind is not
filled, he does not say that he has enough.

6. A sixth and last thing which discovers a covetous mind, is, an immoderate
love and delight in what we have; Soul, take thine ease, (says he) thou have
goods laid up for thee for many years. Now this immoderate joy and delight
appears,

1. In the excess of a man's delight; when a man's heart is even melted into his
bags, and runs out into his gold and silver.

2. When a man can by no means endure to part with his riches; either when
nature calls for them; or when God calls for them.

1. When nature calls for our riches; for our selves for food and raiment;
for our Children to dispose them in the world; but this almost every one will
acknowledge.

2. When God calls for our estate, God calls for it when your Brethren are
in want, poor, and in prison; when you cannot part with it, when nature calls
for it, or when God by his Word calls for it, it argues a too great love and
delight in it; and consequently a too great desire of it; I beseech you take
heed and beware of this Covetousness; there are many Arguments, by which the
Scripture presses this upon you.

1. The sinfulness of it, Isa. 57.17. For the iniquity of his Covetousness I
was wroth --

2. The exceeding sinfulness of it; the Apostle calls it Idolatry. Col. 3.5.
Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which
is Idolatry. The Apostle says it is not to be named, Ephe. 5.3. But
fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not once be named
amongst you -- It is joined with the worst of sins, Romans 1.29. Such as those
who are guilty of them, shall never enter into the Kingdom of God. Being filled
with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness
-- etc. Thirdly, Consider,

3. What a root of evil it is, 1 Timothy 6.10. For the love of money is the root of
all evil, which while some coveted after they have erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows. All neglect of duty lying,
cheating, defrauding, oppressing; it is endless to reckon how many evils grow
from this one root of covetousness.

4. Consider, Fourthly, The unprofitableness of it; no man by thinking can add
one cubit to his stature; how many do we see torment themselves with care,
fear, and trouble, and labor, and when they have done all they can, they are
not able to reach to their ends. I only desire further to press upon you this
one argument of our Savior, which you have in the Text; A man's life consists
not in the abundance of the things which he possesses.

1. Consider, An abundance is not necessary to this life; ad manum est quod sat
est, says Seneca, Sudamus ad supervacanea, a moderate care, a moderate labor
is enough for necessaries, what we sweat for is usually superfluiities, an
abundance is not necessary for thy own life, nor for the life of thy Child;
something is necessary, but an abundance is not necessary; God has so
graciously ordained, that our life lies not in the abundance of what we have,
life is not maintained by the abundance of what we have.

2. Consider, An abundance will not lengthen out thy life; you see Princes,
Noblemen, and rich men, they die as well as others, something of this world, is
sometimes necessary to keep a man living, but an abundance will not lengthen
out a man's life.

3. Consider, The happiness of thy life does not lie in the abundance of what
thou have in possession; does not thy happiness lie rather in the rest, and
quiet content and satisfaction of thy mind; when thou have gotten all thy heart
can wish, all that thy Child's heart can wish, have thou in the least purchased
content to thy self, or to him? If God arms but one thought against thee, or
thy Child? it spoileth all thy satisfaction; if but an humor be disordered in
thy body, and thy self or thy Child be in a melancholy temper, all the world
will not give thy mind rest; why then do thou labor? why do thou cark and
care, and art so solicitous? thy life lies not in the abundance of the things
thou possessest; but thus much is enough for the first Exhortation; take heed,
and beware of Covetousness; and consider whatsoever has been said as to your
selves, is true as to your Children, so as you need not make that a pretense
for your immoderate desires.

Use 2. My second use is that of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.1.8. And having food and
raiment, let us be therewith content. Food and Raiment are necessaries; if the
Lord gives us but enough to cloth us, and to feed us, let us never be
concerned; mark how many arguments might be brought for this from Scripture.

1. We brought nothing into the world, we can carry nothing out of the world.

2. They that will be rich, fall into temptation, and hurtful lusts.

3. The love of money is the root of all evil.

4. Godliness with contentment is great gain; if God has given us but enough,
let us be therewith content. Agur begged no more then food convenient for him;
he prayed against riches, as well as against poverty, Genesis 28.20. See Jacobs
vow. And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, if God will be with me, and will keep me in
this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, etc.
It is a shame for Christians, they should not consider how contented the
Heathens were, and with what scorn they would look upon all the world. What!
have Christians principles below those of Heathens? there were two opinions of
Philosophers, the Stoics thought riches was no ingredient to man's happiness;
others saw a necessity of some of this worlds gooods for the exercise of
Virtue, but all agree in this, that the happiness of a man does not lie in the
abundance of the things which he possesses.

Use 3. What an opportunity does this offer to those that are poor to bless
God? The Apostle rejoiced that God had opened a door of salvation for the
Gentiles; let those that are poor in this world rejoice, and let us rejoice for
them for this door of happiness, which is opened for them by these words of our
Savior; if only the rich could be happy, if content were entailed upon them
only, then none could be happy but the rich, but blessed be God it is not so;
the poor man may be happy as well as the rich, spiritually happy as well as the
rich man.

Use 4. In the next place; see here what an encouragement here is to do good,
our Savior viewing those who were throwing into the treasury, saw some throw
in a great deal, and a poor Widow throwing in two Mites, our Savior said, she
had done more then they all; for they had thrown in out of their abundance, but
she out of her penury and want; a man's life does not lie in the abundance of
what he possesses; God does not call to you to throw away that wherein your
life lies, nor those things which are necessary for your life; he only calls
to you to throw in out of your abundance; he calls to you only for your
superfluities; and certainly it is but reasonable that we should part with
these, when God calls for them; especially if we consider that God has but
made us his Stewards of these, and has therefore given us them: that we should
at his command part with them.

Use 5. If a man's life, the happiness of it does not lie in the abundance of
what he possesses; if God has not laid up your life in them, do not you lay
up your life in them your selves.

1. Do not make it your business for to get them; do not desudare ad
supervacanea, do not let the business of your life be to load your self with
thick clay, Habbak. 2.6. There is a woe denounced unto him who thus loadeth
himself, -- Woe to him that increases that which is not his; how long! and to
him that ladeth himself with thick clay.

2. Be not tormented, if the Lord depriveth you of some of your riches; blessed
be God, your life does not lie in them, they are not your happiness; they could
not preserve your life when you had them, let them not destroy you, now you
want them; they could not make you happy in the enjoyment of them, do not make
your selves miserable in the want and deprivation of them.

SERMON V. VI, VII, VIII.
2 Timothy 1.8. Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of
me his prisoner, but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel,
according to the power of God.
MY Text you see is in the Epistle of Paul to Timothy, the second Epistle that
he wrote to him. Who this Timothy was, the Scripture abundantly tells us, the
name signifies one that fears God; it was the usual course of Parents in
those days to give their Children names, that might either express their sense
of the mercy that God had given them, as Samuel [begged of God] Reuben [see a
Son,] Simeon [hearing] Levi [joined] Judah [praise;] or such as might express
the Childrens duty to God; such was this name Timothy; some think Timothy was
born at Lystra, a place in Asia; there Paul found him, Acts 16.1.2. Then came
he to Derbe and Lystra; and behold a certain Disciple was there, named
Timotheus, the Son of a certain Woman, which was a Jewess, and believed; but
his Father was a Greek. Which was well reported of by the Brethren that were at
Lystra and Iconium. chap. 14.6. They were aw^re of it, and fled unto Lystra and
Derbe, Cities of Lycaonia -- His Father was a Greek, his Mother was a Jew, Acts
16.1. Her name was Eunice, her Mother Lois, they brought him up from a Child in
the knowledge of the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 1.5. When I call to mind the unfeigned
faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois, and thy
Mother Eunice, and I am persuaded that in thee also, chap. 3.41, 15. But
continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and have been assured of,
knowing of whom thou have learned them. And that from a Child thou have known
the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation, through
faith in Christ Jesus. His Father being a Greek, he was not circumcised at his
birth, but afterward, Acts 16.1, 2, 3. After which, Paul took him about with
him in his Travels, and made great use of him; sometimes he was sent as a
Messenger, 1 Timothy 5.11. Sometimes as a Preacher, and he had many bodily
weaknesses, so as he was glad to drink a little wine for his stomach sake, but
he abounded with excellent graces, faith, wisdom, temperance, he was at last
ordained a Minister with the imposition of the hands of the Presbytery, 2 Timothy
1.6. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift of God,
which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands, the Apostle tells us he had
none like minded to him, Phil. 2.19.20, 21, 22. But I trust in the Lord Jesus,
to send Timotheus shortly unto you, that I also may be of good comfort, when I
know your state. V. 20.
For I have no man like minded, who will naturally care for your state. For all
seek their own, V. 21.
not the things which are Jesus Christ's. V. 22.
But you know the proof of him, that as a Son with the Father, he has served
with me in the Gospel; he calls him his Brother, his Beloved Son, faithful in
the Lord, his natural Son in the faith, the Minister of God, his fellow helper,
he joineth him with himself. At last he leaves him at Ephesus, but he seems
not to have been there when he wrote this Epistle, 2 Timothy 4.12. And Tychicus
have I sent to Ephesus. This Epistle seems to have been written the last of
the Epistles, and a little before Paul's death, 2 Timothy 4.6. For I am now ready
to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. Paul died (as is said)
in the 37th year after Christ, in the 14th year of the reign of Nero.

This Epistle, as the rest, consists of a Preface, wherein is showed the
substance of the Gospel, the Preface is in the five first verses.

The substance of the Epistle is hortatory, consolatory, and minatory; he
exhorts Timothy, v. 6. To stir up the gift of God that was in him -- and this
he presses by some arguments. v. 6.7. For God has not given us the spirit of
fear, but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind; in the verse where the
text is, he exhorts him, not to be ashamed of the testimony of our Lord Jesus
Christ, nor of him, though a prisoner, but be thou partaker of the afflictions
of the Gospel, which he presses by several arguments, to the end of the 12th
verse.

This verse is made up of an Exhortation, and the Argument, the Exhortation is
in three branches.

1. Not to be ashamed of the testimony of the Lord Jesus.

2. Not to be ashamed of St. Paul, who was at this time a prisoner.

3. To partake of the afflictions of the Gospel; the Propositions of the text
are these.

Prop. 1. That Ministers and Christians have a testimony to give unto our Lord
Jesus Christ, in the giving of which, they are not to decline a Prison.

Prop. 2. That it is the duty of faithful Ministers and People not to be
ashamed to give this testimony, nor of others when they do give it.

Prop. 3. There are Afflictions that are proper to the Gospel.

Prop. 4. That both Ministers and People ought to be partakers of the
afflictions of the Gospel.

Prop. 5. It must be through the power of God, that any one is enabled to
partake of the afflictions of the Gospel. According to the power of God. It is
the third of these only that I intend to make the subject of my discourse, the
others will fall in in the handling of that.

Prop. That it is the duty both of Gospel Ministers, and Christians owning the
Gospel, not to be ashamed of the testimony of Jesus Christ, nor of the
afflictions of the Gospel, but to be partakers of them.

In the handling of this Proposition there are these Questions, which I shall
speak unto in their order.

Qu. 1. What is meant by the testimony of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Qu. 2. What afflictions are they, which are said to be the afflictions of the
Gospel?

Qu, 3. When may men be said to be ashamed of the Testimony of our Lord, and
how far are we bound not to be so?

Qu. 4. Why are we bound not to be ashamed of the testimony of Christ, and why
ought we not to be partakers of the afflictions of the Gospel?

Qu. 1. What is meant by the testimony of our Lord Jesus Christ?

A Testimony is an attestation which any one gives concerning any person, or
concerning any thing; In every testimony there is to be considered three things.

1. The Person, who gives the Testimony.

2. The Thing, to which the Testimony is given.

3. The Way, by which the Testimony is given. As to the present Testimony of
which we are speaking, the Persons that give it, are the Ministers of the
Gospel, such a one was Timothy, but they are not all so, Rev. 6.9. St. John
says, -- I saw under the Altar, the Souls of them that were slain for the Word
of God, and for the testimony which they held; every Minister is a special
witness, and to bear his Testimony, and every good Christian is also to be a
witness. It is said of Christ, 1 Timothy 6.13. -- who before Pontius Pilate
witnessed a good confession; every Christian ought in this to be conformable
unto Christ.

2. Another thing which is to be considered in a Testimony, is the thing or
person to which it relates, for the term Testimony is a Relative word, and the
proper Correlate to it is Truth, which relates again either to a Proposition,
or to a matter of fact; no person can be under any obligation to give Testimony
to a lie, but now truth relates either to a Proposition, or to a fact; every
man is a debtor to the truth, and is bound as a man to bear Testimony. Christ
tells Pilate, John 18.37. -- to this end was I born, and for this cause came
I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth -- but when I speak
of the testimony that every good Christian is bound to give, I understand it
not thus largely; for though it be that every good man is under an obligation
to testify the truth in any cause, yet the Ministers of the Gospel, and every
good Christian is under a more special obligation to give testimony to some
truths, and these are the truths of the Gospel, the truths that relate to Jesus
Christ; this is that the text calls, the Testimony of our Lord, which may be
taken in a double sense.

1. Either for that Testimony which our Lord bare of himself.

2. Or the Testimony which every good Christian is bound to give to the truths
of the Gospel. Christ bare a Testimony of himself; he testified that he was the
son of God, that he was the King of Zion, that he was the true Messiah; but I
understand it yet larger; every Minister of the Gospel, and every good
Christian is obliged to bear a Testimony to the great truths of the Gospel,
which relate to Jesus Christ, as our Lord and Savior; there is a Testimony
which he ought to bear to those Propositions of truth, and to those matters of
fact, which the Gospel contains and relates concerning Jesus Christ as the
Savior of the world.

3. The third thing which is considerable in a Testimony, is the way of giving
it; the proper giving a Testimony, is by the words of our mouth; either with an
oath, or without an oath; it is one thing for a man to believe a Proposition,
and another thing for him to give Testimony to a Proposition; he believes a
Proposition, that hearing it, does in heart consent and agree to it, that the
Predicate is well fitted to the Subject, whether he speaks a word, yea, or
no; but he testifies, that with his words owneth and declares his faith, Romans
10.10. For with the heart man believes unto Righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto Salvation. It is not enough for a Christian secretly in
his heart to agree to the truths of the Gospel, but he is bound to give a
Testimony; If thou shall therefore confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus
Christ, and shall believe in thy heart that God has raised him from the dead,
thou shall be saved. You may observe, there are two things made necessary to to
Salvation.

1. A heart believing the Proposition of the Gospel.

2. An external confession or profession.

There is a double confession, a Christians duty.

1. A confession of sin.

2. A confession of truth.

Either confession is an open acknowledgment with our lips, thus you read in
Scripture frequently of confessing of Christ, only it may be there is this
difference betwixt a Testimony and confession; any open, asserting,
vindicating, and defending Christ and his Gospel, is giving a Testimony, but
when it is done in the face of Enemies, in despite of opposition, this is
confession, Matthew. 10.32. Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him
will I confess also before my Father which is in Heaven, Luke 12.8. --
whosoever shall confess me before men -- thus, John 12.42. Many believed on
him; but because of the Pharisees, they did not confess him. So that the
testimony of the Lord Jesus Christ signifies, that open acknowledgment of
Christ, and profession of the truths of the Gospel, relating to Christ, which
is the duty of every good Christian.

Qu. 2. What is here meant by the afflictions of the Gospel.

The Original does something differ, (...), suffer thou evils together with the
Gospel; where the Gospel is brought in as if it were a Person by a figure; a
Person that is subject to evils. Timothy is exhorted to suffer evil with the
Gospel; this leads me to the consideration what those afflictions are, what
those evils are to which the Gospel is subjected; there are several evils to
which the Gospel is subjected, or rather evils from three sorts of persons.

1. From the true Professors of it; such as own Christ in truth and sincerity.

2. From the false and seeming Professors of it.

3. From the professed enemies of it.

The afflictions of the Gospel are the afflictions which men are subjected to,
from their owning and professing of the Gospel, and these I say are from 3
sorts of Persons.

1. From such as are the true and sincere professors of it, they may bite and
devour one another, and be thorns and goads in one another sides. These
commonly are so from one of these two heads.

1. From an overheated zeal for the maintaining of different apprehensions in
some matters of truth.

2. From such corruptions as do attend Gods people, considered as men, made up
of flesh and blood.

1. From an immoderate zeal for the maintaining of different apprehensions in
some matters of truth; truth is an uniform thing, and is but one; two
contradictory Propositions cannot be true; but since the fall of man none have
the same apprehensions, there are different apprehensions concerning truth; it
is true, we have the promise of the Spirit of truth to guide us, and to lead us
into all truth; but the sense of the promise must not be extended so far, that
because all Christians have the spirit of God, therefore they shall all be
guided, that they shall not have misapprehensions in a Proposition of truth,
they shall be guided into all necessary truth, they shall not miscarry in any
apprehension of truth, upon which the salvation of their Souls depend; but they
may be mistaken as to a multitude of particular Propositions, one may judge one
thing, and another another thing, yet they all hold the foundation the
fundamental truths of the Gospel; but they may have very different
apprehensions as to some particular truths: now through an over-weaning opinion
of our own apprehensions, there are very great differences, and also hard
censurings and condemnings of one another, and these are great afflictions, but
such as have attended the Gospel from the very beginning; they were such
different apprehensions that caused the first Christian Synod. Acts 15.1, Some
came and taught the necessity of circumcision -- such differences there were,
Romans 14.2. For one believes he may eat all things, another who is weak eats
herbs; hence they judged, despised, condemned and censured one another, and the
Apostle persuadeth to a friendly carriage one toward another, a mutual
forbearance one of another, in these different apprehensions in matters of
truth of a lighter nature; men's immoderate zeal for their own opinions, have in
all times begot great heats, and have caused great afflictions to the Ministers
of the Gospel, and to the Professors of it, and have been a great root of
bitterness amongst Gods own people, we have seen enough of it in the age, and
in this part of the Church, wherein the Lord has cast our lot.

2. Another root of this bitterness has been, Those passions that the best of
men have been subject to. Elijah was a great man of God, yet, Jam 5.17. Elias
was a man subject to like passions as we are -- and the Apostle writing to the
Corinthians, tells them, 1 Cor. 3.3. -- Whereas there is among you envying
and strife, and divisions, are you not carnal? the Apostle tells us, Jam.
4.5. -- that the Spirit that is in us lusts to envy. Envy is a peevish
passion, it makes us to repine at the good of another, and though it ought to
be rooted out of the heart of Gods people, and is in a great measure, yet
something of it remains, and it is very often seen, that when some Ministers
of the Gospel excel others in Parts, or in Grace, or private Christians so
exceed; through this lust of envy which is in the hearts of others, they are
exposed to censures, and to be evil spoken of, others grudging at them; which
are all fruits of the old man which are in us, strife, and contention, Acts
15.39. And the contention was so sharp betwixt them, that they departed
asunder, one from the other, the difference betwixt Paul and Barnabas was so
very small, that it was only whether they should carry John with them, yea, or
no, but it waxed so hot, that Paul and Barnabas upon it left one another, Paul
went one way, and Barnabas went another way, these are some of the afflictions
of the Gospel, not caused by the Gospel, but incident to them who promote the
Gospel.

2. But a second sort of men that raise up afflictions to the Ministers and
Professors of the Gospel, are false Brethren; men who have received the truth,
but not in the love of it, who from some lusts would pervert the Gospel of
Christ, and become great enemies to the sincere Professors of it, and that
chiefly two ways.

1. By broaching and publishing some Doctrines that are contrary to the truths
of the Gospel, the Apostle experienced some of these in the first beginning of
the Gospel; no sooner was the Gospel preached in Galatia, but there arose some
that troubled them, and would pervert the Doctrine of Christ; upon this account
it is, that the Apostle to the Philippians calls the Jews those of the
concision, St. John tells you of many Antichrists that arose in his time, so
as you read something of this in almost every Epistle of the Apostles, these
things have constantly given a great deal of trouble to the faithful Ministers
of the Gospel, and also them who have been the sincere Professors of it.

2. By aspersing the faithful Ministers and Professors of the Gospel, to lessen
their reputation, and make them odious unto people, sometimes affixing crimes
to them that they never designed in their hearts, sometimes by aspersing them
as weak and unlearned men; you shall see this was a great art they used against
St. Paul, as you will observe by reading over the Epistle of Paul to the
Galatians, and his Epistles to the Corinthians, this makes him speak so much
in his own defense, and in the commendation and magnifying of his Office, nay,
they speak of him as if he were a reprobate, they sought a proof of Christ in
him, 2 Cor. 13.3. which caused him to say, Since you seek a proof of Christ
speaking in me, which to you-ward is not weak -- and v. 4. -- for we also are
weak in him, but we shall live with him by the power of God; he says, v. 6.
But I trust you shall know we are not reprobates. v. 7. -- I pray to God that
you do no evil -- but that you should do that which is honest, though we be as
reprobates. These are a sort and kind of afflictions which the Gospel of Christ
has always met with in the true Professors of it; now the root of this is
nothing but wrath, and malice, and envy, lust lives and reigns in the hearts
of such, who though they have made a profession of the truth, yet they never
received it in the love of it.

3. The afflictions of the Gospel are those afflictions which are brought upon
the faithful Ministers and Professors of the Gospel for their Profession, from
the open and professed enemies of it; now these are to be considered in their
kinds, and in their causes; In their kinds; In short, they are all sorts of
external afflictions, man can kill the body, and hurt the outward man, but he
can do no more; but so far as they can, they will go; reproaches and calumnies
respecting men in their honor and reputation, rifling their estates, casting
them into Prisons, taking away their lives; in short, whatsoever can be
afflictive to the outward man, for there are no sort of external afflictions,
but we shall find that the true and sincere Professors of the Gospel have met
with, James was killed with the Sword, Stephen was stoned to death; the
Apostles were often imprisoned, others, as the Apostle says, had trial of
cruel mockings, and scourgings, yea, of bonds and imprisonments, they were
stoned, they were sawn asunder, they were tempted, they were slain with the
Sword, they wandered about in Sheepskins, and in Goat Skins, being tormented,
of whom the world was not worthy; the story of Scripture, and the story of the
several Martyrs does sufficiently tell us what the afflictions of the Gospel
are, but why the Gospel should suffer such things, or men should suffer such
things for the publishing, owning, and professing the Gospel, may seem a little
wonderful, and deserves a further enquiry; for if we consider the nature of
the Gospel, the very import of the word is no other then a good message, or
good tidings; the Angel gave the Gospel its true name; when he proclaimed, Luke
2.10. -- behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all
people. So as there is nothing in the whole systeme of the Gospel, that can
deserve any hatred of it, the Gospel is nothing else but that good saying,
that, Jesus Christ is come into the world to save Sinners; -- That God so loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him
should have everlasting life; what has Christ done? or what is there in the
Gospel that should provoke the lusts and passions of men to give any
opposition, that there should be any affliction entailed to the Gospel?

1. I answer, the true root of this lies in that enmity which God has set
betwixt the Woman and her seed, and the Serpent and his seed, you have it, Genesis
3.15. And I will put enmity betwixt thee and the Woman, and betwixt thy seed
and her seed -- the Woman's seed was Christ, the Serpents seed are vile, wicked,
and ungodly men, there is an enmity, an implacable enmity betwixt these two,
and so long as the world endures, this enmity will abide, and the Devil will
be managing a design to drive Christ, and the Gospel of Christ out of the
world; all the reproaches of Ministers and Godly Christians, all their bonds
and imprisonments which they suffer for the Gospel, they are but the fruits and
product of this enmity, this hatred and antipathy which is betwixt Christ and
the Devil, and the seed of Christ, and the seed of the Devil.

2. Another reason of it lies in the nature of the Propositions of the Gospel,
as to the Doctrine of faith, and as to the precepts of the Gospel, so far as it
concerns holiness, the sublimity of the first, and the purity of the latter,
and its exceeding strictness. The sublimeness of the Doctrine of faith, raises
it two sorts of enemies.

1. The ignorant persons of the world.

2. Those men who have idolized their own reason, and are determined to believe
nothing but what they can fathom by their own reason.

1. For the first, ignorant Persons; the Apostle tells us of some who speak
evil of what they know not, there is nothing more unworthy of a man then this,
yet there is nothing more ordinary, especially when men apprehend the ways and
persons that they speak evil of, are enemies to their lusts and corruptions,
the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8. -- we speak the wisdom of God in a
mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God ordained, before the world unto our
glory. Which none of the Princes of this world knew, for had they known it,
they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. The wisdom of God signifies
the Gospel of Christ, and the Apostle says, the Princes of this world did not
know it, for if they had, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. The
most ignorant persons, if they be also loose in their lives, are enemies to the
Gospel of Christ.

2. Men that have idolized their own reason, and entertained a fancy that they
should comprehend the highest mysteries of the Kingdom of God, that which
makes them enemies to the Gospel of Christ, is their zeal; they are puffed up
in their own opinion of their own reason, and are certain enemies to whatever
they cannot comprehend with it; now the Doctrines of the Gospel being of that
nature, that sublime nature, that ignorant persons cannot comprehend them, and
men of reason cannot fathom them with their own reason, they become enemies
unto them, and to the true Professors of them; hence it was that the
Philosophers of old were such enemies to the Gospel of Christ.

2. As the sublimity of the Propositions of the Gospel is one great reason of
the opposition which it meets with in the world; so the exceeding purity and
holiness of the precepts of the Gospel is another reason; take the Gospel, as
it brings news of a Savior who died for sinners, it pleases them well
enough; but look upon it as it contains a systeme of precepts, an obedience
to which, must be given in order to the obtaining of that salvation, so it
quite crosses the grain of flesh and blood, as it teaches us that no
Drunkard, no Fornicator, no Swearer shall come into the Kingdom of God, thus
they cannot approve of it; and this makes them enemies, as to the Doctrine of
the Gospel, so to the Ministers and Professors of it; for though they have so
much lust as will not suffer them to comply with the Doctrine of the Gospel,
yet they have also so much pride, that they cannot endure themselves to be
contradicted, and outdone by the Professors of it; but this is enough to show
you what the afflictions of the Gospel are, of which the Apostle would have
Timothy content to be a partaker; and what that testimony of Christ is, of
which he would not have him to be ashamed; I come now to the next Question.

Qu. 3. When men may be said to be ashamed of the Testimony of our Lord; and
what the meaning is, to be partakers of the afflictions of the Gospel?

To be ashamed of the testimony of Christ, I conceive signifies two things.

1. To be ashamed, or afraid to give a testimony unto Christ, and to the truth
of the Gospel, to be afraid to give a testimony of Christ, because of the
opposition of men is a great sin; it is contrary to the precept. Fear not them
who can kill the body, and can do no more, but fear him that is able to cast
Body and Soul into Hellfire -- but to be ashamed of this testimony, is a
greater sin; because the temptation is higher under the former, then under the
latter; to be ashamed of the testimony of Christ, is to decline, to own, and
profess Jesus Christ; when there is no great danger that threatens us in such
a Profession, we have an High Priest that can have compassion upon our
infirmities -- but when no such danger threatens a man, only he may suffer a
little in his honor and repute amongst men, and they may not have so good an
opinion of him, and for this to decline the public owning and professing of
Christ, it must needs be a very great sin; it is a dreadful Text, Mark. 8.38.
Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and
sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes
in the glory of his Father with the holy Angels. For a man to be afraid to own
Christ and his Gospel, and the profession of it, when utmost danger threatens
him, is sin enough; it arguing that the fear of man prevails in him above the
fear of God; but for a man, when no such danger threatens him, to be ashamed,
and to think it beneath him to own the Gospel, and to love the honor that is
from men, before the honor that comes from God, is a very dreadful
transgression.

2. That man is ashamed of the testimony of Christ, That is ashamed of others,
for the testimony which they bear to Jesus Christ; I must confess, I think this
is that which the Apostle here chiefly intends, Paul was now a Prisoner, and
at Rome, the condition of Prisoners you know, is a low and contemptible
condition, now for a person to be ashamed to be a friend, or companion, or to
own the relation to, and acquaintance with any, because they are giving a
testimony to Christ, and for that testimony are hated, maligned, and
persecuted, is to be ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, It is reported of
that famous Emperor Constantine the Great, that he would often kiss the hole of
Paphnutius's eye, that was bored out for the profession of the Gospel.

What is the meaning of the phrase, (...) -- Be thou partaker of the
afflictions of the Gospel --

1. Negatively; it does not imply that it is the will of God, that any man
should throw himself into the afflictions of the Gospel, the best of
afflictions are trials and temptations, no man ought to pull trials upon
himself, we read indeed of some in the Primitive times that offered themselves
to the stake, and owned. themselves to be Christians, ambitious of the Crown of
Martyrdom, but these things are miranda, to be admired, not imitanda, to be
imitated; no man is bound to put his self upon suffering afflictions, no not in
defense of the Gospel of Christ, we ought to see our call clear to suffering,
as well as doing; in that sense therefore this precept must not be understood.
But,

2. It speaks unto every Christian to expect that his owning and professing
of the Gospel, should meet with afflictions; and to be content to take a share
in them, Be thou partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel -- look that the
Gospel should be afflicted, and be contented to take thy share with the Gospel
in its afflictions; our Savior tells us; That no Prince goes out to war
with another, but he first sits down, and considers whether he with 10000
shall be able to meet with his enemy with 20000. Christians; before men
undertake the profession of the Gospel, they ought to sit down and consider
what the Gospel will cost them; for the tempers of our spirits under divine
providence, are much according to our expectation; if we expect nothing but
good, and meet with nothing but evil, the evil sinketh us, we did not look for
it, Mala inopinata graviora; but this is not all, to be content to take our
part in afflictions with the Gospel, if God calls us to suffer for owning and
professing the Gospel of Christ, and not think it strange; we should not
murmr and repine against it, or take any unlawful course to decline; but to
cast our lot with Professors, and to take our share with them, and to be
content to suffer evil with them, who suffer for the name of Christ, or for the
profession of any of his truths; nay, it may be there is something more our
duty than this; and that is, to rejoice that we are counted worthy to suffer
any thing for the name of our Lord Jesus, Acts 5.41. Singing in the prison into
which we are thrown, as Paul and Silas did; taking the spoiling of our goods
with joy.

3. Nay, there is something more in this phrase, viz. a suffering together with
others that suffer for the Gospel, though we do not suffer at all, and indeed
this is properly (...); we ought to have a sympathy with the Gospel, and the
Professors of it, it is that which the Apostle urges, and thus it answers
that text Romans 12.15. Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them
that weep: both these are put together in that phrase, in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, Heb. 10.34. For you had compassion of me in my bonds, and took
joyfully the spoiling of your goods -- Both these are the duty of good
Christians; to suffer with them that suffer for the Gospel; and to be content
to suffer themselves, if God calls them to it in defense of the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ; as the Apostle had upon him the care of all the Churches, 2
Cor. 11.28, 29. So he had upon him the sorrow and affliction of all the Church
of Christ; the Apostle in that Chap. v, 23. tells us what stripes, what
imprisonments, what deaths he was in; and then he tells us, that he did not
thus only suffer with, and for the Gospel, but also he was afflicted, and he
burned with others; and this is the duty of every Christian, they ought to
partake joyfully, and with satisfaction to take their share in those
afflictions, to which the preaching or owning the Gospel does expose them, and
also to bear the burdens of others, and to be content to suffer with them, to
bear some share in their sorrow; in their trials and afflictions. I come to the
next question.

Qu. 4. Whence arises this obligation upon Christians; and why are they thus
to partake of the afflictions of the Gospel, and not to be ashamed of the
testimony of our Lord?

This Question has two Branches.

Qu. 1. Whence arises this obligation upon them not to be ashamed to give this
Testimony, nor of it when given?

Qu. 2. Whence arises this obligation upon Christians to be partakers of the
afflictions of the Gospel?

For the first of these; whence this obligation does arise upon Christians not
to be ashamed of the testimony of our Lord? I shall open it to you in seven or
eight particulars.

1. From the will of God. This is the true and proper foundation of all duty;
the will of God, and the duty of Christians are Correlates; nothing can be our
duty toward God, but what is the will of God toward us, and nothing can be
the will of God toward us, but it must become our duty; this is the will of
God; it is the will of God that we should not be ashamed of the testimony of
our Lord; neither our selves, to give testimony unto Christ nor his Gospel, nor
yet of them who do give such testimony. It is indeed the will of God concerning
some more eminently then others; but concerning all Christians, it is the will
of God; it is spoken concerning all, Romans 10.9. That if thou shall confess with
thy mouth, the Lord Jesus Christ, and shall believe in thine heart that God
has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved, Mat. 10.32. Whosoever
therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father
which is in Heaven. The Apostle writes to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 3.3. That
no man should be moved by these afflictions, for your selves know that we are
appointed thereunto, Col. 4.12. It is the duty of Christians to be complete in
all the will of God. It is not only the will of God that men should pray, that
they hear the word, and receive the Sacrament, but they should give their
testimony, and not be ashamed of the testimony of Christ their Lord, 2 Timothy
4.5. Watch thou in all things, endure afflictions -- 2 Timothy 2.3. Thou therefore
endure hardness, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. Ministers and good
Christians are witnesses; and they are Soldiers, and therefore they ought to
endure hardness, and to be ready to give their testimony.

2. It appears from the relation that every good Christian stands in to
Christ as his Lord; (...); mark the words, that thou be not ashamed of the
testimony of our Lord; every subject is bound to give his testimony for the
King, because he is his Sovereign Lord; every Servant is bound to give his
testimony for his Master, because he is his Lord: Christ is our Lord, and
therefore there lies an obligation upon us to give testimony for him; would
not your Prince take it ill, if you should refuse being called, to testify the
truth for him? and would not your Master take it ill, if you should refuse to
give your temony for him? Surely Christ, who is our Lord, must take it ill from
us, if we refuse a testimony to him. If every man, because that he is a debtor
to the truth, takes himself obliged by the law of Charity to give a testimony
to the truth for his Neighbor, when his estate, or his life is concerned, or
any thing of his interest: and every Subject takes himself more highly
concerned to give his testimony to the truth on the behalf of his Prince, or on
the behalf of his Master, because there is a relation betwixt the Prince and
the Subject, and betwixt the Master and the Servant; certainly there must needs
lie an obligation upon every Christian who owneth Christ as his Sovereign Lord
and Master, to give a testimony unto Christ; it is a testimony for the
Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, for him whom we call our Father, whom we
own as our Master; every Testimony to the Gospel, and the truth of the Gospel
is a testimony to Christ; every testimony for Christ, is a testimony for him,
who is our Lord, and whom we own, and avow to be our Lord.

3. This obligation arises from that gratitude which we all owe to the Lord
Jesus Christ, every one looks upon himself indebted unto him who has done
him good; and there is nothing more usual in that case, then to promise a
requital, and to express a trouble that we know not how to make him or her
amends, and to express our willingness to it; the testimony of our Lord, is the
testimony of him who left his Fathers Throne, and came down upon the Earth, and
clothed himself with our nature, and died in our stead, that we might not
perish for ever and ever, he ascending up into Heaven, has left us in charge
with his truth, Philip. 1.27. -- striving together for the faith of the Gospel,
Jude, v. 3. -- that you should earnestly contend for the faith which was once
delivered unto the Saints. Now which of you, if you had but an ordinary friend
like your selves, who had done you some great and eminent kindness, and left
you in charge but to give a testimony unto him and for him, should not think
your selves under an obligation to it! Oh! how great is the obligation which
lies upon every Christian that lives in the world to bear his testimony for
Christ, if he does but consider what Jesus Christ has done for him; shall
Christ come and die for us, love not his life unto death, and shall we be
ashamed to give a testimony unto him, or to be partakers of the afflictions of
the Gospel of our dearest Lord, this ought not to be; if the kindness of a man
lays an obligation upon us, to do what in us lies to serve him; surely the
kindness of the Lord our Savior lays a much higher obligation upon us.

4. Another thing from whence this obligation does arise, is from the duty
incumbent upon us to be conformable unto the Lord Jesus Christ, we ought to
study a conformity to him in his life, and in his death; in his life he
commands us to be holy as he is holy; in his death, thus the Apostle prays,
for a fellowship of his sufferings. For this cause was I born, and for this
cause did I come into the world, that I might bear witness unto the truth; and
it is particularly said of him, that before Pontius Pilate, he witnessed a good
confession, 1 Timothy 6.13. He endured affliction in the first publication of the
Gospel; what was the testimony Christ gave but this? that there were a people
in the world who were very dear to him, chosen unto eternal life for him,
though he was the eternal Son of God, thought fit to cloth himself with flesh,
and to die upon the Cross, that he might redeem this people unto himself; now
it is our duty to be conformable to Christ, conformable to this testimony, not
being ashamed of this testimonony, conformable also in not being ashamed of
Affliction; this yet is advantaged by another consideration: that we are to
fill up the Afflictions of Christ, Col. 1.24. Who now rejoice in my sufferings
for you, and fill up that which is behind of the Afflictions of Christ. The
sufferings of Christ are either those things which he suffered in his own
person: Now concerning them, he said, all is finished, (the Papists vainly
dream of the filling up of those sufferings;) or else those sufferings which
every good Christian shall suffer in his Mystical Body to the end of the World,
and there is much behind of the sufferings of Christ, which we are to fill up,
and filling them up, we act both in a conformity unto Christ, who is our Head,
and also unto the multitude of the Churches that have gone before us, who have
tasted of this Cup, and drank a little of it, but there is much more of these
that is yet to be filled up.

5. The Obligation arises upon Christians from the nature of the Gospel, and
the truths of it, to which we give our Testimony. I have told you before in
this Discourse, that every Man and Woman is a Debtor to truth, no Man ought to
decline a Testimony unto truth; but now by how much any truths are of greater
moment, of greater weight and importance, by so much we are the greater Debtors
to them; you have the substance of the Gospel in that one Text, 1 Timothy 1.15.
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ
came into the World to save Sinners. He said true, who said that Christians
could better want the Sun in the Firmament, than that one piece of the Gospel;
the truths of the Gospel are of that high importance, that the comfort and
peace of all the Souls of the People of God in this Life, and the eternal
Salvation of the Souls of all People in the Life to come, does depend upon the
stability of them; if the truths of the Gospel did not stand firm and fixed,
the Souls of Christians are undone to all eternity, there is no foundation of
peace for them in this Life, there is no hope of an eternal Salvation for them
in that Life which is to come: We stand therefore highly concerned to give a
Testimony to these truths; and to be partakers of afflictions in giving a
Testimony to those truths, and to that Gospel, upon which so much of our
eternal interest and concern does lie, there is no truth but we owe a Testimony
to it, but there are some Propositions of Truth, that are not of that moment,
that we should endure affliction for the justification of them; but the truths
of the Gospel are of that nature that no Testimony we can give to them can be
too high no affliction we can suffer for them, can be too great.

6. A Sixth Obligation that lies upon Christians, is from the station they
take up in the World; I shall here enlarge upon Three things; 1. They are God's
Witnesses. 2. They are God's Soldiers. 3. They are God's Children and Servants,
and Christ's Members.


1. Every Christian is the Child of God, the Servant of God, the Member of
Christ, now should a Child be ashamed to attest the truth for his Father? or
should a Servant be ashamed to attest the truth for his Master? or should a
Member be ashamed to attest the truth for its Head? should the Tongue be
ashamed to speak for the Head? Which of you that are Parents, if you had a
Child that should be ashamed (if called) to speak the truth for you, would not
disown such a Child? There is never a Christian but is the Son or the Daughter
of God, the Child of God; and his relation to God does oblige him not to be
ashamed of this Testimony.

2. We stand in the Relation of Witnesses; 1 Pet. 5. Chapter v. 1. Paul calls
himself a Witness of the sufferings of Christ, Acts 1.8. Christ when he left
the Earth told his Disciples, You shall receive power, after that the Holy
Ghost be come upon you, and you shall be Witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem,
and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the Earth.
Indeed good Christians ought some to be special Witnesses, Acts 10.41. Not to
all the People, but unto Witnesses, chosen before of God. But every Child of
God is the Lord's Witness; though there lies an eminent Obligation upon some,
(especially the Ministers of the Gospel) yet every Child of God is to be the
Lord's Witness, and to give his Testimony for God.

3. Every Christian stands in the Notion of a Soldier; hence the Apostle
speaks to Timothy to endure hardship as a good Soldier of Christ, all
Christians are required to fight the good Fight, and our Life upon Earth is but
a Warfare; wherein we are to fight the good Fight, and shall a Soldier decline
the Fight, and refuse to be partaker of the Battle? How shall we discharge
either the relation of Children to our Father, or Servants to our Lord, or
Members to our Head, or Witnesses, or Soldiers, if we shall either be ashamed
of the Testimony of Christ, or afraid to be partakers of the afflictions of the
Gospel:

7. Another Obligation that is upon us, is from those private Laws that we have
laid upon our selves; and that two ways.

1. By our Baptism.

2. By our Profession.

We are all Baptized, and the Apostle says, we are Baptized into Christ; one
part of the sense of which is, that we are Baptized into the profession of
Christ; no person is Baptized, but he takes a Vow upon him to be the Lord's
Servant; besides, our profession is another private Law that we have laid upon
our selves; the name of a Christian is an Obligation upon us to act for Christ,
and to serve the Lord Jesus Christ; the Press-mony you know obliges the
Subject to fight for his Prince; there is no Christian but besides the general
Laws that are laid upon him, has laid a private Law upon himself, both by his
Vow and Promise in Baptism, and by his taking upon him the name of a Christian;
how does he deserve the name of a Christian, that is ashamed of the Testimony
of the Lord Jesus Christ; how does he answer his Vow in Baptism, that refuses
to fight under the Lords Banner, and to give a Testimony unto Christ, when he
is called thereunto.

8. There lies a great Obligation upon us from our duty of conformity to our
Fellow Members, we are not only the Members of Christ, but are also Members one
of another, Ephesians. 4.25. For we are Members one of another. The Church of
Christ from the beginning of the World, unto the end of it will be but one, and
we ought to be as Members like one another, so that the example of the Saints
and Servants of God in all Ages, who have stood up in testimony of the Gospel,
or who have been partakers of the Afflictions of the Gospel, lays an
Obligation upon us to go and do likewise; that as we might have a fellowship
with Christ in his Death, and in his Testimony, and his Afflictions, so that we
might be conformable unto those Saints and Servants of God which have been
before us, and to their Testimony; John glories in this, and puts into his
Titles, Rev. 1.2. Who bare record of the word of God, and of the Testimony of
Jesus Christ, -- He calls himself, v. 9. -- Their Brother and Companion in
tribulation, and in the Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ. -- For the word
of God, and for the Testimony of Christ, Rev. 6.9. The Angel saw under the
Altar, the Souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the
Testimony which they held. And the seed of the Woman, with whom the Dragon was
wroth, are described to be such as keep the Commandments of God, and have the
Testimony of Jesus Christ, Rev. 19.10. The Angel tells John, -- I am thy
fellow Servant, and of thy Brethren, that have the Testimony of Jesus --

9. A Ninth Obligation that is upon us, not to be ashamed of this Testimony of
our Lord; is the reward that such shall have, who shall not be ashamed, and the
danger they run that are ashamed. I will put both these together; because the
proof of them lies in the same Texts, Mark 8.38. Whosoever therefore shall be
ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful Generation, of
him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his
Father, with the Holy Angels, Matthew. 10.33, But whosoever shall deny me before
Men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven, Luke 12.8.
Whosoever shall confess me before Men, him shall the Son of Man also confess
before the Angels of God. The danger lies here, that if we be ashamed of
Christ, he will be ashamed of us; if we deny him, he will deny us, 2 Timothy 2.12.
If we suffer, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he will also deny
us. The reward you see is, if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him, Romans
8.17. If so be we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. If
we confess him, he will also own, confess, and acknowledge us before his Father
which is in Heaven; this I take to be what every one will grant, that by the
very Law of Nature every one is bound to decline that which will bring evil
upon him, and to do that which will bring him any valuable and considerable
good; so that let us but consider the danger of Christ's disowning us, and the
good of Christ's owning us at the day of Judgment; and we shall easily
understand what Obligation lies upon us, not to be ashamed of the Testimony of
our Lord; and to be ready to give our Testimony to him, and to the Gospel; but
may some say, who are those whom Christ will own or disown at the last day, and
how will Christ disown Men in the day of Judgment?

I suppose you may understand it from some Texts, Math. 7.21. Not every one
that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he
that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 25.31, 32, 33, 34.
Our Savior tells us, Math. 7.22, 23. Many will say to me in that day, Lord!
Lord! have we not prophesied in thy Name? And in thy Name have cast out Devils.
-- And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: Depart from me you
workers of Iniquity. And in that Text, Luke 13. v. 15.27. -- Ye begin to stand
without, and to knock at the Door, saying, Lord! Lord! open unto us, and he
shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence you are: v. 27. -- Depart
from me all ye workers of Iniquity, then shall be weeping and wailing, and
gnashing of Teeth. Consider this, we all must once dye, and after Death come to
Judgment; if Men have here disowned Christ and his Gospel, and shall then cry,
Lord! Lord! open to us, open the Kingdom of Heaven, do not cast us out of thy
sight for ever; Christ will then say to that Man who has been ashamed of his
Testimony: No, Thou were ashamed to own me, and my despised Persecuted Truths
and Servants, now I will not own thee. Christ will say to him depart from me, I
know you not; but what is it for Christ to own a Man? You may learn that from
that Text, Matthew. 25.34. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand,
come you Blessed of my Father, Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from
before the foundation of the World. Now consider with your selves, does not
there lie upon a Man an Obligation to save his own Soul, and to keep himself
out of everlasting burning; the same Obligation lies upon all Men not to be
ashamed of the Testimony of our Lord; but to be partakers of the afflictions of
the Gospel; the same Obligation that the Law of nature lays upon every Man to
look to his highest concern, the saving his Soul, the keeping himself in favor
with God; I shall add but one thing more.

10. The last thing from whence this Obligation does arise, is from the oneness
of the Body of Christ: This should engage us to suffer evil together with the
faithful Ministers, and the faithful Professors of the Gospel; that we may show
our selves to be true Members of Christ's mystical Body: We see in a natural
Body, it is impossible that one Member should suffer and not another; the rest
will feel it, though they may not feel that particular pain, which it may be
does fix only in this or that Member, yet there is affliction in the whole
Body; the whole Body is disquieted and troubled, though only the Head aketh, or
the Tooth, or the like; so will it be in the mystical Body of Christ, though it
may be there are but some particular Members of the Body that do suffer, yet
there will be never a Member of that Body but will suffer a Sympathy; every
Christian will not be slain, will not be imprisoned, or plundered, but if any
of them be so evil entreated, all the rest that are true Members of this Body,
will feel something of the suffering of those Members that do suffer; says the
Apostle, is any Man afflicted, and I burn not? St. Paul commends the
Philippians, Philip, 4.14, 15. Notwithstanding you have well done, that you did
communicate with my affliction, v. 15. No Church communicated with me as
concerning giving and receiving, but you only. The Apostle speaks thereas you
may judge by the 15th. Verse, of a Communicating by giving and receiving; but
this was the fruit of the other; the Philippians Sympathized with St. Paul in
his afflictions, and felt his misery, and this made them to communicate with
him in that state by relieving of him, and indeed those Professors that do not
so communicate with the afflicted Children of God, give a very ill proof that
they are the true Members of the mystical Body of Christ; I have opened the
Doctrine to you. Let us now consider what improvement may be made of it.

Use 1. What you have heard reflecteth sadly upon them, who refuse to give a
Testimony of their Lord: Or,

2. Are ashamed of those who do give this Testimony. You have heard how many
Obligations there are upon us to it; but how few are there who are sensible of
these Obligations?

1. How many are ashamed of the Testimony of our Lord! ashamed to own those
truths which their Lord owned; those truths for the Testimony of which their
Lord died, St. Paul glories of himself, that he was not ashamed of the Gospel
of the Lord Jesus Christ; for, says he, It is the power of God to Salvation,
Heb. 11.16. -- God is not ashamed to be called their God, Heb. 2.11. -- Christ
is not ashamed to call them Brethren: Shall a poor Worm be ashamed to be called
the Child of God, or the Servant of God, to be called a Godly Man or Woman; how
many Professors had we some years since, that are turned back and gone* a
little tribulation and persecution is arisen because of the truths of Christ
and they are offended. We may say of our times, as the Apostle said to the
Hebrews; None has yet resisted unto Blood -- and yet how few have we that do
resist striving against Sin; I tremble to think of that Text, -- Whosoever is
ashamed of me before Men, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed. We have too
many that think it enough to pray, to hear, to read; but forget this piece of
their duty; to bear a Testimony to our Lord; nay how many are there, who are
ashamed of those who do give their Testimony; ashamed of the Chains, and Bonds,
and Imprisonments, and reproaches of the Ministers and People of God; they are
not only ashamed to own the Testimony of the Gospel themselves, and to come in
as Witnesses for Christ, but they are ashamed of them who do; but I hope I
speak to none here who are of that Complexion.

Use 2. It may be some will say, how shall I know if I walk up to my duty in
this particular; if I be not ashamed of the Testimony of my Lord; and be a
partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel? I shall give you two or three notes,
which are sufficient for this discovery:

1. When the discredit of the Gospel, makes us neither to think it beneath us
to own the truth, of the Gospel, nor those who own and profess it. There is a
time when the Gospel has a credit in the World; the Prophet Zechariah
Prophesied of a time. Zech. 8.23. -- When ten men shall take hold out of all
Languages of the Nations, even shall take hold of the Skirt of him that is a
Jew, saying, we will go with you, ^or we have heard that God is with you: That
Prophecy is fulfilled under the Gospel, God sometimes gives the Gospel such a
credit in the World, that every one thinks it an honor to him to be
accounted a Christian, this is a time when it is hard to discern whether a Man
will be ashamed of the Gospel; but there is another time when the Gospel has
as much discredit, so as it fares with the strict Professors of it, as it did
with the Gospel at first, Acts 28.22. -- For as concerning this Sect, we know
that every where it is spoken against. Now is the time for a Man to try
himself, whether he will be ashamed of the Testimony of Christ; we have seen it
in the very times that we have lived in, the Gospel, and the Profession of it
has been a credit unto Men, it has been Men's greatest honor to profess the
Gospel with the greatest strictness; God has turned the Tables upon us, and we
now live in a time when as the Prophet says, Isa. 59.14, 15. Judgment is
turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off; for truth is fallen in the
street, and equity will not enter. -- And he that departs from evil makes
himself a prey, -- when it is a reproach to be a godly man, now if at such a
time as this, a Man thinks it beneath him to stand up for the truths or
Christ, to own the Ministers of Christ, and give a Testimony for Christ this
Man is ashamed of the Testimony of Christ (...) hinted to you before, there is
a differen^^ betwixt being afraid and being ashamed (...) good Christian may be
sometimes afraid (...) a day of great temptation, but he is never ashamed; but
when a Man is ashamed, that he thinks it beneath him to profess the truth, or
to own the Professors of it, this Man is ashamed of the Gospel; but if a
Christian at such a time finde^^ his Heart cleaves to the interest of God, and
to the true Servants of God, though he may be under some temptation of fear,
and (...) not (...) so much as another, it is a great infirmity, but it is not
a being ashamed of Christ's Testimony.

2. When no temptation can prevail upon as to live a Conversation contrary to
the Gospel. Every Man is obliged to give a double Testimony to the Lord; a
vocal Testimony, and a real Testimony; we give a real Testimony unto Christ,
when we dare practically live up to the avowed truths of the Gospel in the
vilest and worst of times; it is true we are obliged to a vocal as well as a
real. Testimony, and a good Christian does not discharge his duty in giving
testimony to the Gospel, by a mere living up to the Rules of it; there is
something more required of a Christian than this: But it is as true that
neither does a Christian give a Testimony to the Gospel, that openly professes
and owneth it in the face of its enemies, unless he lives up to the rules of
it; nay indeed that Man who talks for the Gospel, and lives not up to the
rule of it, gives a Testimony against the Lord, instead of giving a Testimony
for him; what has any Man to do to take the Word of God into his mouth, when
he hates to be reformed, and casts the Law of the Gospel behind his back.
But that Man or Woman who truly lives up to the rule of the Gospel, in
Apostatizing and declining times, is not ashamed of his Testimony; though
perhaps some fear of temptation may not make him so bold for God as another,
yea as some hypocritical and false Professors.

3. When a Man is truly afflicted for the sufferings of others, who suffer for
the Profession of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 11.29. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who
is offended, and I burn not? When a good Christian can say of himself, and say
it in truth; what Minister, what good Christian, what companion of Christ is
afflicted and persecuted, and I am not afflicted for them? I burn not in their
Fires? Now this Sympathy with our Fellow Members, when it is in truth, will
discover it self many ways.

1. It is first discernable a Man's own Heart, When no circumstance of a Man's
felicity, or prosperity can balance his sense of the afflictions of others;
you have a notable instance of this in Nehemiah, Chap. 2. v. 1. He was
Cup Bearer to the King, and had not used before to be sad in his presence, v.
2. The King said unto me, why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick?
This is nothing else but sorrow of heart, -- He answered, v. 3. -- Why should
not my countenance be sad, when the City, the place of my Fathers Sepulchers
lies waste, and the Gates thereof are consumed with Fire. It is said, Esther
3.15. -- The King and Haman sat down to drink, but the City Shi^^^^ was
perplexed. That Man is not a partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel, that
can so down to drink, that can be merry as at other times when the interest of
Religion is under-foot; but that Man is a true partaker of the afflictions of
the Gospel, whose Heart burns for the afflictions of others; who suffer for
the truths and Gospel of Christ.

2. Our being a partaker of the afflictions of others is evident; When we do
what in (...) lies to relieve them: Communicating with their afflictions, and
to their afflictions; helping to bear one another Burdens, and so fulfilling
the Law of Christ, Gal. 6.2. So then it is the Law of Christ for Christians to
bear one another Burdens. They should bear them upon their own Spirits, having
great sorrow of heart and affliction? They should bear them before the Lord,
when ever we go to God, as the High Priest carried upon his Breast, the Names
of all the Children of Israel so we should carry the Names of all the true
Professors; and in the first place the Names of all those who suffer for the
Name of Christ; and we should help and bear them with our hands too: Remembering
those who are bound, as if we were bound with them, forasmuch as we are in the
Body.

Use 3. In the last place, Let me persuade with you a little for this duty of
not being ashamed of the Testimony of our Lord, nor of any of his Prisoners,
and being partakers of the afflictions of the Gospel.

1 Not to be ashamed of the Testimony of our Lord: Now in speaking to this
branch of Application, I will enquire:

1. To what of Christ this Testimony is due; whether to all Propositions
concerning Christ, or to some only?

2. What kind of Testimony it must be; that it may be accepted of the Lord?

3. What Arguments ought to prevail with us; to partake of the afflictions of
the Gospel?

4. What directions may be useful in the case?

Qu. 1. To what of Christ is this Testimony due?

The proper Object of a Testimony, is a Proposition or a Fact, the truth of one
or the other: Now the Propositions that relate unto Christ are of several
natures, of different natures, and of different moment: Some concern the
Doctrine of Faith, some concern the Worship of God, some concern the Kingly
Office of the Lord Jesus Christ, some concern the Rule of a Christians Life: I
know no Proposition of the Gospel, but a Christian is a debtor to, and ought to
bear a Testimony unto; but yet they are not all of equal import, the nature of
Propositions does very much differ.

1. According to what does depend upon them.

2. According to the evidence that they have in Scripture.

1. According to what depends upon them. Some Propositions of truth are the
foundation; look as it is with the foundation of a House, take it away and the
whole Building tumbleth to the ground: So there are some Propositions of the
Gospel, that the whole Fabric of Gospel truths lies upon them, the whole Body
of truth is built upon them; here now the Obligation of our Testimony lies
higher, and rises higher and further, but there is no truth that we are not
debtors unto.

2. According to the evidence that they have in the Gospel; there are different
apprehensions concerning truth, for although the Gospel has revealed all
truth, yet not all with the same evidence, so that Christians have differed
concerning truth, and every man as he believes, so he ought to speak, so he
ought to live; but the apprehensions that some men have had, that they are
bound to give a Testimony to every Proposition of truth which they do in heart
embrace, has begot a great deal of stir; the Apostle gives another Rule when
he says, Have thou Faith? Have it to thy self before God: There are some
Propositions of which a Christian may have a particular persuasion, and of
which he may be very confident of the truth of them, but yet they will not bear
the weight of a Testimony to the disturbance of the Church of Christ; now a
good Christian ought to regulate his Testimony accordingly.

Qu. 2. What kind of Testimony is that, which a good Christian is bound to give
unto the Lord?

I will open this to you in seven or eight particulars.

1. He ought to give a knowing, believing Testimony; there is a Testimony of
Faith, and a Testimony of Faction; that Man gives a Testimony of Faith, that
does in his Heart believe what he with his Mouth confesses, and as the Apostle
says, as he believes so he speaks: So in this case a Christian must speak
as he believes, and when he speaks and owneth, and defends a truth,
because he believes it to be the eternal truth of God, this is a Testimony of
Faith; but then there is a Testimony of Faction when a man runs with a
multitude to attest a truth, and cries for it, but understands not, and
believes not what he professes; I would have every Christian not to be
ashamed of the Testimony of Christ, but I would have him be sure that it be a
Testimony of Faith that he gives, not a Testimony of Faction; for a man to
give a Testimony to truth, if it be in Faction, it is abomination to God,
whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin; The word not mingled with Faith profits
not; and a Testimony not given in Faith signifies nothing: Oh! Christians
beware of this, that none of you in this day be factious Professors, be not
ashamed of the Testimony of your Lord. But first, see that you understand it,
see that your selves believe it to be a good Testimony; a Man or Woman will
have very little peace or comfort in giving a Testimony to that, which either
he knows not, or in Heart believes not; when a Man believes and therefore
speaks, he speaks that with his Lips which his Soul has first examined,
and he sees bottomed in the Word of God, and in Heart agrees and assenteth
to, this is his Testimony; take this note with you in every Testimony, let it
be vocal or real, let it be a Testimony of Faith, not a Testimony of Faction,
and a mere running along with a cry, like the rout of Ephesus, when Acts 19.32.
Some cried one thing, some another, for the Assembly was confused; and the more
part knew not wherefore they were come together.

2. It must be a Loving Testimony, or it is not accepted, Faith and Love m^st
be the principles of all those actions that do or can speak any obedience unto
the Will of God; if a Man receives the truth, and not in the love of it, it is
of no effect; as whatsoever is not of faith is Sin, so whatsoever is done, and
not out of love, is not accepted of God: Love is that which gives the sweet
savor to all our doings, and to all our sufferings for God; If says the
Apostle, I give all my goods to the poor, and my Body to be burnt, if I have
not love, it is all nothing. Let a man give never so great a Testimony to
Christ, if he does not this out of love, it is out of some evil principle of
contradiction or faction, or some stubbornness of Spirit, and God accepts it
not; it is not a Christians saying, I am for the true Doctrine, I am for pure
Worship, and I am for the Kingly Government of Christ, but his doing this out
of a true pleasure and delight in these things, out of a true love to God, and
zeal for the glory of God: And this is another thing that I fear in a crowd
that give Testimony in an evil time, as that some testify they know not what,
so that others testify rather out of a principle of contradiction or
fullenness, than out of a true principle of love to Ordinances and truths;
hence you shall observe, that as in a serene and fair time there are a
multitude of Professors that are like Swallows that will stay with the Gospel
in its Summer time; so you shall observe there are a multitude of others that
in a time of opposition, especially when the Persecution reaches not high,
busy to give their Testimony to truth, which when they may embrace freely they
never regard, and make no conscience of; you have an example of both these at
home; on the one side we had a company of Professors that have now forsaken us
and fled, and embraced this present World; in a time of temptation they are
gone away, and you shall observe a multitude of others that cried out lately
for Sacraments, and against robbing Christians of the Sacrament of the Supper,
the great pledge of Christ's Love: Now that none hinders their coming to them,
they regard not the Sacrament, both these were sick of the same Disease, they
gave or thought they gave some testimony to their Lord, but their Testimony was
equally acceptable to God, neither the one nor the other was out of a love in
their heart to Christ, and to his truth and ordinances, but merely out of
faction and turbulency of Spirit, or for some base worldly end. I would have
you own the Testimony of Christ, I would have you fear being ashamed of it, as
you would fear that Christ should be ashamed of you at the day of Judgment; I
would have you ^onfess him, as you would have him to confess you, as you would
expect he should confess you. But be sure you give your Testimony out of love,
as what you know, and in heart truly believe and agree to; so out of a burning
love and zeal in your heart to the Lord Jesus Christ.

3. Our Testimony ought to be a Judicious Testimony; it is one thing that God
requires when we swear that it should be in truth, righteousness and judgment:
Thou shall swear the Lord lives in truth, righteousness and judgment: Swearing
is an Attestation, a Solemn Attestation of a truth. The Testimony which I am
now speaking to is not necessary to be performed by Oath, though we ought not
to refuse if called to that, but as it must be to the truth, in righteousness,
so it must be in judgment: The judgment that I would have attend the Testimony
of which I am now speaking, is not a judgment that the thing is true, the truth
of Christ, but that it is a truth of that nature that will bear the weight of
such a Testimony too, as it must bear if it bear any; for I must tell you,
though truth, all truth be a very sacred pin, yet every such pin has not an
equal degree of strength, and will not bear a like weight; I am afraid we have
too loud a Testimony to some truths, which though they may have spoken the
faith of Christians, and their love, yet have not spoken the Wisdom and
Prudence of Christians; such Testimonies were those the Christians gave, Romans
14. For things that were in themselves of an indifferent nature, and yet
Christians on either side were too warm. Any Christian is thus far bound to
give his Testimony to every truth, as not to deny it.

2. In his own particular practice to own it; but we ought not to make a party
for every truth: Now this depends upon this great truth. That though there be
no truth of God but we ought to own, and being convinced of to Practice, yet
there are some truths of God, as to which God wills not that we should be
contentious; For God has given his people a Latitude in them without hazard of
their Salvation, and therefore we must give our Testimony to truth with
prudence, a prudential judging of the weight and value of a truth, before we
give a zealous Testimony to it.

4. Our Testimony must be with prudence: Prove. 8.12. I Wisdom dwell with
Prudence: Wisdom does often signify Grace, and truly all true Grace in a Soul
should dwell with Prudence, we are commanded to be wise as Serpents, and to
walk circumspectly not as fools, Matthew. 10.16.
but as wise; there is a great deal of prudence to be used in giving our
Testimony to our Lord; our Lord himself, if you observe him, did it with
prudence, and we ought to let our Wisdom dwell with Prudence: This Prudence
must not be extended so far, as to deny any necessary truth, or to dissemble so
as to declare our selves against it, or not to own it, for it must be such a
prudenc^ as is opposed to impiety, if there be a failure in piety, there can be
no prudence: Prudence does not so much respect the doing, or the not doing of
the thing, as the manner of the doing of it: In general we then give our
Testimony with prudence, when we give it without any just offense to Jew,
Gentile, or the Church of Christ; a Testimony of our Lord may be spoiled by the
height of our Spirit through pride showed in judging, contemning, and
despising of others, or through the boisterousness and the passion of our
Spirits, or by our noise and clamours; so that to the prudence of a Testimony
there are three things required.

1. Humility in opposition to Pride: Pride is a Colloquintida that makes all
our Messes of duty and Service to God bitter; God abhors the proud, he
abhors a haughty and contentious Spirit, he gives grace to the humble, and
he accepts his Testimony. Paul says, Acts 20.19. He served the Lord with all
humility of mind. -- We are bid to put on humility of mind, -- Col. 3.12. and 1
Pet. 5.5. To be clothed with humility. -- Humility is our garment, a Christian
must do nothing but in humility; in what he does in the service of God, there
must be a vein of humility, and in that part of our service to God where
humility is wanting, in that part a Christian always walks naked, and Men see
his shame, a fastidious, scornful contemning sufferer, is no Christian sufferer.

^. Another thing is meekness with respect to passion: This is often called
for, we are bid to put it on, Col. 3.12. And the Minister is to instruct in
meekness those that are without. The Apostle beseeches you by the weakness of
Christ; meekness is opposed to frowardness and passion; a passionate Testimony
to a truth is at best but an imprudent and indiscreet Testimony; The wrath of
man works not the righteousness of God.

3. A third thing that commends a Testimony is courtesy, in opposition to
morosity and soureness; when Festus told Paul, That much Learning had made him
mad, he answered, I am not mad most noble Festus: Observe with how much
complement Paul speaks to Festus and others, while he was bearing testimony
unto the truth of God; the soureness and morosity of a Christians behavior in
bearing his testimony, makes his testimony more unlovely, and not so prudent
as it ought to be.

4. A Fourth thing is peaceableness: The Servants of God must not strive; there
is nothing more asperseth the Gospel, and the Profession of it, then the
imprudence of a Professor of it in the managery of his business.

5. Your Testimony unto God must be uniform and sincere, it cannot be uniform
if it be not sincere; the testimony of the Life must agree with the testimony
of the Lips; you know a Witness that contradicts his testimony, does by it
make his testimony invalid; he that lives contrary to his Profession, gives
himself the lie; he testifies with his Lips, but he denies in his Life. The
Apostle tells us of some, Titus 1.16. They profess that they know God, but in
works they deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and to every good work
reprobate. You shall observe therefore, that when the Devil at any time gave a
testimony to a Truth concerning Christ and the Apostles, they constantly
refused and would not hear him speak, the testimony of one of the Children of
the Devil, is rather a dishonor and weakening of the Truth, than any
strengthening and credit, and confirmation; a Man that is Holy in his Life,
bearing testimony with his Lips, is a great Servant of God; he by his Mouth
declares what he believes; and by his Life he declares that he does indeed
not mock and dissemble with the World; but he believes what he professes to
believe: You shall see in some cases, some foolish Witnesses do more hurt than
good; so a Christian may do more mischief than good to the Gospel of Christ, by
his owning of it, and professing to it.

6. Let it be a bold and undaunted Testimony, he is a good Witness in a cause,
who speak modestly, and with all due respect to those, to whom he gives his
Testimony, and who agrees; and does not contradict himself, and yet is bold
and courageous, speaking with freedom; hence you shall find that word (...) is
often used about the testimony that the Apostles did bear to the truth; a free,
bold testimony in any cause does it great service, while the stammering lisping
Witness, that uses no freedom in his Speech, rather hurts a cause, than does
it good; the Scripture speaks much of, and commends a Christians boldness;
a boldness in Faith, and Prayer, and a boldness in a bearing testimony to our
Lord; when we are not afraid of the Faces of men that would outface the truths
of God; a Christian should be bold in the Faith, bold in Prayer, and bold in
his Confession.

7. Let your Testimony be a hearty testimony, a free, ready, cheerful
testimony; God loves a cheerful giver, (says the Apostle) indeed in all our
Gifts unto God, it is so: God loves a freedom and cheerfulness of Spirit, we
should not be subpoena'd into a Testimony to our Lord Jesus Christ, indeed we
are subpoena'd by that dreadful Text, Matthew. 9. A Christian should give a
Testimony freely, not to provoke and challenge danger, and dare a Trial, but
when he sees suffering at hand, so that God calls him to give a testimony to
him, and to the truths of the Gospel, then cheerfulness becomes a Christian,
cheerfulness as it is opposed to grudging.

8. I will add but one thing more, it should be a patient Testimony, Rev. 19
St. John gives this Character of himself; I John who also am your Brother and
Companion in tribulation, and in the Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, --
Patience under evils is what is often called for in Scripture, and pressed upon
the Servants of God, with a great variety of Arguments; by a patient Testimony
I understand three things.

1. A patient continuance in the Testimony of Christ; a flitting, and uncertain
Christian in the truths of God, who is of one mind to day, and another mind to
morrow, is no good Witness in the cause of Christ, semper idem is the true
Motto of every Christian, of every such Witness, he that is one day of one
mind, another day of another, like a Wave of the Sea tossed about, may possibly
get to Heaven at last, as through fire, but he is no good Witness for Christ;
you know amongst men a good Witness must abide by his testimony; if he varieth,
his testimony is weakened: Therefore Christians are highly concerned to examine
Propositions well before they profess them, and when they profess them, to
think well with themselves before they part with them; a man never is a good
witness for the Lord in that point, wherein he has been uncertain himself.

2. It must be a patient testimony with respect unto those affronts which he
may suffer from men, while he is giving his Testimony, a good and steady
Witness in your Courts is not moved by the affronts of any Lawyer that sets
himself to baffle him out of his Testimony; he that is a good Witness in the
cause of Christ, must not be affected at the affronts of Men that would baffle
him out of his Testimony; he must be patient both as to the flatteries and
enticements of enemies, and also as to their frowns and menaces.

3. A patient Testimony must be a Testimony attended with that patience, which
they had need of, who may suffer for giving their Testimony; for though no Man
ought to suffer for bearing Witness to the truth, yet there is nothing more
ordinary then for men and women to suffer for giving a Testimony unto truth;
and thus now I have showed you, what kind of Testimony it is, that every good
Christian is bound to give unto the Lord. I have but two things more to do;
first to encourage you to it by some Arguments; then to direct you in the
fulfilling of it; now for Arguments to persuade you not to be ashamed of the
Testimony of Christ, you have heard enough already; I have showed you a
Ten-fold Obligation lying upon you.

1. It is the Will of God.

2. Remember Christ is your Lord?

3. You cannot otherwise show your gratitude to him, for that Testimony which
he gave for you.

4. Thus you shall be conformable unto Christ, and what is behind of the
suffering of Christ, shall be filled up in you.

5. Remember the nature of the Gospel, and of the truths of it.

6. Consider the Station which you take up in the World, of a Witness, a
Soldier, a Child to our Heavenly Father, a Servant to a Heavenly Master.

7. Remember the private Law that you have laid upon your selves.

8. Remember the duty which lies upon you to be conformable to your fellow
members.

9. Remember the danger of forbearing, and the reward of your giving this
Testimony.

10. Consider your oneness with the Members of Christ, after all these, what
need any further Arguments; yet because we are of our selves not forward unto
this, our Hearts are awk, and backward to the partaking of the affliction of
the Gospel, and averse to the giving of this Testimony; let me by way of a
further Argument in this cause, name to you, and press upon you the Arguments
which the Apostle uses in this place, and by which he himself presses this
Exhortation.

1. The first lies in those words (...), according to the power of God: One
great discouragement that is upon our Spirits to keep us in a day of Testimony,
that we should not testify, is the fear we should never be able to speak and to
give our Testimony. To give a Testimony for our Lord is a noble thing, to
receive a Crown, the Crown of Martyrdom, is a great dignity. But when the Lord
by his providence seeks out for us, to set this Crown upon our Heads, we too
frequently hide our selves, and the reason is, we distrust our selves, but
Christian! fear not, we shall have the power of God; it is a wonderful thing to
observe, that the power of God has been so seen in no other thing as in this;
you read of a Testimony that Stephen gave to the Gospel: First a vocal, then a
real Testimony, Acts 6.9, 10. And they were not able to resist the Wisdom, and
the spirit by which he spoke, Stephen had then a dispute with the Libertines.
The power and presence of God from the beginning of the Gospel has been seen
in nothing more, than in Gods assistance of his Witnesses, you have a promise,
Luke 12.12. For the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour, what you ought
to say, Matthew. 10.19, 20. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or
what you shall speak, for it shall be given you in that same hour, what you
shall speak. For it is not you that speak, but the spirit of your heavenly
Father which speaks in you. Luke says, When they bring you unto the
Synagogues, and unto Magistrates and powers, take no thought how or what thing
you shall answer, or what you shall say, for the Holy Ghost shall teach you in
that same hour what you ought to say. It is a promise that some have applied to
the assistance of God in the performance of other duties, as Prayer, Preaching,
etc. and it may be there has been but an ill use made of that promise; the
promise in the first place manifestly relates to a time of testimony, I do not
say but there is a dabitur in hora, which those who are much with God in
Prayer, and which the Ministers of the Gospel (...) experience, but that
promise respect^^^ not that so much, as it respects men in confession, and
their Testimony for Christ; in giving our Testimony for Christ, the Spirit of
God shall assist, words shall be given us in that hour, and courage and
strength shall be given us in that hour, you shall not give a Testimony for the
Gospel, you shall not suffer affliction for the Gospel in your own strength, it
shall be according to the power of God, the Holy Ghost shall teach you what to
say, and what to do, and you shall experience that it is not you that speak and
act, but the Spirit that dwells in you, what you do in this case shall be
according to the power of God, you shall not spend merely upon your own Stock,
you shall spend upon Christ's Stock when you are upon Christ's Service, you shall
spend upon the fullness of the Spirit of God; and there have been many
experiences of those that could never find the presence of God so strong in the
consolation of their Spirits, as in that hour; be not therefore ashamed of the
Testimony of your Lord, for not only the thing which you testify, is the
Testimony of the Lord, but your action in testifying, the testimony which you
give shall be from the Lord, the Holy Ghost speaking in you; so that this is a
great Argument, it is a standing up for Christ, and the Spirit of God shall use
your tongue and your hand.

2. Another Argument the Apostle uses, is fr^^ the nature of the truth to
which you testify, and the person for whom you testify: You testify for the
truth, which brings eternal Salvation; you testify for him, who has called
you with an holy calling, and he has done this freely, not according to your
works, but according to his own grace, for him who has abolished Death, and
brought Life and Immortality to light through the Gospel. The Apostle says, He
was not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God to
Salvation. I told you before, that every one is a debtor unto truth, there is
such a cognation betwixt a rational Soul and Truth, that every rational Soul is
a debtor to truth, he is a debtor to own the truth as to himself, and to own
the truth as to another; and I told you by how much a truth is of higher
importance to our or another interest, by so much a Man or Woman is a greater
debtor, a Man is a debtor to the truth, when it concerns but his honor and
reputation, and when it concerns his estate; but much more when it concerns
Life; and so when it is for his Brother, by how much his Brother is more
concerned, by so much he is more obliged; and as the nature of the truth
raises his obligation, so the relation of the person increases it; a Man is
bound by the Law of charity to give testimony to the truth, on the behalf of
his Neighbor, much more on the behalf of his Brother, and higher yet on the
behalf of his Father or Mother that begat him and brought him forth, but yet
his obligation rises higher when it is for his Savior, for him who has done
him the greatest kindness that ever was done, without which he had better never
have been born; such is the Testimony that we are bound to give unto Christ:
The truth is of highest import, the person is of the highest concern: Oh! be
not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, which is the power of God to your
Salvation, of the Gospel, which brings Life and Immortality to light, you
testify for Christ who Witnessed a good confession before Pilate, who has done
more for you than all the friends you ever had in the World could do, for him
who has called you with an holy calling; this is another Argument to enforce
this Exhortation, the consideration for whom and for what this Testimony is
given.

3. Another Argument which the Apostle brings here to persuade Timothy not to
be ashamed of this Testimony, is his own example, v. 12. For the which cause, I
also suffer these things, nevertheless I am not ashamed. -- The Apostle says,
God is not ashamed to be called their God. And he says of Christ, Heb. 2.11.
He is not ashamed to call us Brethnen: Shall we be ashamed to testify his
truth? Shall we be ashamed of the name of his Witnesses? And observe the reason
why the Apostle says he is not ashamed. I am not ashamed, for I know in whom I
have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him.

4. Let me use one Argument further with you; Blessed be God, we yet can say,
as Heb. 12.4. You have not yet resisted unto Blood, striving against sin. There
are diverse Arguments in that Text to make a Christian valiant in his spiritual
fight.

1. That a Christians fight is against sin.

2. That in this fight of Christians against sin, we ought, (if called to it)
to resist unto Blood.

3. By how much the lesser the Trial is, that God calls to us to undergo, by
so much the greater obligation is upon us to endure it; all a Christians fight
and striving is against sin: He gives a Testimony to the Doctrine of the
Gospel; it is against sin to prevent the coming in of damnable errors, which
would sink the Souls of people into eternal ruin and destruction; he gives a
Testimony for the pure Worship of God, it is to keep out Superstition and
Idolatry; he gives a Testimony for the Government of Christ, this is also
against sin, against those that say the Lord shall not rule over them or
others, but we will rule over you; all our fight, all the resistance that we
make is against sin. Now the fight against sin is so noble a fight, that every
good man ought to resist unto Blood, rather to die than to sin against God, or
to suffer sin to prevail in the World; but now when God does not call us to lay
down our Lives, but only to bear a lower Testimony, there our obligation rises
much higher; if God had called us to lay down our Lives, should we not do it?
How much more when the Lord only calls us to give a Testimony? St. John, Rev.
6.9. saw them under the Altar, that were slain for the Testimony that they held.

5. Lastly, Consider, you shall overcome by your Testimony, Rev. 12.11. John
saw the Devil overcome by the Blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
Testimony, -- Magna est veritas, Truth is a great thing, and it will prevail,
look back upon the former Ages of the Church, the Witnesses which God raised up
to his Truth in the beginning of the Gospel were very few; the persons seemed
contemptible, yet God overcame the whole World by them, and brought the whole
World into some professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ, often before the
Church had degenerated, many errors prevailed, at last Popery prevailed; then
stood up Luther in Germany, those that look upon that Story would have thought
it impossible that Luther's Doctrine should have prevailed in the World; but
they overcame by the word of their Testimony, and to that Victory they held,
does the Protestant Religion owe it self: Now this should greatly encourage us
not to be ashamed of the Testimony of Christ, it has ever been victorious, and
shall be to the last; it is by the Faith and patience of the Saints and
Servants of God, who stood close to their opposers, and managed their spiritual
fight, that the Gospel has obtained, and they ought still to hold fast; for
they are sure of victory so long as Christ remains King in Sion. I shall add
but a few words more, and that is to direct Christians what they should do,
that they may not be ashamed of their Testimony.

1. Look that you be rooted and grounded in truth; a Tree that is not well
rooted, you know is very easily shaken, Col. 1.23. If, (says the Apostle) you
continue in the Faith, grounded and settled -- The truth is to make a Christian
that he should not be ashamed of the Testimony of the Lord; he had need of a
double ground, he had need be grounded in Faith according to that Text, Col.
1.23. And he had need be rooted and grounded in love according to that Text,
Ephesians. 3.17. -- that you being rooted and grounded in love, Col. 2.7. Rooted and
built up in him, and established in the Faith -- Christians! look to this,
every Witness ought to understand the cause well to which he is to give his
testimony; many a poor Creature bears a testimony to they know not what,
labor to be rooted in the Faith, rooted in love, and rooted in Christ; that
Soul that is filled with the knowledge of truth, and warmed with the love of
truth never fails in an hour of testimony; that Soul that is either ignorant
of the ground of that truth which he pretends to own and defend, or that
wants a love for God, never holds longer than till he meets with a
contradiction.

2. Look up to the power of God for your assistance, I told you these words in
the Text, according to the power of God, might be taken as an Argument to
persuade Christians not to be ashamed of the Testimony of the Lord, because the
power of the Lord shall be manifested for them; but they may also be
interpreted, as signifying that which we ought to have an Eye to in our
Testimony, and in our suffering affliction; we have no spiritual enemy we can
prevail against in our own strength, our enemies you know are the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil; for the Flesh the Apostle says, Romans 8.13. -- If ye
through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body you shall live. Never yet
was lust mortified by mere moral Arguments, and for the Devil, we are bid to
take upon us the whole Armor of God, to resist him, strong in the Faith, and
it is the same for the World; Our help is in the name of the Lord, and
therefore it has been observed, that none in an hour of Testimony have come
off worse than those who have been most confident; our Book of Martyrs tells
us of two that were in prison together, the one was very confident and
courageous, and told the other that his fat should fry in the fire next day,
the other was very timorous and fearful; the first recanted and denied the
truth, the second was burnt at the Stake. David might possibly mean it of his
external enemies, but he repeateth it thrice; My enemies compassed me about,
but in the name of the Lord I will destroy them; they compass me about, yea
they compassed me about, but in the name of the Lord I will destroy them; they
compassed me about like Bees, they are quenched as the fire of Thorns, for in
the name of the Lord I will destroy them. It must be so as to our spiritual
enemies, we shall never prevail, but in the name of the Lord.

3. Remember in your Testimony, There is more with you, than there is against
you: While we bear Testimony to Christ, God is with us, Christ is with us, the
Spirit is with us, all the Holy Martyrs are with us, there is none but sinful
men against us; Christ the faithful and true Witness is with you, Rev. 1.5.
From Jesus Christ who is the faithful Witness, -- He was the first Witness. The
Apostle St. John says, 1 John 5.7. There are three that bear record in Heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost -- What did the Father witness? This
is my Beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. This is the Lord our
righteousness. What did Christ witness? He witnessed a good confession before
Pontius Pilate; he owned himself to be the Son of God, the Savior of the
World, that they that believe on him should not be ashamed; he owned himself to
be the object of our Faith, to be the Lord our righteousness; the Spirit
testified the same thing, and the Spirit bears witness for us and in us.

4. Fourthly, Would you not be ashamed of your Testimony; love not the World,
nor the things thereof, nor the persons therein, take heed of being swallowed
up in the love of creature comforts and enjoyments: How dwells the love of
the Father in him that doteth on the World? The World takes off Christ's
witnesses, both the Men of the World, and the things of the World, you must be
fond of none of these.

5. Take upon you the whole Armor of God, of which you read, Ephesians. 6.14. Stand
therefore having your Loins girt about with truth, and having on the
Breast Plate of righteousness, and your Feet shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of peace, taking the shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation, the Sword
of the Spirit. Finally pray always with all Prayer and Supplication in Spirit,
watching thereunto with all perseverance.

SERMON. 8, 9, 10, 11.
Matthew 5.10, 11, 12. Blessed are they which are persecuted for Righteousness
sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

v. 11. Blessed are you when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall
say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.

v. 12. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven; for
so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.


THe Evangelist having in the First Chapter given us our Saviors Pedigree,
brought down to his supposed Father Joseph, and an account of his Birth: And in
the Second Chapter of his Motion into Egypt, and return from it: And in the
Third Chapter of his Baptism: And in the Fourth Chapter of his Temptations. In
the latter part of that Chapter he records his entrance into the public
Ministry, dwelling at that time with his Parents in Nazareth, (which was a City
of Galilee) thereabout he first exercised his Ministry, and the Evangelist
tells us that great multitudes followed him, as you find in the last Verse of
the Chapter: In this and the Sixth, and Seventh Chapters, he gives us an
account of the Sermon he made to this multitude at the foot of the Mountain, a
Sermon which contains many excellent Doctrines. He begins it with
pronouncing of several persons Blessed, concerning which blessednesses, these
two things are to be observed.

1. That he pronounces them quite contrary to the common vogue and opinion of
the world, especially at that time.

2. As to the performance of those duties wherein most of Christians
self-denial is to be shown, the world blesses the rich, he blesses the poor;
as v. 3. Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven;
The world blesses the haughty, he blesses the meek, as v. 5. Blessed are the
meek, for they shall inherit the Earth. The World blesses those that laugh and
rejoice, he blesses those that mourn, as v. 4. Blessed are they that mourn,
for they shall be comforted. The World blesses them that are full; he blesses
those that hunger and thirst, as v. 6. Blessed are they which do hunger and
thirst after righteousness, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. The World
blesses those that are in Power to oppress others, he blesses those that are
persecuted, provided it be for righteousness sake, as in v. 10. Blessed are
they which are persecuted for righteousness, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven. Three Propositions will exhaust the sum of these Verses.

Prop. 1. Revilings of men, persecution and speaking all manner of evil of them
falsely for righteousness sake, and for Christ's name sake, has always been the
portion of the Servants and Disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ. Our Savior
here does Prophecy it unto his Disciples, and he speaks it of his Servants
under the Law; for says he, They did so persecute the Prophets.

Prop. 2. Those whose lot this falls to are blessed; and theirs is the Kingdom
of Heaven.

Prop. 3. It is their duty to rejoice, and be exceeding glad under their
persecution upon these considerations. I shall speak to the First and Second;
the two latter will fall in with the Application.

1. Revilings, and speaking all manner of evil and persecution, was always the
lot of the Servants of God, and of the Disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ.

All that I have here to open is, 1. The true notion of persecution.

2. Then I shall show you, this has always been the lot of the Servants of
God, and of the Disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ.

3. I will endeavor to show you the ground of it: As to the First, I shall
endeavor to give you the true notion of persecution in five or six particulars.

(...) from whence this Participle comes, is a word, that is very frequently
used in the New Testament, sometimes it is applied unto things, sometimes unto
persons; when it is applied unto things, it signifies an earnest desire of
obtaining the thing, which is set out as the object of it, implying a singular
love to it, and desire of it, and it signifies a good or an evil act, as the
thing is good or evil, which we do pursue, 1 These. 5.15. -- follow that which
is good -- Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, 1 Timothy 6.11. -- Follow after
righteousness, -- 1 Cor. 14.1. Follow after Charity, -- Romans 9.31. But Israel
which followed after the law of righteousness. Is. 5.11. Woe unto them that rise
up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink. -- Hos. 2.7. And
she shall follow after her Lovers. When it is applied to persons, for the most
part in the New Testament, it signifies a pursuit after them to do them evil,
Romans 12.14. Bless them which persecute you, bless and curse not, 1 Cor 15.9. --
I persecuted the Church of God, Acts 9.5. -- I am Jesus whom thou persecutest,
John 5.16. And therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him,
-- And so in many other Texts, it signifies the following of another, with an
earnest desire to do him some harm, and this may be a good and lawful action,
or a wicked and sinful action, according to the cause, for it is an usual
saying, Causa, non poena, facit martyrem.

2. Therefore the next words must expound this act, for righteousness sake, and
again for my names sake; righteousness here does unquestionably signify the
same thing with goodness, and with holiness; as it is often taken in Scripture
for Christ's names sake, which is the same with for Christ's sake, 1 John 2.12.
-- Your sins are forgiven you for his names sake. It is the same thing which is
expressed under several other terms in Scripture, Math. 10.18. -- for my sake
Math. 16.25. -- for my sake -- Math. 19.12. -- for the Kingdom of Heavens sake,
-- Mark. 4.17. -- for the words sake -- Luke 6.22. -- for the Son of man's sake.
In short, it signifies that suffering which comes upon us to avoid sinning
against the command of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ; all such suffering is a
suffering for Jesus sake, for the Kingdom of Heavens sake, for Christ's sake,
for the Lords name sake, for righteousness sake.

3. The Person inflicting the punishment, and the law of man obliging to the
punishment does by no means alter the nature of such a suffering. If lawful
Magistrates, and such as are clothed with just authority, could not be guilty
of this sin of persecution; then only Tyrants and Robbers, and Murderers could
be called persecutors; but Paul was clothed with a lawful authority, Acts 9.
Yet he himself says, that he persecuted the Church of God; the Jews for ought
I know had a lawful authority, yet John. 5.16. And therefore did the Jews
persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him: And if indeed the pursuing of one to
do him mischief, because he dares not sin against God, be that which is in holy
Writ styled persecution, this must follow, nor can the humane Law excuse it;
you know the Jews said, John 19.7. -- we have a Law, and that they did not
pretend a Law when they had none, is plain, for v. 8. it is said, When Pilate
heard that saying, he was the more afraid. The reason of this is, because all
the ways of men are regulae regula^^^, They are under a higher authority, and
must be subjected unto the Law of God, and judged by it; and it is possible
that unrighteous judgments may be decreed, Is. 10.1. Woe unto them that decree
unrighteous decrees.

4. The command of the Superior does not excuse the inferior agent from the
guilt of persecution; nor yet deprive the sufferer from the blessing of him
that is persecuted: If a person be pursued for righteousness sake; for the
Kingdom of Heavens sake; for doing that which God obliges him to do, the
persecution is as well persecution in the inferior agents, as in the first
causes, and the more superior agents; the Jews accused the Lord Jesus Christ,
they brought him before Pilate, Pilate condemned him, the Jews nailed him to
the Cross, did not they who nailed him to the Cross, persecute him? Paul was
but an inferior agent against the Church of God; Act. 9.
the Letters were from the Magistrate, and the Chief Priests of Damascus, the
guilt lies in the act, in the inflicting of punishment upon such as ought to
be really freed from punishment; it is true, he that commands, he that
counsels and advises is not excused, but much less the next immediate
actor; and this is the most reasonable thing in the World, does not the Law of
man thus deal with offenders: Nay when it excuses the principal agent, it
thinks it justice to punish severely the inferior Minister; for were there
no Minister in wickedness, Superiors could do no hurt; and therefore if any be
so vain as to think they are excused, because they are but Ministers, and do
but execute the Will or Sentence of others, they are mistaken; Paul's holding
the clothes when Stephen was stoned, brought him into the guilt of his death.

5. They are not only persecuted who resist sin unto Blood, and choose Death
rather than sin; but they who are reviled and reproached; our Savior you see
puts all together; blessed are you, when you are reviled and persecuted, and
when they shall speak all manner of evil of you, for my names sake. Gal. 4.29.
-- He that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the
spirit. If you look into the story of Isaac and Ishmael, it is said Ishmael
mocked him; thus Paul complains, Romans 8.39. -- for thy sake we are killed all
the day long, -- all kind of suffering to avoid sin is persecution, and those
that make them to suffer are persecutors, those that are sufferers are so
persecuted, it is true there are degrees both of this and of other sins; but he
that smites with the Sword of the Tongue, persecuteth as well as he that
smites with a Sword that is made of Iron; and he who is so smitten, is in the
Eye of God persecuted, as well as he whose Life is taken from him: Now I say
this has been the lot of the people of God, of the Disciples of Christ in all
Ages, to suffer persecution, to be pursued by wicked and malicious men, both
with their Tongues reviling them, and with their hands endeavoring to do them
mischief, either spoiling them of their goods, or depriving them of their
lives, and that because they will not sin against God.

2. I come now to the second thing; How this does appear to have been the
portion of the people of God?

It appears by the whole story of the Scripture, and also all Ecclesiastical
story: Take Adam's Family immediately after the fall, Abel was persecuted by
Cain, indeed he did not suffer because he would not sin, but because he was
more righteous, and had offered up a better Sacrifice; consider Abraham's
Family, of that the Apostle speaks, Gal. 4.29. -- He that was born after the
flesh, persecuted him that was born after the spirit, Acts 7.52. Which of the
Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted? But if you come unto the New
Testament, and consider the Church of God in that state, you shall find it was
persecuted at all hands: First by the Jews, then by the Heathens, then by false
and pretended Christians, as is evident in the example of Christ, in the
example of Stephen the Proto-Martyr, and of Christians ever since: First by the
Jews, of which you read in the Acts of the Apostles, then by the Heathens,
which persecution lasted 300 hundred years, till Constantine the Great; then by
false Christians, the Papists and others; those that were born after the flesh
always persecuted them who were born after the spirit: It may therefore be
worth the while, rather to fathom the bottom of this, to understand the reason,
why the people of God in all Ages have been the Mark and But of the Worlds envy.

Reas. 1. The original cause must be fetched from that Text, Genesis 3.15. where
God says, I will put enmity betwixt thee and the Woman, and between thy seed
and her seed, -- that Text gives you an account of the reason of a threefold
antipathy or enmity which you find in the World. 1. You see there is a natural
antipathy between the nature of Man and a Serpent, though we have little
experience of it in England: In Egypt and Africa they are mortal enemies unto
Men, and though we have no such exceedingly mischievous Serpents, yet we see
men generally averse to them, and shunning them, and seeking to destroy them.

2. There is an antipathy betwixt the Devil and us; you see by daily experience
that the Devil is the destroyer, though men serve him, yet he destroys them.
Witches are the worst of people, they are his slaves, he is their ruin and
destroyer at last; and for the people of God, he is continually molesting them.
Here is the reason,

3. There is an antipathy betwixt the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the
Serpent; who was the Woman's seed but Jesus Christ? Who are the seed of the
Devil but wicked men? You are of your Father the Devil, says Christ, John
8.44. for his works you do: But although this be the first and more remote
cause, yet there are other proximate and immediate causes, and some of them I
shall endeavor to give you an account of.

2. The next cause, is that Innate hatred of God, and the Image of God which is
in every man since the fall, Romans 1.30. The Apostle tells us of the Heathen,
that they were backbiters, haters of God -- This is a fruit of the fall, when
Man lost the Image of God in which he was created. No Man has a natural love
for God, or for the Image of God, as they say of the Basilisk, that it has
such a hatred to a man, that it will fly upon the Picture of a man, so it is
true that every Man and Woman by nature are Basilisks; they fly upon God, and
the Image of God where ever they see it: Now persecution is but the daughter of
hatred, and though every one has not the like rough and harsh nature, so that
he is not so furious as some men are; yet it is most certain that no man
naturally loves, yea every man naturally hates God, and the Image of God,
hence the more any one has of the Image of God upon his Soul, the more he is
the object of hatred, and the reason of this hatred lies in that unlikeness
that is betwixt a man in the state of nature, and a Holy God; a natural man is
quite contrary and unlike unto God, our Savior gives this very reason, John
15.18. If the World hate you, you know that it hated me, before it hated you.

3. A third reason of it is, because the works of the people of God do condemn
the works of the World. The Apostle Romans 1.30. Describes the Heathen as under
the notion of such as are haters of God, so under the notion of proud persons;
they are proud; the proud man cannot endure to think that any should be better
or do better, or be in a better case or condition then he is; now there is a
light of holiness by which the Child of God does outshine wicked men, and even
to rational eyes does appear more beautiful and comely; as, John 7.7. The world
cannot hate you, but me it hates, because I testify of it, that the works
thereof are evil; John 3.20. Every one that does evil, hates the light,
neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved; John 17.14. --
the world has hated them, because they are not of the world -- the men of the
world have so much corruption as will not suffer them to be as good as the
Disciples and Servants of God; but they have so much pride, as will not let
them be patient to think them better then themselves, or that they should be
reported better then they; the truth is, every good man is a Preacher of
righteousness, to a sinful world, he preaches by his conversation, and they
will not endure the Sermons that are made by a good example, any more than that
which is made by word of mouth.

4. A fourth great reason of the persecution of the people of God by the men of
the world, has been the liberty they have delighted to take in the things of
God, and their ambition to bring all others into a Subjection to their humors
in it: This upon search will be found to have been one of the most universal
causes of persecution at all times; this caused the persecution of the three
Children, which threw them into the Fiery Furnace; this was that which threw
Daniel into the Lions Den: There was a Law made that no man should pray but
only to the King, and Daniel could not be tied up to this Law, he is thrown
therefore into the Den of Lions: This was the cause of Christ and his Disciples
persecution, they did not observe the Tradition of the Elders: The Apostles
could not abide by the Decrees, which commanded them straightly, that they should
preach no more in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ; this has been the cause
of all the Popish persecution; in short, this always has been, and always will
be a root of violence and persecution of the people of God; the conscience of a
man in things of God, is a thing that will not, or cannot be controuled by a
humane Law; it is matter of Life and Death, of Salvation and Damnation, and a
Christian must act according to the dictate of his Conscience, when it does not
suit with the Conscience of the men of the World, then they fall upon him, and
this I say has continually been a fountain of blood and persecution; I come
now to the Application.

Use 1. This may let us see the favor of God to persons, whom the Lord has
spared more than others from this bitter Cup: Some particular periods of time
there have been, and some particular Christians there may be in all times, whom
the Lord does more favor than others; I would have such understand that the
Lord uses them as Benjamins, he sends them out a double Mess; the ordinary
portion of those that own the Gospel is persecution, God has promised his
people no more, Mark 10.30. -- Houses, and Brethren, and Sisters, and Mothers,
and Children, and Lands with persecution, -- 2 Timothy 3, 12. All that will live
Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 1.8. Has the Lord hid
thee in the storms and tempests, has he provided for thee, that thou do not
meet with these trials, that others of the Servants of God have met with, thou
have more abundant cause to bless the name of the Lord, thou see what
severity befalls thy Brother, and the goodness that attends thee.

Use 2. This speaks unto all the people of God to be preparing for trials:
And Secondly, To study their duty under them, that they may as the Prophet
speaks, glorify the Lord in the Fires; this is a word in season, and
therefore I shall take liberty to speak more fully to both Branches; and that
under these two Questions.

Qu. 1. What is the duty of the people of God, in reference to Persecution, not
come upon them, or not to that degree, which it is posble it may come to?

Qu. 2. What is the duty of the people of God in reference to Persecution,
already come, either upon themselves, or upon others?

Qu. 1. What should the people of God do in reference to Persecutions, that are
not yet come upon them, or at least not to that degree which they may expect or
fear, or which are come upon other Churches, or people of God. I answer,

1. Live in a daily expectation of them; we never worse encounter any evils
then those that surprise us; what we live in a daily view of, usually when it
comes, does not take so much impression upon our Spirits, as the evils that
fall upon us at unawares; 1 Pet. 4.12. Beloved, think it not strange concerning
the fiery Trial -- do not look upon it as a thing that shall not come, there is
nothing so much prejudiceth any man, as putting the evil day afar off, and
saying with David, I shall never be moved, when God hides his face in the
least, then we are troubled; look for a time when your goods shall be rifled,
when you shall be put into Prison, when you shall be brought to die for the
Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, there is nothing so pernicious to you as
security is Job puts a case to himself; if the Lord should kill me, says he,
yet I will trust in him; say sometimes to your selves, what should I do if God
should strip me naked? If I should be put to wander in Sheepskins, and
Goat Skins, be destitute and forsaken? You have all the reason in the world to
expect this at the world; the world hates you, as much as it hated all the
Prophets, all the Servants of God in former Ages, who met with this usage from
it; why should you not expect it, when the Lord has said, That all that will
live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution: I say when the Word has
said, that all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution;
what reason have thou to say to thy self, I will live godly in Christ Jesus,
and yet I shall not suffer persecution? You have not in this Age yet resisted
unto blood; but live in an expectation of such a time; that is my first counsel
to you.

2. Above all, Labor to ensure your peace with God, and get the best evidence
for Heaven that you can get; it is the policy of the Princes of the Earth, when
they see they shall certainly have a great War with some of their fellow
Princes, to make Leagues and Treaties with other Princes, that they may not
have them all upon them: I am sure it is great policy for the poor Flock of God
in the world, when they see they are like to have a War with the world, to give
all diligence to make their Callings and Election sure; to have a doubt or any
fears of the wrath of God, when the wrath of men boileth high against
Christians is a very uncomfortable thing; if ever there be a time for men to
wrestle with God in prayer, and to use all their endeavors to ensure their
interest in God; it is a time when the world is most likely to quarrel with
them, and they are likeliest to have the sharpest contest with men in the
world, that so they may not have at once two enemies on their Backs.

3. Labor the mortification of those lusts which may disturb your Souls in an
hour of persecution; it is the policy of all States, and all Nations, when they
fear a War, to weaken that party which when the War comes, they cannot trust
to, and to put them out of all Command at least, if they cannot quite quit them
of the place; it will be the policy of your Souls, if you would prepare for a
time of persecution, to weaken your lusts and corruptions, if you cannot out
them, at least to get them out of Command in your Souls, especially such lusts
as will be most subject to betray your Souls; you will say, what are those
lusts? What are those corruptions which are most subject to betray us in an
hour of persecution; I will instance in some of them.

1. A love of pleasures; it is given as the Character of wicked men, 2 Timothy
3.4. -- Lovers of pleasures -- they spend their years in pleasure, and in a
moment go down to the Grave, Titus 3.3. -- serving diverse lusts and pleasures:
-- These are things that are very grateful to our nature, but he that
harbors them in his bosom, will be very unfit for an hour of persecution;
as he said, who saw a brave Building, and Gardens, These are the things that
make us unfit for death; so truly we may say, these are the things that make us
unfit for persecution, they that cannot satisfy themselves without the delight
of the Eyes, and without the delight of the Ears, will hardly know how to
endure a Prison, or how to endure affliction, which were not affliction if it
were not a denial of our pleasures: Study the mortification of your hearts, as
to all the pleasures of this Life, Moses, Heb. 11.25. chose rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season.

2. Secondly, Study the mortification of wrath, anger and passion; a time of
persecution is a time that will anger us, we had not need be Choleric and
Techy in such a time, the want of this is that which makes Christians in
suffering to render evil for evil, reviling for reviling, and to study revenge;
passion wonderfully roileth the Soul in an evil day, and keeps it from
bearing the Yoke of God with that quietness, with which it ought to submit to
the good pleasure of God.

3. A Third Lust which much prejudiceth us in an hour of persecution is Pride,
and having an high opinion of our selves; in such a day as this, God is
levelling high Mountains, God is humbling all the pride of man's glory; take
heed of a heart lifted up, and swelling high in the opinion of your selves, if
ever you would endure an hour of persecution.

4. Get your hearts as much mortified to the World as you can. Paul gloried in
the Cross of Christ, by which the World was Crucified to him, and he Crucified
to the World, Gal. 6.14. All that persecution can hurt you in, is to divide you
from the World, and to imbitter the World to you; it cannot reach you as to
your heavenly concern, as to your interest there; so that the looser you stand
to the World, both as to your inward affections, and as to your more outward
dealings and trading in it, the fitter you will be for such an hour of trial;
what signifies the dividing of him from the World, who is already dead to the
World? When the heart is glued to worldly profits, or worldly relations, or
worldly employments and business, persecution makes a great breach; but where
the heart is divided from the World as to all these, so as it is not fond of
any of these things, it has no pleasure no delight in them, it can live
without them, persecution does little hurt. There is nothing so commendable to
the study of a Christian, as a preparation for persecution, as the loosening
themselves from Worldly employments which are as Nets, and entangle the Soul,
and the loosening the Soul from Worldly enjoyments, pleasures and profits, from
hearty affections to the World; this was that which made the Saints of God take
the spoiling of their goods with joy; this is that hating of Father, and
Mother, Wife and Children, which our Savior so presses upon his Disciples, it
is a not loving of them more than God; a loving them so as we can part with
them all, rather than sin against God, and wound our Consciences.

5. Take heed of any actions by which you may hasten or aggravate persecution;
and make it appear more bitter than it is. Though persecution be the lot of the
People of God; yet God should choose their lot for them, they ought not to carve
for themselves, afflictions are in themselves evils, and we may pray against
them, and may use means to prevent them, and it is our duty so to do; there are
two things that may hasten, aggravate and imbitter persecution to the people of
God.

1. Sinnings against God. There is no evil in the City which God has not done;
God uses the Sword of Persecutors to avenge his quarrels, take heed then of
sinning against God.

2. Indiscreet, imprudent conversations toward men. Take heed of any
provocative carriages; carry your selves as innocently as you will, the World
will be angry with you, take heed of making them more angry by things which you
are not obliged to do, which if done, will disoblige the Men of the World;
there is nothing that more imbitters our crosses to us, than the sour
reflections of our Consciences upon us under them.

6. Live in a daily contemplation of eternity, and a viewing of him who is
invisible; it is impossible that any thing should make us willing to cut off
the inch of time which we think may be added to our Lives but the view of
eternity; that any thing should make us willing to suffer the spoiling of our
goods with joy, but a knowledge that we have in Heaven a far more enduring
substance; that we should ever be willing to part with our dear and sweet
relations, but upon the sight of better company; if the Heathen upon the
contemplation of the Immortality of the Soul, could be content to make an end
of their Lives, surely we may hope, that our contemplation of the pleasures
that are at Gods right hand, should dispose and prepare us for the parting with
the pleasures of sin which are but for a season; the things which are seen,
they are temporal (says the Apostle) the things which are not seen they are
eternal. What was that which made Jacob endure the cold nights and watchings,
but the sight of Rachel. He had a prospect of a Rachel; his satisfaction in
her, was that which he thought would balance all at last. The quicker view of
eternity any Soul has, the cheaper all the World will be unto him.

7. Labor for a good stock of Faith, Patience and Wisdom. The more full assent
you give to the Proposition of the Word, and the firmer reliance you have upon
the Promises, the better you will endure an evil hour; you will easily
understand the reason of this, if you consider that persecution lies in
nothing else but in your being straightened, or suffering in things visible and
sensible, and faith is the evidence of things not seen. I told you before that
persecution only touches us in sensible parts, for else indeed they were no
afflictions; let me show you the force and power of Faith in this matter to
bring a man into a state fitting for persecution.

1. Faith shows an invisible God.

2. It shows us invisible things.

Faith shows unto us an invisible God. There is nothing so much emboldneth
the Soul to sin, as our not seeing of God; the Fool has said in his Heart,
There is no God; no God that has such an eye to see, no God so omnipotent, no
God so strict and severe in Justice, as he is said to be. Now the more a man
sees of an invisible God, the more a man despises all visible sensible things.

2. Faith shows unto the Soul invisible things, and those of an infinite
transcendency, and supereminent excellency above all things that are visible, 1
Cor. 2.9, 10. -- Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him. But
God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit, Psalm. 16.11. -- at thy right hand
there are pleasures for evermore, Heb. 11.16. -- a better Country, Heb. 11.26.
-- a recompense of reward, Heb. 10.34. -- a better and enduring substance. In
all persecution there are two things; poena sensus, poena damni; there is a
pain of sense, and there is a smart, in prisons and in death. Now Faith armeth
the Soul, showing him a God more armed to punish him in case of sin, than
persecution is armed to make him sin, Luke 12.4. -- Be not afraid of them that
kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do, (says our
Savior) but fear him that can cast both Body and Soul into Hellfire. This
takes away all the pain of sense in persecution; sense tells a man the
Persecutor can do no more than kill the Body, Faith drowns this, by showing the
Soul a God that has the Keys of Hell, and Death in his hand, and that can and
will cast the Soul into Hell fire; for the pain of sense, it is plain, that
Faith devoureth all that, and for the pain of loss, it takes away that: Is it
pleasure that makes thee loath to endure persecution, Faith shows the Soul
the pleasures at Christ's right hand, where are fullness of pleasures for
evermore; is it profit that makes thee loath to endure persecution? Faith
shows the Soul a more enduring substance, a recompense of reward which is
infinitely above thy proportion of labor; yea and Faith evidenceth this to the
Soul, and gives the Soul such an evidence of these things, that the Soul has
no more doubt, no more fear of these things, than if it had these other things
sensibly before its eyes; therefore labor for a stock of Faith; when I say
labor for it, I mean but two things; study the promises of God, that you may
understand them, and the compass of them; pray to God to make them stick to
your Souls; and as this Faith does it, and has a great influence upon the Soul
to make it valiant in its spiritual fight, so that Faith which is the reliance
of the Soul upon the Lord Jesus Christ, has a very great power and influence;
for this teaches the Soul to rest, and rely upon Christ alone for Salvation,
and lays the strongest and highest obligation imaginable upon the Soul to
love the Lord Jesus Christ; and again, to do nothing that may give an offense
unto him by disobedience to any of his Commandments.

8. Endeavor to furnish your selves with patience. Patience is either to be
considered in the act, or in the habit; I now speak of the habit of patience; a
power to exercise patience; patience is usually by Divines said to be active,
which is a power to wait the good pleasure of God, for the fulfilling of the
promise; or passive, a power quietly to bear the dispensation of God to us.
Both of them are highly necessary.

1. For the first, a power to wait for God, for the fulfilling of the promise,
Heb. 10.36, 37. For you have need of patience, that after you have done the
will of God, you might receive the promise: For, yet a little while, and he
that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. The staying of the Vision to an
appointed time, and Gods not making have in the fulfilling of the promise, is
that which shows us the need of this patience.

2. The second is a power to bear the good pleasure of God; and to suffer what
is his will. Both these are wonderful needful unto a Soul in an hour of
persecution. If you ask me how we shall come by patience, the answer is easy;
the more faith, the more patience, for faith begets patience; and because
the habits of both are infused by God, Prayer is the great means both to obtain
these and all other influences and habits of grace from God. Endeavor to
furnish your selves with the grace and habit of patience, patience is the
suffering grace.

9. Labor for spiritual wisdom. Wisdom is a practical habit which directs us
to use the best means, in order to a good end, this wisdom does not teach you
to deliberate at all about the thing, whether you should suffer or no, but only
concerning the manner and the circumstances of the thing; to do it in the best
manner, is as God shall have most honor, and your own Souls most peace and
comfort. You know our Savior says, be wise as Serpents, and the Apostle
James, to his Exhortation to patience presently subjoineth this of wisdom; If
any of you want wisdom, let him ask it of God; there is a great wisdom to be
used in suffering, 2 Timothy 2.5. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is
he not Crowned, except he strive lawfully. To this of the Apostle is subjoined,
v. 3. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. This
point of wisdom to be used in suffering is a large point, and I cannot speak so
much to it as I should; I shall only here say that it lies very much in
avoiding needless provocations of our adversaries, either by word or deed; they
will be angry do we what we can, but certainly it is the wisdom of a Christian
to avoid needless provocations, by suffering as patiently, as meekly, and
calmly as we are able.

10. Would you prepare for an hour of persecution? walk close with God. Walking
holily and closely with God, is the duty of a Christian at all times, both with
reference to his eternal Salvation, and in reference to his peace, but never
more needful than at such a time, Deuteronomy. 23.9. You shall find this passage; When
the Host goes forth against thine enemies, then keep thee from every wicked
thing. Israel was not only concerned to take heed of wickedness at all times,
but especially then, for fear of provoking God, when the Lords Sword is drawn;
when the Lion roareth, the Beasts of the Forest tremble; when a man enters
into persecution, he goes out to Battle; this is our Battle with the world: We
do at all times stand obliged to take heed of sin, but more at such a time than
at another: Our Lord speaking of his coming, says, Blessed is that Servant,
whom when his Master comes, he shall find so doing. When the Lord lets
loose the men of the world, to execute their rage against the people of God,
the Lord does come in a way of wrath and anger against his own people; you had
need at such a time take heed to your selves; every one girdeth his Raiment
close to him in a time of Winter, and pulls his Cloak close about him in a
storm; though a Christian stands obliged at all times to walk close with God,
yet if ever he may give himself a liberty and looseness as to a garment of
holiness, certainly it should not be in the Winter, it should not be when a
storm is coming.

11. Be much in Prayer. As we do nothing in our own strength, so do we much
less suffer in our own strength, Philip. 1.29. For unto you it is given on the
behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake.
It is a gift, and it must be given to us of God for to suffer; all gifts we
have from God are obtained by asking; the Lord gives his holy Spirit unto them
that ask it, and reason teaches us to double our Petitions, and to double our
fervor and heat in petitioning, when the mercy we ask is more necessary for
us, or at such a time when we stand in a more special and particular need of
that mercy which we go to God for; our Lord has taught us this by his example:
He went and prayed, and thrice repeated the same words, that is, the same
matter of prayer: I say by that example our Lord has showed us what is our
great duty in such a time to pray to God, either that the Cup may pass from us,
or that he would furnish us with grace and strength to glorify God in the fire;
thus much for the first Question.

Quest. 2. What is the duty of Christians, when the hour of persecution is come
upon them?

Here in the first place is a case of Conscience to be spoken to about flight;
Whether it be lawful for Christians to fly in a time of persecution to avoid
the storm?

There have been very different opinions of Divines, some have asserted it
utterly unlawful to fly; others moderate it, and say, That before a Christian
is taken, he may fly, but if he be taken, they think he ought to stand to it,
and not to fly; others have affirmed it, as a duty to fly: I do not think the
case is to be spoken to in the general, because circumstances will much alter
this case, as to flight, or voluntary withdrawing our selves.

1. It is lawful for a Christian to fly, when the cause of God cannot be
advantaged by his stay, but may be prejudiced; and when particular ties do not
oblige him for to stay; our Savior bids his Disciples, Math. 10.23. When they
persecute you in this City, flee you into another: I know some say, that this
was only a permission of a duty enjoined the Disciples of our Lord, to the
intent the Gospel may be Preached, but there is no question of this, that
self-preservation is a duty that we owe to our selves, and the very Law of
Nature obliges to it, when some particular law of God does not countermand the
law of nature; so long as there is any probable hope that the cause of God may
be advantaged by our stay, that a man stands as a stake in a Hedge, take it
out and the Hedge falls, he must not stir; but when the case is so, as a man's
stay can no way further the interest of God, he may lawfully withdraw; it is a
rule in War, when the Field is lost, no Captain doubts of providing for
himself; so though a man be a Minister of the Gospel, and of great use in a
place, yet when he sees the Church is dispersed, and he can do no good by his
stay, there is no question but in this case he may fly and secure himself.

2. It is yielded on all hands, That when the persecution is personal, it is
lawful for a Christian to avoid the dint of it; when a particular Minister is
aimed at, or a particular Christian, and there be others; who (if he be gone)
may do his work, and bear up the cause of God; I say in this case, it has been
granted to be the duty of persons to fly in a time of persecution; in short, I
take it to be the duty of Christians in such cases to withdraw, when they can
do it without sinning against God, the flight barely considered is no sin, if
no other sin attends it. If a man has boasted of his standing and then fly,
if a man cannot stir, but he must betray the interest of God in the place where
he is, or fail in his discharge of his duty to them whom the Lord has set him
in near Relation to, he may sin. But in the general when a man can withdraw,
and by his withdrawing not run into a neglect of any other duty by which he is
tied to glorify God, or to do good to the Souls of others, I believe it to be
so far from the duty of a Christian not to fly, as it is his duty to fly; I
conclude therefore:

1. In the first place, It is the duty of Christians in a time of persecution
to stand to it, to endure it until the Lord opens some door by which they may
go out without sinning against God; either deserting the interest of his honor
and glory, or their own duty to them to whom the Lord has set them in near
Relation: We may fly if God opens us a door, but we must not break our selves
a Gap, we must see God going before us, and guiding of us, as to what we do;
this is to be a good Soldier of Christ.

2. It is doubtless the great duty of Christians in such a time, to live as
winning and obliging a conversation as possibly we can, that we may not by any
Indiscretion pull down any suffering or trial upon our selves. We ought always
to remember we are Factors for God, and to walk so as to win others, but
especially at such times, when the worlds passions are in a great fermentation.

3. It is unquestionably a great duty of Christians in a time of persecution,
to study a charitable frame of spirit, Math. 5.44. But I say unto you, love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them that despightfully use you, and persecute you. You see this in
the practice of our Savior; Father forgive them, they know not what they do:
And Stephen praying when he was dying, Lord lay not this sin unto their charge;
1 Pet. 2.21. For hereunto were you called; because Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an example that you should follow his steps. Our hearts are very
prone to revenge, and the more causelessly we suffer from any, the more our
anger rises, and the more we are prone to study revenge, therefore the
mortification of anger in the checking of our passion, is highly necessary to
us in such an hour.

4. We ought not to be solicitous either what to say, or what to do. Be you
only careful of your duty, that you do not bring your selves into trials, that
you do not suffer as evildoers, either with respect to the cause for which you
suffer, or to any circumstances relating to it; see that you strive, and strive
lawfully, Mark 13.11. When they shall lead you and deliver you up, take no
thought before what you shall speak; neither do you premeditate, but whatsoever
shall be given you in that hour, that speak you, for it is not you that speak
but the Holy Ghost. You may be assured that God never calls you to any work,
but he will stand by you; you know who was in the fiery Furnace, Dan. 6.22. My
God has sent his Angels, says Daniel, and has shut the Lions mouths, that
they have not hurt me, 2 Timothy 4.16. At my first answer no man stood with me,
but all men forsook me, v. 17. Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and
strengthened me. You have heard of the profession of the Martyrs burning at the
stake, they felt no more pain than if they were in a Bed of Roses; study
nothing more than how you may be able to glorify God in the fires.

5. Then if ever it is your duty not to be seeking great things for your selves
in this life, Jer. 45.5. Seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not
-- A Christian should order his Conversation in Conformity to Gods
dispensation; he should not be clothing himself with Ornaments, when God is
stripping of him; he should not then be furnishing his house with fine things,
when Gods providence is stripping of him naked; he should not then be perfuming
himself with sweet smells, when the Lord is sending him a stench and rents.

6. Then, if ever, a Christian stands most highly concerned to fill his
thoughts with spiritual objects, to be thinking of the pleasures at Gods right
hand, thinking of that substance that shall endure, of that better Country,
which God h^th prepared for his people.

7. A Christian ought in an hour of trial, to be ready to give a reason of the
hope that is in him, to every one th^^ asks with meekness, and with fear: If
you observe that Text, 1 Pet. 3.15. It is mixed with the Apostles directions to
Christians, how to behave themselves under persecution, a Christian is not
bound to bring himself into trouble; but if the Lord has spread his Net over
him that he cannot escape; if the Lord has hedged up his way with Thorns, he
ought to be ready to give an account of his Faith, and of his hope to them that
ask him: Peter failed in this, who denied that he knew the man of whom the Maid
spoke; but I pray observe, there is a difference to be put betwixt a Confession
of our Faith, and a Confession of a Fact; I do not think that in a matter of
Fact a Christian is bound to betray himself: When Pilate asked our Savior,
Math. 27.11. Art thou the King of the Jews? Jesus said unto him: Thou say.
But this is not all, we are not only to be ready to give a reason of our Faith,
or of our hope, but we must do it with meekness and with fear, in an humble
manner, with that due reverence which is due unto those, whom the Lord has set
in a station above us.

8. We are not to be ashamed of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of his words, Mark
8.38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this
adulterous and sinful generation of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed,
when he comes in the glory of his Father with his holy Angels. Luke 12.8. --
Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of man also c^^sess
before the Angels of God. And you may find the same thing, Math. 10.32. The
Apostle observes of our Lord, 1 Timothy 6.13. That he before Pontius Pilate
witnessed a good confession. Upon which account he adjureth Timothy, that
according to his example he also should fight the good fight, and keep the
Faith. Here arises a Question.

Quest. What is to be determined in this case, when the Magistrate commands
that which he ought to command; or which at least he thinks he may command,
and the Christian does not obey, because he thinks that in obeying he should
sin against God; whether in this case is the Superiors Act Persecution, and
the Inferior persecuted yea or no?

1. I answer, it unquestionably depends not upon the Judgment of men, whether
the thing commanded be lawful or unlawful, that issue must be determined by
God; for God alone is Judge of truth and falsehood, of what is lawful or
unlawful; and such pursuits must be determined at the Bar of God, whether they
be persecution or not.

2. It is most certain, men may persecute others for righteousness sake, and
yet think they do that which they ought to do, Acts 26.9. I verily thought with
my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of
Nazareth, John 16.2. Whosoever kills you will think he does God service. And
it is as certain, men may think they suffer for righteousness sake, when they
suffer for their iniquity as evil doers, as Priests and Jesuits do.

3. When the Superior thinks himself bound to do it, he must do it; and
where the other thinks he is bound to suffer, he ought to suffer; yet the one
may be punished for doing, the other may be rewarded for suffering.

4. When the Magistrate is not bound, but only uses his liberty, though he
thinks the Subject be bound to obey, yet I cannot see how the action shall be
excused from persecution, the reason is, the Superior may forbear his command,
the Inferior cannot avoid his suffering; this is in short, what I think of
this case.

9. Remember them that are in bonds, Heb. 13.2. Remember them that are in
bonds, as bound with them. You should remember them in your prayers, Acts 12.5.
Peter was kept in prison, prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto
God for him. Romans 15.30. -- Strive together with me, in your prayers to God for
me. Remember them in your visits. Mat 25.36. -- I was sick, and you visited me.
Remember them with your purses. In the Primitive Church Christians upon this
account had all things common, Acts 4.34. For as many as were possessors of
lands, or houses, sold them, and brought the prices of the things which were
sold. 2 Cor. 8.14. That now at this time your abundance may be a supply for
their want. Phil. 4.15. No Church communicated with me as concerning giving and
receiving, but you only. There is yet one piece of duty behind, and that our
Savior here hinteth; Rejoice and be exceeding glad. Here are three things I
shall insist upon.

1. I will open the words to you, and show you the import of them, what this is
to rejoice, and be exceeding glad.

2. I will answer the Question, how we can rejoice and be exceeding glad?

3. I will show you the ground upon which a Christian should be exceeding glad.
Rejoice, says our Savior, and be exceeding glad. Joy is nothing but the
satisfaction of the Soul in the union that it has with some good thing that is
present, so as it must necessarily signify these things.

Negatively, 1. A satisfaction of mind in opposition to grief, and trouble, and
affliction. Grief is the true opposite to Joy; when we are bid to rejoice, we
are bid not to grieve; for no man can rejoice and grieve heartily in a breath;
persecution is not a thing fit for a Christians tears. Indeed there is nothing
fit for a Christians tears but only sin; and so far there may be matter of
grief for us under a persecution, if it has been brought upon us by our sins,
or by our indiscretion; but take it as it is a suffering for the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, it is not. He slurs the Crown of Martyrdom that droppeth a
tear, or spends a sigh upon it: Let men howl and weep that are sent to Gaol,
and brought to the Gallows for the satisfaction of their lusts; but let them
take heed of grieving, that are only sent to prison, or brought to a stake, for
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. A satisfaction of mind in opposition to discontent, murmuring or repining;
for not only grief, which is directly opposite to our joy, will spoil our
mirth, but even a discontent and dissatisfaction will spoil our joy; for joy
requires the satisfaction of the mind, so as it must be at rest, and not
tossed up and down with the waves of many fears and cares. Christians should
not be discontented at God's dispensations; they should not grudge, nor
murmr, nor repine at God, if he shall please to bring them under such a
dispensation as to suffer for his Name sake.

3. It implies a satisfaction of mind, in opposition to solicitude; as he
whose heart is full of grief, or whose heart is full of discontent, cannot
rejoice: So he whose heart is full of carefulness, cannot rejoice neither. This
is that which our Lord cautioneth his Disciples against, Take no thought of
what you shall say; and this is the reason that in those fierce and furious
times, the Apostle did so caution Christians, 1 Cor. 7.32. I would have you be
without carefulness, Phil. 4.6. Be careful in nothing, 1 Pet. 5.7. Casting all
your care upon him, for he cares for you. So then, when our Lord calls unto
his Disciples to rejoice, and to be exceeding glad, he forbids them
immoderate grief, murmuring and repining at God's dispensations; and he
forbids them sollicitous and anxious care, either what they should say, or
how they should bear the Cross that the Lord brings them under.

2. But Secondly, There is something positive, and this our Savior does hint
to us by the two words that he uses in this place, (...), the latter word
signifies a great excess of joy, which does not keep within the bounds of the
heart, but breaks forth in actions. Divines have observed that it answers
an Hebrew word, which signifies dancing joyfully, and is used of David, 1 Chronicles. 15.29. dancing before the Ark; and this agrees with James 1.2. Count it
all joy when you fall into diverse temptations; where temptations signifies
persecutions.

Thus the Apostle, Acts 5.41. They departed from the presence of the Council,
rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name. It is the
duty of Christians not only not to grieve and be troubled, not only not to be
discontented, and to murmr and repine; not only to be free from solicitude
and trouble of spirit because of persecution, but on the contrary, to rejoice
and to be glad, yea and that with the greatest excess of joy, to leap for joy.

Obj. But will some Christians say, How should a Christian do this? Can a man
rejoice in evil? Is it not contrary to the very nature of man to rejoice in an
evil? Is it not contrary to whatsoever is the duty of a Christian, to rejoice
in the afflicting hand of God upon him? How then shall a man be glad and
rejoice in persecution, and either answer the Law of Nature, or the Will and
Pleasure of God, not taking notice of his dispensations?

Sol. I answer; First, It is one thing to rejoice in the affliction, and
another thing to rejoice in the time of the affliction; it is one thing to
rejoice when we are persecuted, and another thing to rejoice because we are
persecuted. God does not require that of you which is contrary to your Humane
Nature; God requires of no man to rejoice because he suffers, but yet he may
rejoice when he is persecuted; he may rejoice that he is thought worthy to
suffer.

2. It is one thing to rejoice in the smart of a persecution, another thing to
rejoice in the cause of a suffering, and the fruit and effect of suffering. God
does not require of any person to rejoice in the smart of an evil, but only in
the cause, and in the fruit of it, which I shall open further to you.

3. It is one thing for a Christian to rejoice in persecution, as it is a token
of God's anger and displeasure, another thing for to rejoice in it, as a means
by which it pleases God to make the Soul of his Saints perfect unto glory. The
Apostle tells us, that no affliction is joyous at present, but grievous.

3 Obj. The last Question which remains is, What ground of solid joy and
rejoicing has a Christian under persecution?

I shall open this to you in several particulars. I begin with those of the
Text.

1. Because the Lord has blessed them. This is matter of joy. Is it not matter
of joy to a Christian, that he is in such a condition as he is under a
blessing; yea not under a single blessing, but under a treble blessing? Is it
nothing to you, Sirs, to be blessed of God, to have him who knows the state
of every Soul, in whose hand are all blessings, and cursings, and whom he
blesses they shall be blessed, and whom he curses they shall be cursed? Is it
nothing for you to be in such a state, that you are sure you are under the
blessing of God, that you are some of those he has pronounced blessed, thrice
over blessed, though you be here some of them who are hated, reviled and
persecuted, and spoken evil of falsely for the Lords Name sake?

2. Yours is the Kingdom of Heaven. You have a phrase very like this, which
will come into consideration; Great is your reward in Heaven. I shall not at
present consider it in that sense. Our Savior says elsewhere, The Kingdom of
Heaven is within you. The Kingdom of Heaven within us is the Throne of Christ
set up in our hearts, 1 Pet. 4.14. The Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon
you. So this shall be an evidence unto you, that the Kingdom of God is set up
in your hearts. Thus the words of our Savior are made good; It shall be unto
you for a testimony. The Kingdom of Christ is then set up in any Soul, when
Christ rules, and other things truckle under him and his Law; when a Christian
overcomes in a good fight; when he is too hard for the World, that they cannot
flatter him into a disobedience to Christ, nor frown him into a disobedience of
Christ, it is a sign that Christ sits as Lord and as King in that Soul, and
the Kingdom of Heaven is within that man; it is a testimony of grace, and that
the Spirit of God rests upon that man, and the Spirit of Glory rests on
that man. On your part (says the Apostle) he is glorified.

3. Great is your reward in Heaven. The Papists make a great stir about the
term of a reward, as if it must needs be a correlative to a work; but as there
is a reward of debt, (as you reward a man that has labored for you, and done
you some valuable service) so there is also a reward of grace. The Father says
to the Child, if you will do such a thing, I will give you a new Coat; here is
a reward given upon the Child's obedience; but yet the Child's obedience does
not earn it. There is a reward of grace, as well as a reward of debt; there is
a reward of a work, which is not always a just reward for a work; life
everlasting is promised as the reward of them that suffer persecution; But our
afflictions are, says the Apostle, but light and momentany afflictions, though
they work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, James 1.12.
Is not this matter of rejoicing, that the reward of a man is great in Heaven? 2
These. 1.7. It is a token to you of rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed.

4. They persecuted the Prophets that were before you. There is a great cause
of rejoicing in this.

1. It is no new thing to you; it is but what has been the Lot of the people
of God formerly.

2. As it is no new thing to men, so particularly not to the most eminent
Servants of God. Such were the Prophets; nay, the more eminent they were in
their Generation, the more they have been brought under this Rod.

3. This administreth further comfort to Christians in suffering, that those
who have professed to the same Religion, yet have persecuted those born after
the Spirit. The Jews owned the same God, and the same Religion that the
Prophets did, yet they persecuted the Prophets. Lastly,

4. It speaks you the true Members of the Church. You partake of the common
afflictions of the Members of it; that our Lord might let them know, that it
was no new thing, he says, They persecuted the Prophets which were before you,
that our Lord might let them know they were not too good for persecution, he
says, So persecuted they the Prophets, who yet were the best of the Servants of
God, lest it should be a trouble to them, that persons owning the same
Religion, were their Enemies; he says, So persecuted they the Prophets, that
he might show them with whom they had communion in their sufferings, namely,
with the Ancient Church of God, he says, For so persecuted they the Prophets.

5. I must yet rise one note higher; you are partakers of the afflictions of
Jesus Christ; this is a ground of rejoicing; Rejoice, says the Apostle, 1 Pet.
4.13. in as much as you are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his
glory shall be revealed, you may be glad also with exceeding joy, Phil. 1.20.
Christ shall be magnified in my body, Col. 1.24. Who now rejoice in my
sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind, of the afflictions of
Christ in my flesh. St. Paul, Phil. 3.10. desired to know him, and the power of
his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his Sufferings, being made conformable
to his Death. If (says the Apostle) we suffer with him, that we may be also
glorified together. Romans 8.17, 18. For I reckon that the sufferings of this
life, are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us.

Thus far I have discoursed the duty of God s people relating to an hour of
persecution, whether imminent, or already come upon them; but in all
persecution, there must be an Agent as well as a Patient.

Last Use. Must this be the Lot of the Servants of God, of all those that will
live godly in Christ Jesus, to suffer persecution, take heed your hand be not
upon them. Offenses must come, says our Savior, Luke 17.1, 2. but woe unto
him through whom they come: It were better for him that a Millstone were hanged
about his neck, and he were cast into the Sea. The will of God concerning an
event, will not justify the proximate cause or agent in an action; undoubtedly
of all sins, there is no sin that is greater in its kind than this.

1. Consider with your selves, by way of comparison, if it be a great sin for a
man to do hurt to those that are innocent, how much greater must it be to do
evil to one, because he does good? God has taken a particular charge of
innocent persons, Exodus 23.7. The innocent and righteous person stay thou not,
says God, Deuteronomy. 27.25. Cursed be he that takes reward to slay an innocent
person, Job 22.30. He shall deliver the Island of the innocent. Now I say, if
that stealing from a man that has done me no harm, or the taking away his
goods by violence, or oppressing him be such a guilt in the sight of God, judge
how great the sin must be to slay a righteous person, to undo, or do injury to
a person merely because he does that which is good, and dare not sin against
the Lord his God.

2. I would have you consider how much the Lord interesteth himself in the
quarrels of his people, and in their injuries; He that touches you, says God,
touches the Apple of my Eye. The Lord counts his people as the Apple of his
Eye, as his Jewels. Now for you to plunder the Lord's Jewels, for you to
venture to touch the Apple of God's Eye, judge what the issue shall be. When
Saul was breathing out threatening, and bringing persecution upon the Church of
God, the Lord called unto him out of Heaven, saying, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? And when he said, Who art thou Lord? the Answer was, I am
Jesus whom thou persecutest. And if the Lord does so severely take notice of
the omissions of doing good to his people, Mat. 25.41. Pronouncing the
Sentence, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. Verse 42. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I was
thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: Verse 43. I was a stranger, and ye took me
not in; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick and in prison, and ye visited me
not. What do you think the Lord will do to them that take their bread from
them, and their garments from them, and are Instruments to throw them into
prison?

3. I would have you consider what a dreadful vengeance has followed them who
have been Instruments in persecution in all times. You know how the Lord
punished Cain, so as he cried out, My punishment is greater than I am able to
bear. You know how the Lord punished Ishmael, Pharaoh and Jezebel, and the
Jewish Nation. In short, this work of persecution has been the ruin of all
those that have ever meddled with it; Christ, that stone which the builders
refused, has fallen upon them, and ground them to powder, Luke 20.18. Precious
in the sight of God is the blood of his Saints; he will requite it. If the
blood of a Man slain, does so defile a Land, Numb. 35.33.
that the Land shall not be purged but by the blood of him that shed it; what
do you think will the precious blood of the Saints do? What therefore Pilate's
Wife said unto him, in her message, Have thou nothing to do with that righteous
person: So I say, have nothing to do with men that only strive against sin, and
put themselves upon suffering in this extremity, rather than they will sin
against God; let others meddle at their perils, but have you nothing to do with
them. Take heed of all persecution; and that you may know what you are to
avoid, let me desire you to compare this Text with Luke 6.22. Blessed are you,
when men hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and
shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil.

1. The root of persecution is hatred; and he that hates a man, because he
does not sin, persecuteth.

2. The Eldest Daughter of hatred is separating from them, from their company;
let those that have to do with persecution, consider this.

3. The third thing is casting out their name, reproaching, reviling, speaking
evil of them.

4. Another thing in that which is set out under the notion of persecution,
reaches to the spoiling them of their goods, of their liberty, and of their
lives. Take heed of it, if God makes it their lot, yet be you not the
Instruments in setting out their lot to them. Executioners of Justice are
necessary in a State, yet the Employment, we see, is what none is ambitious of.
Offenses must come. There must be some to persecute, but woe be to those by
whom they come. Persecutors are but the Executioners of Divine Decrees and
Justice, but they mean not so. God will reckon with them, not for executing his
will, but for executing their own lusts of malice and rage. Not many of them
die the deaths of other men.

SERMON. 12.
2 Cor. 4.8, 9. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are
perplexed, but not in despair;

Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed.


MY Text is made up of Riddles, seeming, but no real contradictions, where
several things seem first to be said, then denied, concerning the Apostles of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Primitive Christians, whose lives, (as the lives
of many good Christians) are still made up of things hardly intelligible to
carnal men, who know of no distresses, but what are from without, no despair,
but that whose object is some muddy earthly good, no forsaking but that of
Providence, no destroying but that of the flesh, but yet intelligible enough to
those who have tasted how good the Lord is, and who have senses exercised to
discern betwixt good and evil. What is said here, has been true, and is at
this day true of many thousands, besides those of whom the Text primarily
speaks, for that speaks only of the Apostles and Primitive Christians, but it
concerns us, upon whom the fagg-end of the World is come, and who live in the
latter part of the last days. For whatsoever things were written before, were
written for our Learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.4. The things that have been are, and shall
be, and there is nothing new under the Sun. There is no temptation has
befallen you (says the Apostle) but what is common to men.

The second Epistle of St. Paul to the Church at Corinth, is thought to have
been written soon after his first Epistle to them from Philippi, one of the
first Cities upon the Coast of Macedonia, Acts 16.12. Thither Paul went, Acts
20.1, 2. when he departed from Ephesus, after the uproar made at Ephesus, chapter
19. by Demetrius, for fear that by the Gospel coming amongst them, he should
lose his Trade of making Silver-shrines for Diana. The occasion of the writing
of it to those that read it, will appear to be to vindicate himself from the
calumnies and aspersions which false Teachers had cast upon him, who charged
him with levity, pride, ostentation, rendered his person contemptible, etc. as
also to acknowledge to them their forwardness in contribution to the Saints,
their kind reception of Titus, and the good effect his former Epistle had. In
this and the foregoing chapter he magnifieth his Office, in opposition to those
who had vilified him, as from other things, so from the scandal of the Cross
under which he was. You have in the Text,

1. Paul's external state and condition, or his outward deformity and misery;
he was troubled, perplexed, persecuted, cast down.

2. His inward beauty, support and consolation, in those words, Not distressed,
not in despair, not forsaken, not destroyed.

Hence two Propositions are obviously the Propositions of Truth contained in
this Text.

Prop. 1. The best of God's people may be troubled on every side, perplexed,
persecuted, cast down.

Prop. 2. It is their peculiar privilege, that when they are troubled, they
are not distressed; when they are perplexed, they are not in despair; when they
are persecuted, they shall not be forsaken; when they are cast down, they shall
not be destroyed.

The substance of the first Proposition is no more than this; That there is no
kind, no degree of trouble, to which the most eminent Servants of God are not
in this life subjected and exposed. Here are four words in the Text, the
signification of which this great Apostle of the Gentiles applies to himself,
the other Apostles, and the Primitive Christians of his Age, which are
expressive of this, (...). All trouble you know is either External, or
Internal, either from the immediate hand of God, or from the just hand of God;
mediately by the wicked hands of men, or from our selves (for we are sometimes
our own tormentors.) These words are expressive of all these kinds of trouble.
Let me a little open these terms to you.

(...), we translate it, troubled on every side. In the Greek it is, In all, or
every (suppose) place, or kind, or thing in every circumstance of our lives.
The word is used generally, to signify any kind of affliction that presses a
man, and so used, Joh. 16.33. In the World you shall have (...), trouble: We
meet with more than one kind of trouble in the World, derived either from
(...), a word signifying to break, or (...), which signifies to wear, because
trouble and affliction either breaks us in our body, or bodily comforts, or in
our spirits, and wears us; it signifies to pinch us (as a shoe pincheth our
foot.) The way to Heaven is called, (...), a strait way, which men must crowd
hard to get through. God's people are pressed, straightened, pinched, (or as this
verse is) troubled, (...), on every side, in every place, upon all turns, in
all the circumstances of their lives, the World would be rid of them, and God
would wean them from the World; God therefore by his providence makes every
place, every circumstance of the World uneasy to them, and suffers the World
to break them, and wear them up as fast as may be. God is hastening the time
when he will rain Fire and Brimstone on Sodom, and he cannot do it till his Lot
be out: He is therefore by daily providence, calling away his Lots, that he
may be let alone whiles he executes Vengeance on his Enemies to the utmost,
and not be kept off by their Importunities for one year longer.

2. The next word by which the Apostle expresses their state is, (...), it
signifies to doubt and be in suspense, Gal. 4.20. John 13.22. Acts 25.20. It is
a word that signifies a trouble through an uncertainty of mind, which may not
only respect Propositions of Truth, or Promises, but Issues of Providence,
which is an incertainty which Gods people are, and may be at; for who knows
what a day may bring forth? The complexion of providence may be so lowering (to
humane sense) upon the Church of God, that the best and wisest of them may be
(...), at an incertainty of mind, not able to determine what God will be
pleased to do either with themselves or with his people (the generality of
them) in such or such a Precinct; for though the Gates of Hell shall never
prevail against the Universal Church, or all individual Believers, yet they may
prevail against a particular Church, or some particular Members of it, so as
the wisest men, having no sure word of Prophecy, or Promise to cast Anchor
upon, may be (...), in a great doubt what God will do with them, or the Church
to which they relate. Critics derive the word from the privative particle, a,
which is as much as not, and (...), transitus, according to which notion it
signifies without a passage. To be in trouble, and to have, and see no way out,
in such a condition as the Lepers were when the Famine prevailed in Samaria, 2
Kings 7.4. If they stayed there, they saw they must starve, if they went into
the City, they must die there, if they went to the Syrian Army, it was a
venture whether they would not kill them. These men were now (...), perplexed,
and the best of men may be in such a condition as to outward circumstances. In
this case Job was, chapter 3.23. his way was hid, God had hedged him in. The Church
was in such a case, Lam. 3.7. He has hedged me about, that I cannot get out.
Though indeed these outward stresses of providence, are not so properly the
(...), as the doubtfulness, anxiety, and suspense of mind upon them.

3. A third word by which the Apostle expresses their state is (...), a word
both frequently and variously used in the New Testament; as it is applied to
things or persons, it properly signifies an hot, eager, and violent pursuit of
a person or thing, and the humane action expressed by it is good or bad,
according to the Object or Cause, the thing or person prosecuted, or the cause
of the prosecution. It is generally (in the New Testament, when it is applied
to persons) used to signify the eager and constant prosecuting of persons for
Christ's sake, or for righteousness sake. So Mat. 5.10, 44. chapter 10.23. And thus
(some observe) that being applied to persons it always does signify in the New
Testament.

4. The last word by which their state is expressed, is (...), which signifies
thrown, or cast down; it does not signify such a casting down, as a man
sometimes afflicts himself with, by a demission of his spirits, and failing
in his courage; such a casting down as is mentioned, Psalm. 37.14.62.4. Thus
Paul and the Primitive Christians were cast down by the tongues and hands too
of wicked men, both Jews and Gentiles, such a casting down as the Devil is said
to be cast down by, Rev. 12.10. Where the very same word is used that is used
here.

So then, the sense of the Proposition is this, That the best of God's people
may be broken in pieces, worn with afflictions, in such circumstances, as may
cause them, as to their external concerns, to be in great doubt what to do,
great perplexity and suspense, violently, and incessantly pursued by wicked
men, who may overtake them, and cast them down from their dignity and
excellency. I shall not stay upon the proof of this, which needs none to
those that are but meanly acquainted with the Story of Scripture, and reflect
upon the History of Joseph, Jacob, the Israelites in Egypt, David, Christ, the
Apostles. Nor shall I offer at any Reasons of it. The sweetness lies in the
next Proposition.

Prop. That though they be troubled on every side, yet they shall not be
distressed; though they be perplexed, they shall not be in despair; though they be
persecuted, they shall not be forsaken; though they be cast down, they shall not
be destroyed.

Here now are four words answering the former four; four good words answering
the four former evil words; four words expressing their relief and grounds of
consolation, as the other four expressed their misery and afflictions; let us
examine also the import of them; and 2dly, see how these Predicates agree with
the aforementioned Subjects.

1. The first word is (...), it properly signifies to be straightened in place,
as a man who is crowded up in a narrow room, where he has not sufficient room
or space for his body; thence by a metaphor it is used to signify any
affliction which bears any proportion to this, Romans 2.9. chapter 8.35. 2 Cor.
6.4. 12.10. where it is translated distresses. Now, says the Apostle, we are
indeed troubled on every side, but we are not straightened as to our minds; we are
imprisoned, but we have yet a liberty in our spirits, they are, and shall be
free prisoners; thus Paul and Silas were, Acts 16. who sang in their prison at
midnight. Their bodies were in little ease, but their spirits were at great
liberty; they were not straightened in their own bowels. There is this Riddle
opened; the (...), being in trouble on every side, that referred to their
outward man; (...), not in distress, that referred to their inward man, to
their better part.

2. The second phrase is, (...), we translate it, not in despair, that is, not
wholly in despair. The Praeposition (...) in this place increases the
signification of the Verb (...), to which it is in this Text opposed; he had
said before, that they were in anxiety, in suspense, at uncertainties; but yet
(says he) not wholly at incertainties; we are at incertainty what God will do
with us as to our bodies, liberties, or outward concerns; but we are at no
incertainty what is our duty, nor what God will do with us as to our souls, as
to our spiritual or eternal concernments.

3. The third phrase by which their happiness is expressed, is (...), we
translate it, not forsaken. It is a decompound Verb; the simple Verb signifies
to leave, or to forsake, so does the compound. Critics say the Decompound here
used, signifies more, viz. to leave one in distress when he is in the greatest
danger. It is used by our Savior hanging upon the Cross, Mat. 27.46. Mark
15.34. Acts 2.27. Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, 2 Timothy 4.16. All did
forsake me, Heb. 10.25. 13.5. In all which places it signifies a leaving in
distress, or in a time of danger. God's people shall not be left in time of
danger. But this must be understood of God's special gracious presence,
respecting their inward man; for as to the presence of his providence with
respect to their more external concerns, they are often left.

4. The fourth phrase is, (...), we translate it, not destroyed, which indeed
is the ordinary signification of it, and it never signifies less than dead; it
often signifies eternal destruction. We are (says the Apostle) cast down in
our honor and reputation, and from the station we have formerly had in the
World, but we are not cast into Hell, we are not yet killed, and cast into the
grave.

The Proposition then comes to this; That God will not utterly cast off and
forsake his people, when they are in the greatest dangers, and difficulties
imaginable; he may seem to forsake them, he may withdraw from them something of
his providence which he before afforded them, but he will not wholly withdraw
himself from them.

This leads me (in the next place) to inquire what tokens of Gods presence,
and influences of God upon them, the People of God have experienced, and may
expect in the times of their greatest dangers and difficulty. These are
various, few or none possibly have experienced all, and scarce any of Gods
People but have experienced some or other of them, and may live in the
expectation of them. I will instance in some few.

1. Sometimes they shall experience the Divine power. Once have I spoken (says
the Psalmist) and twice have I heard it, that power belongs unto God. This
power is inseparable from the Divine Being, wherever that is, Omnipotence
must be, but as to the exerting of it this or that way, that depends upon the
will of God. Man does not necessarily, at all times, exert that power which is
at all times in him, and natural to him, but governs himself by his reason
and wisdom, in the use of his power. So does God, sometimes he is pleased not
to show forth what he could of his power, either in preserving his People from
the hands, or out of the hands of their Enemies, he has wise ends, why he will
suffer them to fall into their hands and to be overpowered by them. But
sometimes when they are in trouble they shall have the Experience of the Divine
Power, to keep them from destruction. The Angel of the Lord shall by night open
the Prison Doors, and let out the Apostles, Acts 5.19. And knock off Peter's
chains, and carry him along with him, Acts 12.7. An Earthquake shall arise, the
foundation of the prison shall be shaken, and the Doors opened, and the
Apostles bands shall be loosed, Acts 16.26. Elijahs enemies shall be smitten
with blindness, and led into their Enemies City. God will make a way to escape
the temptation, 1 Cor. 10.13. God will sometimes let his proudest enemies see
and know, that wherein they talk, or act proudly, he will be above them. This
particular appearance of God is not the object of our faith. It is but what God
has formerly done, and does still in some particular instances, but not what
he has by promise tied himself to do; thus the Children in Egypt, the three
Children in Daniel, Daniel himself were persecuted, but not forsaken, as to the
influence of the Divine power for them.

2. But God chooses not thus at all times to make his Power glorious. Sometimes
he will make his wisdom glorious, they shall seem to be forsaken as to his
power, his arm shall not be made bare for them, but they shall experience the
presence of his wisdom, and that two ways, 1 Sometimes taking the wise in their
own craftiness. Job 5.12, 13. He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so
that their hands cannot find their interprise, he takes the wise in their own
craftiness and the Counsel of the froward is carried headlong.

Thus the Jews experienced the presence of God in the case of Hamans conspiracy
to destroy them all. Infinite instances might be given of this in all ages. 2
Sometimes he will fit his people sufficiently to deal with them, Luke 21.15. I
will give you a mouth and wisdom, which none of your Enemies shall be able to
resist. This was verified as to Stephen, Acts 6.20. Of whom it is said, Acts
6.20. That his adversaries were not able to resist the wisdom, and the Spirit,
by which he spoke. Hence Christ commanded his first disciples that when their
enemies should deliver them up, they should take no thought how, or, what they
should speak, for it should be given them in that same hour what they should
speak. For (says our Savior) it is not you that speak, but the Spirit of your
Father which speaks in you, Matthew. 10.19, 20. This was eminently made good to
the first and most famous Ministers of the Gospel, and has in its measure been
since made good in all succeeding ages, so as plain, illiterate, ignorant
creatures, have been able to put to silence the wisest and most learned of
their proud, and cruel adversaries.

3. Sometimes the presence of God is seen with his people in giving them a
great liberty and freedom of Spirit, so as they have not been (...), straightened
in their own bowels; they have been straightened as to room for their bodies, shut
up in close prisons, but their Spirits have been at perfect liberty. This
liberty of our Spirits is seen in a Well pleasedness, a satisfaction, and
contentment with the will of God concerning us. So as we are never less in
prison then when we are in prison; and the Truth is, a prison is nothing to him
who has his Soul and spirit at liberty. Those who have read any Martyrologies
have found instances enough of this, how many Servants of God have found in
prisons, and under their great variety of sufferings, the greatest freedom of
their Spirit, both for doing, and suffering, and from slavish fears imaginable.

4. Sometimes they experience the presence of God with them, giving them
courage. This was that boldness which the Sanhedrim took notice of in Peter and
John, Acts 4.13. which made them marvel; and it is said, that they took
knowledge of them that they had been with Jesus. God sometimes will not let his
people see his power, in delivering them from an evil, nor his wisdom, in
countermining their Adversaries; but they shall experience him making them
courageous and valiant in the spiritual fight, so as they shall not be afraid
at what man can do unto them. Nothing destroys a man in sufferings but
slavish fears, and dejections; whiles the Spirit of a man holds, he can bear
his infirmity; he may be cast down, but he cannot be destroyed. You shall
observe it in reading the History of the Church, as recorded in holy writ, or
in other Books, that it has pleased God sometimes to pick out some persons to
be his witnesses to some Truths; with these now the presence of God has not
been to cover them, and preserve them from their Enemies, nor yet to deliver
them, once fallen into their hands, but giving them a mighty Spirit and courage
to go thorough their sufferings. For this was the Apostles prayer, Acts 4.29.
And now Lord, behold their threatenings, and grant unto thy Servants, that with
all boldness they may speak thy word. This was Paul's declared expectation and
hope, Phil. 1.20. That in nothing he should be ashamed; but that with all
boldness (as always) so now, Christ should be magnified in his body, whether by
life or death. Such is reported to have been the courage of Cyprian, when he
heard the Sentence of condemnation published against him; He thanked God for
it; and when the Proconsul would have had him to have deliberated upon it, he
presently and boldly replied, In re tam justa nulla est deliberatio, there was
no need of deliberation in so just and righteous a Cause. Such was the Spirit
of Basil, when the Emperor Valens threatened him with punishment, and
banishment, Pueris illa terriculamenta propone (says he) Scare Children with
those Bugbears; you may take my life from me, but the confession of the Truth
you cannot take from me.

5. Lastly, (To name no more) sometimes God's not forsaking his people, when
they are persecuted, appears in consolatory influences. The consolations of
God in such an hour are not small with them. Stephen saw the glory of God, and
Christ sitting at the right hand of God, when the stones were flying about him
to take away his life. Infinite almost are the stories that might be produced
out of Ecclesiastical History to this purpose. One (when the fire was put to
the wood under him to burning) crying out, Methinks you strew Roses under my
feet. That of Mr. Samuel, who is reported to have had (the day before his
death) one in white appearing to him, and bidding him be of good comfort, after
that day he should never hunger nor thirst more. And that of Robert Glover, who
is reported to have cried out to his Fellow-Martyr, O Austin! he is come, he is
come. And that of Ridley to Latimer, Be of good comfort (said he) God will
either moderate the flames, or strengthen us under them. But these stories are
endless, and every where occurring in Ecclesiastical History.

Q. But will some say, May one that fears God build upon this? and exercise a
Faith in this experience of Paul, as having in it the force of a promise? Are
there no instances of the Servants of God, who have been sufferers for his Name
sake, and for Righteousness sake, who have despaired and been forsaken?

Sol. 1. I answer; When we speak of exercising Faith, we must find some Word of
God to be the object of that Faith; for tho God be the object of our Faith, yet
we know nothing of God of this nature but in the Revelation of his Word. So as
tho God be the primary and remote object, yet the promise is the proximate
object.

Secondly; There are general promises of God's presence with his people in
danger; such as that, Isa. 43.1, 2. When thou passest through the waters, I will
be with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou
walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee. Now these are the objects of peoples Faith, and every Child
of God may repose a sure trust and confidence in God, that they shall as to him
be made good, and prove Yea and Amen.

Thirdly; For particular promises of preserving from dangers, or deliverance
out of dangers, or comfort, or courage, it is enough if they be made good to
any particular Souls, supposing the promise for deliverance one way or other,
in one method or another, to hold sure, we may well leave it to the good
providence and wisdom of God, how he will fulfill it, and make it good to us.

4. Lastly; It is not possible that the same Servants of God should every way
experience the presence of God with them: If he manifests his presence to his
people in a way of power or wisdom, preserving them from dangers, or delivering
them out of their Enemies hand, how should he manifest his presence in giving
them a liberty of spirit, while they are in their custody, or in giving them
courage, or ballancing their afflictions with the consolations of his Spirit?
Bishop Ridley exercised Faith no further than saying, Either God will assuage
the flame, or strengthen us to bear it. All the people of God cannot exercise a
particular Faith in God as to this or that manifestation of his presence; but
as to some influence which may amount to a deliverance of them from the evil,
or from the Evil of the Evil they may.

Fifthly; Nor is it impossible but there may be some particular instances of
God's people, (but those very rare) whom God (for the punishment of their sins)
may have let fall, and abide into, and in their Enemies hands, and may not have
found these manifestations of the Divine presence either in the freedom of
their spirits, or in a boldness or courage, nor yet in the consolations of his
Spirit; but if they go to Heaven, (as all such shall,) though it be as through
fire, they shall there certainly have his presence, and in it joy, and fullness
of joy, and that for evermore.

I come now to make some practical application of the preceding discourse.

USE 1. I shall begin with that of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.12. Beloved, think it
not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some
strange thing happened unto you. The things that have been are, and shall be,
and there is nothing new under the Sun. You cannot be the first who have been
troubled on every side, perplexed, persecuted, cast down. It is no new thing:
There has no temptation of this nature, there can no temptation befall you,
but such as is common to man, 1 Cor 10.13. Ever since Cain rose up against
Abel, and slew him, because he was more righteous then he, and offered up to
God a more excellent Sacrifice; nay, ever since God put an Enmity between the
seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent, Genesis 3.15. this has been in
the World. So persecuted they the Prophets, which were before you, says our
Savior, Matthew. 5.12. Trouble, distress, persecution are things so far from
being such as Gods people are exempted from, that they are almost entailed to
the preaching and profession of the Gospel. If you endure chastening God
deals with you, as with sons, for what Son is he whom the Father chasteneth
not (at least with the rod of the wicked?) But and if you be without
chastening. (whereof all are partakers, then are you Bastards, and not Sons.
Heb. 12.8, 9. Seeing then you have but neighbors fare, and endure no
temptations but what are common to men, seeing you have but Godly men's fare,
that the Prophets have been thus treated before you, seeing you have but
Christians fare; for so they dealt with Christ and his Apostles, seeing you
have but the fare of the People and Children of God: Why should you think it
strange if any such thing should happen to you, and not rather rejoice in as
much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be
revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy, 1 Pet. 4.13. Wherein are you
better or how can you challenge a further privilege to your selves, then Paul,
then the Apostles, then the Saints and Servants of God in all ages of the World?

USE 2. Secondly Learn hence, That Persons are to be judged not from their
straits and sufferings, but from the having or wanting the presence of God, in
or under their Sufferings. Indeed there is another more certain way of
judgment, because more evident to others, that is, the cause of men's
sufferings. But upon this does the presence of God in men's sufferings depend,
for though men may pretend to comforts and make a show of courage and talk of a
liberty of Spirit in their Sufferings as evil doers, yet they are but
bravadoes, there can indeed no such thing be, God never encouraged any in a
sinful act by one single promise, nor by one single act of providence (except
barely permissive which is an encouragement taken by a naughty heart, never
given by an holy God.)

USE 3. See here the vast difference betwixt a Child of God and another man, in
an hour of trial. Man as man is born to trouble, as naturally as sparks fly
upward: And though indeed there be some afflictions that are proper to the
Gospel, such as suffering for the owning of the great Truths of it, or adhering
to the Righteous ways prescribed and directed in it; yet troubles do not bubble
up only from this fountain, but from the generally debauched and corrupt Nature
of man, which renders hominem homini Lupum, every man an Enemy to his
neighbor, and makes men like the Fish of the Sea, where the greater devour the
less; or like Birds and Beasts, which we see pecking and butting one at
another, though no cause be given. But that which this Text prompts us to
observe, is the difference betwixt the Child of God, and another man in the
hour of trouble. Both are troubled on every side, or may be so. Sometimes
perplexed, hunted and pursued by their Neighbors, or their Enemies; cast down
sometimes. Where is the difference? Hitherto all things fall alike to all men.
Here Is the difference, others, when they are troubled on every side, are
distressed; when they are perplexed, they are in despair; when they are hunted
and pursued, they are forsaken also; when they are cast down, they are
destroyed; the Child of God is not so: Let us see it in an instance; let us
take that of Saul and David. There was a time when Saul was in trouble and
distress enough. You have the story, 1 Samuel 28.15. where you find him
representing his own case to the Devil raised up by the Witch in the likeness
of Samuel. What says he? I am (says he) sore distressed, for the Philistines
make war against me, and God is departed from me, and answers me no more,
neither by Prophets, nor by Dreams. He was troubled on every side. Before him
were the Philistines, and round about him; Saul sees them, v. 5. He was
afraid, and his heart greatly trembled; he was not troubled only, but
distressed. Perplexed he was enough; he would never else have gone to a Witch,
when v. 9. he had before cut off them who had familiar Spirits, and the Wizards
out of the Land; but he was in despair. The Philistines (says he) make war
against me, and God is departed from me. He was persecuted, followed close by
the Army of the Philistines, but he was forsaken. God (says he) is departed
from me. Now let us look upon David in the 30th chapter of that Book, he was
not in Readiness circumstances. Saul was the Actual King, though was David the
Anointed King to succeed him; he fled to Achish, but was turned off from him by
the importunity of his Princes, chap. 29. he had but one poor City to hide his
head in, and to make his retreat to, that was Ziklag. Whiles David was at Gath,
the Amalekites had come, invaded the South, and Ziklag, and had smitten Ziklag,
and burnt it with fire, and had taken his Wives, and the Wives of his
companions, the Women captives, and carried all away. David comes, chapter 30. 3.
and finds the City burnt, the Wives, Sons and Daughters that belonged to him,
and to his company, all taken captives, v. 6. He was greatly distressed; for to
all this was added another great evil, his people spoke of stoning him. What
does David? v. 6. He encouraged himself in the Lord his God. Here was now one
answering to St. Paul in the New Testament, troubled on every side, but not
distressed: perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast
down, but not destroyed. He encouraged himself in his God; is not overmuch cast
down, but is comforted; takes courage, and recovereth all again.

The Reason lies in two things.

1. A wicked man has no interest in God. He can in an hour of trouble cry out,
O God, but he cannot cry out, My God. Nature teaches men in hours of distress,
that Affliction springs not out of the Earth, nor trouble out of the Dunghill;
but there is a Supreme Being, who being offended, plagueth the children of men:
Hence naturally the afflicted person calls upon God after one fashion or
another. The Mariners who were carrying Jonah to Tarshish, in the Storm called
each of them upon his God, Jonah 1. but the wicked man cannot say, My God; he
cannot claim a Covenant interest in, and relation unto God, so as he must be in
distress, in despair, forsaken, destroyed at all such times, when the help of
man is vain; he cannot but think that in an hour of distress, God is saying to
him, Now I am come to reckon with thee for all thy oaths, and curses, and
blasphemies, by which thou have blasphemed me; for all thy drunkenness and
other debaucheries; now go to thy Lusts which thou have served in despite of
my Commandments, to the World, and to thy worldly Friends, and see if they be
able to deliver thee out of my hands.

2. He has no true habits of Hope or Faith. There is indeed a God in the
World, a God that is able to succor people in all distresses, to relieve them
in all troubles; but he has neither any habit of true Hope, or Faith, by which
he should commit himself to this God, nor any object prepared for his Soul to
cast anchor upon; not a Promise in the whole Book of God that he can hope
should be made Yea and Amen to his Soul, for that he is without Christ, in whom
all the Promises are Yea and Amen.

But now the godly man is not so; he is (upon this account) every way as happy
as the other is miserable; he is not more exempted from trouble than another
man; yea, he is more exposed to trouble; the World which loves its own, hates
him, because he is not of the World, but God has chosen him out of the World,
imprinted his Image upon him, marked him for his own. To look to be freed from
trouble, is a mighty vain expectation; Man is born to it, Christians indeed are
more especially as Sheep designed for the slaughter. A man cannot reasonably
wish, desire or hope for a perfect immunity from distresses and troubles,
because it is not possible; so as the Child of God's happiness lies not there,
that the fire shall not come nigh him; but here is his happiness, that the fire
shall not hurt, shall not consume him. If he be thrown into the fire, God will
be with him in the fire; if into the water, God will be with him in the water;
the floods shall not drown him. When the Lord our God, the holy One of Israel
is our Savior, Isa. 43.1, 2. we shall not be in distress, nor in despair, nor
forsaken, nor destroyed. Two things will advantage this Meditation.

1. That we are not afflicted from outward contingencies, but from some inward
defects. Let a man's burden be never so heavy, if he has but strength enough to
bear it, and to go away cheerfully with it, it is no affliction to him; let a
man's affliction be never so sharp and smarting, if he has but a consolation
that ballanceth it, it takes out the fire of it, and chaseth away the grief and
sorrow of it; distressedness of spirit under a calamity, despair and casting
away of hope, dejection, and demission of Spirits, straitnings in our bowels,
the being at a loss in our own thoughts, what to do, which way to turn us, how
to get out of our Net, these are the things that afflict us. Man is afflicted
from the tumultuousness and unquietness of his own thoughts; let those be at
rest, and the affliction of all troubles is evaporated. What signified a prison
to Algerius, who could subscribe a Letter, From the delectable Orchard of the
Leonine prison? or a Martyrs fire to James Bainham, (who burning in the fire)
could cry out, O ye Papists! you look for Miracles, now see one; I feel no more
pain, than if I were upon a Bed of Roses. Or Death to Ann Askew, who being
about to die, could subscribe her Letter written by Ann Askew, who neither
wishes Death, nor fears it, and is as merry as one that is bound for Heaven.
What signified the threat of starving to Elizabeth Young, who had her Answer
ready; If you take away my meat, God will take away my stomach. I give you but
these few of many Instances, to prove that we are not afflicted from outward
contingencies, so much as from some inward defects, had we but (like good men)
learned to be satisfied from our selves, to be content that God should choose
our Lot for us, had we but learned in all estates to be content, and in all
things to rejoice, no outward contingency could afflict us; so that if God has
cast his Salt into the bitter waters, which bubble up from our own spirits, as
from a corrupt fountain, there would be nothing unclean, nothing bitter,
nothing afflictive to us. Now if this be the state of a Child of God, that when
he is troubled on every side, he is not distressed in himself; when he is
perplexed, he is not in despair; when he is persecuted, he is not forsaken; our
irregular passions are then corrected, the sting of our deaths is taken out;
our deaths are ours; the Mercury is corrected, and prepared, and become
medicinal instead of being venomous. Our natural passions are corrected either
by Reason, or by Grace; the first working to its due height, does a great deal
toward it. It were no hard matter to give you a multitude of Instances of
Heathens in this case, from the operation of Moral Philosophy: But alas! what
is the force of that operation, compared with the operation of the Holy Spirit
powerfully commanding, and bowing of our Souls to a compliance with the Divine
Will, and commending to us the infinite Divine Wisdom in the dispensations of
Providence. O the felicity of a Child of God! if the Apostle has in my Text
given a true account of him, he swimmeth like Cork upon the waters of all
afflictions, all troubles; you cannot sink him; he lies like Flint in the fire
of affliction, and is only purged, and made more clean and bright by it. Evils
come to him, as the Prince of this World came to his Lord, but can do nothing
against him, because they meet with nothing in him to make them bitter and
heavy.

2. Nay here is not all; Afflictions do not only not hurt him, but they prove
of exceeding great and high advantage to him, he is not only not distressed,
but he is refined, purged, and made more white, they are to him, as the
refining pot for the silver and the furnace for the Gold. He is not only not in
despair, but his Tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and
experience hope, such an hope as will not make his Soul ashamed. He is not only
not forsaken, but he ordinarily never more experienceth the power, wisdom and
goodness of God, even the most high God. He is not only not destroyed, but
through much tribulation he enters into the Kingdom of God; his light and
momentany afflictions work for him a far more eternal, and exceeding weight of
Glory. And turn unto him for a Testimony, Luke 21. v. 13. But of this argument
I may possibly speak more hereafter.

USE 4th. Fourthly, This discourse shows the vanity of wicked men, in
troubling the People of God. On every side, perplexing, persecuting them and
casting them down. They only satisfy their malice, treasure up to themselves
wrath, that is all. It is a pitiful fruit of an Enemies malice, if he cannot
break ones Spirit, distress him, put him into despair, destroy him. What did
Julian get by all his rage when he was at last but put to it in a rage to throw
his dagger up to Heaven and cry, Vicisti Galilaee, O thou Galilean, thou have
overcome. When wicked men have done their worst if they cannot put Christians
into distresses, into despair, etc. They must at last cry their enemies are
conquerors, yea they are more then conquerours through Christ that loved them.
What did that bloody Bishop Bonner get by all his rage, when he was forced at
last to cry out, A vengeance on them! I think they love to burn. Nay their
Vanity appears yet further in this, they cannot only not break their Spirits,
or Spoil their joys, or hopes, but they commonly add to them, Christians
ordinarily never finding more peace, more joy in the Holy Ghost, more
satisfaction in their own Spirits, more of the presence of God, etc. There are
many that can say, before we were hunted, and persecuted, we had more doubts,
more fears, of our eternal state, of the truth of our Spiritual habits, since
we were thus hunted, God has not so filled us with his terrors, we have not so
many doubts, or fears, we live in a clear view of our own sincerity, and we
have learned less to go astray.

USE 5th. Fifthly, this discourse ought to quicken every one to inquire,
whether he or she be of those who if they should happen to meet with the
troubles mentioned in in this Text, yet might hope to meet with the relief, and
support of the Text. You will say to me, how shall we know that? I answer, if
we wistly look upon what goes before, and what follows after in this
Chapter, we shall find it no difficult matter to conclude what we may hope for
in a day of trouble of this nature, 1. See v. 6. These that Saint Paul speaks
of were such, as that God who commands light to shine out of darkness, had
shined into their hearts to give the Light of the knowledge of the glory of God
in the face of Jesus Christ. God makes the light of the Knowledge of the glory
of God to shine into men's hearts, for a double end. To show them the truths of
the Gospel, and the way to everlasting life that their own Souls may be saved
in the day of Christ; hence enlightened, regenerated Souls who were once
darkness are said to become light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. 2. That they may
communicate this light unto others either by Doctrine (which is the work of the
Ministers of the Gospel) or by an holy and exemplary life, and conversation;
upon which account as well others, as Ministers are compared, Matthew. 5. to a
light lighted up in an house, and commanded that their light should shine unto
men, that men might see their good works, and glorify their Father which is in
Heaven. This is not the privilege of the latter only, but of the former also;
persons, into whose Souls the light of the Gospel has shined, in the face of
Jesus Christ, who have received Christ as their Savior, believed in him, given
up themselves unto him, Psalm. 91. He that dwells in the secret place of the
most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. Such as have chosen God
for their God, Christ for their Savior, as have said of the Lord, he is my
refuge and my fortress, my God, in him I will trust. These are those whom the
Lord will deliver from the snare of the fouler, etc. And of whom he has said,
I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.

2. Secondly, they are such as suffer in the exercise of that calling to which
God has called them. Paul here speaks of such as had received a Ministry, v.
1. and discharged it faithfully, not handling the Word of God deceitfully, v.
2. Such as preached not themselves, but the Lord Jesus, v. 5. God is present
with men in their callings, not in their extravagances, if good men will go out
of their road they must not expect Gods company, or Christ's presence with them.
But if they be in the way in which God has set them, in the station wherein
God has fixed them, and meet with trouble on every side, they may expect that
they shall not be distressed, they shall not be in despair, they shall not be
forsaken.

3. They must be such as have renounced the things of dishonesty; And commend
themselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God, v. 2. Such as the the
life of Christ is made manifest in their mortal flesh. v. 11. A good man may
find himself distressed in a day, when trouble is on every side, in despair,
when he is perplexed, in a great measure forsaken, when he is persecuted, and
may be destroyed when he is cast down, but it must be for some guilt upon his
Soul, for some treading awry from the path of the Gospel, for some defects and
failures, as to his walking with God, Azariah the Prophet told Asa, and the men
of Judah and Benjamin, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you, if you be with him;
if you seek him, he will be found of you, but if you forsake him, he will
forsake you. God has no where obliged himself for his presence with the best
of men where they do humanum pati, behave themselves not as his Servants, but
as the sinful Sons, and Daughters of men; the best of men in some particular
acts of their lives may forsake God, and if they do so they may expect that God
will forsake them.

USE 6. I shall put up this discourse with two words of Exhortation. 1. The
first to all in general. To persuade them to get into such a state. 2. To those
who are in such a state. So to walk, so to behave themselves that they may be
made partakers of so great a blessing.

1. To all. What an argument is here now to those as are yet walking in the
flesh, running on in courses of neglect, and contempt of God, that they would
turn out of their roads of sin and wickedness in hither, and be invited by
these things which God has prepared for them that love him; no rational man
can expect to live in the World without trouble, which way it shall come, or of
what kind or nature it shall be, we cannot tell, but trouble waits for every
man that lives in the World, some meet with more, some with less; some with
trouble of one sort, others with troubles of another sort; all with some. No
man No man must look to live without perplexity at one time or other. Natural
wisdom teaches all to provide for the worst; you say, the best will provide
for it self. There is no such provision, as the getting an interest in God, and
in Christ. Christ gathers his people as the hen gathers her chickens under her
wings. Not only to cherish them, and keep them warm, but to protect them; when
the kite comes the chickens run under the hens wings. The name of the Lord is
a strong Tower, the righteous shall flee unto it, and be at rest. Prove. 18.10.
Let those that are at rest and ease, in a wise prospect of possible, yea
certain future troubles, turn into God, and get under his shadow. God is seldom
a refuge and a tower to those who have not chosen him to be so. Let those that
are in trouble, and perplexity yet at last be wise. It is not often that it is
so, but happy is he whom trouble brings home to God as it did Manasses. Better
late then never, and our merciful God does sometimes extend his favor to those
who come late in to beg and to receive it. Let the happiness of Gods people
invite you to become sharers with them, consider with your selves, what but a
God above can remain to a Man, or Woman when troubles are on every side?

2. But to conclude, This speaks to the people of God so to live, that this
may be their portion. This is not so much the inseparable privilege of a good
man, but he may be without it. In answering the objection, before I came to the
application of this discourse, I hinted to you, that it is possible that some
particular persons, who belong to God, may not find this Text verified in them
in a day of trouble, but they ordinarily are such as have been guilty of some
loose walking with God; and Azariah told Asa, though a very holy man, that if
he forsook God, God would forsake him. Let me therefore advise some few things,
and so shut up this discourse.

1. Take heed that you pull not trouble upon your selves. We never have any
great comfort in such troubles. This we may do, I mean, pull troubles upon our
selves, either by a sinful walking, or by an imprudent, and indiscreet
behavior, Peter charge those to whom he wrote, that they should not suffer
as evil doers, 1 Pet. 4.15. As Murderers, or Thieves, or Evil doers, or busy
bodies in other men's matters. A Prince protects and upholds his Servants in
what they do by his commission, direction, or order, but not in things they do
without it, much less quite contrary to it. And I pray observe, the Apostle
amongst other evildoers reckons busy bodies in other men's matters. Men's
sufferings for actions done out of their place, their sphere and calling, are
always very uncomfortable sufferings. God has fixed the World in an order, all
things though in themselves just and good, yet are not so in the hands of all
persons, several men have their several matters ordered them, by the wise
ordination of God, he that meddles in the matters of another is a busy body;
men by Gods law are to keep their order, and to look after their own Province.
Troubles also may be brought upon our selves, by our Imprudence in language, or
behavior.

2. Secondly, Let not your eye be upon any particular manifestation of Gods
Presence with you in your troubles. He is always present with you, by his
essential presence. Which is inseparably attended with power and goodness
sufficient to help and to relieve you, but how he will exert his power and
goodness for, and toward you, whether by delivering you from your troubles, or
taking the wise in their own craftiness, or giving you an inward freedom and
liberty of Spirit, strength, or courage or comfort, this is according to his
will, and will be determined by the Divine wisdom. Say no more in your troubles
then Bishop Ridley; God will either assuage the heat of the fire, or give us
strength and courage to bear it.

3. Lastly, Be not wanting, either in the exercises of your Faith, or in your
Sollicitings of him by Prayer, these are the acts to be performed on our parts,
in order to the obtaining of these and all other promises, for the promises
exclude not, nor give any Supersedeas from the use of all just, and lawful
means for the obtaining of the thing promised, but suppose the use of such
means, whether Rational or Spiritual. Wait upon the Lord, and keep his way, use
lawful and none but lawful means, and you shall find God will fulfill his word,
and what has been the portion of Gods people before you shall also be your
portion.

SERMON. 13.
Luke 21.13. And it shall turn to you for a Testimony.
IN the 19th Chapter you shall find our Savior having now almost finished his
course, going up to Jerusalem, to the last Passover that he was at; in chapter 20.
you read of several things he did there in the Temple. In the fifth verse of
this chapter you shall find that some of his Disciples were taken with the
brave structure and ornaments of the Temple. Our Savior v. 6. tells them; That
as for those things which they beheld, the days would come in which there
should not be left one stone upon another, that should not be thrown down. This
draws out from the Disciples a curious Question; Master, but when shall these
things be? and what sign will there be when these things shall come to pass?
Matthew, chapter 24. v. 3. repeating the same story, says, that they said unto
him, Tell us, when shall these things be? and what shall be the sign of thy
coming, and of the end of the World? They make three Questions of it, enquiring
about the certain time of the destruction of the Temple, Christ's coming, and
the End of the World. This Question Christ answers there, from the 4th v. to
the end of the chapter; and in this chapter from v. 8. to v. 29. a great deal
of pains is spent (and possibly to no satisfactory purpose) by many Divines
rightly to distribute these signs, and to tell us which of them related to the
destruction of Jerusalem (which happened within forty years after) and which
related to the coming of Christ by his Spirit, in the days of Pentecost; and
which to the last Judgment yet to come. There is indeed one, v. 20, 21. which
can be applied to none but to the destruction of Jerusalem, When you shall see
Jerusalem encompassed about with Armies, then know that the desolation thereof
is nigh. But for the generality of the signs given, I am of their mind, who
judge that God intended in the destruction of Jerusalem to show a type of the
destruction of the world, and that the same which our Savior gave as signs of
the one, he also gave as signs of the other, wars, and rumors of wars,
commotions, prodigious signs in the Heavens and the Earth, Earthquakes, etc.
There were great plenty of these before the dreadful destruction of Jerusalem,
and there will be a greater plenty of them before the last and terrible day.
Amongst other signs he tells them, viz. That before all these, that is, before
the Earthquakes, and the terrible sights, and the signs from Heaven, they shall
lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the Synagogues,
and into Prisons, etc. Then it follows; And it shall turn to you for a
testimony. The Proposition of the Text is obvious, the Subject of it lies in
the preceding verse, the Praedicate only in this verse.

Prop. The sufferings of Christ's Disciples for his Names sake, shall turn to
them for a Testimony.

I told you that the Subject of the Proposition lies in v. 12. there you have
their sufferings described under the notion of laying hands on them,
persecuting them, delivering them up to the Synagogues, and to Prisons,
bringing them before Kings and Rulers, and all for Christ's Name sake^ which is
the only term (relating to the Subject) which needs explication.

Quest. What is this to suffer for Christ's Names sake? We meet with the term
often; Matthew. 10.22. Mark 13.13. Luke 21. v 17. Matthew. 17.29. chap. 24.9. Acts
9.15.

1. To suffer for Christ's Name sake, is to suffer for him; for thy sake are we
killed all the day long, Romans 8.36. It was their fashion, to call Disciples by
their Masters Names; thus the Heathens called Plato's Disciples, Platonists, or
Platonicks; and Aristotle's Disciples, Aristotelians; hence Christ's Disciples
were called Christians. Thus the term is expounded, Acts 5.41. and 1 Pet. 4.16.
If any man suffer as a Christian. The very owning the Name and Doctrine of
Christ, in opposition to the Doctrines of Judaism, or Paganism, in those first
and furious times, was crime enough; there needed no more to bring a man in
question, yea, to bring him to his end, than for him to own himself one of the
number of those who were called Christians; the Christians were accounted as a
Sect, and a Sect every where spoken against. Thus John 15.21. All these things
will they do unto you for my Names sake, that is, for my sake.

2. It signifies any publication or profession of the Gospel, according to the
place and station wherein a man is set. Thus the Apostles of old, and the
Ministers of Christ now, who suffer for Preaching the Free Grace of Christ held
forth, and offered to sinners in the Gospel, suffered for Christ's Name sake.
Thus the Apostles understood the term, Acts 5.28. when the Jewish Magistrates
said to the Apostles, Did not we straightly command you that you should not Teach
in this Name? and behold you have filled Jerusalem with your Doctrine, verse
41. They departed from the Council, rejoicing that they were thought worthy to
suffer shame for his Name.

3. Finally; He who suffers for any thing in the Worship of God, or in the
practice of Holiness, wherein he pays an homage, and yields an obedience to
the Lord Jesus Christ, and does any thing eo nomine, upon that account, because
Christ has required it of him, or forbeareth any thing, because Christ has
forbidden, suffers for Christ's Names sake, that is, for Christ for his
Allegiance and Obedience unto him; for my Names sake, is no more than for my
sake, upon my account, that you may keep any Commandment of mine. Hence these
two things follow necessarily.

1. That it is not necessary that those who make men sufferers for the sake of
Religion, should openly profess that they make them to suffer for Christ's
sake; they may do the thing, though perhaps they may think they do it not, or
at least may not think fit to proclaim their own shame. For men to suffer for
Christ's Names sake, is Persecution; the guilt of which does not depend upon
men's thinkings, and judgment of their own acts. The Jews indeed, and after them
the Pagans, verily thought they ought to do many things against Jesus of
Nazareth, and therefore made no difficulty of an open owning their cruel and
barbarous actions under this notion. But since those two first broods of
Persecution have been worn out of the World, there have none risen up confident
enough to approve their sayings, and do like unto them.

2. Neither is it necessary to denominate one persecuted, that he should be a
sufferer for not obeying some precepts of man. Nor will all such precepts
either discharge Instruments from the guilt of Persecution, or bring those that
disobey them, out of the notion of persons persecuted; if it would, the
Apostles suffering as evil doers, had had no cause to have gone from the
Council, rejoicing that they were thought worthy to suffer shame for his Name,
as they did, Acts 5.41. after they had been strictly commanded, that they
should not Teach in his Name. But whatever other men may judge for any Man or
Woman to suffer for owning Christ, or publishing the Grace of the Gospel, or
living up to the Rule of it, is to suffer for the Name of Christ.

But my great business is to open the Predicate in the Proposition, and to show
you how such kind of suffering shall turn to God's people for a Testimony. I
shall open this under these two Heads.

1. It shall turn to a Testimony on God's part toward them.

2. It shall be a Testimony on their part toward God. I shall open both these
in several particulars.

1. It shall be a Testimony on God's part to them. 1. Of a great honor which
God puts upon them; this the Apostles understood, tho our sense
understands it not; therefore it is said, that they went away from the
Council, rejoicing that they were thought worthy to suffer shame for his Name,
Acts 5.41. When the Persian Emperor asked Haman his Favorite, What should be
done to the man whom the King delighted to honor? If a man makes answer,
Esther 6.8. Let the Royal Apparel be brought which the King uses to wear, and
the Horse the King rides upon, and the Crown Royal which is set upon his head,
and let this Apparel and Horse be delivered to the hand of one of the Kings
most Noble Princes, that they may array the man withal whom the King delights
to honor, and bring him on horseback through the Streets of the City, and
proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King delights
to honor. And the King said to Haman, make haste, and take the Apparel, and
the Horse, and do even so to Mordecai the Jew. But God takes a qui^e contrary
method; Is there a man whom the King of Kings has a mind to honor? Let (says
he) the Crown of Thorns be brought forth, which my only begotten Son wore when
he walked in humane flesh, and let that be set on his head; and let the Scarlet
Robe be brought forth, which they put upon my Son in derision, a little before
his suffering, and let that be upon him, and let him be scourged with the Whip
with which he was scourged, and the Gall and Vinegar that was given him to
drink, and let a company of miscreants deride and scoff him; let the hands that
buffeted my Son buffet him, and proclaim this before him; Thus shall it be done
to the man whom the God of Heaven delights to honor. Paul was one whom God
delighted to honor. Thou shall, says he, be a Witness unto all men: A
Minister, and a Witness. It is true, as Ministers men are Witnesses, but a
sufferer is an eminent Witness; he is not a mere verbal Witness. Hence the
Ancients were wont to call suffering, The Crown of Martyrdom; and some say that
Stephen had his name predictive of this. We read in our Martyrologies of a
Female Martyr, who having a Child in her arms, seeing some Martyrs suffering,
in haste gave it to another, and offered her self to be a Martyr, saying,
Crowns are not to be distributed every day. Amongst men he counts himself
mightily honored, whom the King will make choice of to be his Champion. Every
sufferer for Christ is his Champion. What shall we think of that man whom God
picks out of a whole Parish, a whole City, to be a Champion for him. It is said
of Luther (that great Instrument of God) that in a Letter to some persons
condemned to die, he thus preferred them before himself. I have made (says he)
a great deal of bustle in the World, and done a great deal of work for God; but
God has not yet done me the honor to suffer for him. It is an honor to be
chosen as a Second to Christ, in incountring the World. It is not only a
Testimony that God loves and favors such a man, but it is a Testimony that
God has put an honor upon him, and made him one of his first threes; such
honor have not all his Saints; but those that have it are honored by it.

2. It is a Testimony of great Influences of grace and favor, with which God
has blessed, and will bless them. 1. I say of great Influences of Grace, with
which God has blessed them. God does not use to cull out young Soldiers to
this Combat, they are usually veterani; he will not put new Wine into old
Bottles, lest they break; he will not have those who are weak in Faith,
received to doubtful disputations; much less those that are weak in Faith and
Love does he call out to sharp Trials and Sufferings; the honor of God is
mightily concerned in the Victory of every Christian Combatant: He therefore
usually chooses some to whom he has given strength enough for the Battle.
There is no Soul more jealous of it self, than that Christian who is most
sincere. When God calls such a one out to suffer for his Name, it is a sign
that he has more Faith, more Courage, than he judged himself to have.

2. It is also a further Sign or Testimony to them of some further Influences
of grace with which God designeth them. God's prisoners use not to live upon
their own charge. As great and Noble Princes use to maintain their prisoners
with Bread and Water; so the great God maintains those that are in sufferings
for his sake, with Divine Influences proportioned to their wants. What these
Influences are, I have heretofore showed you upon another Text. One shall have
Wisdom, which the Adversaries shall not be able to resist; another shall have
an inward Strength and Courage; a third shall have the Consolations of the
Spirit of Grace; and that which may confirm us in this, is not only the promise
of God, as never to leave nor forsake his people, so more especially to be with
them, when they pass through the Waters, and through the Fires; so as the
Waters shall not drown them, nor the Fires kindle upon them; but also the
concernment of the honor and glory of God in the case. It is not for God's
honor that his Combatants should fail. No man goes to Battle at his own
charge, is eminently true of the good fight of those that fight the Lord's
Battles, not with fleshly weapons, but such as are spiritual; such as God
armeth the Soul with in its strivings against sin. So that as a Child of God
may at all times build upon that sure promise, I will never leave you, nor
forsake you; and upon the credit of it have its conversation, at all times,
without covetousness; so he may especially build upon it at a time when God
calls him out to suffer for his Names sake.

3. This suffering is a Testimony on Gods part toward them, of a great reward,
which they shall receive from God eith^^ in this life or in that which is to
come, Matthew. 19.27, 28, 29. Behold (says Peter) we have forsaken all, and
followed thee, what shall we have therefore? And Jesus said unto them, Verily I
say unto thee, that ye which have followed me in the Regeneration, when the Son
of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And every one that has forsaken
Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or
Lands, for my Name sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and inherit everlasting
Life. Mark repeateth the same passage but with some Variation, he says he
shall Receive an hundred fold, now in this time, Houses, and Brethren, and
Sisters, and Mothers, and Children, and Lands, with Persecutions, and in the
World to come Eternal Life, Luke chapter 18.30. repeating it, says, He shall
receive manifold more in this present time, and in the World to come life
everlasting. As to the reward of another life, they all agree, that is out of
doubt. If so be we suffer with him, we shall be glorified together, 2 Timothy
2.12. If we suffer we shall also reign with him. The sufferings of the people
of God are a manifest token of the righteous Judgment of God, that we may be
counted worthy of the kingdom of God for which we suffer, 2 These. 1.5. Seeing
it is a righteous thing with God to recompense -- To those that are troubled
rest; When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels.
Sufferings for Christ's sake are tokens of Salvation, and that of God, Phil.
1.28. Suitable to this was the vision which St. John had, Rev. 20. v. 4. Where
he saw thrones and they sat upon them, and Judgment was given unto them, and he
saw the Souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the
word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, nor his image, neither had
received his mark upon their foreheads. Or in their hands, and they lived, and
reigned with Christ a thousand years. It has been questioned by some whether
any but Martyrs shall be saved? And answered, That none shall be saved but
either such as have been Martyrs actu, or Voluntate, either actually, or who
have been willing and ready to be so, if God had called them to it. But of this
there is no question as to the promise. The only question is, how they receive
an hundred fold in this time or (as Luke says) manifold more at this time;
Mark says with persecutions; this is generally interpreted concerning the
internal influences of the Spirit of God upon the Souls of his people, Solatia
promittuntur, non deliciae (says an eminent Interpreter) God promises inward
comforts, not sensible or sensual delights. But God often makes it good of
sensible things in this life: As it is said of Job after his long trial of
Affliction, Job 42.12. That God blessed his latter end more then his beginning.
In his beginning we read his Inventory thus, he had 7000 Sheep, and 3000
Camels, 500 yoke of Oxen, 500 she asses, chapter 1. 3. In his latter end all was
doubled chapter 42. 12. He had 14000 sheep, 6000 Camels, 1000 yoke of Oxen, and
1000 she Asses. So it has been observed, that God has strangely blessed those
families, whose heads have been sufferers for him. I have particularly heard it
observed of those Walloons, who left their country, and fled hither in the time
of D' Alva's rage in Flanders. So that often times God gives manifold more in
this life then they lose for his sake, much more sensible comforts: But oftener
he gives them an hundred fold with persecutions, that is, if together with
their persecutions, they weigh the consolations they have from the Spirit of
God; if they set the one against the other; or weigh the one with the other,
they are manifold more. And this is that which the Apostle experienced, 2 Cor.
1.5. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also
abounds by Christ. The sum is, sufferings for the name of Christ are a
Testimony or a Token to those that suffer, of great rewards which God has
designed them, and prepared for them, either in this life, or in that life
which is to come. In this life either with persecutions, mixing their bitter
cups with the Sweet consolations of his holy and blessed Spirit to that degree,
that the sweet taste shall drown the bitter taste, and they shall have no taste of
the wormwood, and the gall. Or when the persecutions are over (for, Nubeculae
sunt and transibunt, they are but storms, and will go over) repairing their
losses, building them up fairer houses then the fire has burnt, and giving
them better estates then they have lost: Or in the life to come giving them (as
the Apostle calls it, 2 Cor. 4.17.) a far more exceeding, and eternal weight
of glory; for I reckon, (says the Apostle, Romans 8.18.) That the sufferings of
this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
revealed in us.

Fourthly. They are a Testimony on Gods part to those that suffer, That the
Lord will destroy their enemies. Thus Stella expounds this Text. Quod illi
impie contra vos egerunt, and just damnentur; That they have dealt unjustly,
and wickedly with you, and shall justly be condemned. This is that which the
Apostle says, 2 These. 1.4. So that we our selves glory in you, in the Churches
of God, for your patience and faith in all your persecutions, and tribulations,
that you endure, which is a manifest taken of the righteous judgment of God,
that ye may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which ye suffer. Mark
ye! There is one thing of which it is a manifest token, but then it follows.
v. 6. Seeing it is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you. It is a manifest token of that also. Now the reason of
this lies in the heinous nature of this sin, which ordinarily goes before
unto Judgment. And is (...), a mortal sign in every Soul where it is found. A
Soul may be sick of lusts of the flesh, sick of intemperance in eating and
drinking, sick of incontinence, filthy lusts and uncleanness, sick of other
lusts, and yet through grace may recover; such were some of you (says the
Apostle to the Corinthians) but now you are washed. But it is very rare that a
Soul is sick of rage and malice against Christ, and his name and gospel, so as
it breaks out in overt acts; I say it is very rarely that it recovers. This
disease of rage and malice against Christ and his Gospel, which is seen in men's
dealings with the publishers, and professors of it, is much like that disease
in the body which they call a Cancer, which may lurk a great while, and the
person may live so long as he can keep it from breaking, but if it once
breaks there is very little hope of long life. God according to his infinite
patience bears a long time with these vessels of wrath fitted for
destruction; there are thousands in the World, who have this cancerous humor
within them who are full of wrath, malice and rage, and hatred of Christ and
his Gospel, but they keep it from breaking out into overt-acts, they will think
ill enough of God, and Christ, and his ways, and sometimes they will also talk
hardly enough; these may live to an old Age, and go down to their Graves in an
external peace, having no bands in their death: Their sins shall follow after
them, after their lives to judgment, for Jude assures us that the Lord will
come with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and to
convince all that are ungoldly a^ongst them of all their ungodly deeds, which
they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly
sinners have spoken against him. But if men's rage break out openly, God
ordinarily is more quick with them. There are some of those blood-thirsty, and
deceitful men which he has said shall not live out half their days. It is
seldom that God lets pass acts of eminent injustice, and cruelty. But that he
in this life meets with the actors of it, and with the same measure which
they mete unto others it is meted to them again. But now persecution is the
highest species of injustice, for in it there is not only a wrong done to
another, that which is not due is given to him, but God is immediately
concerned in the case, the wrong is done to him for Gods sake; he is abused,
imprisoned, his estate is taken from him, he is imprisoned, tormented, put to
death for Gods sake, because he will own his truths, walk in his ways, do what
he commands him. It is the sin that fills up the measure of iniquity to, and
in a Soul, Matthew. 23.32. Fill ye up then the measure of your Fathers. Nay more
then this, see v. 35. there, That upon you may come all the righteous blood,
shed upon the Earth from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of
Zecharias the Son of Barachias. It draws upon men the sins of the same kind
committed by their forefathers, and not reckoned for it shows, that if they
had lived in the days of their forefathers, they would have done what they did;
they inherit their Spirit. Hence you shall observe, that although in
ecclesiastical story we read of persecutions that lasted a long time, yet we
read of very few particular persons, that were eminent persecutors that lasted
long. When this Cancer has broke out they seldom live long. Gods patience
often extends to Drunkards, and Whoremongers, and Swearers, and Cursers, and
they often die in the times of other men, and after the manner of other men;
they do injury to few but themselves; they show indeed a contempt of God, and a
disobedience to God, but they do not show a rage and malice against God; their
sins do not tend to blot out the remembrance of Christ, and to root out the
name of God from the Earth. But he is not so patient with this blackest sort of
sinners; they do harm to others, yea to those of whom God has said, He that
touches you touches the apple of mine Eye. They are for rooting out the name,
and mention of God from the Earth* God will not bear with these, there shall be
something remarkable in their death, either they shall dye in their youth,
whiles yet their bones are full of marrow, or they shall not dye the ordinary
deaths of men. They shall not come into the grave as a shock of corn in its
season, but be weeded out, and cut up before the harvest. If I durst wish evil
to to him that hated me, I would curse him in the name of the Lord; I would say
let him be a persecutor of others for Christ's name sake. Make but your own
observation if you have known, or do or shall know any such. So that this sin
wherever the guilt of it does stick is an evident token, not only of eternal
perdition to the adversaries of Christ and his Gospel, but an ordinary token of
a destruction in this life. Thus I have showed, how the sufferings of Gods
people turn unto them for a Testimony on Gods part, let me show you in the
next, place, how they turn unto them for a Testimony on their part toward God.
I will open that in five particulars.

1. They are a Testimony of their Discipleship. This is a part of the sense
that Stella gives of it; Eveniet vobis in signum, and attestationem, quod vere
discipuli mei fidelissimi estis. All those that follow a teacher, under a show,
or pretense of learning from him, are in common phrase and way of speaking
called his disciples; so it was with Christ, while he was on Earth he had some
that followed him for the l^^ves, some that believed on him, but he committed
not himself unto them, because he knew all men, Joh. 2.24. These were disciples
(...), in an outward appearance, they looked like disciples, but indeed were
not. He has others who are (...), his disciples indeed. None is a Disciple
indeed to another, who does not really and actually learn of him, either from
his words, or from his example in his life and conversation. What says our
Savior? Matthew. 16.24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his Cross, and follow me. Observe it, Take up his Cross. It is a great
Testimony that a man is Christ's Disciple, not in name and outward profession
only, but in reality, when he can take up his Cross. It is reported of
Ignatius, that after all his sufferings he said, Now begin I to be a Disciple.

2. It will be a Testimony of their Membership with Christ, and conformity to
him. The Apostle tells us, Romans 8.29. That we are predestined, that we might
be conformed to the Image of his Son. There is the Image of a living Christ,
and the Image of a dying Christ. The Image of a living Christ is in Holiness
and Righteousness, Ephesians. 4.23. Col. 3.10. Thus the holy man is conformed to
the Image of Christ; but then there is the Image of a dying Christ. We are
conformed to that Image of Christ only by suffering. The Apostle prays, Phil.
3.10. That he might know the fellowship of Christ's sufferings, and be made
conformable unto his death. It is true, we are made conformable to the death of
Christ in a measure, when we die unto sin, as he died for sin, so we die to
sin; this is an inward, spiritual conformity, which we come to by
mortification; but there is also a more external, obvious conformity to the
death of Christ, and that is, as he suffered striving against sin, and bearing
a witness to the Truth, so we also suffer bearing a Testimony to Truth, and
striving against sin; this we never arrive at till we come to be sufferers, and
our suffering upon these single accounts, turn to us for a Testimony of such
our conformity to Christ. Yea, it is a Testimony of our Membership in and with
Christ. Christ is the Head of the Church, which is the Body, and we are said to
be Members of Christ, and Members also one of another. You have a notable
expression, Col. 1.24. Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up
that which is behind of the Afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies
sake, which is the Church. That which is behind of the Afflictions of Christ.
Is there any thing behind of Christ's sufferings? Has he not suffered, and
entered into his glory, where he is impassible, living with, and unto God, where
he can suffer and die no more? The sufferings of Christ are to be considered in
a double notion, either as Expiatory or Exemplary. If we consider them as
Expiatory, there is nothing of them behind, nothing of them to be filled up. He
said upon the Cross, All is finished. And he trod the Wine Press of his Fathers
wrath alone; there was none of the people with him. But if you consider them as
they were Exemplary, as he suffered, setting us an example; so there is much of
the Afflictions of Christ to be filled up; and they are to be filled up in the
bodies of his Saints. Or else thus; Christ is taken personally or mystically.
Christ mystically is the Church, he the Head, Believers Members, both making
but one body, and that his body which is the Church. Now of Christ (taken in
this sense) much of his Afflictions are to be filled up. And Christians
suffering in conformity to Christ, is a Testimony to them that they are Members
of an afflicted Christ; yea and also that they are Members of that body, of
which Christ is the Head; for in all Ages it has been the Lot of those who
would live godly in Christ Jesus, to suffer persecution.

3. It turns unto a Testimony to them, both of the truth, and of the strength
of their Faith. The Apostle describing Faith, Heb. 11.1. calls it the
evidence of things not seen, the substance of things hoped for. For, says the
Apostle, What a man sees, why does he yet hope for? Many talk of Faith, few
understand it. The work of Faith lies in a being persuaded of God, and
depending upon God for the things which we do not see. Now it is the want of
this Faith which makes men shrink in a day of Trial. The Apostle, Heb. 10.34.
chapter 11.13, 14, 16. concludes from the Servants of God (of whom he there speaks)
taking joyfully the spoiling of their goods; that they knew in themselves that
they had in Heaven a better and an enduring substance. And from their
confessing that they were Strangers and Pilgrims upon the Earth, that they
plainly declared that they sought a Country, and desired a better Country, that
is, an heavenly. Men's unwillingness to suffer the loss of any thing, that shall
be made up with so great advantage, speaks them at least weak in Faith, and
but faintly persuaded of that better state; and that they find a difficulty to
depend upon God's Word for it. But when men can freely for the Name of Christ
leave their Country, and go into Banishment, part with their Estates, and be
content to be stripped of all they have, part with their Liberty, and be content
with a Prison; part with their Lives, and bid Death, even a violent, and most
ignominious Death, welcome, it argues that they both truly and strongly believe
what God has revealed concerning a better Country, a more enduring Substance,
the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, a life everlasting, and full of glory;
and not only that they are persuaded of the truth of the things, but they
depend and rely upon God, and by hope patiently wait upon God for the bestowing
these things upon them, and making them their portion. Now what would not many
a good Christian give for an Evidence of the truth and reality of his Faith?
How many doubts, how many fears has he often times about it! An ability to
suffer for the Name of Christ mightily tends to their confirmation. The Apostle
therefore puts them together, Phil. 1.29. Unto you it is given on the behalf
of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake.
Suffering, a freedom to suffer is a great confirmation of our Faith, both to
our selves, and also to others.

4. It will be a Testimony to the people of God of their Love to him. True
Faith works by Love. Love to another is discerned in nothing more than in
suffering for them; and indeed this is the height of Love. It speaks a Soul to
have discerned a great excellency in Christ, and in heart to cleave to him,
that rather than part with him, will suffer the loss of any thing. Upon this
account among the Heathens is celebrated the Love of Pilades and Orestes,
Theseus and Pirithous, etc. But see it in Paul, Phil. 3.8. Yea doubtless, and I
account all things but loss for the excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus
my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but
dung that I may win Christ. The Soul that may have had its doubts and fears
whether it loves Christ or no, measuring its affections to this spiritual,
invisible Object, by the motions of its affections to Objects more sensible,
(which indeed is not a true and just measure) can doubt no longer, when once
the Lord has enabled the Soul to suffer for his Name sake, it speaks a Soul to
love Christ more than all sensible things, when to serve and enjoy him, it has
freely parted with whatever it had of sensible enjoyments and satisfaction.
Nothing speaks Love like a deep suffering for the Object beloved, Genesis 22.12.
Now (says God to Abraham) I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not
withheld thy Son, thine only Son from me. That term of fear, and fearing God,
in the Old Testament, has often a larger sense, than as signifying that
passion which we call fear. God then knows that a Soul loves him, and the Soul
it self may know that it loves God, when it can readily and cheerfully suffer
for his Names sake.

5. Lastly; It will be to a Soul not only a Testimony of Faith and Love, and
Patience, and Perseverance, and Constancy, Steadiness and Unmoveableness in the
work of the Lord, but it will be also a Testimony of the Soul's Zeal for God.
Zeal is rather the intention of all the affections, than a particular affection
of it self. A small degree of Love will not carry a Soul thorough sufferings.
That Love must be at a great degree of warmth, which shall carry a Soul
thorough great difficulties, great trials, great losses.

6. To these I may add one thing more. Suffering for the Name of Christ is a
Testimony of the presence of God with the Soul. The Three Childrens enduring
the fiery Furnace, was a Testimony of a fourth persons being with them, Dan.
3.15. Daniel's being in the Den of Lions, and enduring that danger, turned to
him for a Testimony of God's special presence with him, and sending his Angels
to stop the mouths of the Lions. Paul's courageous suffering was a Testimony to
him that the Lord stood by him, and strengthened him, 2 Timothy 4.17. A Christian
needs desire no more than a token of God's special presence. No man suffers
for God without the special presence of God. None can pass through these deep
Waters, nor this hot Fire, unless the Lord be with him, according to his
promise, Isa. 43.2. Thus now I have opened the second thing, and showed you how
a good Christians suffering for the Name of Christ, turns unto him for a
Testimony toward God.

I find yet some other senses given of these words, which I shall but name.

3. It shall turn unto you for a Testimony, that is, say some, for a Testimony
for the Truth. The Sufferings of God's people are their Testimony indeed.
(...), Martyrdom signifies a Testimony. I know not how to fix upon this as the
sense of the words, because of the Pronoun, To you. For those Souls must be
rooted and grounded in the Truth, that are persuaded to suffer for it, unless
we will say that the Primitive is here put for the Possessive, and (...) the
same with (...), and the sense is this; It shall be your Testimony. It is
indeed the sealing of their Testimony, and a real Testimony to the Truth of
Christ, and that which alone some are able to give, as that female Martyr, who
told her Persecutors, She could not dispute for Christ, but she could die for
Christ. Every one cannot give a Verbal Testimony; they can conceive, and
believe more than they can with their Tongues express. Suffering is their
Testimony.

4. In Testimonium contumaciae eorum qui non crediderint, for a Testimony of
the stubborness of those who shall not believe. The sufferings of God's people
for the Truth, speak the stubborness of men that will not embrace that Truth
which the Servants of God seal with their bloods. But I shall not enlarge upon
this, not judging it the best account of the Phrase. I have done with the
Doctrinal part of my Discourse, and come now unto the Application of it, which
will be dispatched under two Heads. The first of Discouragement to the Enemies
of Christ and his Gospel. The second of Encouragement to the friends of it.

USE I.
For Discouragement to the Enemies of Christ, and his Gospel. It shall be that,
1 Samuel 2.3. Talk no more so exceeding proudly; let not arrogance come out of
your mouths, for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are
weighed. The Bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled are girt
with strength. Sinners out of their innate Enmity to Christ, are ready to talk
proudly by their threats, Lord (say the Apostles) Acts 4.29. Behold their
threats, and to act cruelly and barbarously. Every wise man propounds to
himself an end of his actions, and does nothing but for some end, that shall be
worthy of his pains; not willing to labor in vain, and to bring forth nothing
but trouble and sorrow. The Actions as to which I am discouraging you, and from
which I am dehorting you, are those mentioned in the verse before my Text;
laying hands upon the people of God, persecuting them, delivering them into
prisons, etc. for Christ's Names sake. I would willingly have all men think
with themselves what their End of such actions is. It is one of these two,
either that themselves may live alone in the Earth, and enjoy their sensual
satisfactions without disturbance, and the sensible enjoyments of the World
without any Rivals, or Competitors: Or else that they might ruin the Interest
of God in the World. Now, admitting that to be a truth which you have heard,
that these sufferings shall be a Testimony, turn for a Testimony, none of these
Ends are feasible. If they be a Testimony, and shall turn to God's people for a
Testimony against the Adversaries, they are not like by such actions to advance
themselves, by actions which are evident tokens of their perdition, both a
sudden destruction here, and an eternal destruction hereafter. There are two
bodies of people, of which no instance can be given, but that God after a short
time that he has made use of them for his purpose, he has destroyed them. The
first are Armies, the second are Bands and Troops of Persecutors; there has
been some of these in all times, some need of them, God, the wise God, in his
Government of the World, has had occasion to make use of them. You shall
observe, that the generality of these bodies are usually made up of the dregs
of Mankind. God has often used them, but they have never lasted long; of all
bodies of people, they have been the most mutable, perishing bodies. The first
are usually guilty of much blood and cruelty, (for it is an hard thing for men
with their Swords in their hands, to keep from smiting but where the Lord bids
them smite.) The latter are guilty of blood mingled with rage and malice
against what is supremely good, their rage is against Heaven, and they at last
find it hard to kick against the pricks. So far is the Persecutor in reaching
his ends, in advancing and setting up himself, that he finds he has taken the
next course to ruin and destroy himself. Look back upon the Records of time;
you read in Holy Writ of several Troops of Persecutors; The Jews, Where are
they? They were the first owners of the Field of Blood; they are scattered, and
Vagabonds over all the Earth. The Roman Empire, those I mean that ruled it,
were the next. Where are those great Powers that were a terror to all the
World? The stump of that Empire remains in Germany, that is, all the Papists
are yet in play, but God has broken them in many places. What is become of all
the Generation of those in Queen Mary's days? Gardener was soon cut off in his
wickedness; Bonner buried upon a Dunghill. I do but name some things to you,
leaving it to you to look back and see where you can find that there has been
any Troop or Band of Persecutors, that God in a short time has not scattered
by his providence, and broken, or any single person almost, who has been
eminent in these Achievements, that has died an old man, and full of days,
and gone with peace to his Grave. Tell me who ever prospered in this Trade?
When the Devil thus enters into a man, it is a Testimony that God is about to
destroy him, and that his Judgment is not far off. What is it then that a man
in such actions should propound to himself as the end? Is it the rooting out of
Truth, the doing of a mischief to the people of God whom he hates? Alas!
neither of these ends are practicable or feasible. The sufferings of God's
people have always rooted and confirmed the Truths of God; the Truths of the
Gospel have got as much confirmation by the steady sufferings of the people of
God in the defense of them, as they have done by the Preaching of them. Three
things have mightily contributed to settle men's minds in the Truth, and to
propagate the Knowledge, Faith, and Love of it: The Preaching of the Gospel by
the Apostles, and since by the faithful Ministers of the Gospel. The miraculous
operations, by which the first Ministers of the Gospel confirmed their Divine
Mission. 3. The undaunted, courageous sufferings of God's people. Miracles
quickly ceased, while they were wrought, but few saw the operation of them;
others then, we since have but had the report of them. The great things that
have propagated Truth, the Truths of the Gospel, have been Preaching and
Suffering; the Preaching of Ministers, and the Sufferings both of Ministers and
People. Those who have not Faith enough to believe the Scripture (upon their
belief of which hangs all the credit of the Miracles we there read of) yet have
had sense enough to discern men dying with boldness and courage in a steady
owning of the Propositions of the Gospel. And it is natural to us to think
there is something of truth in those Propositions, in the defense of which men
will adventure to die, and lose all their sensible enjoyments. What do men then
aim at? Would they do a mischief to their Enemies, and do they mistake the
Ministers of the Gospel, and such as fear God for such? Alas! neither can they
reach this end. Their sufferings turn to them for a Testimony; a Testimony from
God to them, of an honor he puts upon them, great grace which he has
bestowed, and will yet further bestow upon them, an exceeding great reward,
either with their sufferings, or after their sufferings; either in this life,
or in the life which is to come. Why then do people rage? Why do they imagine a
vain thing? O that I could persuade them to sound a retreat from this Battle,
which cannot but end in their own ruin, and their Enemies Victory.

Obj. But I hear some saying, Is there any that would go about to make men
suffer for Christ's Names sake? May not men be made sufferers for their
disobedience to the Laws of the place where they live, but they must suffer for
Christ's Names sake?

Sol. I answer, God forbid, that Christ's name should be made use of by any who
pretend to him to patronize, Treason or Rebellion or any disturbance of the
Civil Order or Peace. Nay, men radically good, may for ought I know suffer as
evildoers. If Peter had been made to suffer for drawing out the Sword, and
cutting off Malchus his ear, I know none could have defended him, it is not
like his master would, who reproved him for it, and told him, That those who
took the sword should perish by the sword. Christ did not justfy that action as
done for his names sake, tho it was for his sake, yet it was spoiled by the
rashness and disorderliness of it, and the want of authority to do what he did;
the doing of an action for Christ's name sake signifies the doing it at his
command, and by his order as well as for his honor and glory.

2. All innocent suffering is not a suffering for Christ's name sake. A man
suffers innocently, when he suffers for a pretended crime of which he is
not guilty, when men lay to their charge things which they know not; but every
one who thus suffers, suffers not for Christ's name sake; Naboth was put to
death upon a false subornation, but he was no sufferer for Gods sake, but for
his own just rights and liberties. Indeed all stand concerned to take heed,
that they be no causes nor instruments of, and in men's sufering innocently, for
it is a dreadful guilt, Exodus 23.7. Psalm. 10.8.15.5. It was one of the crying
sins which brought Vengeance on the Jews, that amongst them was found the blood
of Innocents, Jer. 2.24. and that they had filled the land with the Blood of
innocents, Jer. 19.4. But wicked men may fill a nation with the blood of
innocents, and yet not with the blood of such as suffer for Christ's name sake.

3. I told you before, that a suffering for Christ's name sake must be a
suffering for him, not merely for our selves, in defending our personal just
rights, nor yet for our country in defending its just liberties, but for
Christ, in maintaining his truths and ordinances, whether relating to his
worship, or to men's lives and conversations. As the holy Martyrs of old chose
rather to dye and to lose all they had, then to deny Christ, and not to publish
his gospel, and to live up to his laws for Worship and Holiness.

4. Lastly as a suffering for the maintenance of any civil rights, if for them
merely, is no suffering for Christ's names sake, so no civil Edicts, or Laws can
take away a Christians honor in suffering for Christ, and for his names sake,
if indeed their suffering be of this nature, that is, for this cause, Acts
5.41. The Apostles went away rejoicing, that they were counted worthy to suffer
for his name. Yet it was contrary to the command of the Sanhedrim, v. 28. If a
suffering for Christ's name shall turn to them for such a Testimony, all men
that love their own Souls, or lives, or whatever is dear to them, stand highly
concerned to take heed, that they raise not against themselves any such
testimony, or evident token of perdition, as the Apostle calls it.

USE. II.
If what you have heard be truth, if Christians sufferings for Christ's names
sake shall turn unto them for a Testimony, (which is Christ's own assertion) if
it ^urn to them for such a testimony as you have heard opened; if you search
the Scriptures and find these things are indeed so as I have opened to you: You
see what reason Christians have in such sufferings, to count it all joy, when
they fall into diverse Temptations, according to the Counsel of James, chapter 1.
v. 3. To rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is their reward in Heaven,
according to our Saviors exhortation, Matthew. 5.12. To rejoice for as much as
they are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be
revealed, they may also be glad with exceeding joy. To be in nothing terrified
by adversaries, which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of
Salvation, and that of God. Phil. 1.28. I beseech you sit down and consider
seriously with your selves what a Testimony of Gods favor, what a mark of
honor from him is worth, what a Testimony is worth to your Souls, that you are
some of those, who shall one day be glorified, if you be such who are serious
in the business of eternity, and keep any watch upon the influences of God upon
your Souls, think with your selves what in your sad, and melancholic
reflections at some times you would give, that God would show you a token for
good, Psalm. 86.17. David beggs of God that he would show him such a Token. This
is such a token as God showed Paul to cheer him with, Acts chap. 23. v. 11. The
Lord stood by him and said, Be of good cheer Paul! for as thou have testified
of me at Jerusalem, so must thou also bear witness at Rome. Be of good cheer!
one would have thought it should have quite deadned Paul, and put him out of
all good cheer. God did not so judge, he would not have said so to his Servant,
if he had not judged, that it had been a proper argument of comfort, and for
the filling of his Soul with cheerfulness. Let not therefore your hearts fail,
indeed this ought to be no argument to a Christian to pull troubles of this
nature upon himself, he ought to maintain both the wisdom of a serpent and the
innocence of a dove, and to look that he comes by his sufferings honestly. But
to suffer as a Christian is not a matter of trouble, or shame, but a good cause
to glorify God, 1 Pet. 4.16. What would not any considerate christian give to
have a testimony that he is one whom God delights to honor, one whom the
Lord has influenced with great degrees of grace, and intends yet further to
influence, one whom God designeth a great reward for, either in this life or
that which is to come, to have a Testimony that he is a Disciple of Christ, and
that not in name, but in deed, a true believer, one that loves God, and that
not in word and in tongue only, but in deed and in truth? I have read of one
who in a great agony of Spirit had this expression: I could be content to lie
in Hell a thousand years were I sure then but to have one good look from God.
What says the Apostle? If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. If
you suffer as Christians you may speak to your adversaries in the language of
that ancient Martyr. Sententiis vestris gratias agimus; quum a vobis damnamur a
Christo absolvimur; We thank you for your sentences; when you do condemn us,
Christ absolveth us. In our Book of Martyrs we read of the condemnation of
three famous Martyrs, all Bishops, Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer. The first
replieth to his Judges, I appeal from this your sentence to the Judgment seat
of God. The second told them, Although I be not of your company, yet I doubt
not but my name is written in a better place, whither your sentence will send
me sooner. The third says, I thank God most heartily that he has prolonged my
life to this time. Mark how all these good men counted it all joy when they
fell into these terrible temptations; a good Christian ought not indeed to
desire suffering for Christ's sake; the Apostle speaking of suffering says, 1
Pet. 3.17. It is better (if the will of God be so) that ye suffer for well
doing then for evil doing. Sufferings are things ungrateful to the flesh, and
upon that score evils, as they are temptations. Our flesh always is crying to
us, Master, spare thy self. They are not therefore to be desired. No man
knows what his heart will prove in an hour of trial, but if it be the will of
God, you suffer (says the Apostle.) It is never the will of God that we should
suffer (in that sense wherein the Apostle there mentions the will of God) but
when we suffer for doing the will of God, if this be our lot, that a shower
overtaketh us, walking not in any crooked paths of our own, but in the way of
Gods commandments let us rejoice, Christ is magnified in our body (as the
Apostle speaks) Phil. 1.20. And as Christ is magnified in you, so you are
magnified by Christ. The spirit of glory and of God resting upon you. 1 Pet.
4.15. Wherefore (as the same Apostle says) Let them that suffer according to
the will of God, commit the keeping of their Souls to him, in well doing as
unto a faithful creator. v. 19. I need not much enlarge in this branch of
application. What it is to suffer for Christ's name sake, I have in my former
discourse showed you. There are (as I have showed you) arguments enough in
these few words; It shall turn unto you for a Testimony.

USE III.
Let us therefore in the last place labor for this degree of grace, That we
may be ready to suffer for the name of Jesus Christ. It is every man^ wisdom,
though he be at present in health to prepare for sickness, because sickness is
but a common accident to mortality, and none can promise himself that he shall
always enjoy his health. I call this Grace, for the Apostle lets us know, it
must be given unto us to suffer. Phil. 1.29. There are but two things that I
know of necessary to us for suffering 1. The one is a mortified heart to the
World, both in the sensual satisfactions, and in the sensible enjoyments of it.
We may do a great deal toward this by considering the vanity, and incertainty
of these things, the inconsiderableness of them weighed and compared with the
enjoyments of God: By difusing our selves to them, etc. The second is courage;
now this is partly natural, and morally; partly infused: There is a natural,
and moral courage which many have showed in their personal dangers, and in the
more public dangers of their country; we find a great deal of this, amongst
Pagans, this will not do in this case. The courage here necessary must be given
from above, and the product of Faith in things that are invisible. It is a
courage by which Christians are as the Apostle says, out of weakness made
strong -- by which Women have received their dead raised to life again, Heb.
10.34, 35. For this we had need be much in Prayer. Our Savior commands us
that we should Pray, that we enter not into Temptation. And Luke 21.36. (with
which I shall conclude) Watch ye therefore (says our Savior) and Pray always,
that you may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to
pass, and to ^^and before the Son of man. We ought to pray that we enter not
into Temptation, as Temptation signifies no more then trials, but more
especially in a second sense as Temptation signifies a motion to sin, which is
the Temptation of the former temptations. But if that it be not the will of God
that we should escape temptations in the former sense, yet we may escape them
in the latter sense, and may be able to stand before the Son of man. That
sufferings may not be Testimonies against us, which they will be if we be
ashamed of the Lord Jesus, or of his truths, or ways, but that they may (as is
here promised) turn unto us for a testimony for us.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Edward Giles,
Bookseller in Norwich, near the Marketplace.
SEveral Discourses concerning Actual Providence. A word in Season. Defensive
Armor against four of Satan's most fiery Darts. Sermons upon the whole first
and second Chapters of the Canticles. All published by John Collings, D. D. The
way of the Spirit in bringing Souls to Christ. The Glory of Christ set forth,
with the necessity of Faith, in several Sermons. Both by Mr. Thomas Allen, late
Pastor of a Church at Norwich. Enoch's walk with God and Christ. A Christians
gain: By Mr. Timothy Armitage, late Minister in the City of Norwich. Precious
Promises the Portion of Overcomers. By Mr. John Lougher, Minister in Norfolk.
The Saints Eben-ezer. By Mr. Francis English, late Minister in Norwich.
Directions to spell English right. The History of the Protestant Reformation,
as it was begun by Luther. The Dead Saints speaking: being a Sermon Preached
upon the death of Mr. Newcomb. The English Presbyterian. The orderly matter of
Prayer, drawn into Question and Answer. Two Treatises; the first, Of Rejoicing
in the Lord Jesus in all Cases and Conditions: The second is, Of a Christians
Hope in Heaven, and freedom from Condemnation by Christ: Both by Mr. Robert
Asty, late Minister of Jesus Christ in Norwich. Obedience to Magistrates
Recommended; By Mr. John Clapham, Rector of Wramplingham in Norfolk. A Present
for Youth, and Example for the Aged.
FINIS.

