Aug. 16th 1648.
I Have perused this Book, entitled, (A Cordial for a fainting soul) wherein
I find many cases clearly resolved, tending to the consolation of afflicted
consciences and wounded spirits, which are so judiciously and piously handled,
and so effectually and fitly applied, that I think them very profitable, and
(through Gods blessing) availeable for the comforting of poor weak Christians,
and the curing and removing of their doubts and scruples, which retard and
hinder their progress in the ways of Piety, and therefore very worthy to be
printed and published.

John Downame.

A CORDIAL FOR A FAINTING SOUL: OR, Some ESSAYS for the satisfaction of
wounded spirits, laboring under several burdens: In which several Cases of
Conscience most ordinary to Christians, especially in the beginning of their
Conversion, are resolved.

Being the sum of fourteen Sermons, delivered in so many Lectures in a
private Chapel belonging to Chappell-Field-House in NORWICH.

With a Table annexed, containing the several Cases of Conscience, which in
the following Treatise are spoken to directly, or collaterally.

Preached, and now published (upon the importunity of diverse Christians,)

By John Collings, Mr of Arts, and one of the most unworthy of the Ambassadors
of Jesus Christ, for the preaching of the Gospel in that City.

Hostis noster adhuc in hac vita nos positos, quanto magis nos sibi rebellare
conspicit, ^amo amplius expugnare contendit, eos enim pulsare negligit, quos
quieto jure possidere se sentit; Contra nos vero eo ^ehementius incitatur, quo
ex cord nostro quasi ex jure propria habitationis expe^itur.

Greg. in Cap. 33. Job. Isa. 30. 40. Who is amongst you that fears the Lord?
and obeys the voice of his servant, that sits in darkness, and has no
light? Let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Tomlins at the Sun and Bible near Pie-corner.
MDCXLIX.

To the Right Honorable and truly Noble, both by the first and second Birth,
the Lady Elizabeth Countess Dowager of Exeter, Happiness and Peace.
Madam,
AFter that I was persuaded to let the world see these Receipts, I thought it
policy to give them as much allowance of advantage, as they were capable of,
and to this end, I have presumed to offer them to your Honor, for your
probatum est. The Sermons never yet were made more public, then the private
Chapel belonging to this Family, where they have been offered to the ears of
those that have importuned me to venture them upon a public censure. My
design from the first beginning of that private Lecture, was to satisfy
diverse doubting Christians, in several cases of conscience, if God might but
honor me so far as to remove strawes out of the way of their faith. The most
of those cases, herein contained, were such as in my little time I had gathered
from the experiences of diverse; and possibly it was but my duty, to endeavor
to satisfy them in my Pulpit, who had almost set me in my closet. And had not
I had their Imprimatur, (so much nothing is there of mine in them) they had
never been offered as a Sacrifice at another Altar. If God has sanctified them
but to one soul, I dare not call them common or unclean. If what has satisfied
my own, and possibly some others spirits, may be honored with further
success, let the Physician of souls have the glory, and I only more of his
work (which is a wages to it self.) I am confident as your Honors eye passes
the several pages, your Ladyship will epsy some stone turned out of the way,
upon which your Honors own soul stumbled. Let it mind your Ladyship to say
with David, Psalm. 116. Ah, Lord! Truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant; and
the child of thine hand maid, for thou have loosed my bonds. I shall be
honored if any thing in these Papers, occasion but one meditation of praise.
Madam, I am confident your Honor is past this rough stumbling way. It will be
yet sweetness, for your Honor to remember, the days of old, though you have
led captivity captive. I have here, but begun my work, answering some few
cases, according to the ability God has measured to me. The great part is yet
behind, vi^^ Such as arise from the mi^judging the effects of faith. If this
be acceptable, I may possibly hereafter, venture a second part upon the public
Charity. My single aim in this work, has been to prepare the way of the Lord,
and it is (Madam!) an Honorable employment to be a Pioneer to the Lord of
Hosts. I have neither sought to enter line these plain Sermons with reading,
nor yet glaze them with Rhetoric; I knew, leaves of antiquity, would make no
plasters for wounded consciences; nor would it be the smell or look, but the
inward virtue of the salve, which must heal the sores of a troubled spirit. I
have often wished that some man, whose years had taught him more divine wisdom
and experience in these secret cures, might have prevented me in this work*
Alas, Madam! your Honor knows, I am but an infant of days, let not your
Honor expect much* but remember that he who writes, has not yet exceeded the
twenty sixth year of his age; and that as his days have been few, so they have
most of them been very evil too. But my bowels yearned, to see so many poor
souls lie wounded, and panting for life in the way of our Ministry, and every
one in the midst of this Pamphlet age, passing by, and but looking on, if not
possibly another way. Many have handled notions, and disputed niceties in
Divinity* Others more profitably, have labored in practical paints, (in which
God has honored this age, in which we live, to excel former Centuries of
Time:) But few have made it their work (except collaterally) to remove the
souls obstructions, which soon put the whole frame of their spirits in a sad
distemperature, and upon the remov^th of which, depends so much for the
Christians thriving and growth, though he be fed at the daintiest tables: This
has made me (though the meanest of those that labor for the Lord) to do the
(...) in casting a direct^r eye upon their wound^* where I have failed, my eyes
are unto the great Physician to supply the deficiences of his poor creature,
who in this has endeavored to do nothing but for his sake, and those on
earth, who are his Mystical pieces. How sweet (Madam!) shall be the
countenances of the glorified ones, when the beauty of the Lord Jesus Christ
(the highest flower in glory) shall be fully transparent in their cheeks,
clarified from the duskish shadow that corruption casts upon them? Me thinks it
will be glorious to see, and it is sweet but to think, how beautifully David
appears before the throne of the Lamb, without the visible track of a tear upon
his cheeks, who here quartered so many nights amongst floods and billows of
sorrow, and was so often startled at so poor a querie as, Where is thy God
become? Let your Honor lift up your head; The day of your redemption draws
nigh. The Lord Jesus is pulling out his handkerchief laced with love, to wipe
all tears from your eyes, and hastening to bow the heavens and come down, to
Gather his Saints together, even those that have made a covenant with him with
their lips, and translate them from this valley of tears, to that place, where
they shall hunger and thirst no more, but be satisfied with his likeness, who
is the brightness of his Fathers glory. I humbly beg your Honors pardon for
my presumption. Your Honors former honoring me, with the acceptance of some
former labors, has emboldned me, and I know your Ladyships spirit is so low,
that it can rejoice in stooping to take a message from the Prince of glory
(though from the mouth of his meanest Ambassador:) In which confidence, I
humbly offer these worthless endeavors to your Ladyships hands; and with my
humble supplications at the throne of Grace, for your Honors progress in
Grace here, and happiness in Glory here after, I rest,

Your Honors most devoted JOH: COLLINGS.
From my study in Chappel-field-house in Norwich. Aug. 17. 1648.
To the Christian Reader, especially such an one as walks with a troubled
Spirit.
FOr thy sake (Dear Heart!) were these Sermons composed, preached, and now made
public. The world (this day) abounds with treatises, and excels former times
in the Spirituality of the penmen, who have written powerful, and practically.
Some there are that have made it their work to Plant: These have led souls up
the stairs to Jesus Christ, showing them the way to the land of Glory; such
have been our Shepherd, and Hooker, with diverse others. Others God has set to
build, and as he used the other chiefly as his porters, so he seems to have
used these as the Grooms of his chamber, and appointed them to set out the
excellency of the Lord Jesus Christ, to them that are sick of love: These have
led souls from chamber to chamber, showing them all the chambers of free grace,
and making it their chiefest work, to set out the Bridegroom in his glory, and
exalt the Riches of free mercy. The work of the first was to dress the Bride;
The second discover the Bridegroom in his wedding Robes. A third sort have had
their work allotted them, to show Christians how to keep house with Jesus
Christ: These have directed Christians how to walk closely with Jesus Christ;
of that number have been our Bolton, and Burro^ghs, and Sibbs, and Downham. A
fourth sort have been Gods weeders, making it their work to deliver poor souls
from the snares of the Devil, and the truth of God from those errors which
this age has brought forth: (And no wonder if in greater plenty then former
times, in regard we have had a summer so wet with showers of grace, in the
dispensations of Gospel-mysteries, excelling the dryness of former times.) A
fifth sort there have been, (though a scanter number) that have attended upon
Christ's hospital, endeavoring to heal the wounds of bruised spirits: In this
way have our Downham, and Bolton, and Sedgwicks, and Sibbs, labored in part. I
have labored to rank my self in the latter number, offering to thee some
Receipts for the staying of thy soul (if sick of love) If there be any thing in
this Treatise spoken to thy souls particular wants, Let God have the glory, and
the Author thy prayers: Sure I am, to some of those, (in whose ears they were
delivered) they were As apples of Gold in Pictures of silver. Think not there
is any virtue in these lines, they are but as Elishaes staff to the face of the
dead child. Possibly thou may from hence discover, how irrational the
temptations of Satan are, (if once duly weighed) Use these poor meditations
with faith, and prayer, and possibly Christ may honor them so far, as to make
them isntrumental for the clearing the way of thy faith, and establishing thy
souls peace. Truly (Reader!) it was not my own but others opinion of them,
which has made them public. If by removing a block out of thy way, they but
quicken thy pace to Jesus Christ, if by removing, or preventing thy doubts,
they add but a dram to thy faith, it shall be m^^crown: if they but discover
to thee, the evenues of Gods ways, (which the Devil, and thy, and my base
heart would make rugged) I have my end, who desire nothing from them but a
giving glory to God, in helping on the peace of thy soul.

My intention is to make a further progress, I have sent this but to usher the
way, and to see, if this age can like any treatise, that quarrels not in
choleric disputes, nor smells of novelties.

It is a sad Age (Christian!) in which we live; while most of our time is spent
in Tithing mint, and Annis, we neglect the weightier things of God law.
Disputing opinions has eaten up the Religion of Christians; we are all too apt
to spend more time in examining our Brethrens Tenets then in searching our own
hearts: How much of our times, How many of our Books, are spent in quarrelling
for the Ius Divinum of a Church Government, which is but as the mint and Annis
to the weightier things of Gods Law? (Yet am I not of so loose principles as to
think, The Government of the Church a mere circumstance; nor can I think that
form of Government, worth taking up in a street, that for the essentials is not
to be found in the word of God, Iuxta, and secundum are terms I understand
not.) Every Truth of Christ has the brightness of a star in its forehead; but
of these stars, some differ from others in glory. Reader! thou shall see here,
a great deal of the poor creatures weakness, but his strength must be
perfected in weakness, whose work it is to stay up the hearts of them that
rely upon him. Search the Scriptures, see if these things be true which thou
here meetest with; if they be, receive them for truths sake, and use them as an
handkerchief to wipe the tears from thine eyes. I have endeavored neither to
darken them with misty expressions, nor yet to paint them with beauteous
vermilion-language: I had rather they should take thine heart, then thine ear,
and be rather an object of thy meditation, then admiration. I remember that
true speech of Hierom, in his Epist. ad Nepotianum, instructing him how to
preach: Docente te in Ecclesia non clam^r populi sed gemitus suscitetur,
lachrimae auditorum lauds tuae sint; Sermo Presbyteri scripturarum sale
conditus sit. Nolo te declamatorem, and rabulam, garrulumque sine ratione; se^
mysteriorum peritum, and Sacramentorum Dei tui eruditissimum. Verba volvere and
celeritate dicendi apud imperitum vulgus admirationem sui facere, indoctorum
hominum est. Nihil tam facile quam vilem plebeculam and indoctam, concione
linguaeque volubilitate decipere, quia quicquid non intelligit, plus miratur. I
would (says he) that thou should so preach in the Church, not that the
people should be provoked to humming but sighing; that the tears of thy
hearers, may be the praise of thy Sermon. The Sermon of a Minister (says he)
should be seasoned sale Scripturarum, with the salt of Scripture, [he does not
salibus, with idle querks.] And he goes ^n; I would not have thee like a
declamer in the schools, or a brawler, or one that should have a great deal of
expression, without the substance of reason; but one that should be skild in
the Word, and Ordinances of God. In short (says he) It is the trick of dunces,
to rumble over words, and by their mere expressions, make people admire him:
For there is nothing so easy, as to deceive a poor unlearned people, with a
voluble tongue: for they, by how much the less they understand, by so much the
more they admire. Thus he. And yet was not this the design of our old
Cathedral, and University Preachers? nay is it not yet of many in this City,
that have not left making use of the Pulpit, to tell us what they have of
Greek, and Latin Fathers, in their common place book? A generation of the
worst of men (Ministers of the Gospel I should lie to call them) that go about
to convert, and heal souls, as the Devil heals diseases, by charms that the
Patient understands not. Their whole design is to make people admire them, To
this end they preach, as if the days of Pentecost were still continued: The
men are Galileans, and their hearers too; yet if Parthians, Medes, Elamites,
and the dwellers in Mesopotamia were there, they might hear something of their
own language, and something possibly that neither the Preacher nor the hearers
understand. They are admired, Verily they have their reward. Observe how these
men court an humme, with their jests, and spittings; how ambitious they are to
smooth up their sentences with an esse posse videatur. Such Pulpit-monkies,
that bring the Ordinance of God into contempt, and make the Word of God of none
effect, They may well be styled opprobrium Evangelii. Thus says the Lord unto
the shepherds, Ezra 34. 2, 3.
Should not the shepherds feed the flock? woe be to you shepherds, that Feed
your selves then, that ^at the fat [of applause] and cloth your selves with the
wool [of admiration.] The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have you
healed that which was sick, neither have you bound up that which was broken,
neither have you brought again that which was driven away, neither have you
sought that which was lost: You shall one day without repentance for these
Sermons, hear your reward in plainer English, Mat. 25. 41. While these wretches
vend themselves, the poor hungry soul starves, at meat, crying out, Death is in
the Pett, These unnatural Fathers, while poor souls cry for Bread, cheat them
with Stones, and while they call for Fish, they beguile them with Scorpions. My
heart bears me witness, that in these following leaves, I have labored not to
smooth, but to settle thy soul, which must be by putting thee on to trust in
the Lord. Isai. 50. 10.
If thou mislikest these Sermons for their plainness, know that I had rather
displease thy taste, and teach thee to rectify thy palate, then by studying to
please thy childish tooth, lose the advantage of speaking to many an others
heart. Read it; thou shall not leave it without learning something; if thou
gettest no good in relation to the intended end, thou shall learn yet a lesson
of the poor creatures nothingnesse, and give glory to God, by looking to him,
and trusting in him for thy souls peace. If from any thing in these Sermons,
thy soul (by the blessing of God) gets any comfort, and settlement, Let thy and
my God have the glory, and his soul the benefit of thy tears, and prayers, who
is, and shall be for ever,

The Worthless Ambassador IOH: COLLINGS.
From my study in Chappel-field-house in Norwich. August 17, 1648.
A short Table of those several Cases of Conscience which in the following
Treatise are spoken to more fully or Collaterally, the Letter of which are
noted with an Asteriske.
Ser. I. 1. Whether it be necessary that humiliation should in a soul go
before faith? Ser. II. 2. Whether I may refuse to believe, because I think I
am not enough humbled? Comfort and direction for a soul under that affliction.
Ser. III. 3. Whether I may refuse to believe, because I know not whether I am
elected or no? How to satisfy a Christian under that affliction. Ser. IV. 4.
Whether I may refuse to believe, because I am a great sinner, and as I think
too, unworthy of mercy? How to satisfy a Christian under that affliction. Ser.
V. 5. Whether I may refuse to believe, upon a conceit that I have sinned the
sin against the Holy Ghost? How to ease a spirit under that burden. Ib. * 6.
Whether every sin against knowledge, every denying of Christ, every hating our
brethrens goodness, be this sin or no? Ser. VI. 7. Whether a Christian may
conclude he does not believe, because he cannot act every act of faith? Ser.
VII. 8. Whether true faith may consist with doubting, and how in the same
soul? Ib. 9. Whether a Christian may conclude he has not true faith, because
for the present he is ignorant 1. in circumstantiall points. 2. in the history
of Scripture. 3. in some fundamentals, yea 4. in the necessary points of
salvation, so far as that he cannot make the generals out by particulars, nor
maintain them upon dispute? Ser. VIII. 10. Whether a Christian may conclude
his faith is not true, because he thinks he does not assent to the whole Word
of God? * 11. Whether the true believer can at any time doubt, whether the
Scripture be the Word of God or no? * 12. Whether a Christian may not be
tempted to doubt it, and yet not doubt it, and how to know such a temptation
from our own corruption? * 13. Whether a Christian can have true faith, and
not assent to every particular truth in the word of God, nor to the true
meaning of this or that portion of Scripture? Ser. IX. 14. Whether a Christian
may truly rely upon Jesus Christ for salvation, and yet doubt whether he does
rely or no, and not know he relyes, but be strongly conceited he does not? *
15. Whether a Christian may truly rely upon Christ, and yet find an abatement
sometimes of the strength of his relyance, and to his own thoughts, rely
sometimes more sometimes less? * 16. Whether a Christian may truly rely upon
Christ, and the promises, and yet not at all times find an equal reliance upon
all the promises, but that he can at sometimes as he thinks, more adhere to some
promises then other, and in general, better depend upon Gods spiritual
promises for grace and heaven, then his promises made to us for sufficiency for
this life? Ser. X. 17. Whether a believer may not hang tremblingly upon the
promises, and yet hang truly upon them, what things may cause a trembling faith
in the soul sometimes? 18. Whether a Christian may not truly believe, and yet
not be able at all times, fully and truly to appropriate the promises of Jesus
Christ, to himself in particular? 19. Whether the true believer may apply
particular promises? 20. Whether the true believer at sometimes may not be
unable to apply temporal promises, when, and why? 21. Whether a true believer,
at sometimes may not be unable particularly to apply spiritual promises, if
they be conditional? 22. Whether the true believer at sometimes may not be
unable to apply spiritual promises, though absolute? Ser. XI. 23. What things
must be wrought in that soul, that by a particular application of faith lays
hold upon any promise? 24. Whether, and how a Christian may, and ought to apply
all the promises, so as to bring them as salves to his particular sores. 25.
Whether Conditional promises, suppose that I must fulfill the conditions
before I apply them? Ser. XII. 26. Whether a Christian may not have saving
faith, yet no assurance? 27. Whether, and how persuasion comes into justifying
faith, and is necessary to every true faith? 28. Whether a Christian may
conclude he has had faith of assurance, or has, if it be weak, and
inconstant in degrees? * 29. Whether assurance, when lost, may be recovered
again? Ser. XIII. 30. Whether it be a sufficient ground for me to conclude I
have no faith, if I think I do not feel the strength of God carrying me out
to those duties which I should do, and graces which I should act? 31. Whether
any Christian feels strength always alike, and what causes there may be of
his not feeling Gods strength always alike acting in his soul? 32. What a
Christian ought to do when he does not feel the strength of God, enlivening
him and inabling him to act spiritual duties? Ser. XIV. 33. Whether, and how a
Christian may know whether those doubts which arise in his soul, be such as a
true believer has, or no, better then such as unbeleevers and reprobates have?
34. Whether the principle of doubting in the believer, be unbelief or
infirmity?
An Index of the Contents of the following Treatise.
SERMON. I. CHAP. I.
THe Coherence of the Text, division of it, and 8. Doctrines raised from it. p.
1, 2, 3, 4 The Doctrine insisted upon; viz. That as the best of Christians have
weakness and imperfection in their faith, so it is their nature and duty to be
sensible of it, and to labor and strive against it. p. 4 The Doctrine proved
in its 3. branches by Scripture. p. 5 3 Reasons of the first branch, why
Christians have weaknesses. Ib. 1. Because the state of Mortality is imperfect.
Ib. 2. Christians condition here is inconstant. Ib. 3. Corruptions renew daily.
Ib.
3. Reasons of the 2. branch, Why the true Believer will be sensible of his
weaknesses: Because, 1. He is always laying his heart to his eye. p. 6 2. He
is always laying the square to his heart. Ib. 3. He is not self-opinionated.
Ib.
3 Reasons of the 3. branch, Why the Christian will strive against his
weaknesses: 1. Because the spirit works in him. p. 7 2. Because he levels his
arrows at perfection. Ib. 3. He knows the more he has of faith, the more he
has of Christ. Ib.
Uses. 1. To comfort weak Christians. p. 8 2. To exhort all to labor to
increase their faith. p. 9 1* Direction: to remove those things which hinder
faith. p. 9, 10 1. Scruples and doubts hinder faith. 2. Notes of a weak faith.
p. 10 What we must do to remove scruples that hinder faith. p. 11 What are the
causes why many conceive they ought not to believe. Ib. 1. Cause. The too
irregular eying of preparatory qualifications, they think they are not enough
humbled. Ib. The question disputed, Whether faith goes before repentance, or
repentance before faith? p. 12, 13, 14, 15, etc.
The terms opened, and the question rightly stated. p. 12, 13 Six things
granted to them that hold the Negative, and the question again rightly stated.
p. 14 The Affirmative proved by 3 Arguments, by Scripture and experience. p.
15, 16, 17, 18 7. Objections answered, and the truth vindicated. p. 19, 20, 21,
22, 23, 24 An answer to the Objections of the Jailor and Lydia's examples.
Master Shepherds answer to those examples. p. 24, 25
SERMON. II. CHAP. II.
HOw to comfort the soul under that trouble: I am not enough humbled. The
complaint. p. 26 Something spoken by way of premise. p. 27, 28, 29 Several
considerations to comfort the soul under this trouble, p. 29, 30 1. Though God
has called for humiliation, yet he has not set a measure. p. 29 2. No man is
able to set a measure. p. 30 6 Notes concerning Gods various dealings in
humbling souls. Ib. What souls God ordinarily humbles deeply, and yet how
various his dealings with them are. p. 30, 31, 32 3. Consid. If the end be
wrought we need not trouble our selves about the means. p* 33 2 Ends of
Humiliation. To make sin bitter and loathsome. p. 33, 34 To put the soul in
a capacity of believing. p. 35
5 Notes of Doctor Sibbs, to know when humiliation is sufficient. 34 A 3d end
of humiliation, is to inhance the price of Christ in the soul. p. 36 4. Consid.
Thou may misjudge thy humiliation. Ib. 3. Notes concerning the measuring of
it. p. 36, 37, 38 1. We must measure length and breadth as well as depth. p. 37
2. We must measure inside more then outside. Ib. 3. We must give an allowance
for the time to come. p. 38 5. Consid. Humiliation is not a ground of Faith, p.
41 Nor, Acceptance. p. 39, 40

There may be a spice of Popery in a desire of deep humiliation. p. 39, 40 2.
Directions to Christians under this temptation. p. 43, 44* 45 1. By the Nature
of God. In his Covenant. p. 43, 44, 45 In his Christ in his dispensatio^s of
grace. p. 46 In his promises. Ib.
Consider to what manner of sinners God has dispensed out his grace. Ib. 2
Things to be gathered from the Holy-Ghosts various expression of the work of
humiliation in the Saints. p. 47 3 Notes concerning the promises. p. 48, 49 1.
The promises require no more of us then they engage God for to us. 2. No
promises are made to the measure of humiliation, but to the thing. p. 49 3.
Gods original promises of first Grace and humiliation, are absolute, not
conditional. p. 49 2. Direction, By the nature of humiliation. p. 50 The
Nature of humiliation may be considered in its 1. Original. Ib. 2. Manner of
working. Ib. 3. End. Ib.
3. Direct: Labor after more humiliation. p. 51. Want of humiliation is the
cause of so many hypocrites. p. 51 Means to get our hearts more humbled. p. 52
3. Means given by Master Shepherd. Ib. Several directions given by Doctor
Preston in this case. Ib. 3. Directions given in this case. p. 53 1. Consider
the nature of thy sin, in 6 particulars. Ib. 2. Consider the mercy of God, in
3 particulars. Ib. 3. Fly to God by Prayer. p. 53, 54
SERMON. III. CHAP. III.
HOw to satisfy such Christians as think they ought not to believe, because
they do not know they are elected. The Complaint of the troubled soul. p. 56
Something spoken to it by way of promise. p. 57 The truth concerning Election
premised in 5 Conclusions. Papists and Arminians wound truth to heal
conscience, by lying charms. Ib. 8. Considerations propounded for souls thus
troubled. p. 58, 59, etc. 1. Consid. Faith is not an apprehension of particular
Election, but an application of general promises. p. 59, 60, 61, 62 2. Consid.
That thy faith only can discover to thee thy Election. p. 62 The Covenant is
only showed by God to his Saints. p. 62, 63 3. Consider the phrase of
Scripture, expounding how our Election may be made known to us. p. 63 4. Thou
have no ground to conclude against thy Election, but thy unbelief. p. 64, 65
5. Cons. Those that God elects to the end he elects to the means. p. 65, 66 We
must have a sense of faith before we can have a sense of our Election. p. 66 6.
By this stumbling as we perplexe our selves, so we call Gods wisdom in
question a ways, and slander the charters of free grace. p. 67 7. If we will
believe, Gods decrees cannot hinder us of heaven. p. 68 8. Heaven and glory are
worth an adventure, whether we be elected or no. p. 68, 69
S^RM. IV. CHAP. IV.
HOw to comfort poor souls that dare not believe because of their
unworthiness, in respect of their many and great sins. 7. Considerations to
comfort the soul under this affliction. p. 72, 73, etc. 1. Gods grace is full
enough of height, and length, and depth, and breadth: Christ cannot be brought
to pant for breath of free grace. p. 72, 73, 74, 75 2. Consid. There Is no
defect of will in God to save the highest or greatest sinners. p. 76, 77, 78,
79 There is not only power but eagerness in Christ's will to save the greatest
sinners. p. 77, 75 Christ's eagerness to save sinners, proved by 12
particulars. p. 77, 78, 79 1. He speaks. 2. He swears. 3. He pleads. 4. He
expostulates with us upon denyals. 5. He appeals. 6. He wishes. 7. He
professes he knows not how to destroy them. 8. He weeps. 9. He invites. 10.
He comes from heaven to earth on this errand. 11. He dies for great sinners.
12. He sends messengers to treat and parley with great sinners. p. 77, 78, 79 3.
Consid. God has pardoned, and Christ has washed as great sinners as thou art,
that were so either actually or habitually. p. 80 4. Consid. Infinite mercy
never did its utmost yet: God can pardon greater sinners then he has pardoned.
p. 81, 82 5. Consid. There is as much reason on thy part, why Christ should
pardon thee, as there was in any of the Saints, why he pardoned them. p. 83 6.
Consid. God never married any for a portion, nor refused any for want of one.
p. 84 7. Consid. Christ shall attain his design [in pardoning sinners] more
fully, by how much the greater sinner thou art. p. 84, 85 Christ gets most
glory by pardoning great sinners. p. 85 1. He glorifies his power, and
patience, and riches of mercy. p. 84 2. He gets glory from them: They will love
much. p. 85 3. Others by their example will be persuaded to turn. Ib.
The whole case concluded with a story out of Eusebius. p. 86, 87
SERMON. V. CHAP. V.
HOw to satisfy a soul, doubting that it has sinned the sin against the
Holy Ghost, The complaint stated. 89. Something spoken to it by way of premise.
90. 1. There is such a sin. 90. Why it is called the sin against the
Holy Ghost. 90. 2. It is unpardonable. 91. 3. Elect ones cannot commit it. p.
91 This scruple proceeds from ignorance. p. 91, 92 12. Considerations, tending
to comfort the soul under this wound, and to inform us concerning the nature
of this sin. p. 92, 93, 94* 95, etc. 1* Consid. None could ever tell what
this sin was. p. 9^ Various opinions of it. 92. The Schoolmen and Papists
opinion of it. 92 Their 6 species of it disproved. p. 92, 93 How bsasphemy
against the Holy Ghost may be taken. p. 93 How far we may discover what this
sin is. p. 94 2. Consid. None can be guilty of it but such as have had a
great measure of knowledge. p. 94, 95 3. Consid. It must be a settled sin of
our own, continued in without repentance, not a transient suggested thought
for which we grieve. p. 96, 97 4. Consid. Every sin against knowledge is not
this sin. p. 97 What manner of sinning against knowledge it must be. Ib. 5.
Consid. A bare denial of the truth of God with which we are enlightened, and
the grace of God infused into us, is not this unpardonable sin. p. 98 What
manner of denial of truth is an ingredient into this sin. Ib. 6. Consid. Every
envy at, and hatred of our brethren and their goodness, is not this sin? p. 99
What manner of envy and hatred is an ingredient into this sin. p. 100 7.
Consid. It must be joined with a total falling away from the truth, Religion,
and profession of Jesus Christ. Ib. 8. Consid. Others would complain of it as
well as thy self if thou had sinned this sin. p. 101 9 Consid. Thy
complaining and grieving for it, is a sign thou art not guilty of it. Ib. 10.
Consid. The sin against the Holy Ghost is not unpardonable in respect of Gods
mercy, or its greatness. p. 102 How and why it is said to be unpardonable. Ib.
11. Consid. It cannot be a block for thee in the way of beleevingly, because
though it does take away from thee the power, yet it does not excuse thee from
the duty of believing. 103 12. Thou can not conclude thy self to have sinned
this sin (if thou have sinned it) before thy dying hour. Ib. The conclusion of
the Case: With a general description of the sin against the Holy Ghost. p.
104, 105
SERMON. VI. CHAP. VI.
HOw to satisfy such poor souls as are conceited they do not believe when
they indeed do. 2 Causes of such Complaints. 1. A mistake in the nature and
Acts of faith. p. 108 2. A misjudging of the effects of faith. Ib. 2 Things
propounded in order to satisfaction to such scruples as arise from the first
cause. Ib. 1 Thing, viz. That there are many acts and degrees of faith, and
every act is not required to justifying faith. Ib. 2 Thing. That true faith is
of so good a nature, that it will consist in a soul with many doubts and
weaknesses. Ib. Various opinions concerning the justifying act of faith:
Knowledge is supposed to faith, no act of it. 109 Assent in the first and
lowest act of faith: What it is. Ib. What manner of assent is an act of faith.
p. 110 1. It must be steadfast. 2. Impartial. 3. Clear. p. 110, 111 What
manner of assent wicked wretches give to Gods Word. p. 112 It is a ravished
assent of their will. p. 113 The second act of faith is Reliance, this is the
justifying act. p. 115 Six words which Master Ball has noted in Scripture,
setting out the work of justifying faith. p. 116 The third act of faith is
Full Persuasion, and Assurance: What it is. p. 117 This is not necessary, but
comfortable. Ib. This is not that which justifies, but fides justificati. Ib.
What is good and special justifying faith. p. 118 How far persuasion comes
into justifying faith. 1. There is a difference betwixt a persuasion and a full
persuasion. Ib. 2. There is a difference betwixt a persuasion relating to the
present, and a persuasion relating to the future. 5* Conclusions from the
premises to comfort a soul under this trouble. Ib.
SERMON. VII. CHAP. VII.
HOw to satisfy such Christians as conceit their faith is false because they
have many doubts and weaknesses. Faith is of so good a nature, that it will
consist in a gracious heart with many doubts, and weaknesses. p. 121, 122 5
Conclusions of Master Sedgewicks concerning doubts in a gracious soul. p. 123
5* Arguments of Master Rutherfords, to prove that faith may consist with
doubtings. p. 124, 125
CHAP. VIII.
What doubtings and weaknesses in respect of Knowledge may consist in a truly
believing soul with true faith. The complaint stated. p. 126 It is happy for
the soul to complain it knows nothing. Ib. Six conclusions showing, what
ignorance may be in a true believing soul. p. 126, 127, 128, etc. 1. An
ignorance in some points of Religion, which in some sense may be called
fundamentals. p. 127 A distinction of fundamentals. p. 127, 128 What
fundamentals are necessary to be known, and without which can be no faith. p.
127, 128 The conclusion proved. p. 128, 129, 130 2 Conc. A Believer may have
true faith, and yet be ignorant in many circumstantiall points of Religion. p.
130 The conclusion proved. p. 130, 131 3* Conc. A Christian may have true
faith, and yet be ignorant in the History of the Bible. p. 131 4 Conc. A
Christian may have true faith, and yet be ignorant of the meaning of many
places in Scripture. p. 131 5. A Christian may be so far ignorant in those
fundamentals that are necessary to be known, that he cannot make them out, and
yet be a true believer. p. 132 6. A Christian may be so far ignorant in
substantialls, that he cannot make them good upon dispute, and yet have true
faith. p. 133 2 Cautions to be mixed with the premised Conclusions. Ib. 1 He
must not be content with this Ignorance. Ib. 2 He must not deny nor revile the
truth which he does not as yet know. p. 133, 134, 135
SERMON. VIII. CHAP. IX.
What doubts and weaknesses may consist with true faith in a gracious soul in
respect to assent. The Complaint stated. p. 136 5 Considerations to comfort the
soul in several complaints concerning the weakness of its assent. p. 136,
137, 138, etc. 1. A true believer may think he does not assent to the truth of
God, when indeed he does. p. 137 Our assent is to be judged by our Actions. p.
138, 139, 140 2. A Christian may be a true believer, and yet sometimes doubt,
or indeed rather be tempted to doubt, whether the word of God be the word of
God or no. p. 140, 141 Four notes by which we may know, whether our
Atheistical thoughts against the truth of the Scriptures be temptations or no.
p. 141, 142, 143 1 If they be they are ordinarily but disputations, and not
determinations. p. 141 2. If they be but temptations thou strivest against
them. p. 142 3. If they be but temptations they will not dwell with thee. Ib*
4. If they be but temptations thou leadest not thy life according to them while
thou art under them. p. 143, 144 3. Conc. A Christian may be a true believer,
and yet not for the present assent to some particular truth in the word of God.
p. 144 From what causes such a deficiency in assent may arise, viz. 1.
Ignorance. 2. Weakness. p. 144, 145, 146 4. Conc. A Christian that is a true
believer may possibly not assent to the true meaning of this or that place of
Scripture, yea possibly close with a false interpretation of it. p. 146, 147,
148 Every Misbeliever is not an Unbeliever. p. 147, 148 5. Conc. A Christian
may truly believe and truly and clearly assent unto the truth of God, though he
cannot in all things give a clear evidence for his assent. p. 148, 149 A Truth
is two ways clear to a Christ. First, To the eye of his Reason. Secondly, To
the eye of his Faith. p. 148, 149 Many truths of God are not clear to the
Christians eye of Reason: all are clear to his eye of faith. p. 149 A
Difference of Evidences, out of Master Ball. p. 148, 149, 150 The conclusion of
the case, with a repetition of the conclusions, and an addition of two
cautions. p. 150, 151, 152, 153
SERMON. IX. CHAP. X.
COncerning those doubts and weaknesses, which may consist with true faith in a
gracious soul, in respect to the justifying act of faith, viz. Reliance. The
Complaint stated of such as conceive their faith and reliance is not true,
because they cannot think they rely, or do not as they conceive constantly
rely, or cannot find an equal reliance upon all the promises. p. 156 Several
conclusions and considerations to comfort the soul under such scruples. p.
157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166 1. Consid. A Christian may
truly, and wholly rely on Jesus Christ, and yet not believe he fully, and truly
relies. p, 157, 158 2. Consid. A Christian may have true faith, and truly rely
upon Jesus Christ, and really think he does not truly rest, and rely. p. 159 3.
Consid. Thou may question, and doubt thy Reliance, and yet truly rely.
Disputing argues a weakness, not a nullity of the act. p. 160, 161 Causes
assigned of such conceits in Christians against the truth of their reliances,
and of such disputes in their spirits concerning it. p. 162 etc. 1. Cause. The
remains of natural blindness. p. 162 2. Cause. The Devils temptations. p.
163 3. Cause. The misgiving, and suspicious nature of Christians. Ib. 4. Cause.
Mists of Melancholy clouding the souls eye. p. 164 5. Cause. A Christians
wilfulness, refusing to take any evidence of the truth of faith but from
sense. Ib. 4. Consid. Thou may at all times truly rely and yet not at all
times with equal confidence rely. p. 165, 166 5. Consid. Thou may not so
fully, and equally rely upon some promises at all times as upon other, and yet
truly rely upon all. p. 167 It is hard, in times of apparent danger, to rely.
Ib. Because dangers are obvious to sense: The object of faith is out of sight.
p. 168 Promises where the flesh is concerned, where sense fails, are harder to
be relied on then promises merely relating to the soul. p. 167, 168 2. The
soul may have more cause to fear Gods fulfilling of promises for this life,
then it has or can have to fear the fulfilling of promises for eternal life.
p. 169 The reason of it. p. 169, 170
SERMON. X.
6. COnsid. A Christian may hang tremblingly on the promises, and yet truly. p.
171 Several causes of a believers trembling sometimes. p. 173, 174, etc. 1.
Cause. The deep apprehension of their misery proceeding. p. 173 2. Cause. The
holds that have already deceived the soul. p. 174 3. Cause. The distance of
the promise to sense, and the generality of them. p. 175, 176 4. Cause.
Desertions. p. 177 Whence arises trembling in desertion, viz. from the sense
of sin occasioning this desertion. Ib. 2. Cause. Why the Believer trembles in
desertion is, because the very essence of desertions is the withdrawing of the
shinings of Gods love, which only can keep the soul from trembling. p. 177,
178, 179 7. Consid. Thou may truly rely upon Christ and the promises, and
yet not be able at all times fully and truly to appropriate and peculiarise
them to thy self. p. 180 Several distinctions of promises, and times to be
observed, for the clearing up the consideration. p. 181, 182, 183, 184 2.
Distinctions of promises instanced in, Temporal, Spiritual, Absolute,
Conditional. p. 180, 181 1. Temporal promises made to particular Persons and
Kingdoms must not be appropriated; they are canceld bonds. p. 184 2. We may
truly appropriate Spiritual promises, though we cannot for the present
particularly apply temporal and bodily promises. p. 185, 186 What promises are
absolute, what conditional. p. 181, 182 A Distinction of times must be
observed: there is a difference betwixt the Saints, Winter and Summer. p. 183
What are the souls Winter, and Summer (...). Ib. The truth of the
consideration in certain conclusions* 1. Particular promises must not be
expected to be peculiarised, our name is not in the bonds. p. 184 2. At
sometimes possibly we may not be able to appropriate temporal promises. Ib.
Certain such times expressed: p. 184, 185.
1. A time of extreme want, and penury. 2. In the dark day of desertion. 3. In
a misty day of Melancholy. 4. In a black day of bodily afflictions.
5. It does not argue a nullity of true faith in spiritual promises not to be
able to believe with a special faith the promises for this life at any time.
p. 185 3. Conc. For those that are conditional promises in dark times the
soul may not be able, clearly and fully, to apply them, rest upon them, and
peculiarly apply them; and yet at the same time truly dwell and rest upon them.
p. 186 4. Conc. In dark times, the truly believing soul, though it can give
no reason for it, may not be able to apply the most absolute peculiar promises,
as its peculiar portion. p. 187 This must be cleared by considering what is
required for a soul to be able to rest upon any promise as its peculiar
portion. p. 188, 189
SERMON. XI.
A Progress in the former subject. Three things requisite to be found in that
soul that peculiariseth any promise, so as to say, this is my portion. p. 189
1. There must be a clear understanding of the promise. Ib. 2. A clear
understanding of our own condition. Ib. 3. A mighty and particular working of
God upon the soul. Ib. A misunderstanding of the person to whom the promise is
made, or of the matter of the promise, may be a cause of thy non application.
p. 190 2. Rules for the understanding of the promises in order to our
particular application of them. p. 192 1. General promises are to be
particularly applied, and particular promises are to be generally applied, p.
192 This rule enlarged in 3 branches, and opened. p. 192, 193 2. Rule.
Whatsoever promises thou find in the word of God, made to any particular
Church or People, for spiritual and soul mercies, we may still apply to the
present Church (though not the same) and any member thereof. p. 193 3. Things to
confirm this. 1. God is immutable. p. 194 2. The promises were made to them,
not as such and such people, but as Gods people. Ib. 3. The promises were made
to Christ, and the covenant (of which they are branches) were made to him and
his heirs. p. 195 Many reasons of Master S. Rutherford, to prove that the
promises, and the covenant was originally made to Christ personal, not Christ
mystical. p. 195, 196 Master Rutherfords Distinction of a Covenant and
Promises made to Christ, some to him alone, some part to him and his. p. 196,
197 What they are in their distinction. p. 197 A 3d. rule for the understanding
of the promises. Conditional promises require not that we should fulfill the
conditions required. p. 197, 198, 199 The 2d. thing required to make the soul
particularly apply the promises, viz. A clear understanding in the soul of
its own condition. p. 200, 201 The 3d thing required to make the soul
particularly apply the promises is a constant wonderful working of the power
of God upon the soul. p. 202 This may be sometimes more, sometimes less, p*
202, 203
SERMON. XII. CHAP. XII.
COncerning those weaknesses that may in a gracious soul accompany the bighest
act of faith, viz. Assurance; and how to satisfy the soul that scruples its
faith, because it cannot be assured at all, or if at all, yet weakly, and
inconstantly. Several Conclusions to comfort the soul under troubles of this
nature. 206, 207, 208, 209 1. Conc. Thou may have a true and certain faith,
and such a one as will richly save thee, and yet have no assurance of thy
salvation. p. 206 Various Opinions concerning Assurance. p. 206, 207 How far
persuasion comes into justifying faith. p. 206, 207, 208 The 2 former
distinctions concerning persuasion repeated and enlarged. Ib. Master Burges his
3 Reasons why our sins are not actually and formally pardoned from eternity,
but only when we believe. p. 209 A fourth reason added to his. p. 209 The 4
formerly mentioned conclusions concerning persuasion again repeated and
demonstrated. p. 210, 211 2. Other Conclusions concerning assurance added, and
proved. p. 211, 212 1. That it is false that the Papists say no particular
assurance can be procured, or ought to be looked after. 2. It is as false that
Antinomians say, that there is no true faith without a fullness of persuasion.
Faith without Assurance may be, 1. Saving. 2. Strong. 3. It may be certain. p.
212, 213 It is certain in respect of the 1: Object. p. 214 2: Event. p. 215
2d. Concl. Thy assurance may be true though weak and inconstant in degrees. p*
215, 216 What times ordinarily assurance is most strong. p. 217 1. Ordinarily
it is very high and strong immediately after a desertion. In desertions
ordinarily it is none, or but weak. p. 217 2. Ordinarily it is very high when
his Saints are in greatest distresses, called to suffer Martyrdom, etc. p.
218, 219 3d. Concl. Thou may have had, and again have a true assurance and
full persuasion, though thou for the present have none at all. p. 219, 220
SERMON. XIII. CHAP. XIII.
HOw to comfort that soul that conceives it has not true faith, because it
does not feel Gods strength, carrying it out to those duties, and acts of
grace which it ought to act. A distinction of feeling. It may be 1. Of Peace.
221 2. Of Strength. Ib.
Something spoken by way of consolation to poor souls under this scruple of
spirit. 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, etc. 1. Consid. Not-feeling does not
argue a not-being. p. 223 2d. Consid. The truth of Gods love to us is not so
easily to be discerned in the very acting, and working of God, as in the effect
of such acts and operations. p. 235, 236, 237 3d. Consid. Feeling at the best
is but a deceivable, or a disputable evidence. p. 237, 238 4. Consid. No
Christian feels strength always alike, nor has cause to do it. p. 239 That
of God to the soul which is not seen is always alike; That which is seen not
so. Ib. Causes why God is not felt always alike in the soul. p. 240 1. Cause.
His soft goings sometimes in the cause. Ib. 2. To try whether a Christian can
stand alone upon the true legs of faith, without the wooden legs of sense,
Ib. 3. The soul may be benumbed and have lost its feeling. Ib. 5. Consid. Gods
strength may then be seen in thee when it is not seen or felt by thee. p. 241,
242 6. Consid. It is no argument to warrant thee not to believe, because thou
do not feel God carrying thee out by his arms of strength, in such a
manner, to spiritual duties; and to the acts of spiritual and saving graces
as thou desire, and perhaps expectest. p. 242, 243 We must believe for
strength as well any thing else. p. 243 This di^^ers from the Arminian Doctrine
of free will. Ib. 5* Directions teaching Christians what to do under this
Affliction. p. 244 1. Direct. Find out the cause and remove it. Ib. 2. Causes
may be. 1. Gods will. Ib. Then submitting removes it. Ib. 2. Thy own temper.
Ib. Under temptations. 2. Some known sins. 3. Thy expectations may be too high.
Ib* 4. Thy wilfulness may be the cause. These causes must be removed. 1.
Faith. 2. Loving. Expectations. 3. Repentance, etc. 2. Direct. Wait forfeeling.
p. 244 3* Direct. Learn to live, without bread, on Gods Word. p. 245. 4.
Direct. Learn to acknowledge Gods little finger. Ib. 5. Direct. Act contrary to
thy mind. Sick men must eat against their stomach. p. 245 5 Reasons of Master
Rutherfords, why we ought to perform duties under an indisposition, even
against our mind. p. 245, 246
SERMON. XIV. CHAP. XIV.
HOw to know whether our doubtings be such, as may consist with true faith in a
gracious soul. 5* Particulars in which the doubtings of believers differ from
the doubtings of Unbelievers and Reprobates. p. 248, 249, 250, 251 1. They
differ in the Principle; unbelief is not the Principle of doubting in the
Believer, but Infirmity. p. 249, 250, 251 The exposition of that place, Romans 4.
19, 20. p. 250, 251, 252 2. They differ in the occasion from whence they arise.
p. 253 Several occasions of doubting in Gods people different from the
occasion of Unbelievers doubtings. p. 253, 254 3. They differ in the Object.
The Object of the Christians doubting is something in himself: The Object of
the Unbelievers doubting is ordinarily something in God. p. 254, 255 The
Reasons of it. p. 255, 256, 257 4. They differ in their duration and
continuance. p. 257, 258 5* Notes concerning believers doubtings. p. 259, 260,
261 1. They are most and strongest in the morning. p. 258 2. They may be in the
day time. p. 259 3. If they be they are fewer, and weaker. The reasons of it.
p. 259, 260 4. They are transient clouds, that pass, and return not. p. 260 5.
They have none but they conquer in fine. p. 261 5. They differ in their
Effects. p. 262, 263 The effect of Unbelievers doubting is a forsaking, and
declination from God. p. 261, 262 They commonly produce in Gods servants these
five effects. 1. A complaining unto God. p. 263 2. A craving satisfaction from
God. p. 264 3. A striving against them. Ib. 4. A waiting for God. Ib. 5. A
closer walking with, and adhering unto God. p. 264, 265
LUKE 17. 5. And the Apostles said unto him, Lord increase our faith.
WHen the Jailer fell down at the Apostles feet, Acts 16. 30. and said, What
shall I do to be saved? The Apostle answers, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,
and thou shall be saved. When Ruler feared, Christ says, Be not afraid, only
believe, Mar. 5. 36. When the poor man came for mercy for his son, Mark 9. 32.
Christ's tells him, If he could believe, all things were possible to him: When
we pray, if we can but believe, we shall receive, we shall surely not fail.
Many glorious things are spoken of this mother of graces, that faith seems to
be the whole duty of man.

Demosthenes was asked, how many things were necessary for an Orator, he answers
three; First, action, secondly, action, thirdly, action; meaning, action was
more than all: And when a certain Prince asked a great Commander, what was
necessary for War; He answers him three things, money, money, money; meaning,
that that is the ligaments and nerves of War. And truly, if any should ask me,
what is the unum necessarium, the one thing necessary for a Christian, I would
say, faith; if he should ask me again, I would say, faith; if the third time,
still I should say, believe: To the first, pray for ^aith; to the second, use
faith; to the third grow and increase in faith. Faith and believing, is the
whole duty of a Christian, in a safe sense; for it supposes humiliation, and
it commands newness of life. Preparatory qualifications are but faiths
harbingers, to prepare a room for faith; and the works of sanctification are
but faiths retinue, fed from Faiths table, and accordingly maintained as Faith
is more or less strong, and able to maintain them. This has made the Devil
more beleaguer the castle of Faith, then all the other petty holds
(comparatively) that christian maintains against him: That as the King of
Aram, 1 King. 22. 31. said to his thirty and two Captains over his chariots;
Fight neither with small or great, save only against the King of Israel; so
the Devil seems to make it his great design to fight, and to have given it as
his sole or chiefest injunction, to the Captains of his Chariots, to all his
forces, and all his instruments, to fight neither with small nor great, but
only against the King of graces the Christians Faith. Now all of Faith is,
First, either the Doctrine of Faith; Or secondly, the practice of Faith; The
Devil has mustered his forces against both; first, against the Doctrine of
Faith. It is a note of Chemnitius (as learned an observer of heretics and
heresies, as any) that there have been more dangerous heresies about the
Doctrine of Faith, then any one Doctrine in Christian Religion: He knows dirt
in the fountain, will pollute the streams. Secondly, Nor has he less, but
indeed far more malice against the practice of Faith; he understands well
enough, that it is not knowing and having but acting Faith, that does the
Christian good. This makes him do what he can, to persuade the soul to rest in
a false faith, and hinder the soul from beginning to act a true Faith, or
darken the souls sense of Faith; or if all will not do, yet he will turn every
stone to hinder the growth, and increase of Faith; that every Christian had
need with the Apostles here pray, Lord increase our Faith. The occasion of
these words, is an hard lesson, that christ had been teaching his Disciples,
ver. 3. 4. concerning forgiving injuries, they must forgive four times in a
day; upon this the Apostles say unto the Lord, increase our Faith. The words
are a prayer, in which you may observe, 1. The Supplicants, the Apostles. 2.
The Supplicated, the Lord. 3. The Supplication, increase our Faith.


We may consider the prayer, either in it self, absolutely, or with the former
words, relatively: Relatively, and so we may learn this Doctrine,

First, That hard duti^s and strength to them, must be done and got by prayer
from God. 2. Mark what they pray for, as the means to convey strength into
their souls to this duty, That is Faith: note,

Secondly, That Faith in the soul, is that which quickens

Thirdly, If we consider the words in themselves

1. That even the Apostles had need pray: they are not got beyond prayer the
best of Christians are under the duty of prayer.

2. They say to the Lord, All our prayer ought to be directed to God.

3. The prayer it self is, Lord increase our Faith, for an increase of Faith;
in it we have something suggested and implied, and that is, That they were
sensible their faith was weak: The best of Christians are and ought to be
sensible, as of their imperfection in all graces, so especially of the gra^e of
Faith. 2. We have something here expressed, they pray for an increase of Faith:
First, they pray to God [to the Lord] It is God only that can increase
Christians Faith: they pray for it, The way for us to have our Faith increased
from God, is to pray to him.

Lastly, the Apostles pray, Lord increase our Faith. It is the duty, not only
of the weakest, but even of the strongest Christians, as to be sensible of
weakness, so to labor and pray for the increase of their Faith. I intend not
to handle all these in their order, but to pick out one of them, be build a
large discourse upon: I shall pitch upon the eighth.

The Apostles praying for their increase of Faith, argued their sense of the
weakness and imperfection of their Faith.

The Doctrine is this: Doctr.
That as the best of Christians have weakness and imperfection in their Faith,
and it is their nature to be sensible of it, yea and their duty (...), so it is
also their duty to labor and strive against it. This I might make good from
Scripture, from several places in the several Branches.

1. They may have weakness and imperfection in their Faith, Mat. 6. 30. ca. 8.
26. ca. 14. 31. in all which places, Jesus Christ, checks even those which were
his Disciples, for their little Faith; and yet in checking them for little
Faith, he acknowledges they had some Faith. So,

2. For the second Branch, it were easy to prove, that the child of God will
be sensible of the weakness of its grace, especially this grace of Faith; take
but one instance of it, Mar. 9. 24. Lord I believe, help my unbelief, and so 1
Cor. 13. 9. 12.

And for the third Branch, that they will labor and strive against it, he
prayed, Lord help my unbelief, Mar. 9. 24. The Apostles pray, Lord increase our
Faith; to which we may add that known place, Phil. 3. 13. I count not myself
that I have attained to it, but one thing I do, I forget that which is behind,
and endeavor my self to that which is before, etc. Besides, the experience of
the children of God is abundant proof, for every particular. I might also give
many reasons: First, why the Faith of Gods children is weak. As,

First, Because the state of mortallity is imperfect,

Secondly, Because of the inconstant condition of a gracious heart h^^e: It is
not always high water, or full moon, in a gracious heart; the sun will be in
the eclipse sometime, and the moon in the wane. Now we ordinarily believe by
sight, it is an hard thing to make Faith outrun the eye, Ye have seen (faith
Christ) therefore you believe, Joh. 20.

Thirdly, Another cause may be the multitude of our renewing corruptions: The
bowl of Faith runs nimbly, if the ground of the soul be even, but so long as
the ground that it runs on is rugged, we must expect Faith should meet with
rubs, and be a short cast sometimes, and sometimes more home. Doubts and fears
are rubs in the way of Faith, and all Christians know, that they are the
creatures of mortallity, and the attendants of corruption. There is a great
deal of reason you see, why the Apostles Faith should be weak, In many things
we sin all, and the more we sin, the less we believe.

There is much reason too may be given, why the weak (if true) believer should
be sensible of his weakness. As,

If we consider, that it is his work to be constantly laying his heart to his
eye: The workman, by laying the timber to his eye, often sees, how far it
differs from the square; the Christian, by laying his heart to his eye, sees
the crookedness of it, and how much it wants, and the irregularity in the best
Christian in not so little, but the examining eye will discover it easily.

If we consider, that as the believer lays his heart to his eye often, so he
lays the square to his heart always: The Carpenters eye may deceive him, if he
thinks it does, he lays the square to it, and that mends the error of his eye;
The square of a Christian is Gods Word, the Christian lays it to his heart,
considering how much faith that requires, and discovering how much disagreement
there is between his heart and that, Psalm. 119. 105. Thy word is a light to my
feet, and a lanthern to my paths, Psalm. 19. 11. By the judgment of the Lord,
David was made circumspect. And,

that the Christian is not self-opinionated: He cares not for false glasses,
and is more apt to behold his graces in a diminishing then a multiplying
glass; the sincere Christian concerning himself, is as ready to miscall a
mountain a molehill, as the hypocrite is to misjudge every molehill a
mountain; almost as ready to miscall his good evil, as the other to nickname
his evil good.

And for the third Branch of the Doctrine, That as it is the duty of Christians
to be sensible and groan under the defect of Faith, so it is their duty (and
they will) not stand still but strive and pray for an increase of it, Much
reason might be given for that too: As,

First, From the nature of the spirit of God that works Faith is the spirits
work, 1 Cor. 12. 9. Flesh and blood never revealed it. Now the spirit is a
quickening spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 18. It is life, Romans 8. 10.

Now where there is a principle of life, there will be growth: It is a working
spirit, that phrase we have often, The spirit which works in you, etc. Now
the spirits work is not to undo what it has done, but to work further and more.

Secondly, If we consider The end of the Christian in the acting of all his
graces, Phil. 3. 13. The Apostle expresses it fully: Perfection is his butt,
he knows he must draw his bow with all his strength, and his arrow to the head,
if he means to reach the butt, and he shall not hit it neither. The Christians
voice is, Heb. 6. 1. Let us go unto perfection. It is the hypocrite sets
himself bounds in Religion, and says hither will I go and no further. And to
add no more,

Thirdly, The Christian knows, that the more he has of Faith, the more he has
of Christ: he knows that there is a depth of sweetness in Christ, that can
never be ^adomed; something more to be understood when he understands as much
as he can of him; when the soul has as much as its narrow hand can grasp of
him, whole Christ is too big to be enclosed in mortal arms: Now the soul knows
that Faith is the hand must squeeze that essence of sweetness, the arm that
must claspe him, and he knows that the longer his arm of Faith is, the more he
shall graspe of him, though he shall never be able to comprehend immeasurable
Christ, Ephesians. 3. 16, 17, 18. This makes him always complain of his
dwarfishnesse, that his hand of Faith is not big enough, and his arm of Faith
is not long enough, he cannot get in so much of Christ into his soul as he
would do; this makes him pray for an increase of Faith, and so often complain
of the shortness of his arm, he cannot believe as he would: This makes him say
with our Apostle here Lord increase my Faith.

I come now to the application: and here is matter of Consolation and
Exhortation.

For all Christians, 1. Cons.
especially those that are most sensible of the weakness of their Faith. There
have been and are more dwarfs besides thee Christian; Perfection is a white was
never hit, the best archers come an handful short. It is indeed the mark at
which every one ought to level his arrows, but all the souls of Christians,
like the arrows of Jonathan, have flown, some over into glory, some short, some
on this hand, some on that, none has hit the mark. Be of good comfort
Christian, weak Faith is Faith, little ones are true children of the Father,
that casts none away that comes (though creeping) to him: Heaven has room for
babes as well as men. A child may pull the latch of heavens door, and go in,
and be welcome to the knee of the King of Glory, to the bosom of him, Isai.
40. 11. Who feeds his flock like a shepherd, and carries the lambs in his
bosom. Jesus Christ has his arms full of tender sucking lambs, or at least,
that were so upon the earth. The youngest Christian, if he be an heir, is of
age to take up his land in heaven, nonage is no bar. The Garden of God has
more slips then old stocks in it, now indeed they are become stocks, but here
they were but tender slips while Christ took them up out of the land of grace
and transplanted them. But,

Secondly, E^hor.
Is it so, that the best of Christians have but a weak Faith, in comparison of
that perfection we ought to aspire to, and that it is the duty of Christians to
be sensible of it, and pray, and strive against it? Let us all then look upon
it as our duty; Let us pray, Lord increase our Faith; Let us strive after that
we shall never attain to, even perfection, Heb. 6. 1.

Now here many directions might be given.

The first I will give shall be to remove those things which hinder the growth
of it, as scruples, cavillings, etc. From hence shall I take my rise, for a
subject which with the blessing of God I do intend for some time to insist
upon, to satisfy the souls of some poor Christians, in those scruples which
may perplex them, touching this grace of Faith.

The removing of which, will not a little conduce to the increasing of this
grace in their souls: I will begin with the first. And here though I spend many
Sermons, I trust I shall not be tedious, having intended to make it my work, in
these Lectures to satisfy doubting Christians in cases of conscience, and to
begin with those which concern this radical grace at which the Devil bends so
much of his force and malice.

Therefore would thou grow in Faith, Direct. 1.
remove those scruples which hinder the beginning and progress of Faith in thy
soul.

There are two notes of a weak Faith, in a gracious soul. 1. A sense of no
Faith. 2. A fear of a false Faith.


First, A sense of no Faith. Many a soul does believe, that persuades it self
it neither does nor ought to believe; you shall often meet with Christians, and
especially in the beginning of their conversion, that will cry out, O they
cannot believe, nay what have they to do to believe? Faith were but a
presumption in their soul if they could hatch it up: Or if not so,

Secondly, Yet you cannot make them think that they do believe, no, Faith and
they are strangers, etc.

Now as it is in the diseases of the body, the cure is scarce wrought until
the cause be first discovered and removed; so it is likewise in the troubles
and disquietments of the soul, we shall scarce be able to remove them out of
the souls way, unless we first find how they came there, and if we can but
truly understand the cause we shall easily remove the effect.

In general, we must know these complaints are to be understood concerning the
Acts of Faith. I dare not, or cannot, or do not [beleeve] that is, apprehend
and apply, and rest upon Christ as my Savior. We speak not of Faith as it is
an infused habit, and the gift of God to us, but as it is an inherent grace,
and operative in us. Now then we will, 1. Enquire what the causes of such
complaints in gracious souls may be. 2. We will consider, how to satisfy the
soul in such troubles and scruples.


For the first complaint, I cannot, I dare not rest upon Christ and believe in
him: There are many causes of it which I shall speak to.

One ordinary cause of it is, Scrap. 1.
The souls to much eying of preparatory qualifications. I do not say the souls
eyeing, but the souls too much eying of them.

Hence it is, that if you ask a poor soul under that trouble, what is the reason
thou dare not rest thy self upon Christ? Faith is a precious flower, that
grows as well in the poorest beggars, as the greatest Princes, garden: The
meanest arm may as boldly lean on Christ's shoulder, as that which is gayed with
goldlace. Alas (says such a poor soul) Gods justice proceeds according to
method: First, he uses to pull down, and then to exalt; First, to lay the soul
low licking the dust, then to say to it, I am thy salvation. Alas, I was never
enough humbled! I never saw hell yet; would God rend my heart in pieces, I
could believe he would bind it up; would he humble me, etc.

Now in order to the satisfaction of a soul under this trouble it would be
first enquired,

1. Whether humiliation goes before Faith, or no. 2. If it does, what may
comfort a soul under this affliction of spirit, and what it ought to do in
relation to its peace.
For the first, it is a question variously tossed, and determined, understood,
and concluded in these times, in which God has cast our lot; some utterly
denying any such work, some too eagerly contending for measure, some limitting
Gods dealings, others misinterpreting, if not wilfully mistaking, the terms. It
will not therefore I trust be a lost labor, first, to enquire the truth of
that question, which is ordinarily thus termed.

Quest. Whether Faith goes before Repentance, or Repentance before Faith.

Now for the fuller determination of it, I shall first explane the terms, Then
conclude the truth, and prove it by Scripture and Reason, And lastly, answer
those Objections ordinarily made against it.

First, I will spend a little time to open the terms, which (when rightly
explaned) I am confident will put the question out of question, to those
Christians that have any experience of the Lords dealings: for the ambiguity of
every term, has only darkened the clearness of this truth.

Faith, both in the kind, and in the act. There are diverse kinds, and diverse
acts of Faith. There is an historical Faith, which consists only in the
knowledge and assent to the truth of an History, There is a Faith of miracles,
There is a temporary Faith, and there is a true justifying Faith. The question
is only to be understood of the latter, which has also several Acts. First,
(...): Secondly, Relyance: Thirdly, Persuasion. The question is to be
understood of the second Act, Whether God gives the soul power, comfortably and
truly, to rely upon Christ, and the promises for salvation, before he has
wrought repentance in the soul.

Secondly, the term Repentance, is subject to ambiguity Whether God does not
work in a soul, a sorrow of heart and loathing of it self for sin, before the
soul has power to rest upon Christ, for salvation, and rely upon him as its
Savior.

Lastly, we must safely understand what is also going before: First, we do not
understand [by going before] a precedence in Gods hidden operation; he at once
infuseth the habits of grace into the soul: But secondly, by going before, we
understand a going before in a gracious Act, and in a comfortable apprehension.
Neither farther is the question to be understood, as if we thought Humiliation
went before Faith, as a work wrought by our own strength. We acknowledge
Humiliation to be a work of Gods special grace in the soul. And the question
is plainly thus,

Whether God ordinarily gives a poor soul power to act Faith, by relying upon
Christ, and the promises of life and salvation, before, in some measure, he
has brought the soul to be sensible of its lost and undone condition?

We say he does not.

We will grant to our Brethren that are unsatisfied concerning this truth,

That a man must believe, before he can mourn: But how? not by any saving act
of justifying Faith. He must believe there is a sin-pardoning Savior, that
has fullness and freeness of mercy, and enough in his fullness for him; and
that, though he has sinned, yet there is hope in Israel concerning this thing.
Then he puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope.

Secondly, we will easily grant, that a man must have saving and justifying
Faith, before the work of repentance and humiliation will be perfect in his
soul: As we maintain it to be a precedent work, so we deny it not to be a
subsequent effect.

it is not a work to be done by our own strength, it is Gods work, only our
dispute is concerning Gods usual order in working. The same spirit that works
a power in the soul of dependence upon Christ, takes also away the heart of
stone, and gives an heart of flesh.

that the habits of these graces are both together in the soul. We only
question which God gives the soul power to act first.

We dispute not concerning the measure, but concerning the thing. We do not
question, whether the soul must be thus far, or thus much, or thus long
humbled, before God will give it power to act Faith, by a comfortable reliance
on Christ. We only say it must be humbled.

We do not limit the workings of God, and say it is so necessary on Gods part,
that he cannot give the soul power comfortably to apply Christ and the
promises: but we say, it is not his usual course and ordinary may of
dispensing grace, to do it. Yet his dealings are various, he works not alike to
all; he may, and sometimes does go out of his beaten road. The question is not
concerning a necessity on Gods part, but only concerning a necessity on our
part; not concerning his miraculous power, but his gracious will; nor
concerning any extraordinary operation, but concerning his ordinary way of
dispensations. This is the question truly stated, which I shall endeavor to
maintain as a truth of God, in this following position.

That God in his ordinary way of dispensations of special Grace, The question
(...) stated.
does not give a poor soul power to apprehend Christ, as its Savior, The
Negative part maintained.
and accordingly to rest and rely upon him for salvation, before in some
measure or other he has brought such a soul to be sensible of its lost
condition by Nature, and humbled it for its going a^^ray from him.

This I shall labor to make good, From Reason, Scripture, and Experience; and
clear from those Objections, and Arguments, brought against it.

First, The soul cannot come into Christ, till it be gone out of it self, nor
can the soul know that Christ is come into it, till is knows it is gone out of
it self. The reason of the latter is plain, for it is impossible the soul
should know that to be which cannot be. But Christ cannot come into a full
soul. Now the soul is not gone out of it self, not will it go out of it self,
till it see the danger of continuing in it self; this danger works fear, this
fear sorrow, and this sorrow is humiliation.

Secondly, Christ will only come into such a soul, and soul be humbled, it
will never prize Christ. For the first, that Christ will only come into such a
soul as hungers and thirsts after him, it is plain by the many promises made to
such. But that soul that is not emptied of it self, it is impossible but it
should loath Christ, according to that of the wise man, Prove. 27. 7. The full
soul loatheth the honey comb. The Apostle says, To you that believe he is
precious. If Christ be not precious to the soul, the soul does not, will not,
cannot, believe in him. Now so long as sin is sweet, and lust sweet, how shall
Christ be sweet to the soul? Is Christ and sin both of a taste, think we? What
fellowship has light with darkness? (says the Apostle) If Christ be precious
to them that believe, then certainly sin must be bitter to them that believe,
if light and darkness be contrary as the Apostle speaks. But Christ is
precious to them that believe.

That soul can never be willing to rest upon Christ, that is not willing to
leave sin, for sin and Christ are contrary: and it is impossible for a man to
please his lusts and Christ too, You cannot serve God and mammon. Now it is
impossible that the soul ever should leave sin (which is natural unto it) and
embrace Christ, (whose goodness and sweenesse something more then nature, more
then flesh and blood must reveal) before it be convinced, that sin is vile and
bitter. A reasonable creature is acted by reasonable principles. Nabal could
say, Shall I take my bread, and my water, and my flesh, that I have killed, for
my shearers, and give it unto men whom I know not what they be. Who is David?
and who is the son of Jesse? (says he) The figtree in Iothams parable says,
Shall I forsake my sweetness and my good fruit? and go to be promoted over the
trees. So says a poor soul when it is proud, who is Christ? and who is the Son
of God that I should leave all? Sacrifice my lust and my corruptions unto him?
What! (says the proud sinner) shall I forsake my sweet lust and sweet
corruptions, to yield to Christ? The soul must be convinced that sin is evil,
yea, and the greatest evil, or it will never embrace good. Now it is
impossible that the soul should be really convinced, that sin is the greatest
evil, and God the greatest good, but the soul will be grieved, that it has
forsaken the fountain of living waters, the greatest good, to cleave to the
greatest of evils. But why should I dive into the dispensations of God, by the
bucket of reason? Let us see what Scripture and experiences of the Saints of
God, recorded in Scripture, tell us, Mat. 21. 32. And ye when you had seen it,
repented not afterward that you might believe: A learned and pious commentator
[Zuinglius] has this note upon this Text, Grace and mercy exhibited to the
world in Christ, is not esteemed by those who do not feel their sins and grieve
for them. Christ complains in the Text, that they would not repent that they
might believe, not that they would not believe that they might repent. Will you
know to whom the promises are made, for whom Christ comes, and to whom he
comes. Isa. 55. 1.
He came to seek that which was lost. He came not to call the righteous, Mat.
5. ^, 4, 6. and 11. 22.
but sinners to repentance. He is a Physician, and he tells us, The whole need
not the Physician, but the sick. Rev. 21. 6.
He has told you, that He fills the hungry with good things, Mat. 9. 12.
but the rich he sends empty away. He has pronounced them Blessed that mourn,
Luke 19. 10. and 15. 4. 6.
for they shall be comforted, that are poor in spirit, for their is the Kingdom
God; that Go out weeping, Mat. ^5. 24
and carring precious seed, Psalm. 126. 6.
for they shall return rejoicing, and bring their sheaves with them. Now
certainly, if Christ Jesus only came into the world for such, and none can
have any assurance that Christ came to save him, till he has disclamed his own
righteousness, and is convinced he is a miserable lost creature, Surely then
they cannot believe before, for Faith is the uniting grace that knits the soul
to Jesus Christ.

Secondly, If the promises only belong to such as hunger and thirst, as are
weary and heavy laden, and do not belong to them before they are so, then
certainly they cannot believe before they are weary and heavy laden. For the
same instant that the soul believes, and is married to Christ, the same instant
are the promises intailed to the soul, being its proper jointure, Gal. 3. 22.
Ephesians. 1. 13.

Thirdly, If the blessing only belong to such, surely they must be such before
they can act Faith, or else a believer may be in the state of condemation, and
under the curse. But to such is the blessng pronounced, Mat. 5. 3, 4, 6.

Infinite Arguments might be drawn from Scripture: Shall we see a little
experience. Let us search out Gods ordinary dealings, to whom has he revealed
himself in any comfortable apprehension? what believers can we find in
Scripture, who in coming to Christ had not their feet dipped in bitter waters?
Shall we take that troop of converts at Peter's Sermon? Act. 2. 37. They were
pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the Apostles,
Men, and brethren, what shall we do? O lost undone creatures? what shall we do?
Act. 16. 29. The Jailer came trembling before Paul and Silas, and fell down at
their feet, and said, sirs! what must I do to be saved. Take the great convert
Paul, Act. 9. what astonishing sorrow was he swallowed up in? he was even
humbled to the grave before you read of his Faith: Let every Christian examine
his own experience, whether ever he should have received, or prized Christ, if
he had not first been stricken with the sense of his own misery. Enough has
been said for it, let us hear a little what can be said against it.

1. Obj. No man will be humbled except he believe what shall make me run to God
and mourn, except I believe he will pardon?

Answ. We do not dispute of any Faith, but a justifying Faith. To believe, and
be persuaded I may be pardoned, is not a distinguishing act of a justifying
Faith, this was granted before; it is one thing to believe I may be pardoned, so
may an hypocrite, It Is another thing to believe I am pardoned, or to rely on
Christ for pardon, this is proper to a justified person, nor can he believe he
is pardoned till he is humbled.

2. Obj. Repentance is the effect of Faith, now the cause must always go
before the effect?

Answ. We distinguished before of Repentance: Repentance has two parts. The
aversion of the soul from sin, and the conversion of the soul to God; the
latter part of it is only an effect of Faith, the former part of it, the
turning of the soul from sin, is also an effect, but not only an effect, it is
begun before Faith, though it be not ended till our life be at an end.
Secondly, The turning of the soul from sin, and the imbittring sin to the soul,
is an effect of Faith, or rather a consequent of Faith, viz. a general common
Faith in the beginning, but not always a consequent of saving justifying Faith.

3. Obj. Christ must work this humiliation, or it is good for nothing: now if
Christ be in the soul working humiliation, then there is Faith: Therefore Faith
must go before humiliation.

Ans. First, Though Christ work this humiliation in the soul, yet it does not
follow that Christ is in the soul, for it may be a work of common grace, and
Christ is not in every soul upon which his common grace works. But secondly, to
answer more fully, I am of the mind of Master Shepherd, and Master Hooker,
that although there be an humiliation which is indeed the work of common grace,
which an hypocrite may have, yet there is an humiliation which is the work of
special grace, and that this likewise precedes the exercise of Faith: And
although it is true, that Christ cannot be in the soul, but in the same instant
the soul is in Christ, for Faith is the marriage grace, yet it does not follow,
that the soul is enabled by an act of Faith to apply Christ to it self, as soon
as Christ is in the soul, and the habit of Faith is infused into the soul; and
therefore the question is stated, not concerning the habit of Faith, but
concerning the act of Faith; viz. Whether God gives the soul power to receive,
rely upon, and apply Christ, or receive any comfortable apprehensions of
Christ, and the soul in respect of us (who can only judge of the habit by the
act) cannot be said to have Faith, before it has acted humiliation or
repentance: The question is not which the soul must have first, in respect of
Gods gift, but which it acts first for our apprehension.

4. Obj. The preaching of this puts souls upon di^pair, and hinders Faith, they
do not believe, because they cannot find that they are so humbled as God
requires.

Ans. 1. The sun must not be hid, because it hurts fore eyes: What is the truth
of God must not be concealed, because wicked men and seducers grow worse and
worse.

Secondly, No ^oul that is elected can despair, if God has given them to
Christ, the Devil shall never pluck them out of his hand; the word must be
preached, though to some it must prove the savor of death unto death: To the
Gentiles foolishness.

Thirdly, We do not say, they must repent to such and such a degree, mourn so
many tears; we dispute not how much sorrow there must be, but maintain there
must be some.

Fourthly, True sorrow ought not to hinder Faith, for the end of it is only to
bring the soul to be willing to exercise the grace of Faith, by coming to
Christ, resting and relying upon him for salvation, etc.

5. Obj. But God works not his acts of special grace after the manner of men,
he works them together, therefore faith and repentance are together wrought.

Ans. We dispute not how God works them, but how the soul acts them, not which
is in the soul first, but which appears out of the soul first. Jacob and Esau
may be twins, and in their mothers womb together, but shall it therefore follow
that they shall come out together? may not Esau put out his hand before Jacob,
and be seen first by the mother and world too?

6. Obj. But this is to take away free grace, to say God will not save a poor
creature before it be thus and thus humbled.

Ans. 1. It is not to take away the freeness of grace, but to teach men to
take heed, that they do not turn the grace of God into wantonness; it does not
destroy free grace, to enjoin qualifications and conditions of Gods own making.

Secondly, You may as well say it destroys free grace, to say, none shall be
saved but those that believe, which is the express language of Scripture, He
that believes not is damned already.

Thirdly, Free grace is established hereby: For, 1. Is it not free grace to
give a soul Christ, if it will but mourn and be humbled and believe? is it not
a free gift to give a kingdom unto me, upon condition I will throw away a
knife, with which I was about to cut my own throat? 2. We do not say, that this
humiliation and precedent sorrow, does deserve any such free grace for the
performance of the action, therefore the grace is still free. 3. We say, that
free grace works this humilation, a man can as well break a rock, as break his
own heart without the work of this powerful spirit, and the spirits operations
are free, even like the wind that blows where it lists, Ioh. 3. 8. We exalt
free grace, and make it yet more free; only we would not have men turn the
grace of God into wantonness to their own confusion, and therefore their vain
objection that this brings us again under the covenant of works, (do this and
ye shall live) falls in pieces of it self; for we neither hold that it is in
the power of any creature to do this, to break his heart and mourn for sin, nor
yet that any shall merit any salvation by doing of it: we abhor that doctrine
of merits, that God justifies either for any works of grace acted of our own,
or for the merit of any graces which he has infused into us.

7. Obj. But when the Iaylor asked Paul, what shall I do to be saved? he does
not say, mourn and be saved, (...) fast and pray and be saved, but believe and
be saved; and when we read of the conversion of Lydia, we do not read, that she
had any such humiliation as these Legallists talk of, the text only says,
that God opened the heart of Lydia.

Ans. 1. To that of the Jailer, it is true, that Paul does not say, mourn and
be saved, etc. Paul had learned more wisdom then to afflict the afflicted; the
Text says, He came trembling and fell at the Apostles feet. Now the Apostle
seeing him thus amazed with terror, bids him believe, and though he knew not
what to do, yet he might be saved; and how this proves that there is no need of
humiliation, let the discreet reader judge, because when the Jailer was so
terrified that he was ready to dye, Paul does not bid him still be humbled, but
believe, therefore there is no need of humiliation. It is plain out of the
Text, that his humiliation although it was sudden and short, yet it was strong:
First, It made him tremble and fall down at the Apostles feet: Secondly, it
wrought fully to its appointed end, to beat the sinner out of himself, Sirs!
says he, What shall I do to be saved? I know not what to do, is implied, for
if he had known what to do, he would never have asked, what shall I do?

8. Obj. But some will say his trembling and falling down, was for fear the
prisoners were gone.

Ans. That is cleared out of the Text, Paul had cried unto him, Do thy self no
harm for we are all here, after all this comes his trembling, and crying, what
sall I do? But secondly, we may shape another answer to it, Paul says to the
Jailer, only believe and thou shall be saved; believing does here include
humiliation, Faith is an act of an humbled soul, and no soul will or can
believe, that has not been truly humbled; therefore the great hurt that those
do, that preach down humiliation under a pretense of preaching up Faith, is
dealing too deceitfully with peoples souls: First, Preaching only Faith,
Secondly, Persuading them that a sinner as a sinner, drunkard, whoremunger,
etc. is the subject of Faith, and not a sinner as an humbled sinner. For the
example of Lydia and the Eunuch, which is all, that there is any pretense to
boast of; We answer,

First, That God opened her heart without any knocking, is easier for us to
deny then for them to prove.

Secondly, (says Master Shepherd) These were examples of souls converted unto
God before, who did believe in the Messiah, but did not know that this Jesus
was the Messiah, which they soon did when the Lord sent the means to reveal
Christ, so that it does not follow she had never sorrowed because she did not
the^ sorrow, vid. Shepherd, Sound believer, p. 54.

Thirdly, In examples recorded in Scripture (says he) of Gods converting
grace, do not think they had no sorrow for sin, because it is not set down in
all places, and quoteth, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14. Paul was a persecutor, but the Lord
received him to mercy, does it follow therefore he was received without
humiliation? see the contrary, Act. 9.

Fourthly, Gods works are not always alike in all, therefore in stating the
question: I put in (in Gods ordinary way of dispensations) Elijah went to
heaven in a fiery chariot, but every one must not look to be coacht thither:
See Master Shepherds eight Rules, concerning this, in his Sound believer, a p.
48. ad page 57.

And now I leave every Christian reader to determine, by Reason, Scripture, and
his own experience.

Whether Faith goes before Repentance (or sorrow for sin) or whether that goes
before Faith.

SERMON. II.
LUKE 17. 5. Lord increase our Faith.
Cap. 2.
The way of comforting a soul under that trouble of conscience. I am not enough
humbled, etc.
THe last day you may remember, I discust the question, Whether humiliation
goes before Faith, or no: which being premised, I shall come now to speak
something by way of satisfaction to such souls, as labor under this perplexity
of spirit.

Ah! (says a Christian) I cannot believe, I dare not rest my soul upon Christ,
nor upon the promises. Alas! I was never yet sufficiently humbled, were my
heart broken enough, then I might be bound up by resting upon the premises.
World God lay me low enough, then I might hope to be exalted; but would you
have such an hard flint^-hearted wretch as I, think I believe? what one that
has such a proud stiff-neck? how is it possible, that I should have any ground
of Faith? Faith (they say) is a flower, that grows nowhere but just upon the
brink of the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, it must be bottomed upon
the sense and pain of a lost condition, the way to be found is to be lost,
could I be weary and heavy laden once, I might think to be cased by Faith.
This is the sad affliction that many a good but sadded poor soul groans under.
Now for my more methodicall proceedings in speaking something to the
satisfaction of poor souls, groaning under this trouble of spirit, I will first
speak a word by way of premise* Then I will offer some considerations to
comfort a soul under such a perplexity and distress of spirit; Lastly, I shall
speak something by way of direction and caution.

For the first of th^r^ by way of Premise, Premise.
We use to say, there is no error but has some truth in it; no ore but has
something of gold; as no field of wheat but has some tares, nor scarce a field
of tares but there is some ear or two of wheat: And so it is in this complaint
of the soul, here is something of truth, as well as something of mistake, upon
what the complaint is grounded; that therefore no soul might presume from what
I shall speak by and by, not to oil up a presumptuous soul, but to establish a
fainting soul, Let me premise,

First, That it is a truth, and that which must stand if all the world be found
liers to it, That God seldom or never gives the soul power to apprehend and
apply Jesus Christ, and truly to rest upon him, before that he has first of
all showed the soul its lost and undone condition. God makes humiliation to act
first in the soul, in regard of our sight, and hence are the promises made, not
to sinners as sinners, but to sinners as humbled sinners, I mean, that God has
humbled and brought low. I proved this sufficiently the last time. Christ came
to seek, and to save that which was lost: not to call the righteous but sinners
to repentance. I say this is a truth, and we must grant it, yea, and we must
grant too, that it is according to the ordinary dispensations of his grace; and
if any come to heaven another way, it is beyond Gods ordinary course of dealing
with sinners, for this is his usual course, first, to throw down to hell, then
to lift up to heaven, and a rule must not be cast away for one exception, nor a
summer made with one swallow. And therefore let no soul presume, and say, well
I can believe and rest upon Christ, and yet I never was humbled; without
question where is a false applying and a false resting upon the Lord Jesus
Christ, and there are some that pretend they rest upon Jesus Christ, to whom
Christ will be as a bruised reed, and as a broken staff another day: See it
plain, Mat. 7. 20, 21. But on the contrary, there may be and is a great mistake
upon this truth, in troubled and fainting souls: And therefore I shall in the
next place apply my self to them, to offer something by way of consolation to
them, to support and stablish them, and by way of succor to them, to
strengthen them against this temptation of Satan. For Faith is the radical
and fundamental grace of the soul, and as he said to his soldiers, Fight not
against either small or great, but only against the king of Israel (He knew if
he were over thrown, his army would quickly be ro^^ed) So says the Devil, if I
can but overthrow his Faith, and stave him off from the promises, I shall
easily overthrow his soul; He that believes not is condemned already; but if
he gets that castle, he is safe: therefore I say, to throw the Devils snares
out of the way, I shall offer something to souls whose complaint is this, O I
cannot, I dare not believe, I have not been humbled enough, etc.

First, Be comforted, knowing that although God has every where called for
humiliation, and sorrow of heart for sin, yet he has no where set a measure
for it. The promises are not made to sinners as sinners, (as Antinomians, and
Libertines, tell us) they must make us a n^w Bible before they will show us any
such promises; but it is as true on the contrary, that they are not made to
sinners just thus far, and thus deeply humbled. That there must be some, God
has revealed that in his word; but for the measure of it, God will have that
to order and dispose as he pleases. Be comforted (Christian) that never man
was damned for degrees of grace, for want of grace many a soul has perished,
but for degrees of grace never soul was yet in danger. Mustard seed Faith is as
much saving Faith, as the bulwark Faith of assurance. God holds his bottle, as
well to those eyes that from a sincere heart, drop one tear, this to day, and
another to morrow, as for those that make their heads fountains of tears, and
their eyes rivers of water, Zac. 4. 10. Who has despised the day of small
things? Do yo remember Christ gathered up the fragments of the bread, which he
had created, the least of thy tears is a crystal drop, if from the sincerity
of the heart, the very minimum quod sic, the least of a penitent: Why will thou
make a block in thy own way, and throw a bone in thy own dish? Why will thou
set God a bound, as if he could not or would not save thee, till thy sorrows
flood had come up to such a landmark, when God has set thee no bound, saying,
Hitherto shall thou go, and no further?

Secondly, Consider, as God has assigned no measure for thy humiliation, so
neither can any man set thee a stint, to say, whosoever is or shall be saved,
shall be, and must be, to this, or this degree humbled. I say no man is able to
do it, because Gods dispensations are various: God will not be tract in his
goings, who has found out his footsteps? His ways are past finding out, they
are like the way of an Eagle in the air. Now God has many wise ends in the
variety of the dispensations of his free grace: There are several sorts of
people, that God deeply humbles oftentimes.

As 1. Those that he intends for some great service in his Church, either to
preach the Gospel, for the conversion of so many, as paul Act. 9. Or when it
may be he intends, that they shall come out, and become witnesses for his
truth: These fine vessels, God usually hammers and files very much.

2. Such as God perhaps sees, have quick and high spirits, and will be
enclinable to filthy pride, The Lord lays them low, that they may have their
spirits tamed, and be brought into a lowly subjection to Jesus Christ; And this
might be one cause of Paul's humiliation too, deeper then any other of the
Apostles we read of.

3. Such as have been notorious publick^ sinners: Manasses must be brought to
Babylon, laid in irons, then received to mercy; half hanged, then the rope must
be cut, and the man saved; just sinking in hell, then lift up by the chin; he
had been a persecutor, he had made Jerusalem swim with innocent blood, and that
might be another reason of Paul's so deep humiliation.

4. And yet, In these the ways of God are not the same to our eye. Peter an
eminent preacher, yet we read of no such humiliation in him. Mary Magdalen a
grievous devil-possest sinner, and yet we read of no such sorrow in her: God
will not be tract in his ways, we must not know the manner of his workings with
his Saints, he will choose whom he list, and why he lists, and he will bring
them in how he lists, and when he lists, Eccl. 3. 11. No man can find out the
work of God, that he makes from the beginning to the end. Gods ways are like
the ways of a serpent upon a rock, and although think with M. Shepherd, that
we cannot conclude, because we do not read of the like humiliation of Lydia,
and others of the Apostles, therefore they had no such humiliation as Paul;
Yet I cannot but think, that therefore their sorrows are not revealed, that we
might not stumble upon them, and tie up God to such and such dispensations, as
if God could work but one and the same way.

5. Besides, There may be a cause in the temper and variety of dispositions,
upon which God makes his special grace glorious. God has some that are rough
pieces of knotty timber, these he hewes, and cuts much before he makes them fit
for his Sanctuary: Others of more genuine, and meek, and ingenuous tempers,
would be chopped in pieces, if so much should be hewn off them. Some grounds
need not such stubbing, and digging, and plowing, and harrowing, they will be
fit to receive the seed without so much labor.

6. Some dispositions are not so fixed, as to settle long upon an object, as to
be so deeply affected with it, as others are. Moveable dispositions (says
Doctor Sibbs) are not long affected with any thing, and therefore (says he)
one main use of crosses, is to take off the soul from that it is so dangerously
set upon, and fix our running spirits: Again (says he) the spirits may be
sometimes weak, ana so wasted, that they would not be able to endure so strong
a conflict of grief as others that are of fresh, and strong, and stout spirits:
And in such a case God has promised, not to fix his wrath upon the soul too
heavily, Isai. 57. 16. For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be
always wroth, for the spirits should then fail before me, and the souls which
I have made. Be comforted (Christian) when thou considerest the variety of Gods
dispensations, though thou do not find him acting in such a dispensation to
thee, as possibly he has done to others: It may be he has not appointed thee
for such an eminent service, he intends not perhaps to call thee to martyrdom;
Possibly thou were by nature of a dejected melancholy spirit, and more
indisposed to pride, then others; Perhaps he had not suffered thee to run into
such outrageous wickednesses, as others did, for which they must pay more tears
to his bottle? Possible thou were not of so morose and rugged a temper, as
others; that thou did not need such stubbing and digging; not so knotty, that
thou should need so much cutting and hewing; though thou had as many bad
humors as others, by nature, yet it may be that they were not so settled, and
putrified by vicious custom; or if they were, yet be comforted in this, that
God acts not with great sinners and perverse natures, and proud tempers, and
eminent vessels, alike. Who art thou to tract the Almighty? to limit the holy
one of Israel? and if that God acts in such various dispensations, know that it
is not in the power of man to set a measure.

Thirdly, Consider the end of humiliation, and if the end be wrought, take no
thought for the means. The ends of humiliation are chiefly these two. First, To
make sin bitter to the soul, to bring the soul into a loathing and detestation
of sin. Secondly, To make the soul in a capacity of acting Faith,

1. The first end, is to bring the soul into a loathing and leaving of sin;
That Ephraim may speak two words, First, What have I done? Secondly, What have
I to do with Idols? Consider, thou say I have not been humbled enough, how
shall we judge that? 1. Has thy humiliation made thee to loath sin? That thou
say as Job 42. 6. I abhor my self, and repent: Mark, the end of repentance
is self-horring. Do thou say with David? Psalm. 119. 163. I abhor and hate
lying, and every falseway, verse. 104. And I hate vain thoughts, verse. 119. And
I hate them that hate thee, Psa. 139. 21, 22. This is enough, rest thy thoughts
in it. Heb. 1. 9. Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore
thy God, eventhy God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows. That which was there spoken of God concerning Christ, is true of all
his members; has thy little humiliation (which thou think is not enough)
wrought thus in thee* that whereas thou were a drunkard, liar, swearer, unclean
person, a vain proud person, a companion of fools, Now thou can say, and say
heartily, that thou hate drunkenness, swearing, lying, sabbath-breaking,
vanity, formality, yea, and those that do these things? Why now thy humiliation
has wrought its end. Why should thou not love righteousness, rest upon
Christ, apply the promises, etc. To say now, I cannot think I have ground to
believe, is as much as if one should say, when he has made use of a scaffold
to build a great building, Alas! I cannot believe that I may lay the top-stones
of my building, my scaffold is not high enough, or it is not strong enough;
when it has proved it self both high enough, and strong enough, in holding to
accomplish the work. Sibbs soul conflict. P. 379.
Doctor Sibbs, in answer to this question, When is Godly sorrow such as that
the soul may stay it self with comfortable thoughts abouts its conditions?
Gives these Rules.

1. When we find strength against that sin which we formerly fell into, 5.
Rules.
and ability to walk in a contrary way. 2. When that which is wanting in grief,
is made up in fear. 3. When after grief, we find inward peace. 4. When after
it, we value the grace and mercy in Christ, above all the contentments in the
world. 5. When it springs from hatred, and works true hatred against all sin.
First, Now (says he) true hatred is carried against all sin.

Secondly, Especially, against those sins which are most near. Sorrow for sin
proceeds from the affection of the soul, Hatred from judgment, and we ought
rather to rest in our hatred of sin, proceeding from our judgment, then in our
sorrow for sin proceeding from our passions: Considering that the fountain of
passions, is deeper in men of a melancholy, and reserved temper, then in others
of a quick and chearly temper, and yet these may hate sin as well as the other.

2. The second end of humiliation, is to make us in a capacity of receiving
Christ. Every soul is not in a capacity of receiving Jesus Christ, when the
soul is willing, and desirous to receive Christ, then it is in a capacity of
receiving him. And the soul cannot act Faith, by resting upon Christ, till it
be made willing. Some will say, does not Jesus Christ work this willingness?
yes without question, It is he that works both to will and to do, according
to his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. But yet he first works to will, before he
works to do, and before the soul is willing, it is not in a capacity of
doing. Rev. 22. 17. Whosoever wills, let him drink of the water of life,
freely: First, will, then take, then drink, and yet it is free. They shall
indeed be willing, in the day of his power, Psalm. 110. 3. God draws the will,
but he makes us willing first, before he gives us power to receive, and apply
Christ, which is the act of Faith. Now God uses means to work this
willingness, and that is humiliation. Hos. 5. 15. I will go and return to my
place, till they acknowledge their offenses, and seek my face. In their
affliction they will seek me early. Now if thy humiliation has wrought this
effect in thy soul, that thou art now made willing to receive Christ Jesus, O
believe, act thy Faith, let thy measure of humiliation never trouble thee, it
has wrought its end.

3. I might name a third and of humiliation, and that is to inhance the price
of Jesus Christ to the soul. Christ would not be so sweet, if sin were not so
bitter. Do thou find this end wrought? that now Christ is more precious to
thee then thousands of gold and silver, more sweet then thousands of lusts and
corruptions? That thy heart now says, O that I had Christ, though I had
nothing in the world? That I had the bread of life to eat, and the water of
life to drink, Though I begd my bread, and wanted water, all the days of my
life? O that I had the robes of his righteousness, to cloth my soul though I
went naked! O give me Christ, O give me Christ, above all, for all, instead of
all, or else I dye. Here now be comforted, the end is wrought again, and thou
have no ground not to believe, because thou art not enough humbled. The cause
must not destroy the end, The end of humiliation, is as you have heard. What
serves humiliation for, but to bring thee to it? If thou be already by
humiliation brought, that thou art grieved for sin past, that thou hate sin
present, that thou loathest the thoughts of embracing sin for the time to come,
that thou art made willing to close with Jesus Christ, that thou prizest him
above all the earths contentments whatsoever; thou have no ground, nay thou
sinnest in letting thy Faith stumble upon this threshold.

4. Consider, that it is possible thou may misjudge thy self in this point
of the measure of humiliation too: The fountain of humiliation is often so
deep, that we cannot fadom it; the well may be deep, though we see but a little
of it. First, Consider, that in thy humiliation, you must measure length and
breadth, and all. Secondly, Consider, thou must measure inside, as well as
outside. Thirdly, You must remember it is not done, though it may be done
enough for thee to apply a promise, and rest upon Jesus Christ, and receive,
and apply him to thy soul.

First, Many Christians mistake upon this Principle. Why do thou think thy
humiliation is not enough? They will answer you, alas, I was never in such a
depth of amazing sorrow, as Paul was, as I have heard such and such a Christian
was, they were even in the jaws of hell. My work was a slight work to theirs.
Half so much broad-cloth, of a great breadth, will make a suit as well, as so
much again of some that is not half the breadth; the breadth makes amends for the
length of the other. Others, God has given them deep sorrow, but short,
perhaps he has given thee long sorrow, but not so broad and deep; there may be
as much water in a shallow pond, that is broad, as in a deep well that is
straight. It may be thou have been diverse months, weeks, years, under thy
sorrow, though it was not such an heart-rending sorrow, as others might be.
They had sorrow that even rent their heart in pieces, but it lasted not so long
as thine, before they had joy: God measured out their measure in depth, and
thinc in breadth.

Secondly, Consider, if you will measure your humiliation right, you must
measure both inside, and outside. Possibly, you judge you are not humbled
enough, because you have not shed so many tears as others have, you measure it
only in the outside, alas, many tempers are not so disposed to tears as
others. Suppose two men were wounded, the one bleeds nothing or little at all,
the other bleeds that the blood stains all his apparel, runs down the streets;
you see scarce a drop of blood come from the other, but the wound closes; will
you therefore say, that the one bleeds not so much as the other? nay surely you
will say, that he bleeds more desperately, he bleeds inwardly. The seat of
humiliatio^ is the heart, not the eye. Humiliation is not to be measured by wet
handkerchiefs; the swollen face, is not always the outside of a most broken
heart; possible your heart weeps, your soul is ready to burst with groanings,
but you want the vent of your eyes, they are tongue tied. The measure of your
humiliation for all this may be greater then the other.

Thirdly, Possibly some may say, O but can I think that God requires no more
tears? no more sadness? for those thousands of sins that I have in my life
time committed against him? Consider therefore Christian, that your humiliation
is not past, when you have apprehended and applied Christ to your souls. You
must reserve some tears for the time to come, you have humiliation-work after
Faith, Zach. 12. 10. Though the seven Devils be cast out, and Mary be set by
Christ, yet she may wash his feet with the tears of her eyes, and wipe them
with the hairs of her head: She may come again, and stand behind him weeping,
you have to do to look upon him whom you have pierced and mourn. As the man
that takes physic, it works before he takes his broth, but that sets it
working again, and more; So though before you apply Jesus Christ there will be
some humiliation, yet your receiving him and resting upon him by Faith, does
not stop up your fountain of tears, you shall have a mourning time after that;
save an handkerchief to wet then.

Fifthly, For thy comfort consider, that humiliation ought not to be, 1. A
ground of Faith, 2. Is not a ground of acceptance. The first will depend upon
the latter.

First, Consider, thy humiliation is not a ground of thy acceptance: Thou art
not therefore accepted, because thou art thus and thus humbled. If we watch not
our nature (says reverend Sibbs) There will be a spice of Popery, which is a
natural Religion, in this great desire of more grief, as if when we had that,
we had something to satisfy God withal, and so our mind still runs too much
upon works. If free grace did not clarify tears, and the greatest sorrow we
could have for sin, those bitter waters would be more filthy then the puddles
of the street. If the blood of free grace does not cement a broken heart and
accept it, and merit for it, hell is its desert and portion, for all any merit
in it. It is a good piece of a prayer, Psalm. 20. 3. The Lord accept thy
sacrifice, or [make far thy sacrifice] or [turn thy sacrifice into ashes] A
broken, and a contrite heart is the Lords sacrifice, which he will never
despise, Psalm. 5^. 17. But the Lord must, 1. Turn it into ashes, 2. Make it
fat, 3. Accept it -- And therefore this can be no sufficient remora in thy way
of Faith: For could thou make thy head a fountain of water, and thine eyes
rivers of tears, they should merit no salvation; heaven is not to be bought
with sighs, nor art thou therefore accepted, because thou art humbled, but
even thy humiliation must have an acceptance, otherwise God should save us not
for his own sake, and for his Name sake, (as indeed he does) but for our tears
sake, for our humiliation sake, for our works sake; for Christians must warily
consider, that God does not save his people and accept his children for those
works, which his own spirit works in them: This is a Doctrine of Popery, who
to wash their hands of the Doctrine of merits wherewith they are charged, tell
us they hold no such matter, as that a Christian may be saved by his own works,
but God gives him grace to work good works, and for them he accepts, for them
he saves. We say no, for even the works of Gods spirit of grace, acting in us,
are our works, and salvation is not of works, but of grace. And this
Evangelicall lesson is hinted to us, even in the Ceremonial Law; The Lord
commands a yearly day of atonement, Levit. 16. for the sins of the holy Place.
To prove this, I might instance in all those Text of Scripture, of which the
Epistle to the Romans, and Galatians, are especially full, and so the Epistle
to the Ephesians, which treat concerning the Doctrine of Justification, and
clear it not to be of works, neither internal, nor external, but of grace:
But I will instance but in one, Titus 3. 5, 6, 7. But after that the kindness
(says he) and the love of God our Savior, toward man appeared. Not by works
of righteousness, which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us,
by the washing of regeneration, Mark ye, by it, not for it: Gods mercy and
free grace, is the ground of the souls acceptance, and therefore consider upon
what principle thou runnest, that concludest, I have not yet been enough
humbled, for to be accepted as if thy humiliation were the reason and ground of
Gods acceptance. Indeed we ought never to think that we are enough humbled,
and yet we ought always to think that humiliation too much, and that sense of
our sins too much, which hinders Faith; for it destroys its end. Therefore why
art thou thus troubled (Christian) with this conceit, that your Faith is no
Faith, because before it you wept not just so many tears? It is Faiths work, to
believe and apprehend the souls acceptance before God. Now Gods acceptance,
as you have heard, is never for the souls humiliation; and therefore, what
should hinder thy Faiths working, in apprehending thy acceptance before God,
because thou art not accepted for this work any more then any other -- Nay,

Secondly, Thy humiliation is not a ground of Faith* Thou do not therefore
apply Christ, because thou art so and so humbled. Put case, that a great Prince
should be willing to bestow his son in marriage upon a poor peasant; only
(says he) I will make this term or condition, that when you come to marry
him, you shall come in sackcloth, to show what ye are; he shall give you a better
garment afterward; will any one say, that this maids coming to the marriage
arraied in sackcloth, is a ground of her so rich marriage? or will any say it is
a meritorious condition, that she deserves such a match, to come so attired?
Surely no, the ground of all is the Princes delight in her; this is the ground
of his taking her to wife, and yet the King commanded that attire. So the Lord
says, Poor! vild wretch! I will give thee my Christ in marriage, but thou
shall come weeping, to shake hands with him weeping for thy sins; he shall
afterward take off thy sackcloth garments. Can any say, that this is either a
meritorious condition, or a ground of acceptance, or Faith? Consider
(Christian) were thou never so much humbled, thou could not say, I will
therefore believe because I am humbled. Humiliation is a necessary antecedent
to Faith, (...) ground of Faith. Let (...) that therefore be a stumbling block
to thee, which cannot be a pillar and foundation to thee; if thy Faith cannot
stand upon it, let it never stumble upon it.

And thus I have done with the second thing I propounded, which was, to
propound such considerations to such souls, as were under this temptation, as
might comfort their hearts, and strengthen and stablish them: Only, I beseech
you remember to whom I have been speaking all this while, not to hard-hearted
stony souls, but to broken and humbled souls; not to those that regard not to
get their souls humbled at all, but to those that are humbled, that they can be
humbled no more, and that groan under the hardness of their own hearts; not to
those that presume to apply their hot boiling lusts and corruptions, to the
blood and wounds of Jesus Christ, flattering themselves with a notion of Faith,
and conceiting they do believe; but to those that are humbled, though they
cannot have a good thought of themselves.

I would not be misunderstood, to have spoken one word to slight the work of
humiliation, or to cherish that licentious novell Doctrine, that there is no
need at all of it, and a Christian shall not need regard it; but what I have
spoken, has been not for dead men, (what should they do with cordialls?) but
for dying, fainting, swooning Christians; not for them that consider their sins
too little, but for them that so dim their eyes with poring on them, that they
cannot see the absolute covenant of God, and the free grace of Christ, and lay
hold upon the promises of life. There is an extreme on either side; the sober
Christian avoids either, and keeps the mean. So I have done with the second
thing I propounded, viz. to propound some considerations, which might comfort
the afflicted soul under this affliction, and strengthen it to resist this
temptation: For without question, as the Devil has a design upon many a soul,
to run it upon a rack of presumption, and carry it on in a blind notion of
Faith; so he has a design upon some souls, to wrack them upon the sands, and
sink them in a pit of despair. The Devils devouring voice to souls, is either;
There is no need of humiliation, or, there is no humiliation enough. I come now
to the last thing which I propounded, which is, to give some directions to such
souls as are burdened with this affliction* and groan under this temptation,
how to demean themselves and what to do. I will reduce all that I shall speak,
by way of direction, to these heads.

First, Eye the nature of the covenant, and grace, and promises of God more.
Secondly, Eye the nature and cause of humiliation more. Thirdly, Labor to get
thy heart more humbled.

First of all, Eye the nature of God, declared in the free dealings out of his
grace to thee. This I shall enlarge in three instances.

1. Eye Gods covenant, and the nature of that. 2. Eye Christ's grace, and the
nature of that. 3. Eye the Promises and the nature of them.
First, Eye the nature of God in his covenant more. The cause of this
affliction is Christians too much eying, and poring upon their sins, and
themselves; the penitent believer ought to have two eyes, one to look downward,
another to look upward. This is that which David comforted himself with; when
he considered his own unworthiness, and the unworthiness of his house, 2 Samuel
23. 5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me an
everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure, for this is my
salvation, and all my desire, although he makes it not to grow. David, though
a man according to Gods own heart, yet had a wicked house, Absalom had slain
his brother, rebelled against his Father, lay with his Fathers concubines;
Amnon had defloured his sister, etc. Now David looking upon this personal
unworthiness, both of his own person, and of his children, was humbled for it,
and in sadness of heart says, Although my house be not so ordered with God,
etc. Not so ordered as it should be, not ordered according to the mercies that
I have received from God: Yet see how he casts up another eye, and views the
covenant of God; yet says he, The Lord has made with me an 1. Everlasting
covenant, 2. Ordered, and 3. Sure, for this is my salvation, etc. Christian do
thou the like; thou porest upon thy self, and read a great deal of personal
unworthiness, see thousands of sins, the least of which might damn thee and
damn a world; see much mercy bestowed upon thee by God, and all mercies
abused by thee, to the dishonor of God; yet comfort thy self by eying Gods
covenant, and say, Although my heart, although my life, be not so ordered with
God, although my soul be not so humbled before God; yet the Lord has made with
me an everlasting covenant, and a sure covenant; the covenant of peace and
grace with my soul, was from eternity, and therefore free and without cause in
the creature. I had neither an hard heart, nor a soft heart, when God made that
covenant with me, and it is a sure covenant; as God never made a covenant with
me for the softness and tenderness of my heart, so neither will he cast me
off, for the hardness of my heart, and it is a covenant ordered in all things.
He has made a covenant with me, as to give me salvation, so to give me such an
heart as he requires of me, in order unto my salvation; and for this is my
salvation. I shall not be saved for the worthiness of my house, nor for the
worthiness of my person, nor for the tenderness of my heart, but because he
has made a covenant with me: Here is the groundwork, here is the cause of my
salvation.

Thus Christian, eye 1. The eternity of the covenant. 2. The surenesse of the
covenant. 3. The freeness of the covenant. 4. The particularity of the
covenant. God has not made his eternal covenant at random, with those souls
that shall be broken hearted, and shall believe: No (says David) he has made
with me a sure, well-ordered, everlasting covenant; the other is Arminian and
licentious Doctrine. God has made a covenant with thee, and an everlasting
covenant with thee, and a sure covenant with thee; eye this and say, Well,
though my heart be not so humbled before God as it ought to be, though my soul
be not so broken, though my whole man be not so ordered, yet God has made with
me in particular, an everlasting covenant, sure, well-ordered, and for this is
my salvation.

Secondly, Eye the nature of God and Jesus Christ, in the dispensations of his
grace more. The truth of it is, the covenant, the eternal covenant that God
has made with sinners, is but a declaration of his grace; but I conceive,
there may be a difference conceived between Gods declarations of his grace, and
his dispensations of his grace; though that every dispensation of grace be a
declaration of his grace, yet every declaration of his grace, is not a
dispensation: Declations of Grace may be general, Dispensations of grace are
particular. God declared his grace and love to mankind, when he made that
promise, The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head: But now he made a
dispensation of his grace, when he gives a gracious soul power to draw out its
part in this promise. Now do thou sit troubled, that thy soul is not thus
and thus humbled, not enough brought low, etc. eye the dispensations, the
particular dispensations of Gods grace. Consider to whom God has made
dispensations of his grace. 1. In what manner God has dispensed (and revealed
the dispensations of) his Grace. Sit down and think of the Saints of God, that
God has dealt out his saving grace too, and thou shall find them the most
worthless and vile wretches. To Paul the persecuter, the blasphemer, so
hard-hearted, that he could spill the blood of the tenderhearted Saints of
God; yet this Paul the Lord humbled, and dealt out his grace to: To Manasses,
so hard-hearted that he filled the land with innocent blood, that nothing would
humble but a jail and shackles and setters, yet this Manasses tasted of the
divine dispensations of grace. 2. Consider in what manner God has dispensed
his grace, and revealed the dispensations of his grace to these poor creatures.
Indeed I am apt to believe, that of all those Saints in Scripture, not one saw
Christ without a weeping eye, and a mourning hea^^; but yet this is certain,
that God has not in his word set out to us the like humiliation of Lydia as of
Paul, and of the Jailer: Though I am of M. Shepherds mind, that Lydia was
humbled as well as Paul; yet I conceive there are two things that we may gather
for a souls comfort, from the holy Ghosts so variously setting down Gods
dealings with those souls whom he has brought home to himself; so fully and
deeply expressing the sorrows of some, as of Paul, and Manasses, and the
Jailer, and so tacitly concealing the sorrows of others, as of Lydia, or so
moderately revealing of them; as concerning those converted at Saint Peter's
Sermon, concerning whose humiliation we have only this upon record, that they
were pricked at the heart. I say, I conceive there are two things that we may
gather from it, for a souls comfort under this affliction.

First, That Gods dealings in this particular, are not alike with every soul
that he humbles, some more and deeplyer, some less for his own end: Which I
hinted you before.

Secondly, I conceive, we may gather this from that various dealing of the holy
Ghost, in the word of God, in expressing Gods way with his people, viz. That it
is Gods will that souls should not stumble upon this rock, and stick here; we
are not yet enough humbled, not thus and thus humbled; we ought to look for
some, but not to stick at the want of the same measure of humiliation, which
some of the Saints of God have had. Consider these things Christian! weigh the
reason of Gods so various dealing with his converts, and various expressions
(of his dealing with them) in his revealed word, and let this comfort and
direct thee, and raise thee up: say with thine own heart, My soul! why should
these thoughts hinder thee from going on? Gods dealings with all his converts,
is not alike; and God would have in the same even manner, surely have revealed
the sorrows and humiliations of all his children, as of any, if he would have
had me stumbled at this, and made this a block in my way to him.

Thirdly, Eye Gods nature in his promises. Mark how the promises run, whether
absolutely o^ conditionally; and if conditionally, whether upon this condition,
that the soul should be thus and thus deeply humbled. O (says a gracious soul)
do you set me to eye them? they undo and ruin me, I find the promises of Gods
giving Christ to my soul, run all upon conditions of hungring and thirsting,
Isai. 55. 1, 2, 3. Of being weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11. 29. Of being lost
and undone, and this is that which I stick upon. I will answer thee in this
particular.

First, It Is true, such is the tenor of the promises, they do require hungring
and thirsting, etc. Though not as meritorious conditions; yet consider, That
they require no more then God has promised to giv^. See this Zach. 12. 10.
Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. and 36. 26, 27. Where God has promised to give that same
tender, broken, contrite heart, which other promises require the soul to have,
that does apply them to it self.

Secondly, Consider, that those promises that seem to require humiliation and
brokennesse of heart, as conditions or qualifications (call them what you will)
do no where require such and such a measure; they require rem, but not mensuram.

Lastly, And for thy great comfort consider; that those original promises, in
which God has promised to give that tenderness and brokennesse of heart,
which he seems to require in other promises, as a condition and qualification
for the soul, to whom of due it belongs to apply those promises; I say, those
promises are absolute: for this take but two instances, Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. and
36. 26, 27. which are much the same. And I will give them one heart, and I will
put a new spirit within you, and I will take the stony heart out of their
flesh, and will give them a^ heart of flesh, that they may walk in my statutes,
etc. As if he should say, they cannot walk in my statutes, and keep my
ordinances, until their stony heart be gone, and they have an heart of flesh.
Secondly, They cannot have this heart of flesh till I give it them; And
thirdly, I will give it them. Now sit down and eye the promises say thus: It is
true God does require an heart of flesh, before I can apply the promises of
pardon to me* but the same God has promised to give it me; and there must,
there can nothing be done of me, in relation to that first gift God has freely
promised, to prepare me to apply his salvation, and to walk in his statutes, by
taking away my heart of stone, and giving me an heart of flesh, and believe,
but this, that God will fulfill this free and absolute promise unto me. It is
thy duty not only to believe that God will pardon thee, but also to believe
that God will humble thee; and not to stick upon, I am not humbled enough to
apply the promise, but to say, I will labor to apply the promises of
salvation, and to believe that God will humble me more, and make good (amongst
others) that promise to my soul, that he has made to his people, that he will
take away their heart of stone, and give an heart of flesh, etc.

And thus I have done with the first direction to the afflicted soul. Eye the
nature of God more in his covenant: Secondly, In the dispensations of his
grace: Thirdly, In his promises. I come now to my second direction, and that is,

Secondly, Consider the nature of humiliation; and this thou may consider:
First, In its original; Secondly, In the manner of the operation of it;
Thirdly, In its end. The two latter I have handled at large, in my
considerations I propounded to comfort the soul in its affliction; I will but
name them. First, Think that thy humiliation may be as great as it should be,
though not so deep as others have been, it may be it has been longer.
Secondly, It may have a more inward work. Thirdly, Its working is not done, it
will have a work as long as thou live. 2. Consider the nature of it, in its
end: First, Meditate that the end of thy humiliation, is but to bring thee to
loath sin; secondly, Leave sin; and thirdly, To make thee prize Christ. If this
be done, it has done its work. But this I enlarged my self upon before. 3.
(which should have been indeed first) Consider the nature of humiliation in its
original, and efficient cause, which is God, Zac. 12. 10. Ezekiel. 11. 19. 20.
and sit down now and say, Certainly, God has a good work begun in my soul,
otherwise, why should sin trouble me at all? or why should I be troubled, that
I am not troubled for my sin? and now how unreasonable a thing is it for me, to
start from applying the promises, because, in my conceit, I am not enough
humbled? It is God that has humbled me at all, and it is he that must perfect
the work in my soul; and surely, if he sees it is not enough, he will work
more, and he must do it, if he will have it, for I am not able to humble my
soul. Thus far my direction has reached to help thee to ease thy self, and
direct thee what to do in point of meditation, and consideration. My third
reaches thy practice.

Lastly, Labor after more and more humiliation. Sound believer, p. 104.
and opinion (...) cry down that great work: Want of humilitation, says Master
Shepherd, is the cause of so much counterfeit (...), Ib. p. 146.
as is in the world; and again (says he) we shall observe, if there be little
humiliation, there is little of Christ; if much of humiliation, much of Christ;
if inconstant humiliation, inconstant fruition of Christ; if real humiliation,
real possession of Christ; if false humiliation, imaginary fruit^on of Christ.
Therefore, though I would not have thee so weep, but thou should I have a spare
eye to look up to the free grace of Christ, yet I would not have thee so much
fix thy eye upon the mercy, and free grace of Christ, that thou should have
never an eye to weep for thy sins. Humiliation and Faith are two things, that
are consistant together; That's the last direction.

Labor to get the soul more humbled. I know thou will say, how shall I do
that? truly I might give infinite directions, Ib. p. 150.
but this is so ordinary a point, in which so many pious men have labored,
that I shall but name to you some directions that, they point out, as helps to
the soul in this work. Master Shepherd gives those helps.

1. Remember whose thou art, Romans 9. 20. 2. Remember what thou art, a vild
wretch, Job. 40. 1 3, 4. 3. Remember what thou have been, and how long thou
have been so, and why should God choose thee. 4. Remember what thou will be,
Isa. 64. 6. good for nothing in his service, etc.
Doctor Preston gives these directions, vol. 4.

1. Labor to see the greatness of thy sin. 2. To see the inability to help
thy self.
For the first he propounds this.

1. Fix your thoughts upon some great sin. 2. Think of the number of thy sins.
3. Make past sins present, think of youth sins, etc. 4. Be not willing to
exi^nuate, or excuse any sin. 5. Make sorrow abide upon your hearts.
2. Consider the inability to help thy, self.

1. Think of Gods greatness and strictness. 2. Of thy weakness and
sinfulness.
And in another place he gives these directions.

1. Every day search thy heart, for the sins thou have committed that day. 2.
Study the Scriptures, they will discover your vile hearts more to you. 3. Keep
your hearts and ways upright, that is the way to keep them from ha^dning. 4.
Bediligent in your calling. 5. Remember times and sins past. 6. Distinguish
betwixt grace in thee and thy self, of thy self.
Many other directions have been and may be given, I will reduce all to these
two or three heads.

1. Consider the nature of thy sin. 2. Consider the mercy of thy God. 3. Run
unto God.
Now these may be branched out, into several particulars.

1. Consider sins in the filthiness of them. 2. In the greatness of them. 3.
In the multitude of them. 4. In the aggravations of them. 5. In the effects of
them. 6. In the dangerous consequence and guilt of them.
2. Consider the mercy of God.

1. That has spared thee from hell so long. 2. That yet will pardon thee. 3.
That yet will give thee heaven and glory.
3. But, when thou have done all what thou can this way, these are but poor
helps; the surest way is, to Fly to God by prayer, and entreat him to work his
own work. So the Church, Hos. 14. 2. Here thou may plead with God: First,
His promises, Zach. 12. 10. Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. Secondly, Thine own inability, to
do any thing toward this work, though thou have tried much; and after all
this, rest upon God (...) to such doubting Christians. Now there are diverse
other things, which lie in the souls way, in relation to this also; some of
which I will speak something to, being such as are more ordinary, and as I my
self have met with, from some Christians, either arising from their too curious
inquisition into Gods hidden decrees, or too much poring upon their own
unworthiness. For the first of these, I shall speak something to it at this
time.

Cap. 3.
How such Christians may be satisfied and comforted, as think they have no
warrant to believe, because they conceive they are not elected, or do not know
whether they be elected or no.
ALas! says a poor Christian, why do you tell me of believing? Sure I am, none
can be saved, that is not elected; I can see no ground to make me think, that
God has chosen me to life, before the foundations of the world; nay, I am
confident God has not elected me, but past me over in his eternal decree. Now
to this trouble of spirit, I will speak something: first, by way of promise;
secondly, by way of consolation and direction.

First, By way of promise. It is an ill way of curing such a wound, by breaking
truths head, to make a plaster; as the Arminians, Papists, and Antinomians do.
Let me therefore, first, show you what the truth is, and then show you, with
what considerations, in a consistancy with the truth, a Christian so
unwarrantably by this scruple stopped in its way of believing, may be set a going
again; and there will be left an even-path upon the road of truth for a
troubled spirit to go on in its way of believing; and that both steadily, and
nimbly. Know therefore,

First, It is a truth, That from all eternity, God made choice of a particular
and determinate number of persons, to save them and none other; nor can any be
saved, but those who were so elected, and whosoever are so elected, shall not
fall away. This is the truth of God, which must stand firm against whosoever
they be, that either say there is no election, or an election at random; (as
the Arminians hold) or a slippery one, that is, alterable, (as Papists hold) or
that it is made in time, etc.

Secondly, It is a truth, That God never elected any, because he foresaw they
would believe, and repent and walk holily; but because he has elected them,
therefore they believe, and repent, etc.

Thirdly, It is a truth, That those that are thus from all eternity elected,
may come to knew, and particularly, and fully, and assuredly to know, they are
so elected, and chosen of God.

Nay fourthly, It is a truth, That it is the duty of every Christian, to strive
to make his calling and election sure, to labor to know that his name is
written in the book of life. It is that which the Apostle Peter calls for at
Christians hands.

Nay fifthly, It is a truth, That there are but a very few elected, and
whosoever is elected, shall believe, and more then are elected, neither can nor
shall believe; Many are called and few are chosen; and those that are ordained
to the end, are ordained to the means, they are created to good works. These
are those propositions which I desired to premise, and those which the Devil
and his instruments abuse, to the unwarrantable perplexing of poor souls. These
are (all) the truths of God, which do and shall remain true, though all the
world be found liars; but what of all this? I know none of these premises that
will warrant such a conclusion as this, Then I have no ground to believe,
except I knew that I were one of those few, whose names God has written in his
book of eternity. The Papist, and Arminian, and Libertines, now take another
course, to cure the perplexed spirit, and make no bones of it; to stay a truth,
to heal a conscience. To this end, they have devised such charms to hang about
the necks of sick souls, as these are, There is no such matter as any decree of
election, or God elects us for foreseen works; and if there be an election, it
is not particular, but the decree is entered thus at random, in the Court
rolls of eternity. All that believe shall be saved, without a particular
entrance of the number, or names, as if God had not said, I know thee by name;
and if there be any elected, they stand upon slippery ground, Elected names may
be blotted out, or added in; as if Gods book were more blotted then a Mercers
shop-book. Or if there be any elected, yet, it is impossible to know that I am
elected, nor can I have any assurance of my mansion house in glory, till I have
taken possession of it. But this is to bruise the head, for a plaster for the
heel. On the contrary, another generation maintain, election to be the object
of Faith, and ignorantly maintain, Faith to be the eye of the soul, reading its
name written in Gods book, from all eternity, an apprehension of our particular
election, etc. But, as these do unwarrantably wound tender consciences, so the
other are bad chirurgions to heal such wounds. If I mistake not, we shall find
cordials enough to refresh such swooning spirits, without buying them at so
dear a rate, as the ^ale of a dram of precious truth. Therefore leaving these
premises, to be held and maintained, as the sure pillars of eternal truth, I
come in the next place to propound some considerations that may comfort and
satisfy poor souls, thus unwarrantably troubling themselves, [salva veritate
Dei] the head of truth yet remaining without a wound or scar. That is my next
work, and to that end consider:

First, Thou say, If I knew I were one of those that God had elected, then
indeed I had some ground, in order to my salvation, to rely upon the promises;
but unless I be elected, such reliance will be rather a fond and unwarrantable
presumption, then a warranted and well-grounded Faith.

First, Consider, (Christian!) That Faith is not an apprehension of particular
election, but an application of general promises. Thou art mistaken (without
any ground) in the object of true Faith, Christ calls upon all, to whom the
Lord Jesus Christ is preached, Isai. 55. 1. 2.
in his Gospel, 1 Ioh. 7.
to believe. He, every one that thirsts, come, and buy. John was sent to bear
witness of the truth, Ioh. 6. 29.
that all men through him might believe, Joh. 6. 29. Christ lays it as a duty
upon all the people, That they should believe on him whom God had sent. Now can
we imagine, that the meaning of Christ was, that they should believe, that all
of their names from eternity, were in the Court-rolls of eternity. The Gospel
obliges all that hear it, to believe; but does the Gospel lay an obligation
upon any, to believe a lie? Faiths object is the promises of the Gospel of the
Lord Jesus Christ. It is Faiths work in the soul, not to close with the decree
of God, and to bosom that, but to close with the promises, and embrace them.
It is Faiths work, to eye Christ, in a particular apprehension, through the
prospective of a promise, not to eye Christ, as the souls faviour, through the
mystery of Gods predeterminate purposes, Heb. 10. 23. Let us hold fast the
profession of our Faith, without wavering; Hebr. 10. 23
well, but upon what grounds, the next words tell us, For he is faithful, that
has promised, the sure word, not the sure decree of God, is the object of our
justifying Faith. Now, where has God left thee such a line of promise, as
this? Thou shall be elected to glory, or, I will elect thee to glory. God has
said, I will pardon, I will heal, I will ease you; and these words, God calls
thee to rest upon, as sure and faithful words: God has said, He that
believes on the son, Joh. 2. 36.
has everlasting life; but he has never said, He that believes in my decree,
has everlasting life. Indeed, if our election were that which were to be the
first thing to be believed: it were something to scruple a Christian, and it
would be enquired into how we should know that we are elect; for it is
necessary, that we have some certainty of knowledge of that which is to be
believed, that it should be evident to us; but there is no such matter. The
promises of the Lord Jesus Christ, are our object, which not being particular,
but general, make our way smooth; As for example, we have a promise, Ioh. 3.
16. Joh. 3. 16.
Whosoever believes in him, shall not perish but have eternal life. This
promise now, it is thy work to believe, viz. that believing in him, I shall not
perish, but have everlasting life. Do thou say, how shall I know this
promise is made to me? what ground have thou for that question? when as in the
promise, there is no restriction, Whosoever believes. The writing runs, To all
persons to whom these presents comes, what should they do? believe in the Lord
Jesus; rest and rely upon the Lord Jesus Christ, for eternal life. The
general promise is by thee particularly to be applied. Come unto me all ye
that are weary and heavy laden (says Christ) and I will ease you. This is now
thy duty, to come unto Christ, but say thou, I cannot come, I do not know I
am elected; Christian, does Christ say, Come unto me all you that are elected,
and I will ease you? No he says, Come unto me all you that are weary. Mat. 5.
29.
Suppose a man had an intention to give to such a particular number of persons,
such a quantity of money, and were resolved with himself, to give to none other
but those, yet should make a Proclamation, that whosoever came to him
acknowledging their poverty, Simile.
he would relieve, in the mean while, secretly with himself determining,
not to give a penny to any, but those whose names he had in his book, and who
should come; and knowing that none of the rest would come, but be too proud to
come and take it, were it warrant enough for any to refuse coming upon this
score? I hear he has made a book, and though he makes a general offer, yet he
will give but to a few persons, and for my part I do not think I am one of
them. If he will send me word, I am one of those whose name is in his book, I
care not though I go. It is thy case Christian, apply it in secret; will thou
not believe and go to Christ, because thou do not know thou art particularly
elected? fear lest for this cause salvation be denied thee. But so much for the
first.

Secondly, Consider, That thy election cannot be known to thee, till thou do
believe. Papists say, It cannot at all (...) known assuredly to thee, till thou
come to see thy name in heaven thy self; but that is false; but this is
truth, that till thou do believe, thou can never know whether thou be
elected or no. The eternal decrees of God, are only demonstrable to us [a
posteriori] from the effects, who has ascended up unto heaven at any time, to
search the records of eternity?

First, Ioh. 6. 46.
All that is recreated of God is by the Son, Ioh. 6. 46. No man has seen the
father save he which is of God, he has seen the father. Nor can any thing be
known of the father, Mat. 11. 27.
but by the Son, Mat. 11. 27. Now, where has the Son revealed the fathers
secret decrees any where? when there was but a question concerning the time of
those great things mentioned, Mat. 24. 36.
Mat. 24. 36. ver. 1. Christ tells them, ver. 36. Of that day and hour knows
no man, no nor the Angels, nor the Son, Mark 13. 32. but the father only.
Whether the Son as man, did not know Gods secrets so far, or whether (according
to Aquinas) ideo dicitur nescire quia nos scire non faciet, he therefore be
said not to know, because he will not suffer us to know, I shall not dispute,
either of both will serve our turn; Gods particular decree of election, is a
secret, locked up in the bosom of him who is the ancient of days, of which,
either Christ himself [as man] was ignorant, or concerning which (to be sure)
he was so secret, as never to reveal his fathers thoughts; he was indeed (as
God) the Privy-counsellor of eternity, but a secret keeper of his fathers
thoughts, and counsels, as well as an obedient Son to his commands in revealing
his fathers will: Christ indeed tells his Disciples, Ioh. 15. 26.
He had chosen them, but it was though, not because they believed that he chose
them yet after that he had called them, and they were come to him, and had
walked constantly and obediently with him, that he told them so. Christ has
not revealed particular election to any before Faith.

Secondly, Nor ever will be. Will Christ think you ever reveal the secrets of
eternity to those that actually are his utter enemies? Election is one of Gods
secrets; it is the roll wherein the eternal covenant, betwixt this or that
particular soul, and the King of eternal glory, is written, and enrolled: Now
the Scripture indeed says, Psalm. 25. 14.
The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them his
covenant. But has the Scripture ever said, the secrets of the Lord are with
unbeleeving damned wretches? for (he that believes not is damned already) no,
when the soul is once called, and believes on the Lord Jesus Christ, then God
in his due time reveals the secrets of eternity to such a soul, and puts it on
spectacles to read the particular covenant, that he has made entered, and
enrolled in the court of heaven, which is written in small and invisible
characters, and cannot be read but with enlightened eyes guided by the eternal
spirit. Besides,

Thirdly, Consider the phrase of Scripture, how it does reveal to us our
particular election. Peter calls to them, to Strive to make their calling and
election sure. First your calling, then your election, 1 Ioh. 2. 5. and 3. 6,
10. 1 John 2. 5.
It is the constant language of Scripture, 3 Chapter v. 6. 10.
and the sense of all the Apostles, that by our Faith, and fruits of our
sanctification, which are the consequents, and attendants upon Faith, We must
know, whether we be in God, or no; whether we be the sons of God, or no; our
particular election must be known to us by the effects; do thou therefore
stick at this? I must know that I am elected, otherwise I cannot believe, thou
cuttest off the means by which thou should attain to thy end. Thy end is to
know thy election. Now the means by which thou should attain to this
particular knowledge and assurance, must be Faith and the fruits of it: This
thou casts off, a thing so absurd that thou would condemn it in any worldly
matter. Thirdly, 3 Con.
Consider thou have no ground for thee to think thou art not elected, unless
it be thy unbeleefe. God has made open Proclamation: Whosoever believes in
him shall not perish but have everlasting life: Whosoever comes unto me, I
will in no wise turn him away. Let all come, and I will ease you. Suppose a
King should make a Proclamation concerning some Malefactors: Let every one that
will, come to me and beg his pardon, and he shall have it. Though he has a
secret reservation of thoughts in his bosom to pardon none but such and such,
because he is confident the rest will be too proud and stout to come; yet upon
what justifiable ground shall any Malefactor think the King intends not to
pardon him before he comes to him and humbly begs his pardon: Shall he stand,
and at a distance say, Let the King send me a particular pardon, and then I
will come for it and thank him; but till I am sure he intends to give it, I
will never take the pains to go. Upon what grounds shall such a malefactor
think the King intends not to give him his life? has he not good cause to
think his stoutnesse is the clearest and proximate cause? God says come,
believe, and you shall live; Thou says now, no, I do not think I shall live,
let me know that, and then I will believe; what ground have thou to think thou
shall not have the end, but because thou will not use the means? Suppose a man
lay very sick, his Physicians should prescribe him such and such means,
in order to his recovery; no not he, he remembers, His time is in Gods hand,
and he cannot pass it, he is sure, he will see first whether God will let him
live, or no, and if God will send him a lease of his life, then he will use
means. Suppose now such a man should dye, what might any think the cause why he
dyed so soon? What? the period that God had set to his days? or his own
refusing the means to sustain his life? But this will be further enlarged in a
fifth consideration.

Fifthly, Consider but this, That all those whom God has elected, he has not
only elected to the end, but to the means. Gods eternal decree of election,
is not entered thus in the Court-book, Be it ordained, that such or such a
person shall live eternally: But, be it ordained, That such or such a person,
shall in time be called, and believe the Gospel, and walk holily like one of my
children, and after receive the crown of glory. We were predestined, That we
should be to the praise of his glory, Ephesians. 1. 12. and 2. 10. For we are his
workmanship, created in Jesus Christ unto good works, which God has before
ordained that we should walk in them. God has ordained the means, as well as
the end, and you must first know by your calling and believing, that you are
elected to them, before you can know you are elected to eternal life; the same
God that has made it a decree of eternity, this and that man shall be saved,
has also made it a decree, that this or that man should believe. Believing
that I am elected and one chosen of God to eternal life, is a piece of sense,
not of justifying Faith (says learned and pious Rutherford) and it is a piece
of sense too, to think I believe, as I have at large heretofore showed, but it
is an higher thing, to believe and be fully persuaded that I shall infallibly
be saved, then to think I truly believe, it is a step higher; the
demonstration is plain, because no Christian can think that he shall be
undoubtly saved, unless he thinks, first, that he does truly and savingly
believe. Now therefore thy first work must be to get a sense of Faith, to
believe that thou beleevest; for thou will never know that God has ordained
thee to life, unless thou first know that he has ordained thee to believe, 1
These. 5. 9. For God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by
our Lord Jesus Christ, that is, by believing in the Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore we are said to be elected in Christ, that is, to obtain salvation in
Christ, and by believing in Christ, which is the true sense of that place, what
ever Arminians wrest it for. But I pass on to a sixth.

Sixthly, Consider, That by standing at this scruple, thou do not only
sinfully, and unwarrantably, and endiessely perplex thy self, and hinder thine
own souls peace, but also thou call in question gods wisdom, and slanderest
his charters of free grace. First, Thou call in question Gods wisdom.

1. God in his wisdom has thought it fit, that his particular election of any
soul to eternal life, should be concealed from it till it has believed, to
let Faith go before sense; thou say no, but it is better for me to know I am
elected, and then I have ground of believing; God says, believe, and then thou
shall see, and this is the way of his wisdom with souls; thou say, no, let
me see, and then I will believe; God says trust me, I will be faithful; thou
say, no, I will not trust thee a jot further then I can see thee.

2. God in his wisdom has thought it a sufficient ground for a soul to believe
in him, and trust to him, that in the promulgation of his Gospel, he has shut
none out of heaven, that have not shut out themselves. Thou say, no, I will
know whether God has shut me out, before God shall know whether I will shut
out my self, or no; God judges it most fit, that the sinner should speak
first, and tell him, whether he will accept of his grace tendered, or no; thou
say no, but I will know first, whether God that has made his large tenders
of grace, will make good what he tenders, nay, thou stand upon Gods seal, as
if thou durst not trust his word; God sends thee his proclamation and cause^h
it to be proclaimed in thine ears; thou say, This is not enough, let me have
his broad-seal.

Secondly, Nay, herein Thou slanderest his charters of free grace, Those say,
Whosoever believes shall live; thou say, in effect, no, for if I be not
elected, nay, if I do not know I am elected, I can have no ground to believe;
what do thou but slander the charter of free grace; as invalid and
insufficient, and good for nothing? and is it fitting that the creature should
thus deal with the Creator?

Seventhly, If thou will but believe, nothing that is in Gods decree, shall or
can hinder thee of salvation: The whole Gospel runs in this language, Ioh. 3.
16, 36. and 6. 40, 47. and 11. 25.
Whosoever believes in him shall not perish but have everlasting life. He that
believes on the Son has everlasting life. Lay thy damnation, Christian, to
Gods charge, if believing thou perishest. O Israel (says God) thy damnation is
of thy self. Never fear it Christian, God will wash his hands and clear his
word to, of thy blood, or any sinners in the world; The righteous Judge of the
whole earth, will do no unrighteous action, neither shall any falsehood proceed
out of his lips, He is not as man that he should lie. Thou shall never, nor
shall any damned creature ever say, if the thread of Gods word had not broke, I
had not fallen into this pit. Thy damnation shall be of thy self, not of him, nor
for any fail of his faithfulness.

Lastly, Consider, Heaven and glory are not so inconsiderable things, but they
are worth adventuring for, if thou had but a possibility of obtaining them,
though thou had no certainty. Thou says, except I were sure God had elected
me, to what purpose should I believe? unless I be pre-ordained to salvation,
it is impossible I should be saved. Christian! have thou so cheap and low
thoughts of heaven and glory? a vain student, that has but heard of such a
thing, as a Philosophers stone, which they say has a virtue in it, to turn
other metals into gold, he has but heard that there is such a thing to be
found out, or perhaps does but fancy such a thing findable, with the expense of
much time and study, and money; he upon this conceit, lays out a great deal of
his estate, expends a great deal of time, thinks no time too much to spend, no
money too much to be expended to try a conclusion, he has no certain
confidence perhaps of such a things possibility; however, no certainty, that he
has found out the very way of finding it; perhaps, he has many
discouragements from diverse that have spent their estates, busied their brains,
lost abundance of time, and yet never could find it, yet he goes on carried on
with a strong fancy, hoping not to fail. Queen Esther, when she went into the
King, had no certainty of finding favor, yea, she wanted not some
disheartnings, in regard of a custom in the Court of Persia, that none should
come in to the King, till they were called, and yet more, she had not been
called of thirty days: (an extraordinary time) Yet see her resolution, her
business was extraordinary, many lives depended upon her venturing her life,
she puts on a gallant resolution to go in, and says, If I perish I perish, and
God blessed her enterprise, and she obtained the holding out of the golden
Scepter, and the answer of her desire. Thou says, I am not sure I am elected;
I say yet, believe, Thou art or may be sure, if thou do believe, thou
shall live; thou have the word of God for it, It is but the expense of a little
time in praying, hearing, fasting, etc. Never was their one experience of one,
that believed and was damned, to dishearten thee; God calls thee to it, if thou
do not, not the lives of others but thy own soul is in danger of perishing;
God has promised the golden Scepter, Heaven and Christ, are worth venturing
more for, then thou can adventure; Go in, resolve to rest upon Christ, do it
truly, and my soul for thine if thou perishest. Thus I have shortly
endeavored to speak something, how little soever, and in how much weakness
soever, to poor souls pleading this bar to Faith; Consider of it, you see this
still remains the great work of a Christian to obey Gods revealed Law, not to
search into his secret will: Hear O man! what God has required of thee,
Believe and be saved, make not blocks in thine own way. Art thou weary and
heavy laden? come unto him that says, Come unto me all you that are weary and
heavy laden, and I will ease you: Ah! but (will thou say) I am a poor vild
unworthy wretch, what have I to do to rest my impure hands upon a pure Christ?
But for this I shall God willing, speak something the next time.

SERMON. IV.
LUKE 17. 5. Lord increase our Faith.
I Am discovering to you upon what grounds many Christians think they have no
warrant to believe, and rest upon Jesus Christ, and laboring to satisfy such
poor Christians in such cases and under such perplexities of spirit. I have
showed you already two usual causes: First, A too irregular eying of
preparatory qualifications, thinking that they are not humbled enough: Or
secondly, A too unwarrantable prying into Gods secrets, conceiving they are not
elected, and upon this score utterly refusing to obey that great Gospel
command, Believe; to both these I have spoke something already, to the latter
the last day. I am intended by the blessing of God, and as he shall enable me
to speak something this day, to a third cause commonly alleged by Christians,
why they conceive they ought not to believe, viz. Because of their own
unworthiness, in respect of the greatness, and multitude of their sins, that
have stained, and possibly do yet pollute their soul: Alas! (says a poor soul)
would you have me lay hold on Jesus Christ? what with my filthy hands? what can
such a rotten sinner that has been so ancient in sin, can I (think you) have
warrant? when I have given the Devil my youth, to believe Jesus Christ will
take the fag end of my life? No no, call to the young person to believe, that
is not yet withered and rotten with sin, call to those that have lived honestly
and civilly, not to such profane wretches as I have been. Now, to answer this
cavil, Let me bend my discourse at this time, and propound certain
considerations, which duly weighed, may comfort a soul under this trouble, and
put it upon its work and duty of believing, and convince it that it is its duty.

Cap. 4.
How to satisfy a poor soul doubting whether it may believe or no, because of
its many and great sins past, or its continuing corruptions, and so deemeth it
self unworthy.
FIrst of all consider, Gods grace is enough for thee, This scruple of thy
spirit, arises from scant, and straightened thoughts of rich incomprehensible
grace: Be convinced therefore, that there is a fullness enough in the ocean of
infinite grace to swallow up thy soul, however loaded with a burden of sin;
observe but how the Scripture sets out infinite love, take one place for
all, Ephesians. 3. 17, 18, 19. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith, that
you being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all
Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the
love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that you might be filled with the
fullness of God. Mark how the Apostle expresses free grace, by all dimensions;
are thy sins in the height? there is an height of love; are they in the
depth? there is a depth of love; are they long, broad? are they all? yet there
is mercy enough in this Christ, for such is his love that it passes knowledge;
are they a mountain? why who art thou (O great mountain before Zerubbabell)
thou shall be made a plain; do thy sins cry up to heaven? his mercies are above
the heavens; are thy sins more in number then the hairs of thy head, his
mercies are more in number then the sand which lies on the sea shore. Now this
is easy to be conceived, if we do but conceive, and know that the mercies of
God are infinite; God is an infinite God, and every mercy of his, is as
inconceivable as himself is. His love passes all understanding (says the
Apostle;) have no low thoughts (Christian) of the height of free grace which
reaches up to the heavens, yea, and above the heavens; Is the filthy garments
of thy wickedness of a larger extent think thou, then the long white robe
of his righteousness, Who was made for thee righteousness, wisdom,
sanctification, and redemption. Is the fountain set open for Judah, and
Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleannes so shallow that thou can not bath in
it? Mistake not (Christian) it is a bath of capacity to hold all filthy souls,
be their uncleanness what it will, if they will but come and wash, and be
clean; those that have the rottenest wounds, the fil^hiest sores, the most
unsound ^arkasses, may fetch balm from Gilead enough to heal their wounds. When
Christ was upon the earth, the Evangelist tells us, Matthew. 4. 24. They brought
unto him all sick people, that were sick of diverse diseases and torments, and
those which were possessed with devils, and he healed them. When virtue went
out from Christ, to heal the poor woman (...) ^ouched the hemme of his garment,
it went (...) ^im as light goes out of the sun, that there is (...) for what
goes out. Christ never had any virtue went out of him, so as by such emission
he lost any. How many Saints think you, since old Abrah^m (who was the father
of the faithful) to this day, have touched the hemme of his garment? virtue
went out and healed every one, and yet his garments are all oily with mercy and
grace still. How many drops of blood have thirsty Saints had from David's time
to this hour, and yet the fountain of cleansing blood, has not a drop less in
it? Grace in Christ is like the heat of the fire, or light of the sun, take how
much you will of either, you shall not rob either; narrow, not the breadth of
incomprehensible love; when thou have measured for believers ten thousand
yards, there shall not be a nail less on the piece of free grace. The sea,
though a thing infinite, will hardly be measured out by quills, much less
shall the unfadomable ocean of infinite love, be measured by drops for the
washing poor souls from the stains and filth of their sins. The boy could tell
the father, he would have done emptying the sea into an hole with a spoon,
before he should have opened the Doctrine of the Trinity; And sooner shall thou
get all the light out of the body of the sun, and hear out of the fire, then
put Jesus Christ to pant for his breath of free grace. Oh, that sinners had but
as willing legs as he has capacious arms; we see hands are washed every day,
and have been these thousands of years, now how long can we think it would yet
be, should we get the dirtiest hands we could make, before all the seas,
rivers, fountains, and streams in the world, would be exhausted; yea, though
they should wash seven times a day? infinitely sooner (Christian) then the
fountain of free grace shall be exhausted, with all the buckets that come to
draw the water of life from it. See thou a steeple, as Paul's in London, or
the like, of a very great height; see thou the highest mountain that seems
to have married the clouds, and sit in their lap: Suppose now that mountain or
steeple in the deepest place of the ocean, how much would thou see on it?
nay, were another on the top of that, there would not be a spier of grass, nor
a grain of dust discernable; were thy mountain of sins, that with their height
seem not to threaten the clouds at all, but God himself, were I say, that, yea
and another, and a third, thousands of them piled up and thrown into the ocean
of infinite love, the bottomless depth of his meritorious blood, the waters of
free grace would still be as much higher, as the heavens are higher then the
earth, yea, infinitely higher then the highest planet is above the lowest
spring. O the depth! Suppose thou saw the highest Cedar in Lebanon, the
highest Pyramide upon the earths Make thy self a ladder of ten thousand staves
if thou can, and rear it up, how much higher would the sun be think thou?
infinite higher are the mercies of thy Savior, Christian, above the height of
thy transgressions. There is mercy enough, that's the first -- But this is easy
enough to be evinced, a Christian will tell you he cannot, dare not, does not
doubt this, he doubts not of the power, but of the will of God.

Secondly, Consider therefore, That there is will enough in the God of mercies,
as well as power enough to save thee, if thou will but believe in him. It is a
note of Pious Master Rutherford, That none can doubt, or say they doubt of Gods
will, Rut. trial of Faith, p. 128.
but they must really doubt of Gods power; for if thou beleevest his power,
thou must at the same time believe his will; But for this it is easy enough to
evince the good will of God, to save the greatest of sinners. Where shall we
find his will but in his word? and how shall we judge of it but by his acts?
It is a known and certain rule, That the Gospel shuts none out of heaven, but
those that by unbelief, lock the gate against themselves; Enquire but into
Gods promises, is there the least parenthesis of any exception in all the pages
of free grace? Isai. 1. 18. Come now (says God) Let us reason together, Though
your sins be as scarlet, I will make them as snow; though they be red like
crimson, they shall be white as wool. There is no sinners sin that is died in
grain, but such as have sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost; have thou been a
murderer? thy sin is yet but a scarlet die, I will make it as snow (says
God;) have thou been a blasphemer? All sin and blaspemy shall be forgiven
(says Christ) Mat. 12. 31. Have thou been an idolater? an unclean wretch? I
will sprinkle clean water upon you (says God) and you shall be clean, from all
your filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you, Eze. 36. 25.
What? have thou abused Christ, and spoken against him? who is thy only
salvation? Whosoever (says Christ) speaks a word against the Son of man, it
shall be forgiven him, Matthew. 12. 32. Hark (Christian) is there not as much
infiniteness in thy Christ's will (think thou) as in his power?

Secondly, Nay, consider, his will is not only full enough of power, but there
is an earnestness of desire in his will to save the greatest of sinners, that
leaving their sins, will turn to him; this will be easily enough evinced from
his expressions and actions, tending to that end; He speaks, he swears, he
pleades, he e^postulates, he weeps, he invites, he comes, he dies.

1. He speaks, that you have heard, he says, I will save scarlet, crimson,
sinners; I will say to them that are in their blood, live, I will power out
water upon the unclean.

2. He swears, and has bid us to tell you his oath, Ezekiel. 33. 61. say unto
them, As I live (says the Lord) I desire not the death of a sinner, but had
rather that he should turn from his wickedness and live. Lo, he could swear by
no greater, he swears by himself. O happy creatures (says Tertullian) for whom
God is pleased to put himself to his oath; O unbeleeving wretches, if we will
not trust our God swearing. Yet further,

3. He pleades, Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, why will ye die O ye
house of Israel? Micah 6. 3. O my people! what have I done to thee? and wherein
have I wearied thee? testify against me. He expostulates, Isai. 5. 4. What
could I have done more, for my vineyard then I have done. Wherefore when I
looked that it should bring forth grapes brought it forth wild grapes.

4. He appeals to the mountains and foundations of the earth, Mic. 6. 1, 2, 3.
to the sinners themselves, Isa. 5. 3, 4. Judge now O ye inhabitants of Judah
and Jerusalem.

5. He wishes groaning, Deu. 5. 29. O that there were such an heart in them
that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments always, that it might be
well with them, and their children for ever. And again, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. O that
they were wise, that they understood this, and would consider their latter end.

6. He professes he knows not how to destroy them. Hosea 11. 8. Hos. 11. 8.
How shall I give thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee O Israel? How shall
I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim, my heart is turned within
me, my repentings are kindled together.

7. He weeps when he came nigh Jerusalem, he wept over it and said, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem -- how often would I have gathered thee, as an hen gathers
her chickens under her wings, Mat. 23. 37, 38.
but thou would not? Mat. 23. 37, 38. Christ would, but the sinner would not.

8. He invites, Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3.
Isai. 55. 1, 2, 3. Ho, every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, and he
that has no money come ye buy and eat without money, and without price; and
again, verse. 3. Incline your ear and come unto me, and your soul shall live;
Hark how he calls Mat. 11. 29. Mat. 11. 29.
Come unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden and I will ease you. The
Father says come, the Son says come, the Spirit says come, you that are in
the hedges come, he sends out his servants to highway-people, Mat. 22. 9.
Matthew. 22. 9. To as many as are found there; why stay you disputing his will,
when he so often says come, Rev. 22. 17.
come? Rev. 22. 17. The Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him that hears
say come, and let him that is a thirst come, and whosoever will let him drink
of the water of life freely. Is not all this enough to let thee know God is
willing, and Christ is willing to receive thee? Lo, Christ will come to thee.

9. See that essence of glory, bowing the heavens and coming down, laying aside
his robes of Majesty, and putting on thy filthy garments, see him tiring
himself in going about from place to place, upon no other errand then this, to
cry at the markets, Oh, if any sinners love life, happiness, if any will go to
heaven, let them come to me, I will show them the way to my fathers bosom, and
endear them to my fathers heart. Read his Sermons, observe his pains, thou will
find a willing Savior, not excepting Publicans, and Harlots, from the Kingdom
of God.

10. Would thou have more tokens of his will yet? Mat. 21. 31.
See him dying, hanging upon the cross, dropping out his last blood, breathing
out his last breath, stretching out his dying arms, to encircle sinners should
run into him, breathing out the breath of free grace i^ his very last act upon
a thief, that had not an hour to live; Who shall despair? who shall say Christ
is not willing to save him, and not blaspheme eternal love? speak truth!
corrupt heart say thou art not willing to be saved.

11. Is not this yet enough? Observe him setting Ministers in his Church, left
thou should not read, and none should tell thee the truth of his eternal
love, to speak out his good will in thine ears: All our errand is nothing but
this, sinners Christ is willing to save you, And as Ambassadors for Christ as
though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled
to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
2 Cor. 5. 20. Why can thou not believe his will? Consider in thy Saviors
will, there is not only a latitude for, but an eagerness of thy eternal
salvation: Why therefore do thou say, my sins are so great that God will not
pardon me? Believe, O blaspheme not the God of infinite goodwill.

But thirdly, Consider, That Gods eye of free grace has looked favorably
upon, and Christ's blood has washed as filthy and polluted creatures, as thou
art or can be. Christ has planted in the wilderness, The shittah tree, Esa.
41. 19.
the myrtle, and the oil-tree, and has set in the desert the fir tree, and the
box, and the pine tree; He has made as bad crab-stocks, Esa. 51. 13.
as thy soul is, bring forth pleasant and delitious fruits. It is a note of
Master Rutherfords, That the dew of grace, has ordinarily fallen upon the most
graceless souls. Possibly thou may see and find presidents of actual
sinners, born as black as the Ethiopian, and that have made it their work to
colly themselves with the soot of sins, as much as thou have, and that have
dried in sin with as long customary continuance, as thou have done; yet Christ
took them and washed them milk-white; have thou been an idolater? a persecutor?
so was Manasses; have thou been unclean? so was David; have thou crucified
Christ? so had they that were converted at Peter's Sermon; Act. 2.
have thou denied Christ? so did Peter himself; have thou been a blasphemer? so
was Paul, yea, the chiefest of sinners, yet received to mercy; have thou had
seven devils? so had Mary Magdalen, yet purged and dispossessed; have thou put
off all to the last cast? so did the thief upon the cross. Lo here! souls all
mire and dirt, that nothing could be discerned in them but filth and
putrefaction; their faces were so mired with sin, that nothing of goodness
could be discovered, yet these are now in heaven, all purified Saints, in whom
there is no blemish, no spot, all crowned spotless heirs of glory, without the
least speck of the ink of sin upon them. Have thou sinned beyond these think
thou? it is hardly credible, but suppose that free grace has not (so far as
thou can find) any where set a stamp of love upon a soul so actually wicked
as thou art before God; Yet secondly, There is never a Saint this day in glory,
that was not as seminally and habitually wicked, as thou art or can be, And
free grace looked upon him in restraining the corruptions of his heart, and
preventing him, otherwise he had run with thee to the same excess of riot and
wickedness; David was as filthy a wretch, when he wallowed and tumbled in his
natural blood, as thou art or can be. But to pass on to a fourth
consideration, which will hang upon a chain with this.

Fourthly, If thou could suppose that infinite free grace, never yet did so
great a work, as to wash and save such a sinful soul as thine is, yet this
could not in reason be a just hinderance to thy Faith; because, the depth of
infinite love and free grace, was never yet sounded. Though thou could truly
say, God never manifested his power and good will, in pardoning such a creature
of hell, as I am; yet what would follow? Therefore God cannot pardon me, or
therefore God will nor pardon me: Did ever God do his utmost, Christian?
thousands of thirsty, filthy creatures, since the world began, have been
bringing their buckets, and diving into the infinite depth of eternal love,
but did ever any Ethiopian soul, dive so low as to bring up a stone from the
bottom? was ever any sinful soul, that was brought to the streams of free
mercy, such a capacious bucket, that it could not be filled without grating
upon the bottom of unfadomable love? nay, did ever any carry away so much for
their own wants, that they left the living fountain at a low water? Paul
brought as large a bucket, as any, and had as much need of a great measure of
free grace: Well, he plungeth himself in, but does he dive to the bottom, or
does he not, almost drowned in that depth of eternal sweetness, turn head,
and come up again with his belly and throat, and mouth, full of living waters,
from the springs of eternal love? Romans 11. 33.
And cries out (...), O the depth of the riches, etc. mark how he puts all the
children of love upon diving into the depth, but puts them out of hope of
finding the bottom or top of that height, and depth, and length, and breadth
of love, Ephesians. 3. 17, 18, 19, Ephesians. 3. 17, 18, 19.
which passes knowledge. It is not so much to thee whom God has pardoned, as
whom God will pardon; is not the fountain of his love dry? are the springs yet
running? nay, can he pardon beyond the measure of his former mercies? then how
can thy sins be too great to be pardoned? were there never such sinners
pardoned? Esa. 43. 18, 19.
Behold (says God) I will do a new thing in the earth, I will make a way in
the wilderness, and rivers in the desert; therefore remember not the former
things, consider not the things of old, not to stint the Lord by them; What? do
you tell me (says God) what I have done? I can do more then ever I yet did; I
am not tied to presidents, I can make them.

Fifthly, There is as much reason on thy part for Jesus Christ to receive thee,
though thou be (as thou say) the worst of sinners, as ever there was in
Noah, Daniel, or Job, for him to receive them. This is Master Rutherfords note,
Rut. trial of Faith, p. 20.
What internal cause was there think thou, in any spotless Saints of
glory, why Jesus Christ gave them Faith here, and has now crowned them with a
crown of glory? was there any? Esa. 43. 25. Esa. 43. 25.
I (says God) am he that blotteth out transgressions for mine own names sake.
God for his own sake elected them, therefore Christ died for them; Christ of
his own good will powered out his blood for them, therefore he gave them power
to believe, and come to him; here is all the cause (ab extra) from without
still. And is there less cause in Christ for thee, then there was for them?
look in his Gospel promises; or is there less cause in thee, then a mere
nothing? But I shall make this more full in a sixth position, which I shall
commend to thy consideration, which is this.

Sixthly, That God never received any soul, because it had a portion to set it
off. Thou say, O I cannot believe, etc. why I am not worthy of salvation, I
am a great sinner, I have been an ancient sinner. Well then, suppose that thou
never had to thy knowledge committed actual sins, but were (as thou
think) clean, and spotless, then thou could come to Jesus Christ, and
think he would accept of thee. Thy money perish with thee; do thou think
that Christ, that gift of God, can be purchased with the money of thy merits?
Does Christ take any souls, because they are worthy? or does he therefore take
them, that he might make them worthy? does Christ therefore take a filthy mired
sinner, because it is unclean? or that he might wash it from it uncleanness?
God gives his Son, thou mistakest if thou think he can be bought of thee,
either for love, or money? can thou make Christ rich with the cobblers ends of
thy righteousness? think thou he that has the inexhaustible treasury of
righteousness, do thou think he cares for thy farthings? will thou bring
thy drops to the bottomless ocean of his bloody merits? Your penny-worths
cannot roll about that everlasting wheel of free grace, the decree of
election, nor bow, nor break Christ's free-heart to save you more then another.
The Garden of free grace (Christian) has never a weed of humane merit in it;
no nor yet is there a space to set it in. The Robe of Christ's righteousness is
rich, and full enough, and needs not the dunghill patches of thy merits? That
new-cloth will not endure to be patched with thy old rags. Christ is a
Noble-Bride-groom, that would take a portion with his spouse, if she could
bring a proportion for him; Adam, if he could have got it up, might have been
married to God with a dowry. But for as much as now that cannot be, perfection
is not attainable. Christ scorns thou should say, Thou have brought him a
farthing. The men of the earth shall not make him rich. The first
marriage-contract God made with man, he demanded a portion, and proffered the
jointure of glory: But when man with all his scrapings could not pay it, Come,
says Christ, I will take thee with nothing then. Do all, or take all, is
Christ's Dilemma to the children of men.

Lastly, Consider, That by how much the greater and more abominable sinner thou
art, by so much shall the Lord Christ attain his ends more fully which he aims
at, in saving any souls. Do thou ask what that is? It is his own glory, the
glory of his free grace. God when he declares his free grace to any soul, makes
a particular Proclamation, Come, let all the world see the power of my mercy,
and the good will that is in my bowels, that I can wash such a stained soul
that is nothing else but sin, that I will pardon such an old inveterate sinner;
Now by how much thy sins are more and greater, by so much God more sets out the
virtue of his balm, in healing such old putrified stinking wounds.

Secondly, God knows, such sinners once pardoned and changed, will more
glorify him. They that have much forgiven, will love much.

Thirdly, Luke 7. 47.
God shall have glory from such a sinner, in that others by his example, shall
be kept from despair, and quickened to leave their sins, and trust in Gods
mercy, Psalm. 34. 6. and 51. 13. Come therefore, believe, rest on Christ, Let
not thy unworthiness, thy great, thy many sins, keep thee from Christ.
Eusebius in his third book of Eccles. Hist. cap. 20. has a story of John the
Apostle, who at Ephesus finding a young man of a goodly body, gracious face,
and servent mind, commended him to one of the Bishops or Elders to take care
of him; The Elder accordingly did instruct him, and at length baptized him;
This young man afterward became very wicked, and dissolute, seduced by wicked
companions: First, became a companion of their feasts, and cups, and then of
their theeving, and robberies, at last grew to a very great height of disorder
and outrage, and became a robber on the mountains. Eusch. Eccles. hist. l. 3.
c. 20.
John returning to Ephesus, enquiring for the young man of the Elder, hears
this news; Saint John after rebuking the Elder for his negligence, rode to the
mountain, which this young man (now grown to be a Captain of robbers) kept,
Saint John being taken of the theevish watch, desired to be brought to their
Captain, and accordingly was; when he saw him coming, and knew it was John, he
was stricken with shame, and fled away; Saint John pursues after him crying,
My son, why flyest thou from thy father? O son, tender my case, be not afraid,
as yet there remains hope of salvation, I will undertake for thee with
Christ, I will dye for thee if need be, as Christ dyed for us, I will hazard my
soul for thine, trust to me, Christ has sent me. He hearing this, stood still,
trembled, and wept, embraced Saint John, and wept bitterly. The Apostle, when
he had promised, and protested to procure pardon for him of our Savior, prayed
upon his knees, kissed him, and brings him to the Church, preaches to him,
fasts with him, and leaves him not, before he had restored him a penitent
believer. Is this thy condition Christian? have thou been well principled? and
have thou forget all the Sermons and admonitions, given or preached to thee, and
art thou turned dissolute, disorderly, guilty of all wickedness? and now in
stead of coming to Christ by Faith, do thou, would thou fly from him? See*
thy Christ pursuing thee, calling, inviting, Ah, why do thou fly from me,
that dyed for thee? turn, turn, believe, be not afraid, as yet there remains
hope of salvation in my merits, I will under-take with my father for thee, I
have dyed for thee, I will hazard my favor with my father, for thine; trust
to me, O now stand still, tremble, weep, pray, turn, trust in the Lord Jesus
Christ: Thou art unworthy, but Christ is worthy, he has grace sufficient for
thee; He has a good will to save thee, yea, eagerly bent to thy salvation; he
persuades, he swears, he pleades, he appeals, he wishes groaning, he professes
he knows not how to destroy thee; he weeps over thee, he invites thee, he comes
from heaven to call thee, he dies for thee, he sends messengers to invite thee,
he has washed as filthy wretches as thou art; If he has not, yet he can, he
never showed the utmost of his free grace, he has as much reason to save thee,
as ever he had to save any of his Saints, for themselves. He never took
pennyworth of merit with any; He shall have the more glory, by how much thou
art more unworthy; Free Grace shall more show it self; Thou (if once forgiven)
wilt love him the more; Other great sinners will be ready to trust in him from
thy example. Come now, turn, believe, eschew evil; do good, Though your sins
were as scarlet, they shall be as snow, Though as crimson, they shall be white
as wool.

SERMON. V.
LUKE 17. 5. Lord increase our Faith.
I Am come now to Satan's last block, that he ordinarily lays for the
believer, to stumble upon in the way of believing; when he cannot persuade them
to despair of their interest in Gods hidden decree, nor yet in regard of the
hardness of their own heart, nor yet in respect of their unworthiness, But
the poor soul looks above all these, to the Lord Jesus Christ, then he shoots
his last arrow, by suggesting to the foul such thoughts as these. But what if I
have sinned against the Holy Ghost? That general rule, Mat. 12. 31. All sin
and blasphemy shall be forgiven, has a particular exception, But whosoever
blaspemes the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven. And if I be within that, I
have nothing to do with the general promise. Now Satan having here to do with
a poor credulous soul, that is far easier to believe evil, then any good of it
self, has the fuller blow at it, and follows on while the iron is hot, he
knows if he can but juggle the soul into this persuasion, believing is at an
end. And as there are very many, whom he either first or last, batters with
this engine of death; so in regard of the weakness and ignorance of the most
of Christians, especially in the beginning of their conversion, there are not a
few that are wounded with this dart, and will hardly be beaten out of that
groundless conceit, that they have really, and indeed sinned that unpardonable
sin against the Holy Ghost, which occasions (possibly) many a days sadness,
and dejection, groundlessely. Now in regard that this temptation is entertained
ordinarily through a defect of knowledge and understanding, of what ingredients
that compounded wickedness is made off, I shall in speaking to the
satisfaction of a poor soul under this complaint, Speak something concerning
the nature of that sin, which if once truly understood, will be enough of it
self, to let such poor souls see how groundlessely they have yielded to that
temptation of Satan.

Cap. 5.
How to satisfy a poor soul that conceives, that it has sinned the sin
against the Holy Ghost, and therefore ought not, may not believe.
ALas! (says a poor Christian) Why do you tell me of believing? The
Complainant.
I know sir, there is a fullness, and freeness, of mercy in Jesus Christ, for
poor sinners, yea, though their sins have been many and great; But I am sure,
the sin against the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven, and I and confident
that very sin have I committed. I have sinned against light and knowledge, I
have had blasphemous thoughts, and have in heart denied Christ, and been
tempted to deny the truth of Jesus Christ, etc.

Now to the satisfaction of a poor soul under this perplexity of spirit, let me
speak something: First, By way of premise; Secondly, By way of consideration.

First, By way of Premise, It is a truth that there is such a sin may be
committed, as is the sin against the Holy Ghost, and being committed, it is
unpardonable. That such a sin there is, is plain from several places of
Scripture, Mat. 12. 31.
Mat. 12. 31. But the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven
men: Mark and Luke both make mention of the same passage of truth from our
Saviors mouth, Mar. 3. 28.
Mar. 3. 28. Lu. 12. 10. The Apostle John makes also mention of it, Lu. 12. 10.
1 Ioh. 5. 16. There is a sin to the death; 1 Ioh. 5. 16.
And the Apostle to the Hebrews, in two Chapters, makes a more full, and
specifical discovery, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and 10. 26, 27.
Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6, 7. and 10. 26, 27. It is called the sin against the Holy
ghost, not that it is only against the third person in the Trinity, Usher.
who is the Holy-spirit, Vrsia.
for the sin is against the whole Trinity, Pareus.
the three persons making but one divine Essence; but because it is a direct
opposition, and resistance of the light of knowledge, with which the Holy Ghost
has enlightened the heart of him that has committed it; (...) Trinitatis ad
extra lunt indivisa.
for although the work of enlightening be a work of the Godhead, without it
self, and so a work of all the three persons jointly, according to the known
rule of Divinity; yet it is a work which in the order of working, is
ordinarily attributed to the third person in Trinity. There is such a sin,
called by Christ, Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, he being that Person, whose
office it is, in the order of the God-heads working, to enlighten the minds
with knowledge of the truth, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18.
Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. Heb. 6. 4. -- Secondly, This sin once committed is
unpardonable; Heb. 6. 4.
this is also directly proved from those forementioned places in the Gospel,
Mat. 12. 31. 1 Ioh. 5. 16.
etc. Heb. 6. 4. and therefore is called by the Apostle John, The sin unto
death, In respect of the end, and punishment of it.

Secondly, It is as true that the elect ones cannot commit this sin, Ioh. 10.
28.
or ever be guilty of it. Christ has said, He has given unto them eternal
life, and they shall not perish. 2 Timothy 2. 19
The foundation of God stands sure, 2 Timothy 2. 19. They shall be kept through
the power of God unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5.
1 Pet. 1. 5. They that fall away were never in, nor ever of the number of the
elect; for if they had been of them, they would (no doubt) have continued with
them. But in that they go out and fall away, it is that they might be made
manifest they were not of them, 1 Epist. of John 2. 19. Who so sin, First, Can
never be saved, Christ has said, These shall never perish: Secondly, They can
never repent and believe. Christ has ordained, that the elect shall repent,
and believe, and although they may slip, and fall, yet he has ordained they
shall rise again, and by repentance be recovered. These things being premised,
Let me come in the next place to propound some considerations, that being
seriously meditated and made use of, may serve to stay, and comfort, and settle
the hearts of such Christians, as yielding to this temptation, have troubled
and perplexed their own spirits.

First of all consider, That as it is a certain truth, that there is such a sin
commissible, that a creature may be guilty of, yet it is as uncertain what this
sin is; None ever could yet determine it, or if they have done it, it has been
unwarrantably, I mean for the specificall ^in; Innumerable almost have been the
opinion of the Ancients; Some have thought it to be malice against the
Brethrens-graces; others, Final impenitency; others, despair of Gods mercy.
The Papists make six species of it.

1. Impenitency.

2. Despair: (these two seem to be but consequents of it.)

3. Obstinacy in wickedness: (All obstinacy in wickedness cannot be, and how
high, what degree of obstinacy constitutes it, they leave us to seek.)

4. The resisting of a known truth: This comes nearest it; but yet for the
height and degree of resistance, they also leave us in the dark, and every
resistance is not.

5. The malice against our Brethren for grace and goodness: This has
something in it tending to it, but reaches not the full neither.

6. A sinning out of presumption of Gods mercy. That presumption is an
ingredient in this sin is certain, Aq. 22^. q. 14. At. 2.
and that the sin against the Holy Ghost, is a sin of presumption, but every
sinning upon presumption of Gods mercy, certainly is not unpardonable: It is
certain that blasphemy against the Holy Ghost may be variously taken.

First, L^terally, when any blasphemous speech is spoken against the
Holy Ghost. As if any should maintain the Holy Ghost, is not God, etc. So many
of the ancient fathers took it.

Secondly, It is sometimes, and so we take it to be* meant here for a sin
against the Holy-ghosts proper operations and workings, as his enlightening
grace, etc. Heb. 4. 6, 7. For whosoever sins the first way, sins not
unpardonably, Aus. T. 10.
though dangerously; as Saint Austine largely proves, Sermon. 11. de Verbis Din.
p. 47. Copiose tractat.
that the Texts, Mat. 12. 31. etc. are not to be meant of every blasphemous
word, but there is (quadam blasphemia and quoddam verbum) a certain word, and a
certain kind of blasphemy: Now what this is, that we are in the dark for, nor
have any (except the Papists unwarrantably) dared certainly to define or
describe it, so as to say, This is the unparponable sin; Now therefore,
Christian, upon what ground do thou say, Thou have sinned the sin against
the Holy Ghost, when neither thou nor any other can say, this or that is the
sin against the Holy Ghost? why do thou accuse the soul of thou know not
what? Judge if this be not an irrational yielding to a groundless temptation.
But says a poor Christian, I have refused the enlightening spirit, I have
refused instruction, and hated counsel, and what is this, but the impardonable
sin? or have ^inned against knowledge, such and such a truth I have denied,
disputed against it, etc. To make therefore a little progress, though
positively it cannot be said, nor specifically determined, what the sin against
the Holy Ghost is, that is unpardonable (for it is certain, that every sin
against the Holy Ghost, is not unpardonable; A lie against knowledge, is a sin
against the Holy Ghost, Act. 5. 3. yet not unpardonable, Jacob committed it for
the blessing:) Yet,

1. It may be shown negatively, what it is not.

2. Several ingredients may be discovered, that must be in this compound of
iniquity. And in relation to thy complaint consider,

Secondly, That none can be guilty of it, but such as have had a great measure
of knowledge of Gods truth, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. They must be such as have been
enlightened, that is, such as the Gospel has been preached too, and receive by,
so that it has cleared up his understanding from that darkness and mist of
natural blindness, and ignorance, in which Adams fall left us.

Secondly, Such as have tasted of the heavenly gift, that is, Faith (says
Pareus) such as having heard the word, have not only been convinced of it, but
given a firm assent of Faith to it; for it can only be understood of a
temporary Faith of assent, not of true justifying Faith, for that in whomsoever
it is, is kept by the power of God to salvation, 1 Pet. 2. 5.

Thirdly, Such as have tasted of the good word of God, Such as have had the
Gospel preached to them, and have apprehended it good and sweet, received it
with joy; Heb. 10. 26.
Heard it gladly (as Herod) Heb. 10. 26. They must be such, as have received
the knowledge of the Truth; It must be a defection, and a declination from
knowledge, and a profession, as is clear from that place, Heb. 10. 26. from
whence is plain, that a natural man that never was enlightened, or an heathen
that never heard the word of God, or those that though they have heard, yet
have not had hearts to regard and received what they hear, and give assent to
it, These cannot be guilty of this unpardonable sin; why do thou therefore
trouble thy self, that thou have refused the Gospel, and therefore thou have
sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost, When the Gospel was never made known to
thee, so far as to enlighten thee? possibly thou heardst the word, but
understoodst not, regardest nothing. Those that crucified Christ, were
converted at Peter's Sermon, Act. 2. have thine ears been stopped to the means of
grace? be humbled for it, but despair not because of it, though thou be
called at the ninth hour, yet if thou will come in at the eleventh, thou shall
be received, and welcome, only come. God winked at the time of thy ignorance,
Act. 17. 30.
Act. 17. 30. This sin must be against the word, heard, received, tasted, etc.
It is not a bare piece of original corruption, consisting in a privation of
knowledge, or averseness unto knowledge, or vanity of heart in not regarding
knowledge; but it is the highest piece of actual rebellion, not for a while to
stand at a distance from a pardon offered, but to begin to reach out an hand to
take it, and then draw back, and spit in the face of that God that offers thee;
This is plain, for it is a blasphemy against the Holy Ghost in his workings;
now the spirit does not always work with the preaching of the word, much less
is the law of nature the work of the sanctifying spirit: But the work of
illumination and sanctification, those are the spirits works, in which we must
take heed of opposing him. This sin is not petty-iarceny, but high treason
against God. But alas! will a poor Christian say, yet I fear, for I have
received and tasted the word of truth, and I have made a show of rejoicing in
the good word of God, and after this have I been in my heart, thinking to deny
Christ to be the Savior of the world, to deny the word to be the word of
truth, and sinned against knowledge.

Thirdly, Therefore consider, This sin which is the unpardonable sin, must be a
settled sin of thy own, continued in without repentance, and will be more then a
sin of thy heart. That it is first begot in the heart, as all other sin is, is
a truth, but it goes out of it; blasphemy is properly committed with the
tongue, without question, the heart, and tongue, and hand, have all a portion
in this sin unpardonable, but it is not in the thought only: Besides, 2. It
may be thy blasphemous thoughts, which thou have in thy heart, are none of
thine own; for such thoughts there are often times in a Christian, that are
merely cast in by Satan into the soul, neither bred in, nor nursed by the
soul, nor delighted in, but are like the child that was dead, laid (by the
true mother) by another woman's side. It is a little question, whether these
thoughts be sins, or no, if spurned out, and rejected by thee? whether they
shall be put upon thine, or upon Satan's score, The contrary is determined by
most of our divines.
to answer for? It is by all granted, that if they be sins, they are the least
of sins; as suppose I should have a thought in my heart, that there is no
Christ, but he whom the Gospel speaks of were an impostor; I know not how this
thought came there, I have a suggestion to believe it, but my heart rises
against it, cries avoid Satan, I pray against it, humble my self, that my base
heart should ever have such a guest; for my part, I make a great question,
whether these thoughts be a souls sins, any more then if a strumpet should come
and lay a child in an open porch or entry of an honest woman, it would prove
that the honest woman were the mother, because the bastard lay in her entry or
house, unless the law so adjudged it, in regard the door or entry was open; So
unless you will say, that the heart sins by being no better shut, then to let
such a thought be thrust in, questionless the very thought as a formal
sinful thought or motion, is not the souls, but Satan's: But however, if it be
thy sin for which thou have cause to be humbled; Yet it is far from this sin,
this must be a constant owner and possessor of thy heart, and a sin of a far
higher nature, then ten thousand such thoughts are.

Fourthly, Thou say, O but I have sinned many times against knowledge,
against the light of my conscience. Consider therefore, That though this sin be
a sin aginst knowledge, yet every sin against knowledge, is not this sin:
Without question Jacob ^inned against knowledge, in saying he was his fathers
son, His very son Esau; and David in committing murder, and adultery; and
Peter in denying his Master. All these were sins against knowledge, and yet
none of them sins against the Holy Ghost. It must be a sin against the
knowledge:

1. Of a divine Truth.

2. Of some fundamental truth of the Gospel.

3. Distinctly made known to thee. This is plain from the sixth of the Heb. 4,
5, 6. and 10. 26. And from the Pharisees commission of this sin, Mat. 12. 31.
They were ^onvinced of it as a truth, that Jesus Christ was the (...) of God,
and did those miracles he did by the power of the Divine Nature; yet sinned in
their saying before the people, This man casts out Devils by Beelzeb^^ the
Prince of Devils: Sins of knowledge against the law directly, are far from this
sin also, the sin of our first parents, it is a sin against the enlightening
grace of the spirit of God, yea, though thou have denied some truth, not
fundamental, etc. Indeed for all such sins as these are, thou have very great
cause to be humbled (Christian,) and to ^it down and mourn bitterly, that these
wickednesses may be forgiven, and doing so thou needst not despair of the
pardon of them. But alas, (says a poor Christian) I have in a passion or
sickness, when I knew it was the hand of God, blasphemed God, or I have at
such a time for fear of threats of death, denied the work of God, and the truth
of God, etc.

Fifthly, Therefore consider, That though the denial of thy knowledge and the
truth of God, be a great piece of this sin, yet it is not enough to constitute
it, and besides, it must be another manner of denial, then that which thou
complainest of. It must be a deliberate and advised denial, not rash, and
sudden.
It is not enough to constitute this sin, for there must be a blasphemy:
Secondly, An opposition to it.

Secondly, It is true, that denial is an ingredient in this unpardonable ^in:
But it must be,

1. A wilful denial, free, not arising from fear. Peter so denied his Master,
and many of the Martyrs denied, yea, and abjured the Faith; But either, First,
Satan by his temptations, Secondly, Or the weakness of their flesh,
occasioned it, for they at the same time loved Christ, and the truth of Christ.

2. It must be a denial, on purpose to discredit the truth, out of a venom
and malice of heart to it. I may deny a fundamental truth, in an argument and
disputation, to see how another can prove it, yet I have not sinned the sin
against the Holy Ghost I hope.

3. It must be a constant denial. If they shall fall away, (...) [it signifies
falls all in shatters] so as an old rotten house not well at first put
together. Comfort thy self therefore Christian, thou have not sinned the sin
against the Holy Ghost, though thou have possibly inadvisedly spoke with thy
lips, yea, though through the violence of Satan's temptations and wickedness,
or weakness of thy heart, (for fear) thou have denied thy Savior and his
truth; only go out and weep bitterly, renew thy love, regain thy favor,
confess him before men; Thus many of the Martyrs did, rending their
recantations, or abjurations, and suffering Martyrdom gloriously. But yet will
some poor Christian say. Alas! yet I fear I have sinned this sin, I have hated
such a godly man, envied that goodness which I saw in him, I could hardly
endure such a man, whom I am confident is the Saint of God, etc. Consider
therefore in the sixth place,

Sixthly, That the hatred and envy of every godly man, nor every envy of his
goodness, or every opposition against him for it, does not make thee guilty of
this unpardonable sin. It is possible thou may hate a man that is a godly
man, for some civil injury he has done thee, or thy friend, possibly thou
maye^^ do it ignorantly, verily thinking he is naught; possibly thy envy of
him, may be an emulation, not being sorry that the truth lives in him, but
angry to see the graces of Gods spirit live in him, and not thee; these now are
far from unpardonable sins, nor is every opposition of the truth of Jesus
Christ, or the professors of the truth, an opposition sufficieut to constitute
this sin, it may be a pers^cution out of ignorance as Paul's was, and God
pardoned it, 1 Timothy 1. 13.

It must be first an hatred of, and opposition against, the truth and
godliness of such men. Not when thou malicest godliness, because it is in him
that has done thee a personal injury, but when thou malicest and hate a
man, because he is holy, and loves the truth of God, and lives before God
strictly.

Secondly, It must be with a secret desire to extinguish and spoil the credit
of God, and his truth. When a wretch is mad to see Gods name exalted, and to
see the truth of God prosper, and would fain spoil all its market.

Thirdly, And it must be an opposition to the truth, that to the wretch is
known, and he is convinced, that this is a truth of Jesus Christ, yet he hates
a person, because, he entertains it and walks accordingly, and seeks how to
cut off him, and the truth; such manner of malice was the Pharisees malice,
Mat. 12. 31. Yet, alas! (says a poor Christian) Since I have received the
Holy Ghost, and tasted his gifts, I have sinned thousands of sin, renewing
them every day, etc. From what has been already said, That this sin must be an
opposition, a knowing, wilful, open, malicious opposition, to the truth of
Christ, were enough to answer this. But consider,

Seventhly, It must be a total falling away from the truth, Religion and
profession of Jesus Christ, Heb. 4. 6. Many are the Saints failings, this must
be a total falling from all grace and holiness; When a man clear leaves all
manner of profession of holiness, and falls into all manner of wickedness;
Now dare thou accuse thy heart of this Christian? or do thou sometimes
slip, but presently renew thy covenant made with God, by a seasonable
repentance, praying, crying, bettering thy life and conversation, etc. Never
fear this sin; it has many dr^ms of the weight of hell in it, more then thou
complainest of.

Eighthly, It is not probable (says Master Rutherford) That thou should be
guilty of that sin against the Holy Ghost, and none but thy self complain of
it. It ordinarily breaks out into prodigious acts of wickedness, it is no
chamber closet sin, though it be hatched in thy heart, yet it goes into the
mouth, and defiles that, that sinner with that reviles, and raves, and
blasphemes Christ; and commonly it shows it self further, the sinner (with
Julian) persecuteth the Saints, whom his heart knows are Saints, with fire and
sword; did thou ever do any of these things? (Christian) mistake not thy
self, be humbled for thy sins and failings, but transgress not by despairing
without a cause. Consider further,

Ninthly, If thy sin that thou complainest of so to be the unpardonable sin as
thou unwarrantably think, be a trouble and a grief of heart to thee, thou
mast be sure, that it is not that sin that thou take it for, Heb. 4. 6. It is
impossible (says the Apostle) that they, that commit it, should be renewed
again by repentance. The meaning of which place, is not that if they do repent
yet it is impossible that they should be pardoned, that were to put a lie upon
the promises of the Gospel; But it is impossible, that ever they should repent
to be renewed: Aus. T. 10. Ep. de Verbis Domini 11. p. 45.
This makes Saint Austine determine final impenitency to be* the unpardonable
sin; when the wretch abusing the mercy of God that should lead him to
repentance, according to the hardness of his heart, refuses repentance, and
treasureth up wrath against the day of wrath. Now though I do not think (with
Saint Austine) that this is the whole formality of that sin; nor yet (with
Aquinas and the Papists) that it can be properly called a species of that sin,
yet I think with almost all sober Divines, that it is an undoubted consequent
of that sin; God after the commission of that sin, by any poor wretch giving
him over to a blindness of mind, and a final hardness of heart, that he
cannot repent: But like Esau, If he seeks repentance carefully with tears, yet
he finds it not. Now if thy sin be a trouble, and grief of heart to thee, thou
may be assured it is not that sin, for the undoubted consequent of that is an
hardness of heart, and a reprobacy of mind.

Tenthly, Consider, The ^in against the Holy Ghost, neither in respect of it
self and its own greatness, nor yet in respect of the power of Gods mercy, is
unpardonable. Be it never so great, it is not infinite, as the mercies of thy
God are; It is indeed a scarlet sin, But scarlet sins to the returning
penitent, may be pardoned, Isai. 1. 16. Isai. 1. 16.
It is unpardonable (say some) in respect of Gods will, God can, but he neither
ever did, nor will pardon it, for it is a sin of malice directly against
pardoning mercy: Gods mercy would be stained in the pardoning of it. Secondly,
It is unpardonable (say others, and those the most) In regard that it is
impossible that the sinner should repent and believe, without which, there is
no hope of pardoning mercy, from any Gospel promise: And this is questionless
true, for God has said, Perditio tua ex te, Thy damnation O Israel is of thy
self, not of me. Though a poor wretch be damned for this sin, yet he may
(proximately) thank the hardness and impenitency, and unbeleef of his own
heart, not Gods will. But yet further consider,

Eleventhly, That this can be no sufficient excuse for thee, for not believing,
because though it does take away from thee the power of believing, yet it does
not excuse thee from the duty of believing. Believing is a Gospel duty, it is a
law enjoined to all, every one is called to it, Ioh. 3. 16. Mat. 11. 29. Isai.
55. 1, 2, 3. Yea salvation is proffered to all those that do believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ; does the Gospel any where say, Come you that have not sinned
the sin against the Holy Ghost, come and believe and you shall not perish? No
surely, it calls to all, be you what you will, let your sins be what they can,
how many, how great soever they can, come, believe, and you shall not perish.
It is unwarrantable then to disobey a Gospel precept, upon a believing the
temptations of thine enemy the Devil, or the groundless suggestions of thine
own spirit.

Lastly, Consider, If thou had sinned that unpardonable, thou could not by
any infallible demonstration conclude thyself guilty of it, before thy dying
day and hour. How will thou demonstrate it, from thy hardness of heart, and
going on in unbeleef? thou must do it so or no way; for though thou be a
malicious persecutor and hater of God, and goodness, yet according to the
tenor of the Gospel promises, if thou repentest and beleevest, thou art
forgiven; now if this hardness of heart, joined with thy malice and unbeleef,
be not final, it is no infallible effect of this sin; how will thou know it is
final before thou die? can thou not yet repent and believe? strive then
Christian, God may give thee power, and call thee in at the eleventh hour, V.
Aust. T. 10 Ep. 11. de Verbis Domini, p. 46. copiose.
just at thy dying hour (as the thief upon the cross) which if he does, thou
have unjustly and cruelly condemned thy self, and belyed thy own soul. To ^umme
up therefore all in a word* You hear Christians, believing yet remains your
great duty; It stands firm, believe, and you shall be saved. You have seen one
block more thrown out of your way. I have showed you this temptation, or
suggestion, cannot hinder, where by the way you have accidentally heard
something of the nature of this unpardonable, which being well understood by
Christians, will be enough to satisfy Christians against this doubt. And from
all that has been said concerning this, You may gather this description of the
sin against the Holy Ghost; which is consonant to the sense of most sober and
Orthodox Divines concerning it, and conteins the marrow of what most of our
Divines have said concerning it, Take it thus.

It is for a man that has been first enlightened by the Holy Ghost. A
Description of the sin against the Holy Ghost.


With secondly, Fundamental Gospel truths.

Thirdly, 1. A subjecto.
Distinctly. -- Against, first knowledge, And secondly, Deliberation, Thirdly,
Directly, Fourthly, From the degree.
Freely and wilfully, Fifthly, Openly, Sixthly, A causa procreante.
Maliciously, Seventhly, Desperately. -- Without any provocation, but the
corrupt wickedness of his own heart, (drawn out occasionally upon the making
known of some Divine Evangelicall fundamental truths, or propagating of them,
he himself being convinced, that they are the truths of God) In his heart to
envy the credit of the truth amongst others, and out of his malice to God, From
the acts of it.
whose the truth is, and to the truth, because, it is true; to blaspheme, and
revile the truth of God, and oppose it in others maliciously, and to blaspheme
those gifts of the Holy Ghost, From the object of it.
and that truth which he had formerly been convinced of, and received, From the
end of it.
and to set himself in such malicious opposition against it, as to desire and
do what in him lies, to spoil the credit, From the consequents of it.
and extinguish the light of the truth, and destroy the friends of it, because
they are so, and in this wickedness to go on, making a general defection from
God, and the ways of God, and maliciously persisting in such opposition
without any repentance, and finally perishing in it; despairing of Gods mercy,
if at any time he should have any kind of remorse.

This I conceive is a full description of it, which if such Christians as
ordinarily complain of this burden, would learn, they would quickly find
their complaint groundless. If any yet remain unsatisfied in, I shall refer
them to a little (but full) Book concerning this subject, called, A Discourse
of the sin against the Holy Ghost, composed by Master Bradshaw, in which they
shall find as much as can be said upon this subject. Here I shall break off.

And now I have done with answering the Scruples of those that think they ought
not, and pretend they dare not, believe. Either, 1. Conceiting they are not
enough humbled. Or, 2. Because they do not know they are elected. Or, 3.
Because they conceive themselves unworthy. Or, 4. Upon a conceit they have
sinned the unpardonable sin against the Holy ghost.


I should now come to a second note of a weak Faith, which is a fear of a false
Faith, which is ordinarily a note of a true Faith: O they are confident they do
not believe, so many are their doubtings, so little is their persuasion and
assurance, so weak the actings of their graces are, but of this hereafter.

SERMON. VI.
LUKE 17. 5. Lord increase our Faith.
I Am still upon the work of removing such obstructions as hinder the work of
Faith in the soul. I have done with those of the first sort, viz. such as are
praevious, that make the soul stumble at the threshold, while it conceives it
may not, and pretends it dare not believe. I am now come to a second sort, that
are gone a step further then these, they will tell you that they are convinced,
believing is their duty, and their great duty, and the duty for the omission of
which they fear they shall perish, But they cannot, they do not believe, they
may cheat themselves with a presumption, but they want such a certainty of
persuasion, and such a fullness of assurance, as is requisite to true Faith,
they are full of ignorance, and weaknesses, etc.

Cap. 6.
How to satisfy those that are conceited against the work of Faith in their
souls, viz. against the truth of it.
NOw for satisfaction to such Christians, let us search out the cause of such
complaints; I conceive there may be a double cause.

1. A mistake in the nature and acts of Faith.

2. A misjudging of the effects of Faith.

First, The complaints of such a soul, which yet all this time truly believes,
may arise from a mistake concerning the nature and acts of Faith; and therefore
the way to satisfy it will be rightly to inform it concerning them, and to
this end, I shall but propound to such a soul to consider these two things.

1. That there are many acts and more degrees then one, of true saving Faith.

2. That true Faith is of so good a nature, that it will and may dwell with
many doubtings, and weaknesses, in a poor soul.

These two things cleared, I trust many souls will be satisfied; for commonly
the mistake is grounded upon ignorance, conceiving there is no Faith, but Faith
of assurance, and that Faith comes to be no Faith, if but a dram of doubting be
mingled with it, etc.

Consider therefore I say, First, That true Faith has several acts, and
several degrees. A fullness of persuasion is not the least act, or degree of
Faith, no not of true justifying Faith. There are notes under that Ela. There
is great quarrelling concerning the nature and essence of true justifying
Faith; some will have it to be a bare knowledge. Thus (says the Apostle) The
devils believe, and tremble: Some will afford us a little more, and tell us
that Faith consists in an assent, but beyond this they will not stride; some in
too full opposition to these denying any certainty of persuasion and assurance
to be, have described Faith by an assurance and full persuasion, which is the
highest, and not the direct, but the reflex act of Faith, when indeed the very
essence of justifying Faith lies betwixt these, in an act of adherence to, and
reliance upon Jesus Christ.

To Faith we grant a knowledge is required of Gods word. But this we say is
rather supposed to Faith, then an act of true justifying Faith.

First, The lowest act of Faith is an assent, a yielding in thy soul to the
word of God, an agreement to the truth of it, Exodus 14. 31. Israel believed the
Lord, and his servant Moses, [viz.] gave credence and assent, agreed that it
was just, and good, and true, that the Lord spoke, and relied upon the
authority of him that spoke it; So by this act of Faith, does the believer,
when he hears the word of God revealed concerning his salvation, he closes
with it; as suppose that, Ioh. 3. 16. God so loved the world that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. Or that of the Apostle, There is no other name under heaven,
whereby a man may be saved, but the name of Jesus; or that again, This a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into
the world to save sinners. Faith now does not only know this, but closes with
God in these truths: And so concerning the promises of salvation, when God
says, Though your sins were as scarlet, I will make them as snow, though they
were as crimson, yet they shall be white as wool. Faiths work now is to
persuade the soul to an assent to, and credence of the truth of this good word
of God, yea, and it is not every assent that is an act of Faith neither.

First, It must be a steadfast assent, The believer does as verily believe the
promise of God, as that he does live; he says in his heart, and with his whole
heart: First, The word that tells me this is the world of an ever-living and
unchangeable God, and it is undoubtedly his Word. Secondly, It is the word of a
true and faithful God; The Apostle calls Gods Word, The word of truth; And it
is the word of truth either materially, the matter of it is truth, or
objectively, the object of it is truth. It has the God of truth for the
Author, It is whole truth for the matter. And this the believer gives full and
steadfast credit unto.

Secondly, Yea, and he gives credit to every truth that the word of God holds
out to him as truth. Faith quickens the soul, to thirst after full discoveries
of truth, and quickens the soul, to receive every beam of the light of truth,
that shines into it. The Hebrews say, That there is not the least tittle of the
law, upon which great mountains do not depend. The believer says, there is not
the least jot in the word of God, upon which great mountains of truth do not
depend, not any leaf but the God of truth is wrapped up in. I remember that it
was Gods command in the 28. cha. of Deuteronomy. That when the several curses were
read, all the people should say Amen; and that not to this or that curse, but
at the denuntiation of every curse all the people said Amen; I do not read the
like command when the blessings were pronounced, yet (without question) their
assent was required to them as well as the other. But our hearts are ready
enough to say Amen to blessings, and promises, but we would not say Amen to
threatenings and curses: Now the believer gives assent and credence to the word
of God, V. Balls Treat. of Faith. 1. p.
even there where it seems most to strike at his own interest, and
happiness; he believes all things that are written in the law, and the
Prophets, Acts 24. 14.

Yea, and he gives thirdly, a clear assent to the word of God, and every
portion of it. He is not like him that says Amen to any thing, he will give
his assent to every piece of the word of God, and yet not a blind assent to
any piece of it; but every truth that he assents unto, shines into his soul
with a light as clear as the suns at high-noon-day. As Christ told the woman of
Samaria, Ioh. 4. 22. You worship you know not what, but we know what we
worship. The discourse had been very high about very great mysteries; Christ
had told her of a strange gift he would give her, Living water, v. 10. That
should have a strange quality, even a quality to quench thirst for ever, v. 14.
She gave some assent to this, the water pleased her taste, but it was but a
blind assent, for* she dreamed of such a water as might satisfy her bodily
thirst, that she might no more come thither to draw. And v. 20. When she made a
confession of her Faith to Jesus Christ* that it was just of the same length
and breadth of her fathers, not an inch longer nor shorter (a Faith of the same
last with most now a days.) Christ told her that in the days to come, there
should be a strange kind of worshipping the Father, Neither at Jerusalem, nor
yet in that mountain. Ye worship says he you know not what, but we know what
we worship. Many assent this day to the word of God, They assent to it that
there is a Christ come into the world to save sinners, etc. None will deny
this, but it is in their brains but as a dark notion, or else they have
received it as a tradition of their fathers. (Our forefathers religion is a
great plea in these days) The Samaritans they worshipped* they gave a kind of
a blind credence, and assent to some things that were truths in the word; But
alas! they worshipped they knew not what, they had no clear distinct knowledge
of those truths that they made an orall profession of, and with their mouths
did pretend assent to. So wicked and profane men now a days give a kind of an
assent to the word of God, and to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, but it is far
from the meanest, and lowest act of true Faith. When they hear or have received
it from tradition, that Christ was born of a Virgin, or that Christ though
eternal God yet was also perfect man, that he died for sinners, etc. The
wretches will tell you they believe these things; But alas! they assent not to
them as clear distinct truths, made out evidently and convincingly to their
souls, they say they profess they worship they know not what. They understand
not these things* The natural man receives not the things of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
nor can he know them for they are spiritually discerned. He gives his blind
assent, and perhaps will set his hand to them, but he does but set his hand to
a blank if he does; Nor can it be otherwise, for the carnal man has nothing
but the bucket of carnal reason to draw with, out of the unfadomable depth of
the mysteries of salvation; and while he has nothing else, thus reason
disputes, and cannot but dispute in his soul; If Christ be God, How could he be
born or dye? reason cannot answer these questions, therefore they seem dark to
the poor blind wretch, and though he professes he gives credence to the word
of God, in these particulars; Yet his assent is but a dark and forced act of
his will, not a voluntary and clear act of it, closing with the truth, and
embracing of it; nor can it be, because (as I have showed) his assent of his
will cannot proceed from a well enlightened understanding, without the
precedence of which the will is but ravished into an assent. The understanding
is that which holds the candle to the will in the soul: Now the assent and
credence which every true believer gives to the word of truth, though it be an
act of the will (for it is the wills act to delight in, and close with and
^eal) yet it proceeds from a spiritually, and clearly enlightened
understanding, for it is the understandings office to dictate to the will: Now
assent in the wicked man, is but an act of his will without any clearness in
the understanding, the understanding only presenting the truth, as a notion,
or tradition, or commonly received opinion, this is far from an act of Faith,
but such as the devils have. It is like the Athenian devotion, Paul coming to
Athens, Act. 17. 23. found an Altar with this superscription, (...), To the
unknown God. Their worshipping argued some assent of the will, and the will
always following the dictate of the understanding, It is certain that there
was some knowledge; the truth was this, Their understanding had gathered up
some general notions of the Deity [That there was a God, etc.] and these might
be seen by the light of nature, or heard from their forefathers, and sucked in
by tradition. And it is plain it was no more, for they ingenuously confess,
that the God whom they worshipped, was unknown to them; they knew that there
was a God, and possibly, that this God was a spirit, and that this God must be
worshipped, Natural eyes discern all this, but it was not a clear and distinct
knowledge, and assent, they worshipped they knew not what, their Altar was to
the unknown God, As many name-Christians, believers at large, now a days
mutter over their common prayers to their unknown God, and come to Church to
worship an unknown God, only their fathers or mothers have told them, there is
a God, and a Christ, and this ^^rist came into the world to save sinners, and
they must be good Churchmen and serve God, etc. But now where this is an
assent in the soul (to a truth) as an act of true Faith, it is out of a
distinct and clear understanding. It conceives a great deal of reason, why it
should believe such a truth, close with such a promise, assent to such a word,
and the soul so clearly and brightly sees the truths, that it sets its hand and
heart unto, that it wonders at the blindness of carnal men, that they should
not see it as clear as they do, but yet be blind to the things of God; when
for their parts they are as clear to their souls as the sun when it shines at
bright noonday. And therefore Faith is called, Heb. 11. 1. The evidence of
things not seen. The word translated, evidence, is (...), which signifies, a
convincing demonstration, it comes of the Greek verb (...), Leigh, critica.
which signifies (say critics) so to convince, and bring evidence and reason
for a thing, and prove it by demonstration so clearly, that no man can either
deny it or object against it, or so much as pretend an objection against it.
Such is Faith to the gracious soul, it persuades the soul so to assent, that
the soul is clearly convinced of the thing to be assented to; Faith has so
fully persuaded the soul of the word, truth, promise, that it desires its hand
and heart, to that the soul is fully satisfied in it, and is clear in it.
Though the believing soul neither does see, nor expects to see the brightness
of sublime mysteries, by the eye of carnal reason; yet it sees by another eye,
and so clearly every thing that it assents to, that it conceives there can be
no darkness in it, no reason nor objection pretended against it, but frivolous
and vain, and of no value. This is Faiths first act, steadfast clear assent. Now
in this the soul may possibly deceive it self.

The second Act of Faith (which we ordinarily say is the very marrow, and
essence of justifying Faith) is reliance, and dependency upon Jesus Christ,
when the soul having been persuaded of the word of truth, and assented to it;
does in the next place hang, and depend upon it, as the word upon which it must
live, and commits his soul to Christ, and hangs upon him as the Christ, by
which he only can be saved; This I say is that Act which justifies. A learned
Author has noted six words in Scripture, Ball in his Treat* of Faith.
by which the Holy Ghost does express to us, the nature and work of believing.

First, Faith expressed by six words.
Believing put in opposition to fainting, Psa. 27. 13. I had fainted unless I
had believed.

Secondly, Trusting put in opposition to fearing Psalm. 78. 22. They trusted not
in his salvation, they were afraid of the Canaanites.

Thirdly, Betaking to as to a castle, Psalm. 2. 12. Our translation reads it,
Blessed are all they that trust in him: But Mollerus says it signifies
Protectionis causa aliquo confugere, and se recipere (verbum appositum, says
he) to fly to some place for protection, as to a castle in a time of danger.

Fourthly, By a word that signifies, To lean and rely upon, as an old man
leans on a staff, 2 Chronicles. 16. 7, 8. Because thou did rely upon the Lord,
he did deliver them into thy hand, verbatim (say Expositors) because thou did
lean upon him as thy staff.

Fifthly, By another word, That signifies to stay up the mind, as with a prop,
Esau 48. 2. You stay your selves upon the Lord, from fearing despairing, from
sinking dejections, etc.

A sixth word by which it is expressed, is rolling and hanging upon, as a
drowning man on a boy, Psalm. 37. 5. So that we may say* That the very
essential act in which consists the marrow of justifying Faith, is this --
When the soul being persuaded of the truth of Gods eternal word, gives a f^ll
and fixed assent, and credence to it; to every curse and threatening, as well as
to every promise, and yet does not faint, nor sink in despair, nor drown in
sorrow; but in this apprehension of its lost and undone condition, runs to
Jesus Christ, as a safe castle, and hangs upon him, committing the whole
burden of its soul unto him, and stays there, leaning upon him, and the
promises of life, made in him to the soul. This is now justifying Faith, which
afterward creates in the soul a quiet ^esting in God, a sweet delighting in
God, a steadfast hope in him, and a patient waiting for him; and at last a
confident assurance of him: But this is certainly Faith, so far as is upon pain
of damnation, necessary to salvation: The going out of the soul unto Christ,
and the whole application of it self to the promises of salvation made in and
by him; and whosoever does this sincerely, and with a faithful heart, is
passed from death to life, and shall never perish, neither in this life nor in
the life to come; it puts its trust in him that never fails them that do so.

There is indeed a third Act of Faith, Which is an act of assurance and full
persuasion, commonly called by Divines, The reflex act of Faith. Now this Act
of Faith, Is when the soul is fully and thoroughly persuaded, that Jesus Christ
has actually pardoned all its sins, and that it is his, and he is hers. This
is not that Act of Faith, concerning which the Apostle speaks, Romans 5. 1. Being
justified by Faith, we have peace with God. It is rather a consequent of
justifying Faith, that peace which flows to the soul, as a fruit, and a sweet
effect of justification; and that this is not that Act of Faith which
justifies, is plain, Because the soul must be justified before it can put
forth it self in this Act. This is a comfortable but not a necessary Act of
Faith, and is more properly called [fides justificati, then fides justificans]
the Faith of a justified person, then justifying Faith: It is good and special
justifying Faith, for the soul heartily and sincerely to desire, and thirst and
hunger after the pardon and forgiveness of its sins, through the free grace of
Jesus Christ, and confidently to rest upon the promises of free remission and
pardon. But it is another pitch of Faith, and of an higher nature to be
confidently assured, that all my sins are really and fully pardoned. It is one
thing to believe, that my sins, how many and how great soever, shall be taken
away, and that God will smile upon me, and we shall not finally perish; And
another thing to be fully assured, that now God is well pleased with us, and
all our sins are blotted out; Yea it is one thing to be persuaded, that our
names are in the white book of election, and our sins decretally pardoned,
which was from eternity, and meritoriously pardoned, which was, if ever, in
Christ's death, And another thing to believe that God has acquitted us actually
from the obligation to death, that is in them; God so pardons in time, and in
the Act of justification. It is truth, we ought to strive after a Faith of
assurance, but we are not necessarily obliged to an assurance upon our
justification; Faith precedes actual, and formal justification in our
consciences, it is the instrument to apprehend it. Now the Gospel does not,
when it calls to me to believe, oblige me to a lie: If before I am justified, I
should be tied to believe I am actually justified, the Gospel would oblige me
to that in order to my justification, which I cannot upon warrantable grounds
believe, till after my justification: So that we cannot conclude, that we have
not true justifying Faith, that we do not believe, because we cannot be
confident God has actually and formally, in the court of our consciences,
acquitted us from the guilt of our sins; for the essence of justifying Faith,
does not consist in that: And yet we may not altogether shut out confidence,
and persuasion, out of the justifying Act of Faith, give me therefore leave to
add a word or two concerning it.

The Seventh SERMON.
LUKE 17. v. 5. Lord, increase our faith.
YOu may remember that I have told you, that in order to the increasing of
faith, we must labor to remove those blocks and scruples which hinder the
progress of faith in the Soul: And to this end I have spent several hours
in satisfying poor souls in those scruples which often lie in faiths way in a
gracious soul. I have done with such as are previous to faith, and make the
soul think it dare not, and ought not to believe.

The last day having set the soul so far on of its way, that it is convinced
it ought to believe, but complains That it does not, it cannot believe; I came
to search out the cause of such complaints, which I showed was ordinarily
either,

First, a mistake of the nature and acts of faith, or,

Secondly, a misjudging it self from the effects of faith. I began with the
first, and propounded to such Christians these two considerations:

First, That faith has diverse acts, and the highest was not necessary to a
justifying faith.

Secondly, That Faith is of so good a nature, that it will consist with many
doubtings and weaknesses, and yet retain its truth: For the first of these, I
showed you the last day what were the several acts of true faith, and what act
was necessary to justification, and what act was not necessary: I shall repeat
nothing of what I then said, but go on.

CHAP. 7.
How to satisfy such poor Christians as think they do not truly believe,
because they have many doubtings and weaknesses.
ALas! Complaint.
(says a poor Christian) I am confident my faith is not true, but false; I am
so full of doubtings and fears, and every act which I should think an act of
faith is so weak, etc.

To this Complaint now I shall apply my second consideration, viz. That true
faith is of so good a nature that it will (keeping its truth) consist with much
weakness in the several acts, and dwell in a soul where many doubts are.

This is my Thesis: Now concerning this* diverse have treated so largly, that I
shall be very brief, and rather repeat what they say, following them, then lead
you a worse way of my own. Sedgwicks doubting Christian.
I find Mr. Sedgwick (who has made it his work in his Book called, The
doubting Christian, to handle this very point, and has done it fully) laying
down four or five conclusions by way of premise; for the right understanding
of this point, I shall name them to you.

First, It is without question, that all Doubtings are ^infull, they are the
smoakings of our corruptions, they are begotten of sin, the depravation of
our original light, with which God in innocence enlightened Adam, that is the
cause, and they hinder grace, and hinder us in our duty, etc.

Secondly, They be no part of faith; in that a man does believe, he does not
doubt; Faith and Doubting may dwell under the same roof, but they marry not,
nor mingle any bloods together, they are not at all of a family. Faith is of
the family of Heaven, Doubtings are of the family of Hell; they are inmates,
but have little acquaintance one with another, none at all with one another
natures; they are two things, though in one soul.

Thirdly, They cannot consist at the same instant with the act of faith, Ib. p.
16.
for it is impossible that Faith should formally doubt; the believer while he
believes, and in what he believes, does not doubt; I cannot at the same time
lay my hand upon the Rock, and not lay my hand upon it, etc. But,

Fourthly, Christ dying. p. 27.
(says he) Actual doubtings may be in a soul who has habitual faith; for
as he says, they are not opposed as life and death, but as cold and heat;
water may have some cold, and some heat in it at the same time, Rutherford.
as life and sickness (says Mr. Rutherford) sickness is neighbor with life.

Nay fifthly, I may say more I think, Faith and Doubting may be at the same
time in the soul, though not in the same thing; I cannot believe this truth,
and yet doubt the same; but I may believe this, and doubt some other^ Yea,

Sixthly, There is no believer lives, but has had, or has doubtings. Abraham,
Genesis 15. 2, 3. David, Psalm. ^16. 11. See more, p. 17, 18, 19. ib. The morning
dawning of light, may be light, though there be some darkness mixed with it.

Now to prove this position, that Faith may consist with Doubtings; Christ
dying.
I can say no more then precious Mr. Rutherford has said, p. 27. who proves
it by these five Arguments.

First, because Faith and Doubtings are not contradictories, as life and death,
which mutually deny and expel one another; but opposites, as sickness and
health in the same body, may be successively.

Secondly, Because Christ, when he rebuked doubting, yet supposed faith, and
acknowledged faith, though a little faith in his Disciples, Mat. 14. 31.

Thirdly, Because the Disciples prayed, Lord, increase our faith, what needed
that? they had been at Ela, at the highest pitch and note of faith, if they had
been above all doubtings.

Fourthly, Because Christ prayed for Peter, that when Satan winnowed him, his
faith might not fail; it could not fail, if every true faith were above all
doubtings.

Fifthly and lastly, from the various condition of the Saints of God here,
sometimes they have a full Moon, ^non no Moonlight at all, but a dark Eclipse.

I might add the constant experience of Gods Saints. Who lives, and does not
thus sin against God? I appeal to the best experiences of Gods earthly
Saints. These things I thought good to premise, for the right understanding,
and for the proving of this conclusion.

Now I will not enter into so large a field, as to show you all the Doubts that
Christians may have. Mr. Sedgwick has done a great deal in this work in the
Book before quoted; but thus much I will do.

First, I will show you what doubts and weaknesses and imper^ections may
consist with true Faith in a gracious soul, in relation to the several acts
of it.

Secondly, I will show you the differences betwixt those Doubts which often
arise in (and are consistent with Faith in) a gracious soul, and those which
are damning dispairing doubts of Reprobates: And first of the first of these.

CHAP. 8.
What Doubtings and weaknesses, in respect of knowledge, may consist with true
Faith in a gracious soul, and how to satisfy the soul in this trouble.
THough some dispute knowledge to be a^ act of Faith, yet we say, that it is
required to the lowest and meanest act of Faith (which is assent) rather then
an act of Faith of it self; yet in regard many Christians that strive and
labor after knowledge (having wanted those means that others have had, either
in regard of hearing the Word, or in regard of education) have not attained to
what they desire, walk yet troubled about their condition, in respect of their
ignorance, and because of this are ready to deny the grace of God in the work
of true Faith in their souls: Give me leave a little to speak something by way
of satisfaction to such poor souls; you shall hear them complain in this
manner.

Complaint. Alas! I believe? I have not yet stepped the first step of a
Christian. I have not so much as a knowledge of Gods Word, I am a poor ignorant
soul, I know not half the mysterious doctrines of salvation; can such an
ignorant wretch as I be a believer? Besides for what I know I am ready to deny
it; sometimes I think this is the word and truth of God; sometimes again I
think it is not; I fully believe nothing, I know nothing, I cannot read, nor
understand when I hear; many things in Scripture I know not; and for what I
know I know nothing as ^ought to know it.

Here Is the complaint; now satisfaction.

Now to speak a word or two by way of comfort and stay to the soul, that
labors under this trouble.

For thy knowing nothing as thou ought to know (as thou complainest) it is
happy for thy soul, (if thou speak from thy heart,) that God has wrought
thy heart into so low an opinion of thy self. See what the Apostle speaks, 1
Cor. 8. 2. And if any man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing
yet as he ought to know it. But now for thy real ignorance that thou so much
complainest of, I shall propound a few considerations, which will show thee how
much ignorance may consist with true faith in the soul, and then conclude all
with a caution or two.

For the first,

First, consider, Thou may be ignorant in many points of Religion which are
fundamental in some sense, and yet have faith, true faith; I think, when we
speak of fundamentals, we ought to distinguish; some fundamentalls are
absolutely necessary, our salvation stands upon them as; to believe, That Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners, that he became man, a Jesus, a full
Savior, that he dyed for us that we might live; that there is no salvation in
any other but in him, and that in him there is a fullness of salvation, etc.
These now are those pillars upon which our salvation stands, and the knowledge
of which is always supposed to true justifying faith; none can be ignorant in
these, and believe; For how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not
heard (which was the Apostles question?) but now there are other doctrines
which are ordinarily called fundamentalls, because they are such as Christians
learn, even in the beginning of their conversion, such as are first taught, and
laid for a foundation to build other truths upon; the doctrine of the
imposition of hands, resurrection of the dead, etc. are reckoned up by the
Apostle for fundamentalls, Heb. 6. 1, 2. Now for these it is very possible that
a Christian may be ignorant of them, and yet have a true faith in the Lord
Jesus Christ; The Doctrine of the Trinity of the persons, viz. That in the
Deity there are three distinct manners of being, three distinct subsistences,
distinguished each from other by their several properties; This is without
question a fundamental point of the second sort, such as is usually taught
Christians as a piece of the foundation of Religion; yet I do verily believe
that a Christian may believe, and be in the state of grace, and yet not be
instructed fully, but be ignorant in this. Suppose a Minister should go preach
to Heathens, and preach what need men in natural condition have of Jesus
Christ, what a woeful condition they are in without him, what a readiness
there is in Christ to save them: and upon this press faith; do you think it
is not possible, that some soul may be startled, and run out of it self, and
rest truly upon Christ, and yet not be for the present so well instructed, as
to give you an account of the Trinity of persons? And yet without question it
is a truth and a fundamental truth too, Acts 19. v. 2. Paul came to Ephesus,
and found certain men that were Disciples, v. 1. He asks them if they had
received the Holy Ghost; they ingenuously confessed, that they were so far from
receiving the gifts of the Holy Ghost, that they had not so much as heard
whether there was an Holy Ghost or no: I know most of expositors construe it of
the gifts of the holy Ghost; but for my part I cannot subscribe to their
opinion, but think the latter clause has more then the former, and that there
is an emphasis in their answer; and so Ioh. 20. v. 9. we find the Disciples of
Christ ignorant in the point of Christ's Resurrection from the dead, and Christ
chides his Disciples for their ignorance in this point, The Disciples were
ignorant concerning the Father, Ioh. 14. 8. Lord show us the Father, and it
suffices us.
Luke 24. v. 5. The very Apostles were ignorant in the point of Christ's
Kingdom, and rule, and dreamt of Christ's restoring the temporal Kingdom to
Israel, Act. 1. v. 6. This is the case of many a poor Christian; it may be it
cannot read, or it has not lived where there has been any faithful powerful
soule-enlightning preaching; but when Gods time comes, he brings the soul to
hear, and it does possibly hear of its poor, natural, undone condition, and
that there is none other name by which the Christian may be saved, but only
the Name of Jesus: yet this now being the work of Gods Spirit, the spirit
carries on its own work, and creates faith in the soul, brings the soul to
trust and rely on Jesus Christ. There may be diverse fundamental points that
the soul all this while has not heard a word concerning; as how many year
sometimes does a Minister preach, and not directly meddle with the Doctrine of
the Trinity, etc? How many weeks, and not preach the Doctrine of the
Resurrection? But here is now the condition of such a Christian, after the
Spirit of God has enlightened him, and convinced him, etc. the poor soul (that
regarded not instruction before) now begins perhaps to learn to read, pray; now
he hears the Word more, enquireth concerning God more, etc. and every day
discovers more truth then other, to which the soul by nature was blinded; then
begins Satan's work; the soul reflects upon it self, and begins to say, now, Woe
is me! I have my work still to begin! I have made my self believe I have been a
believer so long; and alas! I have been a poor, blind, ignorant wretch, blind
to the truths of Jesus Christ, etc. how could I believe while I knew so little?
Yes Christian, thou may be a Scholar, though thou be but in thy
Accidence; there are some truths which are the Credenda ad salutem, the very
foundation upon which salvation stands; Now true faith is not consistent
without these* I cannot rest upon Christ, and Christ only for salvation, and
yet not know that there is a Christ, nor what this Christ is, how proportionate
a Savior for me; without question, the knowledge of the Doctrine of faith in
Jesus Christ the Son of God, and the Savior of man, what he is, what he has
done, what need we have of him; what a fullness there is in him; what a
sufficiency of salvation for every soul that believes, etc. is so much
knowledge as is absolutely necessary, and without which no soul can be saved;
yet this must not be understood without some caution, as I shall show you anon;
for though it be truth, such a blind soul may be enlightened so far, as truly
to believe; yet if so, it will deny no truth, but labor and thirst after the
knowledge of every truth: A man may be a Grecian, and yet not know every word
in the Greek tongue, no not every Radix: Believers shall not be saved by their
Book.

Secondly, A Believer may be ignorant in many circumstanciall points of
Religion, and yet be a true Believer; this is clear from many examples in
Scripture. Peter himself did not know he might eat those birds and beasts, Acts
11.
which to the Jews were unclean. The believing Romans did not know their
liberty in point of holy days, Romans 14.
and eating of meats first offered to Idols, Gal. 4.
which makes the Apostle take a great deal of pains for setting Rules to
strong Christians how to carry themselves in relation to their weak brethren,
Gal. 5.
whose consciences were stumbled at their eating; both in the 24. Chap. of his
Epistle to the Romans, and also in his Epistle to the Corinthians, he harps
upon the same string again. The Churches of Galatia and Colosse were ignorant
about the point of Christian liberty. The indulgent Master will not throw away
the child's Exercise for want of a Comma: Christ rejects not the Christians
Faith because it is not fringed with a knowledge in every circumstantiall in
Religion: I call no truth circumstantiall (as by a slighting and neglective
term) for it is a beam of God; but as comparatively, though they be truths to
be known, embraced, loved, practiced, yet they touch not the vitals of
salvation, as I may say: They are not necessary to be known [ad esse] to make a
true believer.

Thirdly, a Christian may be ignorant in the History of the Bible, and yet have
true justifying faith. Every Scholar is not a Chronologer, nor an Historian,
no more is every believer; I may know what Christ was, though I know not what
Moses and Aaron were; I may know which way Christ took, to bring my soul out
of darkness into mavelous light, though I do not know which way Moses took
to bring the children of Israel out of Egypt; I may know there is but one King
of Kings, though I do not know how many Kings there were of Israel and Judah.
The Disciples did not know all the Prophets had spoken, Luke 24. 25.

Fourthly, a Christian may be a true believer, and yet not know the meaning of
many places in Scripture. God would never have appointed expounders of the Law,
if every Christian, qua Christian, were to have been a general Commentator.
That Well is deep, and every one has not a Bucket to draw. There are that tell
us, that ^e Spirit reveals the meaning of Scripture to the believer, and would
thence evince, that whosoever has the Spirit, must needs be fit to unty every
knot, and unriddle every mystery of Scripture; but every one that has the
Spirit, has not the Spirit of prophecy: For those Scriptures which it is
necessary in point of salvation every believer should know, every believer
understands the nature of them: God has made the water shallow, that the Lambs
may wade; but for those places through which the believers passages do not lie
to Heaven, in which the Elephants may swim, God does not require that every
Lamb should sound those depths.

Fifthly, A Christian may be so far ignorant in the fundamentalls, as that he
cannot make them out, and yet be a true believer; he may be ignorant in the
particulars, by which the generals are demonstrated; as for example, he may
know that Christ dyed for him, and rest upon the merits of his death for
eternal life, and so truly believe, and yet not be able to make this out, by
reason of his ignorance, how Christ being God, should be capable of death; how
the humane and divine Nature were conjoined; he may know that Christ satisfied
by his active obedience for his actual sin, and yet not perfectly understand
how Christ being man should be free from sin, being conceived by the Holy
Ghost. The boys Exercise may be true Latin, though he cannot pierce every
word. The Disciples were believers, yet were ignorant concerning the
Resurrection, yea, concerning Christ's union with the Father, Luke 24. 25.
Ioh. 14. 4, 5, 6. The knowledge may be clear to them in the general, though
through their infirmity and ignorance they be not able to clear it up in the
several particulars.

Lastly, They may be so far ignorant in the substantialls of Religion, as
that they cannot dispute them: The faculty of believing, and the art of
disputing are two things: I may know and believe that which I cannot maintain
upon dispute: It is a known speech of that female Martyr, I cannot dispute,
but I can dye for Christ; if she had not believed, she would not have dyed; she
could maintain her faith with her blood, which she could not maintain with
her tongue: As every Scholar, so every believer is not a disputant: It is good
Logic in Divinity, for the Christian to hold the conclusion, though he knows
not what to say to the Sophisters premises: But lest now some should think and
say, that I have laid Heaven a little too wide open; I must limit what I have
said with two Cautions. To satisfy the poor doubting Christian in point of
ignorance, I have laid down the truth in these Conclusions, and showed you how
far it is possible that a man may be ignorant, and yet a true Believer; But,

First, It must be provided he be not content with this ignorance, but uses
the means to increase knowledge, searches the Scripture, and hears the Word;
that this ignorance proceeds merely out of infirmity, not of wilfulness;
otherwise this knowledge will not be sufficient. It is given as the character
of unbeleevers, 2 Pet. 3. 5.
2 Pet. 3. That they were willingly ignorant; We have an High Priest who can
have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way, for as
much as he also was compassed about with infirmity. Heb. 5. 2.
But for the wilfully ignorant, the High Priest was to offer no Sacrifice* Know
therefore Christian, that thou can have no comfort that thou beleevest though
thou be ignorant, unless (appealing to thine own heart) thou can say, I
have done what I can to dispell these mists of ignorance, and learn the whole
truth of God. Christ Jesus will take the blind man by the hand, Mar. 8. 23, 24,
25.
if he beseeches him to touch him, provided he be willing to receive his
sight; And as he did not cast off the blind man that at first saw men walking
like Trees: So he will not cast off the Christian that at his first
illumination sees divine truths like Trees, not clearly, distinctly, and
fully; but as he dealt with that blind man, he left him not there, but he
put his hands again upon him, and made him see every man clearly: So if thou
belongest to Christ, he will put his hands again upon thee, and make thee see
every portion of his divine truth more clearly; he will make thy dawning
twilight be growing up to a midday of knowledge. ^ Pet* 3. 18.
Therefore Saint Peter lays it as his necessary injunction upon Believers,
That they should grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. That Is the first Caution.

Secondly, this gnorance may be consistent with true Faith in thee, provided
thou do not deny the truth that thou do not know; Thou may have faith,
though thou do not know what the Trinity is, or how it is; but if thou
denyest the Trinity, I make a question of thy truth of faith, or possibility of
salvation: Ignorance of some truths, is not damnable, but the denial of every
truth (when revea^ed) is damnable; want of a clear knowldge is not damnable;
but denial of the truth because thou can not clearly make it out, is
damnable. Speak not evil of what thou know not, but wait until, and pray
that God would reveal it unto thee, 1 Timothy 5. 8.
1 Timothy 5. 8. He has denied the Faith, and is worse then an infidel. There
was a great difference betwixt the Disciples that had not yet learnt, and the
Sadduces that denied the Resurrection; I never yet learnt or read, that any of
the latter were believers; the Disciple had not yet known the Father, nor yet
the son well, Ioh. 14. 7, 8, 9. Io. 14 7, 8, 9.
But the Apostle says, He is Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son.
Ignorance of truth will be borne with, but denial of truth shall not. Take
heed of denying the truths thou do not know. Thus I have showed you how true
Faith may consist with doubtings concerning the point of knowledge, which
though it be not properly called an act of faith, yet it is supposed in the
lowest act; and to satisfy you, I have showed you what ignorance may be
consistent with true Faith, and what not; and with what Cau^ions a Christian
may be comforted concerning his faith, notwithstanding his ignorance in some
truths, and some things not unnecessary to be known.

The Eighth SERMON.
LUKE 17. v. 5. Lord, increase our faith.
CHAP. 9.
Concerning those doubts and weaknesses which may consist with true Faith, in
respect to its act of Assent, and how to comfort a soul under such troubles.
I Shall now go on to show you what doubts a Christian that truly believes,
may have consistent with his Assent, which I laid down as the first act of
faith; for knowledge is rather supposed to faith, then an act of it. You may
remember I told you Assent is an act of faith whereby the Believer does firmly,
fully, and clearly agree to the truth of God revealed in his Word. Now (says
the doubting Christian) Alas! I have no faith, I scarce assent to the Word of
God at all; or if I do, many truths there are that I cannot assent unto; and
those which I do assent to, sometimes me thinks I do assent to them, and
sometimes again no; and when I am at the best, my assent is so misty and dark,
that I almost assent to I know not what: Now I shall show thee how much
weakness and doubting, in relation to this act of faith, may yet be consistent
with true justifying says in thee; I shall show it for thy direction and
establishment in these particulars:

First of all, A Christian that is a true believer, may think that he does not
assent unto the Word of God, when indeed he does. It is a known maxim in
Divinity, That faith may be true without sense of faith; True Faith is one
thing, and sense of faith is another; and as it is with the other acts of
faith, so it is with this also: As a man may cheat himself that he does
assent, and consequently truly believe, though all the world may see that he
does nothing less by his irregular walking contrary to his professed assent:
So it is as true, that a Christian may truly assent unto the truth of God,
though he conceits he does not assent; we are ordinarily ill Judges of the
acts of our mind, because they are secret and occult acts which traffic
between the soul and Heaven in an invisible way; and therefore the truth or
falsehood of these acts is ordinarily discerned by the outward acts of our body,
as if I hear a man professing that his soul does assent and close with that
portion of Gods Word, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Neither fornicators, nor idolators, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate persons, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
thieves, nor covetous persons, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners
shall inherit the kingdom of God; and yet at the same time see he lives in them
very sins; he shall pardon me, if I do think that he does not assent; and
whatsoever his tongue speaks, yet his heart does not close with it as a truth
of Jesus Christ: So on the contrary, if I hear a true Christian complaining
that he cannot get his heart to close with the Word of God, and what ever the
world thinks, he does not assent to the truth, yet if I see this man fearing
to sin against God, and trembling at the threatening Word of God, and walking as
even as he can set his feet, according to the directive part of Gods Word, that
as David, he makes the Word of God a light unto his feet, and a lanthorn unto
his paths; Let them think what they will, they shall give me leave to think
that they do assent unto, and close with the Word of God. Take a proof of it,
Jonas 3. v. 5. Jonas there had preached against Nineveh, Ion. 3. v. 4. yet 40
days, and Nineveh shall be destroyed; v. 5. So the people of Nineveh believed
God; that is, gave a full assent and ^redence to the Word of God, were
persuaded that that which Jonah spoke to them in the Name of the Lord, was
true: But how shall we know that? the Holy Ghost tells us, it was evident by
the effects, they proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the greatest
of them to the least; it was manifest by their actions, in relation to this
Sermon, studying and laboring what they could to pacify the wrath of God
before the 40. days were come about, that they did verily think it was a word
of truth that Jonas spoke to them, and that they were persuaded, and from this
assertion of the Holy Ghost we may certainly conclude, that when we see men
living, and acting according to the Word of God, and squaring their lives by
the compass of it, they do believe [that is, assent unto it] as a word of
truth, whether they will confess so much or no: As when we see a man build
houses, purchase lands, give great portions to his children, keep a great
house, we may conclude he is rich, though he goes as if he were not worth a
groat, and though he will tell you he is not worth a groat. The heart is the
seat of assent, and the throne of faith; confession is not essential, nor
sense material to it. Sense of faith is comfortable, but truth and sincere
reality of faith is that which is necessary: Confession of faith with our lips,
brings glory to God externally; but it is the reality of faith in the heart,
which brings glory to God internally: It is he that does assent, that does the
will of God; not he always that says he does it, or thinks he does it. Mat.
21. 28. We have a parable propounded by Christ to his Disciples; it was of a
man that had two sons, and he came to first and said, Son, go work to day in
my Vineyard; he answered, and said he would not, but yet he repented and went:
And he came to the second, and said likewise; and he answered and said, I go
Sir, and went not: whether of the twain (says Christ) did the will of his
Father? They said unto him, The first. To apply it. God says unto all men,
Believe, and close with, and be persuaded of my truth. One says, I do believe
and assent; but his irregular life is such, that all the world ^ees he gives
his tongue the lie. Another says, Lord, I do not assent to and believe it;
yet he dares not swerve a foot from it; Which of these, do you think, does the
will of Christ? Surely the latter, though he will not say nor think that he
does it, but suffers his tongue to give his heart the lie; indeed, sense and
persuasion of faith is that which we ought to strive after, to be persuaded
that we do close with the truth of Christ; but yet many a one does that which
he does not know he does; the Christian is his own worst Judge, and does, and
will do more a great deal for God then he will speak of. But I hasten to the
second.

Secondly, A true believer may sometimes doubt whether the Word of God be the
Word of God, or no (or indeed may be tempted to do it, rather then do it) this
is that which troubles many a gracious Christian; Alas! they do not believe the
Word of God, they are troubled with many Atheistical and blasphemous thoughts,
that they cannot tell what to think; whether the Word be the Word of God, or
only (as Atheists dream) a model of Scripture drawn by some to keep men's
consciences in awe, etc. and this makes them conclude, Tush! I cheat my own
soul, to think I have faith, when I question even the principles of
Christianity, etc. and shake the foundation with one shake; and yet at the very
same time they live, close to the rule of it, and it has a strict and severe
command over their consciences. Now this I say is rather a temptation to doubt
of the truth of Gods Word in their souls, then a real and positive doubt. The
Devil is very busy in such manner of temptations; yea, even Christ himself
shall not be without them, Mat. 4. 6. he had set Christ upon the pinnacle of the
Temple, and bid him cast himself down; for it is written, he shall give his
Angels charge, etc. in which words I conceive as the Devil tempted Christ in
an unwarrantable way to rest upon the promise, so he also tempted him to doubt
of the truth of the Scripture: As if he should have said, If the Scripture be
true, and you believe it, try a little, throw thy self down, thou have a
promise to catch thee, Psalm. 91. 11. Throw thy self down, and thou shall see
now how true the Scriptures are, etc. So the Devil deals with Christians
often, sets upon them to deny the Scriptures, and puts such thoughts into their
hearts, etc. which are but temptations, and argue not a nullity of their assent
to the Scriptures, but an assault made upon their faith by Satan. But may a
Christian say, If I could know this, it were something; how shall I know
whether such thoughts be the spawn of unbeleefe, and proceeding from an
internal cause, my own infidels heart, or whether they be, as you say, merely
the temptations of Satan, and assaults upon my faith. I shall labor to tell
thee briefly.

First, They are ordinarily but Disputations, and Queries, not determinations:
Thou oftentimes have Quaeries in thy soul, What should I think are the
Scriptures, the Word of God or no? They have strange things in them, one would
wonder they should be the Word of Truth; thou never come positively to
determine in thy soul, Tush, they are not the Word of God. God gives Satan
leave to play the Opponent sometimes, to see what a Respondent the Believer can
be; but he always keeps the office of the Moderator to himself, when they
never go beyond a dispute in thy heart, that thou do not determine in thy
heart the contrary, nor declare with thy lips, nor practice with thy life the
contrary; it is a sign they are but temptations, though they argue weakness,
and thou ought to be troubled and humbled for them; if they were children
of thy own begetting, thou would nourish them better.

Secondly, If they be only temptations, thou find a striving against them.
Tell me Christian, when thou have such an Atheistical thought laid at the
door of thy heart, that the Scriptures are not the truth of God, what do
thou do with it? what do thou take it, and suckle it, and rock it, and nurse
it as thy own child? Do thou please thy self with such thoughts, and labor
to coin arguments to maintain and hug them? This is a note of a base heart:
Or art thou impatient of it, but presently cryest out, Ah Lord! what a base
heart have I? And do thou labor to beat such thoughts out of thy heart, and
pray against them, and never listen to any argument Satan would bring to tempt
thee to the belief of it? I believe this is thy tempter, and know if it be,
thou may have such thoughts and doubts, and yet be a true believer.

Thirdly, If it be not real unbelief, but a mere temptation to unbelief,
thy thoughts will not be long. James 4. 7. Resist the Devil, and he will flee
from you. The Devil, if he be left to stand upon his own legs, is as very a
coward as lives; he will come and tempt a believer, to deny the Scriptures to
be the word of truth; the believer finds these filthy thoughts cast into his
heart, he considers Arguments to resist this temptation, cries and prays, and
says, I believe, Lord help my unbeleefe; Away goes Satan presently, will
answer never an Argument, but yield the field, and the believers heart is fixed
presently. I mark this in 4. Matthew. we read there of three weapons the Devil
took up at Christ, v. 3. He tempts him to distrust Gods providence. Christ
resists this, v. 4. The Devil has done with this, not a word more to say;
well, he flies to another, v. 5. tempts him to presume unwarrantably upon Gods
providence, and to deny the truth of the Scriptures. Christ resists this, v. 7.
The Devil durst not reply, but leaves this too; well, he betakes himself to
another, v. 8. Christ resists this, v. 10. Satan has not a word to say but the
coward quits the field, packs up and gets himself away, v. 13. Try thy
thoughts, are they dwelling thoughts, or transient? if they abide not, they are
Satan's, that carries bag and baggage with them when he leaves thee.

Fourthly, Thou may know if they be temptations, by thy life; thou art
sometime ready to think that the Scriptures are not the word of truth, thou
can not assent to them; but at this very time durst thou live contrary to the
rule of the Scripture? Dare thou now go and be drunk and be unclean? for what
now should keep thee in awe? Dare thou? then it is unbeleefe. But at this very
time, if thou durst not but live according to that Word of Truth which yet thou
art in doubt, whether it be the Word of truth or no, say what thou will, thou
do assent unto it, and Satan would but fool thee of thy faith: Thus you have
heard how a Christian may doubt, or rather be tempted to doubt sometimes,
whether the Scriptures be the Word of Truth or no, and yet have and give a true
and firm assent unto it as the Word of Truth; and you have heard me giving some
notes how a Christian may know, whether such thoughts proceed from a principle
of unbeleef and dissenting to the Word of Truth, or from the temptations of
Satan; I come to the third Conclusion, which is this;

Thirdly, A Christian may be a true believer, and yet not fully assent to some
particular truth in the Word of God: There are many pieces of Gods Truth in
Gods Word: The Word is the word of an eternal wisdom, and of a depth too deep
for us (that have but narrow capacities, and finite buckets) to find the
bottom of it: Now I conceive it is not essential to a true belief and assent,
that I should assent to every thing in the Word of God; nay, which of us do
do it? The causes of this may be these:

1. Ignorance. I showed you before when I handled that point, that there may be
a great deal of ignorance consist with true faith; ignorance in point of
Doctrine, and ignorance in circumstantialls, ignorance in diverse things which
are not of absolute necessity to salvation: Now I conceive that assent does
always imply knowledge. How shall they believe on him of whom they have not
heard (was the Apostles question:) Now I conceive assenting to a particular
truth, as the truth of God, does nor consist in a bare negation, but has
something positive in it: I conceive, that I cannot be said to Assent to all
things from which I do not dissent; but if I assent, I do ful^y agree and
close with something as a truth, and it has the attest of my heart. Now in
this regard a Christian cannot be properly and positively said to assent unto
any truth of God which he does not know, though it be contained in the Word of
Truth, to which he does fully and firmly assent: As for example, it was a
truth that the believing Romans were not after Christ was come, tied to days
and meats, it was a truth of Gods Word; yet it is clear, ^4 Romans 4, 5, 6. etc
that they did not know, and were not convinced of this truth, and so
consequently did not, could not assent unto this particular truth, though in
Gods Word; yet it is clear, that they were true believers, and so consequently
did assent unto the whole word of truth conjunctim, though not to every
particular portion and piece of truth contained in that word divisim; Phil. 3.
15.
there is a further revelation of truth for believers: If any (says the
Apostle) be otherwise minded, God shall reveal this to him; but till that
revelation, there cannot be expected a full assent; only thus far, The
Christian that is the true believer, does not dissent from any truth in the
Word of God, but prays for the increase of knowledge, that so his faith also
may increase in the closing with the truth, and giving full assent unto the
Truth of the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. It may be occasioned through weakness: Possibly something may be taught
from the Word of God, which is the Truth of God, that I hear, and cannot
altogether and firmly assent unto, and close with for truth. As put case it be
the baptizing of infants, without question it is the truth of God, and a truth
revealed in his Word, that infants ought to be baptized, and it is a robbing of
the child of its right, not to bring it to that holy Sacrament; yet through
weakness, some that yet do assent to the Word of God, and would gladly close
with every portion of truth revealed in it, dare not assent to this particular
portion of Truth, but are grieved for their weakness in it, and desire to walk
up to every portion of truth they know in the word; shall we say their faith
is not true in any clearly revealed piece of truth, because to this they
cannot declare a full assent, though even from this they do not dissent, so as
to deny this to be a truth, but labor after a more clear manifestation of it?
God forbid; he that conceales the Truth in unrighteousness, indeed cannot be
said to believe; but he that to some particular portion of truth (not
absolutely necessary to salvation) is a debtor through weakness, I conceive
cannot come always within the censure of an infidel: It Is one thing
peremptorily to deny any particular portion of truth; and another thing not to
subscribe to it, and by a present assent not to close with it.

Fourthly, A Christian that is a true believer, may possibly not assent to the
true meaning of Scripture, yea close with a false meaning in this or that
particular place, Believers judgments are not all of a Last, and many a one
that does fully and firmly assent to every tittle of Gods Word, does not,
cannot always subscribe to the judgment of this or that man, or to the
ordinarily received opinion of godly men concerning such or such a portion of
Scripture. Scripture is very deep, who can find it out? and though the Holy
Ghost has left some shallowes that the meanest Christian may wade through, yet
there are also some depths which are past finding out; places, about which the
learned in the world have posed themselves: We see it an ordinary experience
even in the days wherein we live; such or such an Exposition has been
received almost of all former Writers; yet when one of us comes to examine the
grounds of such or such a sense, and to weigh the context, and compare it with
other places of Scripture, though we assent to the truth (if it be one) as
wrapped up in some other portions of Scripture, yet we cannot assent to it, as
the truth of that place; and yet possibly it may be too, that theirs is the
truth of it and ours is the error: Every misbeleever is not an unbeleever; nay
yet further, A man may misunderstand some places of Scripture, and thereupon
hold that to be truth which is not; (so it be not in the points that are
necessary and fundamental to salvation) and yet have true faith, and yield
true assent unto the Word of God. Every particular imperfection in a righteous
man's life will not argue that a man is an unrighteous man in the general; nor
every deviation from truth, argue a man an heretic; nor every mistake of
truth, argue that a man does not assent unto the truth of Gods Word. The
Disciples did verily believe that Christ should have a real Kingdom upon the
face of the earth, that should break in pieces all other Kingdoms, and consume
them utterly, Acts 1. 6.
as is clear, Acts 1. 6. They asked of him Will thou at this time restore the
kingdom to Israel? And the mother of Zebedees children was speaking for
Courtiers places for her sons, which was but a plain and clear mistake of
that place in the 2 of Daniel, 44. yet who durst but say they had true faith? 2
Dan. 44.
So, many in these days do clearly believe that Christ shall reign personally
here upon earth, a thousand years, with his Saints (it is the Millenaries
opinion) which for my part I do not think it is true (and I think that is the
opinion of the most) and I think it is a clear mistake of that place, Rev. 20.
4. and other places.
Revel. 20. v. 4. yet I would be loath to say, that one cannot assent, and truly
assent to the Word of God, that runs upon this mistake; surely such an opinion
is consistent with true faith; indeed if a man does not fully assent to those
truths revealed in Scripture that hold the foundation of faith firm and
steadfast, then you may suspect the truth of his pretended faith. I come to the
last Conclusion.

Fifthly, A Christian may truly believe, and truly, and clearly assent unto the
truth of God, though he cannot in all things give a clear evidence for his
assent. This is that which puzleth many a Christian: Alas! I cannot clearly
discern the truth of God in his Word, I may think I assent, but can I be said
to assent to that which I cannot clearly see, and comprehend, and make out?
Yes, without question, there are but very few truths of God which the Christian
has a clear and full sight of, and gives a clear assent unto; for a
clearness of assent must proceed from a clearness of knowledge. Now a truth
may be clear to a man's soul two ways*

1. To the eye of his Reason. 2. To the eye of his Faith.
There are some truths which are clear even to the natural man, to the eye of
his reason, as that there is a God; that we are all gone a stray from the ways
of God, in which we were first see; to these even the carnal man may give a
clear attest, for he sees a great deal of reason that demonstrates these and
such like truths unto him: But now there are some truths, which to the eye of
Reason are as dark as midnight, as Christ's assuming the humane nature, and the
Doctrine of the Trinity, and the sublime Doctrine of Christ's union with the
soul, etc. Now these also in some manner are clear to the spiritual man's eye
of Faith, in regard that he does believe the Word of God, and that so plainly
holds out these divine truths, it is clear to him that they are truths, he sees
a great deal of reason for him to believe contrary to reason; but yet when he
comes to think how should these things be? and so puzle his faith with reason,
he does not clearly then see that upon a particular enquiry, which in a
general notion seemed very clear unto him; as in particular, that truth
concerning the essential and real union betwixt Jesus Christ and the soul,
the true Believer thinks he sees it very clearly, and believes it very
steadfastly, while he only considers the (...) of it, and looks upon it as it
is a truth; but now when he comes to consider how should this be? there, that
knowledge which seemed clear before, appears very dark and misty; and so
concerning assent which follows the knowledge of any truth. I remember a
passage of a Reverend Divine of our own, There is a manifestation of things by
reason, and by revelation; an evidence direct, and not direct; and evidence
direct, and by consequence; an evidence of the thing in it self, and by the
effect; matters of faith are manifest by revelation, but in reason insearchable
and incomprehensible. The Divinity of the Scripture is in it self evident to
the spiritual man; so is it that there is a providence. other things are
evident from this ground. Ball upon faith, p. 22. thou may not judge that
thou have no faith, or that thou do not assent to the truth of God, because
every truth in the Scripture is not in it self evident unto thee, so as thou
can give a clear and rational assent unto it; it may be a clear assent to
the truth in general, though not in the particulars; there it may be dark, as
in that Doctrine of the Trinity: I may be persuaded, and clearly to my
thinking see that there is a Trinity, it may be a notion as clear as the Sun
unto me, because I take the witness of Gods Word as a sufficient evidence to
me; but yet if I will go pose my Faith with Reason, I shall not be able from an
evidence of Reason to give direct assent unto that truth: It may be clear as
any thing to my faith, That Gods essential presence is wholly every where; yet
when I come now to look to see this with reason, how the incomprehensible God
should be wholly in this or that room, when I come near I have a very dark
sight, and my assent is scarce clear to this truth: Some Pictures, the further
you stand off them, the more you see of them; it is a clearer sight that you
have of the picture at a distance then close by it: So it is with some divine
truths, they seem very clear to the Christian aloof off, while he only views
them with the eye of his faith, and does not come near them with the feet of
his reason: but if once he draws near with those earthy feet to them, they
seem very dark. And thus I have showed you what doubts a Christian may meet
withal in relation to his assent; what weaknesses may be incident to it, and
consistent with it, though arguing imperfection and weakness.

1. He may doubt whether he does assent or or no, and yet at that time truly
assent and close with the Word of Truth.

2. He may doubt whether the Scriptures be the Word of God or no, or at least
may be tempted to doubt; and there I have given some marks by which a Christian
may distinguish a temptation to doubting from a real doubting proceeding from
unbeleefe.

3. He may doubt concerning some particular truths in the Word of God, and
through ignorance or weakness not fully assent to them, and yet fully close
with the Word so far as is revealed to him.

4. He may doubt concerning the meaning of this or that portion of Scripture*
and dissent from the (ordinarily received) truth of it, and yet truly assent
to the Word of God; yea, he may mistake a Scripture, and hold that as a truth
from that Scripture upon his mistake, which is indeed an error, and yet
savingly assent to the Word of Truth, so it be not in necessary fundamentals.

Lastly, he may not clearly by an evidence of Reason, or a direct and distinct
evidence of Faith, assent unto several truths which are in the Word of God,
and yet truly assent unto the Word.

Thus you see true Faith may consist with much weakness and doubting; as with
much imperfection and ignorance in respect of the required knowledge; so with
much imperfection and doubting in relation to the act of assent: Make use of
this, to see Gods goodness that will take such sacrifices at our hands; not to
presume to hug these imperfections, but be always striving against them, 1.
Caution, provided we always strive against them.
that thou do not wilfully cherish any of them; there are many, and may be
many deficiencies in the understanding that God will pass over; but if they
come to be the rebellions of the will, thou shall know he is angry. It is
said, Romans 4. 19. 20. that Abraham staggered not through unbeleefe; Abraham
doubted through infirmity though, when he lay with Hagar, and bid Sara say she
was his sister. Strive against these weaknesses, and let them be thine merely
through weakness (if they be) not of wilfulness; merely of infirmity, not
through unbeleef, and the Lord is merciful, and thy faith may be true. If thou
do steadfastly assent to all the Truth of God, that is the foundation of
faith, and necessary to salvation, and fully and impartially close with the
whole Word of God, and every particular portion of truth in it, when it is once
clear to thee that it is a syllable of that Word of Truth, and live a life
answerable to it, though for the present thou think thou do not assent,
and though thou may be tempted sometimes to doubt of the whole Scripture,
and though thou may doubt concerning some particular truths that are taken
for truths, and are so, and concerning this or that portion of Scripture, and
may take up that as a truth which is an error from it, and though thou
may not for the present by a clear evidence of reason, or a direct and
distinct evidence of faith assent unto several truths which are in the word,
provided,

1. That thou assentest to all truths that are necessarily to be believed to
salvation, and the foundations of Faith.

2. Provided thou strivest against other doubtings, and labourest to get a
sense of Faith, and a strength to resist the Devils temptations, and to be
convinced of every particular truth, and of thy error (if it be one) which
thou have taken up from some mistaken portion of Scripture, and labourest for a
more clear and distinct knowledge of every truth, that so thy assent may be
more clear every day than other.

The Ninth SERMON.
LUKE 17. v. 5. Lord, increase our faith.
I Am showing you what doubts may consist in a gracious soul with true faith:
I have already showed what weakness may consist with faith in respect of
knowledge, and what doubts in relation to the meanest and lowest act of faith,
which is assent: It is my task at this time to show you what doubts and
weaknesses may consist with saving faith in a gracious soul in relation to the
second act, which is indeed the essence and marrow of justifying faith, that is
the act of adhering, the souls rolling, relying, and wholly depending it self
upon Jesus Christ for salvation; for although the souls assenting to the
promise and being persuaded of the promise as a sure and steadfast word of truth
be an act of faith, yet it is concluded by most, or all godly and sober Divines
that it is not the act of faith that justifies; but as it is concluded against
the Antinomians and Libertines on one side, that it is not faith of assurance
that only justifies, so it is also concluded against the Papists on the other
side* that it is not an assent to, and persuasion of the truth of the Word that
justifies the soul; but that true justifying faith, though it does suppose
both knowledge and assent, yet it does especially consist in the souls
rollings, and throwing it self upon the Lord Jesus Christ for eternal
salvation, and adhering to the promises as its portion: And therefore it is
observed by learned and gracious Mr. Ball, 1 Par. p. 24.
in his Treatise of Faith, that there are six words in Scripture by which the
Holy Ghost does in Scripture express to us true and saving faith, This I have
noted before.
every one of which does denote unto us, that the very essence and marrow of
true and saving faith is a reli^nce and dependence of the soul upon Christ.

The first is Believe, opposed to fainting, Psalm. 27. 13. it argues a staying
of the soul upon something, when it was falling, swooning, fainting, etc.

The second word is Trust, his heart is fixed trusting in the Lord.

A third word is translated trust, but signifies to betake to as a Castle,
Psalm. 2. 11. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

A fourth word signifies to lean upon, as a man leanes himself upon a staff,
2 Chronicles. 16. v. 7, 8.

A fifth word signifies to stay and rest the mind upon, Isa. 48. 2. They stay
themselves upon the God of Israel.

A sixth word signifies to roll a man's self upon a thing; as a man in danger
of drowning, catches hold of a Willow, and hang upon it, all which words
denote to us, that the true and proper distinguishing act of true justifying
faith is the souls rolling it self upon the promises of life, and upon Christ
for eternal salvation; I take true justifying faith, so far as it is the
souls act by the virtue and strength of the Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ
infused, in relation to this act, to be this, for a soul wholly, and
steadfastly, and solely, and obediently to rest and roll it self upon the Lord
Jesus Christ for eternal life. Now in this act of true and saving faith there
may be a great deal of weakness, and it may be accompanied with a great deal
of doubting.

CHAP. X.
Concerning those weaknesses which may consist with true faith in a gracious
soul, and how to satiisfie the soul that conceives it does not truly rely
upon Christ because it does not find that it can rely so fully and constantly
as it desires, nor upon all the promises alike.
ALas! (says a poor soul) I cannot think that I do really rest and r^l my self
upon Jesus Christ and the promises for eternal life; when I do rest, as I
think, I am ready again to think I do not, and if I be in a frame of heart one
day, that I think that now I can roll my self upon Christ and trust his
promises; another day again I can trust nothing; if sometimes I do cleave to
the word of life as sweet and precious and embrace it as true, and prize
Christ, and value his Word above all sensual delights whatsoever, and hunger
and thirst after it and after Christ; another while again I cleave to a
sensual good more then to a spiritual promise, or an heavenly Christ; and
besides I cannot rely upon God for the fulfilling of every promise; there are
some of Gods promises that I think I could rest upon God for fulfilling of;
others again I cannot for my life (though I am persuaded that they are equal
words of truth with the other) trust God for, nor can I be fully persuaded that
the promises do really and peculiarly belong to me. Now to satisfy the soul
in this particular, I will show you what doubtings and weaknesses may be in the
soul, and yet the soul at that time may have received, and may rest, and
rely, and roll it self upon the Lord Jesus Christ for the promises of
salvation, and may at the same time have true saving justifying faith; this is
my work to which I am to address my self.

Know for thy comfort.

First, Thou may fully and wholly rely thy soul upon Jesus Christ, and yet
not believe thou do fully and wholly rest: Reliance and dependence is
necessary to Faith, not full persuasion of such a reliance, I mean justifying
faith; Reliance is a necessary act of Faith, full persuasion of such a reliance
is a comfortable act of Faith; depending and relying is the act of this hand
(helped by Gods Spirit;) full persuasion of this reliance is more the shining
of Gods face then the act of our souls; Labor more to get evidences of the
truth of thy act of faith then of the degrees of it; Christ may be in the room,
and yet not seen, he may be in the midst of thy heart, and saying, Peace be to
this soul, and yet the doors of thy sense be shut: Heaven is a thing unseen,
and he that measures his faith by his eye, may call an Ephah an Omer,
especially if thou will not think that thou have faith, unless thou can see
a truth of the very act, and refuse to take an evidence for thy sense from the
effects of faith: The acts of the mind are secret acts, of which (as I said
before) we are very ill Judges; Resting and relying upon Christ is an act of
the mind, and is an hidden and mystical act which we cannot weigh in any
scales to try whether it be full weight yea or no; here is the trouble of many
Christians; ask them whether they rest and rely upon Jesus Christ for salvation
yea or no, they will tell you, they cannot think they do; yet they will
confess, that if they do not rely upon him, they rely upon nothing; their
sins and duties, their morality and civility they have utterly disclaimed,
and will cry out of these as menstruous clothes and filthy rags, yea and
confess that they would not, they durst not sin against God for a world; yet
they cannot think they rest truly upon Christ for salvation, though they will
confess they desire it, and hope they do it, and they make the Law of Christ
the rule of their lives, and they have a secret soule-enflaming love to Christ;
but because they cannot understand the secret mystery of the internal act,
therefore they will not, they cannot flatter their souls into a faith and
apprehension that they do truly believe, when indeed there is no act of the
mind, the nature of which, and truth of which, we can discover from the
knowledge of it clearly in it self, but must be forced to examine the truth
and falsehood of it by the effects; and it must be the infinite and rare work of
God to persuade our sense of the truth of our faith; may it not be possible,
think you, to find one that is beautiful, very beautiful, and yet all her
friends shall not persuade her that she has any beauty at all? we may have
that which we will be not known of: The woman has seen her face in a false
glass, or does not know what beauty is, and therefore will not be persuaded by
other men's eyes to rectify her own judgment: So it is with Believers, they
may have a beautiful face of faith, and yet not think so.

Secondly, A Christian may have a true faith, and truly rely upon Christ, and
really think he does not at all trust and rely upon Jesus Christ. Sense in a
Christian may not only have a mist cast before its eyes, but have its eyes
clearly put out. Suppose a man had put up a Petition to the King for some place
of honor and trust, this Petition lies unanswered a great while, at last the
King answers this Petition, and grants that place or dignity to him; the
Subject being at a distance from the Prince may have this place or honor
conferred, and yet not know of any such matter, but verily believe his Petition
lies like a cast paper, has he not his dignity because he knows it not?
Christians are misjudging creatures, and too ready to suspect their own
happiness, they may call their resting and believing, presumption; their
faith, boldness: The Hypocrite calls his dross Gold, his Alchymie Silver, and
the self-suspecting Christian is as ready on the other hand, to call his Gold
Brass, and his Silver Lead: It is a rare thing to find a Christian that will
look his gracious face in a true Glass, the modest creature is afraid he
should be proud, if he should look upon his beauty: Heaven may be hid under
the dark and cloudy apprehensions of a terrible, dismal hell: Christ may be
saying in Heaven, Thou art saved, Thou art saved, while thou art saying upon
earth, O I am damned, I am damned! The Angels may be keeping holy day for thee
there, while thou art keeping Fridayes here: There may be joy in heaven for the
same cause, and at the same time for which and in which there may be sorrow on
earth; thou may have more friends in Heaven then thou know of; Christ at
that very time may be pleading hard at Heavens Bar for thee, while thou art
thinking he is reading an Enditement against thee; thou may at that time
have Christ in thy arms, when thou think he is as far from thy soul as
Heaven from Hell: From hence will follow:

Thirdly, Thou may question and doubt whether thou do truly rest or no,
and yet truly rest; Disputing argues weakness of the act, and want of sense,
but not a total want of the act. This is less then the other, but I have
mentioned it, because I have found this to be the temper of many Christians:
pinch upon that piont, ask them whether they wholly rest and rely upon Christ
for salvation; they dare not tell you they think they do not, nor they think
they do; but they cannot tell what to think, they k^ow not whether they do or
no; though they dare not conclude the falsehood and nullity, yet they dare not
assert the reality and verity of any act of Faith in their souls, they live at
great incertainties, and this makes them think they do not believe. They are
sure disputing is no believing.

To this I answer in this conclusion;

That thou may make a question whether thou beleevest or no, and yet truly
believe. It is true, disputing is no believing; but though they be not things
of the same nature, yet they are not so ill neighbors but they may dwell under
the same roof of the soul.

First, Thou may doubt whether thou beleevest or no, and yet believe; this
is not a question about the object of faith in which thou may for all this
remain unshaken, but merely about thy act of faith; thus disputing, thou do
not dispute whether the promise be true or no, but whether thou art (as thou
should be) persuaded of the truth of it, and do (as thou oughtst) rest
upon it for a word of truth; and yet some disputes and doubtings about the
object are not inconsistent with faith, as I have showed before. It is a
soule-destroying opinion which some Libertines have hatched in these days,
that a Christian ought not to question the truth of his Faith: Such an
unbeleefe shuts not men out of Heaven, nor argues a nullity of Faith: Paul was
wrapped up into the third Heaven, whether in the body he could not tell, or
whether out of the body he could not tell, yet without question Paul was wrapped
up in the body, if wrapped up at all: The Believer may be in the like doubt
concerning his Faith that S. Paul was concerning his rapture, and yet have
real true Faith; though we ought not to content our selves with it, yet we may
know for our comfort, that we may go disputing our faith to Heaven, and many a
one has such an hot dispute with his own soul, that his death is forced to
prove the Moderator when he receives his end of his Faith, even the salvation
of his soul. And thus I have showed you in three particulars, how the
Christian may doubt concerning his resting and relying upon Christ, and yet
truly rely.

1. He may question whether he truly relies or not.

2. He may not be able to affirm nor think that he does truly rely; yea
further, he may through a misjudging himself think he does not rely, and
notwithstanding all this truly and really rely and rest. Now these kinds of
misgivings may arise from several causes: God may please for his ends to keep
the soul in darkness, to keep it humble, and to keep it in a strict way of
adherence, etc. But I shall rather meddle with the subordinate and
isntrumental causes, and assign three or four causes:

The first may be blindness and ignorance, there may be, yea is a great deal
of darkness in the soul; there was a thick darkness surprised Adams
understanding when he fell, and this still clouds all the children of Adam; we
are not able to discern or judge of the nature of the internal acts of the
mind; we cannot come to a certain knowledge of them as they are in
themselves, but as I said before, must judge them by the effects; the soul
does not understand what affiance is, and this makes her question whether she
does rely or no, and not think she does, being never ready to think well of her
self.

A second cause may be the Devils temptations; such winds will make strong
houses shake sometimes: It is Satan's great design to keep the soul from
believing, and if he cannot keep the edifice of Faith from being built in the
soul, yet he will keep it (if possible) from standing sure. Luke 22. 31.
Simon, Simon, (says Christ) Satan has desired to winnow thee like wheat; the
word signifies to shake up and down as in a fan wheat is used, the kernells
scarce ever lie still: Satan is almost always shaking the Christian by the
shoulders, he desires to winnow them, and as with Job, because he had no power
over his life, he executed his power to the utmost upon the comforts of his
life: So he deals with the soul, because he has no power over the life of
Faith, therefore he will execute his power to the utmost over the soul, that it
may never come to have the comfortable sense of Faith; and no wonder if when he
brings his rams to batter, the poor mud wall of a Christian shakes,
especially considering how smooth an Orator he is to persuade, and how subtle
a Sophister he is to prove: Even as it is as easy with a good Logician to make
a poor simple creature believe, so as he cannot deny that the Sun does not
shine; so it is an easy thing with the Devil to persuade the soul, that it
does not rest and rely, when indeed it does; especially if we consider,

Thirdly, What a misgiving nature and suspicious frame there is ordinarily in
the hearts of Believers. They are always fearing and suspecting, lest they
should not do their duty, they know that in many things all sin, and they
are afraid lest they should cozen and deceive themselves; now when Satan takes
a flint and a steel, and falls a striking, and he meets with such a box of
ready dried tinder, no wonder if he quickly strikes fire; Besides,

A fourth cause may be melancholy, cloudy vapors, that for the present the
soul is darkened with, and can see nothing with a clear sight, but is like a
man in a phrenzie.

And a fifth cause may be, a Christians wilfulness, when the Christian will
take no evidence of his faith by the effects of it: The best evidence that we
either have, or can have of the truth of our faith, and of our justification is
the effects of Faith; now if it comes to this, that the soul will not take any
evidence of the truth of the act of Faith, but only under the Broad Seal of
Heaven, the apprehension and assurance, and full persuasion of it, the soul
may live without comfort a great while, if with Thomas it must see the wounds
and holes; Now here is many a good souls condition; he questions the truth of
his Faith; we come to him and tell him, could there be such an hungring and
thirsting after the Word, that thy ear is unsatisfied with hearing, unless
thou did believe this was the word of God, and rest upon it as the Word of
truth? Could there be such a care to please Christ, and a fear of offending
him to be found in thy whole life and conversation, if thou did not rely upon
him for salvation? Could there be such a willingness to part with all thy
estate for Christ, and rather then thou would deny him or not enjoy him in
his Ordinances, if thou did not rely upon God as thy portion? No, the soul
will not look upon this as a sufficient evidence, but cries out, All this an
Hypocrite may do, sanctification is imperfect, mine is hypocrisy; No, would
God seal it to me, then I would believe it. Now where this is found, the soul
may for a long time sit in darkness, and see no light; yea, it may be, go down
to the grave in its own thoughts, like Erasmus hanging betwixt Heaven and
Hell. But I proceed.

Fourthly, Thou may not at all times trust with alike confidence, and yet at
all times truly trust. The truth of trust and affiance is one thing, the
degrees of it another; the truth of Faith never grows more or less, the
degrees of Faith do; as the least drop of water is water, so the least dram of
faith is faith as much as the highest degree of it: This the experience of
every Christian will tell you; sometimes they will say, I think if the Devil
had hold of me I could trust God for Heaven. Though he kills me (says Job)
yet I will trust in him; that was not Jobs temper always, and yet without
question Job did always believe. Paul was not in the same temper Romans 7. that
he was Romans 8. 38. Peter's crying Master save me, or else I perish, did argue
his faith was under water more then his head. David's temper, Psalm. 27. 1, 2, 3.
was not the same with his temper, 1 Samuel 27. 1. In the first he would not be
afraid of an Host encamping round about, no though the Host consisted of ten
thousand, Psalm. 3. 6. But in that place, 1 Samuel 27. 1. tells us he was afraid
of one Saul, and that after many experiences. So a poor Christian is ready to
think, O I do not truly trust and rely upon God, etc. Sometimes I think if I
had not a bit of bread, nor a drop of water, yet I would not fear, my faith
should be like that Hab. 3. 17. Another time my heart is so far from it, that
though I have for the present enough, yet my base heart can hardly keep from
covetousness; sometimes I think that if God would take me away in a massacre,
I should not yield my blood with a repining word; another time I so doubt of my
interest in Christ, that I should not know how to dye upon my bed, but am
crying, Lord take me not away with the wicked. Christian, thus thou may be.
David, Psalm. 3. would not be afraid of his souls going out of his body if ten
thousand swords were ready to cut out a passage for his soul out of his body.
Another time he cries O spare a little, give me space, that I may recover
strength before I go from hence, and be no more; and again, Take me not away
with the wicked. One while David is troubled to see the wicked flourish like a
green Bay tree; and himself like a withered tree without a leaf; another time
he is not troubled at it, but can as well trust God when he sends to Nabal for
alms, as when he sits at his Kingly Table and; yet his faith was always true.
Faith may be interrupted, that the pulse of it cannot always beat alike, and
yet while there is life the pulse of Faith beats, though by reason of some
sickness in the soul the pulse may beat more faintly and deadly then at other
times; Corruptions, though they are never wholly the Christians Masters, yet
they may be their Masters sometimes more then others; the mind may be more
clouded with earthly thoughts; the tide of passions may be higher, and the
stream of Lusts greater; the body may be sometimes sick and less active, and
yet living: So the soul may be sick, and Faith act more weakly then at other
times, yet Faith may be alive.

Fifthly, Thou may not so fully and equally rely upon some promises as upon
other, and yet truly rely upon all. It is a truth, that the true believer
closes with every promise; but it is also true, that the best Believer finds
a great deal of difficulty more for his soul to close with and rely upon some
particular promises then upon others; and a believer shall find, if he be put
to it, that it is harder to rely upon God for his promises for this life, then
for his promises for eternal life; God has made promises for this life, Earth
is made over by Indenture to the Saints as well as Heaven, Mat. 6. 32. God has
made promises of protection in times of danger, of sufficiency in time of
peuury; now a Christian will find it harder, if he be put to it for want of
bread, to rely upon Gods feeding promises, then upon his promises for eternal
life; O it is hard for a poor creature to trust God for bread and water. Hence
comes distrusting and distracting care, hence covetousness and
earthlymindednesse in Gods own people. And if a Christian be surrounded with
swords, and be in the midst of dangers, it is a hard thing now confidently and
without fear to rely upon Gods shield and buckler, and trust himself within
the Castle of his providence. I am confident when David manifested such an
evident distrust of Gods promise for protection of him, 1 Samuel 27. 1. he did
not at all distrust God for saving of him; we read not a word of such a
distrust: Now I conceive the reason of it may be twofold:

First, Because here the flesh is sensible and concerned in it. Dangers are
obvious to sense; The eye sees swords and trembles, it sees present dangers;
but it sees not that speedy relief which the promises hold out; it must be the
spiritually enlightened eye of the soul must see that: Elisha's man could see
the mountain about Elisha full of charrets and horses; but it was only Elisha
himself that could see the power of God assisting and defending; Elisha was
feign to pray before his man could have the scales fall from his eyes to see
that; Now for believing those promises where flesh and sense have a share, and
a present share, the soul will find it hard; for though the flesh will never
help the soul in relying and resting upon any promise, yet it will hinder the
soul very much, and very often; I appeal to any of you, whether you have not
found it an easier thing to rely upon a promise for salvation and strengthening
and quickening grace which merely concerns the soul, then when you have been
in some bodily straights, you have found it to rely upon the promises for
succor, and support, and deliverance: As take a married man, that has a mind
to the wars, possibly the man is a very valiant and courageous man, and
values his life at as cheap a rate as any, but his wife cries, and keeps a
stir; that if he were single, though the design were the same, and the
danger the same, yet he finds it ten times more hard, then if he were to go
a single man: So the soul married to the body, is ten times more troubled to
close with a promise, and venture into thickets of a danger, by the bawlings
and fearings of the flesh, then it would be if it were to act single in statu
separato, or then it does when it acts clearly for it self.

There is also a second reason may be given of this, viz. Because woe may have
more cause to fear Gods fulfilling his promises for this life, and for
temporal mercies in this life, then it has, or can have, to fear his
promises for spiritual mercies, and for eternal life. The soul that finds
an heart changed, and walks with God, can give no reason why it should not
believe Gods spiritual promises; I mean the promises for spiritual mercies,
and his promises for eternal life. What reason can thou give, why thou
should not believe Gods promises for pardon of sins? What? because thou
art a backslider? The promise is made to such, Hos. 14. 4. Is it because thou
have an hard heart? the promise is made to such, Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. But now come
and ask the soul when dangers are at hand, and the soul is ready to mistrust
Gods protecting promises; here the soul will tell you, Alas! I have been a
backsliding creature, and though the sins and backslidings of Gods people be no
sufficient reason to warrant the souls distrust for salvation, yet there is a
great pretense of reason that the soul has from hence why it should a little
fear Gods wonted dispensations of temporal mercies to it; for this is a sure
rule, that although when God has elected and justified any, he has made a
sure promise they shall never again be cast out of his eternal favor and
love, yet for their sins he will let them know his anger by withdrawing his
temporal dispensations of love and mercy, in relation to which are the promises
of protection and temporal mercies given to chasten them with the rods of men,
and with the stripes of the children of men, 1 Samuel 7. 14, 15. See an
experience of this in in David, when he had backsliden so far as to commit
those two great sins of Murder and Adultery, 2 Samuel 12. David testified his
repentance, and Nathan said to him, the Lord has put away thy sin, thou
shall not dye, v. 13. but the sword should never depart from his house, v. 10.
his wives should be given to be defloured by his Neighbor, v. 11. The child
should die, v. 15. Now though that David could not reasonably, because of this
backsliding, distrust Gods promise for the pardon of his backsliding, yet he
could not reasonably rely upon his promises for the blessing of his house with
temporal mercies so as before. And thence it is clear, that a Christian may
truly rest upon the promises for salvation, and pardon of his sins, though he
does not so easily rest, nor so constantly, nor fully rely upon him for some
particular promises of temporal mercies.

The sixth is this, Thou may hang tremblingly upon the promises, and yet hang
upon them truly. And there is a seventh, Thou may truly rely, and dwell upon
the promises, and yet not truly appropriate and peculiarize them, and dwell on
them as thy own portion, to thy apprehension; but of these afterward.

The Tenth SERMON.
LUKE 17. v. 5. Lord, increase our faith.
I Am come now to a sixth proposition, which is this, A Christian may rely and
hang tremblingly upon the promises, and yet depend truly, a trembling faith is
no contradiction; faith breeds joy; and hence is that of the Apostle, The
rejoicing of your faith, but David has bidden us, Rejoice with trembling. I
have read a speech of S. Austine, that such as was the degree of sollicitous
fear, such was the degree of grounded assurance. It has been observed, that
such men as have had the palsy in their heads, have lived to be aged men. A
Christian I am sure, may be a true Christian, though the trembling palsy of
fear be in him. It is the Apostles counsel, Phil. 2. ^2. Work out your
salvation with fear and trembling: Sure I am, the work of faith must be done
in working out our salvation, and this must be done with trembling. It is a
false and presumptuous tenet that is by some maintained in these times, that
will banish all fear and trembling from faith, as utterly inconsistent with
faith, and will deny any to have faith but such as have got a confident
presumption, as if palsied hands were no hands; Christ was never so cruel to
poor diseased souls as these are; Ephraim exalted himself by speaking
trembling, Hos. 13. 1. The woman feared and trembled, Mar. 5. 33. yet Christ
told her that her faith had made her whole. Paul trembling said, What will thou
have me to do? Acts 9. 6. And yet I think none in their right wits will deny
that the seeds of faith were growing in Paul's heart, though the stalk shaked.
The poor drowning man that catches hold of some twig to save his life, he
knows he is drowned unless he does it, he therefore hangs truly, and even
casts his whole weight upon it, and yet without question his heart trembles for
fear, though he cannot but think the bough will bear him; such is the
Believer; the true Believer is a poor wretch that seeing himself undone, in a
woeful condition, sinking to hell, even just sinking, only spies a branch of
the root of Iesse, the Lord Jesus Christ in a promise; upon this he claps hold;
here, says he, I will hang; if this promise will bear the weight of a broken
undone soul, then I am saved; if not, I perish; then the soul considers what
burden it has to lay upon it, and remembers it is the heavy weight of all its
original and actual sins, this makes it tremble and fear; I doubt not but
Esther when she went in to King Ahashuerosh had very good hopes that she should
prevail, and did depend upon that as the last twig of hope she and her people
had; yet she went in trembling, and said If I perish, I perish; Now there may
be several causes alleged for this trembling.

First, It may be the deep apprehension of misery that did precede; possibly
the poor soul was under a spirit of bondage a long time, and shaked in pieces
almost with horror and fear; at last God opens a keyhole of mercy, and bids
the soul look through and see a Christ pardoning all its sins, and washing
it with his precious blood, and cancelling all its debts, and wiping away its
tears; the soul at the just opening of this now stands and trembles, fearing
lest the news should not to be true, and terrified with those late
apprehensions, not conceiving that hell can be so soon transformed into heaven.
When Peter had been in the Jail and the prison, and without question full of
carnal fears, for the next day he was to have been brought out and have been
slain, and the Lord just in the nick of time sent his Angel and delivered him
Act. 12. 9. Peter could not tell what to think of it, he wist not that was true
that was done by the Angel, but thought that he had seen a vision, he was fain
to stay a while before he came to himself, V. 11.
and said, Now I know of a surety, that God has sent his Angel to bring me
out: So it is with many a poor Believer, he is in Jail too, God has him in
Jail, and the spirit of bondage keeps him in fetters; and to his thinking
there is scarce a minute sometimes betwixt him and death: Alas! death were a
mercy, but he thinks that there is not an hairs breadth betwixt him and hell;
when he lies down at night, he wonders that he does not awake in hell in the
morning; now when under the saddest and deepest apprehensions the soul has of
eternal sinking into hell, God beyond all his expectations sends his Angel to
knock off these fetters, and bring it into the glorious liberty of the Sons
of God, when the soul, like Peter, is sleeping betwixt two devils as it
thinks, and is bound with two bellish chains of terror and fear, and the
spirit of bondage keeps the prison, and the Angel of the Lords consolation
comes upon the soul, and the light, the glimmering glorious light of mercy and
consolation shines into this dark, bellish prison, and smites the soul, and
raises it up, and says, Soul, arise, thou art delivered, and makes the
chains fall off from the Soul, and says to the soul, Poor soul, gird up thy
self, bind on thy sandalls, come stand up from the dead, Christ shall give thee
light, Come, come out of this Hell, cast thy garments about thee, etc. no
wonder if the soul for a while, like Peter, wist not that this is true which
is done, and no wonder if it step a step or two further before its trembling is
over, especially considering that these terrors seldom are at once, but by
degrees abated from the soul; it passes, like Peter, through the first and
second ward, through one iron gate of fears, and then another street of
terrors; I say, considering this, it is no great wonder if it be some while
before the soul says, with Peter, Now I know of a surety, now I know of a
surety, that the Lord has sent his Angel, and has delivered me out of the
hand of the Devil, and from all the expectations of Satan: It is an ordinary
thing if a man has been drowning, and almost drowned, pulld on to the land, he
trembles and quakes at first, as if still he were in his drowning danger,
though he be on the shore; the terrors had surprised him before, are not
presently shaken of.

A second cause may be in regard of some holds that have already failed the
soul; Faith is when the soul lays hold upon Jesus Christ, as the twig of
salvation, and hangs upon him for life, and heaven, and happiness; Now the
soul has had many twigs failed: It is the nature of man to be timorous, and
as a drowning man will catch hold upon any thing which comes next hand to save
his life on; if he catches hold on one, and that breaks, he claps hold on
another; if that again breaks, he claps hold on a third; if that also breaks,
he still claps hold on a fourth, believing it will hold; otherwise he would
never lay hold upon it; yet so many having failed, he cannot but fear lest
that should fail him too: So it is with a poor soul, sin has almost drowned
him in terror: first he claps hold upon morality and civilitie, resolving to
live a sober, and honest, and virtuous life, and thinks this will bear him;
well, this twig breaks, and will not hold; when God has a mind to work his
work upon the the soul, he quickly shows the soul that this is a bruised
reed, and broken staff, the soul is plunged into a depth of horror and terror
again; well, then he claps hold of another twig, and that is his duties, he
prays and fasts, and here he hangs, this shall save me (says he;) this twig
also breaks, the Lord shows the poor wretch that all its righteousness is as a
menstruous cloth, and as filthy rags in his sight, and here the soul is again
plunged in fear; at last God shows the soul the bough of Jesus Christ's
Righteousness; the drowning, sinking, poor creature lays hold of this but
with trembling lest this should also fail; at first it fears.

A third cause may be in regard of the promise; Faiths work is to lay hold upon
the Lord Jesus Christ, but now the soul does not do this immediately; but
mediately. Christ does not appear and speak out of heaven to the soul, and
say, I am thy salvation, then the work of Faith would be more easy; but Christ
has given the soul many both sweet and precious promises, and these are the
cords that the Lord Jesus Christ throws out to the soul to pull it to the
land with: Now the soul takes this but with trembling until it has tried the
strength of them, in regard it conceives the promises are liable to many
ambiguities, bounded with many conditions and limitations, and the soul
conceives it self either not within the bounds of the promise, or unable to
fulfill the conditions of the promise, or that it may make a false application
of the promise: And hence it is, that come to a poor drooping soul, that
fears its condition, and has a true, though a trembling hand of faith (for
Faith may have the palsy) and urge the faithfulness of God in promising, the
surenesse of the promise once made, the unchangeable nature of God; they will
tell you, they do not a jot question this, they know God is not man that he
should lie; nor yet as the son of man that he should repent; they know that he
is both faithful and true; but the promises they fear are not made to them;
they indeed rest upon them, but whether rightly or no, God knows; they
conceive that either the promises were made to particular persons, as to the
Nation of the Jews, or they are sure to the particular number of Gods Elect,
of which they are none, etc. they will tell you that indeed the promises are
true, but they are conditional, and they fear that the conditions of the
promise are not fulfilled in their souls; so that the work lies another way,
not so much to persuade them of the truth of the promises in general, the
cause of their trembling lies not here for fear that the promise should fail
those to whom it belongs, but for fear that they should misapply and
misunderstand the faithful and true promises of God: And now although we must
say concerning this trembling, this is also our infirmity, yet none can deny
that it is an hereditary disease to the nature of man, and will be in us more
or less, so long as any of us be in the flesh, and so long as sin remains
in our flesh, and will be especially and most in those that have lien under
greatest fears and terrors, and are newly got out of them, and begin to have
a little of the light of comfort glimmer upon them; even as a man that should
come out of an horrid and dark dungeon where he has been in darkness, thick
darkness, into the glaring sight of the Sun in the top of the Meridian, at the
first will be dazeled, and rub his eyes, and apprehend himself in some
darkness, though he be in the light. He that had his eyes opened Ioh. 9. first
thought he saw men like trees; and this trembling may consist with true
dependence. Job. 13. 15. Though he kill me, yet I will trust in him* the last
words yet I will trust in him, argued faith, and a strong faith; faith that he
would trust; a strong faith, that yet he would trust; and yet whosoever
considers the first words that Job apprehended himself in a danger of
killing, will easily think that it was a trembling faith that Job there acted.
And as it is ordinary with poor Christians through their infirmity to believe
tremblingly in the beginning of their conversion; so there is also another time
when trembling does ordinarily accompany true faith in the people of God, and
that is a time of desertion. Secondly in time of desertion I think none will
deny but Gods children have, and act, and must act true faith in this saving
and justifying act of reliance and dependency; but I am sure this they cannot
do without trembling: Such was the condition of Job in that place I before
mentioned Job 13. 15. David did rely, and strongly rely in his time of
desertion, insomuch that in his 6. Psalm, v. 8. he speaks confidently of a
thing that he believed for as if it were already done, The Lord has heard the
voice of my weeping; and yet whosoever reads but the former part of that
Psalm, will find that he was in a trembling temper, His soul was sore vexed,
his bones were troubled, he was weary with his groaning, and he made his bed to
swim with his tears, etc. Now the cause of this trembling arises;

First, from the sense of the sin; The sinner says, Ah! the promises did
belong to me; but I have been a backslider, and now what have I to do with the
promises? What has such a wretch as I to do with these filthy unclean hands
of mine to lay hold upon a clean Christ? The sense of sin strikes a deep
impression upon the soul, and puts a shaking into the heart of the soul; yet
it lays hold; if Christ will not save me (says the poor soul) sure I am
nothing else can; to him I will go, and me thinks it goes as the Messengers of
Benhadad to Ahab 1 King. 20. Behadad there had wronged Ahab, and through the
help of God his Army was routed, and Benhadad was glad to hide himself in one
of Ahabs Towns in an inner Chamber, and sends to Ahab; his servants, v. 31.
said to him, We have heard that the Kings of the house of Israel are merciful
Kings, let us put sackcloth on our loins, and put ropes about our heads, and
go out to the King of Israel; peradventure he will save thy life; so they did,
and said, Thy servant Benhadad says, I pray thee let me live; And he said, is
he yet alive? he is my brother; the men caught his words, and they said, Thy
brother Benhadad; and he said, Go and bring him; and accordingly he came, and
Ahab took him up into his Chariot: So it is with the poor soul, when the
soul has fought against God by sin, the Lord overthrowes it by desertion, yet
it lives, but dare not be seen so openly, it is hidden under the dark cloud of
desertion, it squilks as in an inner chamber, it is sensible how it has
deserved death, yea ten thousand deaths; But the li^e of grace being yet in the
soul, it says within it self, I have heard that the King of Heaven, the Lord
Jesus Christ, is a merciful Christ; come therefore, I will send my Messengers
of Faith and Prayer, they shall put sackcloth-upon their loins, and ropes upon
their heads, and go out to the Lord Jesus Christ; peradventure he will save my
soul, and I shall live. Without question Benhadads servants went with
trembling hearts, and yet relied upon this as the only means to save Benhadad
their Master alive: So the soul sends out at such a time a trembling faith,
and trembling prayers, and yet truly relies upon Christ's mercy, and favor, and
the soul says to God; Lord! thy backsliding, revolting servant says, Let me
live, let my backslidings be healed, let my renewed sins be yet pardoned:
Christ will say, Thou art my brother, and take thee into the Charret; but yet
thy faith trembles, and thy prayer trembles: And indeed there is very great
reason for it, if we secondly consider, that the very essence of desertions is
Gods withdrawing of his manifestative love from the soul, that the soul, though
it be loved with Gods elective love in and under desertions, yet it wants the
apprehensions and manifestations of his love: Now, that which only can keep
the soul from its natural temper of trembling, is the apprehended
manifestations of Christ's love to it, which being withdrawn, the soul falls a
trembling again, and yet the life of grace being not extinct, it still trusts,
yea though he kills the soul, yet it trusts in him. So I have done with the
sixth proposition, That the soul may depend tremblingly upon the Lord Jesus
Christ, and yet depend truly.

I come now to the seventh and last Proposition, to show what weakness and
doubting may consist with true faith in the soul: that I shall do in a
seventh proposition thus, Thou may truly rely and depend upon the promises
of God, and upon the Lord Jesus Christ for everlasting salvation, and dwell
upon them, and yet not be able fully and truly to appropriate and peculiarize
all the promises to thy self, and act accordingly to them at all times. There
are distinctions of promises and distinctions of times, from whence will arise
distinctions of causes, which would be understood; To make out this certain
truth.

1. You must know that there is a distinction of promises; the promises are
many ways distinguished; there are general and particular promises, absolute
and conditiall promises, Promises that concern some particular people, as the
people of the Jews, and particular persons, as to David and Herekiah, and other
of the people of God, which if we should apply, we should misapply to our
selves: I shall not meddle with all the distinctions of these promises, but
only with what shall conduce now to my purpose to make out this truth I have
laid down in my proposition, and so I shall distinguish of two promises, two
ways:

First, They are temporal or spiritual.

Secondly, They are absolute or conditional.

First, there are temporal promises, which are or may be called temporal,
either in respect of the matter of the promise, or circumstance of time limited
in the promise. There are some promises that were made for a certain time, and
at the time expired were paid, and now the bonds are cancelled, these were
particular: Such were many promises made to the people of the Jews, and to
particular persons amongst them; Now these we must not look to peculiarize,
and appropriate to our selves, they are done with.

Secondly, There are temporal promises so called in respect of the things
promised, being things temporal for the body or estate, for protection of our
selves, wives, estates, families: Now for these promises, thou may not
peculiarize them, and yet have true faith for salvation; salvation and heaven
being not the thing promised in them; and besides, there may be cause why thou
may not have so good ground to rely, and confidently rest upon God for the
fulfilling of these promises, as I shall show you more when I come to handle
the distinction of times, and as I showed you the last time, in the case of
David 2 Samuel 12. But secondly there is a second distinction of promises, I
mean of spiritual promises, which it is our duty at all times to apply and
rest upon; yet these are either absolute or conditional: It is a note that I
have before somewhere noted, that the promises of Gods first mercies in a way
of saving grace to the soul are ordinarily absolute; I will give, and I will
give, without any praevious conditions to be found in the soul, as his
promises of inlightning grace, Jer. 24. v. 7. I will give them an heart to know
me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be people, and I will be their God: And
for the grace of humiliation, Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new heart also will I give you,
and a new spirit will I put upon you; and I will take away the stony heart out
of your flesh, and will give you an heart of flesh; and so for his grace by
which he convinces, Ioh. 16. 8. The spirit should convince the world of sin,
of righteousness, and of judgment: Now these promises are altogether
absolute, being the free promises for dispensations of the first graces in
order to a poor souls salvation: Now there are other promises of God for
spiritual mercies in order to the souls salvations, which are second
dispensations, and these are propounded with conditions, as the promises of
heaven for power to rely on Jesus Christ, peace, assurance, etc. Isa. 55. 1.
Mat. 11. 29. and again, to him that overcomes will I give to drink of the
water of life freely, with many such more; not as if man could fulfill these
conditions in the soul, and prepare his own heart; No, we abhor that Popish
doctrine, though some falsely charge us with it: But because Christ will fulfill
them, before he bestows those higher degrees of mercy and favor upon them; he
will make the soul hunger and thirst before he will let it know it shall live,
Is. 55* 1.
and give it power to come unto him; Mat. 11. 9.
he will make the soul weary and heavy laden with sin, before he will give
the soul power to rely upon him comfortably for salvation: ^zek. 11. 19.
He will take away the heart of stone out of the soul, and give it an heart of
flesh, before he will give it power to walk in his statutes, and keep his
ordinances, and do them, before he will let it know that he is its God, and
that it is Gods chosen vessel. And thus I have showed you the distinction of
promises; and what we shall conclude from hence for our purpose, I will show
you by and by when I have done with the distinction of times, which I come to.

The Soul has its winter and summer, 2 Distinction.
its cloudy and black days, and its lightsome and glaring days.

First, it has its lightsome, summer Sun shine days, when it is not conscious*

1. Of any great sin committed against knowledge, such as Tertullian calls
Peccata devorantia salutem; Sins that swallow up heaven and salvation in the
soul.

2. When it has no natural distempers of body, no cloudy, melancholy vapors;
for the soul being to act through the body, does something suffer by it: and
as it is with a man that looks at the reflection of his face in a glass, if
there be a wetnesse or dust upon the glass, he cannot see clearly: So the
soul if there be a mist or dust of melancholy oppresses the body, the soul
cannot see and act clearly.

Or 3. When the body is not under some harsh affliction; for the soul
sympathi^eth with the body, and in its acting through the organs of it, shows
the affection that it has with the bodies sufferings; and so also there are
black and dark days; for as it is summer time with the soul and daylight
when it is not sad and darkened with desertion, and when the body is not
oppressed with melancholy, or affliction, or persecution; So on the contrary
it is winter, and a dark time with the soul, when the soul has sinned some
great sin, for which the soul looks up trembling to God, and looks upon him
as an angry revengefull God, or when the body is heavy and oppressed with
melancholy vapors stopping the passages of the soul, or under heavy and
grievous affliction that it is born down even to a back-breaking under them;
even as it is with a fountain that runs through Conduit-pipes of lead, etc. or
wood, into any house, if the fountain be dirty, and muddy in it self, dirty
water comes into the house; or if the Conduit-pipes through which it passes be
dirty and tainted, the water brings the pollution and tang of bitterness,
etc. that was in the pipe, into the house; otherwise, if both the fountain be
clear and sweet, and the Conduit-pipes be not stopped, nor tainted, nor dirty,
then (...) water runs sweetly into the place to which the Pipes lead it: So it
is with the soul that is the fountain that runs into acts, but through the
Conduit-pipes of the body; if the pipes be stopped, or oppressed, or muddy, or
clear, such is the actings of the soul. And thus I have showed you the
distinctions both of times and promises; now I shall conclude the truth of this
proposition in some four or five Conclusions.

First of all, Particular promises must not be expected to be peculiarized; we
may not expect that those promises which were made to the people of the Jews
in particular, should be made good to us, because they had promises to be
delivered out of Babylon and Egypt at such a prefixed time; it were madness in
us to believe that the Church of God should be now delivered just after 70.
years, or 400. years; and so likewise what promises were made to any particular
persons amongst the Jews, as for any now to apply that promise made to
Hezekiah, I will add to thy life 15. years: I think we have a rule here in
Land That if an inheritance be intailed by name, it cannot be translated to any
other; these promises were entailed by name; these thou can not, nay oughtst
not to apply, they are not a portion by thy father designed for thee.

Secondly, It may possibly be that in some times thou may not be able to
appropriate the temporal promises that God has made to his children, amongst
which thou art included.

1. In the dark time of want and penury to believe for bread to eat when I
see none like to come; O it is hard feeding upon Scripture leaves: I showed you
this the last day, it is nothing to do it, or at least to think we do it in
times of prosperity. Habakuks faith, Hab. 3. 17. was an hard faith, though it
were a strong and precious one.

2. In the dark time of desertions, It is hard, as I shall show you by and by,
to apply those promises that are of nearest concernment to our salvation, much
more those which are at so remote a distance.

3. In a time when melancholy, dark, cloudy vapors of the body cast a wist
before the souls eye, and will not give it leave to act clearly.

4. In a time when the soul has sinned, thou may not fully rely and be so
confident, as before.

To peculiarize these promises, I showed you the ground of this before, because
though God has promised that his Saints shall never eternally fall out of his
favor, yet he has and will punish his Saints for sin, with the substraction
of temporal favors, as I showed you before in the case of David; and I take
that to be an old Antinomian error, instead of a new truth, That God does not
with temporal afflictions correctively punish his best servants for sin.

Lastly, It does not argue a nullity of faith, and true saving faith, at any
time not to be able to appropriate outward temporal promises; for although it
is our duty to rely and depend upon all the promises; yet if we through
infirmity be not able to rely upon these, I conceive it does not null the
verity of our faith, salvation being not the thing promised in these.

Thirdly, For those that are conditional promises in dark times, the soul may
not be able clearly and fully to apply them, rest upon them, and particularly
apply them, and yet at the same time truly dwell and rest upon them. What
spiritual promises are made conditionally in Scripture, I have showed you
before; now it may possibly be, that even these, though of great concernment to
the soul, yet at all times the soul may not be able to say, this promise of
Heaven and glory and happiness belongs to me. Psalm. 77. 7, 8, 9.
Holy Asaph in a dark day with his soul, may say, Will the Lord cast off for
ever? and will he be favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever?
Does his promise fail for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious? Has he
in anger shut up his tender mercies? The reason lies not, that the soul doubts
of the truth of God in his promises at all; no, it verily thinks, that if it
had fulfilled the conditions of the promises, the promises would remain to its
soul as steadfast as Mount Sion; but it cannot see that: It looks upon its
sins in a multiplying glass, and upon its repentance in a diminishing
glass. Every mountain of good in its self now seems a Molehill, and every
Molehill of sins seems a Mountain unto it: Thence it is that in the
souls dark day of afflictions in the soul, or in a dark day of afflictions to
the body, the souls faith is weakened, it is ready to look upon its great
affliction as an evidence that it wants that interest in God which it should
have to apply promises: It says with Gideon, Judge. 6. 13. when the promise
says like the Angel, The Lord is with thee; it answers, O my Lord! if the Lord
be with me, why then is all this be^alne me? and where be all his mercies? no,
the Lord has forsaken me, and delivered me to the hand of Satan; now the soul
must not take a judgment of its faith from hence, but appeal abanima
perturbata ad animam quietam to a calm day in the soul again.

Lastly, In dark times the truly believing soul (though it can give no reason
for it) may not be able to rest, and apply the most absolute peculiar promises
as its peculiar portion; this I shall fully make out by considering what is
requisite to be in the soul that shall appropriate any promise to it self as
its portion, upon which it will live, in which, and upon which it will dwell.

The Eleventh SERMON.
LUKE 17. v. 5. Lord, increase our faith.
I Am still treating concerning those doubts and weaknesses which may and often
do consist with true saving faith in a gracious soul. My last Proposition I
left imperfect; it was (as you may remember) this, That a gracious soul may
truly rely upon the Lord Jesus Christ, and upon his promises for eternal life,
and yet not be able at all times fully and truly to appropriate and
peculiarize all the promises to its self: This I showed in four Propositions,
premising first a distinction of promises, and secondly a distinction of times;
my last Proposition was this, That in dark times a truly gracious soul may not
be able to rest upon and apply the most absolute free promises for salvation,
so far as to say, These promises are my portion. To make out this I told you I
would show you what things are requisite to be in the soul, that shall
appropriate any promise to it self, as its particular portion, which is the
work at which I then stopped, and which I have now to take up; for here is the
business with troubled spirits* tell them of large, absolute, free promises, as
(say they) here are jewels in boxes, but these belong not to us, they are not
our portion; and from hence further they conclude, that they have not any true
faith, because they have not for the present a particular full power to apply
these promises as plasters to their wounded souls, and rest upon them* but
yet I shall show you the want of this does not null our faith, and is not
always a negation of it.

I conceive there are three things that are requisite to be found in the soul
that shall be able to apply any particular promise to its self as its portion.

1. A clear understanding of the Promise. 2. A clear understanding of its own
condition. 3. A mighty and particular working of the Spirit of God upon the
soul, inabling the sou^e to make such particular application.
First, There must be a clear understanding of the Promise; the promise must
appear to the soul as a salve having a full efficacy and virtue in it for the
healing of its sore, otherwise the soul can never apply it; now it may
possibly be, that thy non-application of the promise may proceed from thy not
understanding the virtue, or misunderstanding the intent, and end, and power,
and efficacy of the promise; possibly thou may understand the promise to be
made particular, when it is propounded general; and such have I my self
sometimes met with, that being under afflictions of spirit, when I have
propounded a promise to them, as a salve fit for their sore, they have evaded
that way; Ah! but that promise was made to the Jews, or to such, or to such a
particular person; it was a plaster spread for another wound, and what have I
to do to lay hold on it? Or it was not made for such a sinner as I am not for
a backslider, not for such an hard hearted wretch as I am, etc. and with such
cavils have stood at a distance from the promise, crying, It is not meet that
the childrens bread should be given to dogs; or perhaps their non-application
may proceed from a misunderstanding of the matter of the promises. Now for this
thou must clear up thy understanding in the nature of the promise, both in
respect of the persons to whom it is made, and in respect of the matter of the
promise; and for the more clear and full understanding of the promise, I shall
give a rule or two: The first is remarkable, I find it in a reverend Author,
which I shall deliver in his words with a little limitation, thus, General
promises for spiritual mercies are always to be applied particularly, and
particular promises for spiritual and temporal mercies are to be applied
generally; I call those general promises which are either made to Gods people
in general, or concerning spiritual things in general; as for example, God
had made a general promise to any that should pray toward his Temple, 1 King.
8. 37. 40. Iehosaphat being after in distress, 1 King. 8. 3^. 40.
applied this general promise to his own particular condition, 1 Chronicles. 20.
8. 10. 1 Chronicles. 20 8. 10.
And without question it was from a particular faith in this general promise,
that Daniel prayed with his windows open toward Hierusal^m, Dan. 6. 10.
Dan. 6. 10. and so for those promises which are made to the people of God for
spiritual mercies in general, Psa. 84. 11.
such is that promise, Psalm. 84. 11. He will give grace and glory, and no good
thing will be withold from them that live uprightly, ought to be applied for
any spiritual good thing, Iam. 1. 12.
or particular dispensation of grace. So the Apostle James 1. 12. would have
the twelve Tribes under temptations apply those general promises of a crown
of life made unto Gods people that endure any affl^ctions, to their particular
sufferings in their afflictions, and under their particular temptations. And
for those promises that are particular, they are also to be generally applied;
as for that particular promise made to Moses, Exodus 4. v. 12. I will be with thy
mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say; it cannot be literally applied to
every Christian, particularly that at all times God will be with him in going
into Pharaoh, and teach him what to say (for he is not called to go in) but
thus, it may and ought to be applied by any particular Christian, That when God
calls him to a public service, and he finds a warrantable calling, and an
inability, he may by faith particularly rely upon that promise, though not by a
particular application, for assistance, just at such a time and in such a
manner as the promise was made good to Moses; yet in general for some kind of
assistance in the undergoing of his works; and such a general application
Christ warrants every particular Apostle to make of that promise, as you may
see Mark 13. v. 11. And so for that particular promise which was made to Jacob
going to Padan-Aram, Genesis 28. 15. Behold (says God) I am with thee, and will
keep thee in all places whithersoever thou go, etc. A Christian cannot now
particularly apply this so as to resolve upon going to Padan-Aram, leaning on
the staff of this promise: But as there is no warrant for such a particular
application, so neither ought this to be rejected as a promise of no
concernment to a Christian, but to be generally applied; and thus far every
particular Christian may apply this, viz. when he is called to take an
hazzardous and dangerous journey, he may apply this promise for Gods protection
of him in it; and this Christ warranted to us Ioh. 15. 11. 20. Praying that God
in keeping up their faith, would fulfill that Promise which he had made to
Peter, Luke 21. 32^
Luke 22. 32.

This is one Rule which will help thee to understand the full extent and virtue
of the promises, and this you see will easily divide it self into these
particular Branches.

1. That those promises which for spiritual mercies God has made to his
people in general, have such virtue in them, that we may in times of need
particularly apply them to our souls. As for example, that promise, Hosea 14.
4. I will heal their backslidings, and love them freely: It was made to the
people of God in general: Now a Christian that has been a backslider, may
rest upon this as his proper and peculiar portion? and so for other.

2. That those promises which are made for grace and spiritual good things in
general, may and ought to be particularly applied to our souls for any
special good thing, or any particular dispensation of grace which our souls
want: As suppose I want faith, and I am to pray for it; praying is but suing a
Bond; where shall I have a promise to ground my prayer for this dispensation of
Grace, possibly I cannot find out, or call to mind any particular promise, for
that dispensation of grace, yet I may apply that promise, Psalm. 84. 11. or
Zach. 12. 10. where God has made a promise of all grace to his people, if he
has promised to give all, then will he give that.

3. That those promises which are made to particular persons, and for
particular occasions, or for particular mercies, though I cannot particularly
apply them in that latitude, and with those particular circumstances with which
they were made to them, ye^^ may apply the substance of them gener^ly, to my
self in particular, and so far they have particular virtue for me: As
suppose that I be haled to prison, and be to be called before Magistrates, and
be afraid I shall not be able to carry my self so as to credit the cause of
God; and I cannot remember any promise made to the people of God in that
condition; I may so far apply that promise which was particularly made to
Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Mark 13. 3. 11. as to rely upon God,
either to keep me from appearing before them, or to be with me when I am
before them, etc. If I be to take a long journey, and for the present possibly
cannot find a promise in general of Gods protection to his people; I may rely
upon that particular promise made to Jacob, Genesis ^8. 15. thus far that God will
some way or other protect me and provide for me, etc.

A second Rule is this, Whatsoever promises thou find in the Word of God
made to any particular people, for spiritual and soul-mercies, thou may
apply to the still continuing Church and any member thereof; those promises
which were made to the Jews, are good to Gentiles; those which were made to
them and their seed for general and spiritual mercies, are good to us and our
seed: This the Apostle evidently makes good, Act. 2. ^9. where Peter speaking
concerning the Promise of salvation, says, The Promise is unto you, and unto
your children, and unto those that are afar off [That is, the Gentiles] even
as many as the Lord our God shall call; and the Apostle urges this in several
places; he speaks of the Corinthians, as having and being possessed of the
Promises, 2 Cor. 7. 1. and Peter writing to scattered strangers, says 2 Pet.
1. 4. To us are given many great and precious promises.

1. And this thou may be sure of, if thou do but consider,

1. That that God that has promised, is an immutable God, he is the same God
to all the faithful, with him there is no shadow of change.

2. If thou do but consider, That the promises made to the Jews, were not
made to them under the notion of Jews, but under the notion of believers, as
they were the faithful people of God. Indeed the promises in Genesis are many
made to Abraham, and his children, and seed; But (as you have lately heard by
my reverend Brother in another place, upon another subject) Abraham had a
starry seed, and a dusty seed, according to Gods twofold promise, I will make
thy seed as the dust of the earth; and again, I will make them as the stars
of heaven: Now the promise is not made to Abraham's dusty seed, to the bare
children of Abraham according to the flesh, but to the starry seed, to all the
faithful: This was all the Jews brag: O! we are the children of Abraham, to
us belong the Law and the Promises, and the Privileges, etc. But our Savior
Christ decideth this question, Io^. 8. 39. If ye were Abraham's children, you
would do the works of Abraham; that is, if you were the children of Abraham
according to the faith (his starry children;) those Believers that do the works
of Abraham, and believe with the faith of Abraham, they are the seed of Abraham
to whom the promise is made; Gal. 3. 29. And if ye be Christ's [that is, such as
by faith are united to Christ] then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according
to the Promise.

And this will be further evident, if you consider in the third place, That the
whole Covenant, of which every promise is but a branch or member, was made
originally and primarily with the Lord Jesus Christ for all believers, Gal. 3.
6. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made but as of one, Gal* 3. 6.
and to thy seed which is Christ. Beza and Piscator, and many other Expositors
would have that place understood, not of Christ personal, but of Christ
mystical, as if it had not been to be understood that the promise was made
betwixt God the Father and the Person of Christ, but with the Church which is
the mystical Body of Christ: But learned Mr. Rutherford disproves that
Exposition, and proves that the promise was indeed made with the Person of
Christ from the 17. v. for it was made with that Christ, Rutherfor^ Tria^l of
Faith, p. 51, 52, 53, 54.


1. In whom the Covenant was confirmed. 2. In whom the Nations were blessed. 3.
In whom we receive the Promise through faith, Mr. Rutherfords (...). reasons t^
prove the Covenant and Proses were made to Christ for us.
v. 14. 4. With that Christ that was made a curse for us, v. 13.
Which must needs be understood of a personal, not a mystical Christ; and it
is plain (says he) from Heb. 1. 5. compared with Psalm. 89. 26. I will be to
him a father, and he shall be to me a son. And secondly, The Covenant made to
the fathers and David and his seed, is fulfilled to Christ and his seed, Act.
13. 34, 35. And thirdly, he was the second Adam. Now as the Covenant of works
was made with the first Adam for him and his seed, and he was the public
covenanting person for all his posterity; So Christ was the second Adam, and
the Covenant was made with him for all those that should be his seed, 1 Cor.
15. 22. And fourthly, All that is required in a Covenant, we find betwixt God
and Christ; God demanded he should lay down his life, and for it he promises
that he should see his seed, and God should give him many children, Isa. 53.
10. Christ consents to come and lay down his life, and do his Fathers will,
Isa. 40. 7. Ioh. 20. 8. So that whatsoever promises were made for spiritual
and eternal mercies to the Jewish Church, or any members of it, are still
applicable to the Church and Children of God under the New Testament; for the
Promises were not made to them as Jews, but as Christians, (though not known
under that name, which was first given to them at Antioch) that is, Act. 11. 26*
such as were heirs of Christ, and children of Christ; for the Promise was
made originally to Christ, to him and to his heirs; that is, those which
should believe in his Name; so that the promises have made so far an
influence upon us as Christ has; and they had no other upon the Jews. But yet
for the true understanding of the promises, it must further be understood, that
there were some promises only made to the Person of Christ, and not to descend
to his children, as that Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. and Heb. 1. 5. 13. and Is. 53. 10.
Psalm. 110. 2. Ps. 2* 8, 9. There are other promises which are made To him and
his, even as there is a difference in bonds; some run only to the person of
the man, others run to him, his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns:
And first (says Mr. Rutherford) I will be thy God, The Mother-Promise is made
to him, Psalm. 89. 26. Ioh. 20. 17. and to his people too, Ier. 32. 38. Zach.
13. 9.

And special promises (secondly) are made first to him, and then in proportion
to us, as grace to him is promised, and in proportion to us, Ier. 32. 39. Eze.
36. 26. 27. Ioh. 1. 16.

2. Justification is promised to him (not personal, but of his cause, as Mr.
Rutherford distinguishes) Isa. 50. 8. and justification of our persons to us,
Ephesians. 1. 7. Ier. 1. 32, 33.

3. Victory and dominion is promised to him, Psalm. 110. 12. 1 Cor. 15. 25. and
to us, Ioh. 16. 11. 14. 30.

4* The kingdom and glory is promised to him, Phil. ^. 9, 10. and to us, Luke
12. 32. Ioh. 17. 24.

5. For his resurrection after three days, Psalm. 6. 10, 11, to us after a
longer time, Ioh. 11. 266. ^8, 39. For these things more fully I shall refer
you to Mr. Rutherfords trial and triumph of faith, p. 54* 55. so that you see
clearly, that whatsoever promises were made to the Jews, either to the Church,
or to the persons of the believing Jews, are to be applied to us, because they
were primarily and originally made with Christ, to whom we have as great a
title, and in whom we have as great a share as they have. And that is the
second rule to help you for the clear understanding of the Promises; I will
add but one more, which together with these will meet with all mistakes which
in my little experience I have met with in troubled spirits concerning the
understanding of the Promises.

Thirdly, that is this, though some promises are conditional, yet none require
of us a fulfilling of the conditions by our own strength. This is that which
troubles many poor souls, and is a great ba^e to their faith, and staves them
off from applying of the Promises: O but I cannot fulfill the conditions of the
Promise; I cannot be heavy laden, and weary; I cannot hunger and thirst, etc. I
told you before what promises were ordinarily proposed conditionally in
Scripture, viz. Promises of second mercies in order to our salvation, as the
promises of justification, Isa. 55. 1, 2.
ease, peace, which follow after vocation Romans 8. 30. Mat 11. 29*
Ho, every one that thirsts, etc. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst
after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied Matthew. 5. v. 6. Now here does
many a poor soul stand. Alas (says a poor Christistian) I perish, I perish;
We say to the soul in such a complaint, Hark what Christ says, Come unto me
all ye that are weary and heavy-laden, and I will ease you Mat. 11. 29. And
again, Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has
no money, come ye, buy and eat, etc. Incline your ear and come unto me;
hear, and your soul shall live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with
you, even the sure mercies of David. Isa. 55. 1, 3. And again, Isa. 1. 16, ^7,
^8. Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings before mine
eyes; cease to do evil, learn to do well. Come now and let us reason together,
though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though as
crimson, they shall be as wool. But now the Christian not clearly
understanding the nature and virtue of these promises, cannot make a particular
application of them to its soul, it stands off and cannot make a particular
application. Alas (says the Christian) these are made upon condition of a
weariness and an heavy load of hungring and thirsting, of coming, of washing
and cleansing, of putting away the evil of my doings, of ceasing to do evil and
learning to do well: Hard sayings, Who can hear them? I cannot get my heart to
hunger and thirst, I cannot get my heart to be weary and heavy laden; A Leopard
can as well cleanse himself of spots, and an Ethiopian as well wash away the
blackness of his skin, as I can wash my black soul, etc. One that has no
legs can as well walk to Rome as I can come to Christ. But know Christian, thy
particular applying faith here is hindered by a mere misunderstanding of the
promise; for though those promises require conditions, yet they require not
conditions to he fulfilled in thy strength; but those required conditions are
as well parts and branches of the free covenant of Grace, as those promises
which thou desire to apply; therefore you shall find promises for the
fulfilling those conditions in thy soul: God requires a wearines of sin, and a
loathing of sin, and a sorrow for sin as a condition, Mat. 11. 29. Is. 55, 1,
3. God promises to give this self abhorring frame of Spirit, and to work this
loathing in his peoples souls Ezekiel. 6* 9, 20, 43. 36. chap. 31. Zach. 12. 10.
God requires washing and cleansing as a condition Isa. 1* 16. ^7. 18. He has
promised to work this in the soul, Christ tells Peter he would do it ^oh. 13.
8. And David prays that God would do it for him Psalm. ^1. 2. 7. which prayer
was grounded upon a promise; and this washing is attributed to God as the
working of his spirit; Isa. 4. 4. v. When the Lord shall ^ave washed away the
filth of the daughte^s of Sion and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem
from the midst thereof, by the Spirit of judgment and the spirit of burning,
God requires turning and coming and learning and leaving sin, as a condition,
but he has promised to fulfill these, Hosea 14. 8. but he has said, none can
come unless the Father draw him Ioh. 6. 44. and the Spouse without question
grounding her prayer on a promise, says, draw me Cant. 1. 5. He has required
turning as a condition Ezekiel. 33. 11. Ier. 3. 14. but he has promised to work
this in the soul, Mat. 4. 6. and upon this the Church prays Ier. 31. 18. Turn
thou me and I shall be turned: So that this is a certain rule, God requires no
condition of a promise which he has not promised to fulfill in us; And
whatsoever spiritual action is anywhere required of us as a duty, he has
somewhere promised to bestow upon us as a dispensation of free Grace. Therefore
I would have the soul in such a condition, when it stumbles at the condition
of a promise, seek out those promises where God promises to fulfill those
conditions in it, and particularly apply them and rely upon God for making them
good, and direct its prayers accordingly. So I have done with the first thing
required in the Soul for the particular application of the promises, viz. a
clear understanding of the promises, for which I have given three Rules; Now
in regard that at all times there may be in a true believing soul a clear
understanding of the promises: I conclude there may be true faith in the soul
that at all times cannot make a particular Application; But I hasten to*

The second thing which is requisite in that soul that does truly rely, or
that can particularly apply the promises, and that is a clear understanding of
its own condition; for how can I truly and particularly apply a promise to the
wound of my Soul, when I do not understand truly what wound my soul has?
Now, a true believing soul may have a very false estimate of its own
condition: Thus had David and Asaph, and the Church, they thought they were
cast off Psalm. 43. 2. Psalm. 44. 9. Psalm. 60. 1. Psalm. 7^. 1. 77, 7, 89, 38. Now
if I think that a part of my body is gangrened, I will never apply Physic to
it, because I know it is in vain: so, so long as the Soul conceives that its
condition is irrecoverable, its sins unpardonable, that applying promises to it
is but applying warm clothes to a dead man; it will never apply. Now such a
temper may be in the believing Soul occasioned by the violent temptations of
Satan by dark clouds of melancholy, or the like: it apprehends its sins nor
pardonable, or at least not pardonable as yet to the soul. O! (says the
soul) I have sinned against the holy Ghost what good will it do to me to apply
promises? I am dammed.

It is a temptation which Satan ordinarily first or last troubles believing
souls with: I have answered that case of Conscience particularly, and
therefore shall not enter into a particular discourse of it now. Now till the
soul be brought so far truly to understand its own condition, that its wounds
are curable and to cry unto God for the healing and cure of them; it cannot be
expected that it should particularly apply any Promises, as pl^isters for the
healing; and in regard I say that there may be some misjudging of the souls
true estate in a gracious soul, there may also be a want of this peculiar
faith; It is true, it is given by all sober Divines as the least degree of
Faith to believe that my sins are pardonable, and to run and fly, and cry unto
God for a pardon of them: but yet through the distemperature of the soul, even
this thing, that the souls sins are pardonable, which is generally believed,
and is the souls foundation upon which ground it humbles it self, and cries
and prays, may not be believed by the soul that yet has true Faith, or at
least believed very darkly, and with a great deal of doubting.

The third and last thing which I will instance in, which must be found in that
soul that shall particularly apply a general promise as its particular
portion, is a constant wonderful working of the powerful Spirit of God upon
the soul: For let a soul never so truly understand its own condition, and
never so truly understand the virtue of the promise, and never so fully
conceive that the promises have an adequate proportionable virtue for the
healing of its particular wounds; yet unless the spirit of God by a wonderful
powerful work of grace does lay the salve upon the sore, and apply the
promise unto the soul, it cannot be done; as it is with a man that has lost
his hands or the use of them, and suppose him to have a sorein his back; let
him never so truly understand the nature of his disease, and the virtue of the
salve with which the Plaster is spread that is to be applied to the sore, he
is not able yet to apply it and lay it on for cure; the hand of the Surgeon
or some other for him must do this; To. 8. 16.
So it is with the Soul, To. 8. 16. The Spirit it self must bear witness
with our spirits, that we are the children of God: now unless that be
witnessed, we have nothing to do with the promise; the children of the promise
must be the children of God; and in being his children, they become ^^ires of
the promise, as the Apostle disputes Gal. 3. It is a sweet and remarkable
expression of David to this purpose Psalm. 119. Psalm. 119. ^9*
v. 49. Remember the word unto thy servant upon which [thou] have caused me to
hope. It is God and his spirit that must cause us to hope and trust in his
word: Now in regard that the Saints and Servants of God may, though they
always have the spirit dwelling in them, yet sometimes have the Spirit not so
fully and powerfully acting in them the strong and powerful actings of the
Spirit, it being the effects of Gods manifestive love which may be more or
less in a Christian, though his elective love admits of no degrees: I say in
this regard I conceive a Christian may have true saving Faith, and yet not for
the present at all times be able to apply the promises with a particular Faith
as its own proper and peculiar portion. And now you have heard the reasons,
which may be reduced shortly thus:

1. Because there may be a misunderstanding or a clear ignorance of the virtue
of the promises, which must be understood before they can be particularly
applied.

2. Because there may be a misunderstanding of the souls condition: it may say
there is no hope, and judge its wounds incurable.

3. Because there may want such a constant powerful working of the Spirit of
God in the soul as must be joined with the souls peculiar application, and
yet there may be true faith.

For the first, I conceive the particular applying of the promise with a
confidence, they are my portion, does argue a sense of faith, which may not be
in the soul, and yet true faith be in it.

Secondly, Because as a man must not be judged to be no man, because he wants
his power to act reason in a Fever; So the estimate of the truth of faith that
is in the soul, must not be taken in the distemperature of the soul, when
under heavy temptations; or secondly, dark and melancholy apprehensions; or
thirdly, overpressing afflictions; or fourthly, sad desertions.

Thirdly, Because there is a difference between resting out of a principle of
hope, which argues only a relyance and dependence, and out of a principle of
certainty and persuasion, applying. The truly believing soul, when out of
desertions, For hope which is seen is no hope.
and from under temptations, and not burthe^d with afflictions and melancholy,
does alwaeys apply the promises with an application of hope; it hopes they
belong to it, Romans 8. 24.
though not always with an application of persuasion, now the application of
hope and the resting out of a principle of hope, But our hope must be lively.
provided there be an acting accordingly, is enough to save, Romans 8. 24. ^ Pet.
1. 3. 4*
We are saved by hope, 1 Cor. 15. 19. 1 Col. 27. But yet this we must not rest
in, but labor for a full persuasion, the full assurance of hope, Heb. 6. 11.
Thou may apply thy self to the promse, when thou can not apply the
promise to thee: But of this more in the next Sermon.

The Twelfth SERMON.
LUKE 17. v. 5. Lord, increase our faith.
CHAP. XII.
Concerning those weaknesses that may accompany the highest act of faith, viz.
Assurance: And how to satisfy the soul that scruples its faith, because it
cannot be assured at all, or weakly and unconstantly.
MY subject is to discover what doubts and weakness may be in relation to the
last and highest act of Faith in a gracious soul; for there is nothing more
ordinary then to hear such complaints as these from a gracious soul: Alas!
never tell me of faith, I have no opinion at all that ever I shall be saved;
never did poor soul live at such incertainties; I pray, I look upward, I
desire, I faint, I groan, I swoon, and yet not a drop of cordial water of
persuasion that my Christ will afford me to revive my dying spirit; or if I do
sometimes catch up a persuasion in my soul, and come to think that I have an
interest in God, it is but a bare thought, and so weak, that it is scarce able
to ^^^nd a day; sometimes indeed for a day, or a week, or a month together, I
could bless my soul in a good condition; but then again, I am as full of
doubts and fears; and is there any certainty in this faith? am I not like a
wave of the Sea, tossed about with thousands of winds? One while I think I am
sure of heaven and glory, and am as it were wrapped up into a third heaven, and
the diadem of glory is fitting on to my head, another while I am thrown down
to hell, and me thinks every Devil is tracing me. I will (with the help of my
God) endeavavor to satisfy thee, and show thee what weakness may consist with
this act, and in relation to this act of Faith, in these ensuing Conclusions.

Conclus. 1. Thou wayst have a true and certain faith, and such a one as will
richly save thee, and yet have no assurance of thy salvation. Indeed, my
several Sermons that I preached upon this Subject, do all concur to the
proof of this truth; for if a Christian may have saving Faith, and yet so much
weakness and doubting consist and be contemporaneous with it in the soul, it
will necessarily follow, that Assurance is not the minimum quod sic, the least
degree of saving Faith. But now it lying in my way, I shall speak something
more distinctly to it. There are Opinions on the right hand and on the left
concerning this sublime act of our Faith.

1. The Papist denies any possibility of Assurance, and reviles that precious
Doctrine as licentious; and pleads only for a general faith, to believe the
history of the Word, and the Articles of Faith etc.

2. The Antinomians on the other side, deny any Faith to be true Faith that is
accmpanied with any kind of doubting; a full assurance they will make the
minimum quod sic, the least Faith that can help a man to heaven. Some Reverend
Writers living near the time of the reign of that Popish Doctrine, denying
anything of persuasion to come into the nature of true saving Faith, and
setting themselves in full opposition to it, have not a little (though
unwillingly) contributed to the last opinion, defining Faith to be a persuasion
of the pardon of our sins, and of a pardon past and done etc.

I have already showed you, that the essence and marrow of justifying Faith
consists in the souls rolling it self and relying upon God for eternal
salvation, not in the souls assurance that God is its God; in the souls
goings out, not in its commings in; in its direct act, not in its reflect act;
And therefore our Divines make a distinction betwixt a souls application of
its self to the promise, and a souls application of the promise to it self,
and grant that there may be in the soul a certainty of Faith in respect of
the object, though not an assurance of Faith in respect of the subject. We
will a little enquire how persuasion comes into the nature of justifying Faith.
There is a double distinction, which I have noted before, and shall here
repeat, would be observed concerning this persuasion.

First there is a difference betwixt a Persuasion, and a believed Persuasion,
on a full Persuasion.

Secondly there is a great deal of difference betwixt a persuasion eying the
future, and relating to the present; There may be in a gracious soul a
persuasion, though he says he is not persuaded; There is a great deal of
difference betwixt Faith, and the Sense and feeling of Faith, as I shall show
you more hereafter.

Secondly there may be in a soul a certain persuasion, though not a full
persuasion* In all Faith there is a persuasion, but in all Faith there is not a
full persuasion; the word in Scripture translated full persuasion is (...) Romans
4. 21. It is said that Abraham was fully persuaded, it is put in opposition to
doubting of unbelief, being so, says the text, he staggered not through
unbelief, and so Romans 14. Let him that eats be fully persuaded, that is, so
persuaded that he does not eat with any scruple of mind or doubting of
spirit; I may be persuaded of a thing that yet I am not fully persuaded of, but
have some doubts of; yet when my reasons for the affirmative are more then for
the negative, my mind begets a persuasion, and enters a persuasion in my soul
from the major vote of reason; Now I cannot be said to be fully persuaded,
unless my soul runs without a rub^ as it is ordinary amongst us, when we are
informed by credible Witnesses of such a thing done, we may be persuaded it
is true, and really believe the truth of it, and yet will not swear it, and
perhaps shall have scruples and doubts, unless we saw it our selves etc. So a
Christian may be persuaded that Gods love is toward him, but till he feels it
as well as thinks it, he will hardly have (...) a full persuasion without any
manner of doubts or scruples concerning it.

Again, There is a great deal of difference betwixt a persuasion for the
present, and a persuasion for the future: I am forced to put it in these Terms
for want of other; I mean betwixt an assurance that my sins are actually
pardoned, and a persuasion that they are pardonable, and decretally and
me^itoriously pardoned, and I shall feel at last the seal of Gods love; I must
speak here according to the manner of men: it is true it may sound harshly,
that a Christian should believe only that God will pardon his sins, and will
justify him, I know there be some learned and precious men that hold that the
elected soul is pardoned, and formally justified before he believes, and so
would make our justification, (as Master Burgess says wittily) nothing but
the fetching a Copy out of the Courtr^ll; but I am of his mind in his late
Treatise of justification, p. 17. 8. where he gives several Arguments against
this opinion, As,

First, If it be so, then all the Elect were then made blessed and happy,
their sins not being imputed, contrary to Ephesians. 2. 3.

Secondly, because this Doctrine would make justification only to be
declarative; when the Scriptures tell us that our sins are charged upon us
till we believe.

Thirdly, because Christ cannot as an head represent those that are not his
members: now before actual believing we are no members of Christ; Indeed
meritoriously and vertually our sins are pardoned before we believe, See the
Arguments against this answered in Mr* Burgess his Treatise of justification
p. 180* 181.
and our souls are justified before we believe: but I (with him) cannot see
how we are formally and actually justified before we believe: and to his
Arguments give me leave to add a fourth.

Fourthly, Pardon of sin and justification, it is an acquitting of the guilty
soul before God for the righteousness of another; now how the soul should be
actually acquitted before it be actually and formally guilty, I cannot
understand: And therefore I say, a soul may be persuaded that its sins are
pardonable, and shall be pardoned, and accordingly truly rely upon the Lord
Jesus Christ for the pardon of them, which is true Faith, though it cannot be
fully persuaded that its sins are pardoned. And thus much may briefly serve to
have noted how far persuasion and assurance necessarily come into the nature of
true and saving Faith, and how not: And concerning it I shall only nominate
these conclusions to you, as containing the whole truth concerning it.

First, That a Christian may have saving Faith, though he cannot be fully
persuaded that God has actually pardoned and blotted out his sins, and
formally justified him; for a believing that my sins are formally pardoned, is
to believe I am justified: and is the Faith of a justified person, not
justifying Faith (properly so called.)

Secondly, That a Believer may have true saving Faith, though he could never
yet at all be persuaded that God had actually and formally justified his soul
by pardoning his sins. This is still the application of the promise to the
soul, and a reflex act of Faith which conduces more to the souls comfort
then its formal justification.

Thirdly, That a Christian may have true justifying Faith, though he cannot at
all times be fully and unquestionably persuaded that God will pardon his sins;
a rational man in a Fever may have lost his actings of reason, though while
he has the being of a man, reason has a being in him; the tongue may belie
the heart when the actions clear it; A Christian may be at will God pardon me
with his tongue, when his heart really thinks he will, and he manifestly shows
it by crying, fasting, fearing to sin, lying grovelling at the door of free
grace.

Fourthly, That a Christian cannot have true saving justifying Faith, unless
he does (I do not say unless he think he does or unless he says he does,
but unless he does) believe, and is persuaded that God will pardon his sins:
it is easily perceived by its resolving not to leave crying, praying, walking
holily and circumspectly, that it is persuaded in this particular, that it is
best both simply and in comparison to draw near to God, and rely upon his
grace, Ball upon Faith. 82. p.
and so in event (says Mr. Ball) is sure of salvation, and yet would give a
world to be assured of Gods favor, and fully persuaded that its sins are
pardoned.

Fifthly, Willets Synopsis Papismi^ p. 974. 975.
That it is false that the Papists say, no particular assurance ought to be
looked for, or may be procured, it may be procured, and it ought to be sought
for; this might easily be proved: Perkins 3. vol. 220. 2. d. 1. vol. 542* 2. b.
143. 1. c. 564. 1. d* 543. ^. d.
but I shall not meddle with it, it being not my work, and it being a question
would take up a great deal of time: but I shall rather refer him that doubts
of this to those learned men that have sufficiently managed this quarrel
against the Papists. Ball upon Faith, 1. Part. chapter 8. p. 79. 80. 81. Downams*
Warfare, part. 1. l. 2. c* 8. p. 102.. 2. p. 103. col. 1. 30. 104.. 6. c. 9. p.
106. part. 1. l. 2. c. 11. p. 118.. cap. 13. p. 127.. 1. cap. 14. c. 11. and
many others who have largely discussed this point, Rutherfords Christ's dying
for sinners v. codicem.
and maintained this truth.

Sixthly and Lastly, It is as false that the Antinomians and Libertines hold,
that without this well-grounded full persuasion, there is no faith in the
Soul; this a learned Writer of* our own in several parts of his book has
made out against them; Thou may have true saving faith, though for the
present thou can not be fully persuaded that thy sins are pardoned: yea
though thou may think that they are not pardonable (through some accidental
temptation over-powring thee, or some corruptions hindering the actings of
Faith:) yet thou may be persuaded that they are pardonable, and at that time
it will appear to all the world that thou art persuaded they shall be pardoned
to thy soul; by thy fearing to offend God, and thy carfulness to please him
by thy crying, fasting, weeping, lying at the feet of divine grace, and
resolving if thou perishest, to perish at the gate of heaven, and meet with
hell there if thou meetest with it anywhere; Nay, be not mistaken, this thy
Faith is 1 certain, and 2 strong as well as saving.

First, It is saving, That I have already showed you, when I fully showed you
that the essence and pith of justifying Faith was a fiduciall rolling our
selves and hanging upon the Lord Jesus Christ for pardon. Now as it is saving,

Secondly so it is strong; That Faith (says a precious Author) is argued to
be strong that has no light of comfort, but walks in darkness upon the
margin and borders of an hundred deaths. David's Faith was a strong Faith, when
though all Gods waves were upon him, yet he called upon God daily. Psa. 88. 7,
8, 9. when the soul is so far from being persuaded that it is a lovely one in
the Lords eyes, that it conceives it self a damned wretch in the Lords sight,
and only sees a sparkling light in at a crevis of the window, and by a little
pinhole, a beam of hope comes in, and it thinks, well, my sins are yet
pardonable, yet I dare not say there is no hope: yet I know not what to think,
my sins are great Gaole-sinns, I am persuaded if my name be in the Charter of
grace, it is in the bottom, and it is sometimes ready to think that the little
glimmering of light it sees, is rather the counterfeiting light of a Glowworm
then the triumphing light of the Sun: yet the soul is ravished with that
particle of light, and goes and kisseth the hole that gives it a passage, and
says, well, here is all my comfort, my sins are yet pardonable, I see the
ship of my soul is wrackt; possibly this bit of board may save my life, I will
on to it, if I perish I perish; I will not lose this pin-hole light, I will
cry, fast, weep, and pray; Lord, say my sins are pardoned, I am persuaded
thou can pardon them, and if thou will, thou can make me clean; Lord! here
will I lie, filthy, bloody, full of sores at the Poole of Bethesda, I will not
stir a step from the Poole, I will lie in the way till thou have cured me. I
say, this does argue a strong faith; the persuaded assured soul has cables of
comfort, who would fear the breaking of them? God does not rap his fingers so
often as this poor soul; This Believer has but a twine thread to hang upon;
yet he catches hold, and says, this straw shall bear my souls weight; yea,
God raps off his fingers often, his life is full of doubts and fears, yet he
holds and will not stir a step; does it not argue a great a reliance? The
woman of Canaan had no assurance of Christ's favor, Matthew. 15. 21. she cried,
he answered her not a word, v. 23. nay, when she made friends to him, he would
neither hear her nor her friends mediation, (though they were Christ's own
Disciples) still she comes and worshippeth him, he chides her; (this yet argued
no assurance) she replies; he says, Great is thy Faith, v. 28. Mr Ru^therford
notes sweetly upon that, that the fewer Externals that faith needs, the
stronger it is within; little evidence, much adherence speaks a strong faith.
Now though that persuasion be an inward work, yet the grounds are externals;
for the strength or weakness of persuasion is moved by the compass of sense;
the lesser my grounds are, if my adherence be the same, the stronger is my
faith; if I will trust my friends little finger as much as his whole hand, does
it not the more argue my confidence in his strength, and my reliance upon him,
that he will do what he can to hold me? Oh! it is a sweet thing to see a soul
hang upon Christ's little finger, that only apprehends a general promise, and
is persuaded that its sins are pardonable, and sometimes doubts of this too;
yet it cries, and hangs, and weeps, and relies, and scorns to lay its little
finger upon any thing else, any self sufficiency, any creature-righteousnesse
to bear it up; it argues a strong faith: O soul, be not deceived! Great is thy
faith; nay, and such a faith may be certain too, thou may live at
uncertainties upon a certain faith: The bruised reed is not broken, the
smoking flax is not quenched, thy faith is doubly certain, though thy life of
faith be full of incertainties.

1. It is certain in respect of the Object. 2. It is certain in respect of
the Event.
1. In respect of the Object: A weak faith does not argue weakness in Free
grace, or weak efficacy in the blood of a precious Jesus; the pur-blinde eye
does as certainly see the Sun as he whose eyes are best, the weak
pur-blind-eyed soul does certainly see, apprehend, and rely upon Christ though
not so clearly and comfortably.

2 Thy faith is certain in respect of the Event: Even as every thing that
hangs upon a pin or a peg, is as sure as the pin or peg on which it hangs:
So that soul that hangs upon the mercy and Free Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ
and the rocky promises of salvation, is as sure as the promise, etc.

And thus I think I have sufficiently cleared the first thing, that a Christian
may have a true saving Faith; yea and such a one as shall be strong and
certain, both in respect of the object and event, that yet has not this
sublime act of Faith, which is assurance. I hasten to a second conclusion, and
all the rest of my Propositions with respect to a full persuasion that our sins
already are actually and formally pardoned.

2. Conclus. Thy Assurance and persuasion that thy sins are pardoned, may be a
true persuasion and assurance, though but weak; or to speak more properly, you
may have this reflex act of faith, and be persuaded that your sins are
pardoned, and this persuasion may be a true reflex act of faith, and yet not
constant in degrees. Sometimes it may be weaker, sometimes stronger. I call the
weakest persuasion wrought in the soul, that its sins are pardoned, a reflex
act of faith; for I do not think that it is a piece of Faith necessary to the
justification of a soul, that it should believe that its sins are really and
actually pardoned, though it be a beam of grace that the soul should love,
and look after more then the world; and it is and ought to be more precious to
a believing soul, then all the rocks of gold, or mountains of silver or beds
of spices, or ten thousand rivers of oil; yet I say, I do not take it to be
an act of justifying Faith, but of the justified soul. Now this may be true in
the soul, though it be sometimes weaker, and sometimes stronger; That soul
that all times is persuaded that its sins are pardoned and actually remitted,
is not always a like persuaded of it. It is a beam of Gods manifestative love
which admirs of degrees. Now as upon the earth, in the day time there is
always some light, though through some interpositions of clouds the light is
not always alike; so in Christians that the Lord has brought to this degree
that they do really believe that their sins are pardoned, though through the
sun-shines of Gods manifestative love upon their souls, they for the most part
think so, yet they are not always alike persuaded of it. I do verily believe
that David generally was in this temper; and who so peruses his precious book
of Psalms, will find that he takes the pardon of sins for granted; yet who
so again peruses the several Psalms, will easily perceive that David's
persuasion was not always alike, as any one may see by comparing, Psalm. 6. and
Psalm. 41. verse. 11. you shall find him in some Psalms altogether singing, and
praising, and triumphing, not a mention of a tear; but in others, declaring
persuasion, yet wants; expressing confidence, yet tears; as in that sixth
Psalm, verse. 1. 2, 3, 4. compared with verse. 9. Sometimes the heavens are so
clear to gracious souls, that the shinings of grace dazzle their souls so
much, that nothing will satisfy them but heaven; Now Lord let thy servant
depart in peace; O that now I might dye and be incorporated into glory! they
are so wrapped into the third heavens, that they cannot speak their joy; another
while it is lower water with their souls; the Moons influence is not as it
was. David, I am confident, would have been glad of an errand to have sent him
out of the world to heaven, Psalm. 34. But the good man again in the 39 Psalm,
prays as heartily for his life, as any poor wretch could have done, that lay
under an apprehension of a past sentence in hell against him, 1 Pet. 1. 8. we
read of a rejoicing, with which believers should rejoice, even with joy
unspeakable, but there was not such a constant overflowing and full tide of joy
always sure. It is a sure note, that manifestative love has its degrees, and
it is from a strong influence of Gods manifestative love to the soul that the
soul has such a persuasion; now had I leisure, I might at large here tell
you, at what times commonly the springtide of assurance flows highest, and on
the contrary, what may make the apprehension weaker, and at what times it is
ordinarily most weak.

1. Commonly just upon Gods return after a long desertion and sad expectation,
the souls assurance is very great, and its persuasion very high: God turns
midnight into midday: The soul then brings the Lord Jesus Christ into her
mothers house, into the chambes of her that conceived her: commonly when the
husband comes home, after a long absence and long expectation, more then
ordinary tokens of love, and passages of love are discerned betwixt him and the
wife of his bosom; Christ comes in then to make amends for his frowns and
lowrings, with the sweetest kisses and embraces: Mid-winter is turned into a
Mid-sommer, this you shall find constantly in David's Psalms; and so on the
contrary, when the soul is under desertions, if there be left yet a
persuasion, that though God does hide his face, yet he does not hide his
heart, yet it is but a weak and just living persuasion.

2. And commonly at greatest distress, God comes in with strongest persuasions
and fullest assurance, as when the Christian is called to Martyrdom or called to
dye, or called to do any great services, that it distrusts its own strength, and
is ready to fear of faint, that nothing but the most reviving quick and hot
cordial water can keep the soul clean, and able to undergo that great and
extraordinary service that God calls for at his hands; ordinarily now at such
times, the Lord is pleased to come in with a fullness into the soul. (It was
but yesterday you heard by my Reverend Brother, that ordinarily God comes in
with sighs which are evidences to sense, when the soul is in greatest
streights;) and we shall find that Gods promise made to Abraham was often
renewed to him and to Isaac, and to Jacob; but the diligent Reader shall
observe, that God picked out that time, or those times when he called his Saints
to some hard work in doing, of which their hearts might sink concerning the
Lords promise. The original promise was in Genesis 12. 7. it was renewed to him,
chap. 13. v. 15. when he was to go out of the land, he scarce knew whither,
and leave it to others to possess; and to Isaac when he went to Gerar, Genesis
26. 4. and to Jacob going down to Egypt, Genesis 46. 4. At such times the children
of God are to do double work, and had need of double strength, and so a double
subsistence; when Eliah was to go in the strength of his meat forty days, he
had need eat a good meal; the Angel therefore twice admonished him, to arise
and eat, 1 Kings, chapter 19. 6. 7. The journey was great which he had to go, the
frequent Stories of the Martyrs make this good; when the Lord called them to
their great service at the stake, he prepared them for their double work with
double comforts, ravishing their souls with glory, and so often, that God
makes many of his dear Saints live upon short commons all their life time,
when he brings them to the hard work of dying, he gives them a glimpse of
glory; This is a note of a precious Divine, Rutherford, Trial of faith.
who gives experiences of it, and it is especially when they die strong
torturing deaths; for always it is not seen; it may be they have had all
comforts before, and may die in conflicts; God will try how they can walk in
the strength of what they have had, or if they have had no bread till then, God
will hardly call them to die without giving them a crust; yet (as he sweetly
says) God walks in liberty here, and will not have us to limit the breathings
of the holy Ghost to jump with the hour of our dying; for we may make an idol
of a begun heaven, as if it were more excellent then Christ. By this you see
(in stead of much might be said) that assurances may be weaker and stronger,
yet true; and this will be further made good by my last Conclusion, which I
will but touch, And that is this:

Concl. 3. Thou may have had, and again have a true assurance and full
persuasion, and for the present have none at all: I have spoken so much to this
before, that I shall need add very little: It is necessary to constitute the
true direct act of Faith, that it be a continued act; and that soul never did
truly rely at all, that ever since it began to rely ceased to rely; but for a
reflex act, it may be wanting even in the soul that has had it, and may have
it again if God will please to turn his face toward it; nay, I will question
whither ever that Christian had true assurance or no, that has had it, as he
pretends, without any intermission; for so long as there remains a Devil to
tempt, or a flesh to allure to sin, there will be sometimes wants of full
assurance; yea, if there were none of them both, I would make it a great
question, whither the wise God would ever keep such a despensation of his love
in a full Sunshine to any soul (though loved never so dearly;) I am afraid
though we have much talk of Faith of assurance now adays in the world, if the
Lord should come to sift the hearts of his poor creatures, he would scarce
find the mustard seed Faith of adherence. 1. Overpowring temptations. 2.
Overgrowing corruptions. 3. Natural distempers of Melancholy. 4. Divine
desertions shall hinder assurance, and make the act to cease; and judge you
then what soul it is probable shall have it an incessant constant act. But I
have done with this last thing, and now I have showed you what doubts and
weaknesses may consist with every act of Faith in a truly gracious soul. Now I
should show you from what principle these doubts arise, and how they differ
from the doubts of unbelieving desparing wretches.

The Thirtheenth SERMON.
LUKE 17. v. 5. Lord, increase our faith.
CHAP. XIII.
How to comfort that soul that thinks it has not true Faith, because it does
not feel God strengthening it to those acts of Grace which it ought to act.
I Will take leave here (apprehending it a seasonable place) to bring it in, to
speak something to one scruple of conscience, which does often perplex many a
good Christian; and that is want of feeling of Gods love etc. Ah! (says many a
poor soul) did I but indeed know that God and Christ were my Redeemer and
portion, then I think I should not need be much entreated to cast away this
sadness and dejection of spirit, but I cannot feel any such thing. And this
makes a Christian think that it neither does nor may believe.

Now there is a double feeling, for the want of which, many good souls often
complain, and upon the want of which they raise to themselves conclusions
against believing. For want of a distinction I will presume for once to coin
one, There is a feeling of peace, and a feeling of strength.

1. The feeling of peace, is, when a poor Christian apprehends God appeased to
its soul, and feels him saying, I am thy God, the God of thy salvation; this
is that persuasion which is that highest reflex act of Faith of which I spoke
the last time, and showed you what degrees and abatements it might meet with in
a true Believer: Now this a true Christian may want, though he does feel Gods
spirit carrying him on to acts of mortification and vivification etc. Of this I
shall not speak, having spoken the last time, how far it may be wanted,
weakened, or abated, or discontinued, even in Gods true and dear children.

2. But there is another feeling which for distinction sake, I call a feeling
of strength; when a Christian, though he does not feel Gods peace sealed up
and assured unto his soul, yet he cannot deny but he feels his soul carried
out by God unto duties, to love him, to desire him, to delight in him etc. Now
this latter feeling ought to satisfy the soul, when, though God does not
please as yet to apply the promise to his soul; yet he feels God enabling him
to apply himself to the promise, when he feels God changing and renewing his
heart and affections etc. But here is that which many poor Christians want,
and complain for the want of; they will confess, that could they but feel God
strengthening them against their corruptions, and carrying out their hearts in
acts of love, and desire toward him etc they would quiet themselves, and be
very thankful to him, if he would but give them so much of the morsels of
Free Grace as would keep spiritual life in them, and keep their hearts from
dying for want of mouth-fuls, although God would not yet please to let them sit
down at the banqueting table of assurance, and eat of the sweet meats of that
peace which passes all understanding. If God would please to give them but
such sips of his flaggons as might stay them, though they wanted such dishes of
apples as to comfort them, it would suffice; but alas! this they want, and how
can they believe? etc.

Now all that I shall speak to a Christian in this perplexity I will reduce to
these two heads.

1. Something by way of Consolation: And 2. Something by way of direction.
First, By way of Consolation, I should propound these few things, as
considerations which may tend through the blessing of God to the comforting of
such souls in such streights.

Consid. 1. That not feeling, does not argue a not being: A thing may be though
it be not felt; it is no Logic to infer a negative conclusion from ou^
sense. Sometimes we see not the beams of the Sun; the interposition of the
Moon does hinder us in an eclypse from beholding its light; yea, dark clouds
we see ordinarily will do it; what shall we therefore conclude that the Sun
does not shine? or that the Sun does not cast an influence upon the
creatures? this we should call ridiculous. In like manner thou say, I do
not feel God casting his influence of grace upon my soul, strengthening me
against my corruptions, nor so shining upon me with beams of enlivening
quickening grace, my heart is not quick in his service, it is dead unto duties,
and dull in them, I do nor feel the heat of the Son of Righteousness warming
my soul with beams of love etc. therefore will thou conclude God does not do
it? The Psalmist cries out for want of feeling, Psalm. 22. v. 1.
Psalm. 22. v. 1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, and art so far
from my health, and from the words of my roaring? and so he goes on, v. 2. O
my God, I cry by day time and thou hear not, and in the night, and have no
audience. Mark Christian! holy men may sometimes want feeling; did not God
think you hear David? had he indeed no audience according to his sad thoughts?
Ah! (says a Christian) but there was some comfort, though he did not feel
peace, yet he did feel strengh; he felt God enabling him to pray, and cry,
and seek him; but I cannot feel this. Hark yet once again to Asaph, Psalm.
77. v 4. I am so troubled that I cannot speak, David, Psalm. 51. v. 10. 11, 12.
He prays to God, to create a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within him,
and v. 14. to confirm him with a free spirit. And yet shall we think that at
this time David had not the sweet influences of Gods holy Spirit? if so, we are
confuted from the foregoing verse, Cast me not away from thy presence, take not
thy holy spirit from me. By all which it may easily appear that it is one
thing not to feel God strengthening and quickening us, and another thing for him
not to do it: The working of Gods Spirit within us is very secret, according
to the nature of the Spirit; we do not feel the stars influence upon us,
nor yet the actings of our souls within us, and yet it is certain, they have
an influence upon us: and that our souls do subtly and secretly act in all,
in every part of our bodies: and therefore secondly,

Consid. 2. That the truth of Gods love to thee in his acting in thee, is not
so easily to be discerned in the acting and working of God, as in the effect
of such acts and operations; secret acts of spiritual substances are not to be
discerned and understood in agendo, but in affecto, not in the doing but when
they are done; we cannot feel the souls conveying of its influence and power
of working through every part of the body, we cannot understand or see or
feel the time when it does it, nor the manner how it does it etc. yet we know
it is done, and that is enough for us; thou can not see nor feel the acting
of the vegetative soul in the plant, thou can not feel how it grows, or see
when it grows or understand the moment of its shooting out, yet thou say it
does act* the plant is grown, and the vegetative soul in it has questionless
been the internal principle of its growth. You may possibly see a man in some
lethargick disease or in a trance, that you shall not see or discern that his
soul is yet in his body; you shall not discern his pulse to beat, nor discern
him to breath, but all possibly in the room may judge him dead: yet his body
keeps still warm, does not stiffen, or grow cold, his eyes are not set, nor
his chap fallen, and possibly by applying a glass to his mouth you may discern
he yet breathes, and lives, and consequently you may gather the man's soul has
not yet taken its leave of the body, for then you know he would grow stiff and
cold: and so you conclude that his pulse does still beat, though so obscurely
that you cannot feel or discern it; so it may be with thy soul (Christian);
the invisible work of God in acting his grace in thee, quickening, strengthening
thee, moving thee to spiritual duties, if thou look to see it and feel it
acting, as thou may feel the beating of thy pulse upon thy wrist, thou may
be deceived, it may beat darkly and secretly, it is a secret work of a
spiritual substance; and yet thou may be comforted in it, if thou will but
look to the effects; if thy soul and body do not grow stiff and cold and
stinking with old sins and lusts and base corruptions: there is some spiritual
life that keeps thy soul warm; though thou can not feel Gods secret and
spiritual working in thy soul in the very act of warming and quickening thee,
and enabling thy soul to love him, and desire after him; yet speak truth,
does not thy soul love him? do thou not delight in him? do thou not
desire after him? come, let us put a glass to the mouth of thy soul; here is a
base lust and corruption, which if thou actest, thou shall bewray the hatred of
thy God to all the World; dare thou do it wilfully and knowingly? here is a
profane company that would be glad of thy company; and at the same time here is
an Ordinance of God, at which if thou will be, thou may possibly suck a
great deal of sweetness, and taste much of thy God: where will thou be? will thou baulk thy communion with God, rather then with profane and ungodly men?
If thou dare so, it is something; but on the contrary, does no communion, no
company please thee so as the company of the Saints of God? and does no
communion like thee so as the communion thou have with thy God in his
Ordinances? If so, thou have some spiritual life in thee; for the dead man
has no such judicious pallat; and if thou live a spiritual life, it is not
thou that live, but Christ that lives in thee, and thou live by Faith in
the Son of God; thus thou may easily discern that in the effects, which thou
could not in the working of the cause. But Alas! (says a poor Christian) my
willing and desiring is nothing; for though to will be present with me, yet I
have no strength to perform. And what will you make a desire to believe and
pray Faith and Prayer? I answer, raw desires and wishes are no more believing,
then Esaus weeping for the blessing was the blessing, or Balaams wish to dye
the death of the righteous was the happy end of such as dye in the Lord. But
the sincere desires and good will of justified persons are accepted of the Lord
for the deed; and when Christ pronounces such blessed as hunger and thirst after
righteousness, we say in that sense a sincere desire to pray and believe,
Ruth. p. 14^.
is materially and by concomitancy a neighbor, and near a kin to believing
and praying. A verbal or semina^^ intention to pray, believe, love Christ, do
his will, is in the seed of praying, believing etc. when the intention is
supernatural, and of the same kind with the act, as the seed is the tree: we
say not so of natural intentions or desires; As Abraham's sincere intentions to
offer up his son, was the offering of his son etc. But I go to a third
consideration.

Thirdly therefore consider that feeling at the best is but a deceivable and
disputable evidence; ofttimes conclusions grounded upon sense are false and
sink in time. If thou judge thy condition by feeling, thou may ofttimes
think God does nothing for thee, though he be at that instant fully enlivening
thee etc. and again think that God is at peace with thee, and that he
carries thee out to duties etc. when there is no such matter, and it is
nothing but the strength of natuarall parts that carries thee out etc. Saul
thought he had a great deal of feeling, 1 Samuel 15. 13. when he came to meet
Gods messenger, he cries out, Blessed be thou of the Lord; I have kept the
Commandments of the Lord; But yet the following part of that story will tell
you that Saul was far enough off from any true feeling of peace and comfort: So
without question those in Mat. 7. 22. judged themselves to have a great deal
of feeling of Gods strength, when they had prophesied in Gods name, and in his
name cast out Devils, and in his name done many wonderful works; yet Christ
professes he would say to many such, I never knew you, depart from me ye
workers of iniquity; thou cryest, thou do not feel God carrying thee out in
duties as many other Christians are, and that which thou call Gods spirit in
them, or in thy self, may be no such matter; it is not the courting of God
with elegant e^^^essions that argues the strength of God assisting; there is
many a stammering nonsense prayer that has more of the sweet spirit of God in
it: there may be a full heart, though it runs not out of the lips so fast, yea
oftentimes the fullness of the heart causes the straitness of the lips, just
as the fullness of the vessel may occasion the water to run slowly out of the
hole for want of vent or wind.

The Apostle says, that the Spirit of God helps our infirmities, with cries
and groans which cannot be uttered; it does not say it helps our infirmities
with courtly expressions that cannot be pa^alleled: thou may when thou
think that God carrryes thee out with more strength and enlargement to
duties, call and misconstrue that to be the strength and assistance of the
spirit of God which is occasioned merely from thy own clearenesse of natural
spirit, when thou art in a little better vein of Rhetoric then thou were.
Mistake not, there is a distinction betwixt Praying gifts, and Praying graces;
I observe it is said Jacob wrestled with God, (by virtue of strength from him
subintellige.) This is the strength of the spirit: the spirits work is not to
carry out our tongue in expressions, but our heart in zeal and importunity. It
is not said that Jacob scraped legs with God; no; he wrestled; we are but ill
ludges of feeling commonly, which makes feeling but a deceivable and disputable
evidence.

Fourthly, consider that No Christian feels always alike, yea, perhaps, has
no cause to feel always ali^e. God to the best of his dearest servants does
sometimes measure but an Ephah, and sometimes but an Omer; distinguish always
betwixt the truth of Gods love to his dear children, and the actings, I mean
the visible actings of his love; that of God which is not seen, is always
full and certain to Christians, I mean his elective love, the yernings of his
heart toward his dear children; there is of God also that may be seen, Psalm.
68. 24. They have seen thy goings O God, even the goings of my God in the
Sanctuary; Gods goings in a poor soul are sometimes very visible to a gracious
soul, but sometimes his goings are more secret and invisible, yet he is
always going in acts of love and grace to his poor fervants, only his goings
are more mysterious and dark; God sometimes goes a mere foot pace, just sets
one foot before another in them and toward them, sometimes he goes faster and
more strongly in them* and apparently toward them.

First, Gods soft going in the soul may sometimes be a cause why the soul
cannot feel. Peter had no reason to feel the strength of God alike, when he
shamefully denied his Master in the high Priests Hall, as when he durst
venture to walk on the Sea toward him.

Secondly, God withdrawes some degrees of his strength sometimes to try whether
a Christian can stand upon the true legs of Faith, as well as upon the wooden
legs of sense; the mother withdrawes her hand sometimes to see how the child
can go without trusting to the feeling of her hand guiding and supporting it.

Thirdly, another cause may be in the Christian why he cannot feel God
carrying him out to acts of his grace in his strength always alike; The soul
may possibly have lost its feeling; the benumbed member does not feel; In
sicknesses and deseases of the body, Nature may sometimes be so much
infeebled, that sometimes the party affected falls into a dead swound* wherein
he is deiprved for a time, not only of the use of his understanding, reason and
memory, but also of his sense, motion, and vital functions. So it may be with
a Christian; sin or the violence of some temptations of Satan may be such,
that the Christian cannot feel any thing; the soul cast into a swound, and
deprived of all the spiritual faculties of it, faith love, life etc. no wonder
the soul for the present does not feel: the leg of the soul is asleep, the
whole soul is benumbed, how should it feel? but let it alone a little: as such
body (if not quite dead) will quickly return to its sense again and live, and
feel, and move etc. so likewise will the gracious soul quickly come to
recover its life, and sense, and motion again; though the soul seems (to the
judgment of sense) to have no sap or principle of life in it; yet consider it
is wintertime with the soul, stay but till the spring and summer, while the
frost has done nipping and discoloring, and the soul will have its sap
visible, and recover i^s beauty again: there is fire in the soul, though it
be caked up in the night; wait but till the morning that the ashes be blown
away, you shall see the fire of Gods spirit is not extinguished in the soul. I
sleep, (says the Spouse) but my heart waketh: there is a waking heart, though
there be no waking eye, the soul (as well as the body) in sleep is bereaved of
sense: wait but till the morning, and the soul will confess it sees, and
has recovered its senses again. Thus for thy comfort know Christian, that thou
could not justly expect to feel always alike: for first God does not
dispense always alike: and secondly if he did dispense always alike, yet a
benumbed, ashy, winter-sleepy soul has not that beauty ^or that sense which a
lively, healthy, well-tempered, clear-spring-awakened soul has.

Fifthly, consider That Gods strength may be then seen in thee, when it is not
seen and felt by thee. The gracious soul is not always, nay, is very seldom
a competent Judge of it self; the high Christian may often have a very low,
yea, too low an opinion of himself; the Christian is his own worst construing
Book, and especially too at some times: if Paul may be judge of himself,
sometimes he is the least of Saints, and the chiefest of sinners, and unworthy
to be called an Apostle. If David may be judge of himself, Psalm. 22 v. 6. He
is a worm and no man, yea, the very reproach of men. So if many Christians may
be judges of themselves: Alas! they cannot pray, they cannot love God, they
cannot believe, they feel nothing of the rength of God carrying them out; when
(if standers by may be judges) there is a great deal of the strength of God
manifested in their hearts and carriages of their lives, and God is gloriously
discovered in carrying out their hearts so gloriously, and sweetly, and firmly
for him as he does: take a true Christian, and this is a sure rule, that God
and Gods people have far better opinions of him, then he has of himself; now
this may comfort thee, when other better and more experienced Christians (by
thy own confession) then thy self, can see more in thee, then thou can feel;
the body in a dead swound feels no life in it self, but all its vital motions
and functions are hindered: now therefore at such a time, others in the room
are Judges of its life or death, they by observing the warmth of the body, the
motions of the pulse, or applying a glass to the mouth of the swounding
person, do perceive life in the man that to his own sense, and perhaps to the
sense of some others is a dead carcass.

Sixthly and lastly, consider that it is no Argument to warrant thee not to
believe, because thou do not feel God carrying thee out by his arms of
strength in such a manner to spiritual duties, and the acts of spiritual and
saving graces as thou desire, or perhaps expectest; the reason of this is
plain, because it is my duty as well to believe for strength, as for any thing
else; Sure I am, Gods promises are as much for strength to act grace as for any
thing else: and the promises of God are the object of my Faith; it is my duty
to believe the promises, I will strengthen thee (says God,) I will help thee
and uphold thee with the hand of my righteousness: thou say this cannot I
believe. Why? because God does not strengthen me and help me carry out my heart
in an act of Faith: Thus thou beggest the question; the question is not whither
thou ought to believe when thou feel God carrying thee on to believing
etc. But whither thou ought not to believe that God will strengthen thee,
and carry thee out to acts of believing and loving etc. But some may say, What
does this differ from Free Will doctrine? Can I believe unless God does
strengthen me to believe? Why, do you call upon a man to lay hold when he
complains that he wants hands* or upon a man to walk, when he tells you he
cannot find that he has any legs? Mistake not Christian; God has said, I will
strengthen thee, I will help thee, and uphold thee with the hand of my
righteousness: Now I say it is thy duty to believe this promise of strength
and help, and I confess that it is not in thy power to believe this promise,
but God must strengthen thee and help thee before thou can believe this
promise that he will strengthen thee and help thee; but yet I do not call upon
one that has no hands to lay hold, nor upon one that has no legs to walk, but
upon one that says he does not feel his legs, I call upon him to walk, and I
call upon one that does not know and feel that he has hands to lay hold etc.
And this is sense, and warrantable Divinity; Faith is not sensible and visible
to a Christian in the habit, but only in the acts; I call to thee to show forth
the habit of faith. Now it shall not excuse thee from this duty, that thou
can not feel thou have any habit of Faith; the habit of this precious
grace is invisible. Thus have I given thee some considerations, which duly
weighed and considered, may comfort thy soul under this perplexity. I have
only one thing more to do, and that is to speak a word or two of direction to
such souls to show them what to do, that they may be comforted, in which I
will be brief.

First, then by way of direction, Find out the cause and remove it; the causes
may be various; I cannot name them all; but the great and ordinary causes may
be, first Gods will; secondly, thy own temper.

1. Gods will; he will not please perhaps to lead thee with so strong an arm at
one time as at another; he will try how thou will live by faith; sense is
bread; he will have thee not to live by bread only, but by every word that
comes out of the mouth of God. Now sense and feeling, that is bread; if this
be the cause (as it was in Peter) thou must not dispute but submit to it.

2. The cause may be in thy self; it may be thou art under some violent
temptations of Satan, or under the clouds and darknesses of some sins or
corruptions, or thy expectation of feeling or sense may be too high, or thou
may be wilful, and not feel when thou may. These causes must be removed
by faith, repentance, endeavor, obedience etc. Has sin benumbed thee? be
humbled for this sin, and thou shall feel: Art thou in desertion? believe
and hope, and thou shall feel again. It is a known maxim, Take away the
cause, and the effect will cease. But

Secondly, Wait for feeling; this is is a part of thy duty in relation to this
want, especially caused by Gods will, Is. 40. 31. They that wait upon the Lord,
shall renew their strength like the Eagle. Psalm. 27. 14. Wait on the Lord, be
of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart; wait I say on the Lord:
wait with faith and hope, and patience.

Thirdly, Learn to live upon Gods Word: Man shall not live by bread only, but
upon every Word that comes out of the mouth of God: We are not to live by
faith upon the incertainty of sense: All that that speaks is not Gospel; but
we have a more sure and certain livelihood, even the unchangeable goodness,
and infallible goodness of a God that cannot lie nor repent. Sense is
deceiving, truth is infallible; does sense say God does not strengthen me? and
does Gods word say, these things I could not do if God did not strengthen me?
whither it be now better to believe God, or deceivable sense, judge thou.

Fourthly, Learn to acknowledged Gods little finger? thou do not find God
lending his whole hand, perhaps not strengthening thee in such a measure to act
grace in such a degree; but know the least stirring of the soul in a spiritual
manner to a spiritual action is from God; flesh and blood could not do it;
find ou^ out Gods little secret workings, look for these, thou will find some
of them in thy soul.

Fifthly and lastly, Act contrary to thy mind: we bid the sick man eat against
his stomach; thou say I cannot pray, I cannot believe: why? I do not find
God giving me an heart to it; do it against thy mind; thou shall find
strength to do it, and comfort from doing of it.

This learned Mr Rutherford gives great Reason for; as 1. Because it is
ordinarily seen that a Christian may begin to pray with sad and fleshly
complaints of unbelief, yet going on, the breathing of the holy Ghost will
fill the sails etc. if we be doing, the Lord will be with us. 2. Our
indisposition is a sin, and does not free us from our duty. 3. Ruth.
We are to pray against weakness and indisposition, Christ dying.
and for strength, and freedom of spirit. 4. We are commanded in the day of
trouble and temptation to pray, Psalm. 50. 15. Math. 6. 13. ^ 5. It is a sinful
omission in us not to pray and act, not to do what we can, though we feel a
weakness etc. and several other Reasons he gives, p. 486. 487. etc. Now do
thou not feel the strengthening influence of Gods Spirit carrying thee on to
thy duty? yet do it, that is the way to come to have a feeling; stir up the
grace of God that is in thee, 2. Tim. 1. 6. God complained, Esaias 64. v 7. That
there was none that called upon his name, or stirred up himself to lay hold upon
him. It is the ordinary practice of Free Grace, to send in sense and strength
upon thy endeavors, yet freely, not as merited by them. And thus I have
shortly dispatched all that I have to say to this scruple of conscience, where
the soul complains for want of feeling etc.

The Fourteenth SERMON.
LUKE 17. v. 5. Lord, increase our faith.
YOu may remember my design is to direct you to such means as may increase
your Faith. The first which I propounded, was, To remove such scruples as
hinder the progress of our souls in the work of believing; the soul
conceiting either that it ought not to believe, or else that it does not
believe: The latter sort of which (as I have showed you) arises either from an
ignorant mistake of the nature and act and degrees of faith, or from a
mis-judging of the effects of faith: Where a mistake of the nature and acts of
faith is the cause; by way of satisfaction, I propounded to your consideration
these two things.

1. That there are diverse acts of faith, every of which is not necessary to
Justification.

2. That faith is of so good a nature, that it will consist in the soul with
many doubtings and weaknesses.

I have showed you how true faith will and may consist with many doubtings, and
with what weaknesses it may consist in respect of knowledge, assent, reliance,
and assurance; to sum up this business fully, I have only by way of
conclusion to discover to you in what the doubtings which may be in Gods
dearest Saints, differ from the doubtings of unbelievers and reprobates. This
is my work at this time. Alas! (says a poor soul) but I am afraid that my
doubting is not such a doubting as is incident to the Saints of God, but such
as Devils and reprobates have; doubting of despair, not opposite only but
contradictory to faith etc. How shall I know whither my doubts be such as may
consist with faith in a gracious soul yea or no etc?

CHAP. XIV.
How to know whither our doubtings be such as may consist with true faith in a
gracious soul.
IN regard of this, it will be necessary that I should difference doubts, and
show you wherein the Christian may be comforted, being assured his doubts are
not such as are inconsistent with true faith; for thy comfort therefore, know
that there is a vaste difference betwixt the doubts of Gods people and the
doubts of reprobates, apparent in these five particulars.

First, they differ in their ground and principle from which they arise. The
principle from which the doubts arise, which are in the Saints of God, is
infirmity, Romans 4. 19. 20. The Apostle says, Abraham staggered not at the
Promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God.
He doubted not through infidelity, (says Mr Ball) but he doubted of infirmity,
when he took Hagar to his bed, for the raising of him a seed, Genesis 16. v. 2. 3.
and God (Genesis 15. v. 4.) had directly promised him an Heir; yea, so many
children, that the Stars of heaven should be a lesser number; yea, did he not
doubt Genesis 17. 17. when the Lord had promised him a son? he laughed and said
in his heart, shall a child be born to him that is an hundred years old? and
shall Sarah that is ninty years old bear? I know St Austine says, Abraham's
laughing was risus exultantis, non derisio diffidentis, the laughing of one
that rejoiced, and not the scorning of one that distrusted; but (with all due
reverence to that learned and pious man) I do not think that he has fully
solved the knot. I do not think it was a mocking of distrust, nor yet that it
was a bare laughter of rejoicing. I humbly conceive there was an exulting, but
yet mixed with a little doubting or disputing; he rejoiced considering the
faithfulness of the word, but yet his sense (through infirmity) quarrelled
with his faith about it. In the joy of his heart, he said as Mary upon the like
tidings, Luke 1. v, 38. Behold the servant of the Lord, let it be now unto me
according to thy word; and yet through infirmity, he said, How can these things
be? and therefore in the very next words, v. 18. he says unto God, O that
Ishmael might live before thee: which words, as they plainly express Abraham's
good will, and wishing to Ishmael; yet (under correction to better judgments)
I conceive also from a comparing of the words before and immediately after, that
they intimate a kind of doubting of Gods fulfilling his word: As if Abraham
should have said, Lord! I am overjoyed, and know not how to believe this
glorious word; I trust God will be as good as his word, but yet (to make sure)
Oh that Ishmael might live before thee! This (I conceive) we may see is
intimated partly by comparing the words with the former; God had just then
promised him a Son by Sarah, verse. 16. and upon it he utters this speech;
secondly, by comparing the words with those that immediately follow, as Gods
reply upon that desire of Abraham, v. 18. And God said, Sarah thy wife shall
bear thee a son indeed, and thou shall call his name Isaac; As if God should
have said, Art thou disputing Abraham? Indeed, my words shall come to pass, I
am not in jest with thee; nay more (to confirm thee) thou shall call his name
Isaac. God adds two things in his reply to confirm Abraham's faith. 1. The
word indeed, 2. He particularizeth his Son by name, which he should have. So
that it is plain he doubted, yet (says the Apostle) he staggered not through
unbelief: unbelief was not the predominant principle, for he did believe it;
but infirmity was the principle from whence his doubting flowed. Let us a
little consider the words of the Apostle, (...), etc.
and they will fully open this particular, Romans 4. 20. He staggered not at the
promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith giving glory to God.

1. He staggered not at the promise, did not quarrel at the truth of Gods
word, that he believed was true and faithful; his doubt was from himself; he
was a hundred years old, and his wife ninty; indeed, it is said, v. 19. That he
did not consider his own body now dead. I conceive it is to be understood in
fine, he did not so consider it as to let it conquer his faith in the promise.

2. He staggered not at the promise through unbelief: That was not the
principle, a total unbelief; it was weakness for the present, not unbelief.

Thirdly it was not such a donbting, but he gave glory to God, in resting upon
his word as a true and faithful word, and waiting upon him for the
accomplishment. Possibly there may be some thing in that distinction which some
of the Schoolmen make betwixt disceptatio and dubitatio to our purpose;
Abraham did a little too much dispute with his sense upon this, and said to his
flesh a little too loud, How can these things be? otherwise he would never have
gone in unto Hagar his maid: his sense of weakness said, what shall I think?
shall this come to pass? it is out of the course of nature: but he did not
doubt of unbelief. I conceive doubting does argue a more settlednesse of
thought in the negative, then a mere disputing does; when a man is almost
confident of a thing, yet has some scruples against it. I might further add,
that the word in the verse translated unbelief, is by Critics noted, to
signify rather a perfidiousnesse and rebelling against, and falling away from
God, then a bare not believing of his promises fully for the present; and
therefore the Schole-men make a great distinction betwixt incredulity and
infidelity. Abraham was for the present incredulus, but not infidelis: he did
not doubt with such a doubting as is the doubting of an Infidel, that believed
not the word of God, but was for the present incredulous in respect of his
^nfirmity; now on the contrary, the Reprobates doubting proceeds merely from
a root of unbelief, he believes not that the God that has promised is
faithful and just to perform, but secretly denies God in his heart, and does
not indeed so much disceptare or dubitare, as aperte negare, not so much
dispute or doubt, as openly and plainly deny Gods truth in his word. Now
examine thy doubtings by this mark* from whence are they? do they arise from
unbeleef, or from infirmity? as for example, suppose that promise, Come unto me
all ye that are weary and heavy laden and I will ease you; concerning this thou
doubtest now, whether this promise belongs to thy soul, or may be applied by
thy particular soul yea or no, and thou think he that doubts this is
damned. But peace (Christian;) whence springs this think thou? The promise
is this in substance, that Christ will ease those weary and heavy-laden souls
that come unto him; do thou not now believe this? yes; but thou do not
believe the promise does belong to thee: and why? Oh! thou art not weary and
heavy-laden: thou art not in this [(...)] one that doubts about the Promise of
God, but one that disputes his own baseness: and in regard of that do not
so fully believe. Thou will say, Ah! I know that that word is a word of truth,
whose matter is truth, and whose Author is truth, but I doubt whether the truth
of that word does belong to me: and this is the truth of thy heart, which does
not doubt of the truth of the promise to those to whom it does belong, but of
thy interest in it. I say this doubting may be in the dearest Saint of God; the
unbeleever he doubts the truth of the promise, he will not plainly say so with
his mouth, but in his heart he altogether denies God, and denies his word. So
that thou ^eest here is a great difference betwixt the one and the other, in
respect of the Principle from which the doubtings of each spring.

Secondly, there is a great difference betwixt their doubtings, in respect of
the occasion upon which they spring in eithers soul. The occasion in the
Saints of God, may be various.

1. Satan's temptations. Satan is always desiring to winnow us like wheat:
if ^e has the fanning of us, it is no wonder if our hearts be shaken with
doubting; hence often what the child of God has firmly and sted fastly
believed a great while, al upon the sudden he doubts: such a sudden doubting
now contrary directly to the former temper of our mind, is most like to be a
temptation of Satan, when it is I say sudden and contrary to a firm Faith
precedent and subsequent.

2. When thou doubtest only in respect of thy self, that Satan cannot
prevail with thee, so much as to have a dishonorable thought of God, or Jesus
Christ, or the promises of the Gospel. Sometimes the occasion of thy doubtings
is thy present sense of thy unworthiness: either thou have been a great
sinner, or since repentance thou have been a backslider, or thou find a
continued dulnes and deadness and indisposition of spirit. Sometimes again the
occasion of thy doubting may be a divine desertion: God has left thee in the
dark, and now thou criest where is my God become? sometimes the occasion again
of thy doubting may be a total absence of sense, when God takes away sense
altogether, and oppresses thee with a present danger. This was Peter's case
Matthew. 14. 28. he was sinking, overwhelmed with a present danger. These are now
the occasions with many more such like, which make the child of God doubt; and
take him at another time, when Satan does not batter him, when the sense of
his unworthiness does not terrify him, when God has not withdrawn himself
from his soul, when he is not oppressed with a flood of danger suddenly
overwhelming him, the man doubts not at all. But now the reprobates doubts
are occasioned by despairing thoughts; God says to him as Ier. 2. 25. Withhold
thy foot from being unshod, and thy threat from thirst; but thou said there
is no hope; the case is desperate with me; and there is good reason for his
despairing: for at that same time that he says There is no hope, he also
says, no: For I have loved strangers, and after them will I go; I have loved
my sins, and lived in them, yea, and I will love and live in them; and for
such wretches they truly say There is no hope. Here Is a great difference
betwixt the Believer and the Reprobate in doubting; the Reprobates hope is cut
off from before the Lord, their hope is as the giving up of the ghost, as Job
speaks Job 11. v. 20. Now the Saint of God though he doubts, yet he doubts
not without abundance of hope: he has a strong and lively hope for that
concerning which he doubts. The Lord says to the wicked, Return you now
every one from his evil way and make your ways and your doings good (the
blessing upon it is not expressed:) And they, There is no hope, and what then?
We will walk after our own devices, and we will every one do after the
imagination of his evil heart. Now the Believer although he be ready to dye
with doubting, yet he hopes Pro. 14. 32. The righteous has hope in his death;
So that the occasion of the wicked wretches doubting, is either an atheistical
ignorance, or a plain despair of mercy. They say there is no hope; and hence it
is that terrors make the wretches afraid; and this is easily seen: for if
despair be their principle or occasion, they will resolve to damn themselves
to purpose, and say with the Jews We will walk after our own ways etc.
seeing there is no hope as we conceive that God will do us good, we will
resolve to do him as much mischief as we can; this is the second note. Now
Christian examine thy doubtings by it: do thou think there is no hope, and
therefore doubtest whether the promise belongs to thee or no? or has Satan
been busy with thy soul by his temptations? or has God withdrawn his
comfortable presence a little? or art thou under the sense of a present sad
danger? and have these occasioned thy present doubting? Thus the best Saints of
God may doubt.

Thirdly, thou may distinguish thy doubting by the object about which thou
doubtest; examine the object of thy doubting.

1. Something in God is ordinarily the object of the wickeds doubt, but the
object of the Believers doubting is ordinarily something in himself, something
below the Creator. The Believer has ordinarily high thoughts of God and Jesus
Christ: his low base thoughts are of himself* he looks upon God as a God
mighty in his power of mercy, free of his loving heart to poor creatures: but
he says, Lord I am unworthy that thou should come under my roof, therefore
I doubt whether thou will or no; will the Lord, pardon one that has refused
pardon, denied him, slidden back from him? the Believer says not, God cannot
save me, nor yet God will not save me, but I will not be saved. Ah! Sir, it is
my base heart is my damnation, I cannot go to Jesus Christ. Ah! I cannot
believe, therefore I am full of doubts: he doubts of his own goodness, not of
Gods, he has all this while high admiring thoughts of the free grace of a
sinne-pardoning Savior. Now the wicked wretch he says God is not merciful
enough; God does but juggle with sinners, his Gospel calls all sinners, his
election book says he will call but some: I doubt whether I be one of those
that am called but not chosen; thus the wretch lays all the fault upon God,
Christ never dyed for me etc. God will never save me etc. still the the wretch
makes the mole in Gods eye, and forgets the beam which is in his own eye; the
power of God, the free will and grace of God, upon these is all the blame laid,
and concerning these he doubts. The reason of this difference is very plain.

First, because it is natural to every carnal wretch to exalt himself, no
fault must be in themselves: no, they pray, they fast, they are good Churchmen,
they read, etc. they believe as well as any in the Country where they live,
they tithe mint and annise; now therefore if God will not save them, it is not
because of their blindness and sin, for are they blind? like the Papist, if
he misseth Heaven, it shall not be because he does not merit it, but merely
because God will not give it him; like those Matthew. 7. 24. Lord, we have
prayed in thy name, and we have prophesied in thy name, and in thy name we have
cast out Devils, therefore open to us. Natural unbeleeving wretches build
Castle^ in the air, have high opinions of their own doings, they never doubt
their own worthiness, but Gods willingness. It is not a doubting of
humility* Lord, who am I etc. Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come
under my roof; but it is a doubting of Gods willingness.

Secondly, It is not a doubting of Gods willingness, bottomed upon a deep and
horrid sense of their own unworthiness, but a doubt of Gods willingness, yet
supposing their own worthiness. The best child of God may sometimes have so
low apprehensions of himself, and his own vileness and unworthiness, that he
may seem a little to doubt of Gods willingness, or at least dispute: he may
(disceptare, if not dubitare) say, will God be merciful to such a wretch as I
am? though he has a good measure of confidence and persuasion in the interim
that he will, not understanding that even in this there is a secret
dishonouring of God, and slandering of the Charter of free grace.

Secondly, now on the contrary, the child of God makes something in himself
the object of his doubting, in regard of the exceeding low thoughts of
himself, and present understanding of infinite love; he looks upon himself
all filthy and polluted, a monster of sinning, a ^it object for wrath; upon all
his righteousness as a menstruous cloth and a filthyrag, and cries out, what
is thy servant? a dead dog, that my Lord should make this promise to me; no,
surely it is to some else that is not of so unclean an heart, that has not so
base an heart as I have; though yet I say here is a misunderstanding of
infinite love: for Christ came not to call the Righteous, but ^inners to
repentance; he that comes as a buyer of free grace, must carry his money where
it is to be sold; here it is to be had, but not to be sold: Christ has a
Granary of free grace, but all money shall be returned again in the sacks
mouth: it shall never be said that the deserts of a creature made the King of
free grace rich. Thus thou may by a third mark, difference the doubts of
thy believing soul from the doubts of carnal unbeleeving wretches.

Fourthly, Thou may difference them in their duration and continuance. It is
truth, the best Saints of God sometimes doubt, but they do not always doubt:
they have theiitwilights, but they have their noondayes too. Hence you shall
often hear the children of God complain of the inconstancy of their spirits;
at sometimes their spirits are as clear as fountaine-water, not soiled with
the least mud of doubting: sometimes again there is nothing of clearness
scarce in them: sometimes not a cloud in their souls: sometimes they are full
of clouds; and as it is ordinarily with the clouds of heaven, one passes and
another comes, none returns, but passes and vanishes; so it is ordinarily
with the poor soul that with its true Faith has a mixture of doubting. Give
me leave to commend unto you four or five Notes, which in my little experience
I have observed concerning the doubts of believing souls.

First, ordinarily, they are most in the morning, In the beginning of their
conversion; it is a country observation that the greatest darkness is just
about break of the day; the greatest doubt of a Christian is just about the
breaking out of the day of grace in their hearts, when the Son of
righteousness is coming forth gloriously, darkness is his usher; it is an
ordinary note. It is Gregory's note in his comment on the 33. chap. of Job,
(...) quidem quisque etc. every Christian (says he) in the beginning of his
conversion has abundance of sweet consolation, but presently suffers hard
labor etc. It is then the Devil one while persuades his sins are not so great
to need so much repentance, and by and by again that they are too great to be
pardoned; one while he would oil them up to presume, another while hurl them
down to despair; one while they doubt whether they be elected or no, another
while whether they be sufficiently humbled or no: then they fear their sins
are too great to be pardoned: anon they think they have sinned the sin
against the holy Ghost etc. experience makes this good; and besides the Devil
knows that yet a little while and they will be too strong for him etc.

Secondly, It is possible that when their day is come they may have some clouds
too: You know that the fairest day may have a cloud, and an Eclipse may cause
a darkness at brightest noone. So the children of God after they have got
beyond their rugged way, and be past the threshold, may be thickened through the
remaining vapors of corruption in the heart of the Christian; it may be
ecclipsed, through the withdrawing of the favor of God from it, by the
interposition of the Devil; this is possible. The experience of David, and
Peter and all the Saints of God in this life proves it; who lives the life of
grace and doubts not?

But thirdly, Those in the Christians day, are weaker and fewer then those of
his morning, ordinarily.

1. The darkness occasioned by a transient cloud, or by an eclipse, is
seldom so much as that which is at the day-breaking; when the Christian has
got over his first fears and sorrows. I dare not acquit him for ever. No, no,
the days will not come (before eternity be our portion) when all tears shall
be wiped from the Saints eyes, and they shall not hunger nor thirst any more.
But this I dare say, they shall never meet with so many clouds interrupting
their light again; their worst and hardest work is over, although all their
work be not over; they shall never have so many thorns in their flesh, though
they may have a pricking of thorns afterward.

2. No nor shall they be so strong: The reason of this is plain, The weakness
of grace is the strength of doubting, and the strength of corruption is the
sinews of doubting; now the Christian has got more strength of grace, and
corruption has been overcome in many a battle, and though the child of God
has not clean rooted it out, yet he has routed it in many a set battle,
weakened the strength of it; therefore it is, that though the Saint meets with
fears and doubts, and they thrust out their strength against him, yet he has
not so hard work. For

1. He is grown in knowledge: Ignorance was a great cause.

2. He is grown in grace: Want of faith was a great cause.

3. He is grown in experience: He begins to know the wiles and stratagems of
the Devil now; thence it is that thou shall seldom see a Christian so long
tugging under a doubt or temptation, when once his first hard work is over, as
he was with some of his first doubts.

A fourth note that I have observed concerning believers doubts, is this, Those
that once pass, seldom return. If a Christian has once doubted his faith
upon a conceit he is not enough humbled, or that he is not elected, or that he
has sinned the sin against the holy Ghost etc. Let him (I say) but once have
got over, and you shall seldom see him stumble upon the same stone; possibly,
till the wound be fully cured, there may be breakings out again. It may be
afterward he may doubt his condition; but if he does, it shall be upon another
score, something else that he has found out to quarrel with his own soul
upon: His enemies are like the Egyptians, those doubts his enemies, which he
sees this day, he shall see no more from hence forth even for ever: or if they
see them afar off, they shall flee at first sight, they shall see them as
conquered captives, that their sight is but as a Generals over-looking the
field, when he has slain the Enemy; he will tell you Satan's objections, but
he will show you the bullet that killed him; he cries out, O doubts where are
your stings? O hell! where is your Victory? Thus they are like the clouds of
the heaven, which pass and vanish and return not again, but like prisoners in
fetters to do homage to their Conqueror.

Fifthly, This I have observed, That believers have no doubts but they conquer
at last: Doubts are but pieces of corruption gilded a little; the doubt is
chaffie, though it be ten to one but there is a kernel of wheat in the ear
darkened from our eye by the intervening of the chafe. Now God never conquered
a Saints heart, to let any fierce corruption (though the most fair-lookt limb
of hell) rule over it. God gives doubts leave to try their skill, but upon this
condition, that they shall be content to be trodden under foot: God has said
to Satan after much entreaty, Behold, all his comfort and peace and quiet,
(and yet that but for a moment, a little moment neither) is in thy power; only
upon himself [his life and being] thou shall not put forth thy hand. Thou shall
(says God) if thou will, be a combatant, but he shall be the conqueror. There
is scarce a child of God but has his heart full of ensigns, conquered colors
of his enemy hanging up there. Now Christians, by this you shall know whither
your doubts be such as are consistent with saving faith in your souls: have
not you gotten the day over some of your doubts, concerning which you can say,
The God of peace has already trodden Satan under your feet? and do ^ot you
fight against your present doubts, with great hopes that shortly you shall
tread upon the necks of these too? have you not found that Satan has put his
strongest cavalry in the front, and most assaulted you in the morning of your
conversion unto God? have not you found that those doubts which you have since
met with are fewer and weaker then those of the first sort? does not Satan
begin to draw his bow as if he wanted strength, and his arm were now grown
feeble, and he began to quit the field? has he not done his worst think you?
have not you found that the clouds that have past are vanished? do you find
your conquered enemies revive? or are they not rather slain before you? their
not returning as it proceeds from Satan's policy, that will not rally his
beaten forces again for fear of a second rout, so it also proceeds from the
increase of knowledge and grace in your souls. These are notes that may assure
you your doubtings are not the doubtings of carnal despairing wretches; their
doubts return still, they are at the same stumble, God will not save us, he
cannot save us. Let us do what we will, yet say they, there is no hope. But I
hasten to a conclusion.

Fifthly and lastly, therefore, you may difference your doubtings from the
doubtings of unbelieving wretches by the effects: Let us see a little what the
effects of doubtings are, both in unbelieving wretches, and also in the
servants of God.

Quest. What are the Effects of those doubtings which are in unbelieving
wretches?

Answ. A going away from God; they say, It is in vain to serve Lord, in vain
to pray more or hear more, in vain to wait upon God. This evil is of the
Lord (said that wretch,) Why should I wait for him any longer? So these say,
our damnation is of the Lord, why should we pray to him any longer? Why should
we mourn any more? There is no hope: No, Come! let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall dye. Mark this, in that 18th of Ier. 11. 12. And they said
there is no hope: What then? We will walk after our own devises, and we will
every one do the imagination of his own heart: Here Is the effect, that the
doubting of unbelievers works in their hearts; a wilful, desperate departing
from God, and resolving to walk contrary unto him. But now, on the other side:

Quest. What Effects does doubting, work in the the hearts of believers?

Ans. I conceive that the doubtings of the Saints of God produce these four or
five contrary Effects in the hearts of them that fear God.

First, A complaining unto God: The believer runs to God and says, Ah Lord! I
know not what to do? but my eyes are toward thee: Ah Lord! I know not what to
answer: Lord! do thou answer for me: I have a base heart, cloudy; Lord clear
it! yea, and he complains of himself, he says with Job, Job 10. v. 1. I will
leave my complaint upon my self. The unbelieving wretch, he complains indeed,
but he leaves his complaints upon God.

A second Effect that the believers doubts work in his heart, is, a begging
mercy of God: Lord help (says he) my eyes are to thee: Lord, satisfy my poor
doubting soul; Thus did Job, and David constantly. The unbeliever never
carries the burden of his spirit to Jesus Christ that he might have ease: The
believer never keeps his burden upon his own shoulders till it break his back:
The unbeliever says, there is no hope; his dead heart has no principle of
life in it in the world to carry it out to God, but he sincks like lead in the
mighty waters.

A third Effect that the believers doubts work in his heart, is, a striving and
struggling against them: He strives thus to make his calling and election sure,
he looks out for strength, searches the Word of God to satisfy him in his
scruples, enform him in his mistakes, to deliver him from his fears, and
comfort him in his sadnesses and dejections of spirit, he enquires at the mouth
of Gods Ministers, he goes about the City and streets and broad places,
enquiring, saw ye him whom my soul loves? If he meets with the watchmen,
he enquires of them, Cant. 3. 4. He does not look upon it as his duty to sit
still as dead. On the contrary, the other strives not; he says, There is no
help: To what purpose is striving then?

A fourth Effect that the doubts of the believer produce, is, a waiting for
God; his sight is cloudy, yet he waits; I will stay says he, and see if God
will not satisfy my soul in this difficulty: The other says, as he, 2 King.
6. 33. This evil is of the Lord, why should I wait for him any longer? The
Saint says: Yes, Is. 8. 17. I will wait upon him that hides his face from the
house of Jacob. I will wait upon him that yet covers me with a cloud, and
makes darkness to be round about me; he stands at Gods door yet, crying,
craving, waiting, till the Lord comes into his soul.

A fifth Effect (which shall be the last I will name) which doubting produces
in the believing soul, is, a walking with God: What says the doubting
believer, Well, though I do not know whither I am enough humbled, yet I am
weary, I will go to Christ for ease; though I do not know whither I be chosen
of God or no, yet I will choose God to be my God. I will not depart from him
though he kills me, I will walk as near as I can, according to the rule of his
word; though I be full of fears, I will not start from his precepts; though
thou killest me, yet I will trust in thee. The wicked does contrary, as you
heard before, from Ier. 18. 11, 18.

And now Christians, try your selves by this note; what effects do your
doubtings work in your hearts? You doubt sometimes (possibly) whither you
belong to God or no; do you then resolve to make sure of it by a wilful
departure from God, and a rebellion against God? or do you at this time
complain to God, cry unto him, to lift up the light of his countenance upon
you, strive against your doubts, wait for Gods Revelations of his love? and at
this instant in the midst of all your sad doubts, walk closely with God
according to the rule of his word? Can thou say, Though I have been afflicted
very much, yet have I not departed from thy judgments: Be of good comfort
(Christian) God shall wipe these tears from thy eyes. And the God of Peace
shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16. 20.

And now I have done with such doubts and scruples as may arise in gracious
souls, concerning the nature and acts and degrees of Justifying Faith.

To God only wise be glory through Jesus Christ for ever, Amen, Romans 16. 27.

FINIS.
READER, The Author desires the charity of thy heart for the whole, and of thy
Pen for the mending these following Errata's of the Press.
IN the Epistle to the Reader, read he does not say salibus etc. page 1. read
when the Ruler feared, p. 56. for promise read premise, p. 62. for recreated,
read revealed, p. 68. for Thou says, read Thou say, mend the same ^ault, p.
69. p. 138. for redence read credence, p. 142. for this is thy tempter, read
this is temper, p. 189 for as say they read alas! say they, p. 196. read the
promises have such an influence, in stead of have made such, p. 206. for
tracing me, read tearing me, p. 218. for God comes in with sighs, read God
comes in with signs, p. 235. for thou say, read thou see, p. 254. for and
they, read and they say, p. 258. for Son read Sun. ibid. for persuades his
sins, read persuades him his sins*

If there be any more, they are such literal mistakes as thine eye will easily
correct.

An Exact Alphabeticall Table, of all the principal things in the foregoing
SERMONS.
A
ADherence, see Reliance. Application of the promises to the soul in
particular must be the wonderful work of Gods Spirit, page 202. Three things
necessary to such a particular Application, p. 189. 190. 191. 192. Application
of hope and of persuasion, p. 202. Assent, an act of Faith what it is; a ^ase
of Conscience about it 136. 137. 138. What Assent is. What manner of Assent is
an act of Faith, and what not. Three properties of that Assent which is an act
of true Faith. It is the lowest act. It is not the proper act of justifying
Faith. We may truly Assent, when we think we do not, p. 137. 138. Assent true,
and pretended, how to be discerned, p. 137. 138. 139. Assent to every
particular truth not absolutely necessary to Faith, p. 144. Assent to other
men's judgments concerning Scripture no act of Faith, p. 146. 147. Weaknesses
in Assent as an act of Faith, p. 136. 137. 138. etc. Two Cautions concerning
weakness of Assent, p. 153. 154. Assurance what it is, it is not necessary to
justifying Faith, p. 206. 207. Popish and Antinomians opinion about it both
false, p. 207. 208. 211. 212. Assurance may be true, yet weak and inconstant
in degree, p. 215. At what times ordinarily it is strongest, p. 217. 218. What
Christians ordinarily have Assurance at their death, and who want it, p. 219
Assurance may be sometimes quite lost, though once true, and it is again
recoverable, p. 219. Assurance, how hindered* p. 220. Atheistical, and
blasphemous thoughts how we may know whithen they be our own corruptions, or
the Devils temptations, p. 141, 142. 143. 144.
B
Believers will be sensible of their weak faith; why, p. 5. 6. 7. They will and
ought to strive against it for an increase; why, p. 7. 8. may be comforted
though their faith be weak, p. 8. 9. They can have nothing in God^ Decree can
hinder their heaven, p. 68. They have misgiving natures, p. 163. They have
winter and summer times, what they are, p. 183. At what times they may want a
power to apply temporal promises, p. 185. In dark days they may have true
Faith, and yet want a power to a^ply conditional promises and absolute too, p.
186. 187. They must truly understand their condition, if they would apply the
promises particularly, p. 200. They must Believe for feeling as well as any
thing else, p. 242. Their doubts, how they differ from unbelievers doubts, see
Doubts. They doubt not the truth of the promise* p. 252. They doubt in regard
of something in themselves, p. 255. 257. Five Notes concerning Believers
doubts, p. 258. 259. 260. 261. Their doubts, if past, seldom return, or if
they do not to stay* p. 266. They conquer all doubts at last; they may doubt,
p. 124. Their doubts differ from the other doubts of unbelievers in five
different Effects, p. 263. 264. 265. Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, see
Sin against the Holy Ghost. Blasphemous thoughts not the sin against the
Holy Ghost, they may possibly not be our own, p. 96.
C
Charters of free grace how slandered, p. 67. 68. Christ cannot be made rich
with the ^oblers ends of our righteousness, p. 84. Christ would have married
Adam without a portion, none since, p. 84. He undertakes to his Father for
great sinners, p. 86. He was tempted to doubt of the truth of the Scriptures
etc. but he made the Devil run away, p. 140. Clearness of truths to us
several ways, p. 150. 151. The Covenant of Grace was made with Christ for us,
p. 195. Reasons to prove it, p. 195. The nature of it may comfort wounded
Spirits, p. 44. It is 1 Everlasting, 2 Ordererd, 3 Sure, 4 Particular, p. 44.
45.
D
Denial of those truths we for the present are ignorant of, dangerous, p. 134.
135. What manner of denial of truth is an ingredient into the sin against
the Holy Ghost, p. 98. 99. Desertion makes Believers tremble, p. 178. In the
time of it Believers go to Christ, but how, p. 178. Desires to believe and
pray, how they are Faith and Prayer, Mr^ Rutherf. ^pinion, p. 237. The Devil
proved a coward, he durst not reinforce an assault. p. 142. 143, Directions
for such at cannot feel God carrying them out so in his strength to duties as
they desire, p. 244. 245. Dispensations of Free Grace have been made to great
sinners, p. 46. They are made variously, p. 46. 47. Two things may be gathered
from the revealed difference of Gods Free Grace to Lydia and Paul in respect of
Humiliation preceding Faith, p. 47. 48. Doubtings may consist with Faith,
proved, p. 124. 123. They are sinful, p. 123. They are not Faith, p. 123. They
may consist actually with habitual faith, p. 123. Believers may Doubt, or be
tempted to Doubt concerning the truth of the Scriptures, p. 140. Disputing
argues a weakness, not a total want of faith, p. 160. 161. Doubtings in
Believers how they differ from the doubtings of unbelievers, p. 248. 249. 250.
251. 252. 253. 254. 255. 256. 257. 258. 259. 260. 261. 262. 263. 264. 265. They
differ in their Principle, p. 248. How Abraham doubted of infirmity, p. 249.
250. That place Romans 4. 20. concerning Abraham's doubting examined, p. 249. 250.
251. Doubtings in Believers differ from doubtings in others in the occasion of
them, how, p. 253. And in the object, how, 255. And in their duration how, p.
259. They are in them most in the morning, p. 258. They may have some such
clouds in the day, p. 259. Those in the day are fewer and weaker then those in
their morning, why, 259. 260. They differ in the effects; five different
Effects mentioned in Believers, p. 262. 263. 264. 265*
E
How to satisfy those that think they ought not to believe because they think
they are not Elected, p. 56. 57. 58. 59. 60. 61. 62. 63. 64. The truth
concerning Election in five particulars, p. 57. Papists and Libertines Errors
concerning it, p. 58. It is not the object of our faith, p. 59. 60. 61. It
cannot be known in particular till we believe, p. 62. 63. And till we know we
believe, p. 66. It is a piece of sense, p. 66. It is unto the means as well as
the end, p. 65. 66. Nothing but unbelief can justly make us think we are not
Elected, p. 64. Clear Evidence for assent not absolutely necessary to true
Faith, p. 148. Difference of Evidences, p. 150.
F
Faith may be weak in the best, p. 5. 6. Reasons of it, p. 3. 5. 6. A direction
for the increase of it, p. 9. Notes of a weak Faith, p. 10. How it is to be
ta^en in the Question, whither Repentance goes before Faith, p. 12. That
Question truly stated. p. 15. Faith in some sense must go before humiliation.
p. 19. Faith preached without humiliation, how far dangerous, p. 24. It is
not the apprehension of particular Election, but the application of general
promises, p. 59. 60. Its object is revealed promises, not hidden Decrees, p.
160. True Faith will consist with much weakness in its several acts, p. 122.
123. The several acts of Faith, p. 115. 116. 117. Justifying Faith set out in
Scripture by six words, p. 116. 155. Satisfaction to such as doubt the work of
Faith in their souls, p. 108. 109. etc. It may be saving and strong without
assurance, p. 212. 213. How it is certain without assurance, p. 214. 215.
Falling, in what degree it must be to make up the sin against the Holy Ghost,
p. 100. Feeling, double, of strength, and peace, p. 222. What each is, 222. Not
Feeling does not argue not being, p. 223. Feeling at the best, is but a
disputable and deceivable Evidence, p. 237. 238. It is in none always alike;
Reasons of it, p. 239. 240. Not Feeling is no just excuse for our not
believing, p. 242. 243. Causes of not Feeling, how to remove them, p. ^44.
Feeling must be waited for, p. 44. Fundamentals, what are so, properly so
called; a difference of Fundamentals, p. 127.
G
Gods wisdom, and goodness, and Charters of Free Grace, how slandred, p. 67
God gets great glory by pardoning great sinners, p. 84. 85. Going before, how
to be understood in the Question, whither faith goes before repentance, p. 13.
Grace enough in God for the greatest sinners, p. 72. 73. Free Grace has looked
upon as great sinners as we are, p. 80. Infinite Free Grace never yet did its
utmost, p. 81. 82.
H
Hatred of God and Gods people, in what degree it must be to make an ingredient
into the Sin against the Holy Ghost, p. 99. 100. Heaven and Glory are not so
inconsiderable, but they are worth ventring for, p. 68. 69. Humiliation*
whither it goes before Faith, or no, p. 12, 13. 14. It does; how, proved by
Reason, Scripture, and Experience, p. 16. 17. 18. It is a work of special
grace, how Christ's works it, what follows from that, p. 20. it does not hinder
the freeness of grace, it is it self a fruit of it, p. 22. It was in Paul; a
case of Conscience concerning it, largely handled, p. 26. 27. 28. 29. It does
ordinarily go before faith, p. 28. 29. It is called for in the thing, but God
has set no measure, p. 29. Nor can be set by man, p. 30. It is various in
diverse, p. 30. Three sorts of persons God uses to humble deeply, p. 30. His
dealings with those are various, p. 30. 31. A note to be gathered from the
Scriptures sparing relation of Lydia's Humiliation, p. 31. Moveable
dispositions usually not so deeply humbled, p. 32. Various comforts for them
that find not themselves so deeply humbled as others, p. 32. 33. Three ends of
Humiliation, p. 33. 34. 35. 36. If we find the Ends of it wrought, we need
not be troubled about the measure of the means, p. 33. 34. 35. 36. It works
in the soul a loathing of sin, that is one end of it, p. 33. Five rules of Dr
Sibbs to know when it is sufficient, p. 34. It makes us in a capacity to
receive Christ, p. 35. It inhanceth our value of Christ, p. 36. The measure of
it may be mis judged, p. 36. How we must measure it to judge of it aright, p.
36. 37. It must be measured both in length and breadth, p. 37. inside (...)
outside, p. 37. The whole work of it is not done when we begin to believe, p.
38. It is not a ground of Faith nor acceptance, p. 39. 40. 41. 42. Directions
for such Christians as conceive they are not enough humbled, p. 43. 44. 45. 46.
Humiliation, how its nature ought to be considered so as to comfort a troubled
soul. p. 50. It must be more and more labored after, p. 51. Mr* Shephards
opinion of it, p. 51. Several directions given by Dr Preston and Mr Shephard,
and the Author, for increasing this work in the soul, p. 52. 53. 54. Prayer
the surest direction for it, p. 54.
I
Ignorance how far and in what particulars it is consistent with true Faith,
p. 127. 128. 129. 130 etc. Ignorance, 1 in some fundamentals, 2 in
circumstantials, 3 in the History of Scripture, 4 in substantialls and
fundamentals, so far that we cannot dispute them or make them out in
particulars, may be consistent with true Faith, 127. 128. 129. 130. 131. 132.
Provided we be not content with but strive against such Ignorance, p. 133.
Justification is not formally before faith, reasons for it, p. 209. Justifying
Act of Faith, what it is, and the six words* Mr Ball expresses it by, in his
Treatise of Faith. p. 116.
K
Knowledge no act of saving Faith, p. 125. In what degree and manner it must be
in those that can be guilty of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, p. 97. 98. A
low opinion of our own knowledge a good sign, p. 126.
L
Lydiae's conversion without any humiliation cannot be proved; four answers
to the objection drawn from her example against precedent humiliation. Mr
Shepards opinion of it, p. 24. 25.
M
Melancholy oftentimes is a cause of a Christians doubting, p. 164. Misbelief
no Unbelief, p. 147. Misunderstanding of Scripture, not impossible to a
Bel^^ver, p. 147.
O
8. Objections answered, made against that truth, viz. that Humiliation
ordinarily precedes Justifying Faith in the Act, p. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24.
Opposition of truth, in what degree, and of what nature it must be in one to
argue him at sinner against the Holy Ghost, p. 99. 100.
P
Persuasion, how far it comes into the definition and nature of justifying
Faith. Persuasions differ, p. 206. 207. 208. A persuasion and a full
Persuasion, p. 208 A difference betwixt a Persuasion ^ying the future, or the
present, p. 208. What manner of Persuasion there is, and is not in all true
Faith, p. 208. We must Pray though we find an indisposition to the duty;
Reasons for it, p. 245. 246. Promises of Christ are made to humbled Saints, p.
17. 18. They require conditions, p. 48. But no other then otherwhere they
engage to give, p. 48. They nowhere require a limited measure of what they
require as conditions, p. 49. Promises of first grace are absolute, p. 49.
Those for temporal things harder to be rested upon, then those for
Spirituals, p. 168. 169. Why, Ibid. No good reason why we should not rest upon
Promises made for Spirituals, p. 169. Particular appropriating o^ the Promises
not absolutely necessary to true Faith, p. 180. Promises distinguished, p. 180.
Why some are called temporal, 181. True faith may not sometimes be able
particularly to rest o^ Temporal Promises, p. 181. Promises, if particular,
are to be generally applied, p. 184. True Faith in dark times may not be able
to peculiarize conditional Promises, p. 18^. Promises must be clearly
understood by the soul that would particularly apply them, p. 189. General
Promises must be particularly applied, p. 190. 191. 192. 193. If made to the
Church of God of old, they belong to it now. p. 193. They were made to the
Jews under the notion of God's people, p. 194. They are branches of the
Covenant made with Christ, p. 195. Some Promises were made to Christ's person;
what they were, p. 196. 197. Conditional Promises require not of us a
fulfilling in our own strength, p. 197. 198.
Q
Qualifications irregularly eyed hinder the g^^wth of Faith, p. 11. They hinder
not Graces freeness, being rightly required and urged, p. 22.
R
Repentance, whither it goes before Faith or no; how the terms are to be
taken in that Question, p. 12. 13. etc. How it is the effect of Faith, p. 19.
There is as much Reason on the Creatures part, why the Lord should save the
greatest sinner as well as the holiest Saint, p. 82. 83. Reliance upon Christ
it the work and proper act of justifying faith; what it is; it may be true
though not always alike, p. 165. Though not equal on all the Promises, p.
166. 167. It may consist with trembling, p. 170. 171. 172. 173. A Christian may
truly Rely upon Christ, and yet not believe h^ does, but think he does not, and
question whither he does or no, p. 157. 158. 159. 160. It is harder to Rely
upon Temporal then upon Spiritual Promises; why? p. 167.
S
Scruples must be removed if we would increase Faith, p. 9. Sin, the
greatness of it should not hinder us from believing; why? p. 72. 73. 74. 75.
76. 77. 78. 79. 80. 81. 82. 83. There Is at much reason in the Creature why God
should save the greatest* Sinner at any of his Saints, p. 82. Sinners not
received for their p^rt on, p. 83. Great Sinners bring God great glory three
ways, p. 84. 85. A great sinner converted by John the Apostle; a Story out of
Eusebius applied against despair, p. 85. 86. The Sin against the Holy Ghost;
a case of conscience about it opened, and spoke to at large, 88. 89. 90. 91.
92. 93. 94. 95. 96. 97. 98. 99. 100. 102. etc. There is such a sin, p. 9^.
Why it is so called, p. 90. It is unpardonable, p. 91. The Elect cannot commit
it, 91. It is uncertain what it is, p. 92. The Papist's opinion, and their six
species of it, p. 92. How many ways sin against the Holy Ghost may be
committed, p. 93. 94. They must have great knowledge that are guilty of it, p.
94. What ingredients must be in it, 94. 95. Who have not sinned it, 94. It must
be more then an heart-sin, p. 96. Twelve Considerations concerning it, p. 94.
95. 100. 101. 102. 103. 104. 105. 106. S. August* opinion of it, p. 101. It
must be accompanied with final impenitency, p. 101. How it is not, and how it
is unpardonable, p. 102. 103. The conceit that we have sinned the Sin against
the Holy Ghost, cannot excuse us from the duty of believing; we are not excused
if we have ^ired it, p. 103. None can kn^w till his dying (...), whither he
has ^ired this ^ire or (...) he has indeed ^^red it, p. 103. A large (...) of
(...) s^rre, p. 104. 105* We may be strengthe^ed to duties though we do not
feel it, p 235. Gods strength in us (...) to be discerned by the ^^ffects, p.
235. It may be seen in us when it is not seen nor selt by us, p. 241.
T
Temptations to doubt how they may four ways be distinguished from real
doubtings, p. 141. 142. 143. They are ordinarily but Querie* and disputations
not determinations, p. 141. Christ tempted to doubt of the truth of the
Scriptures, p. 140. Atheistical and blasphem^ns thoughts, when they are ours,
and when the Devils temptations, p. 141. 142. 143. 144. The Doctrine of the
Trinity (...) understood by some (...) Believers, p. 127. 128. Trembling is
(...) with true faith. The several causes of it, when so it is usually a
companion of true Faith, in the beginning (...) conversion, and afterward in ^
Christians (...), p. 171. 172. 173. 174. 175. 176. 177.
V
Unbelief not the chief principle of the Saints doubtings, p. 250. 251. What
it means in Romans 4. 20. p. 251. Unbelievers doubt Gods truth, p. 253. Their
doubts are occasioned by despair, p. 254. They make God the object of their
doubts; how and why, p. 254. 255. 256. They doubt continually, p. 257. 259.
W
Weaknesses may consist with true faith in the act of osse^t, p. 137. 138. 139.
140. 141. 142* etc. They must not be cherished, p. 152. There are also
weaknesses consistent with true faith in its act of adherence, p. 155. 156.
157. 158. 159. 160. The causes of such weaknesses, p. 162. 163. 164. 165. Will,
enough in God to save the greatest sinners, p. 76. Will in God to save sinners,
declared in eleven particulars, p. 77. 78. 79. Wilfulness in Christians
oftentimes a great cause of soule-trouble, p. 164.
FINIS.

