THE NATURE and USEFULNESS OF Solemn Judicial SWEARING, WITH THE IMPIETY and
MISCHIEF OF Vain and False-SWEARING: IN A SERMON Preached July 14th, 1681. IN
THE Cathedral Church of S. PETER IN YORK, At the ASSIZES for that County.

By THO. COMBER, D. D. Prebendary of YORK.

And thou shall Swear the Lord lives, in Truth, in Judgment, and in
Righteousness,

Jerem. IV. 2.

LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft, for Robert Clavell, and are to be Sold by
Richard Lambert Bookseller in York, 1682.

HEBREWS VI. 16. For Men verily swear by the Greater, and an Oath for
confirmation is to them an end of all strife.
AS Almighty God is the Creator, so he is also the Governor of all the World,
and has an unquestionable right to rule over every Creature; He was the Maker,
and is the Judge of all the Earth Genesis 18. 25.
. And though he does not exercise this Power immediately, because mortal Men
cannot suffer the glories of his dazzling and illustrious presence, yet he
ordains the Rulers of the World to be his Vicegerents: There is no Power but
of God, the Powers that be are ordained of God Romans 13. 1.
; and he expects we should be subject to them for his and for Conscience sake
Ibid v. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 13.
; since their Authority is of Divine Original, which the Scripture intimates,
in calling Judges by the name of Gods Exodus 23. 28. (...). Orig. in Cells. l. 4.
(a Title commonly given them by the Jews) as also in declaring, They judge not
for Man, but for the Lord 2 Chronicles. 19. 6.
; whence one of the Ancient Fathers brings in Almighty God thus speaking to the
Judges, I have given you my Honor, my Commission, and my Name, therefore do
you Judge as I myself would do (...) Resp. ad Orthod. Quest. 142.
. Yea it was Law Sarisburiens. Polyor. lib. 5. c. 12.
, and Custom Chron. Will. Thorn. col. 2048.
, both of old in this Nation (as our own best Authors inform us) To place the
venerable Book of the holy Gospels before the Tribunal of Justice: as an
Emblem, that they judged by his Authority. But there is no clearer evidence of
the Divine Original of Humane Judicatures, than the solemn use of Oaths, there:
Which are a plain recognizing God as the Supreme Judge of all, and an Appeal to
the High Court of Heaven; For though the Sovereign of the World do communicate
his Authority to our Magistrates, yet his Attribute of Omniscience is
incommunicable; they are capable of representing his Person, but not able to
discern the hearts and thoughts of others. Wherefore since there is one part of
God's Judicial Perfections that no mortal Judge can receive, viz. the knowledge
of Men's Thoughts, a point so necessary, that no infallible and certain Judgment
can be given without it: Therefore in all Controversies, where the Parties make
contrary affirmations, there lies an Appeal to the greater (...) in the Text,
Hellenistice Comparativum pro Superlativo, i. e. (...).
and higher Judge, that is, to God, the greatest of all; which Appeal being in
order to end the strife, and to find out which of the contradicting Parties
speaks true, is called an Oath, and here described by the Apostle, when he
says, For men verily swear by the greater, etc.

And certainly this use of Oaths is very sacred and most necessary, being a
clear manifestation of God's glory, an evident testimony of the Divine Original
of the Magistrates Power, and the great support of the administration of that
Justice which is the Bond of all Societies. But yet there are some so ignorant
and absurd as to deny they are lawful, others so stupid and inconsiderate to
take them without reverence, and swallow them as Common things; yea, too many
so Impious to use them to gain credit to what they know to be false. For the
redress of which dangerous Errors and Impieties, I suppose it will be a very
seasonable and useful undertaking upon this Occasion to explain this piece of
holy Scripture, For men verily swear, etc.

Wherein we will first consider the Apostles general design in this place,
which will prove the lawfulness of Taking Oaths in Judicial cases. Secondly, we
will observe the several particulars contained in the words; which represent to
us, 1. The nature of an Oath, For men verily swear by the greater. 2. The
reason of an Oath, viz. for Confirmation. 3. The end and use of it in Judgment,
to be an end of all strife. And since a Religious Oath is the foundation of all
our Administrations of Justice, the main hinge upon which all these
Controversies turn, the only security that the Reverend Judges, the Jurors, and
the Witnesses do give, that they will speak and act uprightly: doubtless no
Subject can be more suitable or advantageous for this time and place; which
therefore we will prosecute in our proposed Method.

First, We consider the Apostles general design, and the occasion of bringing
in these words here: And we may observe, He is here persuading the Hebrews to
imitate their Pious Ancestors, in relying on the Truth of God, exhorting them
to be followers of them, who by Faith and Patience inherited the Promises, v.
12. adding, that the Promise it self was worthy to be trusted, because it had
the highest and most solemn confirmation imaginable, being secured by the Oath
of God, and that no common Oath neither. Not such as the Poets feign the
Heathen gods took, whom Lactantius derides for their swearing by the Stygian
Lake, a thing meaner than themselves Lactant. Instit. l. 1. c. 11.
. But as Sovereign Princes having no equal in their Kingdom whose witness can
add any Authority to their solemn Acts, conclude them with a Test meipso, and
are witnesses to themselves: so the King of Kings, when he made the Promise to
Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, swear by himself, Ver. 13, 14,
15. Confirming his promise (says Philo) by an Oath worthy of God, -- and
therefore he did not swear by any other, because there was none greater nor
better than he Philo legis Allegor. l. 2. page 98.
. And lest any should object, What need was there for the God of Truth to
swear, who is so far from being made more credible by an Oath (as the same
Philo notes) that he only makes an Oath to be firm Philo de sacr. Cain and
Abel, p. 146.
; and (as S. Ambrose speaks) He alone is the Judge of them that Swear, and the
Avenger of them that Swear falsely Ambros. de eod. T. 1. p. 147.
. Therefore the Apostle prevents that scruple, in the words of the Text, by
declaring that an Oath was not necessary with respect to God, who made the
Promise, but in compliance to Men who were to receive it; in condescension to
their infirmity, He was content to imitate humane Customs, and to give the same
security for his own truth, which men are wont to give for theirs; For men
verily swear by the greater, etc. that is, This is the way (says our Apostle)
by which men confirm things uncertain, this is the method they use to conclude,
(...), all doubtful Controversies where one affirms what the other denies, the
highest and best Means they have to end this strife (which otherwise would not
cease) is to make the Parties swear by the Name of God. And the Divine Majesty
was pleased to take our measures in transacting his Covenant with us, for he
swear to confirm it, not by a greater indeed (as we do) because there was no
greater, but by himself. Genesis xxii. 16. By my self have I sworn, says the
Lord, etc. and upon this Abraham did believe the Promise, and so ought we also.

Now from the words thus explained we infer, That it is lawful for Christians
to use an Oath for confirmation in solemn Cases. We see that God did take an
Oath, and if Oaths were evil in themselves, it is certain God would not swear Si
enim per se malum esset jurare profecto Dominus non jurasset. Decret. l 2. Tit.
24. c. 6. p. 895.
, since he can neither do nor be tempted to do evil, James I. 13. yea his
Swearing certainly proves, it is good in its own nature: and His Oath being
designed to comply with humane custom, as a confirmation of the Truth of his
Word on a great and just occasion; by this Imitation and design, God has
ratified and approved our solemn use of Oaths in deciding differences. This one
Act of his declaring it lawful to swear in all such cases. Besides, the Apostle
here relates the use of Oaths in Judgment, supposing it universally practiced
by Gentiles, Jews, and Christians at that time; for he says (not ye Hebrews
swear, or ye (before your Conversion) did swear; but) Men verily swear, etc.
that is, all Men do it now. Nor does he on this occasion give any intimation
either of his dislike of this general custom, or that it was not to be allowed
to the Christians so to do: wherefore we may conclude from his recording this
usage without making any exception to it, and his justifying it from the
example of God himself, that the Apostle did allow and approve this use of
Oaths.

But our obstinate Adversaries, without considering how to answer these
Arguments, will presently object, That Christ says, Swear not at all, Math. V.
34. and S. James adds, Above all things, my Brethren, Swear not, Jam. V. 12. as
also that some of the Ancients, as well Heathens as Christians, seem by some
picked Sentences to forbid all use of Oaths.

To which I shall reply, That since it is impious to suppose those Scriptures
can contradict this Text, it is reasonable to believe, that some other kind of
Swearing is there forbidden, and not that which is commended here; and it is
very plain to unprejudiced Men, that our Savior is speaking of no other Oaths,
but those used in common discourse, for the next words are, but let your
communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, ver. 37. which shows, he was treating only
of Oaths in our ordinary Communication, which might be wholly prevented, if in
our common talk we barely affirmed things by a plain yea, or yes, or barely
denied them by a plain nay, or no: and the instances he gives of swearing by
Heaven, by Earth, by Jerusalem, and by their Head, ver. 34, 35, 36. were all of
that sort of Oaths which the Jews used in their usual discourse, and not one of
them was ever used in Judgment, where they only swear by the living God, Math.
xxvi. 63. Indeed the Pharisees, to take the Jews off from the wicked custom of
ordinary Swearing by Gods Name, did allow them in their common-talk to swear by
these lesser things, persuading them there was little danger in them, and no
great obligation by them, Math. xxiii. 16, etc. But Jesus reproves this false
gloss of the Third Commandment, declaring, that in our Communication one with
another we must not swear at all, neither by God nor the Creatures; for in our
usual discourse a bare Yes or No is enough, and whatever is more, comes from
either the evil custom of the Speaker, or the evil and jealous temper of the
Hearer. And S. James only repeats and applies his Masters words, warning the
Christians to take great heed they did not use that liberty given them by the
Jewish false Teachers, to swear in their usual talk by Heaven, or by Earth, or
any other Oath; but to be sure always to affirm what was to be affirmed by a
plain, Yea, and deny what was to be denied by a single, Nay; lest they fell
under Gods condemnation for profaning his Name Jam. 5. 12. Graec. (...) at alii
libr. leg. (...) Vid. Erasm. Verse.
; or (as some of the best Copies read) Lest by a common careless use of Oaths,
they fall into that accursed Hypocrisy of binding rash and false words with
Oaths, as customary Swearers use to do. This is all can be fairly inferred from
these two places, and therefore we conclude, they forbid only Common Swearing,
and not that Religious and Solemn Swearing in Judgment, which this Apostle here
approves and commends.

And the Practice of the best Christians abundantly assures us, it was never
believed that solemn Oaths on great Occasions were forbidden in the Gospel.
This Apostle S. Paul, who certainly knew his Masters mind (says S. Augustine)
did Swear Apostolus utique noverat praeceptum Domini, juravit tamen. Aug. in
Ep. Galat. cap. 1.
; for his saying in weighty cases, God is my witness, Romans I. 9. and, Behold,
before God I lie not, Galat. I. 20. are as plain Oaths (in that Father's
Opinion) as can be spoken. And though the Primitive Christians refused to Swear
by the Emperors Genius, or by any of the Demons, since thereby they had
acknowledged them to be gods; yet Tertullian says expressly, But we also swear,
By the Emperors Safety Tertul. Apol. cap. 32. p. 28.
, that is, by God, who is the Author of it. It Is certain the Christians were
Soldiers under Heathen Emperors, and yet they could not be listed without
taking an Oath, which was given to the Soldiers still, even when the Emperors
were become Christian, only with some alteration in the form; For then they
swore, By God, and Christ, and by the Holy Ghost; By the Majesty of the
Emperor, which next to God is to be loved and honored of all Vegetius de re
Militari, l. 2. c. 5. circ. An. Christi 370.
. And Optatus, who lived at the same time, says, God is wont to be named by
Men in swearing to consirm the Truth Optat. Milev. lib. 2. page 58.
. An ancient and genuine Synodical Epistle, written from the Orthodox Bishops
about Alexandria, An. 339. declares, That the Christian People there bound
these Bishops by Oath, to choose Athanasius for their Pastor Epist. Synodal.
ap. Bin. Tom. I. p. 1. page 403.
, and mentions Eusebius of Nicomedia, accusing the said Athanasius, and
swearing to the Accusation Ibid. p. 404.
. And the same Holy Confessor, Athanasius, in his Apology to the Emperor,
clears himself by an Oath from those Slanders (...) Apolog. ad Constant. Tom.
I. page 674.
. Theophronius, a Christian Bishop, begins his Confession of Faith in the
Council of Antioch, An. 341. with a solemn Oath Binius, Tom. I. par. 1. page
416.
. Synesius likewise, a Primitive Bishop, being chosen Arbitrator in a certain
Controversy, makes one of the Parties who was of the Episcopal Order, bind his
Promise by an Oath (...) Synes. Epist. 67. page 213.
. S. Hierom relates the solemn Oaths, wherewith John Patriarch of Jerusalem
Hieron. advers. Joh. Hierosol. Tom. II. page 259.
, and Ruffinus Idem adv. Ruffin. Apol. Tom. 2. p. 323.
, did confirm their Assertions; and though both these were his Adversaries, and
he bitterly inveighs against them for small Crimes, yet he blames them not for
Swearing: and he also observes, that S. Augustine swears to confirm an
Assertion, yet never checks him for it, though he was then angry with him
Hieron. Epist. 90. Tom. 2. page 538. and Ep. 92. page 541.
. A whole Council of Bishops judging Sabatius unworthy of the Episcopal
dignity, made him swear, never to accept it Socrates histor. lib. 5. cap. 2c.
page 694.
. And the Moderator of the Conference at Carthage, between the Orthodox and the
Donatists, solemnly swears, by the Holy Trinity, he will judge impartially
Collat. Carthag. I. Cap. 5 apud Bin. Tom. 1. page 648.
. Yea, the Civil Laws of Arcadius and Honorius, decree severe penalties to them
who would not stand to those Agreements which they had confirmed by an Oath,
either by the Name of God, or by the safety of the Emperor Invocato Dei
Omnipotontis nomine -- and PP. -- salutem Principum, confirmationem initarum
juraverint esse pactionum. Cod. Justin. l. 2. tit. 4. Pl. 41. Si quis, etc.
. And in the Council of Toledo the Prince adjures his Bishops most solemnly to
determine uprightly Council. 8. Toletan. An. 653. Bin. Tom. 2. par. 2. p. 484.
. By these, and inumerable more Instances (which we have omitted, either as
more common, or of later date) it clearly appears, that the Primitive
Christians did think solemn Oaths lawful, and frequently used them: Nor were
any Oaths forbidden by the ancient Canons, but only Pagan Oaths (...) Basil.
Mag. Can. 81. ap. Bevereg. Tom. 2. p. 13. and Council. in Trul. Can. 94. Bever.
T. 1. p. 270.
; they indeed who used them, were to be Ex communicated. But none ever
pretended, that Christian Oaths by the Name of the True God were forbidden by
the Gospel, till the gross Times of Popery; and then Turgot and Aldwin, two
Fanatic Monks of S. Cuthberts, being in Scotland, refused to swear Allegiance
to King Malcolm, on pretense, Swearing was forbid in the Gospel Evangelicum
praeceptum servantes. Simeon Dunelm. l. 1. cap. 22.
; though these Hypocrites had Sworn to the Rules of their Orders before. And a
little after the Monks of Castellion had some scruples, whether it were lawful
for them to Swear, alleging the same Texts and Reasons that our modern
Sectaries urge, as may appear by Innocents Answer to them Decretal. lib. 2.
tit. 24. cap. Etsi Christus, al. 894.
. Wherefore it is from Popish Enthusiasts, and not Primitive Christians, that
our deluded Quakers learn to refuse all Swearing.

But this short and clear account of the Sense of Holy Scripture, and the
Opinion and Practice of the best Christians may abundantly satisfy all that
are unprejudiced, That Solemn Oaths in Judgment, are not only very lawful, but
useful and necessary, and have been used by all Men of all Religions as most
Sacred things: For Men verily swear, etc. that is, all Men do so, and God
imitates the use, and S. Paul records it with approbation. Yet, that Men's
irreverent taking, and impious breaking of Oaths, may not prejudice this useful
Institution, nor be an offense to such as are really tender; I shall pass from
this proof of the Lawfulness of Swearing in general, to consider the
Particulars of the Text: wherein,

First, the nature of an Oath is implied in these words, -- (...). For Men
verily swear by the greater. Whence it appears, that an Oath is an Appeal to a
Higher Power, to One Greater in knowledge, who sees if we deceive, and cannot
be deceived; to one Greater in Integrity and Truth, who will not connive at
Falsehood, nor respect Persons; to one Greater in Power, who can as easily
punish as find out Perjury, and cast the Perjured wretch into Hell Fire:
wherefore every Oath ought to be made by the Supreme Being, and all that define
it, say, it is, The calling God to witness (...) Philo l eg. alleg.
. The giving God for the security of our Fidelity (...) Nazianz.
; and is not to be used, but only when our words cannot be made certain without
calling in the Divine Majesty (...). Aristot. Rhet. c. 18.
. And hence it is made a Duty, and reckoned a part of Religious Worship, to
Swear by the True God, Deuteronomy. vi. 13. and because Oaths in Judicature were
always made by Gods Name, therefore such an Oath is called, An Oath of the
Lord, Exodus xxii. 11. and some think Solomon gives the Oath of Allegiance that
Name, when he bids us obey the King, because of the Oath of God, Eccles. viii.
2. Indeed all Nations are wont to swear by their proper gods; so that there is
the same variety in Men's Oaths, that is, in their Religion. In the League
between Hannibal and the King of Macedon, they swear by above Twenty several
gods of Afric and Greece Polybii, histor. lib. 7.
. And in an older general League among all the Grecian Cities, every place was
to take their Country Oath, and swear by the greatest Deity of their own City
(...) -- and p. p. (...). Thucyd. hist. l. 5.
. So the Heathen Poet requires the Jew to swear to him by Anchialus, that is,
as the Romans falsely pronounced, by the living God, (...) -- jura per
Anchialum. Martial. l. 11. ep. 60.
And the Christians made the Jews swear by the Hebrew Names of God, Adonai,
Sebaoth, Elohim, etc. Digest. lib. 5. Tit. De juram. Jus Graeco-Rom. T. 1. page
119.
. And from this belief, That in an Oath a man appealed to the God he
worshipped, sprang the custom of Sacrificing, when Men did solemnly Swear Genesis
31. 54.
. And the use of going into the Temples and touching the Altars, when they took
a Religious Oath 1 Kings 8. 31. Si aram tenens juraret. Cicero pro Flacco.
, to put them in mind they were in the immediate presence of that God by whom
they swore. To which end also the Gentiles sometimes in solemn swearing touched
the Images of their gods. Contingens ipsa simulachra and pulvinaria Deorum.
Justin. hist. l. 24.
. Whence the Papists (the gross Imitators of Pagan Superstition) have derived
their Swearing upon the Relics and Images of their Saints, to whom they do by
this Act give the honor due to God only. As for us, We swear by no other Name,
but only by the Name of GOD, laying our hands upon the Holy Bible, because all
the Promises made to Truth, and the Curses against Perjury, are written there,
devoting our selves to want all the good therein promised, and to suffer all
the evil therein threatened, if we swear falsely: And we make God himself the
sole Judge of that, to whose Omniscience, Truth, and Omnipotence, we appeal, as
knowing our heart, and call on him as the Witness of our Truth. So that this
kind of Swearing is an Act of Religion, a part of Divine Worship, and was
anciently called by the name of Religion it self Jusjurandum est affirmatio
religiosa. Cicero de Off. l. 3. Primum militiae vinculum est religio. Senec.
Ep. 95.
, and had the Title of Sacramentum: For there is no way in the World by which
we do more honor the Wisdom and Power, the Justice and Truth of God, than by
this highest Appeal; and therefore it is a part of his Honor, which he will
not give to any other, nor can we swear by any Creature without being guilty of
Idolatry; the Creatures are our Fellow Servants, and not enough above us to be
the objects of our solemn Oaths: For Men verily swear by the Greater, etc.

Now from this account of the nature of an Oath we infer two things: First,
That Oaths are a part of that Religious Worship due only to God, and so it is
not lawful to swear by the Creatures. The Pharisees of old permitted it, out of
a pretended Reverence to the Name of God; but Christ and S. James both forbid
it. As for the Heathens that worshipped the Creatures, no wonder if they swore
by them; but it was a silly Superstition in Socrates, to swear by any thing he
saw, as a Dog, or a Goose, etc. that so he might avoid swearing by those he
esteemed gods, as Apollonius makes the excuse for him Apollon. ap. Philostr. l.
6. cap. 9.
: and the Ignorance of the Mahometans may make some Apology for their Swearing
by ordinary Beings, since their great Prophet swears in his Alcoran, By the
Wind and Clouds, by the Stars, and by Mount Sinai: But who can excuse
Christians for this wicked Custom of swearing by the Creatures in ordinary
discourse, contrary to Christ's express Precept? I am sure Tertullian reckons
these kind of Oaths to be one sort of Idolatry Consuetudinis vitium, diccre
mehercule, aut medius fulius, accedente ignorantia quorundam qui ignorant
jusjurandum esse per Herculem. Tertul. Idd. c. 21. page 98.
; and the Custom is both foolish and impious, Foolish, because they swear by
that which is less, or not greater than themselves, which neither knows if they
Forswear, nor can punish their Perjury; Impious, because it gives Divine honor
to a Creature: a Sin so gross that the later Rabbis do condemn it, and one of
them says, He that swears by any thing besides the Name of God, shall be rooted
out of the World Moses Mikotzi. Praecep. affer. 113.
. So that we may well suppose these vain and wicked Oaths among Christians, are
Relics of Pagan Idolatry, that have continued ever since the Creatures were
worshipped as gods; as the swearing by Saints and Angels is a remnant of Popish
Superstition, introduced by those who first gave them Divine honor, and
therefore to be utterly rejected by us, together with those Evil Principles
upon which they began.

Secondly, we infer from the former description of an Oath, That when we do
Swear by the Holy Name of GOD, we should do it with all the solemnity of a
Grave and Religious Reverence, remembering it is an Address to one infinitely
Greater than ourselves, even to the God we daily worship. We ought to think
upon his All-seeing Eye, his Almighty Arm, and his utter detestation of all
Falsehood; we should consider well the Glory of his Majesty, the Infiniteness of
his Wisdom, the Exactness of his Truth, the Severity of his Justice, and the
Terror of his Wrath; and this would make us call him to Witness even the most
certain Truth with holy Fear and Reverence; This would instruct us, not to be
rash with our Mouths, nor hasty to utter anything before God, who is in Heaven,
and we upon the Earth, Eccles. V. 2. It Is evident, that all Nations have so
fully believed the Sacredness of an Oath, that they have endeavored to make it
as Solemn and Venerable as they could. Orpheus imposed an Oath upon his
Scholars (not to reveal the Secrets of his Art to Profane Ears) with all the
Authority which Religious Terror could give it Julius Firmic. praef. ad 7. lib.
Math.
:

It would be too tedious to reckon up all the Religious Ceremonies by which the
Gentiles made their Oaths Sacred: their use of Priests and Temples, Altars and
Sacrifices, on this Occasion, were all intended to teach Men that Golden
Precept of Pythagoras, (...) To Reverence an Oath, and to mind them, that they
did Swear by a Greater than themselves. It may suffice to remark that among the
Jews (who had nothing in higher esteem than the Book of the Law) He that took
an Oath was to stand up, and take the Book of the Law in his hand, and to Swear
by the most Holy Name, or some other Name of God in the form of Invocation, or
Execration, out of his own Mouth, or out of the Mouth of the Judge Maimon.
tract. Sheb. cap. 11. Moses Mikotz. praecep. aff. 123.
. And they say, this is as much as if they swore by all that is written in that
most holy Book Idem praecep. Negat. 241.
. In like manner the Christians in solemn Swearing were wont to lay their Hands
upon the Holy Gospels, a Custom at least as ancient as the Emperor Justinians
Time, who mentions it in his Laws (...) Just. Authent. collat. 9. Tit. 7. Nov.
124. Cap. 1. p. 176.
; and he himself is recorded to have held the Gospels in his hand while he made
a Public Oath, An. 535 Chronic. Alex. An. 535. p. 91.
; and that this was a Custom universally observed in those days, may be seen by
diverse Instances in Procopius Procop. in Vandal, l. 2. p. 121, and p. 131.
. And this Rite has been used ever since, the Person who Swears being to say,
As God shall help me, and the Contents of this Book: which is so great and
dreadful a Wish, that none who understand and consider it can speak it without
trembling; for since all our hopes of Heaven depend upon Gods help and the
Promise of the Holy Gospel, We thus devote our Souls to Damnation if our
Assertions be not true. And for this cause due Care should be taken in all
Courts of Judicature, that Oaths should be administered with all Gravity and
Religious Reverence, and, if possible, by those of the greatest Authority
present. Since the outward Solemnities in all Religious Acts have a mighty
influence on the Mind, and do tend to make Men perform them more seriously and
devoutly. Yea, it ought to be considered, Whether the slight and irreverent
giving of Oaths (too common in our Courts of Justice) do not give Ignorant and
Evil men too much occasion, to think the breaking of them to be a light matter:
it would be an infinite Scandal, if we should say our Prayers, or receive the
Sacrament in so hasty and slight a Manner; yet an Oath is a part of Gods
immediate Worship, as well as Prayer and Sacraments, and this is as direct an
Address to God as either of those; yea, we may reckon this the more dreadful,
since there we only make Applications to his Mercy, here we devote our selves
to his Justice; so that our Oaths should be made as solemnly as our Prayers.
And here I can but observe the Piety of the Ancients, who Ordained, Oaths
should be taken Fasting. A Rite of equal Piety and Antiquity, for Abimelech and
Isaac had their Federal Feast over Night (says the Text) They rose early in
the Morning and swear one to another, Genesis xxvi. 31. as being then Fasting, and
fit for this great Act of Religion. And it is probable, the frequent use of
Oaths in Judgment, was the cause why of Old all Judicial Enquiries were made in
the Morning: Execute Judgment in the Morning, says Jeremy Jer. 21. 12.
; and, Woe be to that Land (says Solomon,) whose Princes Eat in the Morning
Eccles. 10. 16.
, that is, before they have sat in Judgment. Socrates also was wont to say, The
Evening is for Feasts, the Morning for doing Justice Vespere convivium mane
judicium. Dict. Socrat.
. Yea, there is an Ancient Gallican Law of Charles the Great, which Commands,
That Courts of Justice shall be holden Fasting Placitum tenere Comes nisi
jejunus non debet. Capit. l. 3. c. 38. and 3. Cap. An. 803. c. 15.
, that so both the Givers and Takers of Oaths might be serious, and fit for
this so Solemn piece of Religion. And, because Matrimony it self is a Religious
Oath, therefore our Old Canons fixed the celebration of it to be between the
Hours of Eight and Twelve; that so the Parties might make that Oath in their
Fasting-Spittle Synod. Winton. An. 1308. apudSpelm. Council. T. 2. page 448.
, as the words of the Canon are. All which ought to instruct and admonish those
in Power, to Reform as much as in them lies, the scandalous and mischievous
Corruption of slight giving Oaths in Judgment, and to reduce this piece of
Religion to its due Esteem amongst us.

Secondly, The Text informs us of the Reason of an Oath, or the Cause which
moves a Man to take it; which is, that it may be ((...)) For Confirmation. The
Heart of Man is deep and deceitful, so that none but only God knows whether
men's Words and Hearts agree: And Evil men (being assured no Mortal can discover
their Thoughts) hence presume, for Gain, or to favor a Friend, yea to hurt a
Foe sometimes, to speak what they know to be false. But though no Man can
disprove them, the God of Truth sees their Hearts; And therefore All Nations
have used to enjoin Men, to call upon the All-seeing God to attest the Truth of
what they say, with a wish of destruction to Themselves, if the Divine Majesty,
who knows their Thoughts, do not allow their Words for Truth. And because it
may well be supposed, none will dare to do this open Affront to the God of
Heaven, nor expose themselves to his Vengeance, who will discover, and can
destroy them if they speak falsely: Therefore an Oath is the most solemn
Confirmation of what we affirm in doubtful Cases, the readiest way to gain
credit to our Words, and the most Sacred security we can give for our Truth and
Veracity (...). Philo, de Sacr. Cain and Abel, p. 146.
. Hence Philo calls it, The firmest Pledge of our Fidelity: and Diodorus
Siculus, The greatest assurance of Faith among Men. Our Ancestors (says
Cicero) esteemed no Bond so sure to bind us to be Faithful, as an Oath; the Law
of the Twelve Tables shows this, the Sacrifices, and the Leagues by which we
bind our selves to be true to our very Enemies, show it Cicer. Offic. lib. 3.
. And this is the Reason why all the World has used Oaths in Judicature, to be
as a Pledge and Security for the Truth of that Evidence given there, upon which
all Causes usually depend. And though some might speak the Truth there without
an Oath, as many good Men would perform their Promise without a Bond; yet the
difficulty of discerning honest Men from Hypocrites, makes this Caution
necessary: And all Witnesses in Judgment are required to use an Oath for
Confirmation of what they say (...). Plut. de. Audit. page 46.
, unless their peculiar Character give them such credibility as to exempt them;
on which ground Jupiters Priests of Old, and the Christian Clergy in the Middle
times, as also the Nobility in Our days, have been excused from Formal Oaths,
as I could easily prove. But generally, Oaths are thought so necessary in
Judgment, that in the Old Canons, it is the same thing to set down the Days in
which no Oaths shall be taken, and to fix the Times when no Causes shall be
Tried: So that the first Original of our Non-Term and Vacation in Law
Proceedings are derived from the Canons which prohibit the Use of Oaths at
those Times Vide Seldom, Synedr. l. 2. c. 11. p. 303.
. But to proceed; Since an Oath is so Solemn a Confirmation of our Truth, by
calling God to Witness, the Pythagoreans allowed none to Swear in Light
matters, especially not in a trifling Action for a small Debt (...) ^socr.
; and Clinias, a Philosopher of that Sect, chose rather to pay three Talents
unjustly, than to free himself by an Oath D. Basil. hom. 24. Nec deus intersit,
nisi dignus vindice nodus.
. Which Example may justly shame many Christians, who trouble our Courts, and
engage many to Swear on far less occasion. Again, the same Pythagoreans
permitted none to Swear concerning Things contingent, future and uncertain;
affirming, it was neither fit nor safe to Swear in such Cases (...) Hierocles.
. The Grecian Laws also admitted none to Swear what they heard by Hearsay
only: And the Ancient Germans suffered not an Oath to be taken, but when there
was no other way of finding out the Truth In his, vero causis Sacramenta
praestentur, in quibus nullam probationem discussio judicantis invenerit. Leges
Bajoar. apudCapitular. T. 1. p. 119. Tit. 8 c. 16. An. 630.
. For since every Man that Swears, pawns his Soul in Security for his
Integrity, this ought not to be required but in weighty Causes, nor to be taken
but on Sure grounds. This is a Man's last Security for his Truth, and if he once
falsify this, none can ever Trust him after, no Bond can hold him: Which our
Noble King Henry the First well knew, when he generously refused the Popes base
Offer to Absolve him from his Oath, saying, Who will ever trust another
hereafter, when they see by my Example, an Absolution can make void the highest
Bond of Faith Eadmeri histor. l. 5. page 126.
. Now, from this account of the Reason of Taking an Oath, to be for
Confirmation, we shall draw this Inference:

That it is a huge Folly, and a great Impiety, to use Oaths upon a slight
occasion, or in Common discourse, where there can be no need of this high and
Sacred confirmation of our Words by God's Name, unless we have so ill behaved
our selves that none can Trust us, without Pawning our Souls for every thing we
say; yet by using this Religious and Sacred Confirmation to every Trifle, we
make our very Oaths so cheap and contemptible, that we are Trusted the less,
and not the more, for our Vain-Swearing. But, besides the Folly of this vile
Custom, it is a grievous Sin, being the most express breach of the Third
Commandment, and the most profane way of Taking the Name of God in Vain; and
though Men may account this a small Fault in themselves, or their Friend, God
(who is to be our Judge) will not hold them guiltless who commit it: He will
not clear them, nor let it go unpunished, He will certainly condemn them in the
Last Judgment LXX. (...) Non impuninum dimittit. Vatab. Neque enim non reum
habebit cum Dominus in die Judicii magni. Chal. Par.
. As the other Translation reads that dreadful place. And as this Sin is
condemned in the Old Law, so this Swearing in our Communication, is strictly
forbidden above all things (James V. 12.) in the New Testament. Yea, the very
Heathens condemn the Common using Gods Name (...) Plato.
; and Hierocles very expressly says, We must not use an Oath frequently, nor on
ordinary Occasions, nor for silling up our Discourse, nor to confirm every
Story we relate; -- for by the Custom of Swearing often, Men soon fall to Swear
falsely: which is the same with that of S. James, -- lest we fall into
Hypocrisy. It is no doubt a horrid Impiety, to make the Dreadful Name of GOD,
and his Terrible Attributes so cheap and vile, as to bring them to Attest the
most foolish, false, or filthy things, which we vent in the Vainest Company;
and argues a Mind that either denies the Being of God, or at least forgets his
Power; and besides, that it is the most daring Abuse to Heaven, it is also a
high Affront to all the Public Judicatories in the World, since the highest
Security that can be given for our Truth there, the most Sacred Bond of Human
Society, the most Religious Pledge of a Man's Fidelity, on which all our Lives
and Fortunes may depend; is by this bold Impiety rendered Mean and Contemptible,
prostituted to the Scorn of the Atheistical and Profane, yea, and made as Weak
and unsecure, as it is Common and despised. A Sin without any Temptation to
invite to it, or any Excuse to be made for it; having neither Honor, Pleasure,
nor Profit in it, unless we count it Reputation to Dishonor God, Pleasure to
play with Thunder, or Profit to destroy those Immortal Souls of ours, that are
of more Value than a Thousand Worlds: A Wickedness taken up only by Imitation,
and got by the cursed Society of the Debauched and Prosane; and the continuance
in it is the more unpardonable, because it may easily and certainly be amended,
by a few serious Thoughts of God's Majesty, by using the Company of Grave and
Pious Men, and either giving them the freedom to admonish us, or imposing a
small Penance on our selves for every Offense, till the wretched Custom be
overcome. Surely, none but a Professed Atheist does ever commit this Crime, but
merely by Inconsideration; and therefore all others (I hope) may easily be
reduced by those Methods, from the Profaning Gods holy Name, and exposing this
Venerable part of Religion: to which, if this Discourse may be subservient, I
shall rejoice that I have rescued the Sacredness of Oaths from any degrees of
Contempt.

Thirdly, I shall proceed to the last Particular in the Text, viz. The end of
an Oath, or the Cause moving Magistrates to require it, that it may be an End
of all strife: for the Accuser impeaches, and the Accused pleads Not Guilty,
the Plaintiff demands, and the Defendant denies; this is literally, (...),
Controversy, or Strife; and lest these contrary Speeches should produce
perpetual Wrangling, the Witnesses Oaths are required, that by the Truth they
speak, for which they bring in Almighty God for their Voucher, the Cause may be
determined, and the Strife ended. And from this use of an Oath, by the Name of
God, the Divine Majesty himself does, as it were, Judge between the Parties;
and so I understand that Common Phrase of being tried, By God and our Country,
to signify, By the Witnesses Oath, and the Jurers Verdict: for Justinian says
by this use of Oaths, Men seem to enter a Holy Temple when they come before a
Tribunal -- and God, rather than Man, appears to decide the Cause Pro judiciis
put abant homines se in Sacrarus sisti -- and pro hominibus Deum in omnibus
causis jud^cem esse. Cod. l. 2. Tit. 59. l. 3. 8 p. 83.
. Truth (as the Ancients speak) lies in a deep Pit, and if any thing will draw
it out, it must be the Fear of God, who is thus set before the Witnesses Eyes,
to engage them by all their hopes of Mercy, to speak the Truth, the whole
Truth, and nothing but the Truth: And therefore, not only the Apostle, but the
Civil Law, calls it, The best Means to determine Causes Maximum dirimendaram
causarum remedium. Cod. ibid. p. 83.
. And the common Consent of Mankind, has made all our Lives, Liberties, and
Estates, to depend upon an Oath whenever they are in question, supposing this
to be the surest and most Sacred guard unto them. Nor is it without great
reason that so much stress is laid upon Religious Oaths, since though another
Man seem thereby to have our Lives and Estates in his Power; yet by this solemn
Swearing He stakes his own Body and Soul, his Temporal and Eternal Welfare,
against them: and since he can only bring us by a False Oath under some
Temporal Penalty, while he firmly devotes himself to Eternal Vengeance, he runs
the greater Risque, and loses most of the two, who Swears falsely, if he do but
rightly consider it. For, as Plutarch notes, Every Oath contains, either
expressly or implicitly, a Curse on the Taker, if it be false (...) Plut. quest.
Romans
. And though these Curses are variously expressed, and sometimes only supposed,
yet they are very dreadful: so that the Jews, who might not use Ominous words,
chose rather to Swear Elliptically, than to express what was so horrid: So
Moses Swears Josh. 14. 9.
-- if you have not the Land, and there stops; but we are to understand, Let me
suffer all the Plagues due to Perjury: yea, God himself imitates this form, I
swear in my Wrath, if they shall enter into my rest, Hebr. iv. 3. where again
the Curse is understood. And the Scholiast upon Aristophanes Observes, It was
an Ancient Custom thus to Swear Elliptically to avoid all Ominous words (...)
Ariltoph. Ran. 5. 2. Scholiast. (...) Ibid.
. Yet some times these words were expressed in most terrible forms against the
Gentiles, Let the gods destroy me Sueton. Tiber. c. 21.
; Let the Divine Vengeance fall upon my own head, and my whole Family Plin.
Panegyr.
. And to make this more Solemn, they used diverse Ceremonies, as that of casting
away a Stone, and wishing, The gods might so cast them out of all the City and
Capitol being safe) if they did wittingly Swear falsely Festus de verb. signif.
verb. Lapis, p. 82.
. So also the killing of some Beast in Sacrifice, and wishing, They might be so
slain, if they did not speak Truth Live. hist. Romans lib. 21.
: And the quenching a Flaming Torch suddenly, and praying, Their Life and Light
might be so put out, if they deceived Polybii, histor. lib. 3.
; Which last Ceremony was sometimes used amongst Christians, and was solemnly
performed in this Nation, when the Oaths were taken to confirm Magna Charta.
And though in our Modern Courts we now abstain from Ominous Words, contenting
our selves with that very Ancient Form, So help me God It a me dii ament.
Plaut. Bacchid. 4. 8. It a Deos mihi velim propitios. Cicero do Divin.
, yet the Sense duly considered, is as high, as full, and as terrible as any of
the former; for if we Swear falsely, we wish, That Gods Grace and Favor, his
Mercy and Providence, may forsake us; that he may never help us here nor
hereafter, but leave us to perish in this World, and in the World to come. And
oh, how dreadful an Imprecation is this, He that after his Pledge given for his
Truth, dares tell a Lie for favor or Malice, neither fears God, nor loves
himself; he is a desperate Wretch, unfit for Human Society, and really does far
more mischief to himself than to his Adversary. And since an Oath is thus
guarded, we may well be content it should end all Strife among us, for no
greater Security under Heaven can be given or devised. Now from this
description of the End of an Oath, we will observe,

That Perjury, especially in Courts of Justice, is a heinous and horrid
Impiety: the very End of these Courts is to find out Truth, and But to speak
falsely there, though by such as are not upon their Oath, is to affront the
Vicegerents of God, and wickedly to design to pervert Judgment, as well as to
make that holy Institution useless, which is the great Security of all
Societies. But when Men come to Swear, God himself is directly appealed to, the
Searcher of all Hearts is set upon the Tribunal, and the Perjured Wretch Lies
not unto Men, but unto God, Acts V. 4. He defies the King of Heaven to his
face, and affronts him openly in some of his tenderest Attributes, disbelieving
his Truth, trampling on his Justice, and despising his Power; yea, he makes (as
much as in him lies) the Righteous God a Party to that Falsehood, by which he
Murders or Robs his Neighbor; saying, as Philo has elegantly expressed it, O
God, I should not be believed but for thy Name, and therefore I use thee for
the Cloak of my Injustice; I would not be discovered in my sin, do thou help
me, and take the blame on thy self; for though I am a Transgressor by thy Name,
I shall pass for an Honest man; thou neither love Truth, nor punishest
Falsehood Philo de legibus in Specie differ.
. This horrid Blasphemy is the import of all Perjury, the very Image of the
False-Swearers Thoughts, and can any thing be more wicked? This accursed Sin,
not only flies in the Face of God, but by gilding fatal Lies with his Name,
misleads that Sacred Authority he has set over us for securing our Rights, and
endeavors to make that the Instrument of their Revenge and Cruelty; it imposes
upon the most upright Juries, with design to make them Partners in the Crime;
it robs an Innocent man of his good Name, his Estate, his Liberty, nay, his
very Life, if their false Witness be believed: Or if the Jurors be the Perjured
Men, in spite of all Evidence, it rescues the greatest and most dangerous
Malefactors (by a Partiality that defies Heaven) from the Justice of the Law,
and encourages not only them, but others to commit the like Crimes. And
whosoever they be, Jurors or Witnesses, who regard not their Oaths, They do
what in them lies, to subvert the Laws, to take away the Administration of
Justice, and to ruin the Community they live in, by baffling this Great and
Sacred Instrument of our Peace and Safety. If they do this for Fear or Favor,
it shows they value Men more than God, and dare purchase Their Love with his
utmost Displeasure: If they are Perjured for Hire, they sell their Souls for a
Vile Price, and purchase a Reversion in Hell, which they shall inherit for
ever: If they do it in Malice, it is like the Crime of Witches, who give their
Souls to the Devil for ever, to be enabled to do a transient harm to their
Neighbors. And whatever be the Principle it springs from, yea, and whatever
event it have as to the Party Accused, the Perjured Man devotes himself to all
the Curses in Gods Book, and cuts himself off from all hope of the Divine Help
for ever; and therefore the Old Romans allotted no Human Punishment for this
Sin, but left the Criminal to the more terrible Vengeance of the gods, who were
most directly affronted by it Tertul. Apol. c. 28. Item Rescript. Alex. Aug.
Imp.
; the Greeks believed, it brought ruin and destruction to the Man, and all his
Posterity Hesiod. (...).
. Yet, lest these who fear none but Human Penalties should be hardened by
Impunity from Men, (for if they dreaded the Vengeance of God they durst not
commit this Crime) therefore it was Ordained, that if any were convict of
Perjury, who had sworn on the Holy Gospels, his Tongue should be cut out, as of
no use for ever after Eclog. Leonis and Constant. Tit. 28.. 2.
. And all Laws deprive these Wretches of the Privilege of giving Testimony in
any other Cause, and their Credit is Eternally blasted. The Indians cut off
their Fingers and Toes, to reduce them to Beggary and Shame; the Egyptians put
them to Death, as unworthy to Live among Mankind after so inexcusable a
Wickedness. But whatever they suffer here, Damnation does await them in the
next World, unless they do Repent sincerely, and make Satisfaction also. But I
hope, we need aggravate this Crime no further, but having surveyed all the
Particulars of the Text, may now pass to the Application. And that which
naturally follows from the Premises, is,

First, That all Persons concerned be very Cautious in taking Oaths, and that
when they come to Swear, they do it with all Religious Fear and Reverence; not
only as being immediately in Gods Presence, but as making a direct Appeal to
him, and offering their Souls as a Pledge for the Truth of what they shall
speak; and though the thing they Swear be never so True, yet this Application
is so venerable, and so high a piece of Religion, that it ought to be done with
all Gravity and humble Reverence; and if they be so taken, to confirm a known
and certain Truth, they do exceedingly tend to the Honor of God, and to the
Benefit of Mankind, and are so very lawful, that we may as well scruple to make
Application to Gods Mercy in Prayer, as to his Truth in Solemn Swearing, on a
Just Occasion; especially, since it is evident by Reason and Universal
Practice, that the World cannot well be Governed, nor Justice Dispensed without
them; and it is the Abuse of them, not the Serious and Just use of Oaths, that
ought to be avoided.

Secondly, When we have taken them, let us be very fearful of breaking them,
and make Conscience of answering and acting in every Point agreeable to what we
have Sworn; let us fear no Anger, but that of Heaven, nor seek no Favor, but
that of God, nor wish for any Gain, but the Peace of a good Conscience. We see,
that the Laws of God and Men have put the End of all Strife upon our Fidelity,
supposing we are Christians and Honest men, who Fear the Lord of Hosts, and
value our own Souls, and we have given the greatest Security under Heaven, that
we will be Impartial. Now, how vile and infamous a Crime will it be in us, to
betray his Trust, to abuse the Judge of all the World, and his Vicegerents, to
wrong the Innocent, and destroyour own Souls? One would imagine, nothing could
tempt a Rational Man to such an Act; if the too frequent and sad Experience of
Opposite, yea of Contradictory Oaths (in this Impious Age of ours) did not
convince us, that nothing is too monstrous or unreasonable for an Ill Man to
do. If Popish Zealots, by Assurances of Dispensation, were the only Persons,
who assumed the Impudence to commit this Crime, it would not be so very
strange: But for Us, who say, No Power on Earth can Cancel this Sacred Bond of
an Oath, for Us to Perjure our selves, is at once our Shame, and the Worlds
Wonder; doubtless such Men deserve not only the bare Punishments of the Law,
but to suffer an Universal Detestation, that as they are the Bane of our
Government, the Scandal of our Religion, and the Enemies of God, so they may be
esteemed and treated as the Foes of all Mankind, until by Sorrow and Repentance
they shall own their Faults, and return to a better Mind.

Finally, Let us Bless the Holy Name of God for our Good Laws, and the Security
we enjoy by them, since no Man can hurt us in Body, in Goods, or Good Name,
without venturing the Damnation of his own Soul; we have excellent Methods to
find out the Guilty, and clear the Innocent. And though Evil Men will claim
unjustly, accuse falsely, or deny their Guilt impudently, yet while we have so
Just and so Prudent Magistrates on Earth, and so Righteous and Powerful GOD in
Heaven, we may rationally hope, that all Perjury, Falsehood, and Injustice,
shall be discovered either Here, or Hereafter. Cicero mentions a False-witness
at Rome, who was struck Dumb just as He was pronouncing that part of his Oath,
-- If I willingly speak falsely Cicero, Epist. l. 7. ep. 1.
. But if such Vengeance be not Now presently executed, let us not despair; for
there is a Great Assize coming, where all Errors in Judgment shall be
rectified, and all False-Swearers discovered and condemned. But it would
prevent many a sad Sentence at that Dreadful Day, and hinder all Public
Injustice here, if all that are called to this Duty would very seriously
remember, That They Swear by the Greater; and so their Oath for Confirmation,
would ever be a Just End of all Strife: Which God of His Mercy grant, for Jesus
Christ's sake; to whom, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be all Honor and
Glory, now, and for evermore,

Amen.
FINIS.

