Missa Triumphans, Or, The Triumph of the Mass; WHEREIN All the Sophistical and
wily Arguments of Mr de Rodon against that thrice Venerable Sacrifice, in his
funestuous Tract, by him called, The Funeral of the Mass, are fully, formally,
and clearly Answered. Together with an Appendix by way of Answer to the
Translators Preface.

By F. P. M. O. P. Hib.

Beware lest any deceive you by Philosophy and vain fallacy, Col. 2. v. 8.
Permissu Superiorum. Printed at Louain. 1675.

The last Will, etc. Know all men by these presents, that I
John Presbyter Knight, by Country a Scotch-man, of the Tribe of Rabshekah, of
the Lineage of Judas; (being of perfect memory, only a little troubled with
melancholy, and a disease called, The particular Charge of the Army) do
ordain this my last Will and Testament to stand in full force and virtue.

Imprimis, I give and bequeath my soul into the hands of him that gave it; and
whereas I have always (in my life time) been used, and taught all others to
plunder and rob both God and Caesar of their dues; yet at my death I detest all
such horrid Actions, Equivocations, and mental Reservations, and will not rob
the Devil of his: Therefore in plain English, Devil take thy due.

For my body, I bequeath to the earth; provided first, That it be first
decently wrapped in six sheets of the Directory, and then reverently coffined
up in the sacred Ordinance for Tithes, and so with all solemnity carried from
the Temple to Westminster by the C L asses, Doctor Burges, Doctor Gouge, Master
Edwards, and Byfeild being close Mourners, and going before the Corpse, and the
wicked Elders following after, weeping, howling, and knashing of their teeth,
as if they were already in the fire, which such stinking Trees were made for,
upon one of which Judas my great Gransire hanged himself, You may read more of
them in the History of Susanna, with a slow motion, and in the midst of the
streets, that my body may be seen by all, and let your sorrow so much abound,
that you may take up that Lamentation of old, Wisdom crying out in the
streets, but ^e regards h^ -- my will is, That my learned Countriman, Doctor
Cybballs teach at my Funeral in a deplorable tone of language (according to
his special gift) my will being that he preach upon that Text in the 89. Psalm.
ver. 44. The days of my youth have thou shortened, and covered me with
dishonor.

Next I desire that Mr. Calamy and Mr. Case may be sent up to desire a
conference with both Houses, to procure an Ordinance, that there may be a day
of Humiliation appointed and set apart to deplore my sad loss, and that a
Message be prepared, and sent with all speed into Scotland, to give them timely
notice thereof, that they may humble themselves with you, and that whereas we
have continued a Monthly Fast for the distressed Protestants in Ireland, and
we our selves having revoked the Protestant Religion, and instituted the
Presbyterian, (and now finding our own distresses to be above or equal with
theirs) we conclude that our Prayers have not been availeable for them, and
may now change the day, and fast and pray as long or longer for our selves. And
likewise, that they may be pleased to put it to the Vote, whether my corpse may
not be interred near his Excellency their late Lord General, and Mr. John
Pym, and so hereafter all Parliament men disceasing, that we our selves may as
well now, as hereafter take up all the resting places of the Saints, and so
leave no room for either the King or his evil Counsel or Popish Bishops,
they having formerly engrossed that place only for themselves, that an
Ordinance may be speedily drawn up to this effect.

Thirdly, I will and bequeath unto Doctor Burges to have the di^sing of all
fat Benefices whatsoever; provided that the said Dr. Burges hold and freely
enjoy as many of the said Benefices as he himself pleases, and the rest to be
by him disposed of to such persons as he shall think quallified and endued
with gifts befitting so great a Cause as the present Reformation shall require:
to which end, for the better encouragement of him the said Dr. therein, I do
freely give and bequeath unto the said Dr. Burges all the scaffolds, and loose
stones in or about, or belonging to the Church of Paul's, to pull down, take,
carry away, and dispose of as he shall think fitting.

Fourthly, I give and bequeath unto my Reverend Son Dr. Gouge the full sum of
500 l. for these religious uses following, viz. 20 pounds to find his Parish
Bell-ropes, and in case his said Parish shall not have any use thereof, that he
or any of the rest of the venerable Assembly shall have full power and
authority to use them at their own discretions: That one hundred and 50 pounds
shall be by the said Like to li^ quoth the Devil to the Colier.
Dr. Gouge disbursed in sea-coale whilst they are cheap, and by him sellered up
(as lately he did, most of his Parish can justify the same) and by him again
sold out to the poor of his Parish, or any other poor Christians at 10. d.
the Bushel clear gains. And I ordain that he employ the remaining sum in
like manner, or if he thinks it fitting to put it to use at 10. in the
hundred, and not under, and the gains thereof arising to be distributed
equally to Mr. Will. Pri^, and Dr. Bastwick, that they may be the better
encouraged to Query against the Army, to rail against Independents, to rout
out Monarchy, and to prove Presbytery jure Divino, provided that the principal
remain entire to Dr. Gouge himself, without any other fraud or deceit,

Fifthly, I give and bequeath to my dear Child Mr. Edwards, 500. Acres of
Bishops Lands, with all the timber growing thereon, to be by him converted to
Gibbets to hang up the Independents; and in case the said Independents shall
resist the holy Synod, as it is probable they will; That then it shall be
lawful for any of the Assembly being already furnished with hemp (if not
enough in my former Legacy, the Common people of England questionless will
supply their needs) to hang themselves, and to fulfill the old Proverb, give
them halter enough and they will hang themselves.

Sixthly, I give and bequeath all my plundered Books, and Libraries lately taken
from the Bishops to Mr Calamy, Mr Sedgwick, and Mr. Case* it being likely the
Case may suddenly be altered, and my son Calamy feel Calamity, for I fear
destruction is ^igh, and my son Sedgwick will shortly ^leat (like one of
Ieroboams Calves) to his Countrymen in Essex, in one only single poor
Benefice.

Seventhly, I give and bequeath all my Charity to the Aldermen of the City, and
by them to be disposed of to the Parliament, as they shall have need thereof.

Eighthly, All my wisdom and learning to the Common Council, that they may
preserve the City as I and my Children have preserved the Church, and brought
it to the great light and glory that now you see it is.

Ninthly I give and bequeath to all broaken Aldermen, defunct Committees, and
accused Members of the House of Commons, my n^w Creed; and by them to be
disposed of to their Creditors, and all others as they shall see cause, that
they may renew their faith, and again become credible men, by which means the
public faith may again revive, and the City look up: and whereas my
Predecessor known by the name of Doctors Commons of famous memory did decease
about six years since, having first made a will which was made public in
print, and for as much as the said Doctors Commons is again revived to my
great and unspeakeable terror, I do hereby bequeath unto my said Predecessor
all jurisdiction, privileges, profits, and emoluments whatsoever so unjustly
usurped and detained by me, and the rest of my precious Brats.

Tenthly, All my zeal for the Cause I give and bequeath to the dissenting
Soldiers that have deserted the Army, that they may stand up mightily in the
gap, and stop the plaguey devouring Army of Sir Thomas Fairfax.

Eleventhly, I give and bequeath all my new invented Oaths, and Covenants, all
my Schismatic Sermons, all my Perjuries, Forgeries, Plots, Treacheries,
Rebellions, Equivocations, and mental reservations, to my dear children the
Scots, provided that they shall make use of them in their own Country, and
not else where.

Twelfthly. I give and bequeath unto Dr. A notorious turne-coot.
Cyballs 10. l. of lawfu^l money of England, in consideration of my Funeral
Sermon, besides two Canenicall Coats, which he may turn, as he sees fitting;
and I desire him to make his prayer shorter then the ordinary use has been,
for I my self must confess the blasphemies, treasons, heresies,
incongruities, tautologies, absurdities of my children in their measure of
Prayer, from time to time (observed by the people) has been a great cause of
my untimely disease: And also I desire that his Sermon may be printed, and
published, and that Wal-ey'd Bartlet at Austins-gate, and Bellamy at the Old
Exchange have the Printing thereof; and that an Ordinance may be desired, that
none dare to reprint the same.

Lastly, I do entrust all that out of a conscientious duty to me (shall
suddenly after my discease) leave and abandon the House of Commons, (Provided
they exceed not the number of threescore) to be my Executors, that they see
this my last Will and Testament performed, without any fraud according to the
true sense and meaning thereof, and the several legacies to be paid to the
persons aforesaid within five months after my death. And this my Will to
remain in full force, revoking all former Wills, Bonds, Bills, Gifts,
whatsoever.

Witness my hand and Seal, Adoniram Byfield, Scribe.
Sealed and delivered, July, 1647. John Presbyter. Simon Synod. Cornelius
Burges.


Postscript.
Rejoice O heavens* sing aloud O earth, clap thy hands for joy, O England, post
nubula soles, thou shall now have a time of quietness, of peace, of content,
for Presbyter John is dead, and will never vex thee more, nor imprison thy free
Denizens, nor eat up thy fat things, nor devour thy good things, nor eat the
bread out of thy childrens mouths: Therefore farewell persecution for
conscience; farewell Ordinance for Tithes; farewell Ecclesiastical Supremacy;
farewell Pontificiall Revenue; farewell Dissembly of Divines, dissembled at
Westminster, you shall constult together no more; farewell Sir Simon Synod, and
his son Presbyter Jack

Gens antiqua ruit, multos dominata per Annos, And therefore O England,
Interpone tuis interdum gaudia curis
His EPITAPH.
HEre lies Jack Presbyter, void of all pity,
Who ruined the Country, and fooled the City:
He turned preaching to prating, and telling of lies,
Caused jarres and dissentions in all Families.
He invented new Oaths, Rebellion to raise,
Deceiving the Commons, whilst on them he preyes.
He made a New Creed, despised the Old,
King, State, and Religion by him bought and sold.
He four years consulted, and yet could not tell
The Parliament the way Christ went into Hell.
Resolved therein, he never could be,
Therefore in great haste, he is gone thither to see.
FINIS.
(...) graciously to hear the humble Prayers of his hidden Petitioner; and

MADAM, Your Majesty's most Loyal and Devoted Beadsman, W. C.

Chapter I. Concerning the Exposition of these words: This is my body.
MOnsieur de Rodon, against ths exposition of the Roman Catholics, who by this
passage of Scripture, This is my body, understands the real presence of Christ's
body in the Sacrament of the Altar, frames his argument thus.

Rodon. 1. He that speaks contrary to the usage of all the world, and takes
words otherwise then all other men do, must without doubt speak very obscurely;
but if Jesus* Christ by these words This is my body, had meant the real
presence of his body in the host, (as the Romish Doctors assert) and
consequently had meant the substantial Conversion of the bread into his body,
he had spoken contrary to the common usage of a^ the world, and had taken the
words otherwise then all other men do; which I prove thus. The^ was never any
author either sacred or profane that made use of such words as these, This is
my body, to signify the real presence of a thing immediately after the
pronouncing of them, and not before; on the contrary, there was never any man
that did not use them to signify that the thing was already that which it was
to be. For example, when God the Father speaking of Jesus Christ said, this is
my beloved Son, it is certain that Jesus Christ was the son of God, before God
said it; and in common usage it is never said, this is that, except the thing
be so, before it is said to be so. For example, we do not say this is a Table,
before that which we mean by the word, this, be a table. Therefore it is
contrary to the common style of all authors as well sacred as profane, and
contrary to the common usage of all men, to make these words of, Jesus Christ,
this is my body, to signify the substantial conversion of the bread into
Christ's body, and the real presence of his body in the host immediately after
the pronouncing of them by the Priest, and not before; seeing then that Jesus
Christ, when he said, this is my body, did not speak contrary to the common
usage of all ^h^ world, and d^d not tak^ the word^ otherwise ^hen all other men
do; it necessarily follows, that these words of Jesus Christ, when he said,
this is my body, do not signify the substantial conversion of the bread into
Christ's body, nor the real presence of Christ's body in the host, immediately
after the Priest has pronounced them, and not before. And this being so; the
Romish doctors must seek some other passages of Scripture, than this, This is
my body. to prove such a conversion, and such a presence; and seeing they can
find none, I conclude that such a conversion, and such a presence, have no
foundation in Scripture.

Answ. To this argument I answer, confessing the major, viz. He that speaks
contrary to the usage of all the world, etc. and denying the minor, viz. But if
Jesus Christ by these words, This is my body, had meant the real presence, etc.
he had spoken contrary to the common usage of all the world. And to the
probation of his minor, viz. There was never any author, either facred or
profane, that made use of such words as these. This is my body, to signify,
etc. that I grant* and deny the consequence, viz. therefore it is contrary to
the common style of all authors, as well sacred as profane, and contrary to
the common usage of all men, to make these words of Jesus Christ, this is my
body, to signify the substantial conversion of the bread into Christ's body,
and the real presence of his body in the host, immediately after the
pronouncing of them by the Priest, and not before. And the reason is this;
because of the disparity that is betwixt Christ's words, and the words of all
authors sacred and profane; for Christ's words, as uttered by him, have a
creative, productive, and effective virtue and force. It was with his word he
changed water into wine, at the feast of Cana in Galilee. It was with his wotd,
he cured and cleansed the Leprous man in the Gospel. It is with his word, he
wrought all his stupendous wonders and Miracles; and (if Mr de Rodon believes
he is God) he ought to believe, that it was with his word he created heaven and
earth; or dare the Monsieur say, that when God spoke these words fiat caelum,
fiat terra, be the heavens made, be the earth made, that heaven and earth were
in being, before God uttered his creative word: or thinks he that Christ had no
hand in that creation? if he does; then I dare say, and can assure him, he has
no more belief then a mere heathen. But as for the words of a mere man, whether
he be an author sacred or profane, sure it is that they are not of a creative,
productive, or effective virtue and force, as Christ's are; and so it is no
wonder if according to the common usage of all men's meaning their authors words
do presuppose that the things whereof they treat or speak, have their being
before; and not by virtue of their bare significative words. But as it is
proper to a mere man's word, (be he never so good an author sacred or profane)
not to give a being to the thing he speaks of, so it is proper to Chri^s
effective word, to effect or cause what it signifies; and consequently, all
authors (I mean all Christian authors whether sacred or profane) may very
well* and ought, (according to the common usage of all faithful and Christian
people) understand these words: This is my body, as spoken by Christ, (whose
words are of a creative, productive, and effective force and power) in a
common, usual, litteral sense, as when I, or another man should say, this is my
horse, this is my house, meaning a real horse, and a real house, and not the
sign or figure of a horse, or of a house. But if the Mounsieur will not
understand words in the same sense as all other Christians do, and ought to do,
and will give no more virtue and power to Christ's creative word, then Jews,
Turks, and heathens do; I see no reason why he, and all those that take his
part, ought to be e^med (as to matters of belief) better then any of these.

But let us suppose, with the greatest part of all Christians, that ever were,
and now are, that Christ can Transubstantiate bread into his body, that it
implies no contradiction, and that at the institution of this Sacrament, he
intended really so to do. I ask Mr. de Rodon, how Christ could have expressed his
real meaning unto us, with clearer words, and more to the common usage of all
Authors, and men, then by saying: This is my body? When a man says: this is my
hand, this is my cloak; does he speak contrary to the common usage of all
authors and men? or do they understand by his words, the figure or sign of his
hand and cloak only when he intends they are his real hand and cloak? Even so,
supposing Christ can Transubstantiate bread into his body really, and that when
he instituted the Sacrament, he meant really so to do, would it be contrary to
the common usage of all Authors and men, to und^rstand his words in a literal
sense? or how can a conception be more clearly expressed, then by the terms and
words which were instituted for its proper and immediate signification?
Dialecticks and Philosophers, instead of carrying the things they treat of to
School with them* do carry* only conceptions and words thither, and the words
serve only to express their conceptions; and the properer the word is, the
better* it e^presseth the concept. But in this passage, This is my body, the
words are instituted to signify properly and immediately, a^reall corporal
thing, and not its sign or figure; Therefore according to the Rules of
Dialectick, a real body cannot be plainlyer expressed, then by saying: This is
my body.

Doubtless, those that said, how can this man give us his flesh to eat,
understood him literally, as we do, and if our savior himself had meant it
otherwise* could he not easily have answered, and satisfied them, by saying:
you are mistaken sirs, you understand me not right? I mean not, that it is my
real substantial body, but only the representation or Sacrament of it. His
answer was not so, but this: Amen I say unto you, unless you eat the flesh of
the son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you. Here also
he calls it his flesh and blood; therefore he understood it literally as we
do; not figuratively only as M. R. does.

To this I add, that a figurative expression is obscurer then a litteral one;
why then did not Christ to avoid obscurity, foreknowing that in future times
should be great alterations and hot debates in his Church, concerning
Transubstantiation, wherefore I say, did he not say, this is only the figure
and sacrament of my body in^tead of saying absolutely This is my body? for by
saying so, he would take away all ambiguity concerning Transubstantiation, and
his Church would be in perfect union concerning this grand Mystery.

As to Mr. de Rodons first Instance concerning these words of God the father:
This is my beloved son, I confess, Christ was his son before he spok them
words. But these words were spoken by God the father; to let the world know,
that Christ was his true natural son, he intended not then to create him his
son, or to transubstantiate any creature into his sons substance. But if God
the father had taken bread in his hand, and said; this is my son; no sacred or
profane author, (considering his omnipotency) ought to doubt but that that
bread was his real son; because of the force of his creative word, unless they
can prove that it is beyond Gods power to transubstantiate one thing into
another, which no body can demonstrate; because it is an ^asier thing in its
self, to Transubstantiate then to create. What we say of God the fathers word
the same we say of Christ's, because of their equality in power.

Hence follows evidently that Mr. de Rodons second Instance, viz. This is a
Table; is to no purpose, because of the disparity between Christ's word, and the
words of all Authors sacred and profane; Therefore Mr. de Rodon must give us
leave to conclude thus, contrary to him, viz. that since Jesus Christ expressed
his mind, by saying: This is my body* and since his power is so great, that he
is able to do, what he says; and since his word is verity and truth; it
follows evidently, that he did not speak contrary to the common usage of all
the world: and that he did not take the words but in their proper and litteral
meaning, as all other men do, when they say, this is my hand, this is my cloak;
he being able, to effect what he said; which no other Author, sacred or
profane, are able to do. It follows also, that the Romis^ doctors, need not
seek, and cannot have, a clearer passage, out of scriprure, to prove the real
presence, then this: This is my body, whence also follows, that this
conversion and presence, have an excellent foundation in holy scripture. But
let us now examine his grounded reason concerning the common usage of words;
thus he argues.

Rodon. 2. Things must be, before there be any Image, Picture, or
representation of them; and consequently Images are after the things, whereof
they are Images: but words are the Images of conceptions, and conceptions the
Images of things: therefore things are such, before we can really conceive them
to be such, and we conceive them to be such, before we can say they are such.
Therefore that which Christ held, and gave to his disciples, expressed by the
word (this) was his body before he conceived that it was his body, and he
conceived that it was his body, before he said, this is my body: and
consequently it is not by virtue of these words: t^is is my body, that that
which Jesus Christ gave to his Disciples, expressed by the word (this,) was his
body; but rather it is by blessing the bread, or thanksgiving, that the bread
was made the body of Christ, because it was made the Sacrament of it. Whence it
follows, that these words: This is my body, must be expounded thus: This
bread is my body, and these words: This bread is my body, must be expounded
thus: This bread is the Sacrament of my body.

Answ. To this Argument I answer, granting the Antecedent, with its sequel; But
that which he inferrs, viz. that words are the Images of conceptions, I
distinguish, thus: words are the improper Images of conceptions, I confess;
words are the proper Images of conceptions I deny; for although words be signs
of conceptions, yet they are not their proper Images; because (as Dialecticks
commonly say) though every Image is a sign, yet every sign is not an Image;
and the reason is, because an Image has always an essential relation or
likeness to its prototype, which a sign has not always to the thing it
signifies; n^y the very signum natural, natural sign it ^elf, has not that
similitude; for othe^wise smoke which is a natural sign of fire, and the voice
of a man, which is the natural sign of a man, the one would be like fire and
the other like a man, sure it is, and to every man's eye, that the kings head
set up before a Tav^rn, signifies that wine is to be sold there; and yet the
kings head is no Image of wine, because it is not like wine; so that an Image,
and a sign are two different things. But suppose a sign is an improper Image,
because as an Image is like to its Prototype, so a sign represents the thing
it signifies; I distinguish his minor thus: but words are the Images of
conceptions, and consequently must come after the things they signify: humane
words are signs, and must come after, etc. I confess; divine words, (such as
Christ's are) are signs, and must come after, etc. I deny; for humane words are
nothing else but mere empty and speculative signs or shadows of the things
they signify; but Christ's words are practical signs and causes of what they
signify; and so they precede, and must not come after the thing by them
signified. And so Transubstantiation, which was the concept of Christ's words,
when he said This is my body, followed, and was made by his effective word.

This solution is grounded on the omnipotent v^e of Christ's words, which are
not only signs, but also do cause by creation or production what things he
pleases and how he pleases to conceive they shall be; for we never heard as
yet of any other way, God either creat^d or produced any thing, but by h^s b^re
word; therefore although every creatures word, comes after the thing it
signieth; yet Christ's word, which is both a practical sign and cause of
things, must precede what he intends to create, produce, or change.

Secondly, I answer the said minor, that whereas the Romish Doctors hold
Transubstantiation to be not only the real presence of Christ's body, b^t also
the sign and Sacrament thereof; (For they say, it is both Sacramentum and res,
the Sacrament and the thing it self;) As it is a Sacrament or sign, we say, it
pre-supposeth the thing it represents* viz. Christ's patible body upon the
Cross; for although it be still the self same body, yet it is not still in the
self same manner; it is now glorified, and it was then patible; it was then in
its human shape and it is now in the Sacrament, but veiled under the
Sacramental species of bread and wine. Neither is there any repugnance or
inconvenience, that the same thing should signify or represent its own self,
when the manner of the thing is changed; for example, it is neither repugnant
or inconvenient, that a man upon a theater, should represent and signify, what
he did himself, when he was in an army; or to represent his own youthful
actions in his old age, it is not repugnant to any man; and yet the self-same
man is the representer, and represented; even so is it in our case, concerning
Christ's glorified body in the Sacrament, and the self same when it was patible
upon the Cross.

And whereas Mr. Rodon says, that it was rather by blessing the bread or
thanksgiving, that the bread was made the body of Christ, because it was made
the Sacrament of it. I ask him this question; if a bare blessing or
thanksgiving can make this Sacrament, why were not the loaves and fishes our
Savior multiplied for those that followed him into the wilderness, made this
Sacrament also? for Christ blessed them and gave the glory and praise of the
miracle, he was about to do, to his heavenly father. But certain it is, and all
the faithful believe, that this Sacrament was first instituted by Christ at
his last supper with his disciples; and consequently more then a bare blessing,
and thanksgiving are requisite to make this Sacrament, viz. these effective
words of Christ, This is my body, and so the Mounseur is quite mistaken, when
he says, that it was rather by blessing the bread, or thanksgiving* that the
bread was made the body of Christ, because it was made the Sacrament of it, for
there was blessing and thanksgiving of Christ, upon the bread and fishes in the
wilderness, and yet they were no Sacrament.

Therefore, since other men's words are not proper Images, but mere speculative
signs; and since Christ's effective words, are both practical signs and causes
of the things by them signified: and since Transubstantiation is both the
Sacrament and thing it self, and as it is a Sacrament, it presupposes the some
thing it signifies, though taken in another manner. Therefore things which
Christ say to be such, are not such before he says, or conceives them to be
such, because he makes them really such, by saying they are such, although
other men's words can alter nothing by saying they are such, from what they were
before; unless Christ elevates their words, as he does the words of his
Priests, when they consecrate, and gives unto them an Instrumental productive
virtue. Hence also follows, that that which Jesus Christ held, and gave to
his disciples, expressed by the word ( this) was bread, and not his body before
he said: This is my body, by verof which words, he made it his real body. And
consequently, that these words: This is my body, must not be expounded thus:
This bread is my body; nor these words, This bread is my body, expounded thus;
This is the Sacrament of my body; but rather thus This is my body, must be
understood of his real body, although it consignifies also the Sacrament of his
body; for they are both together in the Mystery of Transubstantiation.

Mounsieur de Rodon prosecutes his argument, and proves that these words: This
is my body, must be thus expounded; This bread is the Sacrament of my body.

Rodon. 3. A proposition must be expounded according to the nature of the thing
in question; for example, if a man pointing at the kings person, should say,
this is the King; the Proposition must be expounded thus: this is the Kings
person, because the kings person is meant; But if a man coming into a Painters
shop, and pointing at the Kings Picture should say, this is the King; the
Proposition must be expounded thus: this is the Kings Picture, because here his
picture is meant. Even so, if Jesus Christ laying his hand ^n his breast, had
said: This is my body: we must without doubt have understood the proposition
concerning his real body and not concerning the sign, or Sacrament of it,
because his very body had been then meant, and not the sign or Sacrament of it.
But Jesus Christ being about to institute the Eucharist, and to that end,
having taken bread, blessed itand given it to his disciples, with these words,
take, eat, this is my body, it is evident that they must be understood of the
sacrament of his body, and the proposition must be expounded thus, this is the
Sacrament of my body, because here the Sacrament of his body is meant: And
seeing a Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace, as the Council of
Trent says, in its sixth sess: it is evident that this proposition: This is my
body, being expounded by this, This is the Sacrament of my body, may be
expounded thus: this is the sign of my body.

Answ. I deny the Mounsieurs minor; viz. that it is evident that Christ's words
must be understood only of the Sacrament of his body, and that the Proposition
must be expounded thus: This is the Sacrament of my body; for these words This
is my body, as spoken by Christ, do according to the proper and immediate
signification of the words signify no more the Sacrament of his body, then
these words this is my cloak, as uttered by me do signify the sign or
Sacrament of my cloak; therefore as when I say, this is my cloak, it is not
evident, that I mean the sign only of my cloak; so when Christ said, This is
my body, it is not evident, that he meant only the Sacrament of his body; nay
the words according to their proper and immediate sense, do rather signfy, that
it is his real body; and yet we consess that they consignifie the Sacrament of
his body also; and the Mounsieur has no more to show for this (...) but his
bare word, which we are not bound to take.

(...) Christ laying his hand upon his breast, had said: This is my body, then
( Mr. de Rodon says) we ought to believe he meant his real body. But let us
suppose, he had done so, a blind man being by, who could not see him; I ask
the Mounsieur, how this blind man must understand and expound his words? all
the beholders ought to understand them literally; if the blind man must
understand them so too, why may not we understand them so also? or may the
blind man understand them figuratively only, and the beholders understand them
literally? if so, then the blind understands them not rightly; or if he says,
that the blind man ought to understand them literally, because of the
attestation of the standers by that saw our savior hold his hand upon his
breast while he uttered the words; I say, that the beholders being but men,
their testimony can produce but a mere humane faith in the blind man concerning
the true meaning of Christ's words; or finally if some of the spectatours, out
of malice, or to deceive the poor blind man, should contradict the others; and
say that Christ held not his hand upon his breast, while he pronounced the
words; (although they knew well he did) where I pray Mounsieur is the poor
blind man then? certainly according to your Rule, he will be brought to his
wits end, before he understands the words rightly; unless you give him leave
to understand them literally as we do. Therefore it is not the laying of
Christ's hand or foot upon a thing, that gives unto words their common usage,
nor makes them signify according to the nature of the thing in question; but it
is rather Christ's effective word, taken according to the common institution of
men, to signify things in their proper sense, that creates, or changes one
thing into another according to the real and litteral signification of the
words by him spoken. Therefore since all General Councils, and all the holy
fathers that ever treated of this question, all Catholics of all ages, ever
since the Institution of this Sacrament, unanimously understood the words, this
is my body, in a litteral sense; and since Mr. d^ Rodon, cannot produce one of
them, of his side; nor show us any evident proof to the contrary, but his own
bare word; which we do not at all value; it clearly follows, that these words:
This is my body, must not be expounded of the Sacrament of his body only; and
because a Sacrament is not here only meant; it follows that although a
Sacrament, as the holy Council of Irent says, is a visible sign of an
invisible grace, that this proposition, This is my body, must not be expounded,
this is the Sacrament, or this is the sign only of my body; although (I
confess) that by virtue of the said words, the Sacrament is also consignified
with his real presence in the consecrated Host. The Mounsieur confirms his
precedent Argument thus.

Rod. 4. In these two propositions: This is my body: This cup is the new
Testament in my blood, the word (is) must be taken in the same sense, because
they are alike, having been pronounced upon the same matter, viz. the one upon
one part of the Sacrament, and the other upon the other part of it; and because
of like things, we must give alike Judgment. But in this proposition, This cup
is the new Testament, the word (i^) is not taken for a real and
transubstantiated being, but for a Sacramental and significative being; because
neither the cup nor that which i^ in the cup, is changed into a Testament;
neither is it really and properly a Testament, but the Sacrament of the New
Testament. Therefore in this proposition likewise, This is my body, the word
(is) is not taken for a real and Transubstantiated being, but for a Sacramental
and significative being: and consequently as this proposition: This cup is the
new Testament, must be expounded thus: the wine that is in the cup, is the
sign and Sacrament of the New Testament: so this proposition: This is my body,
must be expounded thus: this bread is the sign and Sacrament of my body.
Whence it follows, that in one single proposition of Jesus Christ in the
institution of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, viz. This cup is the New
Testament; are two figures; one in the word (cup) being taken for that which is
in the cup; this is a figure called a Metonimy, whereby the thing containing,
is taken for the thing contained. The other figure is, that the cup is called
the New Testament: this is also a figure called a metonimy, whereby the sign
is called by the name of the thing signified. And therefore the Romish Doctors
are mistaken, when they tell us that all that Jesus Christ said, when he
instituted the Eucharist, must be taken literally, and without a figure. But
withal, we must not imagine that Jesus Christ spoke obscurely, because he
spoke figuratively; these figures and manners of speech, being commonly and
familiarly used by all the world.

Answ. To this Argument I answer, granting the major, and denying the minor;
and to its probation I confess, that the bare cup is neither a proper
testament, or transubstantiated; But that the consecrated wine in the cup is
not the new Testament, and transubstantiated into Christ's blood, I flatly deny;
because Christ himself in express words said: hoc est novum Testamentum in meo
sanguine. This is the new Testament in my blood; he said not it was the sign
or Testament of his blood, but in his blood; that is to say, that the Testament
did consist in his blood; or which is the same thing, that the new Testament,
is his blood. Thus all the holy Fathers, and General Councils ever understood
these words of Christ; yet the Mounsieur, without any farther proof, but his
own bare word, says that the wine in the cup, after consecration, is but a
sign or Sacrament of the new Testament. But of what weight his bare word ought
to be, against Christ's clear expression, and the common explication of the
whole Church, I leave the reader to consider.

Therefore the Mounsieur mu^t give me leave, to conclude thus, contrary to what
he holds, and say, that in this proposition: This is my body, the word ( is)
ought to be taken for a real and transubstantiated being, and not for a
Sacramental and significative being only. And consequently, that this
proposition: This cup is the new Testament, must be expounded thus: The
consecrated wine that is in the cup, is the real blood of Christ, and new
Testament of his law. And although we confess with Mr. de Rodon, that in these
words. viz. this cup is the new Testament, there are two figures or Metonimies
to be taken; one in the word ( cup) and the other because the Sacramental
species do signify Christ's bloody Passion; yet we deny but that
Transubstantiation is there chiefly by virtue of Christ's effective word, and
the Sacrament consignified only; because (as I said before) we hold the
consecrated Host, to be both Sacramentum and rem (...)* the Sacrament; and the
thing it self together. And therefore we deny that the Romish doctors are
mistaken, when they tell us, tha what Jesus Christ said, when he instituted the
Eucharist, must be taken literally, and not figuratively only* neither have we
any reason to imagine that he spoke obscurly, for his real Presence, could not
be with plainer words expressed: but let us now hear the Mounsieur speak.

Rodon. 5. But when we say, that these words: This is my body, this is my
blood, must be expounded thus: this bread is the sign, and Sacrament of my
body, this wine is the sign, and Sacrament of my blood; we do not mean that the
bread and wine are barely and simply signs of Christ's body and blood; but we
believe that the bread and wine in the Eucharist are signs that do exhibit
the body and blood of Christ to believers: for when they do by the mouth of the
body receive the bread and wine of ^he Eucharist, they do at the same time, by
the mouth of the soul, viz. by faith, receive the body of Christ broken, and
his blood shed for the remission of their sins; as will be proved in the next
Chapter.

Answ. I must confess, if we hold to the common usage of words, and to their
proper signification, according to the institution of all authors; Mr. de
Rodons exposition is unto me both very obscure, and repugnant to the expression
of all solid divines and Philosophers, for first he says, that bread and wine
in the Eucharist, are not barely, and simply signs of Christ's body and blood,
and he says presently again, that they are signs which do exhibit the body
and blood of Christ to believers; here me thinks the Mounsieur does plainly
contradict himself, for either the bread and wine do exhibit the body and
blood of Christ to the believe^ precisely, and reduplicatively by reason of
their signification, or by reason of their natural entitie: if by reason of
their signification, or as they are signs precisely; what are they then else
but bare and simple signs? If by reason of their entity; then according to Mr.
de Rodons opinion, Christ's broken body, and his spilt blood, are carried, or
exhibited to the believers, upon, or by a bare bitt of bread, or in a cup of
bare wine. But how nonsensical this exposition is, and how ill grounded in true
divinity and Philoso^hy, I will presently prove.

But first I would have the Reader take notice, that these words Sacrament or
sign have if not a predicamental, at least a transendental Relation to the
things they signify; what is formal in Relation, according all Philosophers, is
not at all operative or exhibitive, but only mere resultative in order to the
thing it relates unto, as for example: a father is a Relative word, because he
relates to his son; the formality of this word (father) consists in his
fatherhood; and the entity or substract, whereupon fatherhood relies, is in his
human nature, for he was a man, before he could be a father. It is not the
fatherhood (which is the formal part of the Relative) that operates or
exhibites a being to the son, which is his correlative word, but his humane
nature, or rather his act of Generation; and the fatherhood only results from
his act of Generation, and looks upon the filiation, or as one may say,
sonhood, which was operated or exhibited, by a foregoing generative act, so
that although the father and his act of Generation, are elder then the son,
because they are his effective or exhibitive cause; yet the fatherhood is not
elder then the sonhood; because the fatherhood (which is but a mere Relation)
did not effect or exhibit the sonhood, but only relates or looks upon it;
whence follows clearly, that although the father is before his son in his
en^itative being; yet he is not a father before he has a son or child, in his
fatherhood or relative being. Even so I say of the word Sacrament or sign,
which are also relative words; that what is formal in them, is not at all
operative or exhibitive, but only resultative, because they only behold and
look upon the things they signify, and effect, or exhibit them not; from whence
follows evidently, that signification which is the formality of a sign or
Sacrament, cannot exhibit the body and blood of Christ to the believers; and
therefore if any thing in the Sacrament exhibits them, it must be the entity or
substract, whereupon signification is founded. But according to Mr de Rodon,
the entities whereupon signification in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, is
founded, are but bare bread and wine, which entities are not exhibitive, of
Christ's body and blood to the believers, I demonstrate thus.

If the bare entities of bread and wine could exhibit the body and blood of
Christ to the believers, as often as they are received by the mouth of the
body, it would necessary follow, that as often as a man eats or drinks bread
and wine, they convey Christ's body and blood into his soul, and so every fellow
that drinks his belly full of wine, although he drinks himself drunk,
especially if he eats but a bit of bread with it* his soul will be full of
Christ. But it is both impious and absurd to say, that Christ should be
conveyed into a drunkard^ soul* after this manner; Therefore the doctrine that
teaches this, is absurd and impious. The major I prove thus: all the entities
of bread and wine do agree if not specifically, at least univocally; that is to
say; as a man, a horse, and a cow, are true and real animals, and this word
animal agrees properly to every of them: so the words bread and wine, are said
truly and properly of all sorts of bread and wine, and they all agree in name:
But according to all divines and Philosophers, univocal causes, do produce
effects alike; all men, other men, all horses, other horses, and so ^orth;
therefore if the entities of bread and wine agree univocally (as certainly they
do) it follows that their effects must be all alike; and consequently if the
bare entities of Mr. de Rodons communion bread and wine (for their
signification as I have already proved cannot do it) can exhibit, convey, or
carry Christ's body and blood, to believers; the entities of all other breads
and wine can do so also, for they agree all univocaly, and all univocal causes
do produce effects a like. Therefore the Mounsieur must either contradict all
Philosophers, and be the only Philosopher himself; or else grant that as often
as he eats and drinks bread and wine, (which was perhaps too much and too often
in a day) he received the Sacrament; and consequently, if as often as he took
bread and wine, he did not examine himself, and discern the body of our Lord,
according to the Apostles saying: judicium sibi mand^cavit and ^ibit, he did
eat it (as Judas did) to his own damnation* what impious, nonsensical, and
Blasphemous doctrine this is, let any rational man consider.

But according to the doctrine of the Romanists, the Eucharist is quite another
thing, they say, that bare bread and wine are not the substract or foundation
whereupon signification relyes in the Sacrament; but that the Sacramental
species are the foundation whereupon signification is grounded; which
Sacramental species being received worthily by the mouth of the body, because
they contain the body and blood of Christ, they say that at the same time they
feed the soul also, because they have a spiritual exhibitive faculty to convey
Christ into the soul, and work upon her by uniting her to Christ and making her
one os his mistical members; and thus the soul by feeding upon his body, now
glorified and impatible, (if she receives him worthily) he changes her
affections wholly into himself, and as it were incorporates her; for all the
delight of a devout soul, is to be wholly united, and absorpt in Christ, and yet
his body, being now impatible and glorified, receives no damage or harm
thereby, more then the sun does by casting his beams upon a dunghill. And
although faith be necessary in him that eats this bread; we say that hope and
charity must also accompany this morsel, unless a man eats it to his damnatian;
for faith alone is not enough to give it a relish in the soul. The Royal
prophet calls it the bread of Angels, for it feeds their spirits also; which if
it were but the mere entity of bread, it could not do; for they never eat
wafer, nor bakers bread, nor drink of the entity of our corporal wine; neither
do they eat the Sacrament it self, by the mouth of faith, as Mr. de Rodon would
have our souls to eat it here, for if we believe the Apostle, there is neither
faith nor hope in heaven, where the Angels are; but only charity.

And since we are come to the mouth of the soul, faith, (for so the Mounsieur
calls it) saying; by the mouth of the soul, viz. by faith: I wish he would show
us, either by the common usage of speaking, or in true Philosophy, that faith
is the mouth of the soul. If he takes the word ( mouth) literally, the soul
being a pure spirit, has no mouth; as it has no hands nor legs. If he takes
it figuratively or metaphorically, he will never be able to make it out in true
philosophy, that faith is the mouth of the soul; which I prove thus: a mouth
must be an intrinsecal part of that thing whose mouth it is, whether the word (
mouth) be taken literally or figuratively; for a corporal mouth is an
intrinsecal part of the body that eats or speaks: and when God, or an Angel
does speak methaporically, they express themselves by their understandings and
wills, which are intrinsecal unto them. But faith is not intrinsecal to a man's
soul; for otherwise, every soul would have faith; besides, faith according to
all divines, is one of the Theological or supernatural virtues; but no
supernatural thing can be intrinsecal to a mere natural thing, such as a soul
is. Therefore unless he means to make a Monster of man's soul, faith which is
extrinsecal to her, can not be her mouth literally nor figuratively.

In short, the whole debate betwixt Mr. de Rodon and his party, and the
Romanists and their party, consists in this; that Mr. Rodon holds Christ is
conveyed into our souls, and feeds them spiritually, with the mere entities
of bread and wine; for signification, (which is the formal part of the
Sacrament) has no exhibitive, but only resultative power. And the Romanists
hold that our souls are fed spiritually, with the real entity of Christ's
glorified body; which being taken by the mouth of the body, we say he is
exhibited into our souls. Now whether it stands more with reason and faith, and
whether it be more consonant with sound divinity and Philosophy, that the
entity of Christ's real body can better feed the soul, then the bare entityes of
bread and wine can; we leave the prudent and impartial Reader to Judge.

But if our adversaries say, that by eating Christ's real body we damnify it, or
do it any irreverence, That we deny; because we eat his body as it is now
glorified; and a glorified body, we say, is incapable of suffering any harm or
wrong. Neither can any irreverence be done to it, but when it is taken
unworthily, that is to say, while one is in mortal sin; and then the receiver
takes it to his own damnation; but Christ's glorified body, is never the worse,
or in the least annoyed thereby; for his body is now impatible; and as it
cannot die again, so can it not suffer. But now we are come to the Mounsieurs
additional argument which is thus.

Rodon. 6. When a man says that a thing is such, if it be not such, during the
whole time, which he imployes in saying it is such, he makes a false
proposition; for example, when a man says, that a wall is white if it be not
white, during the whole time he imploys in saying it is white, he makes a false
proposition. But according to the Romish Doctors, when Jesus Christ said, This
is my body, it was not his body, during the whole time which he employed in
saying, This is my body; for they say, it was his body afterward only:
therefore according to the Romish doctors, Jesus Christ uttered a false
proposition: which being blasphemy to affirm, we must lay down this for a
foundation, that that which Jesus Christ gave to his disciples, when he said,
This is my body, was his body, not only after he had said it, but also while he
was saying it, and before he said it* And here we have this advantage of those
of the Romish Church, that we believe the truth of these words of Jesus Christ:
This is my body, much better then they do, because they believe it at one time
only. viz. after he had said it: but we believe it at three several times viz.
before he said it, when he was saying it, and after he said it. But here some
may object, that we must not take the words of our Lord, in too rigorous a
sense; and that in these words: This is my body, we must take the present-tense
for the next future, and then the sense will be this: this will immediately be
my body. To which I answer, that the Romish doctors will have us take these
words: This is my body, in the rigor of the litteral sense, and then the
proposition is evidently false. I know that the present-Tense may be taken for
the next future, as when Jesus Christ said: I go to my father, and to your
father, I go to my God, and to your God, that is, I shall go speedily. But who
can be so bold and ignorant, as to affirm that this speech is without a figure,
seeing all Grammarians know that it is a figure called Enallage of time?
Therefore the Romish doctors must confess, that by their own doctrine, this
proposition of Jesus Christ; This is my body, is either false or figurative;
and seeing that it is not false, it must be figurative, and that the figure must
be a Metonimy, whereby the sign takes the name of the thing signified (as has
already been proved) and not an Enallage of time.

Answ. To this additional argument I say, that to verify any proposition, it is
enough that the thing is such as the proposition says it to be, after the
proposition is uttered, although it be not such, while the proposition is in
uttering; if by a ptoposition Mr. d^ Rodon understands a perfect and
significative proposition, as he ought to do; and as this proposition, this is
my body, is. But if we should grant that while a mere man utters a
proposition, the thing meant by the proposition ought to be such before he
spoke, and during the time he is speaking it, to have his proposition not to be
false; yet it follows not that while Jesus Christ, (who is both God and man)
does utter a proposition, the thing he speaks of should be such, before* and
while he speaks; to make his proposition be true* for as I said often before,
that as Christ's word is an effective word, so his proposition is an effective
proposition; because his word and proposition do make what they signify.
Therefore the Romish doctors say very well, that the bread was made his body,
only after he pronounced the words, and not before; and yet we deny that Christ
then uttered a false proposition. Nay we hold de Rodons laid foundation to be
blasphemous, because it gives not an effective virtue to Christ's words* above
the words of ordinary men. (...) we take not only the words, but also (...)
Tense or time while they were spoken, in as rigorous a sense as he does, viz.
in their real litteral meaning; and the word (is) in the present Tense; without
a recourse either to a Metonimy, or Enallage of time; and yet we deny the
proposition, as uttered by Christ to be at all false; because his was an
effective proposition, though other men's are not. We deny also that our
adversary has any advantage of belief over us, for beleving it was Christ's
body, before, while, and after he spok the words.

CHAP. II. Concerning the exposition of these words. He that eats my flesh,
and drinks my blood, has everlasting life. My flesh is meat indeed, etc.
MOunsieur de Rodon, did promise in his precedent Chapter, to prove in this,
that Christ speaks of a spiritual eating and drinking by faith, which he says
is the mouth of the soul; and not of a corporal eating and drinking, by the
mouth of the body: his first argument is this.

Rodon. 1. When a man would satisfy his hunger, and quench his thirst, he
o^th, and drinks that thing, which he hungers and thirsts after, because
eating satisfies hunger, and drinking quenches thirst: But it is by faith,
that is, by beleiving in Jesus Christ, that we satisfy the hunger, and quench
the thirst which John: he that comes to me, shall never hunger, and he that
believes in me, shall never thirst; and he that beleveth in me, shall never
thirst: Therefore it is by faith, or by beleving, that we eat and drink Jesus
Christ, and consequently the eating of Christ's flesh, and drinking of his blood
is spiritual, and not corporal.

Answ. To this argument I answer, granting the major, and distinguishing the
Minor thus: but it is by faith, as by a condition requisite, that we satisfy
the hunger, and quench the thirst, which we have after Christ, I confess; but
it is by faith, as by the proper and formal cause of satisfying our hunger and
quenching our thirst, after him; or as faith is the spiritual mouth of the
soul, to convey Christ into her; I deny the minor, and both the consequences
following.

Therefore (I say) although not only faith, but also hope and charity, be
requisite conditions, wiihout which no body can have the spiritual refreshment
this divine food gives unto the soul, and which the soul so much hungers and
thirsts after; yet neither faith, hope nor charity, jointly, or severally, are
the chief cause of this refreshment and spiritual satisfaction; but the real
entity of Christ's body, (which is in the consecrated host) being received
corporally by us, while we are in the state of grace; is that which chiefly and
principally causes this spiritual refreshment, in us, it is that glorified
body, that satisfies our spiritual hunger, and quenches our spiritual thirst,
and faith is only one of the requisite conditions, that Christ's body should
feed us spiritually; just as the application of fire to wood, is a condition
requisite that fire should burn the wood; but none can say, that the
application, the condition requisite, is that which burns the wood; but the
fire is the whole cause of burning; Even so we say of Christ's body in the
Sacrament, that it is the chief and whole cause of the spiritual refreshment of
the soul; and the thing which she chiefly hungers and thirsts after; and faith
is but a condition requisite, when his body is taken corporally by us, that it
should refresh us spiritually.

To the passage he alleges out of S. John, I answer; that his words must not
be understood, that he that comes to me, by faith alone shall never hunger,
and he that only beleiveth in me shall never thirst, for many may believe in
Christ, and yet be actually in mortal sin; and yet certain it is, that mortal
sin, causes a divorce betwixt Christ and the soul: or dare Mr. de Rodon say,
that if he, or any of his party, should chance to be drunk, to swear, or to
envy another man, that by such an action he forfeiteth his belief? if so: then
he presently becomes an heretic; for heresy is nothing else, but forfeiture of
belief in a Christian. Therefore the said passage must be understood thus: he
that comes to me by virtue of this, or any other of my Sacraments, or by true
contrition, and believes in me, (taking faith as a condition requisite, not as
the cause of coming unto him) such a soul if she leaves him not by falling into
sin again through her own fault; shall never hunger nor thirst spiritually; but
be for ever refresht by virtue of his body and blood, with increase of charity,
and all other virtues.

Neither is it to be doubted, but Christ's body, when worthily received, by the
mouth of the body, does work spiritually upon the soul; which I prove thus:
because where Christ's glorified body is really present, there is his divinity,
humanity, and person also, by concomitance; and where his person is, there the
persons of the father, and of the holy Ghost are, by circumincession, as Divi^s
^all it; but where the divinity personally i^abits, it replenishes and satiats
that soul and body with spiritual food and joy. Therefore whosoever takes the
body of Christ worthily, and puts no obstacle to its spiritual operations, he
is satiated* spiritually with the the same body, by reason of the concomitance
of the divinity and soul of Christ, that always accompany his glorified body:
as also by reason of the circumincession of all the three persons of the most
blessed Trinity, inhabiting the soul. But now let us come to his second
argument, which is this.

Rodon. 2. Jesus Christ says, he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood
has eternal life. And except ye eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his
blood, ye have no life in you. John. 6. But it is the spiritual eating and
drinking by faith that gives life everlasting, and not the corporal eating and
drinking by the mouth of the body. Because many Reprobates (according to the
very doctrine of Rome it it self) do corporally eat the flesh, and drink the
blood of Christ, and yet shall not inherit eternal life.

Answ. To this Argument I answer; denying Mr. de Rodon's supposition, viz. that
the soul eats spiritually by faith; for faith being no mouth of the soul, in
any sense, as I proved before; and nothing being able to eat properly or
improperly without a proper or improper mouth; it follows that the soul cannot
eat by the mouth of faith. Besides, the Angels do eat of this celestial food,
not with the mouth of faith, for there is no faith in heaven, but a clear
vision; Therefore the thing that seeds the soul spiritually, is the real
substance of Christ's body, received by the corporal mouth of him that is in the
state of Grace while he receives the Sacrament; which real substance of Christ's
body, works spiritually upon the soul, by reason of the concomitance of Christ's
divinity and soul; and of the circumincession of the other two divine persons
with Christ's person there really present with the substance of his body;
however I confess faith and the other Theological virtues, are conditions
requisite for one to be sed spiritually; and I confess also, that a reprobate
can take the real body of Christ, by his corporal mouth, without any spiritual
nourishment or satisfaction; but the fault is in him, not in the Sacrament,
which always operateth spiritually in such souls as are well disposed by faith
and the other Theological virtues to receive it. Therefore what the Mounsieur
objects concerning eating Christ's body corporally, by reprobats, is to no
purpose; for we confess, that to eat him corporally only, without faith, and
the rest of the Theological virtues, brings rather eternal damnation, then
eternal life to the soul; and yet we still deny that he is eaten spiritually,
by the mouth of faith alone, or that there is any such thing, as mouth of faith.

Rodon. 3. His third argument he takes from S. Augustine, and Cardinal Caietan,
who expound (he says) the words of Jesus Christ as he does. S. Augustine in
Book 3. of Christian doctrine, speaks thus. [To eat the flesh of Christ is a
figure; teaching us to partake of Christ's Passion, and to imprint in our
memories with delight and profit, that Christ was crucified for us.] Cardinal
Caietan in his commentary on S. John 6. says: [To eat the flesh of Christ, and
drink his blood, is faith in Christ's death; so that the sense is this; if you
use not the death of the son of man as meat and drink, ye shall not have the
life of the spirit in you:] And having sufficiently proved this exposition, he
adds, [To eat and drink the Sacrament is a thing common, as well to those that
eat unworthily as to those that eat worthily: but that which Jesus Christ here
speaks of, is not common to both; for he faith, he that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has eternal life; he faith not, he that eats worthily,
and drinks worthily, but he that eats and drinks.] whence it clearly
appears, that according to the letter he speaks not of eating and drinking the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, but of eating and drinking the death of Jesus
Christ.

Answ. This exposition of the holy Father we embrace, for it makes nothing
against us, but rather for us; for we say also, that when we receive the
substance of Christ's body, which is his flesh, by our corporal mouth, under the
species of bread and wine, we say, we eat the Sacrament, which is a figure or
sign, that makes us partake of Christ's Passion, and impri^ts with delight and
profit, Christ's Passion in our minds, for we hold with the great divine S.
Thomas of Aquin, that the figure or Sacrament, which we eat, is a signum
rememorativum, a rememorative sign of Christ's death. And our Savior himself
said, when he instituted this Sacrament; as often as you do this, do it in
remembrance of me; which we understand thus: as often as you eat this
Sacrament, which is an unbloudy sacrifice, and a figure of my bloody sacrifice
upon the Cross, remember my bitter Passion; for by offering this unbloudy
sacrifice unto my father, he will be pleased with it: and since your prayers,
fasting, almesdeeds and all your other best works, as they are, precisely
yours, are not satisfactory to him for your offenses against his divine
Majesty, and are not of themselves able to appease his just wrath against you,
according to the rigor of the attribute of his divine Justice, which he cannot
but uphold, when he beholds this pure Sacrifice, and sees that I am become your
mediator, and that it is offered him in remembrance of a rigorous satisfaction
for your sins, by my bloody sacrificing my self unto him upon the altar of the
cross, it will incontinently pacify and reconcile him unto you; it will
encourage you, and delight your souls, for it will put you in hopes of your
salvation, whereof you would be otherwise for want of this inter-mediation, in
a deep despair: This and many more virtues and graces does this Sacrament
operate in our souls, unless we our selves, by receiving and offering it in
mortal sin, do obstruct or hinder them; which if we do, the fault is ours, not
the Sacraments, which retains always this virtue in it self. If any man can
with reason and faith attribute such virtue to the bare entities of bread and
wine; I leave any prudent reader to judge.

As to the learned Cardinal, however his exposition, alleged against us, upon
S. John. 6. must be understood; no body doubts but his opinion concerning the
real presence was the same ours is, and that he died in it; therefore if he be
of any authority with Mr. de Rodon, he ought to understand him according to his
meaning. The words be these, but if rightly understood, and according to his
meaning, not at all against us. To eat the flesh of Christ and drink his blood
is faith in Christ's death: so that the sense is this; if you use not the death
of the son of man, as meat and drink, ye shall not have the life of the spirit
in you: the accute Cardinals meaning was to expound the true meaning and sense
of these words: [ is says in Christ's death:] and also to instruct people how
to receive this Sacrament with profit to their souls. Therefore he says: that
the sense of those words is, to use the death of the son of man as meat and
drink, if we intend to receive profitably; and what else is it to use the death
of the son of man, as meat and drink, but to ruminate and meditate upon his
death? so that the Cardinals meaning was, that to receive the Sacrament
profitably, when we eat and drink the body and blood of Christ, we must do it
in remembrance of his Passion; which is the self same thing Christ commands us
to do; and which Catholics practice daily. And his additionate words, viz. to
eat and drink the Sacrament, is commonly as well, etc. do clear his meaning;
for he knowing that to eat Christ's body corporally, is a thing common as well
to the reprobate as to the elect; he tells us, that to eat it profitably, we
must believe it to be a rememorative of Christ's death; and that by so eating
it, we eat, and ruminate upon his death. Therefore although we confess, that
faith is necessary in him that receives the Sacrament, to take it worthily, and
profitably, yet we deny, that faith is the mouth wherewith we eat it: or that
by faith alone we eat the death of Christ; for we deny, that faith is the mouth
of man's soul, or body; and without a mouth, there can be no eating.

As to the Cardinals last words, viz. he says not, he that eats worthily, or
drinks worthily; but he that eats or drinks. I am sure he meant by eating
and drinking, to eat and drink it worthily; for he could not mean, to eat and
drink it unworthily; and betwixt eating and drinking worthily and unworthily,
there is no medium: so that of necessity, when he speaks of eating and drinking
it spiritually, or with profit (as he meant here) he must be understood, by
eating and drinking; eating and drinking worthily: from whence it does not
clearly appear that according to the letter, he speaks not of eating and
drinking the Sacrament of the Eucharist, but of eating and drinking the death
of Jesus Christ; for these words ( eating and drinking) may better in a
litteral sense, be alluded to the Sacrament, then to death, the one having a
positive being, and the other consisting in a privation only. But let us hear
the Mounsier speak.

Rodon 4. Now that we may clearly understand this doctrine, we must consider,
wherein the life which Jesus Christ gives us does consist; for seeing the flesh
of Jesus Christ is meat to us, because it gives us life, it is evident, that if
we know what life that is which Jesus Christ gives us, we must know likewise
h^w Jesus Christ is meat to us, and consequently how we eat him. But to know
what that life is which Jesus Christ gives us, we must consider what that death
is, in which we are involved, which is expressed by S. Paul, Ephesians. 2. in these
words: [When we were dead in sins and trespasses, God has quickened us,
together with Christ; by grace ye are saved] and consequently the death in
which we were involved, consists in two things, first in the curse of the Law,
which imports the privation of felicity, and the suffering of temporal and
eternal punishment for our sins: secondly it consists in an habitual
corruption, whereby sin raigns in us; and therefore it is said, [1. Tim. 5. The
widow that lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives.] Also sins: are called
dead works. Heb. 10. So that the life which Jesus Christ has purchased for us,
consists in two things, first in deliverance from the curse of the Law by the
pardon of our sins, as S. Paul tells us. [Colos. 2. God has quickened you
together with Chri^, having forgiven you all trespasses, blotting out the (...)
that was against us;] which obligation ^receded from the Law, because it did
oblige all the transgressors of it to a curse; secondly, it consists in
regeneration, or sanctification, whereof Jesus Christ speaking in John. 3.
says, [Except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.]
And S. Paul. Heb. 12. [without holiness no man shall see the Lord.] Therefore
seeing that the life which Jesus Christ has purchased for us, consists in the
pardon of our sins, and in our regeneration, and sanctification, which ends in
glorification; and that Jesus Christ is called meat in reference to this life,
we must consider the me n^* whereby Jesus Christ has purchased these things
for us: and seeing it is certain, that his death is the means by which he has
purchased Pardon of sins and regeneration, we must conclude that Jesus Christ
is the food and nourishment of our souls in regard of the merit of his death.
But that Jesus Christ by his death has purchased life for us (that is
Justification, which consists in the pardon of our sins, and regeneration,
which consists in holiness of life) appears by these passages of Scripture,
viz. [We are justified by the blood of Christ, and reconciled to God by his
death. Romans 5. We have redemption by his blood, even the remission of sins,
etc.] Therefore seeing Jesus Christ has purchased life for us by death, and
that his flesh and blood are our meat and drink (because they purchased life
everlasting for us on the Cross, viz. the remission of our sins, and
sanctification ending in glorification) it follows that the action whereby
Jesus Christ is applied to us for righteousness and sanctification, is the same
by which we eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood. But this action is
nothing else but faith, as the Scripture tells us. [Being justified by faith we
have peace with God. Romans 5. God purifi^s our hart^ by faith. Act. 15* he that
beleiveth, has eternal life: John. 6.] from what has been said, I form this
Argument. That action whereby we obtain remission of sins* and sanctification
ending in Glorification, is the same, whereby we have that life, which Jesus
Christ purchased for us by his death* because that life principally consists in
the remission of sins and sanctification, as we have proved. But the spiritual
eating and drinking by faith, and not the corporal by the mouth, is that action
where by we obtain remission of sins, and sanctification, as we have also
proved; therefore the spiritual eating and drinking by faith, is the action,
whereby we have that life, which Jesus Christ purchased us by his death, and
not the corporal eating and drinking by the mouth: And consequently seeing in S.
John. 6. a certain eating and drinking is spoken of, whereby we have that life
which Jesus Christ has purchased for us by his death* it is evident, that a
spiritual eating and drinking is there spoken of, and not a corporal.

Answ. Now after clearly understanding Mr. de Rodons long sermon-like doctrine*
we confess, the flesh of Christ is meat to us, because it gives us spiritual
life, we confess also, that the life it gives us, consists in the forgiveness
of our sins, and in our sanctification which ends in Glorification; Thirdly we
confess, that the death wherein we were involved* consists in the privation of
eternal felicity, and in the suffering of eternal and temporal punishment for
our sins: in a word, we grant our souls are quickened from the death of sin, and
all its effects, and that she lives spiritually, by the merits of our Saviors
death and passion; and lastly, we grant also, that the action whereby Jesus
Christ is applied unto us for righteousness, and sanctification ending in
Glorification, is the some by which we eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his
blood. But that this action is nothing else but faith, as Mr. de Rodon inferrs,
we ^atly deny; and maintain, that besides the act of believing, there must be
also an act of corporal eating.

Therefore to his proofs out of Scripture, we answer; that the three
forementioned passages, speak not of faith alone, nor of faith, as the cause of
our sanctification; but of faith as a condition requisite to it, as I have
formerly proved. And being action proceeds from a suppositum (as Schoolmen call
it) or cause, and is attributed to it, and not to a bare condition, as it is to
be evidently seen in the example of fire, which is the cause of burning wood;
not the application, which is only a condition requisite; where the action of
burning, is attributed to fire, the cause, not to application the bare
condition. Even so is it in this case: The Sacrament is the cause of our
sanctification; and to receive it with faith as a remembrance of Christ's death,
and Passion, is only a condition requisite for receiving it spiritually, and
with profit to our souls. By this solution, Mr. de Rodon's concluding argument
upon the premises above-granted, and passages of Scripture clearly expounded,
vanishes into smoke: his argument is this: That action whereby ^e obtain
remission of sins, and sanctification ending in glorification, is the same
w^ereby we have that life which Jesus Christ purchased for us by his death;
because that life chiefly consists, in the remission of sins and
sanctification; that I confess. But ( quoth he) the spiritual eating and
drinking by faith, and not the corporal by the mouth, is that action whereby we
obtain remission of sins, and sanctification; that I deny; as also the
supposition, viz. that the soul can eat by faith, as by her mouth; faith being
no mouth of the soul, whether a mouth be taken literally, or figuratively;
which Mr. de Rodon never proved, or will be able to prove in sound Philosophy.
Therefore his conclusion is blown and vanished like smoke: and consequently
seeing in S. John 6. a certain eating and drinking is spoken of, whereby we
have that life which Jesus Christ has purchased for us by his death; it is
certain and evident, that a corporal eating and drinking, which has a
spiritual operation upon the soul, when we receive the Sacrament, being in the
state of Grace, and we believe it is a rememorative of Christ's death, is there
spoken of, and not an imaginary spiritual noteating by the notmouth of faith.

Rodon. 5. From what has been said it appears, that when Jesus Christ says:
My flesh is meat indeed, etc. the figure falls upon the word (Meat) which is
taken not for corporal, but spiritual meat. The reason whereof is, that
corporal food is that which is appointed for the nourishment of the body, as
spiritual food is that which is appointed for the nourishment of the soul, so
that although corporal food be taken by the mouth of the body, yet that only
does not make ^t to be corporal food, except it be taken for the nourishment of
the body, otherwise poison, medicine, a bullet, etc. which a man swallows would
be corporal food, which is absurd to affirm. But the flesh of Christ, which is
pretended to be eaten in the Eucharist, by the mouth of the body, is not
appointed for the nourishment of the body; because that food which is appointed
for the nourishment of the body, is changed into the substance of our bodies:
therefore the flesh of Christ is not a corporal food, but his flesh broken, and
his blood shed on the Cross is a spiritual food, which nourishes the souls of
those who by a true and lively faith, do embrace this flesh broken, and this
blood shed; that is who do wholly rest amd rely on the merits of his death and
Passion, for obtaining mercy from God. And certainly seeing that the life which
Jesus Christ gives us by his death, is spiritual, that the nourishment is
spiritual; that the eating his body and drinking his blood, is spiritual (as
has been proved); it follows, that his flesh must be spiritual meat, and his
blood spiritual drink. And this flesh of Christ, is incomparably better, and
more truly meat indeed in regard of its effects, then corporal food can be,
because it does better, and more perfectly nourish the souls of the believers,
then corporal food does their bodies, this being corruptible food which gives
temporal life only, but that spiritual and incorruptible food, which gives life
everlasting.

Answ. From what Mr. de Rodon has been hitherto answered, it appears, that
when Jesus Christ says: My flesh is meat indeed, no figure falls upon the word
( meat) but that it must be taken literally for that flesh is meat indeed,
according to the common usage of speaking, is understood more properly in a
litteral, then in a figurative sense; as are also all other things, which are
said to be such things indeed. And yet this corporal flesh of Christ, being
taken by the mouth of the body, is ordained to feed and nourish the soul, and
not the body; because it has a supernatural operation, by reason of its
personal union with Christ's divinity, and most blessed soul: which supernatural
and spiritual operation, the bare entities of bread and wine have not as also
no other corporal food has, but is only appointed for the nourishment of the
body, by which dispurity between the operation of Christ's flesh, and the
operation of all other corporal ^oods, the silly reason of the Mounsieurs
argument, is both enervated, and precluded; and all the consequences he draws
from it, are of no force or truth. I say his reason is but silly, because he
says, that although corporal food, be taken by the mouth of the body, yet that
only does not make it to be corporal food, except it be taken for the
nourishment of the body; for otherwise Poison, medicine, and a bullet taken in,
would be corporal food; which to say, is absurd. Tell me I pray, Mr. de Rodon,
where did you ever see or hear, that poison, physic or a bullet were taken for
corporal food, by any man, unless he were of less reason then your self? or
tell me, if you eat bread, though not with an intention to nourish you, whether
it will not nourish you? or if you should chance to swallow down a bullet, or
chaw it (if your teeth be so good) with an intention it should nourish you;
would it nourish you, because you took it for your nourishment? This any body
may see, is but very silly stuff: whence you in ferr: But the flesh of Christ
which is pretended to be eaten in the Eucharist by the mouth of the body, is
not appointed for the nourishment of the body, because the body of Christ is
not changed into the substance of our bodies. I confess it. But what then?
Therefore (you say) the flesh of Christ is not a corporal food: his flesh is
not a corporal food, that nourishes corporally, I confess: a corporal food that
nourishes spiritually; I deny; and the rest of your consequences also, inasmuch
as they militate against eating the corporal real body of Christ, though its
operation we confess is but spiritual; however we agree with you in this; that
the flesh of Christ is incomparably better, and more truly meat indeed, in
regard of its effects, then any other corporal food can be; for the reasons you
allege. But yet we say, that it is sufficient to take his flesh, with the
mouth of our body, being in the state of Grace* and believing the Sacrament to
be a rememorative of his death; to have it work its spiritual effects in our
souls.

Rodon. 6. I conclude this Chapter with this consideration, when a doctrine is
proposed which is pretended to be divine, and that passages of holy Scripture
are alleged for the proof of it, if it opposes, or seems to oppose sense and
reason, and to include contradictions, and that a more suitable and rational
sense can be found out for those passages, so that all those inconveniences
and contradictions may be avoided; there is nothing more just, then that we
should embrace that probable and rational sense, and reject that doctrine which
opposes sense and reason, and seems to imply contradictions; But the doctrine
of the real presence of the manbood of Christ in the host, and the
Transubstantiation of the bread into his body, is repugnant to sense and
reason, and seems to include diverse contradictions; (viz. that a human body is
in a point, without any local extension; that a body may be in diverse places at
one and the same time, that the bread and wine are changed into the body and
blood of Christ, which were before, that accidents may be without a subject,
etc.) And the passages that are impertinently alleged to prove such a
presence, and such a change, have a sense very commodious, and very rational,
for the avoiding all these contradictions, as appears in this, and in the
former chapter; where I have rationally expounded those two passages which the
Romish doctors impertinently make use of for this subject; Therefore they ought
to embrace that commodious and rational sense which we have given them; and to
reject the doctrine of the real Presence of the body of Jesus Christ in the
Host, and the doctrine of Transubstantiation.

Answ. How much this grave consideration of the Mounsieur can work upon
ignorant illiterate people, upon heathens, Jews or Turks, or upon brute beasts,
of best sensation, if they had intellectual, or cogitative faculties agreeing
with their sensation, I know not; But sure I am, that no good Christian, or man
of learning or knowledge ought to regard or value it; for all Christians, and
all rational and learned men do know, that objects of divine faith, (such as
this is) ought not to be levelled or measured by our reason and senses; for
otherwise some beasts and birds, whose sensitive faculties surpass man's, must
also surpass him in faith; And if the best reason should carry away the cause,
then the best Philosophers, would be the best believers; and so Plato and
Aristotle, who were far more Eagle-sighted concerning objects of natural
reason, then many millions of poor Christians are, would surpass all these
Christians in divine faith; a thing both impious and ridiculous to assert
amongst Christians: neither do seeming contradictions, unless they be real
ones, validate or strengthen this his profound consideration; for many things
may seem impossible to us, which are not so really to God. This the Mounsieur
(I am sure) must grant, unless he maintains that man can comprehend Gods
omnipotency, which to say, is open Blasphemy.

However, for disputation sake, we let pass the major; but we deny the minor,
as to all its parts; first, we deny, that the real Presence of Christ's body in
the Sacrament is repugnant to reason and sense; though it be above them; so we
say, that the raising of a dead man to life, and all miracles are only above
reason and sense, but not repugnant or against them; for what is repugnant, or
contrary to reason and sense, quite destroys them; as to be, and not to be, at
the same time, and after the same manner, is impossible, and destroys reason
and sense; but we deny Transubstantiation to be of that kind. Secondly, we
deny, that it implies, or seems to imply a contradiction, that a human body
should be Sacramentally in a point, without any local extension; though we
grant it cannot be circumscriptively in a point. Thirdly, we deny, that Christ
to be in his human shape in heaven, and to be at the same time sacramentally
upon earth; or for him to be sacramentally in ten thousand places together upon
earth, is at all any contradiction; because to be sacramentally, in a place or
places, requires no local extension; for as in true Divinity, if Christ should
assume and suppositate hypostatically three several humane natures altogether,
to his Divinity, they would all (in that case) have but one person, without any
implicancy or contradiction; so Christ may also without any contradiction be at
once sacramentally in several places: who is then able to penetrate and dive
into the infinite power of God? finally, we grant that accidents cannot be
naturally without their connaturall subjects; but supernaturally they can; as
Christ's humane nature is now without any other but the divine personality of
Christ, and yet naturally it should have a humane person, which no body can say
it has, without being an heretic; for otherwise he must own that there are
two persons in Christ, a divine, and a humane one, and consequently say, there
is a quadrinity in the mystery of the blessed Trinity: Even so I say, that as
Christ without contradiction, supplyeth the human personality with his divine;
so can he also without contradiction, supply the connatural subjects of bread
and wine, with his infinite power.

Therefore since this answer is well grounded in true divinity and Philosophy;
and that all the holy fathers and General Councils that ever have been in
Christ's Church, and treated of this matter, were of the same belief concerning
the real presence, as we are of; and since it is more consonant both to reason
and faith, that the substance of Christ's body is more nourishing to the soul,
then the bare entities of bread and wine are. Farthermore, since the question
here in agitation, is above, though not repugnant to reason and sense, it being
an object of divine faith, which Christ revealed unto his Church; and she ever
practiced from the Apostles time, as all Ecclesiastical histories do testify:
Neither could our adversaries ever show, what year, or in what place or country
the Mass crept first into the Church; nor who were the orthodox fathers, or
general Councils that ever opposed it, until many hundred years after it was
in practice throughout the Christian world: and finally, since the first oppo*
ser of it, was presently cried down by all the orthodox, for a public
heretic: For these and sundry other such reasons, I say, no rational, or
learned man, ought to value the groundless and weak consideration of Mr. de
Rodan, which has no other prop to uphold it, but frail human reason, wherewith
he intends to inveagle and deceive the poor ignorant illiterate sort of people,
who ought rather, submit their judgments and understanding humbly to the
common belief of the Universal Church, concerning matters of faith, then rely
upon either*their own, or the grave Mounsieurs deep reason and wit. This
ancient and universal doctrine of the real presence of Christ's body in the
Eucharist, do the Romish Doctors must solidly and pertinently maintain and
desend against all the enemies of Christ's Church, against Luther, Calvin,
Rodon, and all his impertinent sophisms; nay, and against all the devils of
hell, if they should come to assist him, and furnish him with their arguments.
Neither has he hitherto in this, nor in his former chapter said any thing
against it which I have not fully and sufficiently answered; as I leave any
indifferent impartial Reader to judge.

CHAP. III. Against Transubstantiation.
BY destroying Trasubstantiation, which is the life of the Mass, the Mass must
perish also. Mr de Rodon considering this, picks out of the storehouse of his
Philosophy, his keenest arrows, wherewith having (as he questions not in this
Chapter) hit the the mark home; although he conceits, he is the killer himself;
yet he is pleased to bestow the funeral exequyes; as the Title of his book
shows. To bury the dead, I confess, is with us, one of the seven works of
corporal mercy, but to bury one alive, we count to be an inhuman tyranny, and
most horrid and execrable act. We then believing our Mass is alive, and will
be, until the worlds end* cannot but censure and accuse Mounsieur de Rodon of
inhuman tyranny; unless he demonstrats, that he killed the Mass, before he made
the funeral; that he is sure to do, by destroying Transubstantiation, and
therefore ayms at it with his first arrow thus.

Rodon. 1. In every substantial conversion, that thing into which another thing
is converted, is always newly produced; for example, when seed is converted
into an animal, that animal is newly produced; when Jesus Christ turned the
water into wine, the wine was newly produced, etc. But the body and blood of
Jesus Christ cannot be newly produced in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. The
second proposition, viz. that the body and blood of Christ cannot be newly
produced, I prove thus: that which is newly produced, receives a new being;
because to produce a thing, and give it a being, is the same thing; but the
body and blood of Christ cannot receive a new being, which I prove thus: A man
cannot receive that which he has, while he has it, and therefore cannot
receive a being, while he has a being; for as it is imposible to take away a
being, from that which has no being, so is it imposible to give a being* to
that which has a being already: and as you cannot kill a dead man, so you
cannot give life to one that is living. But the body and blood of Christ have,
and will allwaies have a being; therefore they cannot receive one; and
consequently, cannot be reproduced in the Eucharist.

Answ. To this argument I first answer that in every substantial conversion,
there must be some thing newly produced, or adduced, and so we say, bread and
wine are converted substantially into Christ's body and blood, by an adductive
action; because by virtue of the words of consecration, Christ's body which is
in its humane shape in heaven, is brought into the Sacramental Species, and
remains in them in a Sacramental manner; without any new production of his
body, which was produced already.

Secondly, I answer to the said major thus: In every substantial conversion,
that thing, etc. is always newly produced, entitatively or modally, I confess;
entitatively only, I deny. And to his minor thus: but the body and blood of
Christ, cannot be newly produced in the Sacrament of the Eucharist;
entitatively, and in his humane shape, I confess; modally or Sacramentally* I
deny the minor; and the consequence also: and all Mr. de Rodon's ensuing proofs
militate against an entitative production only; which we grant him; but not at
all against a modal or Sacramental production.

Therefore we say, that Christ's body being already produced, as to its entity
and natural being, the same entity is not newly reproduced in the Sacrament, in
order as to give his body a new essential being; because he has that already
in heaven; But we say, that the entity of his body is newly produced, or rather
adduced into the Sacrament, in order to a sacramental or modal being; against
which modal being, Mr. de Rodon's proofs, are of no value or force: and so his
first arrow has miss't the mark.

Rodon. 2. In every substantial conversion, that thing which is converted into
another, is destroyed: for example; when the water was turned into wine, the
wine was destroyed; But in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, the bread and wine
are not destroyed by the consecration; which I prove thus. In the celebration
of the Eucharist, there is breaking, giving, eating, drinking, after the
consecration, as appears by the very practice of our adversaries, who after
consecration, break the Host, and divide it into three parts, give nothing to
the communicants but consecrated Hosts, and eat and drink nothing but what was
consecrated. But the Scripture says, that in the celebration of the Eucharist,
bread is broken, and bread and wine are given, and that bread is eaten, and
wine drunk; as appears by these following passages. S. Paul. 1. Cor. 10. says,
[the bread which we break, is it not the communion of Christ's body?] and 1.
Cor. 11. S. Math. 26. S. Mark. 14. and S. Luke. 22. it is said, that Jesus
Christ took bread, brake it, and gave it: and S. Mark 14. and S. Math. 26.
Jesus Christ after he had participated of the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
says, I will drink no more of this fruit of the vine; and 1. Cor. 11. As often
as you eat this bread, and drink this cup, let a man examine himself and so let
him eat of that bread and drink of that cup.

Answ. To this argument I answer, granting the major, and distinguishing the
minor, thus. But in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, the accidents of the bread
and wine are not destroyed; I confess; the substance of the bread and wine are
not destroyed, I deny. To what he farther urges, viz. that there is breaking,
giving, eating, and drinking after the consecration; as concerning their
accidents, I grant; as concerning their substances, I deny; for their
substances are converted into Christ's real body and blood, by virtue of the
words of consecration, though their accidents remain un destroyed and are
sustentated supernaturally by the power of God; for we hold of no
transaccidentation in the Sacrament, but only of Transubstantiation

As concerning the passages by him alleged out of Scripture, to prove that ^t
is bread that is broken, that it is bread and wine that are given; I answer,
that in every of these passages, the words, bread and wine, must be taken
Analogically, not literally; because Christ in other places, calls them
expressly, his flesh, his blood, and his body: and all orthodox Christians from
the first institution of this Sacrament, for many ages, did without
controulment hold as we do, that after the words of consecration the bread and
wine are converted into the real body and blood of Christ. Therefore although
because of the symbolls or accidents of bread and wine, which still remain in
the Host after consecration, they retain the denomination of bread and wine,
yet they are not really, but Analogically only bread and wine, and really the
true body and blood of Christ; and they are analogically called bread and wine,
because of the Analogy or likeness real bread and wine have with this
Sacrament; the one nourishing the body, the other the soul: but now to Mr. de
Rodon.

Rodon. 3. When Jesus Christ said to his disciples: drink ye all of this Math.
26. that is, drink ye all of this cup, either he commanded to drink of a cup of
wine; or of a cup of blood: if he commanded them to drink of a cup of wine;
then it follows that they drank nothing but wine, because it is certain that
they obeyed Jesus Christ: for it is said Mark 14. that they all drank it: or if
he commanded them to drink a cup of blood, then it follows that the wine was
already changed into his blood; because it is not probable, that Jesus Christ
said to them, drink ye all of this cup of blood, and yet that it was not a cup
of blood, but a cup of wine. But when Jesus Christ said, drink ye all of this;
he did not speak to them of a cup of blood; for the wine was not then converted
into Christ's blood; because (according to our Adversaries) it was not changed
until Jesus Christ had made an end of uttering these following words for this
is my blood: But he uttered these words; drink ye all of this before he uttered
those, for this is my blood: because a man must utter a proposition, before he
can give the reason of it.

Answ. To this I answer, that when Christ said, drink ye all this, he meant, of
his blood; for although by reason of the sacramental species, he gave it the
donomination of wine; and although it was not his blood immediately after he
said, drink ye all this, until he added these other words; for this is my
blood; yet by so saying, he made it his blood; and consequently, he meant, that
they should drink of his blood: for I suppose, (and to think otherwise is not
at all propable) his disciples were not so rude, illbred, and irreverent to
their Lord and Master, as to snatch the cup out of his hand, and drink it
before he made an end of his speech to them; the last part whereof, viz. for
this is my blood, made it his blood: and so is this arrow of Mr. de Rodons
blunted in bread and wine, and cannot pierce Transubstantiation: Therefore he
out^ with his third arrow.

Rodon. 4. When a thing is converted into another, we cannot see the effects
and properties of the thing converted, but only of that into which it is
converted: for example, when the seed is changed into an animal, we can see no
more the effects, and properties of the seed, but of the animal only; and when
Jesus Christ turned water into wine, the effects, properties, and accidents of
the water were no more seen; but of the wine only, etc. But in the Eucharist we
cannot after the consecration, perceive the effects, properties, accidents, or
parts of the body and blood of Christ; but we see there all the effects,
properties, and accidents of bread and wine. Therefore in the Eucharist, the
bread and wine are not converted into the body and blood of Christ. And the
truth is, if that which appears to be bread, and has all the effects,
accidents, and properties of bread, be no bread, but Christ's body clothed with
the accidents of bread; then it may likewise be said; that they that appear to
be men, and have all the effects, properties, and accidents of men, are not
men, but horses clothed with the accidents of men.

Answ. I distinguish the major proposition thus: When a thing is converted,
etc. we cannot see the effects and properties, etc. with our corporal eyes I
confess; with the spiritual eye of our soul, viz. with our understanding
supported by divine faith, I deny: the major, with its minor also in the same
sense, which being both shattered, the consequence must needs vanish away. The
reason why the effects and properties of the Sacrament are not seen with our
corporal eyes, is, because they are objects of faith; which objects are beyond
the sphere and capacity of our corporal eyes, and other senses; for the object
of our corporal sight, is coloratum quid, some colored thing, and the objects
of our other senses are mere corporeal things; but objects of divine faith, are
never seen nor known by their colors, nor by smelling, touching or tasting;
from whence a man may see, how sharp, keen, and witty this arrow of Mr. de
Rodon's is against Transubstantiation, which is a high object and mystery of
divine faith.

As to both his examples of seed into an animal, and water turned into wine,
without any of their effects seen either in the animal or in the wine; I
confess all that to be true; and the reason is, because those are but mere
simple conversions, and no sacraments: But Transubstantiation, is not only a
conversion of one substance into another, but it constitutes a Sacrament also;
and because it is a Sacrament, it is necessary, that although the entityes of
bread and wine are destroyed; their accidents should remain, to be symbols or
signs of our spiritual nourishment; and are therefore called Analogically bread
and wine; though they are not really but mere accidents of bread and wine; and
the natural entityes of bread and wine, wherewith they were formerly
sustentated, are really changed into the body and blood of Christ.

This then being so, the truth is, that although the Sacramental species appear
to our corporal eyes, to be but bread and wine; and according to our senses
seem to have but the effects, accidents, and propertyes of bread and wine; yet
to the eye of our soul, viz. to the understanding, supported by divine faith;
they are not really such, but the true body and blood of Christ; because he
himself said so, and his word could make them so. And it is also plain truth,
that if Mr. de Rodon had ever received the Sacrament worthily (but alas he
never did) it would have wrought its spiritual effects and properties upon his
poor soul, as it does upon all other devout ones, and fills them with interior
joy, devotion, and tranquillity of mind and conscience: But since he never did,
or believed in Christ's words, as his Church understands them, but was always
led by the track of his senses only, to the sight of this supernatural object;
certain (I say) it is, and the very plain truth, that he had no more faith in
him, then a horse has, that follows the sent of oats. But let us hear him
farther.

Rodon. 5. In every substantial conversion there must be a subject to pass from
one substance to another; for else it would be a creation, which is the sole
action that does not presuppose a subject. But in the Sacrament of the
Eueharist, after the consecration, there is no subject, because according to
our adversaries, there remains no subject, for at they assert, the accidents of
bread and wine, remain without any subject at all. Therefore in the Sacrament
of the Eucharist there is no substantial conversion.

Answ. To this argument I answer, denying the major; for this proposition is
verified only in formal substantial conversions; that is to say, when one
substantial form is changed or converted into another; as when the form of seed
is changed into the form of an animal, and the form of water was changed into
the form of wine at the feast of Cana in Galilee; which are but simple
substantial conversions, in which the matter or subject passes from one form to
another. But Transubstantiation is a quite other sort of substantial
conversion; for not only the forms of bread and wine are changed into the body
and blood of Christ, but also their matters or subjects, by virtue of the
omnipotent effective word of the infinite Agent, who has an absolute power
over all sorts of entities, as well material as formal. Therefore the material
entities of bread and wine being as subject to Christ's effective word in order
to a substantial conversion, as their formal entities are; and
Transubstantiation being a total conversion of both the material and formal
entities of bread and wine into the body and blood of Jesus Christ, as the
words of consecration do plainly import; it follows evidently, that although in
every simple formal substantial conversion there must be a subject to pass from
one substantial form to another; yet in Transubstantiation which is not a
simple conversion of one substantial form into another; but a total conversion
as well of the material entityes of bread and wine into the body and blood of
Christ, as of their formal entityes; I say, in this extraordinary supernatural,
and total substantial conversion, there need be no subject to pass from one
substance, or substantial form to another; because here, the subject it self,
is as well changed as its substantial form: And yet this miraculous conversion
cannot be termed a creation; because it is not productio rei ex nihilo, a
thing produced of nothing, or a sole action that does not presuppose a subject,
as the Mounsieur says right, creation is,

However though the Sacramental species (because they are accidents, and no
accidents can properly be called subjects) be not the proper subjects of this
conversion; yet they are somewhat subject-like; for they pass through the whole
conversion, and exist supernaturally without any subject to prop or sustentate
them. God miraculously supplying the place of their connatural subjects; as he
supplies the natural subsistence or personality due to Christ's humane nature;
which if Mr. de Rodon will not believe because he cannot see it with his
corporal eyes, nor apprehend it with any of his other senses: he will be
forced, besides the three Persons of the B. Trinity, to allow also of a humane
person in Christ, to personate his humane nature, which is plain and manifest
heresy. Now to the Mounsieur again.

Rodon. 5. That doctrine which asserts, that Accidents are not Accidents but
substances, destroys the nature and essence of Accidents: because it is
impossible that an accident can be a substance; But the doctrine of
Transubstantiation asserts, that Accidents are not Accidents, but that they are
substances: which I prove thus. That doctrine which asserts, that Accidents are
not inherent, but that they subsist by themselves, does assert, that Accidents
are not Accidents, but that they are substances; because inherence is the
essential difference of a substance. But the doctrine of Transubstantiation
asserts, that Accidents are not inherent, but that they subsist, which I prove
thus; That Doctrine which asserts, that Accidents may be without a subject,
does assert, that Accidents are not inherent in a subject, but that they
subsist by themselves: But the doctrine of Transubstantiation asserts, that
Accidents may be without a subject, viz. the Accidents of bread and wine
without any substance, and without any subject to sustain them. For by
Transubstantiation the substance of the bread and wine is gone, and their
Accidents remain; Therefore the doctrine of Transubstantiation asserts, that
Accidents are not inherent, but do subsist by themselves: and consequently
asserts, that Accidents are not Accidents, but substances, and so destroys the
nature and essence of Accidents. But here it may be said, that actual inherence
does not constitute an Accident, but Aptitudinal only: Against which I form
this Argument: Whatsoever does exist actually, either it exists in some thing
else actually, so that it cannot be without it; which Philosophers call actual
inherence, as walking; or else it exists by it self actually, so that it may be
alone by it self; which Philosophers term actual existence; the former of these
constitutes an Accident; and the later constitutes a substance. But the
Accidents of the bread and wine after consecration, do exist actually;
therefore they must exist either in something else actually, or in themselves
actually. But they do not exist in, and by themselves actually; for then they
would subsist by themselves, and b^ real substances, which i^ impossible;
therefore they exist in something else actually, viz. in the substance of the
bread and wine, and consequently the substance of the bread and wine remains
after the consecration, and so there can be no Transubstantiation.

Answ. As to this fifth arrow of the Mounsieurs we deny, that
Transubstantiation destroys the nature of Accidents; yet we grant, it is
impossible that an Accident can be a substance: we also deny, that the doctrine
of Transubstantiation asserts, that Accidents are not Accidents, but
substances: And to his Probation, viz. that doctrine which asserts that
Accidents are not inherent are not Accidents, I answer, and distinguish this
proposition thus; That doctrine which asserts, that Accidents are not inherent
actually nor aptitudinally, asserts (I consess) that Accidents are not
Accidents: that doctrine that asserts, because Accidents are not always
actually inherent, asserts, they are not Accidents: I deny. And consequently, I
deny, that because the accidents of bread and wine in the Eucharist do not
inhere actually in their connatural subjects, viz. in the entities of bread and
wine; that therefore they are no accidents: And the reason is, because it is
not actual, but Aptitudinal inherence; that is essential to accidents; which
aptitudinal inherence to their natural subjects, viz. to the substances of
bread and wine, we say, the Sacramental species have still; also after the
words of consecration; for an aptitudinal inherence consists in a natural
sympathy inclination, or dependence which the Accident has to its own natural
substance or subject; insomuch that i^ its subject were reproduced, and
restored to its former being again; the Accident would naturally cleave,
adhere, and result unto his proper subject, if God did not supernaturally
supply the subjects place; as he does in this misterious conver^on; just as I
said before, he supplies Christ's humane subsistence or personality in the
Mystery of his Incarnation: Therefore though the actual inherence of the
Sacramental species be hindered and supplied, yet they still retain their
natural sympathy, inclination, and propensity to their proper subjects in case
they were reproduced: in which inclination and propensity the nature of
Accidents does consist, and not in their actual inherence. And consequently
since Transubstantiation destroys not the Aptitudinal inherence of Accidents,
but only their actual; it follows evidently, that it leaves them in their
essential being, which consists in an Aptitudinal inherence only.

As to his reply concerning aptitudinal inherence, viz. that it m^st exist in
something else actually, or else in, or by it self; I deny: that accidents
naturally do properly exist, but rather coexist with their subjects, for
existence pertains properly to substances; and is called by all Philosophers
modus substantialis, a substantial mode, and takes its seat in the indirect
line of the series or Predicament of substance, and it is properly excluded
from all the Predicamental Accidents: however we own, that the Sacramental
species do supernaturally exist in, and by themselves, without any subject at
all; and yet we deny, they are substances therefore: because although they
exist supernaturally in, and by themselves, as subjects do exist naturally in,
and by themselves; yet their existences are for unlike: for their existence
has a natural inclination and propensity to their proper subjects, if they
were restored to their being again; But substantial existences have no such
inclination or propension to any subject: so that the Sacramental species,
although they exist in, and by themselves supernaturally, and miraculously, by
the power of God, like substances; yet they are still essentially Accidents;
^or they retain their aptitudinal inherence and inclination to their proper
subjects; which aptitudinal inherence substances have not.

Rodon. 7. Every Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace, as the
Council of Trent says, in sess. ^. and every sign re^ates to the thing
signified; so that we must speak of signs and Sa^raments, as of things
relating to something else. But all Relative things have as it were a double
being. viz. an absolute being, which is the natural being of the thing, and a
relative being, whereby it relates to something else; for example, in a man
that has begotten a child, we consider his absolute and natural being, as he
is a man, as others are, and his relative being whereby he is a father, and is
distinguished from other men that have no children, and so are not fathers. So
in the Sacrament of Bap^ism; the sign, viz. the water (...), an absolute and
natural being, viz. its cold and moist substance, whereby, it is water, as
other waters are: and a relative Sacramental and significative being, whereby
it is the sign and Sacrament of Christ's blood. Even so is the Sacrament of the
Eucharist; the bread and wine which are the signs, have their natural and
^blute being; viz. their substance whereby they are bread and wine, as other
bread and wine which we commonly use; and their relative S^cramental and
significative being, whereby they are the Sacrament and signs of the body and
blood of Christ, and differ from all other bread and wine that is not thus*
employed. To this I add, that it is impossible a relative being should be
without an absolute; because a relative cannot be without its foundation: for
example, it is impossible to be a father without being a man, to be equal
without quantity, etc. and this being granted, I form my Argument thus. That
which takes away the natural being from signs and Sacraments destroys their
nature and essence, because the relative and Sacramental being cannot be
without the absolute and natural, as has been proved. B^ the doctrine of
Transubstantiation destroys the natural being of the bread and wine which are
signs and Sacraments of Christ's body and blood; for by Transubstantiation the
whole substance of the bread and wine is destroyed. Therefore the doctrine of
Transubstantiation destroys the nature and essence of Sacraments.

Answ. All this doctrine, viz. as concerning the definition of a Sacrament,
That it is a relative, and that all relatives have a double being; and that it
is impossible that a relative being should be without an absolute, we grant; we
grant also that the substantial entities of bread and wine, which be the
subject and foundation whereupon the sacramental species, before the words of
consecration, relied, are by the same words of consecration, destroyed or
rather changed into the body and blood of Christ; and yet we deny, that
Transubstantiation destroys the nature of Sacraments. And the reason is this;
because signification, which is the formal part of the Sacrament, is not
destroyed, and this signification relies upon the quantitative and qualitative
accidents of the former bread and wine, which accidents are absolute entities,
and remain still undestroyed in the Sacramental species, miraculously without
their natural and proper subjects: so that though the absolute accidents of
bread and wine, viz. their quantity and quality (which are no relatives) exist
supernaturally and miraculously without any subject; yet signification, which
is the ^ormal part of the Sacrament (and a relative term) has something
subjectlike to rely upon; viz. the quantity and quality of the consecrated
host: which being supplied and maintained by Gods infinite power, are stronger
props then the bare entities of bread and wine were.

Neither do we grant unto Mr. de Rodon that to keep up the Analogy,
signification, and likeness betwixt the Sacrament, and the thing by it
signified, corporal nourishment is requisite in the Sacramental species; for
this Analogy is evidently saved, and seen in the mere Accidents of bread and
wine; for it is they that signify spiritual nourishment, and not their
substances: so that whether they nourish the body or no, is impertinent to
their signification for which they were instituted.

By this answer the Mounsieurs first reply is also precluded: yet for charities
sake, I answer his argument in form thus: That which takes the natural being
from signs and Sacraments destroys* their nature and essence: I distinguish
this Major; if it takes away their formal being, and supplies not their
material and fundamental, with another as good or better; I confess the major:
if it takes away their material being only, and leaves the formal, supplying it
with another (as it were) materal being, as good, or better; I deny the Major;
and in the same sense I distinguish the Minor, and deny the consequence. This
may be exemplified in a house or any other such like thing; for who can say,
that a house is destroyed while it keeps its form and shape: is it because
(forsooth) its first foundation, which was but a mudd-wall was destroyed, if
another better of brick or free-^t^ne be set under it, to supply the muddwalls
place? no man I am sure will say so. Even so ^is in our case here; for the
entities of bread and wine which did sustentate the significative part of
nourishment before the words of consecration; by virtue of the said words,
those entities are destroyed. But after the words of consecration, instead of
those substantial entities, God with his infinite power supplies their place,
and makes the Sacramental species exist in, and by themselves and serve instead
of subjects to prop and sustentate signification, which is the formal part of
the Sacrament. Now these spocies upheld and supplied by Gods power and word,
are firmer props then the entities of bread and wine were; and (as I said
before) because their existence has always a natural inclination and sympathy
to their proper subjects, it retains always its aptitudinal inherence, and
consequently is no substance and so because the sacramental species, which be
the absolute accidents of the bread and wine, do sustentate signification,
which is the formal and relative part of the Sacrament, it remains still
verified, that a relative being is not without an absolute being; and because
the existence of the sacramental species retains its inclination to its proper
subjects, and has anaptitudinal inherence in it; it follows evidently, that
Transubstantiation which is the causer of all this, neither destroys the nature
of Accidents nor of Sacraments neither. Let this then suffice for his sixth
arrow, and its first reply: Now to his second reply.

Rodon. 8. Secondly the Council of Trent in sess. 13. commands, that the
Sacrament of the Eucharist shall be adored with Latria, which according to our
adversaries is the sovereigne worship due to God only: but the Accidents of the
bread and wine ought not to be adored, because they are creatures; and that God
alone must be adored: Therefore the accidents of bread and wine are not the
Sacrament of the Eucharist.

Answ. To this second reply we answer, and obey the holy Councils commands, and
we adore the most blessed Sacrament with the adoration of Latria, which is the
highest sovereign worship due to God only. And to what he inferrs, viz. that
the accidents of bread and wine, because they are creatures, ought not to be
adored so, I answer and distinguish that proposition thus: with an absolute
Adoration I confess; with a relative adoration I deny; for we give a relative
adoration of Latria, not only unto the Sacramental species, but unto the holy
cross also; and yet we deny it to be Idolatry; because the Adoration redounds
wholly upon God; but if we should give unto the Cross, or any other creature an
absolute adoration of Latria, that is, if we should adore them absolutely as
they are in themselves, without any relation or reference unto God; then indeed
I confess, it would be Idolatry. But far is that from our intention, when we
adore them, or any other pictures or Relics, however our adversaries, are
pleased to interpret and force our intentions. Nay more then that, we give but
a relative Adoration of Latria even unto the body, blood, and soul of Christ,
inasmuch as they are but creatures; and yet we hold them to be more and better
then the accidents of bread and wine in the Sacrament; nevertheless we afford
both them and the Sacramental species too, an absolute Adoration of Latria,
inasmuch as they are united hypostatically to the Divinity, and yet deny it is
Idolatry to do it.

But since the Mounsieur and his Translator, do impeach us with Idolatry,
concerning the Adoration of Latria, we give to our Sacrament; as also
concerning our worshipping of Images: wherefore may we not also pose them, and
those of their party, concerning their communion bread and wine? wherefore, I
say, may not we ask them, whether they afford any spiritual worship, adoration
or reverence to their communion bread and wine, after they are consecrated by
them, or no? If they answer, no, then what respect have they for their
Sacrament, or communion, more then they have, for the other ordinary bread and
wine which they daily eat and drink? and why may not they carouse with their
communion wine, and drink to one another with it, as they do ordinarily with
the other wine when they drink together in a Tavern? or why may not they throw
a bit of their communion bread to a dog, as they use to do when they are at
their common meals? for if they have no more spiritual reverence or worship
for the one, more then they have for the other; there is no reason why they may
not use them both alike: If this be their principle and tenet concerning their
Sacrament, or communion, and if they have no more adoration or worship for it,
then they have for their other ordinary bread, which they often throw to dogs;
I would have them consider, to what a pass they have brought one of the two
Sacraments they only own, of the seven which the Church does hold Christ
himself did institute; and which he called that of his last supper: among other
of his divine words he said: Nolite sanctum dare canibus; give not that which
is holy to the dogs. But if they have no more worship or respect for their
communion bread, then they have for their ordinary other bread, whereof they
give some to their dogs; I know not what their consecration signifies; if it
hallows the bread, then the bread must be holy, and to any holy thing a
reverence, veneration or worship is due; if it does not hallow the bread, then
the bread is as it was before; and consequently, it may be given to dogs as
other bread is often thrown to them; and what would else (forsooth) follow from
this doctrine; but that their communionbread may lawfully be given to dogs: it
follows also; that if bread can be consecrated and hallowed; that water may be
consecrated also; and then they will be forced, to acknowledge some virtue or
force in our holy water.

But if their answer be affirmative, and they give a spiritual worship and
adoration to their Sacrament or communion; this adoration or worship, can be no
less then a Relative Latria; for they worship their communionbread, because it
is a sign or Sacrament of Christ's broken body, and spilt blood upon the Cross;
and consequently they adore it in relation to Christ, or if they adore and
worship it, not in order to Christ, but as it is in it self; then they give it
an absolute worship; which is a far grosser kind of Idolatry, then that they
attach us with: for they believe their Sacrament to be nothing else but bare
bread and wine; and consequently nothing else but mere creatures; but we
believe our Sacrament to be the real body and blood of Christ with his
divinity; and therefore we adore our Sacrament upon far better grounds, then
they do theirs. Moreover, if they give a Relative adoration of Latria to their
Sacrament, and may lawfully do it, because it is a sign, or it signifies
Christ; why may not we also give a relative adoration to our crucifixes and
Images, because they are signs of Christ and of his Saints, whom they
represent? or if they call us Idolaters for for doing this; why may not we call
them Idolaters for adoring their communionbread? In a word they must either
give it no adoration, worship, or reverence at all, no more then they give to
their unconsecrated bread; and consequently they may as well give it to their
dogs, as they do their other bread; or if they give it any adoration, worship,
or Reverence, it must be some kind of a Latriacal adoration, either Relative
or absolute; (for they must adore it because it signifies Christ's passion; or
they must adore it as it is in it self, without any Relation to Christ) which
if they do, they fall into a grosser Idolatry, then we do.

Rodon. 9. Thirdly, a Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace as the
Council of Trent defines it in sess. 6. and 13. But in the Eucharist the body
and blood of Christ are not visible, therefore in the Eucharist the body and
blood of Christ are not signs.

Answ. To his third, I answer and acknowledge the holy Councils definition of a
Sacrament; but I deny, that the body and blood of our savior are not visible
by the eye of our understanding, helped and supported by the supernatural light
of faith; although we cannot see them with our corporal eyes; as no more can we
see the entities or substances of bread and wine with our corporal eyes, if
they were not destroyed, but their accidents only: and those accidents we see
in the Sacrament also, which is sufficient for to constitute a Sacrament; being
we firmly believe his body and blood are in the species. But the Mounsieurs
faith is so nice and delicate, that unless he sees and smells the object, he
will not believe it; certainly this divine man saw and smelt the Mysteries of
the Blessed Trinity, and of Christ's Incarnation, or if he did not, why does he
believe them? O curious eye! O delicate nose!

Rodon. 10. Lastly, I say, that in every Sacrament the sign relates to the
thing signified: and Relation is always between two different things, because
nothing relates to it self, and consequently nothing can be both the sign, and
the thing signified. But the body and blood of Christ, are the things
signified; therefore the body and blood of Chrst are not the signs. And it is
to no purpose to say, that Jesus Christ in the Mass, is the sign and figure of
himself on the Cross; for Jesus Christ wheresoever he is, is one and the same,
yesterday* to day, and for ever; and therefore Jesus Christ, not being
different from himself, cannot be relative to himself, nor the sign of himself.

Answ. To his last reply, I answered sufficiently already, where I showed, that
it is neither inconvenient nor contradictory, that the self same thing may
represent and signify its own self: for example, that an old man may represent
his own self in his youthful actions or represent upon a Theater what feats of
arms he did in the field; where the representer and the represented is the
self same man; which thing is so clear, that every old woman and little child
can easily apprehend and understand it: what hard matter is it then to
understand, that Christ can represent himself in the Sacrament, as he was upon
the Cross, although he be still the same Christ? It is a great wonder and
admiration to me, that such a famous Philosophy-professour as the Mounsieurs
Translator takes the Mounsieur to be (especially he having so curious an eye
and dainty a nose as can reach up to objects of divine faith) that he should be
so senseless and dull as not to apprehend that which is obvious to all old women
and childrens understanding.

Mr. de Rodons Quiver being quite exhausted, his arrows vainly spent,
Transubstantiation untoucht, and consequently the Mass alive as yet: Let us now
see what great feats he will perform in his next chapter; for he vowed our
Diana's death, and resolves here to give her her healing-stroak, and to that
intent, he in his next chapter more then double fills his Quiver; for whereas
in this chapter he had but six, in the next he has thirteen keen arrows:
Therefore, let us for shame accompany our old Mistress, and forsake her not,
while she has any life in her, and we any hope to save her from her Tragical
end.

CHAP. IV. Against the real presence of Christ's body in the Host, or
consecrated wafer.
LOok now very well to your self Madam Diana, for Mr. de Rodon has bent his
bow, and aims thus at you.

Rodon. 1. The Romish doctors affirm; That immediately after the Priest in the
celebration of the Mass, has pronounced these words, this is my body, the ^ody
of Christ is really present in the host; and that it is whole and entire in
every part and point of the host: which doctrine I destroy by these following
arguments.

Answ. The Romish Doctors have an excellent ground and reason for saying so,
because the Priest received power from Christ to do as he did himself, when he
took bread, and changed it into his body, saying, this is my body; for Christ
commanded his Apostles (whose successors the Priests are) to do as he did
himself, and gave them power to do it, by virtue of these words: as often as
you do this, do it in remembrance of me: for he commanded them to do, this,
that is to say, the same thing he did himself, when he uttered these words, this
is my body: But they could not make it his body unless they had power from him
to do it: therefore since they did as he commanded them to do; (...) follows
evidently, that if he made it his body and blood, they did so also: for most
certain it is, that he commanded them not to ^o a thing impossible; and
consequently that (...) gave them power to consecrate bread and wine into his
body and blood, as he did himself. Or dare the Mounsieur say, that Christ could
not Transubstantiate bread and wine into his own body and blood? and after
Christ said in express terms, this is my body, dare he say, it is not his body?
what thing else I pray is this, but to contradict Christ's words, and give him
the lie in his teeth? for what else are, It is and it is not, but
contradictories, when they are said of the self same thing, at the same time,
and after the same manner? so that as any man may clearly see, this good
Mounsieur opposes here, not only the Priests, but also Christ's power concerning
the real presence of his body in the consecrated host: and he gives no more
virtue to Christ's effective and creative word, then he gives to the words of
other ordinary men. But let us hear this Lucifer like Goliath speak, that dares
oppose Christ's plain words, a^ they are generally understood by his whole
Church. If he can by true Philosophy (I mean by a Philosophical conclusion
deduced, out of any Philosophical principle generally allowed of by all
Christian Philosophers) demonstrate against the Romish Doctors, that
Transubstantiation is a thing impossible, and beyond Christ's power; then I
confess, he carries away the victory and prize: for all men of understanding
agree in this; that implicancies and contradictions are impossible, even to God
himself, because they quite destroy reason and sense; and God is reason it
self. But if he be not able to perform this task, and demonstrate that it is
not in Gods power and might to Transubstantiate (a thing which he nor any else
will be ever able to do) then how can he appear to the world, and especially to
all Christians, but as a Lucifer-like heretic, for opposing Christ's omnipotent
power and word? I am no Romish doctor, but one of their meanest disciples; and
yet I dare take up the ^udgells in this just quarrel against great and famous
de Rodon, next unto holy writ (as his Translator esteems him) one of the
smartest and best of his party, that ever wrote yet, and is extant against the
Romish heresies; and I leave the decision and arbitration of our contest* to
the verdict of any judicious and (...) Reader. But lo, here he comes with his
first keen arrow.

Rodon. 2. If a thing be created in a place, either it must be produced there,
or it must come, or be brought thither from some other place, for it is
impossible to find out a third way of putting any thing in a place. And the
Romish Doctors have hitherto been able to invent but one of these two ways of
putting Christ's body in the host. The Jacobins telling us, that it is brought
thither from some other place* and the Iesui^s, that it is produced there; But
the body of Christ can neither come, nor be brought thither into the host; nor
can it be produced there. Therefore the body of Christ is not in the host.

Answ. To this argument I answer, denying Mr. de Rodons supposition, viz. that
Christ body is created in the Sacrament, but only the bread and wine
Transubstantiated, or converted into his body and blood; at which conversion*
one substance succeeds another; so that Christ's body is in the Sacrament
immediately, and formally by reason of its substance, and not by reason of its
quantitative dimensions; But all Philosophers agree in this, that a thousand
substances can be altogether in one point, without taking up any proper place.
And yet we confess that where his substance or body is, that there his quantity
is also by concomitance, though not with its quantitative dimensions in order
to its parts, as they are extended in a place; for extension of parts in order
to a place, is but a property of quantity, or of a quantitative body; and the
essence of quantity consists in the extension of the parts of a quantitative
body, as they are in order to themselves: and if the Mounsieur ask us, how this
is feasible, or how can a body be, without being in a place? we will ask him,
how Sydrach, Mysach, and Abednego could be in the Babilonian furnace without
feeling the heat of the great fire that was put under it? and if he says, (as
he ought to say) that God supplied or hindered the heat, notwithstanding the
fire remained, because heat is only a property, and not essential to fire: the
same thing say we also of quantity, or of a quantitative body, and of its parts
as they are extended in order to a place. Therefore since Christ's body is
really in the Sacrament by reason of a substantial conversion, and no substance
is properly in a place by reason of its own self, but only by reason of its
quantitative dimensions; since Christ hinders or obstructs the quantitative
dimentions of his body in the Sacrament, as he did obstruct the heat of the
fire of the Babilonian furnace; it follows evidently that Christ's body in the
Sacrament, is there, without being in any proper place.

Rodon. 3. The body of Christ cannot come, or be brought into the host from any
other place, because it can come from no place but heaven; being no where but
in heaven; But Christ's body neither comes, nor is brought from heaven into the
host; which I prove thus: when a body comes; or is carried from one place to
another, it must leave its first place: for example, if a man would go from
Paris to Rome, he must leave Paris; but the body of Jesus Christ never leaves
heaven, for the heavens must contain him until the time of the restitution of
all things. Acts. 3. Therefore Christ's body neither comes, nor is brought from
heaven into the host, Besides it is impossible that Christ's body should come,
or be brought into the host, without passing through the space that is between
heaven and earth, where the consecrated hosts are, because a man cannot pass
from one extreme to another, without passing through the space that is between
them; But the space between heaven and earth is too vast to be passed through
in a moment; for these doctors will have it, that immediately after pronouncing
these words, This is my body, the body of Christ is brought into the host.
Moreover, it must in a moment be in all the heavens, and in all: he Aires
between the highest heavens and this earth where the hosts are, (because a man
cannot pass through a place without being there) and then it would have three
sorts of existences at once, viz. one natural and glorious existence in heaven,
one Sacramental existence in the hoji, and one ayery existence in the Air; But
s^ing all th^se things are absurd, we must conclude, that Jesus Christ's body,
neither comes, nor is brought into the host.

Answ. I told you just now Mounsieur, that Christ's body is not in the
Sacrament, as in its proper place, for the reason all Philosophers give, viz.
that no substance is in a place, but by reason of its quantitative dimensions,
which dimensions we say, Christ's body has not in the Sacrament; but is in it
immediately by reason of the substantial conversion, wherein one substance
immediately succeeds the other: and so according to this answer, we deny, that
Christ's body is either brought from another place into the Sacrament, or
produced in it, as in its propor place, but rather that it exists in it without
any local dimensions; as all other substances, if they were without their
quantitative dimensions, would exist in, and by themselves; without taking up
any place: yet since you are so acute a Philosopher; (or at least taken by your
party to be so) and do make use of Philosophical principles against us; I think
it not amiss, for the clearer understanding of my answer; first to set down the
common definition which all philosophers give of a place; as also to let the
Reader know how many manner of ways all divines, and Christian Philosophers do
acknowledge a thing may be in a place.

As to the first, they unanimously own a proper place to be defined thus;
Ultima superficies corporis continentis immobilis primi: The last superfice or
overmost part of the first immovable containing body; for example, my proper
place, is the next hollow superfice of the air surrounding my body; and the
proper place of water in a vessel, is the next hollow superfice of the vessel,
not the exterior, but the interior superfice: Where note, that according to
Philosophers, a proper place has also these two properties or faculties in
order to the thing that it contains: first, it circumscribes and environs the
thing placed of all sides, and round about: Secondly, a proper place is a
preservative of the body which it contains; and therefore it is, that every
corporal thing has a natural inclination to tend to its own proper place and
center. So we see, fire has a natural inclination to ascend toward its own
Element, and when it is there in its proper center and place, it rests, and is
quiet: Water also tends naturally toward the sea; and until it be in its
Element and center, is never at rest; so is it also with all other Elementary
and mixed bodies.

As to the second, all Philosophers agree in this, that a thing may be in a
place two manner of ways, viz. circumscriptively, and definitively* corporal
things circumscriptively, and spiritual things, as an Angel or man's soul,
definitively; that is to say, they are not in every place, as God is; but in
some finite or limited place wherein they operate; and yet they are not
circumscribed by the place wherein they are, because they are no bodies, nor
have any superfice: nor also depend of their places in order to their
conservation, as corporal things do. Besides, these two manner of ways of being
in a place, which all Philosophers own, the divines hold of a third way; viz.
to be Sacramentally in a place; from whence we have from both divines and
Philosophers, that a thing may be in a place 3 manner of ways; viz.
circumscriptively, definitively, and sacramentally: what is in a place
circumscriptively, is properly in its place because the superfice of the place
touches and surrounds the superfice of the body which it contains: so the
hollow superfice of the vessel touches and surrounds the water which is within
the vessel: What is in a place definitively or Sacramentally, is not properly
in any place; because the superfice of the place, and of the thing contained,
touch not one another immediately, as all proper places ought to touch
immediately all the things properly contained in them: for an Angel, and a soul,
have no superfices wherewith to touch the superfices of the place wherein they
are contained, for they are pure spirits, and only corporal things have
superfices: however they are said to be in a place improperly, because they are
contained within some limits of bounds where they operate (or else they would
be in all places as God is) like unto corporal things which are contained
strictly within the immediate limits of their proper places: yet with this
distinction still; that spiritual things never touch the superfice of their
proper places (and consequently are not circumscribed by them) as corporal
things touch and are circumscribed by their proper places. All proper places
are called by divines and Philosophers, univocal or circumscriptive Places: and
all improper places, they call Equivocal places, such as are definitive and
sacramental one^: for properly and in rigor, they are no places at all because
the definition of a proper place agree, not with them, for want of a
superficial manner of containing the things that are said to be within them.
This received doctrine of all divines and Philosophers presupposed.

I answer the Mounsieurs major with this distinction; the body of Christ cannot
come, or be brought into the host, circumscriptively, as into its proper and
univocal place; I confess the major, sacramentally, as into its equivocal
place: I deny the major.

Therefore I say, that Christ's body is really in the host, but not as in any
proper place, for to be in an equivocal place, is as much in a manner, as to
say in no place at all; and certain it is, that an equivocal place, is no more
a proper place, then an equivocal or painted man, is a proper and real man: so
that the substance of the bread and wine is converted into the body and blood
of Christ without any circumscriptive motion, or bringing it circumscriptively
from one proper place to another, as our circumscriptive bodies move from one
place to another: but by virtue of the effective words of consecration, and
omnipotent power of God, his substance succeeds the substance of the bread and
wine in the consecrated host, without any proper local motion: for he is there,
by reason of his substance, and substances are incapable of any proper motion;
and although his quantity be where his substance is by concomitance, yet it is
not there with its quantitative dimensions: for these are hindered in the
Sacrament, as I said before; the heat of the Babilonian fire or surnace was
hindered supernaturally: and being Christ's body is in the host, as we say, by
reason of its substance; it is in it, in one respect, like as our souls are in
our bodies: that is to say, totus in toto, and totus in qualibet part: all
Christ in the whole host, and all Christ in every point and particle of the
host; as all Philosophers say: the whole soul is in the whole body, and the
whole soul in every part and point of the body; yet the manner of Christ's body
being in the host, differs from the manner of the souls being in the body in
this, viz. that the soul is in the body, but as in one definitive or limited
improper place, but Christ's body is in the Sacrament, as in its improper place,
not definitively or limited to one host, as the soul is to one body; but
Sacramentally, that is to say, in all places where the words of consecration
are uttered upon the bread and wine: and this Sacramental existence Christ's
body has by reason of its hypostatical union to the divinity which is in all
places; and yet the Sacramental ubication or existence differs from the the
divine general ubication in this; that the Sacramental ubication is but where
the words of consecration are uttered, and the general divine ubication, is in
all places; for without it, the creatures would desist to be.

But here the Mounsieur may object, that there is a great difference betwixt
Christ's body, and an Angel, or man's soul; for an Angel, and a soul, are pure
spirits, and therefore be not capable of an univocal place, but only of an
equivocal one; But Christ's body, is a true real body; and therefore it can have
but an univocal circumscriptive place.

To this I answer, and confess that Christ's body is a true real body, and no
spirit; and yet I deny but that it may have an equivocal place in the host;
because it is now a glorified body, and as it were spiritualized with spiritual
qualities, which redound into it from his glorified soul, which spiritual
qualities the Divines call dotes corporis gloriosi, the dowries of a glorified
body; as are subtility, impassibilitie, Agility, and clarity. By reason of the
all manner of subjection a glorified body has to its soul, in so far that it
neither cloggs nor burdens her (as our lumpish bodies do our souls here) the
body may move in an instant by the instantanean motion of its soul, or of her
mind: and by reason of the Hypostatical union betwixt the divinity and soul of
Christ, and of his glorified body; it may accompany them into ten million of
equivocal places at once, according to the Apostles saying. 1. Cor. 15. It is
sown a natural body, it shall rise a spiritual body; that is to say, a real
body endowed with spiritual qualities, such as those of the soul are; not with
a spiritual entity or substance, because the substance of a spirit, and the
substance of a body are two different entities, essentially differing the one
from the other: so that if Christ's body had risen with a spiritual entity, it
could be no more a true real body but a spirit, which to affirm is plain
heresy. Therefore according to the Apostle, glorified bodies will rise again
with their corporal substances, but endowed and qualified with spiritual
dowries redounding from their souls. From whence follows, that by reason of
their subjection to the souls, and because they shall be no clog to them, that
they can in an instant move from heaven to earth, with an equivocal motion,
following the instantanean motion of the mind: from whence also follows,
that Christ's glorified soul, being in heaven, and having a thought or desire,
to be in an instant upon earth, and in a thousand equivocal places there
sacramentally, at the same time without passing through any intermediate place,
(which she can do, by reason of her hypostatical union to the divinity) that
his body because of its perfect subjection to his soul, can pass with a Motus
discretus, or equivocal motion, and accompany her in all her sacramental places
together, and be really in every of them, not after a quantitative or
circumscriptive, but after a sacramental or spiritual manner, as the soul is in
a man's body: all the soul in the whole body and all the soul in every point and
particle, of the body: for as a spirit possesses not a place quantitatively or
superficially; so also may a glorified body being spiritualized, be in a place
after a spiritual manner.

By this solution Mr. de Rodons first arrow is not only shivered and broken,
but his following proofs also eluded and enerved; For all their force is bent
only against the bringing, or being of Christ's body in the host
circumscriptively, and into its natural and univocal place; all which we grant
cannot be supposing the heavens are to contain him until the time of the
restitution of all things; Acts. 3. But they make nothing at all against its
being, or being brought in the host sacramentally; and in its equivocal place;
for such a being, or coming depends not upon a proper and univocal place, as
all divines and Philosophers confess. And consequently Mr. de Rodons ayery
existence of Christ's body, is but a mere ^himera. Though we grant Christ has
a natural existence in heaven, and a sacramental one upon Earth; which we say
is but one and the self same of him as he is in several manners. For if he
should change himself into the form of a child; or into any other form
whatsoever, (as he can do) his natural existence, and that would be one and the
self same.

By this solution is also seen, how Christ's body may be brought into the
Sacrament (as the Iacobins say) or produced in it (as the Jesuits say) without
his leaving to be in heaven in his human shape: for no body leaves its proper
place wherein it is, but by its proper local motion, from the proper place
wherein it was, *into another proper place. But a proper local motion belongs
only to circumscribed bodies, when they are brought circumscriptively to their
proper and univocal places. Therefore since Christ's body is not brought so into
the Sacrament, it may keep its connatural station and situation in heaven; and
yet notwithstanding be brought, or produced in the host, being he comes, nor is
produced there by local motion; nor is in the Sacrament, as in its proper
place; but only in an improper and equivocal one, as we have often said before.

Rodon. 4. Secondly, Christ's body cannot be reproduced in the consecrated host,
because a thing that is produced already, cannot be produced again without a
preceding destruction: for as a dead man cannot be killed, nor that be
annihilated which is annihilated already: so neither can that be produced which
is produced already, nor that receive a being, which has one already. This
common conception of all men is founded upon this Principle: that every action,
whether it produces or destroys a thing, must necessarily have two distinct
terms; the one called in the schools Terminus a quo, that is, the term from
which the thing comes; and the other, Terminus ad quem, that is, the term to
which it comes. But according to this Principle, that cannot be annihilated
which is so already, nor that receive a being which has one already; because
the term from which it should come, and the term to which it should come, would
be one and the same thing; contrary to the maxim already laid down, viz. that
the terms of Action must necessarily be distinct, and that one of them must be
the negation or privation of the other.

Answ. To this argument I answer, that that which is produced already, cannot
be reproduced as to its entitative and essential being; but that which is
produced already as to its essential being, may be produced, or rather adduced,
as to its modal being; and so we say Christ's body is in the Sacrament, because
his essential being, as he is in his natural human shape in heaven hinders not
his Sacramental or modal being here upon earth; for neither his entity, nor his
Sacramental existence depends upon any univocal place or space.

Rodon. 5. Here perhaps it may be objected, that by Transubstantiation the
substence of Christ's body is not newly produced, but only a new presence of him
in the place where the substance of the bread was: But to this I answer, that
in all substantial conversions and actions, a new substance must be produced,
as in accidental, a new accident must be produced; But Transubstantiation
(according to the Romish doctors) is a substantial conversion: Therefore by
Transubstantiation a new substance must be produced: And seeing that the new
presence of Christ's body in the place where the bread was, is not a substance,
but an accident of the Cathegory which the Philosophers call (ubi) it is
evident that by Transubstantiation the presence of Christ's body only is not
produced in the place where the substance of the bread was, and seeing that the
substance of Christ's body is not produced there, (as has been proved in the
preceding number) we must conclude, that there is no Transubstantiation nor
real presence of Christ's body in the host; which has been already refuted in
number the third.

Answ. Mounsieur, you need not bragg much of your refutations in both your said
numbers, for they are clearly answered by me in their due place: And the
objection you make for us here, is very true: for it is not the essential
substance of Christ's body that is newly produced by transubstantiation, but
only a new presence of him in the place where the substance of the bread was;
for that essential production was made at his Incarnation, and will abide for
ever: however we say, that his body has a substantial and essential existence
in the host, by reason of its Sacramental presence there; and you speak very
unskillfully, and unphilosophically, when you say, that Christ's presence in the
Sacrament, is an accident of the Cathegory which Philosophers call, ubi; for
his Presence there is no Cathegorical or Predicamental, ubi, but a substantial
and Sacramental one; because all Predicamental ubies, must result from
univocal, and not from Sacramental places; as all good divines and Christian
Philosophers do unanimously teach: And consequently your proofs can be of no
force or value amongst them, whatever you would have them be amongst the
illiterate vulgar people, whom you intend to delude and deceive with your
Philosophical quibbles. The Mounsieurs first arrow being thus vainly shot, he
pulls o^t his second, which is this.

Rodon* 6. In a true humane body, such as Christ's body is, there is something
above, and something under, right and left, before and behind; for the head is
above the neck, and the neck above the shoulders; the shoulders above the
breast, the breast above the belly, etc. But all the world knows, that in a
point, there is nothing above or under, right or left, before or behind;
Therefore Christ's body is not in a point; and consequently it is not in every
point or part of the host. To this I add, that the quantity and greatness of
Christ's body, is nothing else but its extent, as*we all know, and a body is
extended when it has its parts one without another; as all the Jesuits expound
it. But the doctrine of the presence of Christ's body in the host, puts all its
parts one within another, because it puts them all in a point. Therefore such a
doctrine takes away its extent; and consequently its quantity.

Answ. This arrow follows his former directly; for if Christ's body could have
no other place but an univocal one, nor no being in it, but a circumscriptive
being; the arrow would hit right: But seeing Christ's body is in all things
subject to his soul, as his soul is to his divinity; and that his soul is (as
ours are) all in his whole body, and all in every point and part of his body:
it follows, that his body now glorified and spiritualized by reason of its
spiritual qualifications and dowries, may be not only naturally in its univocal
place, as our bodies are in their natural places; but that it may also be in an
equivocal or Sacramental one, as pure spirits are, without any dependency of an
univocal or proper place: and consequently, that it may be in every part and
point of the host, as our souls are in every point and living part of our
bodies.

But here I ask the Mounsieur, if he ever was in heaven, and saw the situation
of Christ's glorified body there? because he says some part of it must be above,
and some part under; some before, and some behind; some on the right side, and
some on the left: I would fain know of him, where is above and under in heaven?
where is the right and left hand there? and where the before and behind? or is
there any other body in heaven, above the heaven where Christ and his Angels
and saints are, to denotate high and low, right and left, before and behind?
sure it is the^, that ^he never was there, and (unloss he changed his opinion
before he died) I fear never will be: and sure also it is, that this his
argument o^ arrow, is but a very pitiful miserable one, for comparing and
liking the situation of Christ's glorified body unto ours, as if Christ would
not situ^te himself in heaven, or upon Earth but after our circumscriptive
material manner. Certainly if he can do no more then what we apprehend or
understand, and cannot transcend our weak capacity in his works, he is no God;
and there is no such thing as an object of divine faith. Therefore (forsooth)
because Mr. de Rodon cannot with his Philosophy comprehend or understand, how a
man cannot be without his head, above his shoulders, and his shoulders above
his breast, Christ cannot be really in the Sacrament; an unanswerable reason,
and a keen killing arrow, I confess, to ignorant illiterate people of no
belief; but to the learned and faithful, it has no more force then a broken
straw.

To his addition I say, that he that can make a Camel pass through a needles
eye, can also put his own quantity into a point. To his lastly or last, I
answer, that the quantity of Christ's body, as also of all other bodies, is
nothing else essentially, but the extent of its parts as they are in order to
themselves, and not as they are extended in order to any place; for that
extension is on^y a property of the former extension, and may be hindered
supernaturally, as the heat of the forementioned Babilonian ^urnace was, which
heat although it was the property o^ the fire that was set under the furna^e,
and wrough^ its effect upon the standers by, yet God could, and did suspend its
operation upon the three holy young men that were put into it, and it neither
burnt or hurt them at all; even so can he do, and does with Christ's body in the
Sacrament, for the substance of his body is there with its essential quantity
by concomitance; although the properties of his essential quantity, (whereof
extension of its parts in order to a place is o^e) be hindered and suspended,
for being the Sacrament was instituted for us that we should receive and eat
it; it was necessary that the local extension of Chri^s body in it, should be
hindered; Therefore as Christ when he said, this is my body, could, and did put
his body substantially in the Sacrament in the species and form o^ bread and
wine, for to attemperate it to our natures, that we may receive it without any
loathsomeness, so he did also suspend and hinder its local extension sor to
accomodate it to our bodies for our spiritual nourishment: and so this arrow
follows the other. Now to his third.

Rodon. 7. To move, and not to move at the same time; to be eaten, and not to
be eaten, at the same time; to be in a point and not to be in a point at the
same time; to occupy a place, and not to occupy a place at the same time, ar^
contradictory things. But if the body of Christ were in diverse consecrated
hosts, it would move and not move at the same time: for example, when a Priest
carries a consecrated host to a sick person; the body of Christ which is
pretended to be in it moves with the host; for it leaves the Altar, and goes
with the Priest toward the sick persons house; and at the same time, the body
of Christ which is pretended to be in the other host that remains at the Altar
moves not: and so the same body of Christ, at the same time, moves and moves
not, which is a contradiction. Seeing then it is impossible, that one and the
same body, at one and the same time, should move, and not move; it is likewise
impossible that Christ's body should be in diverse hosts at the same time. In
like manner, if Christ's body were at the same time in heav^n and in the host;
it would be eaten, and not eaten at the same time; for it would be eaten in the
host by the Priest, and at the same time it would not be eaten in heaven: Also
it would be in a point, and not in a point at the same time: for in the host it
would be in a point, and in heaven it would not be in a ^oint at the same time.
Therefore seeing it is impossible that one and the same body, at one and the
same time, should be eaten and not eaten, should be in a point, and not in a
point; It is also impossible that Christ's body should be both in heaven and in
the host, at the same time.

Answ. Before I answer this argument, I presuppose with all Philosophers, that
a thing may move, or be moved two manner of ways, viz. by a motio per se, that
is its own proper motion, and by a motio per accidens; that is, by its
accidental motion, by reason of the motion of another thing, wherein it is
contained: sor example, when a man is in a ship, his own proper motion, or
motio per se, is, when he goes up and down the ship; and his motio per
accidens, or accidental motion is, his being carried by the ship toward his
intended voyage: and this is the difference between these two motions; that
what moves, or is moved by a motio per se, is never at quiet or rest, while it
is in that motion: But that which is moved only by a motio per accidens,
although it be carried from one place to another, yet it may be at rest and
quiet in it self, and without any proper moving or stirring: so may a block or
a stone be accidentally moved in a cart, and yet not moved at all in it self,
but quiet and still i^ its own proper place. Likewise, the self same thing,
viz. the same man may at the same time move two contrary ways at once, he may
move westwards toward his journey by his accidental motion in the ship,
wherein he is carried that way; and yet at the same time, he may walk from the
west part of the ship to the east part of it, by his own proper m^tion; and so
the same thing may at the same time, move, and yet be quiet, and also move two
contrary ways by these different motions: This doctrine (which very experience
shows us to be true) being presupposed.

I answer the Mounsieurs argument thus: first, by denying his supposition, viz.
that Christ's body is movable in the Sacrament* because it is in it by reason of
its substance; and all substances, secundum se, (as schoolmen call it) that is,
in themselves, are immovable: for all things that are properly moved from one
place to another, are moved by reason of their quantities, and not of their
substances: and therefore because Christ's body is in the Sacrament immediately
by reason of its substance, or of the substantial conversion of the bread and
wine immediately into his substance; it follows evidently that it is immovable
in it.

I answer secondly, and distinguish his major thus: to move, and not to move at
the same time, with a motio per se, his own proper motion, is contradictorie; I
confess the major: to move, and not to move at the same time, but an accidental
motion, that is to say, if a body be at the same time moved by reason of the
motion of another thing wherein it is contained as in its improper place; I
deny the major, and the reason is clear; for then only is a true and formal
contradiction betwixt opposite things or propositions, when there is an
affirmation and negation of the same thing at the same time, and after the same
manner; but no^ if the thing, time, o^ manner be different: as for example,
There is no contradiction in this, viz. that Peter should speak, and Paul
should hold his peace, at the same time; because they are not one and the same
man: Nor in this, that Peter* should be a Bachelour now, and a married man next
year; because although he be the same Peter, yet it is not at the same time.
Nor also in this, that Peter should be at the same time an Ambassador in
France, and no Ambassador in England; because though he be the same Peter, and
at the same time, yet he is not after the same manner. Even so we say of
Christ's body in heaven and in the Sacrament; for it is in heaven in its proper
shape and place, and may remain there quiet and still without any motion; and
yet it may be in the Sacrament in another manner, viz. Sacramentally, and move
there per accidens, by the motion of the Sacramental species, in which it is
contained, and which is but its improper and equivocal place: Just as we now
said, that a man may go eastwards in a ship, and yet at the same time be
carried westwards by the same ship, at the same time; or as a stone or block
may be moved p^r accidens, by the motion of a cart or ship, and yet remain
unmoved in its own proper place: all which we know by experience does often
happen without any contradiction; because the manner of moving is not the same;
the one being a motio per se; or proper motion; and the other being but an
accidental improper motion of the body that is in the cart or ship, although
their motions are proper, and per se, unto them.

This solution concerning motion, may serve also concerning been eaten, being
in a point, and in a place; because Christ's body in the Sacrament, is in a
quite other manner then as it is in heaven, in its own proper natural humane
shape: for it is in heaven with its quantitative dimensions, and in its proper
univocal place; but it is in the Sacrament by the dimensions of the Sacramental
species only, and in its improper and equivocal place, which in rigor is no
place at all: and though the Sacramental species may be said to be in their
proper place, by reason of their quantitative dimensions; yet Christ's body
cannot be said to be so in them, because it is in them Immediately by reason of
its substance, and consequently as in a point: for substances per se, that is,
as they are in themselves, possess no place; from hence is seen, that all the
Mounsieurs examples are to no purpose: for their force is only bent against a
natural and circumscriptive being and place, and not against a Sacramental
being or place. Since this arrow had no better luck he outs with his fourth.

Rodon. 8. Two relatives are allwaies different, as the father and the son, the
husband and the wife, etc. and relation is always between two things that
really differ, as the equality between two else, the resemblance between two
crows, etc. In a word, nothing can have relation to it self, but whatsoever
has relation must necessarily have it to some thing else, as appears by the
definition of relation. But to be distant is a relative, and not an absolute
term* for when we conceive an absolute term, we conceive but one thing, as when
we conceive a crow: but when we conceive a relative term, we necessarily
conceive two things; for example, we connot conceive a crow to be like, without
conceiving something else, to which it is like: seeing then we cannot conceive
a thing to be distant, without conceiving something else from which it is
distant; it is evident, that to be distant is a relative term, and that distant
things are relatives; and consequently, are really different, whence I form
this Argument Relative things are really different, as has been proved, but
the body that is at Rome, is distant from that which is at Paris, by reason of
the space of 300. leagues that is between these two cities; and the body that
is in the highest heavens, is distant from that which is upon earth, by reason
of the many thousands of leagues that are between heaven and earth: Therefore
the body that is at Rome, is different from that which is at Paris, and that
which is in heaven, is different from that which is upon earth; and
consequently one and the same body cannot be at the same time at Rome and at
Paris, in heaven, and upon earth; else one and the same body, might be distant
and different from it self which is a contradiction. Therefore seeing Jesus
Christ is not distant and different from himself, it follows, that he cannot be
at the same time in heaven and in the host, nor at the same time in the
consecrated host at Rome and at Paris.

But perhaps it may be said, that a body being at the same time in two distant
places, is not distant from it self; but that the places only are distant; and
therefore that Christ's body in heaven is not distant from it self in the host;
but it is the places only, viz. heaven and earth (where the host is) that are
distant. To this I answer, that it is only the distance of places that makes
the distance of things existing in those distant places: for example, the
reason why Peter at Rome, is distant from Paul at Paris, is not because they
are two things really different; else they would be always distant, even when
they are in one bed together (for they are always really different) but all
the reason of their distance is, because they are in two distant places; Seeing
then (according to our Adversaries) that Christ's body is in two distant places
at once, viz. in heaven and in the host, at Rome and at Paris in diverse hosts,
it follows, that Christ's body is distant and different from it self, it is
evident that it cannot be in two distant places at once; and consequently not
in heaven and in the host.

Besides, suppose that Peter could be at Rome and at Paris at once; and that
Peter that is at Rome should have a mind to go to Paris, and should go
accordingly; and that the same Peter that is at Paris, should have a mind to
go to Rome, and should go accordingly; it is certain that Peter would draw near
to himself, and meet himself; but things that draw near to each other, must of
necessity have been at a distance before; and therefore if a body draw near to
it self, it is certain that it was distant from it self before: and hereupon I
would fain ask our Adversaries, whether when Peter should meet himself, he
would let himself pass or not? and if he should let himself pass, whether Peter
going to Rome would step aside, and give way to himself going to Paris, or else
the contrary? but if he should not step aside and give place to himself, I
would ask, whether he would hinder himself from passing or not? and if he
should not hinder himself from passing, whether he would pass through himself,
and so make another Janus with two faces, etc. whatsoever answers they will
make to these questions, must (I am sure) be very absurd, and ridiculous.

Answ. I am sure, the answers I shall make to these your questions and argument
also, will appear to any learned man to be both solid and sound, and better
grounded in true Philosophy, then all your sophismes are; and they will
manifestly evince that these unphilosophical illations (and as you think, witty
conceited interrogations, of yours) are but mere ridiculous quibbies and
impertinent foolish trifles, not at all touching our Diana, which is the mark
you ought to aim (...) with your arrow.

Therefore to give your argument or arrow the more vent and force; I grant two
Relatives are different, and that Relation is always between two things that
differ really or modally; I also grant that two crows, and two Jackdaws too,
although they are like in color and shape, do differ in their entities; and
that nothing has a relation to it self, while it is taken in the same
formality* Finally I confess that this word (distant) is a relative, and not an
absolute term: Now all this being granted, I hope the Mounsieur will hit right:
thus he shoots: Relative things are really different; But the body that is at
Rome, is di^tant from that which is at Paris; therefore the body which is at
Rome, is different from that is at Paris.

Before I shatter this vain and ill-leveled arrow, I must let the Reader know,
that although this word ( distant) be a relative term, that signifies an
interval betwixt different things; yet because there is no distance between
corporal things by reason of their proper and univocal places; therefore
distance cannot extend it self beyond the sphere of an univocal place. So that
there can be no proper distance, but betwixt bodies, and only betwixt such
bodies too, as are circumscribed, and are in their univocal places: for no body
can rightly and properly say, that two angels, or two spirits are distant from
one another, because they have no bodies, and consequently no univocal places
to circumscribe them: and the whole reason is, because distance depends wholly
upon an univocal place; so that where there is no proper place, there can be no
distance. This sure ground thus laid, I confess the Mouusieurs Major, and
distinguish his minor thus: But the body which is at Rome is distant from etc.
The body which is circumscriptively at Rome is distant from the body which is
circumscriptively at Paris: I confess the minor; the body which is
sacramentally or in its equivocal place at Rome, is distant from the body that
is at Paris, or in heaven either; I deny the minor, and consequence also.

Therefore we say, that it is not to be in two equivocal places, nor in twenty
also together, that causes two bodies to be near or distant: Nay more then
that, although one of those bodies were in its proper place, and the other but
in an equivocal one, we say those two bodies would not be properly near or
distant: because nearness and distance has no relation at all to equivocal
places, but only to univocal ones. Since then Jesus Christ is in his natural
shape in heaven, in his proper place; and in the Sacrament he is but in his
improper, and equivocal place, to which distance has no relation at all; it
follows evidently, that his body in heaven, is not different or distant from
it self in the Sacrament; no more then two Angels or spirits are distant from
one another; which yet no good Philosopher will acknowledge, because of their
incapacity of being circumscribed, for want of supersices.

By this solution is clearly seen, how frivolous, ridiculous, and impertinent
all Mr. de Rodons ensuing Instances, and witty quodlibetical questions are; and
how wide they are from the mark: for they all aim, and strike at one body, the
same time, in two or more circumscriptive places but they touch or concern not
at all one body at the same time in its natural place, and in its sacramental
place; which is the only question we are about. Therefore according to good
Philosophy, he argues unskilfully, and impertinently, by arguing from an
univocal place to an equivocal one, or vice versa: for I grant him that the
same body at the same time cannot be circumscriptively in two places; but what
is this to our present controversy!

Therefore I am mistaken if I have not (according to the judgment of any
indifferent Philosopher) answered the Mounsieurs argument pertinently and
Philosophically as all other Philosophers would have done, and not absurdly and
ridiculously, as he is sure it could not be answered otherwise; and to his
ridiculous questions, I say, that if Christ or Peter, should meet themselves in
their sacramental or equivocal places, they may walk by themselves freely,
without passing through themselves or making a Ianus or two faces; for when our
savior gave himself sacramentally to himself, and to his Apostles, he made
neither a Ianus or double face because as I have a hundred times repeated it
over and over, a body sacramentaly or equivocaly in a place, (which properly
and in rigor is no place at all) cannot stop or hinder a circumscribed body
from going unto any proper place: Neither do we allow of any nearness or
distance, but between circumscribed bodies in their univocal places: from
whence I conclude, that these questions are more ridiculous and impertinent,
then any answer could have been given them; and so this arrow is also lost. Now
then to his 5th.

Rodon. 6. It is a perfect contradiction, that a body should be one, and not
one: But if Christ's body should be at the same time in heaven, and upon earth
in the host, it would be one, and not one; for it would be one by our
adversaries own confession, and it would not be one, which I prove thus: that a
thing may be one, it must neither be divided in it self, nor from it self, as
appears by the definition of unity. And it is certain that nothing is divided
and separated from it self. But if Christ's body be at the same time in heaven
and upon earth in the host, it will be divi^ed and separated from it self, that
which is in heaven ^eing separated and divided from that which is upon earth,
because it (...) not in the space between both.

Here again it may be objected, that a body in diverse places, is divided from
it self locally because the places in which it is, are divided but not
entitatively, because it is still one and the same entity of body. To which I
answer, 1. that entitive division (which is nothing else but a plurality of
beings, or a plurality of things really different) is no true division: for
then the three divine Persons, which are really different, would be also really
divided; and the body and soul of a living man, which do really differ, would
also be really divided. Secondly, I say, that if a body be divided and
separated from bodies which it touches, it is also divided and separated from
bodies which it does not touch; and if a body be divided and separated from
bodies to which it is near, it is also divided and separated from bodies that
are far distant from it; but especially the division is true, when between two
there be bodies of diverse natures, to which there is no union. Therefore seeing
that between Christ's body, which is really in heaven, and the same body, which
is pretendedly upon earth in the consecrated hosts, there be diverse bodies of
diverse natures, to which it is not united; it is evident by our adversaries own
doctrine, that Christ's body is really divided and separated from it self. And
seeing it is impossible it should be separated from it self, it is also
impossible that it should be in heaven, and in the host at the same time.
Thirdly, I say, that local division takes away entitive division; and things
that are divided locally, are also divided entitatively, that is, they are also
really different; else no reason can be given why two glasses of water taken
from the same fountain, ^are really different, seeing these waters are like in
all things, except in reference to place; and there can no reason be given why
the ocean is not one single drop of water only, reproduced in all places
occupied by the ocean, except it be that one drop of water cannot be reproduced
in all those places; but if it be possible, then reason obliges us to believe
that it is really so, because God and nature do nothing in vain, and it is in
vain to do that by many things, which may be done by one thing: and if it be
really so, then it follows, that all the Sea-battells that ever have been, were
fought in one drop of water; and many thousands of men have been drowned in one
drop of water, and all people since Adam have drunk but one drop of water,
which things are absurd and ridiculous.

Answ. Yet more impertinencies Mr. de Rodon, and more of your foolish merry*
conceited ridiculous sequels: I doubt not (gentle reader) but this famous
Philosophy-professor was excellently well pleased, at this witty and merry
conceited drop of water, that drains the ocean, drowned so many thousands, and
refreshes us all. But who knows that the Philosopher took not a hearty draft or
two of good wine, to season his brain, before this great drop presented it self
to his whimsical nodle? Therefore lest he should grow frantic with his
dropsical conceit; I moulder his argument, and its sequels thus: by denying his
minor; viz. that in that case he puts; Christ's body would be one, and not one;
and to his proof, I deny also his second minor, viz. that if Christ's body were
at the same time in heaven, and upon earth in the host, it would be divided,
and separated from it self, because Christ's body is in the host but
Sacramentally only, just almost in a manner as our souls are in our bodies:
(and the difference is this, that our souls are pure spirits, and his body is a
true body spiritualized) and that his body is not confined and limited to one
equivocal place, as the soul is to the body; but it may be at the same time i^
sundry Sacramental places: yet Christ's body in the Sacrament, and man's soul in
his body, agree as to this; viz. that neither of them is in a proper and
univocal place, but only in an equivocal one, which in rigor is no place at
all: but if this Philosopher forgets not himself, he confesses that although
the body and soul of a man are different, yet they are not distant from one
another; and it is true; because the soul is in her body, only definitively,
that is to say, in her equivocal, or improper place; Therefore (also I say)
because Christ's body is in the host but Sacramentally, (which is but its
equivocal place) it is not distant from it self in heaven in its natural place;
although its manner as it is in heaven, and as it is in the Sacrament be
different. If the Mounsieur be a Christian Philosopher, he must confess that
Jesus Christ when he was incarnate and descended from heaven into the Virgin
Mary's sacred womb; and that his divine person was then different from the
persons of God the father, and God the holy Ghost; but dare he say that their
persons were then also distant from one another? Christ was then here upon
earth 33. years in his circumscriptive place; and yet was not distant from the
other two persons who remained in heaven; because the other two persons are
pure spirits, and have no circumscriptive place: wherefore then may not Christ's
glorified body remain in its humane shape in heaven, and yet be Sacramentally,
or after a spiritual manner in the host, without being distant from it self?
verily, no other but a dropsical brain would ever contradict this most true
doctrine.

Therefore in answer to his impertinent and ridiculous replies and dropsical
sequels, I grant and say with him, that a plurality of things really different,
is no true and real division, and consequently that there is no such thing as
an entitative division, without a respect or relation to an univocal place: But
that which I flatly deny is, that a body can be divided or separated either
from it self or from any other body, or that it can touch it self or any other
body. or be near to it self or any other body: or lastly, that it can be
distant from it self or from any other body, but while it is in its univocal
place, and the other bodies in their univocal places also. And therefore since
Christ's body in the host is not in its univocal place, it is neither divided
near to, nor distant from his body in heaven: I confess also, that things
which are divided locally, if they be divided by a proper or univocal local
division, such things are divided entitatively also; but I deny that things for
being in their improper or equivocal places (as Christ's body in the Sacrament
is but in its equivocal place) are at all distant from themselves or from any
thing else: I grant also, that if a body be divided or separated from bodies
which it touches, it is also divided from bodies which it does not touch; but
I deny that a body in its improper or equivocal place can touch or be touched
by any other body, whether these bodies be separated or not separated from one
another. Lastly, I acknowledge, that local division causes entitative
division, but I deny that there is any proper local division between Christ's
body as it is in heaven, and as it is in the host; because he is not in the
host as in his proper place: and though I grant Christ can put the whole Ocean
into one drop (for it implys no contradiction in it self, nor imperfection in
God so to do) as he can make a camel pass through the eye of a needle, and put
life into the least grain of dust or sand, yet I deny that reason obliges us
to believe he did really so, or that God and nature by doing otherwise should
work in vain, because God and nature are not obliged to do all that they can
do: God can create another world, and yet he is not obliged to do it, and never
will create another; and since he created the ocean, and ordained it should be
in its proper and univocal plaee; it follows not, that all sea-battels were
fought in one drop of water, nor so many thousands of men were drowned in one
drop of water, nor that all the people from Adams time drank but of one drop of
water, all which sequels of the Mounsieur are but dropsical, nonsensical, and
ridiculous and yet it follows that because Christ did put his body in the host
sacramentally only; it is there; as our souls are in our bodies; all in the
whole host; and all in every point of it; without being near distant, or
divided from his body as it is naturally in heaven, but one and the same: and
consequently as the Mounsieurs proofs are nonsensical and ridiculous, s^ this
arrow of his i^ forever lost. Now then to his sixth.

Rodon 7. Jesus Christ cannot be in diverse places at once, as he is man, if
another man cannot be so too; because Jesus Christ, as he is a man, Was made
like unto us in all things sin only excepted, as the Apostle to the Hebrews
observes. But another man cannot be in diverse places at once: for example,
Peter cannot be at the same time at Paris, and at Rome; which I prove thus: It
is impossible that Peter should be a man, and no man at the same time. But if
Peter could at the same time be at Paris, and at Rome, he might at the same
time be a man, and no man; which I prove thus. He that may be at the same time
dead and alive, may at the same time be a man, and no man; because he that is
alive is a real man, and he that is dead, is no real man, but a carcass; but if
Peter could at the same time be at Paris, and at Rome, he might be both alive
and dead at the same time; for he might be mortally wounded at Paris, and die
there; and at the same time not hurt at Rome, but alive and making merry there.
Besides Peter may be divisibly at Paris and indivisibly at Rome, ( as Christ's
body according to our adversaries, is divisibly in heaven, and indivisibly in
the host) but if in Paris ( where he should be divisibly) his head should be
cut off: and so he should remain at the same time a living and real man; which
is a contradiction. In a word Peter might be at Paris in the midst of flames,
and be burnt, and reduced to ashes, and consequently should die, and be no man;
whereas at the same time, he might be at Rome in the river Tiber sound and
brisk, and consequently be a true and living man. Whence it follows, that he
might be a man, and no man, which is a contradiction.

To this may be added other absurdities that would follow from this position;
that one body may be in diverse places at once, viz. that one candle lighted
might give light to all the world, if it were reproduced in all parts of the
world; that a great army might be made of one man, reproduced in a hundred
thousand adjoining places; that all the debts in the world, might be paid with
one crown, reproduced as many times as there be crowns due, That all the people
in the world might quench their thirst with one pottle of wine, reproduced as
many times as there be inhabitants in the world; that all the men in the world
might drink in one and the same glass, reproduced as many times as there be men
in the world, (whereupon a man might be so curious as to ask, whether if this
glass should be broken at Paris, it would also be broken at Rome,
Constantinople, and other places) that one man reproduced in an hundred
thousand places, might at the same time marry an hundred thousand wives, and
lie with them; whereupon a man might desire to know whether these women might
not conceive, and every one of them be delivered of a child at the end of nine
months: and consequently it may be said, that one man did in one night beget
an hundred thousand children, etc.

Answ. It is a common saying, Stultorum plenus est mundus, that the world is
full of fools; and I think our Mounsieur may serve for all; for the little
Microcosme of his aerie giddy brain is so full of senseless frantic figaries,
that it is not in his power to rid himself of them; so he proceeds from folly
to folly, or (rather to use his own terms) he produces one foolish arrow, and
reproduces it so often, that from it and its sequels, he falls into an horrid
blasphemy: for thus he shoots; Jesus Christ as he is man, cannot be in diverse
places at once, if another man cannot be so too; because Jesus Christ as he is
man, was made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted: But another man
cannot be in diverse places at once, ergo, etc.

This arrow certainly aims not only at Diana, but also at Christ himself,
therefore rather then it should hit Christ, let us leave her, and run to save
him. But how Rodon? because the Apostle says* Christ is made like us in his
humane nature and essence, and in all the rest of our properties which flow
from our essence, (though not conceived and born in sin, as we were) does it
follow that we are equal and like to him in power also? If so; then the
Mounsieur rose again the third day after his death at Geneva, by his own proper
might and virtue, without the ministry or aid of any Angel, and sits now check
by joal to Christ, at the right hand of God the father; and will descend with
him to judge the quick and the dead; for none of these things be sins; and we
must be like Christ in all things, sin only excepted. Where be all those
(forsooth) that the Mounsieur raised from death to life? where be all the lame,
all the blind, all the dumb, deaf, and sick people he cured? Christ did many
such things, and yet they were no sins: how can he then, or any of us be like
unto Christ in all things, sin only excepted, save only in our humane nature?
But to be in two places at once, belongs to Christ's power, and not to his
humane nature: where is Mr. de Rodons comparative argument, then now? If this
be no blasphemy, I know not what to call blasphemy.

Therefore Peter, Paul, nor Mr. de Rodon himself are like to Christ in his
power, though they be like him in their humane nature, sin only excepted: and
consequently although Peter cannot be killed at Rome, and alive at Paris, at
the same time, for otherwise (if he means a mortal Peter) he should be man, and
no man at once; yet Christ can be in heaven naturally, and Sacramentally at
Rome, the self same time, because he is in the Sacrament, not as in his proper
place; and his body in it, is a glorified, immortal, and impatible body, and
consequently cannot be killed; as Peter, being but a mortal man can be at Rome.

To those additionate absurdities which I call his additionate impertinencies
(for none of them are pertinent to our question) I answer, as I often did
before; that no body can be in two places at once circumscriptively; though it
may be circumscriptively in one place, and sacramentally in another. And all
his impertinencies militate only against one body circumscriptively at once in
two places: which we grant cannot be. And so this arrow ends in its venom and
Blasphemy. Now then to his seventh.

Rodon. 8. If Christ's body were in the host, it would be seen there; for being
there in its glory (as the Roman Doctors say it is) it would be there more
visibly, then it was when he conversed amongst men here below; because the
glory of Christ's body, does principally consist in the brightness and splendour
of an extraordinary light. Like to that which he had upon Mount Thabor* ^ut who
dares affirm, that such a glorious body is not visible, wheresoever it is? yet
it is certain that Christ's body is not to be seen in the host, which is an
evident sign that he is not there, etc.

Answ. I distinguish the major thus: If Christ's body were in the host, it would
be seen there with the eye of our understanding helped by faith, I confess;
with our corporal eye; I deny. The Romish Doctors then do hold that it is
enough, this grand Mystery is intelligible, and implies no contradiction; to
have it be believed; for if there be no impossibility nor contradiction in the
case as concerning the veracity of the thing in it self; they rely upon Christ's
own effective and true word; therefore since our intelligible faculty helped by
faith shows us, that Christ can create, which is a thing more difficult in it
self, then to transubstantiate one thing into another; as also that he left us
an evident pattern of his power in such a case, by converting water into wine;
we considering his omnipotency, and his goodness whose property is to impart
his self to his rational creature in the highest degree; our spiritual eye,
viz. our understanding illuminated by faith; seeing this far more clearly then
our corporal eyes can see any thing: and seeing also that for Christ to
communicate himself really and substantially unto us, is a more perfect and
high degree of communication, then if he should give himself figuratively only
we seeing the thing feaseble in it self, and agreeable to Christ's infinite
goodness: believe it, upon his word which we know to be firmer then heaven and
earth. Mr de Rodon strives by his natural reason grounded upon humane
Philosophy, to demonstrate that it is not in Christ's power to Transubstantiate
bread into his own body: this is the main point, and substance of our dispute:
he opposing Christ's power as to this thing, and we propugning it, and
maintaining it to be agreeable to his infinite goodness, that the thing should
be so, as he expressly said. But although we believe he is glorious as he is in
the Sacrament too, yet we confess, we see him not there with our corporal eyes
shining in glory; because he hides it from us there; for he knows it is neither
expedient nor requisite that he should manifest his glory unto us here upon
earth; that our merit should be the more by believing his plain and express
word. This was the reason why, that during the time while he was conversant
with men, in his patible body, although his soul was also then always glorious
by reason of the Hypostatical union; yet this glory of hers never redounded to
his body, but once at Mount Thabor, and then, but transeunter, for a short time
only; to animate Peter, whom he designed to be his Vicar on earth; as also
James and John, who were his near kinsmen, and of the chief of his Apostles;
that these three being eyewitnesses of his glorious Transfiguration, should be
the more confirmed in their own, and the better strengthen the rest of the
Apostles and disciples in their belief concerning the death of their dear
master, and the grand Mystery of his Resurrection* Therefore while we are
members of the Church militant, it is not expedient we should see the body of
Christ shining in glory with our corporal eyes; although we are bound to
believe his glorified body is really in the Sacrament.

Neither is brightness, and splendour of an extraordinary light, more proper and
principal to a glorified body, then are impassibility, subtility, and agility,
which are likewise dowries of a glorious body, and yet the Apostles saw none of
these three other dowries of Christ's body in the Mount, though his body had
them there; so also although Christ's body in the Sacrament, has all the same
dowries and properties, after his Resurrection; yet it is neither expedient or
necessary, that every one of us, should see them with our corporal eyes the^e,
but it is enough we believe it; from whence follows not evidently (as the
Mounsieur says) that they are not there; for an argument from a corporal
visible not seeing, to an intelligible spiritual not being, concludes but
against ignorant people, and misbelievers; not against any learned or faithful.

Rodon. 9. But (quoth Mounsieur helping us out) it may be said that Christ's
body is under the accidents of bread and wine, and that these accidents hide it
from us. To which answer he replies very Philosophically and acutely (as he is
wont) thus. But the substance of the bread and wine, was not under the
accidents, and the accidents were not upon their substance; for then the
substance of the bread and its accidents, had been in different places; above,
and under, being two several differences of place, and that which is under, is
not above; Therefore Christ's body cannot be under the accidents of bread; and
consequently the accidents do not hide it from us: O Philosophy! Philosopher!

Answ. But who can but admire, to hear such a silly reply, from so famous a
Professor, as Mr. de Rodon is esteemed, and cried up to be amongst his admirers
and applauders? I pray tell me Mr. Rodon, whether the substance of your own
body, be over, or under its accidents or no? if you say, I; then your body
(which consists of substance and accidents) is at the same time in two places;
for according to you; over and under, are differences of several places; and
consequently, according to your Philosophy one body may be naturally in two
places at once; for I suppose your body is but one, and its situation is not a
supernatural one: now then; if under and above, be differences of diverse
places, and your substance is under your accidents, it follows manifestly that
your body is naturally in two places at once; which is more, then we affirm of
Christ's body, for we say it is in the Sacrament, not naturally, that is, after
a natural manner; but supernaturally: If your answer be, no: then, I pray tell
us where the substance of your body is? is it in the accidents? then, why may
not we also say, that the substance of the bread, before the consecration, and
the substance of Christ's body, after the consecration are in the Sacramental
species? which if so, then they are all but in one place; and consequently, the
substance being in the accidents, for ought this reply can contradict, the
substance is absoonded in them; and so are really all substances hidden from
our corporal eyes; for we never see the substance of any body, but only its
outermost superfice: But in true Philosophy, substances separated from their
accidents, have no over nor under; and consequently possess no place, but by
reason of their accidents or quantity. So that according to all good
Philosophers ( Mr. de Rodon only excepted) a thousand substances may be
together in one point: from whence follows, that the Mounsieur is either the
only Philosopher himself; or else, that this reply is merely nonsensical; he
speaking contrary to the usage of all Philosophers.

Neither is his second reply more pertinent, then the former was; though more
ridiculous; for he plays the fool with Philosophy in it: These be his words.

Rodon. 10. And seeing (as our adversaries say) Christ's body is in every part
and point of the host, it must needs be in the supersice; and consequently
cannot be hid or covered by the accidents of the bread; (then he helps us out
again), here again it may be said, that Christ's body is glorious, luminous, and
visible of it self, but God hinders us from seeing it: To this I answer, that
if God hinders it, it is only because he is pleased so to do; and consequently,
if he were pleased not to hinder, he would not do it, but would permit it to be
seen in the same posture as it is in the host: (then he comes up with more of
his witty, merry interrogations again), viz. in what posture it would be seen
there? whether sitting, standing lying, or in any other posture? or whether it
would be in any posture at all? If it be in no posture, it must be without any
external form, because posture or situation absolutely depends upon external
form. But how can a man be seen without an external form of a man, and without
being in any posture of a man? and how can Christ's body be without posture, and
without external form, seeing (as our adversaries say) it is whole, and entire
in the whole host, and occupies the whole space of a great host? But if it be
sitting, or standing, or in any other posture, and with the external form of a
man, and if (as they say) it be whole, and entire in a point of the host, Then
it will follow, that a man may be seen sitting, or standing in a point; and
seeing a man that is standing, has his head above and his feet below; it will
follow that Jesus Christ will be seen in a point of the host, with his head
above, and his feet below; though in a point, there be nothing above or below.
To this I add (quoth he) that if it could be seen in the host, it would appear
as big as the host; because it would occupy the whole space of the host; and it
would appear round, because it would be bounded by the space that the host
occupies, which is round. Besides, if the host should be divided into two equal
parts, it would appear less by one half, and in the form of a half circle;
because it would be whole and entire in the half of the host, and occupy the
space of it. It would also appear a hundred thousand times less, and in a
hundred thousand several forms; for, as they say, it is wh^le and entire in a
hundred thousand parts of the host; and occupies the spaces of them. In a word,
there was never such a monstrous thing seen in the world, as Christ's body would
be, if it were really in the host, in such a manner as our Adversaries affirm
it to be.

Answ. To these impertinencies I answer, that according to all Philosophers, a
body may be taken two manner of ways, viz. either substantially, as it belongs
only to the Predicament of substance, and is placed directly in that line or
series; or Quantitatively, as it belongs to the Predicament of Quantity: a body
in the first acception, has no extension at all, and is not properly in a
superfice, or any other part of its accidents, as in an univocal place, but it
only sustentates both the superfice and all the other parts of its accidents;
for no accident can be naturally without its proper subject; and therefore
Philosophers commonly say, that substances are under their accidents, and yet
they say not (as the Mounsieur does) that their accidents are above them, nor
that they, and their subjects are in different places; the accidents above, and
the substance under; because they know substances has no proper places: But if
they express themselves not sufficiently, I give our Mounsieur leave to correct
them; however, I had rather follow their common way of expression, then his.

If a body be taken in the second acception; then, I say Christ's body in the
host is in every part of it, and in its superfice also, with its quantitative
extension, in order to his parts, as they are in themselves; (which kind of
extension is essential to all quantitative bodies) but I deny that Christ's body
is in the host, with its local extension; for a local extension, or extension
of the parts of a quantitative body, in order to a place; is only a property
that flows from the former essential extension: this common and solid
Philosophical foundation being laid: I answer all his impertinencies, in these
few words: that Christ's substantial and quantitative body is in the host
really, without any situation or posture; because situation and posture do
depend of extension in order to a place; not of the essential extension, in
order to the parts of a quantitative body, as they are in themselves. Therefore
if he asks us, in what posture or situation Christ's body is in the Sacrament?
we will ask him, where was the heat of the fire that was set under the furnace,
to destroy Sydrach, Misach and Abdenego? if he answers (as he should do) that
God hindered and suspended its operation, because heat is only a property of
fire, and God can hinder the effects of Properties, although the essences from
whence they flow remain undestroyed: so we can answer him, that God can hinder
local extension, which is but a property of quantitative essential extension,
in order to the parts of a quantitative body, as they are in themselves;
without destroying the quantitative body: and consequently we can say, that
Christ's body is in all parts of the ho^t, and in its superfice, extent in its
parts, as they are in order to themselves, though not as they are in order to
their local extension; and being situation and posture depends only upon local
extension; because Christ is not in the Sacrament with his local extension; it
follows evidently, that he is not by situation or po^ture although his
quantitative body be really in it, with its parts as they are extent in
themselves: from whence also follows, that all the rest of the Mounsieurs
pretty and witty questions about great host, little host, half host, round
host, etc. are but mere childish and foolish quibbles. Lastly, it follows
that Christ's body appears not more or less for dividing and subdividing, and
hundreddividing the host, because division depends upon a local extension; that
is to say, if a body be in a place extended o^ strecht out, then if you divide
it, it will appear less; but if a body be not at all extended in a place (as we
say Christ's body is not extended in the Sacrament) then break the host into
never so many pieces; Christ's body will be entirely in all of them, and yet
will not appear in them more or less. In a word, Mr. de Rodon tells a monstrous
lie, in saying, that there was never such a monstrous thing seen in the world,
as Christ's body would be if it were really in the host, in such manner as we
^ffirm it to be; for we say only that he is there in his Essence and quantity,
though not after a quantitative, but spiritual manner; that is to say, not with
its local extension; but as the soul is in the body: because the Apostle says
(speaking of a glorified body) seminatum est corpus animale, surget corpus
spiritale: it is sown a natural body, it will rise a spiritual body, 1. Cor. 15.
that is to say* with spiritual qualities; as I shall hereafter prove: and so
this arrow is also set by.

Rodon. 11. Either the manhood of Jesus Christ, which is pretended to be in the
host, can act there, or it cannot; if it cannot, ^hen it follows that it cannot
see, hear, know, or love, or exercise any other function of the sensitive or
rational soul. But if the manhood of Christ in the host, knows nothing nor
loves nothing; then it follows, that it will not be happy; because happiness
chiefly consists, in the knowledge and love of God. Also the manhood of Christ
in the host, will be different from his manhood in heaven; for it will know in
heaven, and at the same time know nothing in the host; it will love in heaven,
and love nothing in the host; it will see in heaven, and see nothing in the
host. But if Christ's manhood can act in the host as it does in heaven; then it
will follow, that it will open its eyes, and move its feet in a point; because
according to our adversaries, it is whole and entire in every point of the
host; and being; as they tell us, God can easily put the whole world into a
point, as he does the whole manhood of Christ into a point of the host; it will
follow, that all the parts of the world, existing in a point, may do in it, all
those actions which they now do in a vast space, as the parts of Christ's
manhood existing in a point of the host can do in it all those actions which
they do in heaven; and so in a less space then is occupied by a grain of corn,
the sun may move from east to west; and the sea may have its floods and ebbs,
and the English may have a seafight with the spaniards. In a word, a sparrow
may easily swallow all the world, seeing the world will not occupy so much
place as a grain of corn does, and yet the world which it shall swallow, will
be as great, as it is at present; even as Christ's body is as big and as tall in
the host, as it was on the Cross, as our adversaries affirm.

Answ. Here you see Mr. de Rodon for lows the hare still, with his hare-braind
sequels; though he is like never to catch him. But the thing which I must
wonder at, is this that the Mounsieur is not only an enemy to Diana, and seeks
to distroy her; but seek^ also to distroy and pearce Gods omnipotency through
her side. The first article of our creed, is, to believe in God the father
almighty; if we believe God is almighty; then we must believe he can do all
things that imply no contradiction in themselves, nor imperfection in him, as
all divines and Philosophers do unanimously assert. Therefore until Mr. de
Rodon can demonstrate that it is impossible to God, or that it argues an
imperfection in him, to put the whole world into a point, we have no reason to
doubt, but that he is able to do it. Neither will he be ever able to persuade
us, but that Christ, as man (because his manhood is united to his divinity) can
do more then all other men can do, notwithstanding his likeness to them, in all
things, sin only excepted. But although Christ can put the world into a point,
and has power being in the host, to act as he does while he is in heaven; yet
it follows not that he does, or will act while he is in the host, as he acts
in heaven. All Philosophers (nay and I am sure the Mounsier himself) hold that
a consequence a potentia ad actum; from the power, to the act, or execution of
that power, is never good; for example; this is no good consequence; viz Peter
can go to Jerusalem, therefore he will go thither; as no more is this: Christ
can open his eyes in the Sacrament, therefore he will open them in it; when I
say, Christ can put the world into a point, or Christ can act in a point, I
mean not that Christ can act in a point, or that the world can act in a point,
reduplicatively, that is to say, precisly while they are in a point; but my
meaning is, that Christ, (and the world also) being in a point, can act
specificatively; that is to say, Christ, and the world also, existing in a
point, have power (also while they are in a point) to act when they are out of
a point. From whence follows, that Christ's body is as glorious and happy while
it is in the Sacrament, as it is in heaven, it being the same body in both,
though not in the same manner: for certain it is, and no Christian can deny it
that Christ's body, while it was patible, by reason of its hypostatical union to
the divinity, was always as happy and glorious in it self, as it is now in
heaven, and yet while it was a patible body, it was not a glorified one
reduplicatively, for to be patible and impatible at the same time, is
impossible: nevertheless, even while it was a patible body, it was a glorious
body specificatively; that is to say, the self same body that was then but
patible, could, and had the power to make it self glorified when Christ
pleased; as he did once, for a short time at his Transfiguration: Even so it is
now, (we say) with his body in heaven, and in the Sacrament.

These terms Reduplicative and specificative are expounded otherwise by the
Divines; who by the word Reduplicative, understand, sensus compositus, a
compound sense, that is, a sense that joyneth power and act together at the
same time; In this sense, we say, it is impossible to move, or be able to move
in a point. By the word specificative, they understand, sensus divisus, a
separated sense, or a sense that separates and divides the power from the act:
for example* Peter standing, has a power to sit; in a compound sense, this
proposition is false; because it signifies, that Peter should both stand and
sit together, which is a thing impossible; but in a separated sense, the
proposition is true; because it signifies, that Peter while he is standing, has
power to sit afterward, though not of standing and sitting together, or at the
same time: Even so we say of Christ's body in the Sacrament; that in a compound
sense, it cannot be in a point and act in it; because it is impossible to act
in a point but in a separated or divided sense, we say, his body may be in a
point, and yet have power even while it is in the point, to act out of it.

By this solution is easily seen, how it is impossible the sun should move from
east to west, reduplicatively, or in a compound sense, while it is in a point;
or that a seafight should be fought in a point, reduplicatively; or that a
sparrow could easily swallow all the world, reduplicatively, though if the sun,
the sea, or the world were by Gods power put into a point; the same
specificative sun, sea, or world, have power (even while they are in a point)
to be extended as great, or greater then they are now; not jointly while they
are in a point; but separately; being extended afterward: for the power of
being extended remains still in them, also while they are in a point; though
the act of extending them is not jointly together with that power: and so the
hare escaped this arrow. Now to his ninth.

Rodon. 12. As a body cannot be in a place, except it be produced there, or
that it comes, or be brought thither from some other place; so a body cannot
cease to be in a place, without being destroyed, or going to some other place:
and consequently, if Christ's body cease to be in the host after the
consumption of the accidents, it must necessarily either perish, or go to some
other place: but Christ's body cannot perish; for Jesus Christ dies no more.
Romans 6. and Christ's body goes to no other place; for if it should go to any
other place, it would go to heaven; but it cannot go to heaven, because it is
there already, and a man cannot go to a place where he is already: Therefore
Christ's body does not cease to be in the host: whence it follows, that either
Christ's body remains still in the host and that it is impossible that it should
be consumed, or else that it was never in the host; but every man knows by
experience, that the hosts are eaten and consumed, and that Christ's body cannot
be there after the consumpsion of the accidents of the bread. Therefore it
never was in the host.

Answ. To this argument I answer thus: that as a body is produced, or brought
into a place, so it can leave, or cease to be in that place: Therefore since
(as I said in answer to Mr de Rodons first argument of his third Chapter)
Christ's body is not newly produced in the Sacrament, in order to its entitative
being; (which was produced already) but only produced, or rather adduced, in
order to a Sacramental modal being: which is as much as to say, that the self
same eutity of Christ's body which is already produced, and now in heaven in its
natural shape, by virtue of the words of consecration, has a sacramental
existence, and equivocal place in the host: since also there is no proper
coming, going, or bringing of a body, but to, or from a proper and univocal
place. And lastly since a thing cannot perish, unless its entitie be destroyed,
although it may cease from being in a place, or leave its place, after the same
manner as it came into it, without going away after another manner. Therefore,
I say, Christ not coming into the Sacrament, as into his univocal place, by way
of a proper local going; and being not reproduded in it, in order to a new
entity or essence, having his entity in heaven before; but only in order to a
new sacramental existence, and for that he is incapable of perishing because
his body is now glorious; It follows* that as he came into the Sacramental
species without any proper or local motion, or reproduction; that he can also
leave, or cease to be in them, after the consumption of the accidents, without
any local recession, or perishing either: whence it follows also, that after
the species are taken and consumed; Christ's body remains there no more: and
finally it follows, that although (as experience shows) the host be consumable,
nevertheless the Mounsieur concludes falsely, by inferring inconsequently, that
Christ's body was never there: whereas for my reasons to the contrary, no such
lawful consequence can follow: and so his ninth arrow, is also blown, have at
us now with his tenth; but before he lets it fly; he wisely lays this platform
of doctrine; that he may shoot with the better aim.

Rodon. 13. The properties of a species are incommunicable to every other
species. For example, the Properties of a man are incommunicable te a beast;
for seeing the properties flow from the essence, or are the very essence it
self, it is evident that if the essence of a species be incommunicable to
another species, then the properties of a species are also incommunicable to
another. But the body and the spirit are the two species of substance,
therefore the properties of the spirit cannot be communicated to the body, as
the properties of the body cannot be communicated to the spirit: But there are
two principal properties which distinguish bodies from spirits. The first is,
that spirits are substances that are penetrable amongst themselves; that is,
may be together in one and the same place; but bodies are impenetrable
substances amongst themselves; that is, they cannot be together in one and the
same place. The second is, that bodies are in a place, circumscriptively; that
is, all the body is in all the place, but all the body is not in every part of
the place; but the parts of the body are in the parts of the place; But spirits
are in a place definitively, that is, all the spirit is in all the place, and
all the spirit is in every part of the place; because a spirit having no parts,
must necessarily be all, wheresoever it is; whence I form my argument thus.
That doctrine which gives to a body the properties of a spirit, changes the
body into a spirit, and consequently destroys the nature of a body; seeing
properties cannot be communicated without the essence: but the doctrine of the
pretended presence of Christ's body in the host, gives to a body the properties
of a spirit; because it affirms that the quantity of Christ's body penetrats
the quantity of the bread, and is in the same place with it; that all the parts
of Christ's body are penetrated amongst themselves, and are all in one and the
same place, and that Christ's body is all in all the host, and all in every part
of the host. Therefore the doctrine of the Romish Church, touching the
pretended presence of Christ's body in the host, destroys the nature of Christ's
body.

Answ. Mr. de Rodon endeavoring to save Christ's body harmless, hits his
Apostle directly with this arrow, and gives him the lie in his teeth: for the
Apostle in his 1. Cor. 15. has these express words. It is sown a natural body,
it will rise a spiritual body. Now I ask the Mounsieur whether according to the
Apostles words, the body shall rise a spirit, or a body spiritualized? if he
says it will rise a spirit, then it will not rise a real body; for he himself
here in his platform doctrine does confess that a body and a spirit are two
different species of substance. If he says, it will rise spiritualized; that
is, with the properties, and qualities of a spirit; that is, the contradictory
of his own argument; for he says, that the properties of a spirit are
incommunicable to a body; and the properties of a body are likewise
incommunicable to a spirit.

But to save Christ's body, our Diana, and the Apostle harmless from this keen
arrow; I answer, that as it is the property of a natural or patible body, to be
corruptible, lumpish and obscure; to be impenetrable with another body; to be
circumscribed, and commensurated by another body, and to have all its parts
corresponding with the parts of its proper place; so it is the property of a
glorified body, to be subtle, impassible, quick, and luminous or clear: for as
the state of the soul is ^ltered though not her essence so will the state of
her body be altered, its essence remaining the same. The Mounsieur himself
says, that the glory of Christ's body does principally consist in the
brightness, and splendour of an extraordinary light, like to that which it had
upon Mount Thabor; which is nothing else, but the dowry or gift of clarity; and
yet it is certain; that charity or brightness, is not the property of a natural
or patible body; which is rather properly obscure and dark: wherefore then may
not penetrabilitie be communicable to a glorified body, by reason of the dowry
of subtillity: as brightness is communicable to it, by reason of the dowry of
clarity? from whence follows, that the state of the soul being altered; the
properties of her body (especially its secondary properties, as are
impenetrability and circumscription) are altered also, and so likewise this
arrow follows the rest, without hurting Christ's body, Diana, or the Apostle.

His eleventh arrow takes its force from heaven, viz. from Christ's glory; and
unless it be waved, will descend like a thunderbolt upon Diana's head, and
crush her in pieces: if the Mounsieur can but hit right now, she is utterly
destroyed, and Popery too: out comes this celestial dart thus.

Rodon. 14. Jesus Christ being sat at Gods right hand, is in a glorious estate:
and yet the doctrine of the pretended presence of Christ's body in the host,
subjects him to diverse ignominies, viz. that his body goes into peoples
bellies, and among their excrements; that it is subject to be eaten by his
enemies, yea by Mice, and other beasts. Hear what Claude de Xaintes a famous
Romish doctor, says of it, Repet. 5. Chap. 2. Of all these, we exclude not one
from the true and corporal receiving of the Lords flesh in the Sacrament; let
him be Turk, Athiest, Infidel, or Hypacrite, yea though he should be the Devil
himself incarnate. It is also subject to be stolen; for about 25. years since, a
thief was executed at Paris, for stealing out of a Church a chalice, and this
God in it; and the Priest went to the prison in his sacerdotal ornaments, and
falling on his kne^s before the Thives pocket, pulled his God out of it; And as
it is a God that cannot keep himself from being stolen, so neither can he keep
himself from being burnt, as it appeared when the Pallace-hall at Paris was
burnt. In short, the host, or* God of the Mass, has been seen in the hands of
one possessed by the Devil, and consequently in the devils power; yea there are
charms made by the Romish Priests, to compel the devil to restore God to them;
a horrible and prodigious thing to put God into the devils power, and into a
capacity of being eaten by the devil incarnate; especially being he is now
glorious in heaven.

Answ. While de Rodon pretends to vindicate Christ's glory in heaven, he
blasphe^nously derides him just as the high Priests and scribes did when he was
crucified; alios salvos fecit, seipsum non potest salvum facere; he saved
others (said they) but he cannot save himself: and as it is a God (quoth the
Jewish-like Mounsieur deriding the B. Sacrament) that cannot keep himself from
being stolen, so neither can he keep himself from being burnt. These Jews
believed not, that Christ was the son of God, because he descended not from the
cross, when they uttered therein geering tants against him; and yet all
Christians believe, that if Christ would, it was in his power then also to save
himself from that ignominious death. De Rodon believes not Christ is really in
the consecrated host, because the host is liable to be stolen, or burnt; and yet
all orthodox believers are certain that if Christ would, it is in his power to
hinder both. So that as you see, the Jews derided Christ upon the Cross, even
so is he derided by this godly Mounsieur in the Sacrament; for as the Jews
argued that he was not the son of God, because he could not descend from the
cross, so he argues that he is not in the Sacrament, because he cannot save it
from being stolen and burnt; and consequently thus far he jumps with the Jews
against Christ. Now then to his Thunderbolt or celestial arrow.

The doctrine of the pretended presence of Christ's body in the host, subjects
him (says the Mounsieur) to diverse ignominies, That I deny: it goes into our
bellies, and among our excrements, (quoth he); suppose it does, what ignominy
is that to a glorified body? as much as it is to the sun to cast it^ beams upon
a dunghill. Certain it is that Christ ordained this Sacrament, for to be eaten
by us, that by receiving it into our bodies, we may become his mystical
members: as the Apostle 1. Cor. 10. insinuats by these words. For being many,
we are one bread, one body, all that participate of one bread: what can
incorporate us mystically unto Christ, more then his body taken in the form of
bread? was not this the food Christ meant, when speaking to one of his
favorits, he said; cibus sum grandium, cresce, manducabis me, nec ego mutabor
in^e, sed tu mutaber is in me: I am the food of the great ones, increase, and
thou shall eat me; I shall not be changed into thee, but thou shall be changed
into me, and S. Ciril of Jerusalem Catechesi Mistagog 4. says: non si^ haec
attendas velim, tanquam sint nudus and simplex panis, nudum and simplex vinum;
corpus enim sunt and sanguis Christi: I would not have you take these things
so; as if they were but bare and simple bread, and bare and simple wine; for
they are the body and blood of Christ. Thus this holy father understood what
the B. Sacrament is; thus all the rest of the holy fathers understood it; thus
all General Councils that ever treated of this matter, defined it. Christ did
institute it, as a mean to incorporate us into himself mysticaly; and says it
shall not be changed into us, but we into it; what ignominy or hurt then, can
our bellies or excremenrs do it more then the sun or its beams receive from a
dunghill; the Mounsieurs thunderbolt, (I think) will prove but a Buggbeare at
last, to terrify children. or ignorant childish wits; for Christ's divinity,
and glorified body also, are incapable of ignominy, or being hurt by any thing.
It is (says the Mounsieur subject to be eaten by his enemies; yea by mice, and
other beasts. What of that? so was his body also while it was patible, subject
to be abused, and ignominiously treated by his enemies; and although Christ
could hinder them yet he did not; however though he foresaw the ignominies that
should happen to his sacred humanity, he was nevertheless pleased to become
Incarnate: can the Mounsieur find fault with him therefore? even so, although
Christ was pleased to bequeath his body, now glorified (and consequently
incapable of ignominy) to his Church; in the Sacrament, for to be her spiritual
food, and to incorporate her unto himself; because forsooth, the Sacramental
species are liable to some accidental mischances, which reflect not at all upon
his glorified body, to do it any annoyance or hurt, it being incapable thereof;
therefore Mr. de Rodon thinks it a horrible and prodigious fault, that his body
should be really in the host. But his communion bread and wine are as liable to
these ignominies, at least to some of them, as our Sacrament is. Therefore he
must either think it is of no value or worth; or if he thinks there is any
thing of divine in it, he must needs grant, that it is a horrible and
prodigious thing to expose it to those ignominies it is liable to; and so
consequently lest we should fall into prodigious crimes and sacriledges, we
must have no Sacrament of the Eucharist at all. O brave Mounsieur. As to Claude
de Xaintes, if his words be rightly understood, they import not any the least
ignominy to Christ's glorified body; for Xaintes his meaning was this; that if
any man should with pretense of devotion, and of being a Christian, come to
receive the B. Sacrament, although he were in himself a Turk, an Infidel, an
Atheist an Hypocrite, or devil incarnate, the Church will not bar him from
taking the Sacrament; and the reason is, because the Church does judge of
exterior things only, and not of interior. But if a Christian and Catholic
also, were convinced of a public and notorious crime, or were known to be
under an Ecclesiastical consure; until he were reconsiled to the Church,
absolved from his sins, and did satisfactory penance for them; he may be sure,
he shall not be admitted to this Sacrament: what ignominy is this, I pray, to
Gods glorified body? That the Sacrament was stolen away at Paris, and the theif
executed for it; was wickedly done by the theif, and he was justly punished for
it; and the Priest that took the Sacrament out of his pocket, did very well to
go in his sacerdotal ornaments, kneel, and take it out reverently; and in all
this the Priest did but his duty. But where is the ignominy done to Chr^sts
glorified body all this while? or did it suffer any prejudice by the Theif, or
by the Priest? and when the sacramental species were disasterously burnt with
the kings Palace at Paris; did that fire work upon Christ's glorified body? or
can a glorified body be subject to fire, water, sword, gun, or any kind of
sublunary body or element? In this my thinks the Mounsieur shows what an
excellent Divine and Philosopher he is. That the host, the God of the Mass,
has been seen in the hands of one possessed, I do not believe the Mounsieur,
because no body may handle, our Sacrament lawfully, but a Priest or a deacon,
unless it were through extreme necessity for saving it from fire or from the
hands of infidels. But that the Priest might lay the Sacrament upon a possessed
bodies head, or hold it before him, I questi^ion not; and yet if the Sacrament
were put into the hands of a person possessed, I deny it would be in the Devils
power therefore, more then it was when Christ himself gave it to Judas the
traitor: but will de Rodon say, that Christ did a horrible and prodigious act
for giving himself to Judas? That the Romish Priests do use exorcisms composed
by the Church, (which are no charms as the Mounsieur slanderously term them) to
compel the devil to obedience, and sometimes make use of the B. Sacrament too,
as of her most es^icatious means in order to that effect; is no ignominy at all
to Christ's glorified body; but it rather shows manifestly that the Romish
Priests are the true successors of the Apostles, unto whom Christ gave power to
tread upon the infernal serpents and scorpio^s, and upon all the power of the
enemy. Luke 10. 19. a thing which de Rodon, nor any of his, ever as yet did
dare practice, or when ever they did, or do; they never come off with better
luck, then the seven sons of Sceva the Jewish high Priest did. Act. 19. 14. In
short, whereas our Savior himself gave the Sacrament to Judas, who was not
much better then a devil incarnate; and since he gave it him while his body was
as yet patible; and consequently more subject to be hurt and annoyed then it is
now being glorified and impatible; sure it is, that although those who receive
his body unworthily, will (as Judas did) reap unto themselves ignominy, harm
and misery; yet Christ's glorified body, by reason of its spiritual dowries, is,
and will always remain glorious and hurtless in it self; and so will our diana
also, for ought this arrow can do against her: his twelfth arrow is miraculous;
that is to say, drawn from miracles thus.

Rodon. 15. God does no Miracles without necessity; But what necessity is there
that he should do so many miracles in this Sacrament, viz. that accidents
should be without a subject? that the bread should be converted into Christ's
body, which is already; that Christ's body should be in a point, and in a
hundred thousand places at once; what necessity is there that it should be
eaten by wicked men, by beasts, or by devils incarnate? what necessity is there
that it should be carried away by the devil, that it should be stolen, or burnt,
etc. Can it be said, that it is for the salvation of the soul of him that
eats it? But Reprobates, as our Adversaries confess, eat it too; and the
faithful under the old Testament did not eat it; nor do the little children of
the believers under the new, and yet they are saved for all that. Can it be
said with Bellarmin and Peron, that the host being eaten, serves as an
incorruptible seed for a glorious Resurrection? but the faithful of the old
Law, and the little children of the believers of the new, will rise ag^in
gloriously, though they never participated of the Eucharist. And S. Paul tells
us Romans 8. that this seed of the Resurrection of our bodies, is not Christ's
flesh, but his spirit, in these words; If the spirit of him that raised up
Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he shall also quicken your mortal bodies by
his spirit that dwells in you.

Answ. That God does no miracles without necessity, or some great cause, I
confess; and to each Quaere of this interrogative argument, I shall answer;
first, presupposing this, Gods own saying; and my delight's to be with the
children of men: Prove. 8. for this reason, Christ ascending into heaven, in his
corporal shape, and sitting at the right hand of his heavenly father, to feed
all the celestial spirits, with the sight of his glory (for their chief
felitity consists in contemplating and beholding of it) where he is to remain
until the time of the restitution of all things) yet he was also graciously
pleased, to remain with us in his Church militant, after an ineffable
sacramental manner, to feed our souls upon earth, with his graces that flow
from this Sacrament; as also for to forti^e and strengthen us against our
common Enemies, viz. the devil, the world, and our own proper flesh, with his
divine presence, lest otherwise they should prove too hard for his poor
fighting Church. Lastly, he was pleased so to do; that we should know, and be
encouraged thereby, that we have a Mediator, to interpose himself betwixt his
father and us; which father, when he sees the rememorative unbloudy sacrifice
we offer him in remembrance of the bloody Passion of his most dearly beloved
son, in satisfaction for our heinous sins, committed against his divine
Majesty; for the worthiness and purity of the oblation or sacrifice, (if we
offer it him with due devotion, and while we are in the ^tate of Grace) he is
presently reconciled unto us, for his sons sake, and ready to bestow upon us
more of his new favors and Graces*

Christ then, who is the wisdom of his heavenly father, seeing that his own
personal presence was necessary both in heaven and upon earth: in heaven to
glorify his Church triumphant, on earth to ass^t his Church militant; he
ascended into heaven, and ^ays there in his natural glorious shape, and yet at
the same time, he gives us his body under the form or species of bread and wine
for our spiritual nourishment. Now supposing this saying of Christ, Behold I am
with you even to the consummation of the world, Math. 28. and this other saying
of his: This is my body. Math. 26. and Luke. 22. and comparing these two
passages with that of the Prove. 8. viz. and my delight's to be with the
Children of men; (he said not, his representation, figure, or sign, but his
real self,) it follows evidently, that he is to be also really upon earth,
until the cons^mation of the world. And since he cannot be in his natural
glorious shape in both places at once; it follows that he is in his natural
shape in heaven, and sacramentally with us here upon earth. And whereas he saw
our nature abhors to eat and drink raw flesh and blood, he found it necessary,
to attemperate and accommodate his body and blood, (which he instituted for our
spiritual food) to our nature; and therefore exhibiteth himself unto us in the
likeness or shape of bread and wine, which be our natural and ordinary food.
But to do this, he saw it was necessary, the substances of bread and wine should
vanish, and that the substance of his body should come in and supply their
place; he saw also 'twas necessary that the accidents should remain
undestroyed, to be symbols or signs of our spiritual nourishment. And because
Christ's body is not in the Sacrament impanated, that is in bread, as Luther
falsely asserts: (for Christ said not, This bread is my body; or This is my
body and bread, or, This is my body in bread*) it was necessary the Accidents
of bread and wine should be in the Sacrament without their connatural subjects;
therefore by virtue of his omnipotent word, he gives the Sacramental species a
substance-like existence, in, and by themselves, without any subject, and he
props them miraculously with his own infinite power; though still with this
difference, that the sacramental species retain their aptitudinal inherence,
which substances do not: Moreover, it was necessary, seeing he is in his humane
shape in heaven, that he should be sacramentally on earth; for to verify his
above mentioned saying, viz. that he would be with us unto the consummation of
the world; he then being sacramentally with us, it follows, that he may be in
an equivocal place, and consequently in a point, as the soul is in the body.
And whereas this Sacrament was instituted to be our spiritual food, and we are
commanded to eat it we being in a thousand million of places together, it was
necessary that the Sacrament may be in so many places together also for us to
be fed therewith. It is also necessary it should be obvious to the good and
wicked; for to make the good better, and to make the wicked people good and
devout; the which if it does not always, it is no fault of Christ or of the
Sacrament, but our own fault. As no more is an Apothecarys shop the worse for
having all sorts of excellent medicines and druggs in it, although some of them
may chance to kill here and there some people that take them undis^reetly. In
like manner although some Iudas-like people receive the B. Sacrament
unworthily, and to their own spiritual ruin and damnation; yet it is
necessary, that it should be ministered to all sort of people, to the wicked as
well as to the faithful, being it was instituted for us all; as also because
the Priest (who is the right minister of this Sacrament) cannot discern the
worthy from the unworthy; for if Christ himself who knew Judas his heart, gave
him his body to eat, though he was sure he would receive it unworthily, why may
not Christ's minister, not knowing the unworthi* ness of the receiver, give it
him in hopes it would make him better? Christ gave his own body to Judas though
he knew it would work his damnation; because though he knew Judas to be wicked
and unworthy, yet his sins were not public and known to the world, but only
secret sins, viz. of avarice, or theft; even so does our holy Mother the
Church, to whom the administration of this Sacrament is left; she bars no body,
for his private sins, from receiving it; knowing that as Christ was tender of
Judas, his fame and reputation, though he was a vile sinner concealedly: and
therefore denied not him his body because he was to communicate publicly with
the rest of the Apostles; so she ought also to deal in this matter with her
children. But unto public sinners, or Excommunicated persons, she flatly, and
openly denies this Sacrament, before they become wholly reconciled and
penitent, (at lest exteriorly) to the sight of the world. And although it be
not necessary that a devil incarnate; or a beast should eat it; or that it
should be stolen, burnt, or taken away by the devil; yet because it is very
necessary in it self, for our spiritual nourishment, and because we are not
Gods, (but only his unworthy ministers) to discern a devil incarnate from a
mere man: also because we know not what future accidents may chance by reason
of fire, water, thieves or bruit beasts; and especially because we believe and
are sure no annoyance or harm can come to a glorified body from any of all
those forementioned things; we hold it necessary, and not at all inconvenient,
to keep the B. Sacrament in decent Tabernacles deputed and consecrated merely
for that use, and nothing else; for to have it always ready at hand, in time of
need, for the spiritual refreshment and nourishment of the faithful,
especially of those who are very sick, and like to take their leave of this
world. And as our Tabernacles are only for this purpose, so are our Churches
for no other use but prayer, and offering this Sacrifice; whatever use the
Mounsieur and this confederate reformers, put their Churches to, as also those
of ours, which they wrongfully wrested out of our hands, notwithstanding our
quiet and peaceable enjoyment of them for many hundred years successively, even
since their erection by our Ancestors who built them, and planted Christian
Religion here in England. Nay all this the very Protestant chroniclers
themselves assert, and cannot deny. That the devil ever ventured immediately
upon the Sacrament, either to touch it, or take it away; I never read nor heard
as yet, and therefore believe not Mr. de Rodon as to that point; But that Jews,
witches, thieves, or such like rabble, may have carried it away, and abused it;
and also of stupendous Miracles, and exemplary punishments that often happned
unto the malefactors, in sundry ages, and countries, I have read in several
grave and credible Authors.

Therefore all the forementioned necessities being well considered, it may be
very well said with Bellarmine and Peron, that the host being eaten, serves as
an incorruptible seed for a glorious resurrection: and though we grant, that
the faithful of the old Testament, and the little children of the believers
under the new, which were Baptized will rise again in glory, having never
received it; because it was not (...) in the time of the old law for the
faithful of that time; and the little ones of the New, departed this life
before they were capable of di^eerning what it was, and consequently un^t to
receive it: yet we believe that as the Sacraments of the old Law were but types
and figures of the Sacraments of the New; so they caused Grace, and gave
spiritual nourishment only in reference to our Sacraments; The old Sacraments
(as all divines do hold) were but vasa vacua, emply vessels, and produced
grace, only, ex opere operantis, by virtue of those that received them; But
Christ's Sacraments of the new Law, are vasa plena vessels full and replenisht
with graces, and do produce grace (when they have no obstacle) ex opere
operato, by their own operation: for if Christ's Sacraments were of no more
efficacy then those of the old law were; for example, if circumcision were of
as great virtue as Baptism is, and the Paschal lamb as good as the Eucharist,
what needed he institute his Sacraments and make new laws, whereas the old ones
were quite as good as his are? Therefore to save Christ's credit from making
superfluous Sacraments and laws, we must of necessity maintain and say, that
his Sacraments are far more excellent and efficacious, then the Sacraments of
the old Law were; and consequently, we must grant, that the old Sacraments had
alwais a relation or reference to those of the new: and in real truth it is so;
because all the Sacraments of the new Testament derive their sorce immediately
from Christ's Passion, and as one may say, were dipped in his precious blood;
whereas those of the old Law, were but mere symbols or types of his Passion,
and looked remotely, and as it were afar off upon it, however because they had a
reference to Christ and to his Passion, they served as remedies to those of
their time, while they were in vigor; because those of the new Law were not as
yet instituted; But after the new ones were instituted and promulged; then the
old Sacraments were quite cashired; and the case is now quite altered with us,
for no body can now be saved without them, or at lest such of them as they are
capable of receiving: from whence follows, that because the Sacrament of the
Eucharist was not instituted in the time of the faithful of the old Testament,
those of them that died in the state of Grace, will rise again in glory,
without having ever participated actually of our Eucharist, by virtue of the
Paschal lamb which they eat in reference to our Sacrament; and the little
children of the believers of the Law of grace, if they be Baptized (because
they are capable of Baptism) will rise so also; though they never received
actually the B. Sacrament, because they were never capable of receiving it. But
as for all the rest of our believers that are come to the use of understanding;
they shall never rise again in glory, unless they receive the Eucharist
actually, or at least in desire, if they cannot have it otherwise; for our
Savior himself says, that unless we eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink
his blood, we shall not have life in us.

Finally, as to S. Paul's words alleged against us by Mr. de Rodan; Romans 8. I
deny that the Apostle says absolutely that Christ's flesh is not the seed of the
Resurrection of our bodies; for he only says thus: If the spirit of him that
raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he shall also quicken your mortal
bodies, by his spirit that dwells in you: Which words may be very well
expounded and understood thus: viz. that although it be the spirit of God that
shall principally and immediately quicken our mortal bodies, yet that Christ's
flesh may be the seed, which mediatly and remotely, brings or conveys his
spirit into us: and certainly we have more reason, and better grounds to
believe, that his sacred flesh, united to his soul, and divinity, can better
convey his spirit into us, then the bare entities of bread and wine can do, and
so is this miraculous arrow unluckily split.

His last arrow is drawn out of clear Scripture; but if rightly understood, it
is so far from hurting our Diana, that it makes more for, then against her,
here it is.

Rodon. Lastly, the holy scripture is clear in this matter; for Jesus Christ is
ascended into heaven. Acts. 1. and the heavens must contain him until the time
of the restitution of all things. Acts. 3. And he himself says: I leave the
world, and go to the father. S. John. 16. The poor ye have always with you,
but me you have not always. S. Math. 26. To which may be added, what Jesus
says, S. Math. 24. viz. in the last days, false Prophets will come that shall
say, Christ is here or there, and that he is in the secret chambers; (or
cabinets) which cannot be but by the doctrine of the Romish Church, which puts
Christ's body in diverse places, and shuts it up in several cabinets on their
Altars. And it is very remarkable, that in the Greek it is, in the cupbords,
tameion being properly a cupboard to keep meat in.

Answ. The Mounsieurs four first scripturistical arrows, I break in shivers
with one blow: for I say, that those four Passages must be understood, of his
going to heaven to remain there in his proper humane shape; which hinders not
his being with us upon earth in the sacramental species. And whereas the
Mounsieur alleges, that Christ himself said, I leave the world and go the
father. John 16. and the poor you have always with you, but me you have not
always S. Math. 26. So I allege also against the Mounsieur that Christ
himself said: This is my body; S. Math. 26. and S. Luke 22. and, bebold I am
with you even to the consumation of the world. S. Math. 28. Therefore to versie
all these passage^, which seem to contradict and oppose one another; to bring
them to a concordance and true sense, it is necessary, that Christ should be
really after one manner of way in heaven, and really after another manner of
way upon earth, until the consummation of the world; which is the same thing
our Romish Doctors do teach, viz. that he is in his humane shape in heaven; and
yet really with us in the Sacrament also; which Mounsieur de Rodon and his
party do flatly deny.

To our impeachment of being those false Prophets S. Matthew makes mention of
in his 24th Chapt. who in the last days will come and say, Christ is here or*
there, and that he is in the secret chambers; I answer that the Mounsieur and
his party ought to take good heed, they are not these Prophets themselves; for
it is most certain and evident that these words cannot concern us, because
popery has its being from the very beginning of the Evangelical Law, as all
Ecclesiastical histories can testify: Therefore if popery and the Mass be
convertible terms (as our adversaries say they are) the Mass must be as ancient
as popery is; for all convertible terms according to dialecticks, are
simultanean or together. But certain it is, that the Evangelist meant by the
last days, the last days of the Evangelical Law, and not of any other Law;
therefore sin^e it is well known to all the Christian world, that Popery and
consequently the Mass, for they are convertible terms) began not in the last
days of the Evangelical law; but had been standing ever since the beginning of
the primative Church; it follows (I say) evidently, that these words of the
Evangelist concern not at all, either Popery or the Mass. Moreover, although we
hold, that some eminent great saints of the Popish Religion, had the gift of
Prophecy bestowed on them, yet all Priests and Papists profess not themselves
Prophets, neither do they hold their Religion upon any other prophecies, but
such as are authentical by the old and new Testaments; we ground our Religion
(next under the holy writ,) upon the antiquity of our Church, because Christ
himself said, that the gates of hell should never prevail against his Church:
and we endeavor to maintain and prove out of Church-Annals, and by the
Testimonies of holy fathers, that ours is the only Church, or congregation of
Christian believers, that were seen and known through all ages, since Christ
spoke these words. We ground our Religion also upon the u^iversality of our
Church; that is, that amongst all congregations of people who own Christ to be
the son of God, there is not one congregation so numerous and ample, that has
so spread and enlarged it self and Christ's Gospel through all Nations and
Countries, from all ages, as ours has; from whence follows, that ours is the
Catholic Church; for Catholic and (...) are synonims, or the same thin^: wh^e
note that S. Athanasius Creed (which Protestants also hold) warns us, that
above all things it is necessary we hold the Catholic or universal faith; the
which faith (the sa^e saint says in the last sentence of the said Creed) unless
every one does faithfully and firmly believe, questionless he must
everlastingly perish. But it is impossible there should be two universal or
Catholic Churches at once; for there is but one faith, as the Apostle tells
us; and when we ^ay our creed, we say not I believe in the Catholic Churches,
but in the Catholic Church; Therefore Mr. de Rodon and his party must either
snew that their Congregation is, and has been more numerous and universal then
ours is; (which I am sure they will never be able to perform) or else they will
be forced to lay down the ^udgells, and flatly deny S. Athanasius his creed;
which to the world they nevertheless seem to profess. Thirdly, we ground our
Religion upon unity, or consent; for knowing that there is bu^ one faith, and
that without that one faith, it is impossible to please God, as the Apostle
says, Therefore concerning all points of faith, viz. concerning
Transubstantiation, praying to saints, praying for the dead, relative
worshipping of Images, Purgatory, Indulgences, Justification, etc. we all from
the highest to the lowest, from the doctor to the peasant agree as to the main
point and object of our belief, submitting our selves wholly to the definitions
of our Church; because Christ said, that those that hear not the Church, ought
to be esteemed as heathens and Publicans. Lastly, we ground our Religion upon
the sainctity of our Church; which we believe is not only holy by reason of her
doctrine, laws, and pious exercises; but also for the seven sources of grace,
I mean, the seven Sacraments dipped in our Saviors blood, which continually run
in her, and refreshes spiritually all her children, of what age or condition
soever: for by these Sacraments, Christ left to his spouse the Church militant,
a medium or mean to provide for us all. By Baptism, both great and little, are
regenerated, and from being conceived and born in sin, made members of Christ:
By confirmation, we are strengthened and confirmed in the ^aith we professed in
our Baptism, when we are come to the use of understanding, and by virtue of
that holy unction; we are made champions to fight Gods battle against our
common enemies, the devil, the world and our own flesh and blood, as also to
endure persecutions, and bear crosses courageously for the love of Christ. By
the Sacrament of Pennanc^, we are cured and absolved from our spiritual wounds;
Christ promising unto us, that he would ratify in heaven, what his ministers do
upon earth, if the penitent puts no obstacle to the ministers sentence. By the
Eucharist our souls are spiritually fed and nourished. By holy orders, some of
us are empowred and sanctified to administer Sacraments to themselves, and to
the rest of the faithful. By Matrimony, a provision is left in the Church, for
the lawful propagation of mankind; that one woman having but one man, at the
same time, care should be the better taken for the education of the issue that
comes from them, to have it brought up in the love and fear of God. Lastly, by
extreme unction, new vigor and grace is given to the faithful combatant while
his body is weak and feeble, and his soul ful^ of an^ and care, to fight
courageously against his enemies, the devils, who then sets upon him more
eagerly then ever, in hopes to bring him to despair; for now (the devil thinks)
or never is the time to conquer this soul; and therefore sets upon her with all
power and fury imaginable; and to resist this fierce shock or brunt, Christ
left unto his Church this soveraign^ ^emedy: for these reasons, and chiefly for
her Sacraments, we believe our Church o^ congregation of faithful to be more
holy then Mr. de Rodons or any other Church and congregation whatsoever, that
pretends to believe in Christ, is.

Therefore the Mounsieur fasly belyes us, and himself also, by impeaching us to
be those false prophe^s the Evangelist mentioned in his 24. c^ap. for we never
did, or do pretend to be Prophets, although some great saints of our Church had
the gift of Prophecy also given them; which is more then ever we or they
themselves, read or heard that any of their Church had yet; unless they count
James Nailor, or some such like mad braind fellow who sprouted out of their
Church, to be one.

Why we keep the Eucharist in our pixes and decent Church-Tabernacles I gave
reason before. But why Mr. Rodon and his party keeps the leavings of their
Communion bread and wine, in cupboards, baskets, ^laggons botles or cellars,
and eat and drink of it until (as I was told) they are fudled, I know no reason
for it, nor no more do I think the Mounsieur does himself; unless it be because
they believe there is nothing of sanctity in it, more then in other ordinary
bread and wine, for otherwise, I know not how they can excuse themselves from
committing open sacrilege, for profaning their consecrated hosts.

But I pray good Mounsieur, i^ a man may be so bold as to ask you a question,
tell us, why may not you and your party be suspected to be those false Prophets
the Evangelist spoke of more then we? for you and your doctrine are much later
then ours; you are divided into many sects and opinions amongst your selves,
and every sect of you hates and condemns the other, and thinks that he alone
found out Christ; none of you all can show such marks ^or your Churches, as
those I showed for ours; or if you can, I pray let us see them, and we will
willingly shake hands with you, to rid ourselves from persecution and troubles.
But if you cannot, wheresore without convincing us by reason, do you force us
with vour penalties and heavy laws to abj^e our faith against our consciences,
and the light we find within us? or do you think by for^ing us thus (if we
should yield to your terrors and tortures) we could be saved, while we go
against our consciences (which we cannot help) to please you, and save our
lives and estates? verily this is a strange and extraordinary way, to make
orthodox Christians, a way to prefer this life before the next, and this world
before God and his heavenly kingdom and riches; a way I say, quite contrary to
that Christ taught us, while he conversed upon earth: as S. Luke tells us in
his 14. chap. If any man come to me, and hates not his father and mother, and
wife and children, and brethren and sisters, yea and his own life besides, he
cannot be my disciple.

Now Mr. de Rodon, I having fully answered all your arguments, and your Quiver
being wholly exhausted in vain against our Diana, to conclude this chapter, I
think we may well answer you, as Diogenes (if I be not mistaken) or some other
of the ancient Philosophers answered a certain unskillful archer, who shooting
at a Butt, and the Philosopher seeing how far he used to shoot off the mark,
ran quickly to the mark, and stood before it, while this archer was aiming to
shoot at it with his bow; who spying the Philosopher in his light, called to
him, bid him be gone, and asked him if he was not mad for standing at the mark
while he was shooting? But the Philosopher bid him shoot on freely, and that he
stood there for his more security of being hit by his arrow. Even so is the
case betwixt us, our Diana, and Mr. de Rodon, for we can be never securer from
his arrows, then while we stand before our Diana, while he aym^ at her, and so
ends this Chapter.

CHAP. V. Against the adoration or worshipping of the host.
MR. de Rodon not being able to keep Christ's body out of the Sacrament, yet he
will not have it adored there, for these three reasons: the first is this.

Rodon. 1. We are not obliged to adore or worship God every where, or in all
places, where he is, at least, not with external adoration; but we are only
obliged to worship him in all plac^s where he appears in his glorious Majesty:
The first part of this Proposition, viz. that we are not obliged to worship God
in all places where he is, appears by the practice of all Christians; for God
being every where, and consequently in stones, trees, beasts, devils, and all
other creatures, there is no man so extravagant as to fall on his knees before
a tree, an Ass, or a devil, that he may worship God in them, who is really
present in them, as he is in heaven.

The second part of this proposition, viz. that we are only obliged to worship
God both with internal and external adoration in all places where he appears in
his glorious Majesty, is proved, first by the commands which Jesus Christ gave
his Apostles when they asked him how they should pray, for he answers them
thus: when ye pray, say, Our father which art in heaven. S. Luke 11. why does
he say, which art in heaven, and not which art on Earth, or in the Sea, or in
the Air, seeing God is equally in all places? but only because God appears in
heaven in his glorious Majesty, and there crowns all the blessed spirits with
his glory. Secondly, when God appeared to Moses in the burning bush, which was
not consumed, he said to him, Take thy shoos from off thy feet, for the place
wherein thou stand is holy ground: Exodus 3. why is this ground called holy,
and Moses commanded to approach it with reverence, submission, and adoration,
seeing any other ground is equally Gods creatures, and that he is equally
present every where? but only because God did manifest somewhat of his power
and glory in that place, by causing the bush to burn without being consumed.
Thirdly, Josua and the Isralites did prostrate themselves before the Ark of the
Covenant, Josua. 7. 6. because God appeared there in a peculiar and glorious
manner, for, from the Mercyseat which covered it, he gave his oracles, and made
known his will, Exodus 25. 22. Numb. 7. fourthly, when the Priest celebrates
Mass, a little before consecration, he recommends the sursum Corda, that is,
the lifting up of their hearts; why the lifting them up, seeing God is equally
above and below? but only because God appears above in heaven in his glorious
Majesty; and consequently it is thither that we must direct our vows, our
Prayers, and our worship.

Answ. These passages I confess do prov^ that God ought to be adored and
worshipped with internal and external adoration when he appears in his glorious
Majesty; But they prove not at all, that he is not to be worshipped in the host
also, or that he ought not to be adored but when, or while he appears in glory;
which notwithstanding is the conclusion our Mounsieur undertakes to prove.

However, the better to satisfy the Reader; we acknowledge that God is present
in all his creatures, though not in every of them after the self same manner;
for otherwise, he should be with the devils in hell, manifesting his glory
there unto them, as he does to his Angels and saints in heaven, and
consequently the devils should be as happy as the Angels and saints are: we
also acknowledge that wheresoever God is, his glory is always with him, though
not always manifested to his creatures; and therefore we say God is in all
places, but differently; he is in the whole universe with a general kind of
presence and power, conserving it in its being; he is in hell, showing those
that are there the Attribute of his Justice only; he is with the just upon
earth, more peculiarly showing them his favors and graces, then he is with the
wicked; he is in the sacramental species more peculiarly yet, for he is in them
personally present, though abscondidly from our corporal eyes; and finally he
is in the Blessed Trinity, manifestly to be seen in heaven, in his Essence,
Persons, and Glory. Of all these manner of ways that God is in his creatures,
and can manifest himself unto them, Mr. de Rodon holds, that external adoration
is never due to him, but where, and when he manifests his glory. But we say,
that external adoration is also due to him, where we know and believe him to be
personally present. Now I ask Mr. de Rodon, whether the three holy kings that
came with presents from the East, to visit Christ, did extravagantly, when
falling down at his feet (as the text says) they adored him? for in the place
where they found him, they saw not his glory, neither did he manifest it unto
them there. But perhaps the Mounsieur may say, that they saw the miraculous
star that stood over him, which star showed his glory, and therefore they
adored him. But then I ask the Mounsieur again wherefore did not they rather
fall down and adore the star, wherein was the godhead also, and showing it self
in glory? Therefore it evidently follows, that the chief thing adored by the
three holy kings, was Christ's person, which they found in a poor stable or
manger, without showing any signs or tokens of his glory, which he purposely
absconded from them; and yet their adoration was not extravagant, but very
pious, and praise worthy. I believe if the Mounsieur had been in their company,
he would have checked and reprehended them, and called them extravagant fellows
for doing what they did; so far would he have been from adoring Christ in such
a mean place, although he had known he was there in person, because he would
not vouchsafe to show himself to him in this glory: from this also follows,
that external adoration is due to Christ's person, wherever he is known, or
believed to be present, whether he manifest himself in glory there or no: for
sure external adoration is as much due to Christ's person wherever he is known
to be, as external honor is due to the person of any earthly Prince or
Monarch; and yet if a man should chance to be so ill bred as not to put off his
hat in the presence of an earthly king; ^y in his Presence Chamber, whether the
king were in it or no, whether he were in his Regal robes of Majesty or no;
doubtless the kings servants would shrewdly assront, and soundly rebuke and
beat that malapert ill bred fellow, for so slighting their king and dread
sovereign; and no body would pity him, or take his part, but they would
rather say, he deserved it very well, and more too for his malepartness in such
a place. And why (forsooth) should it not be the same with us, knowing Christ
to be really and personally present in the Sacrament, if we should refuse to
give him his due adoration there, unless Mr. de Rodon thinks, that more honor
ought to be done to an earthly King, then unto Christ?

The L^per adored him, saying, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean, S.
Matthew. 8. and yet he saw not his glory. And Matthew. 9. did not a certain
Governor approaching to him, and adoring him, say* Lord, my daughter is even
now dead, but come lay thy hands upon her, and she shall live. The like
recounteth the same Evangelist in his 14th chap. 20th. and 28th. and S. Mark in
his 5th. all which adorations were done to Christ, by diverse, while he was in
his patible state, without she wing them any glimpse of his glory. But
according to the Mounsieurs Principles, all these adorers, ought to be counted
but for extravagant fellows, because they adored him, without showing them his
glory. But to speak the plain truth, the proper effects of heresy and heretics
are to be undutiful and uncivil both to God and king; which makes me the less
wonder at Mr. de Rodons first Proposition. The second part whereof, because it
makes nothing against us, I pass by.

Therefore our Catholic tenet against Mr. de Rodon is, that although external
adoration toward God, be not obligatory by reason of his ordinary presence;
neither for his extraordinary remote (as he is in the Just) presence also; yet
where we believe and know him to be particularly and personally present (as we
believe he is in the Sacrament) there we say we are obliged to adore and
worship him with external adoration; though he shows us none of his glory in
it; which tenent I think is sufficiently proved and demonstrated out of the
precedent plain passages of Scripture even now alleged by me; where these
several Adorers, (as may be manifestly seen) adored him not precisely for any
ray of glory they saw shine in his face, or about him, for he absconded that
from them, but they adored merely for his personal Presence, which personal
presence we believe he has also in the blessed Sacrament; and because we are
sure the adorations of those holy men the Evangelists makes mention of, were
not at all extravagant, but very meritorious and pleasing to God; therefore we
doubt not but our adoring him in the Sacrament (being both our adorations are
alike and of the same kind) are so also. Let Mr. de Rodon and his party think
or say of it what they list. His second reason, or Proposition is this.

Rodon. 2. We are not obliged to adore Jesus Christ in the water of Baptism,
though he be really there, in regard of all that is adorable in him. The first
part of this Proposition, viz. that we are not obliged to worship Jesus Christ
in the water of Baptism, is chiefly proved by the practice of all Christians;
for no man ever fell on his knees before the water of Baptism, and adored Jesus
Christ in it, at least not with external worship, which is only here intended;
and doubtless the reason is, because Jesus Christ discovers no beam of his
glory there, nor does he appear in the water of Baptism any more then in other
waters; so that as we are not obliged to worship God, save only where he
appears in his glorious Majesty, as has been proved; so neither are we obliged
to worship Jesus Christ, but only where he discovers some beam of his glory,
which he does not in the water of Baptism.

The second part of this Proposition, viz. that Jesus Christ is really present
in the water of Baptism, in respect of all that is to be adored in him, is
proved thus: All that is of it self adorable in Jesus Christ is either his
Godhead, or his divine person, or his divine Attributes. As for his Godhead,
seeing it is really every where, it cannot be denied, but that it is also in
the water of Baptism. As for his Person, seeing it is divine, and eternal, and
infinite, it is really every where, and consequently in the water of Baptism.
And as for his divine Attributes, seeing they are not really different from the
Godhead, or the Person of Jesus Christ, it necessary follows, that seeing the
Godhead and person of Jesus Christ are really in the water of Baptism, his
divine Attributes must really be there likewise.

Answ. The Mounsieur, you see, stands stiffly upon his punctillios of honor
with Jesus Christ; he will not give him an inch of respect, not as much as one
congey, bare head, or bow, unless he shows him first his Patent signed with a
ray of glory for it. Frenchmen are generally counted to be very ceremonial and
civil and we use to send our children into France to learn breeding, and good
manners; But this French Mounsieurs principles of Religion forbid us to be
dutiful and civil even to God himself while he is personally present, although
we know he be so, unless he first does us the honor to show us some glorious
sight; for doubtless (he says) the only reason why we ought to adore Christ,
is, for showing us a beam of his glory: But this only reason which is doubtless
to the Mounsieur, is not doubtless to us; for our doubtless reason, why he
ought to be adored in the Sacrament, is, because of his personal presence in
it, as those holy men, whom the Evangelists mention, adored him, only for his
personal presence, without seeing any beam or ray of his glory. Nay the devil,
who (as holy writ says) can change or transfigure himself into an Angel of
brightness, may show himself unto us in a resplendant beam, and so if the only
reason why we ought to adore Christ were because of his beam or ray of glory;
the devil also appearing unto us in a bright ray; we may chance to adore the
devil instead of adoring Christ: from whence follows evidently that this
reason of the Mounsieur is very fickle and weak.

Therefore I answer his argument thus: by granting the Antecedent, viz. that we
are not obliged to adore Jesus Christ with external adoration in the water of
Baptism, though he be really there in regard of all that is adorable of him;
and yet we deny the sequel or consequent which the Mounsieur intends to draw
out of it; which is this; viz. that we are not obliged to adore Jesus Christ
with external adoration, in the Sacrament, though he be really there, in regard
of all that is adorable of him: our reason and disparity for it is this,
because Jesus Christ, though he be really in the water of Baptism (as he is in
all other creatures) in regard of all that is adorable of him, yet he is not in
it personally, though his person be also there, but he is in it only with a
general kind of presence, as he is in all other things, to keep them in their
being; for otherwise they would return to their former nothing. But he is in
the B. Sacrament, not only really in regard of all that is adorable of him; but
also Personally; that is to say, his divinity, Person, Attributes, and Manhood
are not only really there, but they are also peculiarly and demonstratively
there, with their particular presence; for Christ when he instituted this
Sacrament, said, This is my body, and the Pronoun demonstrative ( This)
denotates some particular thing; for example, when one says, thi^ man is my
father; this is my horse; But when he instituted the Sacrament of Baptism, or
any of his other Sacraments, he made no use of the Pronoun ( This) and
consequently his real being in them, or any other of his creatures; where there
is no mention made of the demonstrative ( This) although he be in them really,
in respect of all that is adorable of him; yet he is not in them personally
with a particular personal presence, as he is in the blessed Sacrament.

Moreover, if there were no distinction betwixt Christ's being really present in
his creatures, when he is in them withal that is adorable of him; it would
follow that he should be all alike in them all; and so, that he should be in
hell showing the Attribute of his mercy, as well as the Attribute of his
Justice, and in heaven, showing the Attribute of his Justice, as well as that
of his mercy; for he is in both withal that is adorable of him: and what else
would follow from this (good Mounsieur) but to confound heaven and hell
together; or to destroy both heaven and hell.

Therefore besides this real being of Christ in his creatures, with all that is
adorable of him, by reason of his general presence in them; he must also have a
particular presence in some creatures more then in others; that is, he must
show some of his Attributes to some, and hide them from others; or else
doubtless, all will be in a confusion; and consequently by reason of the
pronoun demonstrative ( This) Christ must be personally and peculiarly in the
B. Sacrament, and not in the water of Baptism, where no ( This) is mentioned;
although we grant he is really in it in regard of all that is adorable of him
with a common and universal ubication or presence: and so the Mounsieurs second
Proposition, is fully answered, as to both its parts: his third Proposition is
this.

Rodon. 3. We are not obliged to adore Jesus Christ in the host though he be
really there, in respect of all that is to be adored in him, viz. in respect of
his Godhead, his divine person, and his divine Attributes; yea though he were
there invisible in respect of his Manhood too. The principal reason of this
has been touched upon already, viz. that we are not obliged to worship God in
all places where he is (at least not with external worship) but there only
where he appears in his glorious Majesty, viz. ordinarily in heaven, and
extraordinarily elsewhere, as has been proved in the first Proposition. And as
we are not obliged to worship Jesus Christ in the water of Baptism with
external adoration, though he be really there in respect of all that is
adorable in him, because he does not discover the least beam of his glory
there, nor appears in the water of Baptism, more then in other waters, as has
been proved in the second Proposition; Even so, we are not obliged to worship
Jesus Christ in the host with external adoration, although he be there in
respect of all that is to be adored in him; yea though he were there in respect
of his Manhood too; because Jesus Christ does not discover any beam of his
glory there, nor does he appear in the consecrated hosts any more, then in
those that are not consecrated, for no man can distinguish the one from the
other: And for his Manhood which is pretended to be there invisibly, I say that
that there is no sensible mark of its presence, and consequently nothing which
obliges us to external worship, for the same reason as is already alleged:
for if the invisible presence of the Godhead, divine Persons, and divine
Attributes of Jesus Christ, which are of themselves adorable, do not oblige us
to exterior worship in the water of Baptism; why should the Manhood of Jesus
Christ, which is not of it self adorable, oblige us to external adoration,
though it were in the host, it being there only as they say, invisibly? In a
word, they must show the disparitie, and tell us the reason why we are not
obliged to adore Jesus Christ with external worship in the water of Baptism
though he be really there present in respect of all that which is adorable in
him, viz. in respect of his Godhead, his divine Person, and his divine
Attributes, and yet we are obliged to worship Jesus Christ in the host with an
external worship, though nothing renders him more adorable there, then in the
water of Baptism.

Answ. Mr. de Rodon, you are so far from having proved what you said in your
first Proposition, that I have produced in answer to your weak proofs there,
not only solid reasons, but also many evident texts of scripture to the
contrary, which undermines the whole structure or foundation you build upon.
And in my answer to your second Proposition, I likewise by showing the
disparity of Christ's being in the Sacrament, and in the water of Baptism; viz.
that he is in the water of Baptism only with a common general presence, as he
is in all creatures; but he is in the Sacrament with a particular and proper
personal presence; I have, I say, broken your second ground; so that this third
argument or Proposition of yours is built only upon Quicksands; therefore I le^
any rational man judge how firmly it can stand. But you say that his Manhood
which is pretended to be there invisibly, is not there sensibly present. What
then? does your consequence therefore follow? I deny that; for it is sufficient
we believe it is there; the eye of our understanding supported by divine says,
being a surer ground and foundation to rely on, then the fickle and weak
testimony of our carnal eye though helped also by one of Mr. de Rodons rays or
beams, which may prove diabolical Illusions, especially concerning an object of
so high a nature as this is of.

Therefore though the learned Jesuit S. Rigants answers to your arguments and
replies be in themselves, true, sound, and orthodox, yet we want them not here;
for you lost your self quite in choosing your ground, which is no better (as I
told you) then quicksand, as any body of understanding may easily see, and for
that cause, leaving your frivolous and impertinent replies against the Jesuits
answers, I come to your additionate Proposition, which in your own opinion is
very considerable, but in mine not worth a rush; as I hope here to demonstrate.
But first we must hear it out.

Rodon. 4. To the three foregoing Propositions, I add this Argument, which is
very considerable. In lawful adoration it is requisite that ^e that adores, be
well assured that what he adores is the true God, else he may be justly
reproched, as Jesus Christ reproched the woman of Samaria. Ye worship, ye know
not what. But the Romanists can never be assured (according to their own
maxims) that the host which they worship is the true God, and they have
always cause to suspect, that they worship a morsel of bread instead of the
Redeemer of the world; because according to their own doctrine, the real
presence of Christ's body in the host, depends on lawful consecration, and
lawful consecration depends on the quality of the Priest, and on the
pronouncing of the words of consecration, and on his intention in pronouncing
them, for there is no consecration (they say) when either he that celebrates
Mass is no Priest, or does not pronounce the words that are essentially
requisite to consecration, viz. this is my body; or does not pronounce them
with intention to conscerate. And consequently in these cases the host remains
mere bread. But it is impossible certainly to know these three things; for as
for the quality of the Priest, he must have been Baptized, and he that baptized
him, must have observed the essential form of Baptism, and have had intention
to baptize him. Again, he must have received ordination from a true Bishop, and
the Bishop must have observed the true form of Ordination and have had
intention to make him a Priest; and to make this Bishop a true Bishop, he must
have been baptized in due form, and with the requisite intention, and must have
received Ordination in due form, and with the requisite intention from other
Bishops; and they again, for the making them true Bishops, must have received
also Baptism and ordination in due form, and with the requisite intention, from
other true Bishops, and these from others; and so back to the Apostles. But who
can be assured that from the Apostles to a Bishop or Priest now adays, there
has been no failing, either in the essential form of Baptism or Ordination, or
in the requisite intention? As for the pronouncing the words requisite to
consecration, none but the Priest can know whether he pronounces them or not,
because in the celebration of the Mass, those words are pronounced so softly,
that no person present can hear them. And as for the intention, it is evident
that no man but himself can know it. Besides, it is known, that some Priests
are Magicians, as Lewis Gossredi, and some other wicked Priests who do neither
consecrate in due form, nor with the requisite intention; especially such as
believe nothing of what they profess, yea diverse Monks and Priests that have
been converted to our Religion, have assured us that for a long time before
their conversion, they did abhor the Idolatry that was practiced in the
adoration of the host; Judge then if such persons as those had any intention to
consecrate, in the celebration of the Mass.

Answ. In Mr. de Rodons opinion, and I believe in his translators too, this is
a very considerable argument; But in my opinion, and I think, in the opinion of
any learned or understanding Christian Reader, it will prove to be not only
inconsiderable and of no value, but also pernicious to all mankind, for it
everts all laws, both divine and humane, and destroys Christian society, which
I prove thus. If this argument were of any force or worth, no Christian could
know himself to be a Christian, no man could know any other man to be a man;
the father should not know his son; nor the mother her child, and we should be
in as bad a condition after the Evangelical law, as the heathens, Turks, and
Jews are. But all this is absurd, and destructive not only to Christian
society, but also to human kind, and to the divine law. The major as to its
first part viz. that no body could know himself or any body else to be a
Christian, is evident and clear; for no body according to the Mounsieurs
assertion, can tell whether he be Baptized or no, and Baptism is the only thing
that makes a man a Christian, or else what is it good for? and all Christians
(I know not what Mr. de Rodon believes) holds it to be the Sacrament of
regeneration; that is, the Sacrament that makes us from being conceived, and
born out of our mothers wombs in sin, (as the Royal psalmist tells us in his
50th. psalm) to become members of Christ, and regenerated or born again to him,
as our Savior himself told Nicodemus, Amen I say to thee, unless a man be born
again of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. John.
3. That no body can tell whether himself or another is baptized, with a
phisical, Metaphisical, or Logical certainty (which be the certainties the
Mounsieur aims at here, for of a moral certainty I shall speak hereafter) is
most certain, for who knows, (unless God reveals it unto him) whether he that
offered to baptize him, had any belief, or intention to baptize? moreover, who
knows but that he that offered to Baptize him (which is the second part of the
major) was a devil incarnate, and no man? for the devil can naturally assume
the shape of any humane body, and delude our five senses, with his prestigious
black art, if God permits it him; who (I ask the Mounsieur in such a case)
knows his child, or any man else from a devil incarnate appearing to him in the
perfect stature and shape of his child or of such a man? when our Savior cured
the young man, (mentioned in the Gospel) that was blind from his nativity;
although the scribs and Pharisees saw, and knew him every day before while he
was blind, yet when they saw him have his perfect sight, they doubted whether
he was the same man or no; and thereupon sent for his father and mother to be
informed by them of the truth; As to the third part of the major I ask Mr. de
Rodon, how divine or humane Laws can be observed amongst us, unless we
certainly know we converse with men? and yet according to his argument, we can
have no phisical certainty (which is the certainty he requires for Baptism and
ordination) that our conversation is not with devils incarnate instead of men;
and much less have we certainty that we converse with Christians, for we know
not whether those we converse with were ever Baptized or no. But how, not only
inconsiderable and rediculous, but also impious, abominable and pernicious,
these sequels are, (which flow from the Mounsieurs very considerable argument)
in the cars of all good Christians; I let the prudent Reader judge. And before
I answer his argument in form; I will lay down this Christian platform of
doctrine received by all, to bear my answer up.

Therefore I presuppose with all other Christians, that Jesus Christ who is
true God and true man, and the wisdom of his heavenly father, being he was
graciously pleased to descend from his heavenly Palace, and converse with men
for the space of about three and thirty years concerning the salvation of their
souls; and to that intent, left them his life as a pattern to imitate, for he
is the way, the verity, and the life) and his Sacraments for their spiritual
comfort, I suppose I say, that during all that time, he planted his Church
Militant here upon Earth, and that he planted her so firmly too, that he lest
those of her Congregation a certain and sure method how to serve him in her;
else, where was his infinite wisdom? I suppose also with all Christians, that
Baptism is the gate and entrance to Christianity, for all men, and the
Sacrament of Regeneration; for by it only we are enrolled in Christ's book, and
called Christians, or made mistical members of Christ. And whereas it is a
Sacrameat of so great necessity, that without it no body is a Christian;
doubtless Christ who in all other things concerning our corporal necessities,
is so careful provident, and wise, was not ^ailing concerning the grand and
chief thing of all which is our souls safety; but lest means sure and safe in
his Church, in order to the aid and relief of man's soul to bring her safely to
the happy port of eternal felicity; which was the end wherefore she was
created. These means or mediums, were chiefly his Sacraments, which derive
their virtue from his Passion, and are (as one may say) dipped in his precious
blood; But especially the Sacrament of Baptism, which is of greatest necessity,
being no body without it can have as much as the name of a Christian; and
consequently it is most certain that Christ has a particular care and
Providence concerning Baptism, that it should be certainly administered unto the
faithful. But wherein* that certainty consists, whether it be a Phisical or
moral one is the question: a Phisical certitude (as Philosopers say) is when a
man has a palpable and evident knowledge either by his reason or senses, of
the thing he knows: a Moral certitude (they say) is, when one is sure of a
thing, not because he saw it with his eyes, or touched, heard, or tasted it: but
because all men say it is so: for example, when all the world says there is a
famous City in England, called London* those, that were at London and saw it,
have a phisical certitude thereof; but those that never were in it, nor saw it,
have but a moral certitude of it, viz. by the relation of all people: where
note, that a moral certainty may sometimes have as a much or more firmity in it
then a Phisical one has; especially when it is grounded upon Gods providence
and word.

This true doctrine presupposed, I answer Mr. de Rodons argument thus: granting
his Major, viz. that in lawful adoration, it is requisite that he that adores
be well assured that what he adores is the true God: And denying his minor,
viz. that the Romanists according to their own Principles can never be assured
that the host which they worship is the true God; and to his second minor, viz.
But who can be assured, that from the Apostles, to a Bishop or Priest now a
days, there has been no failing, either in the essential form of Baptism, or
ordination, or in the requisite intention? I answer, that all Christians may be
assured thereof with a moral certitude, (because of Christ's care and providence
for his Church) that for the generality of all Christians, and especially of
those whom he picked out of the rest to make them ministers of his Sacraments,
there is no such faylings as Mr. de Rodon mentions, destructive to the
Sacraments, from the Apostles time until the Bishops and Priests of our days;
for otherwise, Christ's care and providence for his Church Militant, would not
be sufficient, which is impious and blasphemous even to think of. And this
moral certainty, (especially as it relyes upon Christ care and Providence for
his Church, is far firmer and better, then any of our Phisical natural
certitudes are. And consequently Mr. de Rodon's very considerable additionate
Proposition is not worth a rush.

Rodon. 5. The Romish doctors have sought all the remedies imaginable to
prevent this danger. Pope Adrian Quest. 3. speaks thus: In the adoration of the
Eucharist, there is always a tacit condition, viz. if the consecration be duly
made (as has been decided at the Council of Constance) otherwise they could
not be excused from Idolatry, that worship the host when the Priest pretends to
celebrate, and is no Priest, as it many times happens: observe these words, it
many times happens; for they show that there is great cause of doubting, and
that much caution must be used: for as if a woman, in her husbands absence,
should say to a man that comes to her, and tells her he is her husband, (and
she has probable grounds to suspect him;) If thou art my husband I will
receive thee, and thereupon endeavors to clear it before she admits him to
privacy; this condition frees her promise from blame; but if she gives her self
up to him, before she clears this doubt, saying I will receive thee, if thou
art my husband; this condition does not free her action from blame, but she
will be reputed an adulteress: Even so, if a man to whom an host is proposed to
be adored, and he has reason to doubt whether it ought to be adored, should
only say: If thou art Christ, I will adore thee, and should not adore it before
he be well assured of it; this condition would render him blameless; But if
notwithstanding his doubt, he adores it, this condition, If thou art Christ, I
adore thee, does not exempt him from the crime of Idolatry; for to what purpose
is the condition, whether it be tacit or expressed: I adore thee, if thou art
Christ, because he actually adores it, without knowing whether it be so, or not.

Answ. Mr. de Rodon, whatever shifts and remedies the Romish Doctors sought out
to answer your unconsiderable pernicious and impious proposition, which I
manifestly proved not to be worth a rush; I am sure these last words of Pope
Adrian, viz. as it many times happens, of whom you desire a particular notice
should be taken, strengthens not your very considerable Proposition at all; for
they may be well applied to two, or three, or half a dozen desperate
miscreants, who in some ages might have oftentims committed such horrid
sacriledges; But not to the generality of all Christians, and Priests; for
otherwise Christ's providence for his Church would be insufficient; as has been
proved already. But I believe the Mounsieur had rather Christ should fail in
his providence, then be adored in the Sacrament.

The said Popes first words concerning a conditional adoration, do clear the
case and difference between a woman receiving another man for her pretended
husband, and the conditional adoration of the host; for the woman before she
receive such a man, may, and ought strictly to enquire, and be surely informed
that he is her husband indeed; which morally speaking, she may easily do, by
reason of some fore-passed circumstances of speech, place and time when they
were married; by his, or her own relations, or a hundred other ways. But no
such inquiry can be made of a Priest or of his intention of celebrating, the
only enquiry which can be made about his Priesthood, is, that he show his
sacerdotal Patents, or some authentical letters from his superiors for his
being a Priest, which if he has not to show, and is in a strange Country
where he is not known, the custom of our Church is, not to let him celebrate
at all; and this we hold to be sufficicient for a moral certitude of ones
Priesthood, and consequently of adoring the host by him consecrated; relying,
as to the rest, upon Christ's providence and care for his Church. Neither if we
should chance to adore an unconsecrated host for a consecrated one, (if we know
it not) is the Idolatry but material; just as the drunkenness, or fornication
of a pure naturalist or ninny, are but material, and not sinful at all,
according to the laws of God and man.

If some of our Monks or Priests that Apostatized from us, for the love of a
wench, or some such thing (which is commonly their cause) and you receive them
with open arms, and presently (to fasten them the more unto you) bestow
benefices upon them and make them Parsons or Pastors of your flocks; If (I
say,) such devout, honest, and exemplary persons, that so well kept their
solemn vows, made even to God himself; (to please, or rather to delude you the
more do tell you sacrilegious tales of themselves or scurrilous lies of us,
after they are converted by your money, or to speak more truly, perverted by
wenches; you have very great reason to believe them; but much more to trust
your souls to them and their doctrine: Make much of them, much good may they do
you; for I am sure that amongst us, they are esteemed the archest Rogues and
knaves in nature.

Rodon. 6. To what has been said, I add, that the Primitive Church never
adored the host, nor believed that the body and blood of Christ were really,
and invisibly in the Sacrament of the Eucharist; for if the Christians of the
Primitive Church had believed it, they had furnished the heathens with specious
pretenses, to excuse their Idolatry of their Image Worship, and to retort upon
the Christians, those very arguments, which they had made use of against them:
for,

First, the heathens did maintain that their Idols were composed of two things;
viz. of a visible Image, and an invisible Diety dwelling in it. They bring
their Gods ( says S. Chrysostom in Theodoret in Atress.) into their base
Images of wood and stone, and shut them up there as in a prison: your Gods (
says Arnobius, book 6.) dwell in plaster and baked earth; and that they may
make these materials more venerable, they suffer themselves to be shut up, and
to remain hid and detained in an obscure Prison. But might not the heathens
have justly replied ^o the ancient Christians, if they had believed what the
Romish doctors do now adays. And do you not believe the very same of your host,
that it is composed of two things, viz. of the visible species of bread, and
the invisible body of Christ which is hid under the species? does not your
Christ dwell in baked dough; and that he may make a piece of bread more
venerable, does he not suffer himself to be shut up, and does he not remain hid
as in a Prison?

Secondly, the heathens held, that consecration was the means whereby the
diety, which they adored, was made present in the Image: So Tertullian in his
Apolog. chap. 12. says, I find nothing to object against Images, but that the
matter of them is such as our frying-pans and Kittles are made of, which
changes its destiny by consecration. And Minutius Felix speaks thus of a Pagan
Image. Behold it is melted, forged, fashioned, and yet it is not God; behold it
is gilded, finished and created, and yet it is not God; behold it is adorned,
consecrated and worshipped, and then it is God. And Arnobius in Book. 6.
Dedication and consecration makes them dwell in Images, they refuse not to
dwell in habitations of earth, or rather being forced to go into them by the
right of Dedication, they are incorporated and joyued to the Images. But might
not all heathens have replied to the Christians thus; we find it just so in
your Eucharist, viz. that the signs are of the same matter with our common
bread and wine, but change their destiny by consecration; Behold it is kneaded
and molded, and yet it is not God. Behold, it is baked in the Oven; and yet it
is not God Behold it is consecrated and adored, and then it is God: for your
Christ does not refuse to enter into these earthy matters; or rather being
forced to go into them by the right of consecration, he is incorporated and
joined to the species of bread and wine.

Thirdly; the heathens had both great and little Images, and did believe that
the deity which they worshipped, was as well in the little, as in the great
ones. Arnobius in Book 6. jears them for this, saying: that if their Gods had
their great and little Images in which they dwelt, they must needs be
straightned for want of room in the little ones, whereas in the great ones,
they might strech themselves out at their full length. But might not the
heathens have reproached the Christians of those times in the same manner, if
they had believed that Jesus Christ had been wholly contained as well in a
little host as in a great one, and as well in the least part of the host as in
the greatest?

Lastly, the heathens were reproached, for worshipping wood and stone, the work
of men's hands; things that cannot see, hear, smell, taste, breath, speak or
move; things exposed to age, rust, corruption, dust, falling, breaking,
burning, etc. to the injuries of worms, mice and other beasts; subject to the
power of Enemies; to be stolen, locked up, etc. as you may read in Arnobius,
Lactantius, Minutius Felix, and other ancient doctors of the Church. But if
those ancient doctors had believed what the Romanists now do; might not the
heathens have replied thus. And can you deny that the host which you worship,
is the work of man's bands that molded it, and gave it such a form as pleased
him, and then consecra^ ^ with certain words to make your Christ come into it
whole and entire? do not you adore your host, which neither sees, nor hears,
nor smells, nor breaths, nor walks, nor speaks non moves? Is not your host
subject to age, dust, felling burning; to worms, to mice and to other beasts?
Is it not subject to be taken away, stolen, locked up, etc. But if it be said,
that the accidents of the host are only subject to these inconveniences, and
not Jesus Christ that is under them; I answer, that the heathens had said the
same, viz. that their Gods were not subject to these inconveniences, but the
Images only in which they were: for in Arnobius his 6 book they speak thus. We
believe not the copper, gold, and silver whereof the Images are made, to be
Gods and Deityes, that of themselves deserve adoration; but in these materials
we adore those that sacred Dedication introduces, and causes to dwell in the
Images.

Answ. Certainly what you add ( Mounsieur) viz. that the Primitive Church never
adored the host, nor believed that the body of Christ and his blood, were
really and invisibly in the Sacrament; is most false; and you may easier prove,
that all the Romances that ever were made, were true histories, and the Moon is
made of green cheese, then either prove or maintain this assertion: for
besides, that Christ himself in most plain and express terms said; This is my
body, the practice of his Church from all ages has been to adore the host, and
believe the Sacrament as we do. All Ecclesiastical histories, all General
Councils; and all the holy fathers of the Primitive Church, bare witness
against Mr. de Rodon, and contradict him in plain terms, in this point. S.
Alexander 1. that glorious Pope and Martyr of Christ, who lived in the year of
our Savior 121. is numbered by all the orthodox amongst the holy fathers of the
Primitive Church; this holy prelate passing his verdict upon the Eucharist
says: Nihil in sacrificiis majus esse potest, quam corpus and sanguis Christi*
In sacrifices, there cannot be a greater thing then the body and blood of
Christ: which is as much as to say, that in the Eucharist are sacrificed the
body and blood of Christ, which is the greatest of all sacrifices. Cyrillus the
most worthy Bishop of Alexandria (one also of the holy fathers of the Primitive
Church) speaking in the name of the whole Council of Ephesus, declares the
verity of the Eucharist in these terms. Incruentam celebramus in Ecclesiasticis
sacrificiis servitutem and sanctificamur participes corporis and pretiosi
sanguinis Christi, non ut communem carnem percipientes, sed vere
vivificatricem, and ipsius verbi propriam factam: We celebrate an incruent
service in our Ecclesiastical sacrifices, and are sanctified; being made
partakers of the body and most precious blood of Christ; not receiving it as
common flesh, but as the true life-giving and proper-made flesh of the word. To
these S. Hillary not Iess renowned for learning and sanctity, and also of the
Primitive Church: subscribes in his 8. Book de Trinit. with these words; de
veritate carnis and sanguinis, non relictus est ambigendi locus: nunc enim, and
ipsius Domini professione, and fide nostra vere caro est, and vere sanguis est.
Concerning the verity of flesh and blood, there is no doubt left, for now both
by the consession of our Lord himself and by our own faith it is truly flesh,
and truly blood; what could be said more plainly? S. Damascen also adds his
suffrage to these holy fathers above mentioned, lib. 4. de fid. orthod. c. 14.
Non est figura (quoth he) panis and vinnm corporis and sanguinis Christi (absit
enim h^c sed est ipsum corpus Domini deificatum, ipso domino dicente: hoc est
meum, non figura corporis, sed corpus, non figura sanguinis, sed sanguis; Bread
and wine are not the figure of the body and blood of Christ, (God forbid) but
they are the very body and blood of our Lord Deified; our Lord himself
averring* this is my, not figure of body, but body; not figure of Blood, but
Blood. Oh what a frind and favorit was Damascen of de Rodon, and of his
Presbyterian opinion and faction? great S. Aug. testimony is also for us, lib.
sent. Pros. Caro (says he) ejus est quam forma panis opertam accipimus, and
sanguis ejus quem sub vini specie and sapore potamus. It is his flesh we take
covered under the veyle of Bread; and it is his blood we drink in the shape and
taste of wine. S. Hierom also an old father, and one of the chief doctors of
Christ's Church, inferior to none in sanctity and learning, is unanimous with
the rest in this point, Nec Moses (says he) dedit vobis panem verum, sed
Dominus Jesus, ipse conviva and convivium, ipse comedens, and qui comeditur.
Neither did Moses give you the true bread, but our Lord Jesus, he is the
Inviter and the feast, ne the eater, and the eaten. S. Ambrose must not be
forgotten, who in all persections is equal to any of the rest, he says, lib. de
Sacramentis. quod erat panis ante consecrationem, jam corpus Christi est post
consecrationem, What was but bread before the consecration, after consecration
is the body of Christ. To these I add great S. Gregory, commonly called* the
fourth universal doctor of the Church; he in hom. Pascha. has these words.
Quotidie ipse Christus comeditur and bibitur in veritate, sed integer, vivus,
and immaculatus manet. Christ himself is daily eaten and drunk in verity or
reality, but he remains entire, alive, and unspotted. If the authorities of the
abovementioned holy doctors and fathers susfice not the curious Reader; let
him read S. Chrysostom. dial 3. de dignit. sacerd. cap 4. Theophilact. in
comment. sup. Job S. Anselm, and all the rest who treat upon this subject,
which would be too tedious for me to reckon up, and he shall find them all
unanimous amongst themselves, and in most plain and express* terms agreeing
with us. Neither is it likely or credible at all, that after Christ himself
promised his Church, that the gates of hell should never prevail against her,
this Idolatry should creep into her bosom, infect all her noblest members,
enlarge it self through all countries and nations where the name of Christ was
ever known, and last for innumerable ages without controulment, or opposition;
for none of dianas adversaries could hitherto ever tell when she begun to show
her face in Christ's Church, or who for many ages opposed her entrance. All
heresies that ever crept, or were introduced into the Church, were presently
taken notice of, opposed and condemned with their chief authors and
ringleaders; only our Diana, the Idol in the Mounsieur^ opinion (maugre Christ's
promise to the contrary,) had the good luck, to stand it out all along from
Christ's time until now, and made all the Christian world adore her. But sure
it is that if heresy cannot prevail against Christ's Church, Idolatry also
cannot; and consequently since our Diana or Mass, has held it out so long,
does still, and is like to do until the worlds end; she is no Idol as Mr de
Rodon takes her to be; but that truo incruent or unbloudy pure sacrifice of
Christ's body which his spouse the Church offers daily to his heavenly father,
for a reconcilation and attonment with him for her childrens sins, from whence
follows, that she ever did, does, and will exhibit unto the host the
adoration of Latria, which is the highest adoration, and solely due unto God.

Of what value or force Mr. de Rodons bare confident (I mean impudent)
assertion is, against the whole torrent of the chief doctors and holy fathers
of Christ's Church; I let any reasonable man judge, and deny that if the
Primitive Christians had believed and adored the Sacrament as we do; they had
furnished the heathens with specious pretenses to excuse the Idolatry of their
Image Worship; and that they could have retorted upon the Christians these very
arguments which they made use of against them; for first the ancient Christians
believed but in one God, never owning but one deity in the three divine
persons; whereas the Heathens believed in many dieties or Gods. Secondly the
primitive Christians believed there is no other substance in the Sacrament or
host, but only the substance of Jesus Christ; and consequently they owned no
composition in Christ or in the host, as that Christ, or the host are composed
of Christ's body, and of the sacramental species; because Christ is in the host
substantially, as he is composed of his body, soul, and divinity; or, (which is
the same thing) the host is nothing else but Christ in his substance; and the
sacramental species, or accidents of the bread and win^ which remain in the
sacrament, after Transubstantiation, by virtue of the words of consecr^on;
enter not at all into the composition of Christ, or of the host; but they only
serve for significations sake, viz. to signify our spiritual nourishment. But
the heathens believed that the very metals or materials whereof their Idols
were composed, after they were consecrated and dedicated to their Gods, were a
substantial part of them. They believed, and adored their materials and
statues, after their consecration and dedication as Gods. The ancient
Christians, nor the modern Catholics also, ever believed that the bare
accidents of bread and wine in the Sacrament, are Jesus Christ, or his body and
blood; though they believe they signify his body and blood; and that his body,
blood soul and divinity also, are personally present, (by reason of the pronoun
demonstrative ( This) which is uttered in the consecration) where the
sacramental species are, and consequently they do very well and piously, in
adoring the host with the adoration of Latria. But if those of the Primitive
Church, or we either, should hold with the Apostle of the Protestants, Luther,
that Christ is in the Sacrament impanated, that is, in bread; then the heathens
may indeed have some^ing to say against us; for then there would be a kind of
composition of Christ's body (...) of the bread, in the Sacrament, as the
hea^hens made a composition of their materials or Images, and of their false
deities which they pretended were in them. But no such heretical thought ever
entered into the hearts of any orthodox Christian of the Primitive or modern
Church.

That as the heathenish Idols were mad^ by consecration, dedication, and
adoration; so our Sacrament is also made by consecration, and after
consecration, offered and dedicated by us unto God the father, and that we
adore it, we cannot deny. But the ground upon which our consecration is built
and the ground upon which the heathenish was, are quite different; our
consecration is built upon the effective words of the son of God, who is
omnipotent; and gave us power to consecrate as he did himself; when he said to
his Apostles (whose successors we surely believe our Priests are) as often as
you do this, do it in remembrance of me. But the heathenish consecration had no
other ground, but their own bare ayery words and consequently there is no
parity betwixt both consecrations.

Lastly, that as the heathens were upbraided; jeared, and reproached by the
holy fathers because of their great and little Images or Idols; so may the
primitive Christians be, by the heathens for believing that Christ could be in
a little, or great host, or in the least part of it; is false, for the heathens
believed their Gods were in their Idols circumscriptively or definitively as
water is in a vessel or the soul in the bedy; for they wanting the light of
faith, knew not what a sacramental presence is. But the Primitive Christians,
(and we also) believe Christ to be in the Sacrament, Sacramentally only, that
is in every consecrated host, as our souls are in our bodies; tota in toto, and
tota in qualibet part, all Christ in the whole host, and all Christ in every
part and particle of it. And thus Mr. de Rodons three propositions, with his
very considerable additionate, are fully and pathetically answered; and an end
put to this chapter.

CHAP. VI. Against the taking away of the cup.
Rodon. 1. THe taking away of the Eucharistical cup, was established as an
Article of faith by the Romish Church Representative, assembled in the Council
of Constance; 1415. sess. 13. in a canon, the chief clauses whereof are these:
seeing that in diverse parts of the world there be some who rashly presume to
say, that Christian people ought to partake of the Sacrament of the Eucharist
under both species of the bread and wine, and to give the Communion to
Laypeople, not only under the species of the bread, but also under the species
of the wine; This present holy General Council of Constance lawfully assembled
in the name of the holy Ghost, being desirous to provide for the safety of the
faithful against this error, does therefore declare, decree, and determine,
that although Jesus Christ did administer this venerable Sacrament to his
disciples under both the species of bread and wine; and although in the
Primitive Church, the faithful did receive this Sacrament under both species;
yet notwithstanding that (for the avoiding of certain dangers and scandals)
this custom, which was introduced with reason, ought to be kept, viz. that
Priests that say Mass, shall communicate under both the species of bread and
wine, but that Lay-persons shall communicate under the species of bread only;
and they that shall say the contrary; ought to be expelled as Heretics, and
grieveously punished by the Bishops, and their officialls; This canon was
confirmed by the succeeding Romish Councils, and particularly by the Council of
Trent*

2. Against so horrible a Canon, and so strange a Law, it is very difficult to
oppose any thing, for if you tell them, that this Law i^ contrary to the
Institution and command of Jesus Christ, they freely confess it; seeing that
although Jesus Christ did institute and administer the Eucharist under both
species, yet they will not have it so practiced. If you tell them that this Law
is contrary to the command of S. Paul, and practice of the Primitive Church;
they ingeniously own it; for they openly declare, that the faithful in the
Primitive Church did receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist under both species,
yet they that practice it thus ought to be expelled and punished as Heretics.
This is the true way of ending all Controversies, and of keeping us from
disputing with them. For example, if we allege that S. Paul. Tim. 4. says,
that they who forbid to marry, and command to ab^ain from meats, do teach the
doctrines of Devils; they need only answer, that although S. Paul does say so,
yet we must not believe it, because the Romish Church has determined
otherwise. Again, if we alledg, that the same Apostle Ephesians. the 2. says that we
are saved by grace, through faith; and that not of our selves, it is the gift
of God; not of works, lest any man should boast; they need only answer, that
although this was written by the Apostle, yet we must not believe it, because
the Romish Church has determined, that we are saved by works and faith as
coming from our selves, and from the strength of our own free will, etc. And
now I leave you to judge; whom we ought to follow, whether these lying
doctors, or Jesus Christ, and his Apostles. But that which I find utterly
unsupportable is this viz. that they accuse of rashness, error, and heresy,
those that by obeying Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, and following the
Practice of the Primitive Church, do affirm that we ought to partake of the Cup
as well as of the bread. Again I find it an insufferable piece of impudence,
that they boast so much of Antiquity, and of the conformity of their Creed to
that of the Primitive Church, and yet can so openly renounce both, in this
chief and principal point of Doctrine.

Answ. That the Romish Church Representative, ever made or established an
article of faith; we deny; that she made Canons or statutes in her general
Councils, which were grounded upon former articles of faith which the Apostles
left us; and that what one precedent General Council decided and declared to
belong unto an article of faith, (because what the Council declared, was
implycitly included in that article) another subsequent general Council
approved, and confirmed it, we freely confess; for it makes more for us then
for Mr. de Rodon, though he is sure he got a great advantage over us thereby;
because the other General Councils, and especially the Council of Trent
approves and ratifies this Canon which he recited out of the Council of
Constance, which Canon (he says) contradicts Christ, and his Apostle. But I am
sure, that if the Council of Trent had contradicted that of Constance, his
advantage had been much more, for neither the one or the other of these holy
Councils does contradict Christ, or his Apostle. Because then, and not
otherwise, (as I proved before) is a proper contradiction, when there is an
affirmation and negation of the same thing, at the same time, and after the
same formality or manner; for if the thing, time, or formality be not the same,
then is there no contradiction; for example; there is no contradiction in this,
viz. that Peter should be virtuous, and Paul wicked at the same time; because
Peter and Paul are not one and the same man: Nor in this, viz. that the same
Peter should have a beard, and not have a beard at different times; as also
neither in this, viz. that the same Peter, at the same time, should be an
Ambassador in France, and be no Ambassador in England or in Spain.

This true doctrine which is commonly received by all Philosophers and learned
men, being presupposed, I evidently demonstrate out of several Passages of
Scripture if well considered, knit and compared together; that this Canon or
statute of the Constantian Council, does not in the least manner contradict or
gainsay the commands of Christ, or of his Apostle. The first Passage whereupon
I build my proof is this; Data est mihi omnis Potestas in Caelo, and in terra;
that to Christ is given all power in heaven and upon Earth: S. Math. 20. The
second is this: sicut tu misisti me in mundum, and ego misi eos in mundum: as
thou did send me into the world, I also have sent them into the world: S.
John. 17. Let us now compare these two passages, to these other two: Qui
Ecclesiam non audit, sit tibi tanqnam Ethnicus and Publicanus: He that hears
not the Church, let him be unto thee as a heathen and Publican: S. Math. 18,
and to this: Qui vos audit, m^ audit, qui vos spernit, me spernit: he that
hears you hears me, he that despises you despises me. S. Luke 10. where
note that in the first passage is said, that all power in heaven and earth is
given to Christ; and in the second is said, that Christ bequeathed the Power he
received from his father, unto his Church representative; for what else do
these words ( as you my father sent me, so I send them into the world) import;
but that they had, (I mean his Apostles and disciples, who were his Church
Representative) the same spiritual power delegated unto them, by him, as he
received from his heavenly father; the difference being only this; that his
power from his father was absolute and Principal in him, the Power he gave to
his Church, (if compared to his power) is but a subordinat or delegat power.
Now then if we consider that Christ having cel^ated and bequeathed his power on
earth to his Church; and commanded us to hear her, if we will not be counted as
heathens and publicans; and tells us also, that by despising her, we despise
himself, what I pray (good Mounsieur) consequence follows or flows from these
evident passages of Scripture, (and all uttered by Christ's own sacred mouth)
but that we are to hear and obey the Church representative, (which, were the
Apostles and his disciples in their time, and the general Councils ever since
their time, concerning her canons and statutes, and her other direction and
guiding of our souls? So that until Mr. de Rodon can prove that the Council of
Constance was ^n unlawful or Acephal Council, and no Church Representative
(which he undertakes not in this Tract) he has no reason to exclaim against
her Canons and statutes, nor to make them so horrible to the world; neither
have we any reason to be terrified at it, because as I shall now show you, it
is in effect nothing but a mere s^are-crow.

For what Christian of any understanding or belief, can judge or think, that
Christ, who is verity it self, and his heavenly fathers wisdom, should
contradict his own commandments? and yet if the Canons and statutes made by his
Church in her General Councils, were opposite and contradictory to his
commandments, it would necessary follow that he contradicted himself. Because
he and his holy spirit is the self same thing, and so by contradicting his
spirit, he must needs contradict himself. But he promised his Church militant,
that he would be with her all days unto the Consumation of the world; and in
another place he tells her, That his spirit which is in her, and his words
which he put in her mouth, shall not recede from her mouth, nor from the mouth
of her seed, nor of her seeds seed from that time, and for ever; which is as
much as to say, that his spirit should be always her directour and guide in
all her conciliary definitions and decrees.

Yet if notwithstanding this reason, deduced out of clear Scripture, Mr. de
Rodon will still persist in his fearful exclamations, and object against us,
that nothing can be more evident and clear, then that this Constantian Canon or
Law, is contradictory to Christ's institution and command concerning the Cup; we
deny that Law to have at all opposed Christ's commandment; because of the
difference of time that interceded betwi^ the commandment and that Law: Christ
told his disciples, or Church Representative, that he had many things to say to
them, but they could not bear them at that time. John. 16. whence follows, that
Christ, by his holy spirit, might have revealed some things to his Church,
which he would have observed by her children, whereof he made no express
mention to his disciples, while he was conversant with them: If the Constantian
Canon or Law had been made, just at the same time when Christ instituted this
Sacrament and ^ommanded it should be received under both species; something
might be said in the matter: But who knows that Christ, in future times, would
not have something altered concerning this Institution, by his Church, to whom
he promised his holy spirit should be her directour and guide in all her
statutes and ordinances unto the consummation of the world? All divines hold,
that the Sacrament of Baptism, is of greater necessity (because without it, no
body can be saved) then that of the Eucharist is; And was it not one of the
last commandments our Savior left his Apostles that they should go preach the
Gospel, and Baptize in the name of the father; and of the son, and of the holy
Ghost? Math. 28. however the Church of her own proper authority, even in the
very Apostles times, changed this form for a time, for some certain reasons,
and Baptized in the name of Jesu; as may be seen in the Acts of the Apostles.
19. chap. was not the keeping of the Sabbath Day commanded by God, in the first
table of his commandments written by his own holy finger? But by whose
authority was the day altered? we have no scripture for it; we have no other
but the authority of the Church. This was an express commandment of God, no
Christian, nay no Jew will deny it; all Christians* know that the Church
altered the day for certain grave reasons; viz. that we should not communicate
with the Jews; because our Savior rose again upon our Sabath, because the Holy
Ghost descended upon our B. Lady and the Apostles upon our sabath; and for
sundry others which the holy Ghost inspired her with; wherefore then may not
the Mounsieur exclaim and cry out against her, as well for this, as for her
constantian Canon? may not he say, that she contradicted Gods express
commandment of keeping the Jewish sabath, when by her Canons or ordinations
she commanded our sunday should be observed and their sabbath slighted? yes
truly that he may, and yet as we, nay and the Protestants themselves, I hope,
will deny any transgression to have been done by the Church against Gods
commandment, by her statutes or Canons, for not keeping the Jewish Sabbath; so
we also deny that by her Constantian Canon, she contradicted Gods commandment
concerning denying the cup to the Lay People; and the reason is, because the
commandments and the Canons, were not made the same time; and because the holy
Ghost for sundry reasons, inspired the Church to alter some things concerning
the former commandment Christ left her, but for a certain time; (as he himself
told her before, that he had many things to say to her, but she could not bear
them at that time) which is not to contradict, but rather to dispense with
Christ's former commandments.

To this I add, the Apostles command, concerning not eating blood; nor
strangled meat; which notwithstanding is not observed even by those of the
Reformed Church: so that the Mounsieur has reason to exclaim against them
also, and against the whole Christian world: for they abstain from such meats
no more then we do; and neither they nor we have any warrant for eating such
prohibited meats, but only the authority and statutes of the Church; and upon
that score we do it, and will do it, notwithstanding Mr. de Rodons
fulminations, exclamations, and outcries.

Now I leave the Prudent Reader to judge; whom we ought to follow; whether the
true doctrine of the Church Representative, guided by the holy Ghost, or the
groundless and frivolous opinion of pitiful Rodon? But that which I find
utterly unsupportable in this miserable wretch, is, his intolerable Pride, in
making himself censurer of the whole Christian world; by contradicting not only
so many General Councils, but also the most holy spirit of God, who promised to
assist and direct his spouse the Church alwais* And again, I find it an
insufferable piece of impudence in him who has nothing to show for the
antiquity of his pretended Church, to contradict, and revile at the old mother
Church, unto whom God gave power to alter things for the better, as his holy
spirit should inspire her in due times, as is palpably demonstrated out of the
passages of holy Scripture abovementioned. Away, away then with Mr. de Rodons
silly exclamations against Gods Church Representative, which serve for nothing
but to scare crows with; and not to startle or daunt any man of knowledge or
belief.

What matter is it then if juggling Rodon alledg S Paul in his 1. Tim. 4.
against us; saying: that they who forbid to marry, and command to abstain from
meats, do teach the doctrines of devils? for these words cannot concern Roman
Catholics who allow not only of marriage; but also own it to be a Sacrament
to, which is more then Mr. de Rodon, or his party does; or is it because we
allow not, that our Priests and Religious men should marry, who of their own
free accord made a voluntary contract with Allmighty God, never to marry, that
by observing a single life they may the easier, and with more freedom serve
him? or did our Church before they made their contract with God and her, ever
forbid them marriage? or Lastly, while a man is already married, is it the
doctrine of the devil that he should not marry again? if not, wherefore should
it be his doctrine, to prohibit Priests and Religious Persons to marry;
whereas they are already contracted and married to Christ and to his Church? if
a contract, promise, or vow made to a woman does oblige and tie a man to her;
sure a contract or vow made unto God must oblige him as much, according to the
Royal Psalmists saying in his 49th. Psalm Immolate to God the sacrifice of
Praise and pay thy vows to the Highest. The same thing we say again concerning
meats, our Church ^orbideth not the eating of any sort of meats; for we ^at of
all sorts of meats Mr. de Rodon and his party eats of; though not at all times;
because in obedience to our mother the Church, we abstain from several meats on
certain days, being Christ commanded fasting; but left the determination of the
time when we are to fast, to his spouse the Church; as is evidently collected
out of S. Mark 2. where we read, that when the disciples of S. John, and of the
Pharisee^ came to our Savior, and asked him, Why his Disciples did not fast, as
they did? our Savior answered them thus: that so long as they have the
Bridgroom with them, they cannot fast; But the days will come when the
Bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then they shall fast in those
days: and for this reason the Church commands no strict fast from Easter Day to
Assention. But wherefore does not the good Mounsieur show, and make it out by
Scripture, or any way else, that our fasting is against the Apostle, or
according with the doctrine of devils: a splenative man may say of others what
he li^t; but any rational or well settled brain may rather think, that Mr. de
Rodon and his ^arty, (who never use to fast from any kind of meats they can
come at) do contradict Gods commandment concerning fasting; and consequently by
disobeying him, and his Church, do at least practice, if not teach the doctrine
of devils.

What matter is it also, if honest de Rodon alleges against us these words of
the said Apostles. Ephesians. 2. We are saved by Grace through faith, and that not of
our selves; it is the gift of God; not of works, least any man should boast,
for we humbly believe those words, and our Church never determined any thing to
the contrary. Therefore de Rodon does falsely belie us, when he says that we
hold we are saved by works and faith, as coming from our selves, and from the
strength of our freewill, etc. for we never held, or do hold any such thing;
neither do we say that we can have faith from our selves; because we hold faith
is a supernatural virtue insused into us, not acquired by our industry or
diligence. That which we say, and maintain against all our adversaries is, that
our good works done, while we are in the state of Grace, are meritorious: we
say not that our works (precisely as they are ours) are of any merit; but as
they are supported by Gods Grace, which grace we cannot have without faith, and
I pray, did not our Savior himself say, whosoever shall give you to drink a
cup of water in my name, because you are Christ's: Amen I say to you, he shall
not lose his reward: which sentence of his, we understand thus, viz. that if a
man while he is in the state of Grace, does bestow or give any thing for the
love of God, be it never so little, or does any good work for the love of God,
be it never so inconsiderable, that such a man shall be hereafter* rewarded by
God for it; and being rewards are the correlatives of merits; we conclude, that
a man for doing any good work while he is in the state of Grace, does merit yet
we attribute not the merit chiefly to the work but to Grace, which we hold to
be the principal cause thereof. And we say moreover, that, be any man's work
never so good in it self, if it be done while he is out of the state of Grace,
such a work is not at all meritorious to him; and consequently we hold that a
penny given for Gods sake by him that is in the state of Grace, is more
meritorious to him then if he or any body else should bestow a thousand pound,
(also for Gods sake) while they are out of it. How then can this true doctrine
of the Church disagree with the Apostles words, or agree with de Rodons false,
and calumnious lie? when he says, that the Romish Church has determined that
we are saved by works and faith as coming from our selves, and from the
strength of our own free will, etc. a thing which she never dreamt of, and
utterly detests as mere Pelagianism. But it is a common saying, that it is
easier for a man to defend himself from a thief, then from a Liar. Therefore we
may well say with the Royal Psalmist in his 42. Psalm, from the unjust and
deceitful tongue of Mr. de Rodon, O Lord deliver us.

Now then M. de Rodons exclamations being proved frivolous and vain; and he
himself a calumnious Liar; the Romish doctors need not run for shelter to any
place or thing: for whether it was a command or no, practiced by the Primitive
Church or no, to minister the Sacraments under both kinds; it imports not,
neither does it contradict Christ's commandment at all, to receive it now but
under one kind only; for that commandment was but for a time, and until his
holy spirit moved the Church for sundry grave reasons, to alter it; as he did
in other things of as great and greater moment, for the Salvation of man's soul,
viz. the altering of the form of Baptism by the Apostles for a while, which
Sacrament is of greater necessity for man's salvation, then the Eucharist is; as
I have already sufficiently shown.

Therefore being I fully answered the Mounsieurs argument a quite other way;
his replies against the Romish doctors answers (which are very good) need no
farther answer by me here: however this ought to be well considered; that
whereas Christ instituted this Sacrament for our spiritual nourishment, and
since his body which we receive in it, is a glorified body, and consequently as
the Romish doctors well say, where his body is, there is his blood also by
concomitance; It follows evidently that by receiving the Sacrament under one
species, we receive his body and blood both together: or dare de Rodon say,
that Christ's body and blood are now separated? if he* does; I dare say, he is a
most impious heretic. But if they be not now separated; then by receiving the
one species, we equivalently receive both; which is all we are commanded to do,
according to the Institution of the Sacrament; so that whether we eat the
Sacrament, and drink it formally or virtually, is the same thing: for it
nourishes our souls all alike, and we observe Christ's command as well by
eating and drinking it virtually, as we do by eating and drinking it formally;
there being no more virtue or substance in the one eating then in the other,
nor no more spiritual nourishment (which is the cause why this Sacrament was
instituted) in the one more then in the other; and all the Mystery and
difference is only this; that the Priests, by reason they represent, or act
Christ's person when he instituted this Sacrament, are commanded by reason of
their ministry and function to complete the Sacrament; by consecrating under
both species, as Christ himself did: and therefore he commanded his Apostles
whom he then made Priests (saying unto them, As often as you do this, do it in
remembrance of me) to consecrat under both kinds. And yet neither the Apostles
did then, nor do the Priests now, receive more then the layman do when they
receive but under one species only, because of the concomitance of Christ's
glorified body and blood as they are in the Sacrament.

To conclude this chapter, I say, that whether our Savior laid his commands
upon the Apostles and Priests only, or upon all the believers of the Primitive
Church, both Priests and Laymen together, to receive the Sacrament under both
kinds or species; all that can be deduced from thence is, that his commands
were to be observed punctually as thereunto, during the time his commandment
was in vigor and force, and no longer. But after by his holy spirit (whose
assistance he promised to his Church, for to guide and direct her in all her
Canons and Laws) this command was altered and changed otherwise; we are firmly
to believe and adhere to what she determines concerning matters of says, and
Sacraments; and to hold, that what is done by her orders is done by the orders
and appointment of Christ, and not at all contrary to his commands or Law;
because amongst others of his commands, he commanded us to hear the Church; and
told us that by dispising her, we should despise him. Therefore, it is a far
surer and safer ground for any man of prudence and understanding, to rely upon
the authority of the Church as to this high question we here treat of, and as
to all other questions which are built upon divine faith; then upon Mr. de
Rodons bare frevolous exclamations and outcryes; for Christ promised his
Church, that she should be always guided by his holy spirit, which is a surer
warrant for her Canons and Laws, then the hidious exclamations of the Mounsieur
are, to whom no promise (as we know of) was by Christ ever made concerning this
question or any other.

To what is by me answered touching this point; I also add Christ's own practice
to the contrary of what Mr. de Rodon exclaimeth against the Church
Representative: for Christ himself did not always give the Cup with the
consecrated host; as may be seen when he gave the host to his two disciples
whom he accompanied going to the Castle of Emaus, and afterward vanished
immediately out of their sight; where the holy text makes no mention of his
giving them the Cup. The like was also often done by the Apostles, as any man
may easily see in their Acts; and so I think I have sufficiently answered Mr.
de Rodons sixth chapter.

CHAP. VII. Against the Mass.
NOw Madam Diana look very well to your self, for the Mounsieur is come up to
your body, if you can escape him this time, sure you will live to the worlds
end.

Rodon. 1. The Mass, according to the Romish doctors, is a sacrifice of the
body and blood of Christ, propitiatory for the sins of the living and dead;
and so it is defined by the Council of Trent sess. 22. Against such a Mass we
might allege all the Arguments already made use of against Transubstantiation,
and the pretended presence of Christ's body in the host; for our adversaries
confess, that those reasons which destroy Transubstantiation, and the pretended
presence of Christ's body in the host; do also destroy the Mass. But in this
Chapter we shall only use such arguments as are directly against the Mass, and
so utterly destroy it.

Answ. The holy Councils definition of the Mass, we acknowledge, as also that
the arguments which destroy Transubstantiation, and the real presence, do also
destroy the Mass. And Mr. de Rodon does very wisely (we say) for not
reproducing his old shivered arrows or arguments, which we have already brok
and shattered into small splinters when they were shot against
Transubstantiation, and the real presence of Christ's body in the host; for to
say the truth, those Buts are so hard and steel-proof, that the weak arm of
the Mounsieurs understanding was not strong enough to bend his bow, to do them
any harm, nor his arrows able to transfix them. But now, I hope, he will come
better provided with his new ones, against Diana. Behold, he comes.

Rodon. 2. The first argument is drawn from this, viz. that in the Institution,
and first celebration of the Eucharist, Jesus Christ did not sacrifice nor
offer his body and blood to his father as appears by what is mentioned in the
three Evangelists, and the Apostle S. Paul, in which there is not the least
footstep to be seen of a sacrifice, or oblation of Christ's body and blood. This
Bellarmin confesses in Book. 1. of the Mass, chap, 27. in these words, the
oblation which is made after Consecration, belongs to the entireness of the
Sacrament, but is not of its essence; which I prove; because neither our Iod
nor his Apostles, did make this oblation at the first, as we have demonstrated
out of Gregory. The Jesuit Salmeron in Tom. 13. of his Commentaries on the
Epistles of S. Paul, makes a Catalogue of unritten Traditions, in which he puts
the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. The worshipping of Images, the Mass, the manner of
sacrificing, and the Tradition that Jesus Christ did offer a sacrifice in the
Bread and wine. Card. Baronius in his Annalls on the year 53. freely
confesses, that the sacrifice of the Eucharist, is an unwritten Tr^dition. A
strange thing, that the Mass, which is the foundation of the Romish Church (for
the doctors require nothing of the people, but that they should go to Mass)
cannot be found to have been instituted or commanded by Jesus Christ. And the
truth is, if Jesus Christ in the celebration of the Eucharist had offored unto
God his father a sacrifice of his body and blood, propitiatory for the sins of
the living and dead, then there had been no need that he should have been
sacrificed again on the Cross; because having already expiated our sins in the
sacrifice of the Eucharist, there was no need he should expiate them again on
the Cross. To this I add, that S. Paul. Ephesians. 4. 11. mentions the offices which
Jesus Christ left in his Church when he ascended into heaven, in these words:
he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and teachers, but makes no mention at all of the Sacrificers of Christ's
body and blood: nor in 1. Tim. nor in the Epictle to Titus, when he describes
the duty of Bishops, Presbyters and deacons, without making the least mention
of this sacrificing of Christ's body and blood.

Answ. But I pray good Mr. de Rodon, wherefore do you not produce some Passage
out of the three Evangelists, or S. Paul, to prove your assertion? for
according to all Philosophers (and I believe you esteem not your self amongst
the meanest of them) arguments that only consist of negatives, do never
conclude, or prove any thing: you say it appears by what is mentioned by the
three Evangelists and S. Paul, that Christ at the Institution of the Eucharist,
did not sacrifice or offer his body and blood to his father; you tell us not in
which of the Evangelists, or wherein S. Paul, and we find no such thing in
them. But we find these express words in S. Luke. 22. Chap. and taking bread,
he gave thanks, and broke, and gave to them, saying: this is my body, which is
given for you. If these last words, viz. which is given for you, signify not
to be offered or sacrificed for you; I pray tell us, what else do they
signify? for the Evangelist said before, that the bread was given them; and
immediately after, in the same sentence, he adds, which was given for you: Sure
if these last words signify not which was offered, or sacrificed for you; they
must needs be nonsensical, and a vain Battalogical repetition of the same
words, for the sense would be this; and gave to them his body, which is given
for them: Therefore these words: which is given for them, is as much as to say,
which is offered, or sacrificed for them. And yet the Mounsieur is not ashamed
to say, that there is not the least foot-step of a sacrifice, to be seen in
what was mentioned by any of the three Evangelists. But perhaps S. Luke was not
of the three he meant, whether he was or no, it is certain, that in this very
Passage, he left us a true and plain track of Christ's unbloudy sacrifice.

But I cannot conceive nor understand, how Mr. de Rodon (or his Translatour
too) is able to save him from the infamous brand of heresy, for obstinately
denying, what so many general Councils, and holy fathers do unanimously assert:
an Heretic as he is distingushed from a Turk, Jew, or Pagan, is thus
described, viz one that professes to believe in Christ, and yet dissents in
opinion from the rest of the orthodox obstinately. But now let us see how the
Mounsieur agrees with the whole Church as to this point; first, with the great
and most eminent doctor S. Aug, who in his 20th. Book de civit: Dei, speaking
of Christ, who says thus: per hoc and sacerdos est ipse offerens and oblatio,
cujus rei Sacramentum quotidianum esse voluit Ecclesiae sacrificium, cum ipsius
corporis, ipse caput, and ipsius capitis, ipsa sit corpus, tam ipsa per ipsum,
quam ipse per ipsam suetus offerri. By this (meaning the Eucharist) he himself
is both the Priest offering and the oblation; the sign or Sacrament whereof,
he would have the daily sacrifice of the Church to be; for whereas he is the
head of his Mystical body, and she is the body of her Mystical head, she was as
well wont to be offered by him, as he by her: and again. lib. 17. de civit c.
20. the table which the Priests of the New Testament does exhibit, is of his
body and blood; for that is the sacrifice which succeeded all those sacrifices
that were offered in shadow of that to come; for the which also we acknowledge
that voice of the same Mediator in the Psalm: But a body thou have fitted to
me; because instead of all these sacrifices and oblations, his body is offered,
and is ministered to the partakers, or receivers. With S. Cyprian more ancient
then the former, and in learning inferior to none; who in his 2. Epistle to
Pope Cornelius has these words. Sacerdotes qui quotidie Sacrificia dei
celebramus, hostias Deo, and victimas praeparemus. We priests who daily
celebrate the sacrifices of God, let us prepare hosts and victimes for him:
with S. Ambrose in cap. 10. hebreor. Quid ergo nos, etc. What we then? do not
we offer every day? we offer surely: but this sacrifice is an exemplar of that:
for we offer allwaies the selfsame, and not now one lamb, to morrow another;
but always the self-same thing: therefore it is one Sacrifice; otherwise by
this reason, because it is offered in many places, there should be many
Christ's: not so, but it is one Christ in every place, here whole, and there
whole, one body: But this which we do is done for a commemoration of that which
was done; for we offer not another Sacrifice, as the High Priest of the old
Law, but always the self-same, etc. with S. Chrysostom, hom. 17. in Epist. ad
Heb. and after him with Theophylact. Oecumenius with Haymo, Paschasuis,
Remigius, and others, who object to themselves thus: Do not we also offer every
day? we offer surely: But this sacrifice is an exemplar of that, for we offer
always the self-same, and not now one lamb, and to morrow another, but the
self-same; therefore this is one sacrifice; otherwise, because it is offered in
many places, there would be many Christ's: and a little after, Not another
sacrifice, as the High Priest of the old Law, but the self-same we do always
offer, rather working a remembrance or commemoration of the sacrifice. With
Primasuis S. Augustines Scholar, who preoccupates the Mounsieurs oblections
thus: What shall we say then? do not our Priests daily offer sacrifice? they
offer surely, because we sin daily, and daily have need to be cleansed: and
because he cannot die, he has given us the Sacrament of his body and blood,
that as his Passion was the redemption and absolution of all the world, so also
this oblation may be a redemption and cleansing to all that offer it in truth
and verity. in which sense also venerable Bede calls the Mass: Redemtionem
corporis and animaesempiternam, the everlasting redemption of body and soul,
lib. 4. c. 22. histor.

To these above mentioned holy doctors, who not only unanimously agree that the
Sacrament of the Altar is an host and sacrifice, but also that it is the self
^ame sacrifice which was offered upon the Altar of the Cross for our Salvation:
I add these ensuing General Councils and holy fathers of the primitive Church,
whereof some were the Apostles contemporaneans and Disciples: The first holy
Council of Nice, chap. 14. in fine tonc* ex graeco. the Council of Ephesus.
Anathematis. 11. the Chalcedon Council art. 3. page 112. the Ancyran Council,
chap. 1. and 5. the Neacaesarean Council, Can. 13. Laodic. can. 19.
Carthaginian 2. c. 8. Carthag. 3. cha. 24. and Carthag. 4. chap, 33. and 41. S.
Denyse cha. 3. Eccles. hierarch. S. Andrew in hist. Passionis S. Ignatius
Epist. ad Smyrn. S. Martialis Epist ad Burdegal. S. Iustine dial. cum Tryphone.
S. Irenaeus lib. 4. c. 23, 24. Tertullian de eult^ feeminarum and corona
militum. Origin. hom. 13. in Levit. S. Cypr* epist. ad Cecilium. number* 2. and de
coena Domini. number. 13. and Eusebius. demonstrat. Evangel. lib. 1. c. 10.

Let us now compare all these holy Councils, Fathers, and Doctors unanimous
authorities with M. de Rodons bare word, without any text of Scripture,
contradicting them; let us, I say, compare all their affirmative votes to his
no mention, no foot step, and judge which of these two parties deserves to be
counted heretics: (for they cannot be both counted orthodox, because they
contradict one another in point of faith;) what man then (unless he were
wilfully prodigal of his salvation) would adhere to de Rodons crack-brain'd
obstinate self-opinion, and forsake for him the whole torrent of General
Councils, Fathers, and Doctors of Christ's Church?

Neither are S. Gregory and Bellarmine for him too, but rather point blank
against him, as to the main point of this question, which is, that at the first
Institution of this Sacrament, Christ offered and sacrificed his body and blood
to his father: for Bellarmine in the place alleged by the Mounsieur, viz. out
of his first book of the Mass, chap. 27. speaks only thus; that this sacrifice
consists not precisely in the consummation of the host, nor in any other part
of the Mass, but only in the words of consecration, because S. Gregory said,
that the Apostles used no other ceremonies at the Mass, when they first
practiced it, but only the Lords prayer, and immediately after, they consumed
the consecrated host. But neither he, nor S. Gregory ever said, that Christ and
his Apostles never offered sacrifice to God the father in the Mass, for
Bellermine says positively in that very chapter, that Christ offered sacrifice
to his heavenly father; and that the Apostles and their successors do the like
daily. But he holds that the sacrifice consists precisely in the words of
Consecration, and not in the oblations before or after, nor in the consumption
of the host; all which makes nothing for Mr. de Rodon; who is not ashamed
confidently to say, that S. Gregory and Bellarmine are of his side; whereas
there is no such thing to be seen in them, but the quite contrary, as may be
evidently seen in the alleged chapter of Bellarmines said book.

As for learned Salmeron the Jesuits commentary, and Cardinal Baronius his free
confession concerning an unwritten Tradition of the Sacrament of the Eucharist;
any man of reason or belief would sconer believe the Traditions of the whole
Church, then admire or stand in doubt of them; and much less would they harken
against them, to Mr. de Rodons bare word, or to his srivolous no mention, no
footstep: for Gods Church had no other rule to follow from Adams time until
Moses (who was the first that ever writ of the old Testament) concerning what
she was to believe, but Tradition. And from the time of our Saviors Assension,
until some of the Apostles, and the Evangelists set their penns to paper, what
else had the faithful to trust unto, but only unwritten Tradition? what
Scripture have we for changing the Sabbath day? or for the twelve articles of
our Creed, made by the twelve Apostles, which be the Principles and foundation
of our faith, without which none can be saved? only Tradition: finally, does
not the Apostle in his 2. Epist. to the Thessal. 2. chap. command us to hold
the Traditions which we have learned, whether it be by his word, or by his
Epistle? wherefore then should it be a strange thing that the Mass, which is
the daily practice and sacrifice of the whole Church, from the Apostles time,
until ours, (suppose there were nothing left written concerning it) wherefore
(I say) ought it not be held and believed, as well as the changing of the
Sabbath day, or as the twelve articles of the Apostles creed?

Moreover, being the Mass (as we hold, and is evidently proved by the
testimonies of the General Councils and holy fathers abovementioned) does
chiefly, and essentially consist in the words of consecration; and that Christ
himself was the first that ever consecrated; we consequently hold, that he was
the first and chief Priest that ever said Mass: And whereas we find, that after
he consecrated; he commanded his Apostles, that as often as they did this
(that is to say, consecrated) they should do it in remembrance of him: we find
(I say) that the Mass was instituted and commanded expressly by Christ himself.
Therefore in my opinion, it is a thing far more wonderful and strange, that any
man of common reason or sense should join in opinion with Mr. de Rodon against
the Mass; which has the Tradition and practice of the whole Catholic Church
from the Apostles time unto ours, of its side; and the Mounsieur not a tittle
out of Scripture, Council, or holy father that makes for him; but his silly
negative, no mention, no footstep.

And as the Mounsieur is impudent and obstinate in opposing the universal
Church; so is he also shamless in believing of her; for he says, that her
doctors require nothing of the people, but that they should go to Mass; which
is an arrant lie; for although it be true, that our holy Mother the Church,
commands all her children, if they have no lawful impediment, viz. of sickness,
or some other very urgent affayrs of consequence, to the contrary; to be
personally present, and assist at the oblation of this divine sacrifice, on
sundays, and holy days of obligation, (for to hear Mass on workingdays, is only
of counsel, not of precept or command) yet she never taught them, that by only
hearing Mass, they should be saved. But she rather teaches them the contrary,
viz. that if they hear never so many Masses, while they are in mortal sin, they
shall reap no benefit by them, in order as to any the least jott of merit or
reward, unless they believe as the Church believes, go to confession, and do
penance for their sins, and firmly resolve to keep Gods commandments, and the
commandments of his Church for the future, and finally do some satisfactory
works for the transgressions of their ill life past.

And far from truth is it also what de Rodon says, viz. that if Jesus Christ
in the celebration of the Eucharist, has offered unto God his father a
sacrifice of his body and blood, propitiatory for the sins of the living and
dead; then there had been no need that he should be again sacrificed on the
Cross: far I say, is that from truth; Because as all the sacrifices of the old
Law were but types, and derived all their force and virtue from Christ's bloody
sacrifice upon the Cross; so also this incruent or unbloudy sacrifice has its
reference or relation to the said bloody sacrifice; and the difference between
the old sacrifices and this our sacrifice of the new Law is this: that they
were but mediate types and mere shadows of the bloody sacrifice; But our
sacrifice, is not only an immediate type, but also a true Idaea, and daily
express real commemoration of it: Nay (as all the holy fathers do generally
accord) it is the very self same sacrifice as that of the Cross was, though not
offered in the same manner, for that was bloody, and this is unbloudy: and the
reason is, because Christ (as I said before) having a desire to be amongst the
children of men, and promising his Church to be with her alwaise, unto the
consummation of the world; since he is to be in heaven in his humane and
glorious shape, until the time of the restitution of all things; he found out,
in the infinite abyss of his wisdom, this other admirable and ineffable way, of
being really and personally present with his Church militant in the most
blessed Sacrament, for to encourage, seed and strengthen her wirh the manifold
graces that flow from his real presence in her, into the souls of his elect
servants.

To his farther addition out of S. Paul. Ephesians. 4. 11. and 1 Timothy being he
inferrs all from negatives, he can never conclude. However since the Apostle
makes mention unto Tymothy, of Presbyters; that is to say Priests; and since
betwixt Priest, and sacrifice, there is a correlation; it follows that the
Apostle (at least virtually) made mention of sacrificers.

Rodon. 3. The second argument is drawn from the definition of a sacrifice, as
it is given us by our adversaries. Card. Bellarmine in Book. 1. of the Mass.
chap. 2. defines it thus, sacrifice is an external oblation made to God alone
whereby in acknowledgment of humane infirmity, and the divine Majesty, the
lawful Minister consecrates by a mistical ceremony, and destroys something that
is sensible and permanent: from those last words, viz. that the lawful Minister
destroys something that is sensible, I form 2. arguments, which destroy the
sacrifice of the Mass. The first is this: In every sacrifice the thing
sacrificed must fall under our senses; for our adversaries say it is a sensible
thing: but the body and blood of Christ, which are pretended to be sacrificed
in the mass, under the accidents of the bread and wine, do not fall under our
senses, as we find by experience; therefore the body and blood of Christ,
which are pretended to be under the accidents of the bread and wine, are not
the thing Sacrificed.

Answ. From these last words: ( viz. that the lawful minister destroys
something that is sensible); drawn out of Bellarmines definition of a
sacrifice; Mr. de Rodon forms two arguments, like two huge milstones that will
crush and destroy the sacrifice of the Mass, and consequently poor Diana^s head
too.

To his first crusher which begins thus: In every sacrifice, the thing
sacrificed must fall under our senses. I grant its major, and its minor, which
is this. But the body and blood of Christ, which are pretended to be sacrificed
in the Mass under the accidents of bread and wine, do not fall under our
senses, as we find by experience. I distinguish thus, but the body and blood
of Christ, etc. do not fall under our senses in their connatural and proper
shape, I confess the minor; do not fall under our senses, in a sacramental
shape* or in the form and shape of bread and wine, which by experience we know
falls under our senses: I deny the minor, and consequence also, for we never
say, that Christ is in the Sacrament, in his proper humane shape, but only
sacramentally, that is to say, in the shape of bread and wine; and yet we hold
that he is really and personally there; because he himself said so, in most
express terms. These sacramental species then being obvious to our senses, and
Christ being really in them; they being destroyed; (although Christ's body
according to its natural and human shape be not destroyed, for he is not
reduplicatively so, in the Sacrament, but only specificatively) his sacramental
presence is also destroyed in them; and consequently, we say, that by
destroying the sacramental species, which are palpably obvious to our senses; a
true and proper sacrifice, though an unbloudy one, is offered to God the
father, in remembrance of Christ's once-bloudy sacrifice upon the Cross*

Rodon. 4. Against this answer, Mr. de Rodon has these two replies. The first
is, that Christ's body is not visible by the species of bread; because as his
adversaries say; that hides it from us, and hinders us from seeing it, and he
says moreover, that although a substance may be said to be visible and
cognizible by its accidents; yet it is never so by the accidents of another
substance; and consequently (he infers) Jesus Christ may be said to be visible
by his own accidents, but not by the accidents, of bread which are just alike
both in the consecrated, and unconsecrated hosts. And it is a ridiculous shift
to say, that Christ's body is visible under the species of the bread, because
that species is visible; for as we cannot see wine that is in a hogshead,
because we see the hogshead: and we cannot see money that is in a Purse closed,
because we see the purse; so neither can we see the body under the species of
bread, because we see the species ^for* as our adversaries say, that species
hinders us from seeing (...).

5. Secondly, he says, that by the sacramental being is understood, only an
accidental being of Jesus Christ (for example, his presence in the Sacrament)
or else besides that, is understood his substantial being too. If his
substantial being be also understood (seeing the substantial being of a thing,
is nothing else but its substance and nature) then it will follow, that if
Jesus Christ be destroyed in the Sacrament of the Eucharist in respect of his
substantial being; he must also be destroyed in respect of his natural being,
which is contrary to what the Apostle says, Romans 6. Jesus Christ dies no
more. If an accidental being of Jesus Christ be only understood (for example,
his presence in the Sacrament) then these absur^ityes will follow, viz.

First, that the sacrifice of the Mass will be the sacrifice of an accident
only, and not of Jesus Christ; because the Presence of Jesus Christ, is not
Jesus Christ himself, but an accident of him.

Secondly, it will follow, that the sacrifice of the Mass, and that of the
Cross will not be the same sacrifice, in reference to the thing sacrificed;
because Jesus Christ, and his presence are not the same thing. Jesus Christ
being a substance, and his presence an accident, which is contrary to the
decision of the Council of Trent, which has determined, that the sacrifice of
the Mass, and that of the Cross, are the same in reference to the thing
sacrificed.

Thirdly, it will follow, that the thing which is destroyed in the Sacrament,
is not the same with that, which was produced there; because there is only an
accident destroyed, whereas a substance was produced by Transubstantiation*
which is a substantial conversion; as has been sufficiently proved.

Fourthly, it will follow, that the sacrifice of the Mass, will be offered in
the Priests stomach only; because this presence is not destroyed, till the
Priest has eaten the host, and consequently, the sacrifice of the Mass, will
be offered after the Mass; for this presence is only destroyed by the
destruction of the accidents; and commonly these accidents are not destroyed
till after Mass is said.

Fifthly, it will follow, that the Justice of God will cease to be the same;
for whereas heretofore it could not be satisfied but by the death of Christ,
and by the destruction of his natural being; now God is appeased, our sins
expiated, and Gods Justice satisfied, by the destruction of his Sacramental
being only; for they will have it, that the Sacrifice of the Mass is
propitiatory for the sins of the living and the dead.

Answ. It is far more ridiculous and nonsensical (good Mounsieur) to measure
objects of divine faith with our corporal senses, whereas it is impossible that
any such object can fall under them. Therefore it is enough that a man has a
certain and sure knowledge by belief, grounded upon Christ's attestation, of his
personal presence in the Eucharist, and a visible sensible certainty of the
Sacramental species wherein he is contained; this is (I say) enough to offer it
as a true sacrifice; for this intelligible and credible certainty relying upon
Christ's true and effective word, is a far more firm and sure knowledge, then
any visible or sensible knowledge is; and where this intelligible and true
credible sight is, the visible and sensible knowledge is quite unnecessary. If
Christ should reveal unto the Mounsieur the wine that is in the hogshead, or
the money that is in the closed purse; would he not believe him, and be certain
of their being there; unless he saw the wine, and the money with his eyes? he
may choose; but I am sure I would believe him, and so ought every other
Christian to do, as well as if he saw these things with his eyes. So Christ
said to bread; this is my body; wherefore then should I not believe, and be as
certain it is so, as if I had seen him in his humane shape with my eyes? Now
then being I certainly believe the thing is as he said it is; and having a
visible knowledge of the Sacramental species wherein he says he is really
present, wherefore by reason of this visible sight of the accidents or species,
and of the intelligible or credible certainty of the object or thing which I
believe is in the species; wherefore I say may not this be called, and offered
up to God as a true and rigorous sacrifice, being there is nothing in the
definition of a rigorous sacrifice, which is not found here? That a substance
cannot be visible, or known to be in a place, but by its own accidents, I grant
is true, naturally speaking; But it implies not that a substance may be known
to be in a place supernaturally, by the accidents of another substance; and so
it is in our case, for Christ with his omnipotent effective word supplies the
substance of bread and wine in the Sacrament, and makes them exist, in, and by
themselves without their connatural subjects, or any subject at all, and so the
accidents of the bread and wine, which remain supernaturally undestroyed in the
Sacrament, signify, and give us a certain knowledge of Christ's real and personal
presence there, without signifiing (after the words of consecration) the
entities of the bread and wine. Thus we answer his first reply.

To his second reply, I answer, that the Sacramental being of Christ, is no
accidental, but a substantial being; for though his Sacramental ubication be a
predicable accident; yet it is no Predicamental accident; and consequently
belongs not to any of the nine series or categories of the Accidental
Predicaments. And the reason is, because his body is not circumscriptively
there, in its univocal place; and all Predicamental ubications or presences do
result from an univocal place, and not from a Sacramental one: that Christ's
ubication or presence in the Sacrament is a Predicable accident, hinders not
its being a substantial mode or manner of presence; for subsistence, and
existence are predicable accidents also, and but accidentally predicated or
said of their first substances, or essences; and yet there is no good
Philosopher breathing will say, that subsistence or existence are essentially
accidents, or do belong to any of the nine Cathegories of Accidents, but they
all hold that they are substantial modes, and they all place them in the
indirect line of the Predicament of substance.

Therefore I answer his second reply in form thus; By the Sacramental being is
understood an accidental Predicable being, which Predicable being is a
substantial mode or manner of Christ's being present in the Sacrament. I
confess. By the Sacramental being, is understood an accidental Predicamental
being of him in the Sacrament, I deny, and the reason I gave just now; which
is, that because his body is not circumscriptively in the Sacrament, but only
sacramentally; his ubication or presence in it, cannot be a predicamental one;
belonging to any of the nine series of accidents, for all predicamental
ubications or presences must necessarily result from univocal and proper
places, as the received definition of a Predicamental ubi, which Gilbertus
Porretanus in opusc* de sex Principiis, viz. Ubi, est circumscriptio corporis,
a circumscriptione loci proveniens, an Ubi: ubication, or presence, is a
circumscription of a body, proceeding from the circumscription of a Place; does
evidently show.

Then replies the Mounsieur again: If Christ's being in the Sacrament, be a
substantial being, since his substantial being is nothing else but his
substance and nature; then it follows, that if Christ's being be destroyed in
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, in respect of his substantial being there, he
must be also destroyed in respect of his natural being.

I deny the sequel; for although Christ's entity be in the Sacrament by virtue
of the words of consecration, yet it is there but modally by virtue of the
words, and he remains still essentially, and in his proper humane shape in
heaven; so that his essence or entity remains still as it was, although his
modality or manner of being so and so in the Sacrament (which we say is a
substantial, and not an accidental manner of being, for the reason alleged) be
destroyed, or cease to be there. If we should say that Christ's body is
circumscriptively and in his proper human shape in the Sacrament; by virtue of
the words of consecration, then something may be said in the matter; but we
hold no such thing; we only say that by virtue of the words of consecration,
his substance is really in the Sacramental species, which are no proper place
at all, because he is in them immediately by reason of his substance, and no
substance can immediately by reason of its own self, possess any proper place,
but only by reason of its quantity; and all Philosophers (I know not what the
great Mounsieur holds) do hold that ten thousand substances may be contained in
a point, without being in any proper place. So that the sacramental species
being destroyed, it follows only that Christ's substantial presence which was
modally in them, as in no proper place, cease to be in them after they are
consumed or destroyed, and yet cease not (because they are destroyed) to be
at all, or to be in his proper natural shape in heaven. Moreover, as all
Philosophers do commonly say, corporal things do depend of their proper places
in order to their conservation, and are in statu violento, (as they call it)
that is, they have an inclination to tend toward their center, and are not at
rest and quiet until they be there, but suffer some kind of violence and force
from such bodies as obstruct their passage; so we see fire tends always upwards
toward its Element which is its proper place; and all the waters tends toward
their own Element. But Christ's glorified body has no natural inclination or
tendency toward the sacramental species; which is a sign that it is not there
in its connatural place, and consequently that it has no dependency from them;
from whence follows evidently that when they are destroyed, although his
substance cease to be in them; that his substance is not at all annoyed or
destroyed, by the destruction of them; for it never depended, of them.

This formal distinction of both kinds of accidents, Praedicamental and
Predicable, obstructs all de Rodons rushing absurdities, which he says would
ensue from the doctrine of the Mass.

It obstructs the first, because according to this distinction the sacrifice of
the Mass, is not a sacrifice of an accident only, but of a substantial mode, or
manner of presence, accidentally predicated of an essence and nature, which
has, and always will have its natural being in its proper place in heaven,
until the restitution of all things, Acts. 3.

It obstructs the second, because the holy fathers above mentioned, and
especially S. Ambrose and S. Chrysostom (whose authorities are of far more
worth, and rather to be believed, then de Rodons simple bare word is) do
expressly affirm, that the sacrifice of the Mass, and that of the Cross, are but
one and the self same sacrifice essentially, though not in manner or mode, the
one being bloody, and the other unbloudy.

It obstructs the third, because the same thing which was produced, viz.
Christ's substantial ubication or presence in the Sacrament, is only that which
is destroyed, at the destruction of the sacramental species; and not his
nature, essence, or substantial being; for after the consumation of the
sacramental species, Christ cease to be personally present in them any more;
but he cease not to be in his own humane shape in heaven, for their being
destroyed.

It obstructs the fourth, because we hold with Bellarmine, that the sacrifice
of the Mass, consists chiefly and essentially in the words of consecration,
(which are not uttered in the Priests stomach) and not in any oblations of the
host before or after, neither in the consumpsion also; though at the
consumpsion of the host, we confess the sacrifice is integrated and completed;
and consequently no more to be offered in the Priests stomach; for when the
accidents are consumed, and dessended into the Priests stomach, they are out of
our sight and sphere of offering them; and they are then altered in fieri, as
schoolmen call it; that's to say in the way of being altered or destroyed. And
since we know not how long they remain undestroyed there, there is no reason
why we should offer them in his stomach; for they were offered already, both as
to the essential and integral oblation, at the words of consecration, and
ceremonies following unto the consumption inclusively.

It obstructs the last, because it being the self same sacrifice with that of
the Cross (as all the holy fathers and doctors of Christ's Church do unanimously
assert) its virtue, force, and satisfaction, is totally derived from the
Justice and satisfaction of the cruent or bloody sacrifice of the Cross; for
this sacrifice is nothing else but an express Idea and perfect memorial, nay to
speak more properly, it is but the self same sacrifice with the bloody one,
reiterated after an incruent manner; and consequently it is propitiatory for
the sins of the living and dead.

His first millstone being thus split and shattered into small pieces; we need
not fear his second; because one Millstone alone cannot grind; yet fearing left
the Mounsieur or his party, should think that its weight should crush or
destroy us, I let it appear thus.

Rodon. In every true sacrifice, the thing sacrificed must be utterly
destroyed, that is, it must be so changed, that it must cease to be what it was
before; as Bellarmine says in express terms in the place above cited: But in
the pretended sacrifice of the Mass, Christ's body and blood are not destroyed;
for Jesus Christ dies no more, Romans 6. Therefore in the pretended sacrifice of
the Mass, the body and blood of Christ, are not the thing sacrificed.

Answ. In every sacrifice the thing sacrificed must be destroyed, that is, it
must be so changed, that it must cease to be what it was bofore If by ceasing
to be what it was before, he intends, ceasing to be in the manner as it was
before; I confess the major. If by ceasing to be, etc. he intends, ceasing to
be the entitie or same thing it was before, I deny the major, And Bellarmins
words in the place alleged, do express no more; for these be his words in the
same place; And destroies something that is sensible and permanent: for by the
word ( something) a mode or manner may be as well understood, as an entitie or
nature; and so we say, it is in the Sacrament: we say, that the sensible
accidents of bread and wine, with the substantial sacramental Presence of
Christ's body and blood (which is the only thing produced by the words of
consecration) are destroyed: But we say not that the entitie of Christ's body
and blood, (which is rather adduced then produced in the Sacrament,) or that
his body and blood in their proper shape are destroyed in the Sacrament;
because the words of consecration does not put them so into it. And so both Mr.
de Rodons huge Milstones, with all their following absurdities are quite
shattered and split; Now then to his third Principal Argument drawn from the
Apostles words; Hebr. 9 which is this.

Rodon. Hebr. 9. the Apostle says: Almost all things are by the law purged
with blood, and without shedding of blood is no remission: it was therefore
necessary that the patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with
these: but the heavenly things themselves, with better sacrifices then these:
from which words I form this argument: There is no propitiation or remission of
sins without shedding of blood, as the Apostle says; But in the Mass there is
no shedding of blood, for it is called an unbloudy sacrifice; Therefore in the
Mass there is no propitiation or remission of sins, and consequently, no
propitiatory sacrifice. This argument may be thus confirmed; under the old
Testament there was no propitiation or purification without shedding of blood,
and the types of heavenly things were so purified, as the Apostle says, Heb.
9. Therefore under the new Testament also, there can be no propitiation or
purification, without shedding hf blood; and heavenly things being represented
by the legal Types must be purified by a more excellent sacrifice, viz. by the
shedding of Christ's blood. And although the Apostle uses the word (sacrifices)
in the plural number: yet we must understand the only sacrifice of Christ on
the Cross; because when one thing is opposed to many, it is often expressed in
the plural number; as whem Baptism, which is but one, is called Baptismes. Heb.
6. 2. But the only sacrifice of the Cross of Christ, in the text above cited,
Heb. 9. 23. is opposed to the old sacrifices, which were types and figures of
the sacrifice of the Cross.

Answ. I grant that unless Christ had shed his blood for us, there had been no
propitation or remission of sins; and consequently that there was no expiation
or remission of sins in any types or sacrifices of the old law, but only in
relation and reference to Christ's bloody sacrifice upon the Cross: which is all
the Apostle meant in the forementioned Passage: But all this concerns not the
unbloudy sacrifice of the Mass at all, which is not a bare type or shadow of
Christ's bloody sacrifice, as all the sacrifices of the old Law were, and no
more; for the sacrifice of the Mass is not only an immediate type of that of
the Cross; but also a proper Idea, memorial, nay (as the holy fathers say) the
self-same sacrifice of the Cross; reiterated after another manner, viz.
unbloudily; because it is not convenient that Christ's body being now glorious
and impassible, should suffer again; and by reason it is a perpetual memorial
or repetition of the bloody sacrifice, it has a reference or relation to it;
from whence follows evidently, that because it is the selfsame sacrifice
essentially with that of the Cross, and it has an immediate relation to it,
and remembrance of it; It follows, I say, evidently, that it is propitiatory
for the living and the dead, as that of the Cross is: for if it be the same
body and blood that is now offered, and was offered upon the Cross (as Christ
himself says *it is his body, and the fathers of the Church say it is the same
sacrifice with that of the Cross) it imports not at all as to the essence of
the sacrifice, whether it be offered bloudily or unbloudily; because to be
bloody or unbloudy, is not essential to a sacrifice; there being some
sacrifices offered in the old Law, whereof some were bloody, and other strict
sacrifices also offered which had no blood in them. Therefore to make the Mass
a proper and strict sacrifice, it is sufficient that in the Mass there be
sensible symbols, viz. the accidents of bread and wine, containing Christ's body
and blood, really, personally, and ^bstantially present; and that at the
destruction of these symbols or signs, Christ's body cease to be
substantially and personally present there any more; though he cease not
(because of the destruction of the species) to be absolutely, and in his humane
shape in heaven.

Finally, I say, that God the father knows* and accepts of the sacrifice of his
sons body offered unto him by us, for our sins, as our Mediator; whether the
said body be offered to him bloudily or uubloudily.

Rodon. The Apostle, Heb. 10. 16. says; this is the Covenant which I will make
with them after these days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their
hearts, and in their minds will I write them, and their sins and iniquities will
I remember no more: Now where remission of these is, there is no more offering
for sin: whence I form this argument; where there is remission of sins, there
is no need of an oblation, or propitiatory sacrifice for sin, as the Apostle
faith: But in the Christian Church, by virtue of the new Testament or new
Covenant, confirmed by the blood of Christ, there is remission of sins, Heb.
10. 16. 17. Therefore in the Christian Church now adays, there is no need of an
obligation, or propitiatory sacrifice, and consequently no need of the
sacrifice of the Mass.

Answ. Mr. de Rodon, the better to draw his argument out of Scripture,
salsifies the text in two places; for where the text says; This is the
Testament, etc. he has: This is the Covenant, etc. the reason (I believe) why
he puts Covenant instead of Testament is, because he denies the Eucharist to be
a Testament of the new Law; saying that it is only a figure or sign of it: and
therefore being he could not handsomely translate the text thus, this is the
sign of the Testament which I will make with them after those days: (seeing the
word, Testament, was more against him then for him) he changed it into
Covenant; whether this corrupting the text be his own, or the translatours of
his Bible, it matters not, so long as the corruption is evidently to be seen.

In the second place by him falsisied, where the true text runs thus, and their
sins and iniquities I will now remember no more, but where there is remission
of these, now there is not an oblation for sins, instead of But where there is
a remission of these; etc. the Mounsieur has: Now where remission of these is,
etc. and this changing of ( But) into ( Now) was that he may the easier infer,
that now, after the once bloody sacrifice of the Cross, there is no more
sacrifice offered, for he forms his argument thus: where there is remission of
sins, there is no need of an oblation, or a propitiatory sacrifice for sin, as
the Apostle says; But in the Christian Church, by virtue of the new Testament
or new Covenant confirmed by the blood of Christ, there is remission of sins,
Heb. 10. 16. 17. therefore in the Christian Church now adays there is no need
of an oblation, or propitiatory sacrifice; and consequently no need of the
sacrifice of the Mass.

Whatever his or the Translators reason was to change But, into Now, I will not
stickle with them about it. Therefore I answer his argument, granting the major
and distinguishing the minor thus: in the Christian Church by virtue of the
bloody sacrifice of Christ's body upon the Cross, there is remission of sins
without any repetition of the same bloody sacrifice again, and without any
other oblation or sacrifice essentially different from this bloody Sacrifice; I
consess the minor. In the Christian Church, by virtue of the bloody sacrifice
of Christ's body upon the Cross, there is remission of sins, without any
repetition of the same unbloudy sacrifice, or of a sacrifice only accidentally
different from his bloody sacrifice upon the cross, I deny the minor: and the
reason is this; because Christ suffered and sacrificed himself bloudily for all
men, and for the sins of all the world in general: Behold the lamb of God,
behold him that takes away the sins of the world. S. John. 1. for if Christ had
not suffered for all mankind in general, but only for the elect; besides that
it would sound something of a personal acception (which is not at all in God)
the reprobates may justly allege that the chief cause of their damnation was,
because Christ did not suffer, nor satisfy for their sins; But if Christ
suffered for the sins of all mankind, (as certainly he did, else how could he
be called the Redeemer of the world) then according to the Mounsieurs argument
and Principles, by reason of this general satsfaction and bloody sacrifice, all
the sins of the world are remitted, and so by reason of this bloody sacrifice
once offered in general for all men without exception, all will be saved, be
they Jews, Turks, heathens, believers or unbelievers, virtuous or vicious: why?
for there is no need of offering sacrifice or oblation to God any more, and the
bloody sacrifice is still in force; if we believe the Mounsieur sure this is
the shortest, openest, and easiest way to heaven that ever was heard of; and
yet Christ himself says: Regnum Caelorum vim patitur, that the kingdom of
heaven does suffer violence; S. Matt. 11. Or can the Mounsieur say, that
Christ's bloody sacrifice was not fatisfactory in rigor for all the sins of the
world? if he does, I tell him another man for saying so, would be counted an
arrant liar and a most impious blasphemous heretic.

Therefore we say, that although Christ's Passion and bloody sacrifice was in it
self of force and virtue sufficient to take away all the sins of the world, and
although he suffered for all mankind in general without excepting one; yet we
say, that unless his Passion be applied to every one in particular (I mean to
all those that fell into relapse of sin after Baptism) it will not avail them
at all; and his application we say, is made, by reiterating the same sacrifice
unbloudily; as Christ himself expressly commanded, when he said, unless you eat
the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in
you. John. 6.

That Christ's body was given him to be sacrificed not only upon the Cross, but
upon the Altar also, S. Aug: affirms in his 17th book, de civit. Dei. 20. chap.
The table (quoth he) which the Priest of the new Testament does exhibit, is of
his body and blood; for that is the sacrifice which succeeded all the
sacrifices that were offered in shadow of that to come; for the which also we
acknowledge that voice of the same mediator in the Psalm, But a body thou have
fitted to me, because in stead of all these sacrifices and oblations, his body
is offered, and is ministered to the partakers and receivers. And again lib. 4.
de Trinit. c. 14. Who so just and holy a Priest as the son of God? what might
be so conveniently offered for men, of men, as man's flesh? and what so fit for
this immolation or offering, as mortal flesh? who so clean for cleansing the
vices of mortal men, as the flesh born of the virgins womb? and what can be
offered and received so gratefully, as the flesh of our sacrifice made by the
body of our Priest? Could the holy Doctor or any man breathing, have spoken
more clearly and manifestly in the behalf of Transubstantiation, and of the
sacrifice of the Mass, than this? first, he calls it the table of the body and
blood of Christ, then he says, it is offered by men for men; the holy Doctor
meant not, by men, the Jews that killed our Savior, but the Priests that
sacrifice him unbloudily for men, or for the sins of men; for all the world
knows, that the Jews killed our Savior out of mere hatred and spleen, and not
with intention to sacrifice or offer him to God the Father, to satisfy for the
sins of mankind. Lastly, he says, nothing can be offered and received so
gratefully as the flesh of our sacrifice, made by the body of our Priest, where
calling it our sacrifice, he says it is a sacrifice, and not the bloody one,
which was rather for us then ours: and by saying, made by the body of our
Priest, he expressly owneth Transubstantiation; that is to say, he expressly
owneth that very thing we understand by the word Transubstantiation; or he
owneth expressly the self-same thing we hold Transubstantiation to be.

S. Ambrose seconds S. Augustines tenet concerning this: What (quoth he) we
then? do not we offer every day? we offer surely, but this sacrifice is an
exemplar of that; for we offer always the self-same, and not now one lamb, and
to morrow another, but always the self-same thing: he calls it a sacrifice, he
says, it is offered every day, therefore he meant not the bloody sacrifice, for
that was offered but once; and he says, We offer always the self-same thing,
therefore it must be the self-same host or sacrifice; and since it was never
offered bloudily but once, it follows evidently that all the other daily
oblations of the same host, (meant by the holy doctor) are the unbloudy
sacrifice of the Mass.

Primasius, S. Augustins Scholar, in the place I cited him before, clears this
business, and gives solid reasons withal; What (says he) shall we say then? do
not our Priests daily offer sacrifice? they offer surely, because we sin daily,
and daily have need to be cleansed; and because he cannot die, he has given us
the sacrament of his body and blood; that as his Passion was the Redemption and
absolution of the world; so also this ^blation may be a Redemption and clensing
to all that offer it in truth and verity. Do not you see ( Mounsieur) how
contradictory these words of this holy father, one of great S. Augustins chief
disciples, are to your conclusion? Do not you see what solid reasons he gives
for his saying? viz. that because we sin daily, and have need to be daily
cleansed, it was necessary the self-same sacrifice should be reiterated; not
bloudily; and he gives a reason why; viz. because he cannot die, his body being
now a glorified body. Then concluding solidly his discourse, he says, he has
given us the Sacrament of his body and blood; that as his Passion, etc. where
he gives solid reasons, wherefore besides the bloody sacrifice, it was
convenient and necessary this unbloudy sacrifice should be instituted also;
viz. because although the bloody and the unbloudy sacrifice be but the
self-same, yet as to their effect there is some difference; for the bloody
sacrifice is for all men in general; but the unbloudy, for those in particular
who offer it. Lastly do not you see ( Mounsieur) that by these last words of
this cited Passage, viz. that as his Passion was the Redemption and absolution
of the world, So also this oblation may be a Redemption and cleansing to all
that offer it in truth and verity: do not you see, I say, how by these words,
this holy father makes a clear distinction between the bloody sacrifice of
Christ's Passion, and the unbloudy sacrifice of the Mass which the Priest offers?

I omit S. Chrisostom, Theophilact, Oecumenius, Haymo, Paschasius, Remigius,
and many more of the ancient holy fathers, whose authorities as to this point
are most clear and manifest; because to repeat the same thing over and over
again is both irksom and prolix: Therefore I will come to his fifth argument
which is this.

Rodon. The fifth argument is drawn from the words of the Apostle, Heb. 9.
Jesus Christ offers not himself often, as the high Priest enters into the
holy place every year with the blood of others; for then must he often have
suffered from the foundation of the world; but now once in the end of the world
has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. And as it is
appointed to men once to die, but after this the Judgment, so Christ was once
offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him shall he
appear the second time without sin unto salvation. This is confirmed by the
words of the same Apostle, Heb. 10. The Law being a shadow of good things to
come, and not the very Image of the things, can never with the sacrifices which
they offered year by year continually make the comers thereunto perfect; for
then would they not have ceased to be offered because the worshipers once
purged should have had no more conscience of sins. But in those a remembrance
is made again of sins every year; for it is not possible that the blood of
Bulls and of Goats, should take away sins, etc. And every high Priest stands
daily ministering and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices which can never
take away sins; but this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, for
ever sat down on the right hand of God; for by one offering he has for ever
perfected them that are sanctified. Which i^ conformable to what he had said a
little before, that We are sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus
Christ once for all: from all which I form these arguments.

Answ. Before the Mounsieurs arguments rush upon us too fa^t; for clarities
sake, I will first expound these passages in our Catholic sense; and after
will answer his arments in order.

By these words of the Apostle in his first Passage, viz. Jesus Christ offers
not himself often, as the high Priestss etc. we understand them thus; that he
did not offer himself often bloudily, or that he did not offer a bloody
sacrifice yearly, as the high Priests of the old Law used to do: and so we
understand all the rest of the words of the same Passage, in the same sense,
viz. of a bloody sacrifice* for it is unnecessary, and also impossible that
Christ should suffer again, his body being now glorious and impassible. But
although this Passage denotates a difference betwixt Christ's bloody sacrifice
and the sacrifices of the old Law, in as much as Christ's bloody sacrifice was
but for once; and their bloody sacrifices were yearly; yet his bloody sacrifice
has no opposition to the sacrifice of the Mass, but only accidentally in this,
viz. that the one is a bloody sacrifice, and the other an unbloudy one;
Notwithstanding which accidental difference, the sacrifice remains essentially
one and the self-same; and to reiterate the same thing, though never so often,
causes no opposition in the thing to it self, as any body of the meanest
understanding may easily see; for nothing can be essentially opposite to it
self as the very light of nature shows us.

The first words of the second Passage, out of Heb. 10. do more confirm our
doctrine then the Mounsieurs, for these words. The Law having a shadow of good
things to come, and not the very Image of the thing, etc. shows the great
difference that is between the sacrifice of the Mass, and the sacrifice of the
old Law; for the old sacrifices were but mere speculative shadows of Christ's
bloody sacrifice, and consequently of themselves, were of no value or force to
sanctify people, or to remit sins; whereas according to our doctrine, the
sacrifice of the Mass is not a mere shadow, but a perfect immediate Idea or
Image, and daily actual remembrance of Christ's bloody Passion, Nay the
self-same in essence with the bloody sacrifice, as all the doctors of the
Church teach us; and consequently of the same force and value to remit sins to
those that receive it worthily, as the bloody sacrifice is in it self to remit
all sins in general, if no obstacle were put to it. The last words of this
Passage, ( viz. But this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, for
ever sat down on the right hand of God: for by one offering he has forever
perfected them that are sanctified:) we understand in the same sense as we
understood the words of the former Passage, viz. that after Christ offered one
bloody sacrifice for sins, he forever after sits at the right hand of his
heavenly father, until doomsday, and we also understand these words, viz. By
one offering he has perfected them that are sanctified; we understand (I say)
that his once bloody offering himself upon the Cross, was in it self a perfect
rigorous satisfaction, and of worth to sanctify all those that are sanctified;
But that which we deny is, that this oncebloudy sacrifice does oppose or
exclude the unbloudy sacrifice of the Mass, which we say (with the holy
fathers) is the self same essentially with it, and consequently of the same
force with it, in order to the remitting of sins, and sanctifing of those who
receive it worthily, and to whom it is particularly applied unto; as Learned
Primasius says in the place abovementioned. Now then to the Mounsieurs
arguments.

Rodon. First, the old sacrifices were reiterated; for the Apostle says, that
the high Priest enters into the holy Place every year with the blood of
others. But the sacrifice of Jesus Christ must not be reiterated; for the same
Apostle says: that Jesus Christ offers not himself often; and that he has
once appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself: Therefore the
sacrifice of the Mass is not the sacrifice of the Cross reiterated, or the
reiteration of the sacrifice of the cross, as our adversaries would have it.

Answ. If the Mounsieur takes all those to be his adversaries, that say the
sacrifice of the Cross, and of the Mass are the self-same sacrifice; I am sure
all the fathers of the Church are his adversaries. I quoted some of them
already, and could quote many more if need were. But what cares the Mounsieur
for all the fathers? why may not he answer for himself as well as Luther, the
chief Apostle of the Protestants did to king Henry the 8th thus? Luth. tom. 2.
con. Reg. Aug. fol. 34^. Against the sayings of fathers, of men, of Angels of
devils, set no old custom, nor multitude of men; but the word of the only
eternal Majesty, the Gospel; here I stand, here I sit, here I glory, here I
triumph, here I insult, over Papists, Thomists, Henricists, Sophists and all
the gates of hell, much more over the sayings of men, be they never so holy.
Gods word is above all, the divine Majesty makes for me, so as I pass not, if
a thous^nd Austins, a thousand Cyprians, a thousand King-Harri^- Churches stood
against me: God cannot err, or deceiv^. Austin, Cyprian, and likewise all other
elect might err, and they have erred: Here answer Master Harrie, here play the
man, I contemn thy lies, I fear not thy threats, here thou stand astonished
like a stock. etc. Just the same language may the good Mounsieur give to all
General Councils and holy fathers that ever treated of this question; for they
are all unanimously against his opinion; so that since he has nothing to stand
unto, but his own bare word, or the sayings of those that were since Luthers
time, and derived from him; I see no reason why he should not stand in defiance
of them all, as well as Luther did. Therefore he may very well say with Luther,
here I stand, here I sit, here I glory, here I triumph and exult over all the
General Councils, and old fathers that were in the Apostles time, or ever
since. Gods word is above all, and the divine Majesty makes for me, so as I
Pass not, if a thousand Austins, a thousand Cyprians, Ambroses, Chrysostomes,
and a thousand holy fathers be against me; and I contemn your words, your lying
authorities, concerning Transubstantiation, and the sacrifice of the Mass; and
have no more esteem for you then for so many stocks, this I say, and such like
good language, may the Mounsieur give to the holy fathers, as well as Luther
gave to King Henry; for they both go upon the same Principles, viz. upon their
one bare words; for de Rodons strawy illation drawn out of this passage of
Scripture; I break thus.

By confessing the major, viz. that the old sacrifices were reiterated; as the
former words of the Apostl^s Passage do prove; and I distingush his minor, viz.
but the sacrifice of Jesus Christ must not be reiterated, Bloudily, I confess;
unbloudily, I deny: and the subsequent words of the Apostle, from whence this
illation is drawn, do prove no more; so that I deny his consequence also, viz.
that the sacrifice of the Cross, and of the Mass are not the self-same; which
cannot follow from his minor, before he proves that the sacrifice of Jesus
Christ cannot be reiterated unbloudily; a thing which he, nor his will ever be
able to do, out of S. Paul's words here, or any where else.

Rodon. Secondly, the Apostle adding, Else he should often have suffered from
the foundation of the world; makes it apparent, that Christ cannot be offered
without suffering; for as he that should say, this is not fire, else it would
be hot, does necessarily presuppose, that fire is hot, and as he that should
say, he is no man, else he would be rational: So when the Apostle says that
Jesus Christ offers not himself often, otherwise he should often have
suffered; does necessarily presuppose, that Jesus Christ cannot offer himself
without suffering; But Jesus Christ does not suffer every day in the Mass;
therefore he is not offered every day in the Mass by the ministry of Priests.

Answ. The foresaid words of the Apostle makes it rather evidently appear, that
Christ's bloody sacrifice is there meant, which is just as we expound and
understand them; which bloody sacrifice, we confess, cannot be reiterated
without suffering, which makes nothing against us; for we say not that Christ's
bloody sacrifice ought to be reiterated: But we deny that Christ's body may not
be offered or sacrificed unbloudily in the Mass without suffering; or that the
forementioned Passage makes it apparent; and to the proofs or parities the
Mounsieur produces, as touching fire, and heat, man, and rational; sacrifice,
and suffering: first I say, that suffering is not essential to sacrifice, as
rational is to a man; nay, nor its property also, as heat is to fire; if we
take the word, sacrifice, in its whole extent and latitude: for there were many
sorts of rigorous sacrifices of the old Law, wherein the things that were
sacrificed did not suffer, or were capable of suffering; as were the sacrifices
of meal, oil, bread wine, etc. secondly, I answer, that as heat is proper to
fire, and rational essential to man; so is also to suffer a property to a
patible living body sacrificed; and not to suffer, a property to an impatible
or glorious body, such as Christ's body is sacrificed in the Mass: where is now
then the Mounsieurs strong argument, out of clear and apparent scripture?

Rodon. Thirdly, these words, from the foundation of the world, are of great
weight; for it is as much, as if the Apostle had said; if the only sacrifice of
Christ on the Cr^ss, be not sufficient to take away sins which shall be
committed hereafter, it follows, that it was not sufficient to take away sins
which have been committed heretofore; from the creation of the world; for it is
very unsuitable, that the sacrifice of Christ on the Cross, should have more
virtue before it was offered, then since, but the sacrifice of Christ on the
Cross, had the virtue to take away sins before it was, otherwise ( says the
Aposile) he should often have suffered from the foundation of the world:
Therefore it has also virtue to take away sins committed since it was. And
consequently there is no need that it should be reiterated in the Mass.

Answ. Sure it is, and we confess it, the the foundation of the world, (or to
speak more properly) the world upon its foundation, is a thing of very great
poyse and weight in it self. But alas! the argument which the Mounsieur draws
from it, is of no weight at all; it is as light as any fly or feather: for we
grant, that the sacrifice of the Cross is sufficient to take away the sins
committed not only before it, from the creation of the world but also that
shall be committed hereafter; and that his bloody sacrifice was offered for all
people in general: yet since (as holy Primasius says) our sins do daily
increase, and all ages grow more and more corrupt; it is not only convenient,
but also necessary, that this bloody sacrifice typified by all the Sacraments
of the old Law, and virtually in its self, sufficient to destroy all the sins
of the world, even from the foundation thereof until doomsday; should be
reiterated, rememorated, and applied by the Church, for the daily sins of the
faithful; not bloudily, as it was upon the Cross, for that would be a cruel and
Jewish action; but unbloudily, as it is in the Mass; for Christ's body being now
glorified, can suffer no more.

Rodon. Fourthly, the Apostles comparison is c^nsiderable, the sense whereof is
this: as men suffer death but once, and after death appear n^ more till the d^y
of the Resurrection, and day of Iudgme^; s^ Christ has offered himself to his
father once for all on the Cross to take away sins, and will be n^ more upon
earth, until he comes to judge the quick and the dead. This utterly destroys
the Mass, in which Jesus Christ is said to be offered and sacrificed
continually by the ministry of Priests.

Answ. Notwithstanding the Apostles considerable comparison, this argument of
the Mounsieurs is as inconsiderable as his last was light: for we confess, that
as men suffer death but once, and after death appear no more until the day of
refurrection and judgment; so Christ has offered himself to his father once
for all, on the Cross to take away sins, and will be no more in his humane
shape upon earth until he comes to judge the quick and the dead; but we deny
that he will not be really upon earth also in the Sacrament, until the
consumation of the world, as he himself promised us he would be, and to his
illative exclamation or outcry, viz. This utterly destroys the Mass; I answer
as loud as he; that his consequence makes him an Ass; for it follows not at
all, that because Christ will appear no more upon earth in his humane shape,
that he is not really in the Mass, or that the Mass is utterly destroyed: how
does the Mounsieur infer this? how does he prove it out of this Passage? verily
no better then an Ass would if he could speak.

Rodon. Fifthly, sacrifices that take away sins, and sanctify those that come
thereunto, ought not to be reiterated; for the only reason which the Apostle
alleges why the old sacrifices of the law were reiterated, is because they
could not take away sins, nor sanctify the comers thereunto, as appear by the
Text above cited; But the sacrifice of Jesus Christ on the Cross* takes away
sins, and sanctifies those that come thereunto; therefore the sacrifice of
Jesus Christ on the Cross, onght not to be reiterated; and consequently is not
reiterated in the Mass.

If Jesus Christ did offer himself a sacrifice on the Cross that he might
sanctify us for ever, and and purchase eternal redemption for us; then it is
evident that the fruit and efficacy of this sacrifice endures for ever, and
that we must have recourse to no other sacrifice but to that of the Cross; But
Jesus Christ did offer himself a sacrifice on the Cross, that he might
sanctify us for ever, and purchase eternal redemption for us as appears by the
Texts afforesaid; Therefore the efficacy of the sacrifice of the Cross endures
for ever, and we must have recourse to no other sacrifice but to that of the
Cross. In a word, either we must confess that the sacrifice of the cross has no
virtue to take away sins, and to sanctify us for ever, (which is contrary to
what the Apostle says) or else if it has this virtue and sufficiency, then
Jesus Christ has offered one only sacrifice once for all, and consequently is
not offered daily in the Mass, by the Ministry of Priests.

Answ. These two pitiful illations deduced out of your fifth argument are
chopped off in two words; for as to the first, we consess again and again, that
Christ's bloody sacrifice which takes away sins and sanctifies people, onght not
be reiterated bloudily again, unbloudily, we deny; and this we told the
Mounsieur a hundred times over* as to the second, we also deny that the
sacrifice of the Mass is any other sacrifice distinct from that of the Cross;
as we also told him as many times over and over: which two principles of ours
until he destroys, (which he nor any of his, will ever be able to do, his
Illations will remain pittyful, and never be worth a rush.

Rodon. The Apostle almost throughout the whole Epistle to the Hebr. says,
that Jesus Christ was constituted and consecrated by his father high Priest for
ever, and particularly Chap. 7. he says: that many were made Priests, because
they were not suffered to continue by reason of death; But Jesus Christ because
he continues for ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood; and that he is able
to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives
to make intercession for them. And consequently ( infers the wise Mounsieur) he
has no need of vicars or companions in his Priesthood.

Answ. Why Mounsieur is it because God the father did constitute Christ high
Priest, for to sacrifice himself bloudily upon the Cross, for our sins, and
unbloudily upon the Altar, you infer he has no need of vicars or companions
in his Priesthood? what a fine consequence is this? Christ sacrificed himself
once bloudily, therefore there is no need of any other Priest to sacrifice him
unbloudily; this antecedent and consequence hangs not together: Nay nor
supposing Christ sacrificed himself once unbloudily; (as we hold he did at the
first institution of this Sacrament) does it follow that there is no need of
any other Priest to sacrifice him unbloudily; for he commanded his Apostles to
do as he did himself, when he said; As often as you do this, do it in
remembrance of me. But good Mounsieur tell me, how could Christ be constituted
by his Father high priest but in reference to some vicar or underpriest? are
not high and low relative terms? you told us once, that under and above do
denotate different places; and (different) you know is a relative, because it
imports inequality between two things or more; therefore I believe you will not
deny but that (high) is a relative word because it signifies as (above) does:
But all correlatives be simultanean, that is, together, or at the same time.
Therefore Christ was constituted high priest in respect to some Vicars or
inferior Priests; and since he was constituted high priest of the New
Testament or Law, it follows evidently, that there must be Priests his vicars
and substitutes of the same Law; and if there be Priests of the New-Law, then
follows it as clearly that there is a sacrifice of the new Law, to be offered
by them, (for Priest, and sacrifice, are also correlatives) But there is no
more bloody sacrifice of the new Law; therefore the sacrifice which the Priests
of the new law now offer, is the unbloudy sacrifice of Christ's body in the
host: really Mounsieur these consequences do hang better together* then yours
does of its antecedent, drawn from the Apostles words. For besides its
impertinency, it openly contradicts the same Apostle, who in his 1. Tim. 5.
says, the Priests that rule well^ let them ^e esteemed worthy of double honor;
and again the same place, Against a priest receive not accusation: Therefore in
the Apostles time there were Priests; and yet de Rodon concludes there is no
need of vicars, or companions of Christ's Priesthood: The Apostles themselves
were all Priests, and Highpriests too, for they constituted Bishops and
Priests, as S. Paul did Timothy, Titus, and many others; yet in comparison to
Christ's Priesthood, they were but vicars, and substitutes. The holy fathers
called themselves Priests, and said, that they offered every day a sacrifice,
whose examplar was the bloody sacrifice of the Cross: as I have showed before,
where I cited their very words: yet the Mounsieur confidently inferrs out of
scripture, that there is no need of vicars, or companions of Christ's
Priesthood; an excellent consequence, and wittily deduced against S. Paul's
express words, who mentions Priests, and against the whole torrent of holy
fathers: This is that smart divine of the Reformed Religion, whose small
treatise (in his Translatours opinion) is the best Antidote against Popery (the
holy scripture excepted) that over he read, and for ought he knows, it is not
inferior to the best of this kind that ever was yet extant: these be his own
words in the Preface of his Translation. But our Diana and Popery will never be
annoyed or destroyed with such silly and ungodly stuff as this. Christ said,
Ego sum Pastor bonus: I am the good Pastor, John. 10. wherefore may not the
Mounsieur infer as well out of this text. Therefore Christ has no need of
vicars or under Pastors to feed his flock, or to be companions in his
Pastorship? and yet Christ bid Peter, pasce oves meas, pasce agnes meos; feed
my sheep, feed my lambs: In a word, if the Mounsieurs consequence holds, the
Reformed Church needs no Preachers, Teachers, Ministers, or Pastors; for Christ
himself the good and high Pastor, will do it all for them* and the people will
but displease him; for constituting Ministers and Pastors over them, to be his
companions or vicars in his high Pastorship; and to say the truth I think their
flocks for the most part do not regard very much what they preach or teach; for
if they did, so many sectaries would never sprout from them; and without any
other commission but their own private spirits, invade the pulpit, and
undertake the task of preaching upon themselves* I mean, both men and women
also, and many of them but ordinary tradesmen: But if their flocks would take
away their fat Benefices and stipends from these godly Pastors, as their
Ancestors did deal with us, I doubt whether they would stick so close to their
principles, as we do to ours, and endure so much for their Religion and
consciences, as we do. After this short digression, let us return again to Mr.
de Rodon.

Rodon 17. In answer to these Argument's the Romish Doctors are wont to say,
that the Sacrifice of the mass is the same with that of the Cross, in respect
of the essence of the Sacrifice, the same thing being offered in both, viz. by
Jesus Christ. But it differs in respect of the manner of offering, for on the
Cross Jesus Christ offered himself bloudily, that is, when he died he shed his
blood for mankind; but in the mass he offers himself unbloudily, that is,
without shedding his blood, and without dying: On the Cross Jesus Christ was
destroyed in respect of his natural being, but in the mass he is destroyed in
respect of his sacramental being. They add, that all the arguments drawn from
the Epistle to the Hebrews, respect only that bloody oblation which was once
offered on the Cross; but besides this bloody sacrifice, there is another that
is unbloudy, which is daily offered in the Mass. Lastly, they say that the
sacrifice of the Cross is primitive and original; but that of the Mass,
representative, commemorative, and applicative of that of the Cross, as the
Council has it in its 22. session.

Answ. All this doctrine is sound, irre* fragable, and orthodox, save only this
clause; viz. but besides bloody sacrifice there is another that is unbloudy,
which is daily offered in the Mass: for the Mr. belyes the Romish Doctors; who
say not that it is another sacrifice, but another manner of offering the self
same sacrifice of the Cross; viz. unbloudily; and in that sense, the whole
doctrine is Catholic.

Rodon. To these distinctions I reply, that the sacrifice of the Mass does not
differ from that of the Cross in respect of the manner only (which is but an
accidental difference) but it differs in respect of essence too.

Answ. That we deny he proves it thus:

Rodon. First, because the natural death of Jesus Christ is of the essence of
the sacrifice of the Cross; But the sacrifice of the Mass does not comprehend
the natural death of Jesus Christ, for, Jesus Christ dies no more, Romans 6.
Therefore the sacrifice of the Mass does not comprehend that which is of the
essence of the Sacrifice of the Cross; and consequently differs from it
essentially, and not in respect of the manner only.

Answ. To this reply I answer first, that (according to all Philosophers) what
is essential to any thing, if it be abstracted or taken away, the thing cannot
be understood without it: for example; if you take away animality or
rationality from a man, man cannot be understood, because animality and
rationality belong to his essence: for the essence of any thing, is the very
first that is conceived of it; But a sacrifice, yea a rigorous sacrifice too,
may be well understood without death; for death enters not into the definition
of a sacrifice, being there were many sacrifices of the old law of things that
were not capable of dying; viz. of oil, meal, bread, wine, etc. and yet they
were rigorous sacrifices, for the things offered were sensible, and destroyed;
Therefore as what is not essential to man, is not essential to Peter or to
Paul; so what is not essential to sacrifice in its whole univocal latitude,
cannot be essential to this sacrifice, or to that; and being death is not
essential to sacrifice ut sic, as Schoolmen call it; that is, to sacrifice in
its whole extent and latitude, it can make but an accidental difference between
the same sacrifice offered bloudily and unbloudily, because all essential
differences proceed from different forms, and therefore since all rigorous
sacrifices agree univocally in the same reason or form of a sacrifice; it
follows evidently, that to be sacrificed bloudily or unbloudily, is but a
mere accidental difference of a sacrifice.

Secondly I answer, distinguishing the minor viz. But the sacrifice of the Mass
does not comprehend the natural death of Jesus Christ. The sacrifice of the
Mass does not comprehend the death of Jesus Christ, actually and practically, I
confess; speculatively, significatively, commemoratively, and applicatively, I
deny, and the consequence also: for Christ instituted this Sacrament, not only
to be a sign or type of his bloody sacrifice, but also to be a commemoration
and daily application thereof; and therefore he said to his Apostles, As often
as you do this, do it in remembrance of me.

Rodon. Secondly, because the representation of a thing differs essentially
from the thing represented: for example, the Kings picture differs essentially
from the King. Also the memorial of a thing differs essentially from the thing
whereof it is a memorial: for example, the celebration of the Passover, which
was a memorial of the Angels favorable passing over the houses of the
Israelits, differs essentially from that passing over: and lastly, the
application of a thing differs essentially from it: for example, the
application of a Plaster differs essentially from the Plaster: But aceording
to the determination of the Council of Trent, in sess. 22. the sacrifice of the
Mass is representative, commemorative, and applicative of that of the Cross;
therefore the sacrifice of the Mass differs essentially from that of the Cross.

Answ. To the second part of this reply, I say, that the representation of a
thing need not always differ essentially from the thing represented, in essendo
(as Schoolmen call it) in its natural essence or being; but only in
representando, in its representative or significative being; for example, when
an Angel understands himself, or represents his own being to himself* sure it
is that his being is not essentially different from himself in essendo;
although his being be essentially different in representando from the form or
species wherewith he understands himself; the same thing we say of the
sacrifice of the Mass, that it differs from that of the Cross in its
significative or representative being, and in its application also; from whence
follows not, that the sacrifice of the M^ss is essentially different from that
of the Cross in its natural entity or being; and being it is the selfsame
essence which is sacrificed in both; the distinction or difference cannot be in
essendo, that's to say, in the entities of both sacrifices; but only in
representando, vel applicando; that is to say, in their representation or
application. Just as I said before, that a man in his old age, may well
represent himself or his childish actions, when he was young; and yet he
differs not essentially in his old age, from himself while he was young; for
otherwise he would not be the same man: and so this consequence is also blown.

Rodon. Thirdly because the sacrifice of the Cross is of an infinite value, and
consequently ought not to be reiterated; for its value being infinite, it is
sufficient to take away all sins past, present, and to come; as Bellarmin
says, Book. 1. of the Mass. chap. 4. But the sacrifice of the Mass is of a
finite price and value, according to the same Bellarmin and other Romish
doctors; at which we may justly wonder, seeing as our adversaries say, it
differs not from the sacrifice of the Cross, either in respect of the thing
sacrificed, or in respect of the chief Priest, and yet from these the sacrifice
has all its price and value.

Answ. To the third part of this reply, I say, that although the sacrifice of
the Cross be of an infinite value, and sufficient to take away all sins past;
present and to come; yet no inconvenience follows of its being reiterated
unbloudily; though it would follow if it were to be reiterated bloudily; which
we abhor as much as to think of. I say also, that as the sacrifice of the
Cross is of an infinite value and price, so is also the sacrifice of the Mass,
as to the thing which is sacrificed, viz. the body and blood of Christ; though
it be but of a finite or limited value, as to the Priest or sacrificer: and
Bellarmin with the rest of the Romish doctors says the like and no more.
Therefore there is no just cause of wondering, that Christ who is both the high
Priest and sacrifice too, should offer this sacrifice bloudily upon the Cross,
and unbloudily upon the Altar, (as he did when he first instituted it) and that
his sacrifice should be of an infinite price and value; because of the dignity
of his person; though the same sacrifice, as it is offered by all other
Priests, who are but his substitutes, be not of an infinite value; their
persons though never so holy, being infinitely unequal in worth and dignity to
his: and yet as to the thing sacrificed by them, viz. the body and blood of
Christ, it is of as infinite a value and price, as that which Christ himself
offered is, and no man of reason and belief wonders at it.

Rodon. 19. Secondly, I say that an unbloudy propitiatory sacrifice, is a
feigned and an imaginary thing, and thus the arguments drawn from the Epistle
to the Hebrews do wholly destroy it.

Answ. I say, this Proposition of the Mounsieur is utterly false as to all its
parts; and his bare word for it without any proof, is no imaginary, but real
obstinate impudence, for he contradicts all the General Councils, holy fathers,
and universal Church of God: yet he offers to prove it thus.

Rodon. First, because it is said Heb. 9. that without sheding of blood there
is no remission of sins: Therefore in the unbloudy sacrifice of the Mass, there
can be no remission of sins, and consequently it cannot be a propitiatory
sacrifice for sin.

Answ. To this silly consequence, I answer again and again, and say, that what
the holy fathers unanimously consented unto and practiced daily as concerning
an unbloudy Propitiatory sacrifice, is ten thousand times of more weight, and a
better warrant for our opinion, then de Rodon and all his Phanatick rabbles
bare word is to destroy or weaken it. Therefore I confess with the Apostle Heb.
the 9. that without sheding of blood there is no remission of sins. Because if
there had been no primitive bloody sacrifice, this unbloudy sacrifice had not
been instituted for it was instituted as a memorial or remembrance of the
bloody one; from whence follows not at all, that the same host which was once
offered bloudily, may not be offered again unbloudily for our sins; and
consequently that the sacrifice of the Mass cannot be a propitiatory sacrifice
for sin.

Rodon. Secondly, because Jesus Christ cannot be offered without suffering; for
the Apostle says, Heb. 6. Jesus Christ offers not himself often, otherwise
he should often have suffered: But the sacrifice of Jesus Christ with
suffering, is a bloody Sacrifice, therefore there is no unbloudy S^crifice.

Answ. That Christ can be offered without suffering, and that a rigorous
Sacrifice may be without death, blood, or suffering, is sufficiently maintained
before, as also that these words of the apostle must be understood of a bloody
sacrifice, which we confess is not to be reiterated; but not of an unbloudy one
we said before. Therefore these consequences drawn out of the Apostle, are but
frivolous repetitions of his old shattred stuff.

Rodon. Thirdly, because the bloody sacrifice of the Cross, being of an
infinite value, has purchased an eternal redemption, Heb. 9. and has taken
away all sins past, present, and to come: whence it follows, that there is no
other Sacrifice either bloody or unbloudy, that can purchase the pardon of our
sins, the Sacrifice of the Cross having sufficiently done it.

Let the Mounsieur stir the r^bbish never so often, and turn it over and over;
and let him turn and search the Apostle to the Hebrews, and look narrowly into
all his other works never so often; I am sure he will never be able to pick one
golden or silver consequence, nay not one worth a straw to serve his turn
against us; for we grant, that there is no other sacrifice bloody or unbloudy,
essentially distinct from the bloody sacrifice of the Cross, that can purchase
the pardon of our sins: But we deny that the sacrifice of the Mass is
essentially distinct from that of the Cross: or that the sacrifice of the Mass,
being the self-same with that of the Cross, cannot purchase the pardon of our
sins: and I pray Mounsieur what force has your consequence out of the Apostle
against this answer? no more certainty (as any man may see) then a broken straw
has.

Rodon. Fourthly, Because the justice of God requires that sins shall be
expiated by the punishment that is due to them; and this is so true, that the
wrath of God could not be appeased but by the bloody and ignominious death of
the Cross; Therefore the Justice of God must have changed its nature, if sins
can be expiated in the Mass without pain or suffering.

Answ. I grant that Gods wrath for our sins was appeased by the bloody and
ignominious death of Christ upon the Cross; and that the satisfaction was
according to rigorous Justice; But I deny that the nature of Gods Justice must
have changed, if sins can be expiated in the Mass without pain or suffering,
because the Mass as it is a sacrifice, derives all its force, virtue and
vigor from the Primitive bloody sacrifice of the Cross; and being both are of
one essence, and that there is no more need of a bloody satisfaction for sin;
it follows, that the repetition or reiteration of the same sacrifice now
offered unbloudily (for there is no more need of a bloody sacrifice) has the
same force and efficacy* to expiate sin now, as it had when it was offered upon
the cross; the person offered being the self-same, and of the same value and
worth. And this is true, that the Mounsieurs consequence is very false, because
Christ having satisfied once bloudily, and his body being now glorious and
impatible, as it is not convenient he should suffer again having satisfied
sufficiently already for all sins in general; so is it convenient his bloody
passion should be rememorated unbloudily, and applied for the sins of the
faithful in particular; both because Christ left orders with his Church in
express terms, it should be done so; when he said: as often as you do this, do
it in remembrance of me: as also for holy Primasius his reasons, viz. because
we sin daily. Now then to his third Reply.

Rodon. 20. Thirdly to the distinction of Primitive sacrifice which was offered
on the Cross, and representative, commemorative, and applicative, which is
daily offered in the Mass, I reply, first, that what the Council of Trent says
in sess. 22. viz. that in the Eucharist there is a sacrifice representative,
commemorative, and applicative of that of the Mass, may bear a good sense, viz.
that there is in it a representation, commemoration, and application of the
sacrifice of the Cross, viz. a representation, because the bread broken,
represents the body broken; and the wine powered into the cup, represents the
blood of Christ shed for the remission of sins; a commemoration, because all
that is done in it, is done in remembrance of Jesus Chaist; and his death,
according to his own command in these words, do this in remembrance of me: and
according to what S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 11. As often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come: and an application,
because the merit of the sacrifice of the Cross, is applied to us, not only by
the word, but also by the Sacraments, as we shall show hereafter. But our
adversaries are not content with this, for they will have it that in the
celebration of the Eucharist, there is offered a crew and proper sacrifice
propitiatory for the sins of the living and dead, which has been already
refuted at large.

Answ. That you have done indeed, as Luther refuted king Henry the eighth,
against the sayings of fathers, of men, of Angels, of devils, etc. But I think
any impartial reader may easily see and judge that I have fully and
pathetically answ ered all your refutations, and showed your consequences to be
but frivolous and strange. Therefore to the first part of this third principal
reply of yours, I answer also: that the mediate representation, commemoration,
and application which you found out in a good sense to be in the Sacrament or
Mass (we are glad you found some good thing in it) if it contains any such good
thing it hinders not but that an immediate representation, commemoration, and
application according to the holy fathers, and Council of Trents meaning, may
be also found in it; which immediate representation, commemoration, and
application, because they are of far more efficacy and virtue then the former
are, they may be very well called a true proper sacrifice, propitiatory for
the sins of the living and dead, which propitiatory sacrifice Mr. de Rodon has
not as yet refuted, nor will be ever able to do, having all the holy fathers,
and practice of Gods Church against him.

Rodon. Secondly, I say that the application of the sacrifice of the Cross may
be considered on Gods part, or on man's part: on Gods part, when he offers Jesus
Christ to us, with all his benefits, both in his word and Sacraments: on man's
part, when by* a true and lively faith, working by love, we embrace Jesus
Christ with all his benefits offered to us both in his word and Sacraments. And
this is that Jesus Christ teaches us, S. John 3. in these words: as Moses
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the son of man be lifted
up, (viz. to die) that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life: he does not say, whosoever sacrifices him in the Mass, but
whosoever believes, etc. And S. Paul shows it clearly in these words: God has
set forth Jesus Christ to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, he
does not say through the sacrifice of the Mass, but through faith. And we
really and truly apply the sacrifice of Christ's Cross, when we have recourse to
him, as a man applys a pluister, when he has recourse to it, and lays it on
the wound: But the recourse or refuge of a penitent sinne^ to the sacrifice of
the Cross, for obtaining mercy from God, is nothing else but faith.

As for the distinction of the Sacramental and natural being of Jesus Christ,
it has been already refu^ed in the 6. number.

Answ. This second part of his reply, I answer thus: that Christ being offered
not to us, as the Mounsieur says, but for us, as the holy Evangelist tells us;
we ought on our parts by a true and lively faith to embrace him with all his
benefits offered us by virtue of his passion both in word and Sacraments. And
since by his word we are to believe, that it is his body which is offered for
us in the Sacrament, we ought to believe it without any staggering or
hesitation, because he himself said absolutely, this is my body. And as in S.
John the third is said, that as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness,
even so must the son of man be lifted up: So must we also believe, that he was
lifted up bloudily on the Cross, and is lifted up daily unbloudily in the Mass
for our sins; because our mother the Church commands us so to believe; and
Christ said, he that hears not the Church, let him be to thee as a heathen and
publican, Math. 18. However, although belief be a condition requisite, that the
virtue of Christ's Passion, and his Sacraments should be applied unto us; yet it
is not the principal cause of our sanctification, but Christ's body offered upon
the Cross, and in the Sacrament, for Christ's body offered for us, is the
principal cause of our salvation, and the healing Plaster which is applied to
a sick soul to hea^ her spiritual wounds; and faith whether it be actual or
habitual, cannot alone do the deed: and consequently S. Paul in the place
alleged, where he says God has set forth Jesus Christ to be a Propitiation
through faith in his blood; must be understood through faith, as a condition
requisite, and not through faith, as the Principal cause in his blood: for the
principal cause of Propitiation is Christ's body and blood offered for us once
bloudily upon the Cross, and daily offered for us in the sacrifice of the Mass;
so that although the Apostle says not explicitly; through the sacrifice of the
Mass; yet he says it implicitly; because Christ's blood is there offered and so
there is an end to all Mr. de Rodons replys.

As to the distinction concerning the natural and sacramental being of Jesus
Christ; the Prudent Reader may judge, whether its refutation be not
sufficiently answered by me; where I solved all his arguments of the said sixth
number.

Rodon. 21. I shall conclude this discourse with the testimony of Thomas
Aquinas, the most famous of all the doctors of the Romish d^ctors, and called
by our adversaries, the Angelical doctor; This Thomas in part 3. Quest. 8. Art.
1. having proposed this question, viz. whether Christ be sacrificed in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, he concluds wi^e these memorable words: The
celebration of this Sacrament is very fittly called a sacrificing of Christ, as
well because it is the representation of Christ's Passion, as because by this
Sacrament we are made partakers of the fruit of the Lords Passion. And
afterward he gives his answer, in these words; I answer, we must say that the
celebration of this Sacrament is called a sacrifice of Christ, in two respects;
first because ( as Augustine to simplicius says) we are wont to give to Images
the name of the things whereof they are Images, as when we see Pictures on a
wall, or in a frame, we say, this is Cicero, this is Salust* etc. But the
celebration of this Sacrament ( as has been said above) is a representative
Image of Christ's Passion, which Passion is the true sacrificing of Christ, and
so the celebration of this Sacrament, is the sacrificing of Christ. Secondly
the celebration of this Sacrament is called the sacrificing of Christ, in
regard of the effect of Christ's Passion, because by this Sacrament we are made
partakers of the fruit of the Lords Passion. Let the Romanists keep to this
decision of their Angelical doctor, and we shall agree with them in this point;
for I am confident that there is not one of the Reformed Religion, but will
subscribe to this true doctrine of Thomas Aquinas.

Answ. Will you indeed Mounsieur, this profer (I confess) is fair, but I doubt
much whether you and yours will stand to his arbitration as to this point: as
for my own part, I take him to be one of the most eminent doctors of our
Church, and worthy to be called Angelical, both for his excellency in learning
(especially concerning the B. Sacrament) and for his purity of life; Therefore
I wish you and your party would follow his opinion, and choose him umpire
betwixt you and us concerning this high question we dispute of; for never any
body yet spoke more divinely of this grand Mystery of the B. Sacrament, then
our famous Thomas Aquinas did: and so great was his devotion to this Sacrament,
that he was the first who obtained of the Pope to institute a solenm holy day
throughout the whole Church in its honor: he himself composed the whole office
which we use in this festivity, both in Church, and at Mass. In his Rithem
upon the Mass of corpus Christi day, he says thus; docti sacris institutis,
panem, vinum, in salutis consecramus hostiam; we are taught by holy statutes
and ordinances, that we consecrate bread and wine into an host of health or
safeguard: here he calls it an host, and consequently a sacrifice; for an host
and a sacrifice, are correlatives. Again, in the same Rythem, he says; Dogma
datur Christianis, quod in carnem transit Panis, and vinum in sanguinem; a
decree is left to all Christians, that the bread is changed into flesh, and the
wine into blood. And again, Caro cibus, senguis potus, manet tamen Christus
totus sub utraque specie, The meat is flesh, the drink is blood, and yet Christ
remains entire under each species. In a word, there is nothing more clear and
palpable, then famous S. Thomas of Aquins opinion is, in all this holy Rythem
concerning the real presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist, and concerning
his unbloudy sacrifice. Nay if the Mounsieur were pleased but to be so just as
to prosecute the said doctors words, in the self sa^e place where he cites him;
he may easily see, that this testimony is also quite against him; for the holy
doctor has these ensuing words in that very place, viz. Quantum igitur ad
primum modum, poterat dici Christu immo^sri etiam in figuris veteris
Testamenti, etc. sed quantum ad secundum modum, proprium est huic sacramento,
quod in ejus celebratione Christus immoletur. As concerning the first acception
of a sacrifice, Christ may be said to have been sacrificed in the types of the
old Law also, etc. But as concerning the last acception of a sacrifice; it is
peculiar and proper to this Sacrament, that Christ is sacrificed in its
celebration: where he clearly says, that although in the first acception of a
sacrifice, viz. as the Sacrament is a sign, Image, or representation of
Christ's passion, it may be called a sacrifice, as the word sacrifice is common
to the Sacrifices of both Laws: yet in the later acception of a Sacrifice, viz.
as by this Sacrament we are made partakers of Christ's passion; in this later
sense the holy Doctor says, it is proper and peculiar* only to this our
Sacrament in its celebration, to be called a sacrifice; which is the self-sa^
thing we say; for we hold that we are made partakers of Christ's passion, and of
his bloody sacrifice upon the Cross, by receiving this our Sacrament offered
unbloudily in its celebration of the Mass, for us.

Therefore M. de Rodon, all other arguments failing him, if he were not mad,
would never pitch upon our Thomas Aquinas of all men in the world; and he, with
his whole party subscribe to his Testimony here, which is father quite against
them: for it is very well known to all the world that our Venerable Lady. Diana
never had a stouter Champion to de^end her then Thomas Aquinas. However, while
the Mass is sound and sa^, and will be alive until the worlds end, ma^gre all
the devils of hell, as Christ promised it should be, We must give leave to
malicious and mad heretics to speak madly, and make (...) Funerals; as this of
de Rodons concerning the Mass, is the maddest and most malicious that ever was
written.

CHAP. VIII. Containing Answers to the Objections of the Romish Doctors.
ALthoug when conbatants or (...) (...) to fight, they commonly before they go
to the field, choose what arms they are to fight with, and foresee, let there
should be any inequality in their weapons; ve^ it was never heard or seen, that
the advers party should choose his enemies sword before they went to fight,
weild it for him, while they are actually a fighting; that he leaves to himself
to make use of, as he pleases; and much less ought he to blunt it. However
(prudent Reader) I would have you take notice, that Mr. de Rodon observes not
this common way with us, in this controversal conflict, which all duelists use,
but chooses such arguments of ours as he please; and puts them in such order or
form as he likes best; he mentions not our authors, that we may know whether
the arguments be theirs, and set out in their manner or form; this is the way
to blunt our weapons, and to give us directions how we must fight him, but so,
and so, make our blow or thrust at him but so and so; what else is this, but
that he weilds our sword for us, while we are actually fighting against him;
and blunts it while he sets out our arguments in his blunt manner or form: Sure
any body may see that this is a very unjust and inequal manner of fighting with
ones adversary. Nevertheless, being he has no other shift left him now, to
oppose and annoy Diana, he shall be answered, and encountered this way also; for
although he chose the weapons both his and ours; yet I am sure we stand upon
the firmer and better ground. Behold him coming against us thus.

Rodon. 1. In the two first chapters, we have answered the two principal
objections of the Romish doctors, drawn from these words, This is my body, etc.
and from these, he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal
life: etc. Now we must answer the rest.

Answ. In the first two chapters of this book, these your answers are clearly
refuted, shattered, and quasht; therefore answer the rest better then you did
these; otherwise your labor will prove but ridiculous and vain; and I question
not but it will prove so at last.

Objection 1.
Romanists. 2. The first objection is this; when the establishing of articles
of faith, the Institution of Sacraments, and the making Testaments and
covenants are in agitation, men speak plainly and properly, and not obscurely
and figuratively: But in the celebration of the Eucharist, Jesus Christ
established an article of faith, Instituted the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and
spoke of a Testament, and a covenant: for it is said of the Cup, that it is the
New Testament and the New Covenant in the blood of Christ; yea he spoke then to
his disciples, to whom he spoke in plain and proper terms, and not in obscure
terms or in figures or parables, as he did to the people.

Answer.
Rodon. ^. To this objection I answer, first. that it is false, that Articles
of faith are always expressed in proper terms, in holy scripture as when it is
said in the Creed, that Jesus Christ sits on the right hand of God, it is
evident that this is a figure and a Metaphor, for God being a spirit, has
neither right hand nor left; and all interpreters expound this sitting on Gods
right hand metaphorically, viz. for that Lordship both, of heaven and earth,
which he has received from God his father, as Earthly Princes make their
Lieutenants whom they appoint to govern in their name, to sit on the right side
of them. Again when it is said S. Math. 16. upon this rock I will build my
Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, and I will give
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on
earth shall be bound in heaven, etc. It is manifest, that these are figures and
Metaphors, as Bellarmine confesses in Book. 1. of the Bishop of Rome, chap.
10. and yet it is chiefly by this Passage, that they endeavor to prove the
Popes authority.

Answ. If this be our weapon or objection, I pray Mounsieur* give us leave to
handle and order it our selves, and then the standers by, or arbiters may judge
whether we thrust or push home with it or no; for as you handle it, it is to
blunt too pearce through. Therefore instead of saying: when the establishing of
Articles of faith, the Institution of Sacraments, etc. men speak plainly and
properly, and not obscurely or figuratively; give us leave to say; men ought as
well as they can, and as far as the subject they treat of bears it, to speak
plainly and properly, and not obscurely or figuratively, and then perhaps our
weapon may do some execution. As for example, at the Institution of this
Sacrament, Christ first took bread in his hand, and said plainly without any
figure: this is my body: and left it as a Testament with us; so we take it,
and believe it to be. Afterward he took wine in a cup, saying: This is the
Chalice of my blood. Certainly, if the consectated bread be his real body, the
consecrated wine must needs be his real blood, because (as we suppose) the
words of consecration were uttered upon both in the same sense and meaning.
Notwithstanding, the words spoken of the bread, were spoken plainly, and not
figuratively; but the words spoken of the wine were figurative; why? because he
took not the wine immediately in his hand as he took the bread; but he took it
in a cup, or chalice, and therefore to express the Testament of the blood, it
was necessary he should speak figuratively, and yet he expressed himself as
plainly as could be. But in the Testament of his body, where there was no need
of a Metonyn^e or figure, he expressed himself plainly and down right; from
whence follows, that Sacraments, Testaments, and covenants ought to be made as
plainly, clearly, and in as proper terms, as their subjects will permit them to
be expressed.

Sometimes also, a thing is better expressed, when one speaks figuratively then
by the proper literal Phrase: for example, when I say: such a man is a Lion, a
Tygar, or a Nero. Such an expression, is as plain, and yet better and more
energical to show and express strength, cruelty, or tyranny, then if one
should say: such a man is mighty, strong, very cruel, and tyrannical. So was
o^r Saviors expression of S. Peter, Math. 16. where he calls him a rock;
because the word rock, is more significative and energical to show the
stability and firmness of Peter and his successors spiritual power, then if he
had expressed himself in plain terms, thou art the head or chief Ruler of my
Church. And yet I eonfess that Rock there, has but a figurative sense.
Therefore I say, that when we have not a proper word to express a thing, or
when we cannot express it so well, with its proper term as we can with a
figure, then it is lawful in Sacraments, Testaments, and covenants to use
figurative expressions, instead of plain and litteral ones. But in our present
question or dispute, concerning the Eucharist, (especially concerning the
consecration of the Bread) there is no need of any figure, either for to
signify the thing consecrated, or to express it with more energy. Therefore
being it is left us for a Testament of the new Law; we ought to take the words
in their plain and litteral meaning, without having recourse to any needless
figurative glossation or sense.

Therefore although as Mr. de Rodon handles this weapon or objection, it be
false, that Articles of faith, Testaments, and covenants are always expressed in
proper terms, in holy scripture; (which word Always, he has in his answer,
though he puts it not in the objection) yet as I handle it, that is thus: when
the establishing of Articles of faith, the Institution of Sacraments, etc. Men
ought as well as they can, and as far as the subject they treat of, ^ears it,
and when there is no necessity to the contrary, in making Testaments,
covena^ts, or Articles of faith, to speak plainly and properly, and not
obscurely or figuratively. In this sense, I deny our major Proposition to be
always or ever ^lse. And being the minor is evident, clear, and uncontro^ led
by Mr. de Rodon; with* my good leave, I let the consequence follow.

Rodon. 4. Secondly, I answer, that the holy scripture commonly speaks of
Sacraments in figurative terms: Thus Circumcision is called Gods Covenant, Genesis
17. in these words, This is my Covenant, every male shall be circumcised, that
is, this is the sign of the Covenant as appears by the following verse ye
shall circumcise the fle^ of your foreskin, and it shall be a token of the
covenant between me and you. So the Paschal lamb is called the Lords Passover,
Exodus 12. because the blood of this lamb sprinkled on the doorposts, was given
as a sign of the Angels favorable passing over the houses of the Israelites;
^s appears by verse. 13. of the same chapter. So Baptism is called, the washing
of Regeneration, because it is the Sacrament of it. In a word, the
Eucharistical cup is called the New Testament, because it is the sign, seal,
and Sacrament of it.

Answ. Really Mounsieur these wily sophistical excuses or answers, will not
serve your turn; for we grant, that Circumcision, the Passover, and all the
rest of the Sacraments of the old Law, were but mere speculative signs and
tokens of what they signified; and that they had no practical or operative
virtue in them, of themselves, to sanctify or give grace to those that received
them; and God gave grace to the receivers of the old Sacraments, only by
compact, viz. he promised Grace to such as received those Sacraments or signs,
he then gave them, for their distinguishment from the unsaithfull; not that
those signs or Sacraments contained actually or practically any grace in
themselves, or that they were immediate instrumental causes of Grace, as the
Sacraments of the new Law are: for the former Sacraments were (as divines call
them) but vasa vacua, empty vessels; and the new ones are vasa plaena: full
vessels, dipped in his Passion, and filled with his precious blood; and
consequently, vessels full of operative Grace; for otherwise, the Sacraments of
the old law, would be of as much value and worth as those of the new; and so
Christ's new Sacraments would be instituted in vain; which would be a great
derogation to to his infinite wisdom; and consequently Blasphemous to assert.
Therefore, although circumcision, the Passover, and all the rest of the old
Sacraments; were but mere tokens or signs; yet it follows not that Baptism,
the rest of Christ's Sacraments, and especially the Eucharist, which was
particularised, and pointed at with the Pronoune demonstrative ( hoc) are but
mere signs: for as Baptism (and so I say of all the rest of Christ's
Sacraments) is not only a sign of the washing of Regeneration (as the
Mounsieur calls it) but also the instrumental cause of Regeneration; so the
Eucharist; or that which is in the Eucharistical cup, is not only a Sacrament
or sign of Christ sacrificed; but also his real body and blood, as he himself
said it is; in most plain and express terms without using any figurative
expression, especially concerning the consecration of the bread, where there
was no need of a figure; and consequently the Mounsieurs sly and sophistical
Illatives, viz. because it is the Sacrament of it; and, because it is the
sign, seal, and Sacrament of it, are sufficiently answered, and quasht; for
his becauses, are not the entire and adequate causes, that constitutes
Sacraments of the new law: for besides their significations, or being signs,
of Grace, they are also real causers of it; and the Eucharist principally;
because it is both Sacramentum and res; the Sacrament, and the thing it self.

Rodon. 5. Thirdly, I answer, that in holy Scripture Testaments are not always
expressed in proper terms without a figure; for the Testament of Jacob, Genesis
49. and that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 33. are nothing else but a chain of Metaphors, and
other figures: and civilians* will have it, that in Testaments we should not
regard the proper significati^n of the words, but the inte^ion of the Testator.
To this I add, that Jesus Christ did not make the new Testament, and the new
covenant, but only instituted the seal and Sacrament of them; for the covenant
w^ made with all mankind in the Person of Adam, after the fall; when God
promised him, that the seed of the woman should break the serpents head. This
was afterward renewe^ with Abraham, when God promised him that in his seed,
all the nations of the earth should be blessed, viz. in Christ the blessed
s^ed, who has destroyed the Kingdom of Satan. After this, it was confirmed by
the blood of Christ shedd on the Cross; then it was published through all the
world, when the Apostles had recei^ved the holy Ghost; and lastly, Baptism and
the Eucharist, are the signs, seals, and Sacraments of it.

Answ. We grant, that for the better expression of things, in Testaments and
covenants, figures may be used, and for that reason, they are sometimes, nay,
often used in holy Scripture: yet to use Amphibologies and figures in
Testaments, covenants or Sacraments, without necessity, and when they can be
otherwise as clearly or better expressed in plain and proper words; we hold
neither convenient or lawful: for else how can the Civilians themselves (whose
great Patron de Rodon is) penetrate or dive into the Testators intention? sure
this were the high way to set all the world together by the ^ars; this is the
way to wrong and undo poor widows and orphans, the way to break and distract
haman society, and to fill Mr. de Rodons favorits, the civilians pockets with
ill-gott-gold. Gods laws and Testaments would be so enveloped and folded up in
obscure figures and Tropes, that scarce any body could have a glimpse of them,
even in our time of the Evangelical Law, which is called the Law of Grace: De
Rodon then must of necessity make way for this weapon as I have ordered it, or
else by enriching his dear Civilians, he will quite ruin and destroy, not only
thousands of poor honest people, but also human society, and all Christian
souls. But if neither he, nor the Translator, his surviver be able to break
this thrust (as I am sure they are not) then will they be forced to submit to
the Romish doctors mercy.

As to the Mounsieurs additionate reason, viz. that Jesus Christ did not then
make the new Testament, and the new covenant, but only instituted the seal and
Sacrament of them; for the covenant was made with all mankind in the Person of
Adam after the fall, when God promised, that the seed of the woman should break
the serpents head, etc. to this additionate reason (which is but one of Mr de
Rodons start-holes to save himself) I answer, that whatever the Testament or
Covenant between God and Adam was, Christ himself called the Eucharist, Novum
Testamentum in meo sanguine, this is the New Testament in my blood: if it be a
New Testament or Covenant, how can it be the Testament or Covenant made with
Adam? or did Christ make any Testament or Covenant with any body else before
Adam, that his Covenant or Testament with Adam may be called the New Testament
in Christ's blood: Christ said not, this is the sign or seal of my new
Testament or covenant, as Mr. de Rodon glosseth him. But perhaps de Rodon the
great Civilian, understood the Testators intention better then he was able to
express himself; for Christ, the Testatour spoke but plainly, and ordinarily;
and he understood him figuratively, elegantly, and Rhetorically, who then can
say but that this grand Civilian received his fee; I am sure he deserved it,
and a good one too.

Rodon. 6. Fourthly, I answer, that if by these words * to speak clearly and
plainly, be understood, to speak intelligibly* s^* that the Apostles might and
ought understand what he said to them; then it is certain that Jesus Christ did
speak clearly; for to speak Sacramentally, and according to the style used in
all Sacraments, was to speak clearly, and not obscurely. But if by these words,
to speak clearly; be understood to speak without a figure; then it is false,
that he always sp^ke to his disciples: wittness the calling his disciples to
whom he said, Math. 4. follow me, and I will make you fishers of men. And when
he says elsewhere, ye are the salt of the earth, and the lights of the world;
etc. To this I add, the Apostles did ask Jesus Christ the meaning of Parables,
and other things which they did not understand; and therefore certainly they
had much more reason to ask the meaning of so many strange things as follow
from the Mass, from Transubstantiation, and from the pretended presence of
Christ's body in the host, viz. how a human body can be in a point and in diverse
places at once? how the head of Jesus Christ and his whole body could be in his
mouth? how accidents can be without a subject. etc.

Answ. I do not deny ( Mounsieur) but that a man may sometimes better and more
significantly express his mind with figurative words then with plain and clear
words; and therefore I say that figures may be used in Testaments and Covenants
when there is need of them to express a thing with more energy, or when one
has not proper words to serve his turn; however, figurative words are never as
plain and clear as proper words are: for a figurative expression although it
may be more significative then a natural expression is, yet in comparison to
the natural and proper one, it is essentially obscure; because obscurity is
essential to every figure and Trope; and therefore where there is no need,
especially in Testaments and Sacraments (as there is no need of any figure or
figurative sense in these words: this is my body) they ought not be used. That
Christ spoke to his disciples in Parables and figures, in the passages
mentioned by Mr. de Rodon: what is that to our purpose? at the uttering of these
Parables, was he instituting Sacraments, or making of Testaments? our objection
speaks of the establishing of articles of faith, of the institution of
Sacraments, mak^ng of Testaments and covenants, and not of* (...) (...) ^ords
sermons, speeches, and Parables to his disciples and to the vulgar people; for
we deny not, but that our Lord spoke very often figuratively and parabolically
to the people, But we deny that when he instituted any of his Sacraments, (and
especially the Eucharist) he spoke figuratively or parabolically: the matters
and forms of all the Sacraments of the new Law have no figures in them; the
water of Baptism is no figure of water, but natural water; and these words. I
Baptize, or wash thee, in the name of the father, son, and holy Ghost, amen;
are no figurative words: No more is the oil of confirmation, a figurative, but
a real oil; and the form, or words spoken by a Bishop, viz. I sign thee with
the sign of the cross, and confirm thee with the crisme of salvation, in the
name of the father, etc. are no figurative or typical words: no more are the
man and woman that marry figurative, but real persons; nor their words of
contract figurative, but plain and proper words, viz. I take thee to my wi^e; I
take thee to my husband; And so forth of all the rest of Christ's Sacraments.
Even so I say of the Sacrament of the Eucharist; for the bread and wine whereof
it is made, are no figures or signs of bread and wine; and the words of
consecration (which are the formal part of this Sacrament) are not figurative,
but plain words, so that although every Sacrament of the new Law does signify
something that is Mystical; yet the essence of the Sacramants does not only
consist in the mere signification of the Mystery it signifies; but in its own
plain matter and form also, which form always consignifies something mystical;
and consequently the style used in the Sacraments, of the new Law, is not
figurative, but rather proper and plain.

To what he adds, I answer, that it is pity the Mounsieur was not with the
Apostles when they ask^ Jesus Christ the meaning of Parables, and other things
which they did not understand. I say it is pity he was not with them to help
them out concerning this question; for when the Jews asked him, Quomodo potest
hic carnem suam dare ad manducandum? how can this man give his flesh to he
eaten? and they received no other Answer but this; Amen I say unto you, unless
you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall not have
life in you: the Apostles who heard this answer, replied no more but humbly
submitted, and believed Christ's words. But if Mr. de Rodon had been by, this
answer belike would not have satisfied him, he would argue the case with Jesus
Christ more profoundly, according to his Principles of Philosophy, he would
pose him, and pose him again, even until he sacked him, if he could; to fetch
out how he could Transubstantiate bread and wine into his body and blood; or
else he would not believe him. So may he also misbelieve that Christ revived
Lazarus, until he shows him the manner how he did it, for it seems the
Mounsieur allows of no supernatural power in Christ; for if he did, he would
never so often repeat these frivolous questions, viz. how a human body can be
in a point, and in diverse places at once? how the head of Jesus Christ, and his
whole body could be in his mouth? etc.

Rodon. 7. Lastly, since Jesus Christ said, drink ye all of this Cup, all
Priests whether Jesuits, Monks, or other Romish doctors, would of necessity be
constrained, really, properly, and without a figure, to drink of the Cup,
whether melted or not, and really to swallow it, until they should confess
that there are figures in the words of Jesus Christ, in the celebration of the
Eucharist.

Answ. No such constraint good Sir; for the Romish doctors do allow that there
is a figure in the word ( Cup) but they allow not of any figure in the
consecrated wine which is in the Cup; Neither do they hold that the Cup is the
Testament, but the consecrated wine which is in the Cup. Therefore I pray give
them leave to drink the consecrated wine which is their Testament, and has no
figure in it; and since you are so great a lover of figures; drink you the Cup
molten or unmoulten if you can.

Objection. 2.
Romanists. 8. The second objection is this: The Sacrament of the Eucharist is
more excellent then that of the Passover; because the Sacrament of the
Passover is a type of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and the thing typified
is always more excellent then the type, But if the Sacrament of the Eucharist
did not realy contain the body and blood of Christ, but was only the sign of
it; then it would follow, that the Sacrament of the Eucharist, would not be
more excellent then that of the Passover; nay the Sacrament of the Passover
would be more excellent then that of the Eucharist; because a lamb, and its
blood is more excellent, then Bread and wine: and the death of a lamb, and the
shedding of his blood, does much better represent the death of Christ, and the
shedding of his blood on the Cross then bread broken, and wine powered into a
cup can do.

Answer.
Rodon. 9. To this I answer, first, that the thing typified by the Paschat
lamb, is Jesus Christ, and not the Sacrament of the Eucharist; as S. Paul shows
clearly, 1. Cor. 5. when he calls Jesus Christ our Passover, in these words,
Christ our Passover was crucified for us: The truth is, a whole lamb without
spot or blemish killed and burnt toward the Evening, and its blood shed, does
very well represent Jesus Christ perfect without sin, put to death and his
blood shed toward the end of the world, and in the fullness of time; but such a
lamb represents nothing of that which is seen in the Eucharist. Besides, the
types and Sacraments of the old Testament, were instituted, that the faithful
of those times, might come to the knowledge of the things typified and
signified for the salvation of their souls: But the faithful under the old
Testament never came to the knowledge of the Eucharist by the Paschal lamb, and
though they had come to the knowledge of it, yet they had had no benefit
thereby. In a word, seeing the Passover and the Eacharist are types, Images,
and signs, of Jesus Christ, it is very impertinent to say, that the Passover
is the type of the Eucharist, because a type is not properly the type of
another type, but only of the thing typified; as the Image of Caesar, is not
the Image of another Image of Caesar, but only of Caesar himself.

Answ. Mr. de Rodon breaks this thrust, or objection, three manner of ways, all
which I will answer in order: to his first, wherein he says, that the thing
typified by the Paschal lamb, is Jesus Christ, and not the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, as S. Paul shows clearly, 1. Cor. 5. when he calls Jesus Christ our
Passover in these words, Christ our Passover was crucified for us: I answer,
that this Passage of scripture, shows not clearly that the Paschal lamb is not
also a type of the Eucharist; Nay I say, that this text makes rather for us;
for whereas all the holy fathers and doctors of the Church, with all the
general Councils, do unanimously hold, that the Sacrament of the Eucharist
offered, is nothing else but Christ immolated unbloudily upon the Altar, in
remembrance of his once bloody Passion. If the same Christ (we say) then the
same thing typified; and the only difference is in the immolation or offering,
viz. that the primary oblation of him was bloody, the secondary incruent or
unbloudy; all which we grant, and for that reason do averr and maintain that
the Paschal lamb was a type not only of Christ crucified, but also of Christ in
the Eucharist. And we leave it to any Prudent and impartial Reader to consider
and judge, whose authority and opinion is surer to be embraced and followed in
this debate, John Calvin's, Mr. de Rodons and a handful of new Phanatick
opiniatours, or the General Councils of all ages that ever treated of this
subject, all the holy fathers, and the universal Christian Church.

But (replyeth Mr. de Rodon) such a lamb represents nothing of that which is
seen in the Eucharist; I answer, that it represents that which is believed to
be in it; which is a surer and better sight or knowledge then what we see or
know with our corporal eyes, which may be deceived by the illusions of the
devil; whereas our understanding supported by the light of says cannot be;
because it relyes upon the testimony of Gods word, which testimony and word we
have expressly in the 6th of S. John of our side.

But (quoth he again) besides, the types and Sacraments of the old Testament,
were instituted that the faithful of those times might come to the knowledge of
the things typified, and signified for the salvation of their souls; But the
faithful under the old Testament, never came to the knowledge of the Eucharist
by the Paschal lamb; and though they had come to the knowledge of it, yet they
had not benefit thereby.

I confess, that the types and Sacraments of the old Law, were instituted for
the reason you allege, and I distinguish your minor thus: But they never came
to an explicit sormal knowledge of the Eucharist, I confess; but they never
came to an implicit vertual knowledge of* the Eucharist; I deny; and deny also
that they had not the vertual benefit of it: for the Eucharist and its
immolation, being the self same thing with Christ, and his immolation upon the
Cross; although this being the primary immolation (as is said before) and
including virtually the secundary which is that of the Altar; yet because the
very same thing is still offered; it follows, that this secondary,
immolation, which is the Eucharist, was typified also vertually and implicitly,
by the Paschal lamb; and that those of the old Law reapt benefit by it, as they
did explicitly by that of the Cross. In a word, seeing the Passover and the
Eucharist, are not Types alike; but the one mediate, and the other immediate,
the one but a bare type, and the other both type and the thing typified; it is
not at all impertinent, that the Passover should be the type of the Eucharist:
Neither is the Parity of Caesar with his own Image, to any purpose; for Caesar
and his Image are not the same thing, as Christ is the self-same thing with the
Eucharist: There M. de Rodon ought to hold ^is impertinent tongue, or speak
better to the purpose. But he that is full of impertinencies, and has nothing
else in him, must of necessity burst out with some of them, or otherwise he
would become quite dumb.

Rodon 10. Secondly, I answer, that the excellency of one Sacrament above
another, must be drawn from its form and efficacy, and not from its matter;
because it is form that chiefly gives being to things composed of matter and
form: But the form of Sacraments depends on the words of Institution, because
being signs of divine Institution, their form can only depend upon the will of
God, who chooses certain things to signify other things; and this will of God
cannot he known but by revelation, which is the word; so that it is properly
said, that the word joined with the element makes the Sacrament* therefore
although the Sacrament of the Passover be more excellent then the Eucharist in
respect of its matter, because the Paschal lamb and its blood, are more
excellent then the bread and the wine of the Eucharist; and that the lamb and
its blood have a greater Analogy with Jesus Christ and his blood shed on the
cross, then the bread and wine of the Eucharist have; yet the Sacrament of the
Eucharist is much more excellent then that of the Passover in respect of its
form, which depends on the words of Institution; because that at the
institution of the Sacrament of the Passover, God spoke not the word of the
principal end for which he did institute it, viz. to be the type of Jesus
Christ and his death. But at the institution of the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
Christ declared in express terms, that he did institute the eating of the
bread broken, and the drinking of the wine poured into the Cup, to be
commemorative signs of Christ himself, and his death. The Sacrament of the
Eucharist is yet more excellent then that of the Passover, in respect of its
efficacy, which depends on two things, viz. on the form, which being more
manifest in the Eucharist, does operate with more efficacy; and also because it
represents a thing past, viz. the death of Christ: But the knowledge of things
past, is more clear and perfect then the knowledge of things to come, and we
are more touched with the memory of things past, when some symbol brings them to
our thoughts, then when we consider things to come through clouds and shaddows:
To this I add, that the bread and wine of the Eucharist, have a greater
Analogy with Jesus Christ, then the Paschal lamb had in one respect, viz. in
regard of the spiritual nourishment which we receive by Christ's death; for as
Baptism is the Sacrament of our spiritual birth, so the Eucharist is the
Sacrament of our spiritual nourishment: But this nourishment is much better
represented by bread and wine, which are the ordinary nourishment of our
bodies, then by a lamb.

Answ. All that Mr. de Rodon says in this second answer, strengthens, and
confirms our major above; but it strikes at our minor, viz. But if the
Sacrament of the Eucharist did not really contain the body and blood of Christ,
but was only the sign of it, then it would follow that the Sacrament of the
Eucharist would not be more excellent then that of the Passover; nay that of
the Passover would be more excellent then that of the Eucharist, etc.

That the excellence of one Sacrament a bove another, must be drawn from its
form and efficacy, and not from its matter, because it is form that chiefly
gives being to things composed of matter and form, as Sacraments are; this
doctrine, I confess, is very good and true; and that the form of the Sacrament
of the Eucharist depends on the Institution of Christ's words, is also very
certain and true. But by what words (forsooth) did Christ institute this
Sacrament? doubtless by no other but these, viz. this is my body, this is my
blood: and immediately after consecrating he said; as often as you do this, do
it in remembrance of me. Now if you take away the first and immediate
signification of the words of consecration, which is, that it is his body and
blood; I ask Mr. de Rodon, how bread and wine can signify the body and blood
of Christ, after the words of consecration, more then they did before? or if
Christ's body be not really there, how can bread and wine be the signs of his
body and blood because they were consecrated, more then if they were not
consecrated at all? and (to use the Mounsieurs one phrase) we cannot see or
discern with our eyes, any greater signs of Christ's body and blood, in the
consecrated bread and wine, more then we do see in the unconsecrated. I confess
indeed, that these words: as often as you do this, do it in remembrance of me,
do signify Christ's bloody Passion: But what that ( this) is; unless it be
Christ's body, (for he said immediately before, this is my body) I cannot
understand; for if by the word ( this) Christ had meant the remembrance or
sign of his body, and not his real body; then the sense of his words would be
this: as often as you do the remembrance of my body, do it in remembrance of
me: which as any body may see, is a perfect Batalogy, or senseless repetition
of the self-same thing. But sure it is, and according to Mr. de Rodons own
concession, that the Paschal lamb has a nobler natural entity (because of its
life) then bread and wine have; and that his blood has a greater Analogy with
Christ and his blood shed on the Cross, then they have; Therefore not only
according to the material entity (which is the matter) but also according to
the representative or significative entity, (which is the formal part of the
Sacrament) if Christ's body be not there really present; the Passover is a more
excellent sign or Sacrament of Christ's bloody Passion, then the Eucharist is;
which is a great absurdity, if not rather Blasphemy (we say) to assert.

To this I add, that whereas according to M. de Rodons own saying, it is an
impertinency to make a Type of a Type; it follows that the Paschal lamb
signifies the thing typified, viz. Christ's bloody sacrifice, better then the
Eucharist does; if you take away the body of Christ from the Sacrament, or cut
off the immediate signification of these words, This is my body: upon which
words the signification of the Eucharist do wholly depend.

Rodon. Lastly, I answer, that it is far les^ inconvenient to give some
prerogative to the Passover above the Eucharist, (viz. to give it a more
excellent matter and Anology) then to assert the corporal Presence of Christ in
the host, by an unheard of Transubstantiation, which destroys the nature of
Sacraments, gives our Lord a monstrous body, includes notorious absurdities and
contradictions, and gives the lie to sense, Reason, and holy Scripture, as has
been proved.

Answ. This last answer of de Rodon is not only absurd, but also impious, and
Blasphemous; for it makes the Sacraments of the old Law, to be better, and more
perfect, then those of the new; which is a great derogation to Christ's infinite
wisdom, that he should institute Sacraments (for all the Sacraments of the new
Law are instituted by him) of lesser worth and likeness then those were which
were used before his Incarnation: It puts the Law of Grace, beneath the Law of
Moses; It makes Christ's words, Institutions, and Instruments of our Redemption
(which be his Sacraments) imperfect and vain, if the Sacraments of the old Law
be worthier and more significative then his are; and consequently it lessens
the price of our redemption, which is Symbolized perfectly in his Sacraments;
finally, according to this rate, we had better fall to circumcising our selves,
become Jews, and forsake Baptism, and consequently our Christianity; for if the
Passover may without offense excel the Eucharist in matter and Analogy or
signification, why may not circumcision also excel Baptism? away, away then
with this blasphemous liar, who vainly and falsely boasts of his non-sensical
proofs, that Transubstantiation destroys the nature of Sacraments, gives our
Lord a monstrous new body, includs notorious absurdities and contradictions,
etc. for all his silly proofs are already destroyed, shattered, and quasht by
me, in their due places. This is (Reader) that malepart Civilian I told you of
a little before, who so well deserved his fee; and I doubt not but he received
it by this time.

Objection 3.
Romanists 11. The third Objection was proposed at Nismes, Anno 1657. by the
Iesuit^ S. Rigaut thus. God does communicate or can communicate to the creature
in a finite degree, that which he possesses in an infinite degree; for
example, God has an infinite power, whereby ^e can do all things at once, as
appears in a man, for he can see, hear, talk, and walk at the same time: God
has also an infinite wisdom and knowledge, whereby he knows all things at
once; therefore he communicates or can communicate to the creature a finite
knowledge, whereby it may know diverse things at once: And even so God has a
virtual infinite extent, which is called Immensity, whereby he sills all things
and all places at once; Therefore God communicates or c^n communicate to the
creature, viz. to a body, a finite extent, whereby it may sill diverse places,
and occupy several places o^ once; whence it follows, that Christ's body may be
in diverse pl^ces at the same time, viz. in heaven, and in the host.

Answer.
Rodon 12. To this I answer. that as God cannot be in two places (for example,
in heaven and upon earth) without being in all those places that are between
both, (for then he would be distant and separated from himself) so Christ's body
cannot be in two distant places, viz. at Paris and at Rome, in heaven and upon
earth in the host, without being in all those places that are between both; for
then it would be distant and separated from it self, which is impossible; as
has been sufficiently proved. Therefore since Christ's body is not in all
places between Paris and Rome, and between heaven and earth; it follows, that
it is not in heaven and upon earth in the host, nor at Paris and Rome in
consecrated hosts; so that to make a creature (for example the body of Christ)
partaker of Gods extent or immensity, it is sufficient, that as God by his
infinite extent occupies all places; so Christ's body, should by its finite
extent occupy some place. But if to make it partake in a finite degree of this
divine Attribute of Immensity, it must be in diverse places; yet it is
sufficient that it be in diverse places successively, and not at once: Or if to
make (...) partake of this Attribute, it must be in diverse places at once, yet
it is sufficient, that it occupies them by its several parts; f^r example; that
the head be in one place and the feet in another, etc. In a word; that it be
without discontinuance or separation, as God is every where without
discontinuance. Thus the learned Master Brugier, then answered, and much
better, but I cannot remember his full and complete answer.

Answ. Mr. de Rodon, your learned Brugier, shows no learning in this answer,
which is but very simple and false; but if you think his answer to the question
was full and complete, you had better say, that you cannot remember one word of
it, for if he and you rely upon this answer, and take it to be a complete and
satisfactory one; you both show that you are but a couple of very ignorant
fellows that go against all Philosophers and learned men, which I demonstrate
evidently thus: The reason you give, why God cannot be in two places together,
without being in all those places that are between both, is because he would
otherwise be different and separated from himself. But this reason is false,
and stark naught, which I prove thus: God is a pure spirit, but betwixt pure
spirits there can be no proper distance, or separation, by reason of the
difference of material places; for while Christ was upon earth, his diviniry
which was also here, was not distant nor separated from the divinity of the
father and of the holy Ghost, which was at the same time in heaven also:
Neither does any Philosopher or learned man say that two Angels are properly
distant or separated from one another, by reason of their material places: and
the general reason is, because distance (as I proved before) is proper only to
corporal things that are in their corporal and material places, by reason of
their superfices, and of the superfices of their places; so that pure spirits
(as Gods is a most pure one) having no superfices, are consequently incapable
of being circumscribed by any material place; and consequently also incapable
of any proper distance or separation; for otherwise, since the measure of any
thing, in the way or line of commensuration, is more perfect then the thing
which is measured; it would follow, that a material place, which is but a
corporal thing, (if it should measure or commensurate a spirit) would be more
perfect in the way or line of commensuration and regulation, then any spirit
would be, which is both absurd, and impious to assert.

Therefore if there be any reason why God cannot be in two places at once,
without being in all those places that are between, it is not for the distance
or difference of the places; but rather because of his Immensity or infinite
ubication; for without his ubicacation, the other intermediate places would
desist to be; because their being does wholly depend upon his ubication: But
Christ's body may be in a thousand, and ten thousand places together personally
with his sacramental ubication without being in the intermediate places
personally; because all those intermediate places may be preserved in their
being, by virtue of the common divine ubication or presence. And whereas a
sacramental presence or ubication (as I have formerly proved) is a spiritual
presence, or rather the real Presence of Christ's glorified body spiritualized,
according to the Apostles saying; Cor. 15. It is sown a natural body, it shall
rise a spiritual body: I say, because it is a spiritual or spiritualized body
and presence, it has no dependence from corporal places, nor consequently from
their distances, or differences.

All the learned Master Bruguiers, and all profound Master de Rodons other
petty answers to this objection, are frivolous, if not ridiculous; for they
grant no more to Gods being able to communicate his Attributes finitely to
Christ's glorified body, then what we see he does communicate unto our lumpish
mortal bodies: for our bodies, do possess some place, and our bodies can be
successively in two places; and our bodies, though they be not in two places at
once, yet we possess them by our several parts, viz. our head in one place, and
our feet in another; or if he means, by possessing two several places at
once, that our heads, feet, and our whole bodies, are at the same time in both
several places; then he gives us more then we ask: for we say not, that one
body is circumscriptively, and according to its natural situation in two places
together; But that the same body may be circumscriptively in one place, viz. in
heaven, and also at the same time sacramentally in another, viz. here upon
earth: or that the same body may be sacramentally at once in diverse places;
which is far easier, then for a body to be at the same time in two different
places circumscriptively. But that God imparts and communicates his gifts and
Attributes unto Christ, and to his body now glorified, more then he does unto
us, and to our corruptible lumpish bodies, is a thing most certain: for without
doubt Christ partakes more of the divine wisdom, Power, Justice, mercy,
goodness, bounty, etc. then we do; and his body partakes now of the gifts or
dowryes of subtillity, impassibility, Agility, and clarity, which ours do not:
why then (I pray) cannot God make Christ's body partake more of the Attribute of
his Immensity, then ours does? questionless he does; and consequently it can be
in more places at once, then our heavy lumpish bodies can be.

Objection 4th.
Roman. 13. The fourth objection is this; If diverse bodies may miraculously be
in one and the same place, then it also follows that one body may miraculously
be in diverse places; there being no more difficulty or impossibility in the one
then in the other. But diverse bodies may miraculously be in one and the same
place; sor Jesus Christ came into the room where his disciples were, the doors
being shut, which he could not have done, if his body had not penetrated the
do^rs. Besides, it is said that Jesus Christ was born of the Virgin Mary, and
consequently Mary was a Virgin, both before and after his birth, which could
not have been if Jesus Christ had not penetrated her belly, and come forth
without fraction or overture. Lastly, Jesus Christ penetrated the stone that
was laid on his sepulcher when he rose again, and it is said, that he
penetrated the heavens when he Ascended.

Answer.
Rodon 14. To this I answer.

First, That it is not said that Jesus Christ came in the doors being shut, for
these are the words: The same day when it was Evening, and the doors having
been shut for fear of the Jews, Jesus came, etc. which words do indeed show
the time when Jesus came in unto his disciples, but not the manner of his entry
by penetration; But if the words be translated, the doors being shut, and that
they do import that the doors were not opened by any body, yet they do not
exclude the opening of them in the twinkling of an eye by the divine Power,
sub we have examples of this in holy Scripture; for Acts the 5th, we read,
that the Apostle went out of Prison, though the doors had been fast shut; but
it is said, that the Angel of God opned them. And Acts. 12. the door of the
prison opened to S. Peter of its own accord; that is, without being opened by
any body. And so it is said that Christ entered, the doors being shut, or having
been shut; which excludes the opening of them by any body, but not the opening
of them by a divine power in so short a time that it was undiscernable.

Answ. Mr. de Rodon has many answers to this objection; all which answers I
will refute in order: his first is, that these words the doors being shut, are
not the right words, but these: the doors having been shut, which words he
confesses, do indeed show the time when Jesus came in unto his disciples; but
not the manner of his entry by Penetration. This answer I say, has no
resemblance of Truth, solidity, or reason; not of Truth, because our vulgar
Translation of the Scripture is far more ancient and authentical for the
authors sanctity and learning, (and consequently far more worthy to be
believed), then de Rodon, and all his new Translatours are. It has no solidity
or reason; because Christ's miraculous manner of entrance to his disciples,
deserved as much, or more to be chronicled then the time when he entered did;
for the time of his entrance, whether it was in the morning or evening, or at
noonday, imports not very much; but the circumstance of the manner of his
entrance ( the door being shut) is of great weight, for it shows that he entered
not after an ordinary manner. But if the Mounsieurs Translation were the right,
then we may imagine, that when Jesus Christ came to the door, and finding it
shut (as we suppose it was for fear of the Jews) he knocked at it, and that the
porter coming to the door asked, who is there? and Christ should answer him, I
am Jesus Christ, I pray let me in; all this may very well follow from the
Mounsieurs right Translation; for if Christ did not enter, the doors being
shut, but the doors having been shut, and afterward it was opened for him to
let him in; then by all likelihood it was, as I say; which if so, then
doubtless when he knocked, he putt the poor disciples into a great terror,
fearing lest the Jews came to apprehend or massacre them in the place. But how
ridiculous this translation is, and how void of credit or belief; besides that
holy text makes no mention of it, I let any rational Christian judge. Moreover,
if the time of his entrance was of greater importance to be considered, then
the manner of his entrance was; it is wonder the very hour was not set down too.

But Mr. de Rodon has another string to his bow, and saves himself thus. But
(quoth he) if the words be translated, the doors being shut, and that they do
import that the doors were not opened by any body, yet they do not exclude the
opening of them in the twinkling of an eye by the divine power, ^ith we have
examples of this in holy Scripture: for Acts the fifth, we read, that the
Apostle went out of Prison though the doors had been shut fast: for there we
read that the Angel of God opened them. And acts the 12th. the doors of the
prison opened to S. Peter of its own accord, that is, without being opened by
any body: And so it is said that Jesus Christ entered, the doors being shut, or
having ^een shut; which excludes the opening of them by any body, but not the
opening of them by divine power, in so short a time that it was undiscernable.
Thus Mr. de Rodon very wittyly and wisely answers us.

But good sir, here you are to answer to these words: the doors being shut, and
not to these, the doors having been shut. And what else (forsooth) means the
doors being shut, but, the doors not being open, or while the doors were not
open? If so, then whether the doors were opened by divine or humane power, it
imports not, for our Savior entered not but the doors being shut, or while they
were shut: So that though the time be never so short, and the twinkling or
instant never so imperciptible, while the doors were open, our Savior did not
enter; or else the words of the text be not true; because the text says* he
entered the doors being shut, or, while they were shut; Therefore the Mounsieur
by this answer commits three horrid faults; first, he falsifies the text, by
putting the doors having been shut, for the doors being shut; secondly, for
excluding the shutting of the doors by divine power, which is either his
addition to the text, or glossing upon it; which yet he ought not to do,
because of the curse that accompanies those that diminish or add to Gods word,
or expound and interpret it wrongfully. Thirdly, because whether the doors were
opened by Gods power or by man's, although it were but in the least twinkling of
an eye (as he says) he manifestly contradicts the Text, for if in that
twinkling the doors were open, when our Savior entered, he did not enter the
doors being shut, but he entered the doors being open, or at that instant while
the doors were open: Or could he enter the doors being open and shut at the
same instant or twinkling? Therefore whether you will or no Mounsieur you must
confess accoridng to this Text, that our Saviors glorified body did penetrate
the doors of the room where his disciples were, or else say, that he entered
while the doors were open and shut together, which is both non-sensical and
contradictory.

Neither do your clear passages out of Act. 5. and the 12. avail you a jot; for
first, there is a very great difference between Christ's glorified body, and the
Apostles patible body, as it was when he lay in prison: and therefore to let a
patible body go out of prison, it was necessary the doors should be opened by
an Angel, or some body: But Christ's glorified body needed no such help.
Secondly, because the Text says not, that Peter went out of prison the doors
being shut, as it is said, that Christ entered to his disciples while the doors
were shut, therefore these passages of Scripture are nothing to your purpose.

Rodon. Secondly, I answer, that the Virgin Mary was a true Virgin both before
and after her delivery, if by being a Virgin he meant not to have had the
company of a man: but it is certain that Jesus Christ came out of the Virgins
belly by opening her womb; for it is said, Luke 2. that Joseph and Mary carried
Jesus Christ to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord, as it is written in the
Law; Every male that opens the womb shall be holy unto the Lord.

Answ. Concerning our B. Ladies virginity, your answer Mounsieur is also
impious and false* for strict and rigorous virginity, (such as the mother of
Gods is) consists in the integrity of a virginal enclosure. Therefore it is so
far from being certain, that it is a false and an arrant lie, that Jesus Christ
came out of the virgins womb by fraction or overture; for that is contrary to
virginal integrity. But most certain it is, and a thing questionless, that de
Rodon deserves a double fee, one for vilifiing Christ's Sacraments, and another
remarkable brand upon his ungodly tongue or lips for speaking blasphemously
against the B. virgins virginal integrity, which according to his impious
doctrine, would not be as entire as that of ordinary young little maidens is.

The Scripture which you allege for it, helps you not out also; for although
Joseph and Mary carried Jesus to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord, as it is
written in the Law, Every male that opens the womb shall be holy unto the
Lord: yet it follows not, nor proves at all, that Christ at his birth, did open
his virgin-Mothers womb; for when Jesus and Mary came to the Temple, and he was
to be presented there to the Lord, it was not for any obligation he or she had
to the Law, for as they were both most free from sin; so were they exempted
from the Law also, which was made only against sinners. But he was pleased to
be presented at the Temple like a sinner, because all other males, but he that
opens the womb, were really sinners, and consequently subject to the Law. But
he, as he said of himself, came not into the world to destroy the Law, but to
fulfill it; and therefore for to give no occasion of scandal unto others, he
was pleased to be presented to the Lord, like unto a sinner, although both
himself and his most blessed mother were clear from all sorts of sins, and
consequently not subject to the Law: he was also perhaps pleased to be
presented in the Temple to the Lord, the better to conceal himself from the
devil; for the same reason as Martyr Ignations gives, why he chose rather to be
born of a Married woman then of a virgin unmarried, because the devil only
suspected and guest who he was, and was not quite certain of it, as it
evidently appears by these words of S. Math. 4. If thou art the son of God,
command that these stones be made bread: where as one may clearly see the devil
spoke doubtfully. So that as Jesus Christ was exempted from the Law, and yet
fulfilled the Law; even so he came out of his mothers belly without opening her
virginal womb as all other males when they are born, do open their mothers
wombs, Certain it is therefore, and most certain too, that as Jesus Christ was
conceived in the virgins womb without any detriment to her virginal integrity;
so he also came out of her womb leaving her as pure and entire a virgin as she
was before his birth; and consequently as entire as any little maiden virgin;
and this susliceth to refute de Rodons blasphemous answer against the B.
virgins Integrety.

Rodon. Thirdly I answer, that Jesus Christ did not penetrate the stone that
was laid on his sepulcher, for it is said, S. Math. 28. that the Angel of God
rolled it back from the door of the sepulcher.

Answ. Neither will this text serve your turn Mounsieur for the stone was not
rolled by the Angel, to make way for Christ's body to come out of the sepulcher,
as de Rodon falsely glosseth it, and heaps curses more and more upon his own
head by so doing. But the stone was rolled for the Mary's who came to visit our
Lords sepulcher, and he rose before they came; for when they came with
ointments to anoint his body, they found the sepulcher shut; and S. Mary
Magdalene said, quis revolvet nobis l^pidem? who will roll the stone for us? S.
Mark. 16. Therefore the stone was rolled for them, and not for Christ to come
out of his sepulcher, because he could, and did make way for himself by his own
proper might and virtue, without needing the help or administry of his Angels,
as he assended into heaven without their aid or help.

Rodon. 14. fourthly, I answer, that when it is said, Heb. 4. that Jesus Christ
penetrated the heavens, we must understand it improperly, in the same manner as
it is commonly said, that an Arrow penetrates the Air, that is, the Air gives
way to the Arrow that Passes through the Air; and so Jesus Christ penetrated
the heavens, because the heavens gave way to his body, and not that the heavens
and his body were in one and the same place.

But why Mr. de Rodon? when the Apostle says plainly and exnresly, that Jesus
Christ penetrated the heavens, why (I say) must we understand his words
improperly? do you think that Penetration is an impossible thing to God? have
you an Augustine, a Hierome, an Ambrose, a Gregory, a Chrysostom, or any of
the ancient Fathers to second you? or have you any Text of Scripture or General
Council that backs you in it? if you have, produce them, in the name of God; if
you have not, (as I am sure you have not) is it not a very great presumption
and audacity in you to offer to interpret clear passages of Scripture, and turn
them to what sense you please, upon your own bare word and authority? or
finally, do you not see your own heretical Pride, in offering to persuade the
world to believe your bare word against the Apostles clear meaning? for
certainly the Apo^le purposely mentioned the word ( Penetrated) to let us know
that Penetrability is a property that belongs to a glorified body: he^p on
(...), heap on, more and more curses upon your own self, for adulterating Gods
clear word; but I am sure no body of understanding, reason or belief ought to
believe you, or pin his says upon your glosses, after so many blasphemies and
lies by you expressed in this small treatise. Therefore it is certain that as to
be obscure, corruptible, impenetrable and lumpish or heavy, is proper to every
patible body; so it is proper to every glo^ious body (as Chri^s is most
glorious) to be luminous, incorruptible, penetrable, active or fleet* or if you
deny penetrability to a glorified body, you must deny it agility,
incorruptibility, and clarity also; and then you contradict your own self: for
in your 4th. chap. numb. 15. you own that the glory of Chri^s body does
principally consist in the brightness and splendour of an extraordinary light;
which is nothing else but the gift or dowry of clarity.

Rodon. 15. All the Romish doctors agree with us, that modal accidents (which
are nothing else but the manner of being of substances, as Action, Passion,
Relation, figure, etc.) cannot be without a subject, no not by the power of God
himself: But all the Objections by which they endeavor to prove that the
accidents of the bread and wine may exist without a subject (that is without
their substance) do prove the same thing of modal accidents too, so that I
shall not stay now to repeat these objections with their answers, which are set
down at large in my dispute about the Eucharist.

Answ. Certainly Mr. de Rodon you are much mistaken in the general opinion of
all the Romish doctors concerning accidents, and I believe you never read them
all, nor the tenth part of them: for although these Accidents which you
recount, if compared to the accidents of Quantity and Quality (because of their
small entities and being) are but modal; yet in themselves they are real and
positive entities, and not pure modes: for each of them constitutes a peculiar
Predicament or series of Accident, as the common opinion of all the best Romish
doctors hold with Aristotle, commonly called the Prince of Philosophers. But
whatsoever they hold of these Accidents, whether they be proper entities, or
only pure modes, very sure it is, that they hold, that subsistence and
existence themselves (which are substantial modes, and more intrinsecal and
near to their subjects or substances, then modal accidents be) may be separated
from their substances; as Antichrists subsistence and existence are now
separated from his Essence, for essences (as Aristotle says) are ab aeterno,
from all eternity; but subsistences and existences are not. But suppose these
modal accidents, for the smallness of their entities, cannot be without a
subject; yet it follows not, but that the Quantity and Quality of the
Sacramental species (which have a greater and more solid entity) may be without
their connatural subjects, their connatural subject being supplied by a better
and stronger, as we say the power of God which upholds the Sacrament, is a far
better and stronger prop of the Sacramental species, then the bare entities of
bread and wine were. And suppose again, that according to all the Romish
doctors, these modal Accidents cannot be, (even by the power of God himself)
without a subject; yet it follows not, that they cannot be without their
connatural subject, because God can supply their connatural subject with a
better; and so he does in the Mystery of the blessed Sacrament; for he gives
the Sacramental species a better and stronger subject then they had before
while they were sustentated by their connatural subjects of bare bread and
wine. In a word, it is sufficient for all Accidents to have an aptitudinal
inherence to their natural subjects, without having an actual inherence in
them.

Objection 5th.
Roman: 16. The fifth objiction is drawn from Mal. 1. in these words: from the
rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, my name shall be great among
the gentiles; and in every place shall they offer incense to my name, and a new
pure offering: where by this new and pure offering nothing can be understood
but the sacrifice of the Mass; because by this offering, we cannot understand
prayers, alms, contrition of heart, and other good works, which are sometimes
in Scripture called oblations and sacrifices; for the Prophet Malachy promises
a new offering. But Prayers, Alms, and other good works, were common amongst
the Jews, and besides, they of the Reformed Religion do believe that all the
actions of the faithful are polluted, and the Prophet speaks of a pure and
clean offering. Again, by this offering which Malachy speaks of, cannot be
understood lambs, Bulls, and such like animals, which were wont to be
sacrificed in Solomon's Temple; because the Prophet promises that it shall be
offered in every place, amongst the heathens. Lastly, by this offering cannot
be understood the bloody sacrifice which Jesus Christ offered on the Cross,
because that bloody sacrifice was offered but once upon Mount Calvary in Judea,
and the Prophet speaks of an oblation that shall be offered in every place:
Therefore by this offering must be understood the sacrifice of the body and
blood of Christ, under the species of bread and wine; which is nothing else but
the Mass.

Rodon. 17. To this I answer, first, that by the offering whereof Malachy
speaks, must be understood that spiritual worship and service which believers
should perform unto God under the New Testament, which is comprised in that
sacrifice which they offer to God, both of their persons and Religious actions,
and this is the reason why S. Paul Romans 12. speaks thus; I beseech you
therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God that ye present your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. And
chap. 15. speaking of the grace that was given him of God, he says. It is
given him that he should be the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles,
ministering the Gospel of God, and that the offering up of the Gentiles might be
acceptable, being sanctified by the holy Ghost: whence it appears that by this
oblation whereof Malachy speaks, we must not under, stand the offering of
Christ's body and blood under the aecidents of bread and wine; but the offering
up of the persons and Religious actions of those that should be brought unto
God by preaching of the Gospel, and particularly the Gentiles.

Answ. I wonder where Mr. de Rodon did read or learn all these witty
commentations he has upon Scripture. If they were revealed unto him by God,
then they carry as much authority with them as Scripture it self does. But if
they be not revealed, nor seconded by any of the holy fathers, upon what
foundation does their verity rely, but upon de Rodons own bare word? All the
world then must follow Mr. de Rodons bare word, and leave the plain sense of
the words of Gods Prophet, although we are sure he was inspired by God. The
Prophet says expressly, that in every place they shall offer Incense to Gods
name: Incense is the sign of a strict and rigorous sacrifice, not of a
sacrifice improperly taken; for in all the proper sacrifices of the old Law,
the ceremony of Incensing the sacrifice was commonly used, though not at the
offering of improper sacrifices; such as are Prayers, Alms, and other good
works. Therefore the Prophet meant hear, a strict and proper sacrifice whereat
Incense is used. supposing then for certain, that, the Prophet spoke of a
rigorous and proper sacrifice; I see no reason to the contrary, why Mr. de
Rodon should not be held to Bellarmines definition of a strict sacrifice; as
well as he holds us to it, until he gives us as good or a better of his own;
holding him then to the same words he held us to, viz. and destroys something
that is sensible and permanent; whereas his answer is, that by the offering
whereof Malachy speaks, must be understood that spiritual worship and service
which believers should perform unto God under the New Testament, which is
comprised in that sacrifice which they offer to God both of their Persons and
Religious actions. I ask the Mounsicur when he, or any of his brethren, do
offer their Persons, or their Religious actions to God, whether they de^troy
their own Persons and actions, or not? if they do, then they destroy their own
bodies and works; if not, how is it a strict and proper sacrifice they offer?
for such a sac^fice cannot be offered wit^out destroying something that is
sensible and permanent. But we seldom see, or hear that any of the R^formed
Church destroy themselves through an excessive zeal to Gods service; but on the
contrary, we often see that they are very curious and careful both of their
diet and apparel, and do mortify their bodies with fa^ting and other penal
exercises, for Gods sake, but very little: yet true it is, that we hear
sometimes of some Phanaticks or Quakers (derived from the Reformed Church) who
now and then, out of mere zeal do hang themselves, or throw themselves out of
windows or high places, and so sacrifice their persons to the devil.

Neither does these words of the Apostles, Romans 12. I beseech you therefore,
brethren, by the mercys of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service, favor you, o^ hurt
us; for the Apostle speaks there, of a sacrifice taken not strictly, but in
its common acception: for he bids us not destroy our bodies, nor our actions;
and yet according to our definition of a proper and strict sacrifice, some
sensible and permanent thing must be destroyed. And though he had meant a
strict sacrifice, yet it makes nothing against us: for his Passage is very well
understood in this sense, viz. that we ought to be always ready, and prepared
in mind, to offer up all we have to the honor and service of God, nay to
sacrifice, and make victimes of our selves, and our whole estates, and lose
all, rather then to swa^ve from God, or deny our Religion: this manner of
Sacrificing unto God (which is very acceptable unto him) the poor Catholics of
England, I am sure, do practice a thousand times more, then those of the
Reformed Church do: for they, upon the only score of their Religion, are hunted
after, from house to house, their names taken up, they are presented,
indighted, convicted, their estates taken away, they are banished, imprisoned,
and persecuted a thousand manner of ways; they are incapable of bearing any
manner of office by sea or land, and all ways for them to live in their own
native Country, to maintain their poor wives and families are obstructed; a
Turk, a Jew, a heathen, nay any body, so he be not a Roman Catholic, has his
freedom, and may live as he please, without let or molestation.

And in the sense of an improper sacrifice, must these words also of his 5th.
chap. be understood, viz. that the offering up of the Gentiles might be
acceptable; for otherwise, if by offering up the Gentiles, a proper and strict
sacrifice were meant; then it would be acceptable to God, that the Apostle
should kill or destroy those Gentiles he was to offer unto God; and so
according to Mr. de Rodons answer, the Apostle was to go up and down the world
amongst the Gentiles or heathens, and after he had preached Christ unto them,
those of them that believed and were converted by him, the Apostle was to take
a knife, or some other weapon, and to cut their throats, or knock them on the
head, to make them proper victimes or sacrifices for Christ, for without
destruction of a sensible permanent thing (according to the definition of a
strict sacrifice, and we will stand to this definition until de Rodon shows us
a better) there can be no strict or proper sacrifice. And this may be (for
ought we know) Mr. de Rodon and his parties true sense or understanding of
these words; for they do as far as they are able, destroy not only the
estates, but also the Persons of the Romish doctors, and all the Romish
Catholics too; and who knows but they think they offer an acceptable sacrifice
to God by doing it? for if they think otherwise, sure they offer these sort of
sacrifices with a guilty conscience, and consequently if they offer them so,
they cannot be at all acceptable to God, but to the devil.

Rodon. 18. Secondly, I answer, that in the whole Passage of Malachy
above cited, the words New offering; are not to be found, but only clean
offering. And though a new offering had been there spoken of, yet I say, that
things may be said to be new, when being spoiled and corrupted, they are
restored and made sound again. But the service of God which had been corrupted
under the Law, was reestablished by Jesus Christ and his Apostles under the
Gospel, so that all things were made new: a new time, viz. the time of the
preaching of the Gospel: a new people, viz. the Christian people: a new place,
viz. all parts of the world, and not at Jerusalem only a new Prayer, viz. the
Lords Prayer: new Sacraments, viz. Baptism, and the Lords supper: and new
Preaching, viz. the preaching of salvation by Jesus Christ.

Answ. Mr. de Rodon, we will not stand with you here about the difference of
these two words, New and clean, for the one serves our turn as well as the
other; and whether you forged the New upon us, instead of the word clean, I
know not, for you cite no author for it of ours; and I find the words clean
offering, in our Bible also, as you have. But this imports nothing at all to
our question: therefore, if you will not have it to be a New sacrifice, at
least show us which is that clean one the Prophet spoke of? If it be a strict
sacrifice, a sacrifice with Incense (as the Prophet says it is) it must be
destroyed. Is the new time, (you speak of) that sacrifice? a great deal of that
time I confess, is past, and spent; but when was it incenst? were the new
people, the Christians, this sacrifice? it is true, many of them are dead and
gone; but were they all thurified an Incenst at their departure out of the
world? or is the new place (the world) your new or clean sacrifice? that is
neither quite destroyed as yet, nor in most places Incenst: No more are the
Lords Prayer, the new sacraments, viz. Baptism and the Lords supper, (as they
are celebrated by you) nor your new preaching, (if they be your sacrifices) I
say, they are not offered with Incensation, or thurification; But the Prophet
promised that at the new or clean offering or sacrifice of the new Law, which
sacrifice is to be offered every where, or in every country or dominion, it
shall be offered with Incense and thurification to the honor and glory of Gods
name: and so (I am sure) do the Roman Catholics through the whole world, when
they celebrate or offer the unbloudy sacrifice of the Mass solemnly to the
honor and glory of Gods name, they offer it with Incense and thurification.
And this sacrifice (as we believe it is the real body and blood of Christ) is
infinitely cleaner then your bare bread and wine, and then all the rest of the
sacrifices you mentioned are. Therefore since the Prophet says, there must be a
new or clean sacrifice; and that this sacrifice must be offered in every place
with Incense to the name of God; it follows according to the Prophets words,
that the sacrifice of the Mass, whereat Incense is daily offered, is that new
and clean sacrifice, since that of the Cross cannot be it, it having not been
Incenst, nor offered in every place; and the Mounsieur nor any of his party,
can show us any other clean or new sacrifice of theirs where at Incense is used.

Moreover, God not only changed and multiplied his people, but also changed and
bettered his sacrifice; for in place of sacrificing Cattle, birds, and other
weak and poor creatures, which were not able to purge sins, and were also often
polluted by the sins of the offerers. God in this place promised a most
effectual, pure and excellent daily sacrifice to continue perpetually in all
places of his Church, that cannot be polluted; which accordingly our blessed
Redeemer and Savior instituted of his own body and blood, in the forms of
bread and wine, as all ancient fathers prove. So Justinius Martyr teaches, in
dialogo cum Trpihone. S. Cyprian, lib 1. cap. 18. adversus (...) 5. Damasc^n.
lib. 4. c. 14. de fide orthedoxa. S. Ierom. S. Theodoret, and S. Cyril, in
their comentaries upon this place. S Augustine lib. 18 c. 15. de civit. S.
Chrysostom. in Ps. 95. and oratione conara Iudaeos; showing plainly, and urging
the Jews, and all oppugners of this Catholic belief and doctrine, that this
Prophecy is not otherwise fulfilled, but in the daily sacrifice of the Church;
for that here is proph^sied another sacrifice distinct and different from the
Jewish sacrifices, neither were sacrifices offered in all the world, neither
could be ordinarily offered out of Jerusalem. But of this most sacred Mystery,
and particularly that this is here prophesied, there is so much published by
ancient and late writers, that more need not to be here added. And yet Mr. de
Rodon with his bare word, or exposition, thinks to carry away the prize from
all these; so great is his opinion of himself, and of his illuminated spirit, a
thing common to all heretics.

Rodon 19. Thirdly, I answer, that the oblation which is offered to God under
the Gospel is pure and clean, the service which performed unto him, according
to his word, is pure, the preaching of the Gospel is pure. In a word, the
Christian Religion is pure, though there be many failings in those that profess
it. And although the faithful that present their bodies a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable to God, be compassed about with many infermities, and that
their Religious actions be accompanied with diverse failings; yet their persons
and words may be said to be pure and clean in Jesus Christ in whose name they
are presented to God; so that although they cannot of themselves please or
satisfy God; yet as they are members of Christ, they are reputed holy before
God: for it is these S. Peter speaks of, in Ep. 1. chap. 2. Who as living
stones, are built up a spiritual house, a holy Priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. And so our sacrifices
are a pure and clean offering, but it is through Jesus Christ, who covers them
with his purity and holiness; so that the defects of them are not imputed to us.

To this I add, that besides the perfect purity which we have by the imputation
of Christ's rigteousness, we have also a purity begun by the holy Ghost, of
which S. Paul speaks, Romans 15. in these words: that the offering of the
Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the holy Ghost: for that
which God has decreed, Jesus Christ has purchased, and the holy Ghost has
begun, is reputed by God perfect and complete. And S. Paul shows clearly the
truth of what has been said 1. Tym. 2. 8. in these words. I will that men pray
every where, lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting. And Ephesians. 5.
Jesus Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify
and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he might present it
to himself, a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing,
but that it should be holy and without blemish.

Answ. Your third answer is, that the oblation which is offered unto God under
the Gospel, is pure and clean, the service which is performed unto him
according to his word is pure, the preaching of his Gospel pure. In a word the
Christian Religion is pure, though there be many failings in those that profess
it.

All this I confess is true, but what is it to your purpose? I think (if all
the holy fathers above cited, ought to be more believed then you; and I know
not why they should not) I think I say, and I am sure on it too, that you rather
accuse and condemn your self, and your whole party by this answer, then save or
excuse your selves; for by that pure oblation which is offered unto God under
the Gospel, all the holy fathers did understand the body and blood of Christ,
as they are daily offered and sacrificed upon the Altar, in the Mass, then
which nothing can be offered and sacrificed more clean and pure; but they never
made any mention of your bare bread and wine. By the pure service which is
performed unto him according to his word, cannot be understood your service;
for you contradict his word; his plain express word is, that Bread and wine
(after the words of consecration) are converted into his real body and blood:
for his express words upon the bread and wine he took in his hand, be these,
this is my body, this is my blood: And you say no: it is not his body but the
sign or Sacrament of his body only, and you have no more reason to misbelieve
this, then you have to misbelieve the Mysteries of his Incarnation, and of the
Blessed Trinity; because his word or Testimony for this, is as clear, if not
clearer, then for any of the other two grand Mysteries of our Belief: and Gods
word or Testimony is the only ground and motive of our faith: and as you
misbelieve his word in this point, so you misbelieve his Church in many things
more; notwithstanding his express word commands you the contrary; as in S.
Math. 18. he bids you hear the Church. And in S. Luke the 10th. speaking to his
Church representative, he says, he that hears you, hears me, he that
despises you, despises me: a lesson which every good Christian ought to heed
very well. It is also one of the Articles of our Creed, to believe in the
Catholic Church: In a word, because you believe not him, nor obey his Church;
your preaching the Gospel, and your unchristian Religion, whereof you so much
boast, and wherein (as in your selves) be many failings and absurdities; are
very far from being pure and clean: and consequently the sacrifices you here
mention; (though as they are offered by the orthodox people, while they are in
the state of grace) be pure and acceptable to God; yet your schismatical, or
rather heretical sacrifices, are neither pure, nor pleasing to him: for you
like rotten or withered branches, are excommunicated, and quite cut off from
his Church; and so will still remain, until you be reconciled unto her,
according to Christ's command.

That your doctrine and preaching, and consequently your sacrifice and service
to God, are not clean and pure, but rather putrid and stinking, appears
manifestly by these your own words, which be these. And although the faithful
that present their bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, be
compassed with many infirmities, and that their Religious actions be
accompanied with diverse failings; yet their persons and works, may be said to
be pure and clean in Jesus Christ, in whose name they are presented to God; so
that although they cannot of themselves please or satisfy God; yet as they are
members of Christ, they are reputed holy before God; for it is these S. Peter
speaks of in Ep. 1. c. 2. who as living stones, are built up a spiritual house,
a holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. And so you say, your sacrifices are a pure and clean offering; but it
is through Jesus Christ, who covers them with his purity, and holiness, so that
the defects of them are not imputed to you.

This (I say) is very impure and stinking doctrine; for it contradicts Gods
word, who Proverb. 15. says the victims of the impious are abominable to our
Lord. God is no acceptor of persons; if a drunkard, a whoremaster, a murderer
or a thief, offer him never so many sacrifices, while he is out of the state of
Grace, although he offers them in Christ's name, they are not pleasing or
acceptable to God, but rather odious and abominable; and much less are the
sacrifices of disobedient and stubborn heretical spirits pleasing unto him, for
Obedience, is with him better then victims; and consequently, to be obedient to
his Church, is more acceptable unto him, then any victims or sacrifices we can
offer him in whose name soever. Therefore until Mr. de Rodon can prove, that
his is the only universal Church of Ood, (which he will never be able to
accomplish) he ought not to brag or boast of his sacrifices: for all the
sacrifices that are offered to God out of his Church (as the Jews, offer him
sacrifices too) are odious and abominable unto him. Certain then it is, Mr. de
Rodon, that you, nor any of your party, are those persons the Apostle meant in
the fore-alledged passage: and certain also it is, that Christ never covers or
hides your, or any bodies else, his nasty sins and abominable sacrifices, which
be always more loathsome to him, then any cloose-stool or carrion is to us: and
much less (whatever you presume your selves to be) are you his members, being
now (as dead branches lopt of from a tree) cut off from his Mistical body the
Church: for no soul can be a living member of Christ, before she be renst and
washed by virtue of his precious blood, which boiles in his Sacraments, that are
the spiritual salves, which must be applied unto her; to wash and take away all
the filth of her sins. Then, when she is thoroughly cleansed and purged from
sin, Christ enters and inhabits her, afterward he beautifies and adorns her
with a bright ray of inherent Justice; and finally after well seasoning and
sweetning her with the fragrant odor of divine Grace, he incorporates her unto
himself, and makes her his mystical member. Therefore Mr. de Rodon, you grossly
wrong Christ, by saying that he covers or hids your filthiness and sins,
because you are his members; for Christ has no commerce with dirt, he is no
patron* protector or coverer of iniquity or sin, he hates it from his very
heart, and there is nothing that causes a separation or divorcement between him
and his creatures but only sin; therefore if he does but only cover the sins of
his mystical members, and not quite wash them, and take them away; it follows
that the dirt of their sins will stick to them also when they are in heaven
(for Mr. de Rodon says their sins are but covered by Christ) and consequently
that their sins will follow them into heaven; although holy writ says that no
dofiled thing shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven: by this discourse the
Reader may well see, how stinking and impure this doctrine of the Mounsieur is
as also that neither he, nor his party, with their confessed failings, are
those the Apostle spoke of; and much less that they are members of Christ; and
consequently that their sacrifices are not acceptable to God: Therefore the
Apostle meant only the orthodox Catholics that offer sacrifice unto God while
they are in the state of Grace; and yet the sacrifice the Apostle speaks of
here, is not a strict and proper sacrifice, but an improper one; for otherwise
something must have been destroyed.

To what you farther answer, viz. that besides the perfect purity which you
have by the imputation of Christ's rightiousness, you have also a purity begun
by the holy Ghost; of which S. Paul speaks Romans 15. in these words: that the
offering of the Gentiles might be acceptable being sanctified by the holy
Ghost. I answer that you are far deceived in this your proud fancy of your
selves, for as Christ covers not your impurities, nor imputes his righteousness
unto you, but rather esteems you for no better then heathens and publicans,
because you hear not his Church; so the holy Ghost has nothing to do with you;
for Christ's holy spirit never contradicts Christ. True it is what you say, that
that which God has decreed, Jesus Christ has purchased, and the holy Ghost
has begun, that that is reputed by God perfect and complete. But this only
concerns orthodox people, and not you; for them be these the Apostle speaks of,
1 Tym. 2. 8. in these words you aledge; I will that men pray every where,
lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting. And Ephesians. 5. Jesus Christ
loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse
it with the washing of water by the word, that he might present it to himself,
a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it
should be holy and without blemish. Very far (alas) are you from such people:
for you pray but very little or nothing, in comparison of others who pray both
day and night, and you pray not every where; for if you were compared with the
rest of the world who profess Christ, you are but a handful of people in little
corners or Islands, and there too, but for a very short time in comparison of
former ages, how holy your hands are, (set aside your own private conceits of
your selves) the rest of the world can easily judge, how void of wrath,
(especially against us) we very well know; how undoubting you are in points of
Religion, no body breathing can tell; for no two of you could ever as yet fully
agree as to that point; and every one of you is always seeking, but never
finding what can quiet and content his conscience in that matter: you run from
the lukewarm Protestant to the precise Puritan or Presbyterian, who hates and
rayles at the Protestant Bishops and Clergy, as much as they do at us: others
of you from being Presbyterians, turn Independents and viceversa; from
Independents, and Presbyterians, you turn Anabaptists, from Anabaptists you
become Quakers; from Quakers Fanatics, and from Phanaticks, at last you become
Atheists: your union consists only in this; that to preserve your worldly
Interest, you retain the common notion or name of Protestant, and band all
against the Roman Catholic; whereas on the contrary, the Roman Catholic or
Papist, holds still to his old Lady Dinna, to his Invocation of saints, to his
praying for the souls departed, to the Indulgences which are (as he believes)
bequeathed by Christ unto his Church: to Pur gatory; all which (they say) are
included in these two articles of our belief, viz. I believe in the holy
Catholic Church; and in the communion of saints. In a word, all the Roman
Catholics do unanimously agree in all the tenants and points of their whole
Religion, and are perfectly satisfied and contented in their consciences as to
all matters of faith, without running here and there, from one sect to another,
to search and seek after new opinions, as the Protestants do; How then can you
be the Church, the Congregation of the faithful, whom the Apostle says, Ephesians.
5. Christ loved, and gave himself for? how can you be a glorious Church? a
Church without spot or wrinckle, or any such thing? a holy one and without
blemish?

Objection 6th.
Roman. 20. The sixth objection is drawn from Genesis 14. in these words; And
Melchisedeck king of salem bringing forth bread and wine (for he was a Priest)
blessed him: and from Ps. 110. and from Heb. 7. where it is said, thou art a
Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck: from which words they argue
thus: Jesus Christ is a Priest, not after the order of Aaron, but after the
order of Melchisedeck; the difference between Aaron and Melchisedeck consisting
in this, viz. that Aaron and the other Levitical Priests, offered bloody
sacrifices, killing and shedding the blood of beasts, which they sacrificed to
God, as a sign and figure of the bloody sacrifice of Jesus Christ on the
Cross; But Melchisedeck offered an unbloudy sacrifice; for when he went to meet
Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, he offered to God bread and
wine. And seeing this bread and wine offered to God by Melchisedeck, were signs
and types of Christ's body and blood, Jesus Christ was obliged to offer an
unbloudy sacrifice, viz. his body and blood, under the species of bread and
wine, which he did at the Institution and celebration of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, that so the reality of the thing typified, might answer to the
shaddows and types. Secondly, that although Melchisedeck had brought all his
bread and wine for the refreshment of Abraham, and his Army^ that returned from
the slaughter of the kings, yet he first offered it to God, and then gave it to
them, that so they might partake of the sacrifice of bread and wine, and the
reason of this is, because the scripture says, that Abraham returned from the
battle with great spoils, amongst which, there was bread and drink enough for
the refreshment of himself, and of his people. Also it says expressly, that
Abraham's people had taken such refreshment as was necessary before Melchisedeck
met them; and consequently, they had no need of the bread and wine which he
brought, except it had been to partake of the sacrifice of the bread and wine
which he offered. Thirdly, they say, this is strongly proved by the following
words, for he was a Priest of the most high God, which show the reason why
Melchisedeck brought bread and wine, viz. to make an oblation or offering of it
to God; for if he had brought this bread and wine for the refreshment of
Abraham and his people, the scripture would have said, that he brought this
bread and wine, because that Abraham and his army being faint and tired, had
need of meat and drink, but it speaks nothing of this: on the contrary it
says, that he brought bread and wine for he was a Priest: fourthly, they say,
that Jesus Christ is a Priest forever, after the order of Melchisedek; and
seeing there can be no Priest without a sacrifice, there can be no eternal
Priest without an eternal or perpetual sacrifice. But the sacrifice of the
Cross was offered but once, and cannot be reiterated, for Jesus Christ dies no
more, Romans 6. Therefore there must be another perpetual sacrifice in the
Church, which Jesus Christ offers by the hands of Priests, which can be
nothing else but the sacrifice of the Mass, viz. the sacrifice of Christ's body
and blood, under the species of bread and wine, typified by the sacrifice of
broad and wine of Melchisedeck.

Answer.
Rodon. 21. To this I answer, first, that the hebrew word does not signify
bringing but brought, drew out, caused to be brought, etc. But our Adversaries
falsify the Text thus, to make way for another falsification, viz. to put
these words in a Parenthesis (for he was Priest) instead of putting them
without a Parenthesis, And he was Priest: so that we may say in these few
words, they have made three falsifications, first, when they translate it.
Proferens, bringing, instead of Protulit, brought, or drew out. Secondly, when
they translate it, erat enim sacerdos, for he was a Priest, instead of
translating it, and erat sacerdos, and he was a Priest. Thirdly when they
translate it, benedixit ei, blessed him, instead of translating it, and
benedixit ei, and he blessed him: and so of three different propositions, viz.
Melchisedeck brought bread and wine, and he was a Priest, and he blessed him;
they have made but one, with a Parenthesis thus: Melchisedeck bringing bread
and wine, (for he was Priest) blessed him.

Answ. When one tells a notorious and impudent lie indeed, and provokes another
too much with his lie; sometimes he is answered no better then thus; The devil
take the Liar. S. Ierom or you, must needs be the liar in this Translation, for
the Romish doctors do follow S. Ieroms Translation; and we know no modern
Romish doctors, Translators of our Bible: we all hold to S. Ieroms Translation,
which goes by the name of the vulgar Translation among us. If he be your
adversary; then we have one champion of our side, worth ten thousand de Rodons,
and all those of his party. But I pray tell me, Mr. de Rodon, where were you,
your Bible, and your Translators, when S. Ierom translated his Bible, which we
all follow? or did any of yours oppose or contradict his Translation for so
many hundred years that past betwixt him and Luther, Calvin, and de Rodon? Tell
me again (I pray) whether you and yours, translated your Bible by inspiration
from God, or whether you had your Original from us? If you had yours by Gods
inspiration, then doubtless yours is the true and right one, and we must
acquiesce to it. But how shall we know it? or what warrant can you give us for
it? only your bare word? pardon us good sir; that suffices us not, for we have
no reason to believe your bare word against the testimonies of ten thousand
authors better then your self, who tell us the contrary. But if you had our
Bible for your original (as you your selves confess you had) how can your
coppies correct their original, but by your adding or diminishing something to
it? by doing whereof, you infallibly purchase to your selves a heavy curse. Of.
S. Ieroms soul to be in heaven, I make no doubt, and consequently out of the
devils clutches and reach: But as for Mr. de Rodon who strikes at S. Ierom
through the Romish doctors sides, who accuses him of corrupting and falsifiing
the text, and consequently who presumes to blaspheme against so glorious a
saint, and eminent doctor of Christ's Church, I dare not swear, but the devil
holds him very fast for an arrant Liar, and makes him sit next to himself, who
is the father of Lies. Therefore I do not think Mr. de Rodon that the Romish
doctors, or any man of reason and sense, will easily leave Saint Ieroms vulgar
translation, approved of for so many ages by the whole Church, to adhere to
your simple bare word, or to any of your parties, whose dictator the devil was,
that filled both your Bible and brains with falsehood and lies.

But suppose Mr. de Rodon, the right Translation were as you say, and that of
the words must be made 3 different propositions, viz. thus: Melchisedeck also
brought bread and wine, and he was a Priest, and he blessed him; suppose I say
the true Text runs so; since holy writ makes no mention of any other kind of
sacrifice that Melchisedeck ever offered unto God, and since he was a Priest,
and since he blessed Abraham, and finally since the holy fathers (as I shall
hereafter produce) agree with us as to the principal and main point of this
question, viz. that the bread and wine which Melchisedeck brought or offered,
was a type of the Eucharist; there is no reason why the words of the text,
whether made into three propositions without a Parenthesis, as he translates
it, or made into one proposition with a Parenthesis, as S. Ierom or the Romish
doctors (as he says) translated it; I say, there is no reason why the whole
text should not be understood in our meaning and sense: for the word, brought;
which he translates for the word bringing, may be well understood, brought to
offer or to sacrifice. And these words: And he was a Priest, which he
translates instead of these for he was a priest, do signify that Melchisedeck
was a priest, and we may well think that holy Scripture did not make mention of
his Priesthood in this place, but in order and reference to some sacrifice; as
Priest and sacrifice are always correlatives. And finally, these words, and he
Blessed him, which the Mounsieur translates instead of ours Blessed him; may be
as well applied unto Abraham, as to God, whatever Mr. de Rodon says to the
contrary; for the Romish doctors do take themselves to be as good grammarians
and dialecti^ks too, as he is, and therefore will not swerve from their
Principles, nor from the unanimous opinion of the holy fathers concerning the
main point of this question, for Mr. de Rodons bare word, or interpretation;
unless he proves his conclusion better; either by holy Scripture or fathers;
which it seems he cannot do; or if he can, wherefore does he not produce them
to make his cause good?

Rodon. 22. Secondly, I answer, that the hebrew word used by Moses, signifies
commonly brought, drew out, caused to be brought, caused to be drawn out,
caused to come, etc. But we must not stray from the proper signification of
words but upon very great necessity, which appears not in this Text. And
although this hebrew word should signify brought to offer, and that it should
be taken for offered; yet our adversaries would gain nothing by it, for it is
not said in the Text, that he brought bread and wine to offer unto God, but we
must rather expound it thus, viz. that he brought bread and wine to offer and
present it to Abraham: and indeed the following words, viz. and blessed him, do
clearly show it; for the Pronoun relative, him, relates to Abraham according to
the exposition of the Apostle, heb: 7. where he says expressly, that
Melchisedeck met Abraham and blessed him; and a little after he says, that
Melchisedeck blessed him that had the promises, and that the less is blessed of
the greater. But if these words: he brought him bread and wine, must be
expounded thus: he offered bread and wine to God, then it must necessarily
follow, that Melchisedeck blessed God, and not Abraham; for in these words,
viz. he offered bread and wine to God, and blessed him, the Pronoun him, can
relate to no^e but to God.

Answ. Certainly the Mounsieur would make a better dictionarist, then
Philosopher or divine, for he is mighty copious in expounding of words as you
see, though none of them can help him out of his straights or necessities, in a
Philosophical or theological sense; nay nor in a gramatical also: for I granted
him brought instead of bringing; and let him make three several propositions of
our one; and yet all cannot serve his turn, as I showed immediately before. But
he, to recompense our bounty, regratifies us, and says, that although this
hebrew word should signify brought to offer, and that it should be taken for
offered, yet we would gain nothing by it; for it is not said in the Text, that
he brought bread and wine to offer unto God, but to be offered and presented
unto Abraham; for so he will have it understood.

But good Mounsieur the text makes express mention of Melchisedecks being a
Priest, And he was a Priest, thus you translate it your self; but why does the
text make mention of his Priesthood, but in order to a sacrifice? if in order
to a sacrifice, (because Priest and sacrifice are allways correlatives) then
the sacrifice was offered to God and not to Abraham, for otherwise Melchisedeck
would be an Idolater. Therefore if the word brought, signifies brought to
offer, and if the offering was done by a Priest, why may not this offering be
thought a sacrifice; and if a sacrifice, then being offered by such a Priest as
Melchisedeck was; it is most certain he offered it to God, and not to Abraham.
As to your proofs of Scripture to strengthen your reason that Melchisedeck
offered bread and wine to Abraham, and blessed him; we agree with you as to the
later part, viz. that it was Abraham that was blessed by Melchisedeck. But we
deny that if Melchisedeck had sacrificed bread and wine unto God, that the
Pronoun Relative, him, could not relate to Abraham, but to God, against the
exposition of the Apostle: for we say, (and so does our famous grammarian Lilie
also) that the relative him, may relate either to the former or to the later
thing mentioned be-fore in the precedent sent^e.

Rodon. 23. Thirdly, I answer, that Melchisedeck brought bread and wine to
Abraham to refresh him and his people and not to offer unto God. Bellarmin in
Book 1. of the Mass. chap. 6. confesses, that Melchisedeck brought br^d and
wine to Abraham to refresh him, and his people; who returned faint and feeble
from the slaughter of the kings, which is true; but he adds that Jesus Christ
had offered it to God before, which is false, and cannot be proved. Jerome in
his Epistle to Evagrius writes, that the Jews understood it that Melchisedeck
meeting Abraham after his victory, brought bread and wine to refresh him and
his people. Josephus writing this history, says, that Melchisedeck presented
bread and wine to Abraham to refresh him and his Army. Damascen, Book 4. of the
orthodox faith, says that Melchisedeck treated Abraham with bread and wine.

Answ. Doubtless this Mounsieur must needs be some great Rabbin in his own, or
in his parties opinion; for he speaks so confidently and masterlike, as if all
his sentences were oracles; he thinks all the world is bound to believe what he
says, without giving any reason why, or wherefore, he says, that Melchisedec
brought bread and wine to Abraham to refresh him and his people, and not to
offer unto God: we must believe him, because he says it; though he gives no
reason nor authority of any body of note why: he says Bellarmin in his 1. book
of the Mass, chap. 6. confesses; that Melchisedeck brought bread and wine to
Abraham to refresh him and his people, who returned faint and tired from the
slaughter of the kings: so we say too; he says, that S. Jerome in his Epistle
to Evagrius, writes, that the Jews understood it that Melchisedeck meeting
Abraham after his victory, brought bread and wine to refresh him, and his
people: what if they did understand it so? might he not have refresht them with
his bread and wine, after offering it to God before? or might he not have
refresht them with his consecrated bread and wine? the same I say concerning
Josephus, and concerning Damascens words. But why does not the Mounsieur (as he
ought) prove that Melchisedeck did not offer his bread and wine to God, before
he brought it, drew it out, caused to be brought, caused it to come, etc. (for
these be his words) before Abraham, and his people? The Mounsieur is here the
oppugner, he is to destroy our Objection, wherefore then does he not prove it?
certainly, if his Translatour were not a very partial man, he could never have
said in his Preface, that de Rodon has by way of Prevention, destroyed all the
Arguments made use of by the Romish Doctors for the restoring and
re-establishing of our Diana or Mass; for I am sure all his preventions
hitherto are by me sufficiently retorted upon himself, in this Treatise; and if
his Translatour has a mind to second or vindicate him, I trust so much in the
goodness of our cause, that I doubt not with Gods help, but to give him a full
and sufficient answer also.

Rodon. 24. Fourthly; the reasons of our adversaries, mentioned in the
objections to prove that Malchisedeck brought bread and wine to Abraham that he
might partake of the sacrifice which he had offered, are not considerable; viz.
because Abraham returned from the battle with great spoils; and so there was
meat and drink enough for him and his people; and that they had taken their
repast before Melchisedeck met them, etc. These reasons, I say, are
inconsiderable; because although Abraham had great spoils, yet he restored all
to the king of Sodom, and though his people had eaten and drunk of such as they
found amongst the spoils, yet it is not said that Abraham did eat and drink;
and though both he and his people had eaten and drunk, yet it is not said how
long it was since, and that they had no need of more provision; and though they
had no need of more, yet Melchisedek not knowing that they had eaten and drank,
did that which prudent men are wont to do, viz. provide all that may be needful
in case of necessity.

Ans. Although these reasons ( Mounsieur) in themselves; are not to me (I
confess) demonstrative, and evidently convincing, because it is very hard to
demonstrate things so long past with all their circumstances, yet they are in
themselves as considerable as the reasons you give to destroy them, which are
not also demonstrative or convincing, unless your bare word must be taken for a
demonstration or oracle; and that we have no reason to do, considering your so
manifold former lies, blasphemies and absurdities; yet if these reasons be
backed and seconded by the unanimous Testimonies of the holy fathers, (as I
shall hereafter show they be) then I dare say, your answer is of no more
consideration or weight to counterpoise them, then a feather is to a wain load
of lead: therefore I pray (good sir,) until you produce better proofs out of
Scripture or fathers to overballance them, give us leave to hold them for
probable and considerable in themselves; and for demonstrative by reason of the
holy fathers Testimonies.

Rodon. 25. Fifthly, I answer, that the principal reason which our Adversaries
bring to prove that Melchisedeck offered unto God bread and wine, viz. because
it is in the hebrew text, for he was Priest, is a manifest falsification; for
it is in the hebrew text, and he was Priest: Also the old latin Interpreter,
and the Greek Septuagint translate it as we do; viz. and he was Priest. And it
is very probable that this Passage has been corrupted in S. Jeroms latin
translation, because in his hebrew Questions, and in his epistle to Evagrius,
he translates it, and he was Priest. S. Cyprian in his Epistle to Caecilius,
and S. Augustine Book 4. of Christian doctrine, chap. 21. and elsewhere,
translate it, and he was Priest. So that although the hebrew particle used by
Moses do sometimes signify (for) yet seeing that both its proper and common
signification is (and) and that for one place where it signifies (for) there
are a thousand at least where it signifies (and) and that there is nothing that
obliges us to translate it (for) it is evident that the argument of our
Adversaries is of no force at all: Therefore it is more pertinent to refer
these words, and he was a Priest, to what follows, viz. and blessed him, then
to what goes before, viz. brought bread and wine: for as Melchisedeck being a
liberal King, brought bread and wine to Abraham to refresh him and his people;
so as he was a Priest much more excellent then Abraham, he blessed him. And
though it should be translated, for he was a Priest, yet it would not follow
that Melchisedeck did sacrifice bread and wine unto God; for it might be said
that Moses would show the reason of the good will of Melchisedeck toward
Abraham, viz. it was very fit that he that was Priest of the most high God,
should testify his kindness to so eminent a servant of God, as was Abraham, by
presenting bread and wine to him; whereof he thought there was need.

Answ. It is more then you can do, Mounsieur, to make this a manifest
falsification, or a probable falsification either; for S. Jerome was ever
counted for a better latinist then you or I are, and yet this is not the first,
and only place of Scripture, where (for his elegancy in the latin tongue) he
translated and into for. In the 20th. of Genesis where the hebrew text has, Lo
thou shall die, for the woman that thou have, and she has a husband. S. Jerome
translates it thus: for she has a husband: and in Genesis 30. where the hebrew
text has, I have learned by experience, and God has blessed me: he translates
it thus, I have learned by experience, that, he has blessed me; which is as
much as to say, for he has blessed me: and again, in Isai. 64. the hebrew text
has, Behold, thou art angry, and we have sinned: he translates it, Behold,
thou art angry, because we have sinned: which because signifies the same thing
as for does, so that S. Jerome in his latin translation for the elegancy of
the latin Phrase, does often use for for and: for he attends not to the meaning
of every word verbatim in his translation, (as no man else ought to do, when he
translates a book into another language) but he attends to the sense and
meaning of the whole sentence, Therefore it is not probable that this passage
has been corrupted in S. Ieroms latin Translation, as Mr. de Rodon says,
because S. Jerome attending to these words that went before, viz. bringing
forth bread and wine, he purposely changed and into for because he understood
that the word for, related to the antecedent words, viz. bread and wine; and
not to the subsequent, viz. blessed him, or and he blessed him, as Mr. de Rodon
would have it to be. And for the better confirmation of what is here said, it
is to be noted, that not only in the hebrew text, but also in the Caldean,
Greek, and latin texts, immediately after these words, viz. and he was a
Priest, there is set a full stop or point, which sort of stop, the hebrews call
soph pasuch: and it perfectly ends the whole sentence; which termination proves
evidently, that these words for he was a Priest relate only to the precedent
words, viz. bread, and wine and not to the subsequent, viz. and he blessed him.
But what need I stickle with Mr. de Rodon about these two words for and and,
whereas I have already referred our main question to his own translation? and
yet (as I have showed before) he benefits nothing by it.

Rodon. 26. Sixthly, I answer, that from what is said, ps. 110. and Heb. 7.
viz. that Jesus Christ is a Priest for ever, it will not follow that he must
offer himself every day in the Mass, under the species of bread and wine, by
the ministry of Priests; for the Apostle writing to the hebrews, places the
perpetuity of the Priesthood partly in this, viz. that there is no need he
should be offered any more, seeing by one oblation he has consecrated for ever
those that are sanctified; and partly in this, viz. that being exalted far
above the heavens he intercedes continually for us; for the Priesthood consists
in certain functions, and in the virtue and efficacy of them. And seeing there
are two parts of Christ's Priesthood, whereof one relates to the oblation of
himself, which he offered on the Cross; and the other to his Intercession; it
is certain that the virtue and efficacy of the oblation is eternal, and that
the Intercession will co^ unto the end of the world.

Answ. Do no^ you know ( Mounsieur) that the Royal (...) says that Christ is
not only a Priest after the order of Meichisedec, but also that he is a Priest
for ever after that order; that is to say, until the worlds end? And do not you
know that if he be a Priest for ever, there must be an everlasting sacrifice
answerable to his Priesthood, and corresponding with the order of his
Priesthood? because Priest and sacrifice are correlatives, and convertible
terms. If Christ then be a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec, it
must necessarily follow that a sacrifice is to be offered for ever after the
same order; but that sacrifice cannot be his bloody one; for although its
effect will last for ever, yet the sacrifice it self was offered but once; and
besides, it was a bloody sacrifice, and so not after the order of Melchisedec;
therefore the everlasting sacrifice must be unbloudy, and since we know of no
other sacrifice bloody or unbloudy, that Melchisedec offered, but bread and
wine; nor of any other kind of sacrifice that is offered in Gods Church, but
that of the Mass, under the species of bread and wine; we conclude that this is
the sacrifice whereof the Royal psalmist, and the Apostle spoke.

To what you say concerning the Apostles words to the hebrews, and that he
places the perpetuity of Christ Priesthood partly in this, viz. that there is
no need he should be offered any more; we confess that there is no need he
should be offered bloudily any more, because the effect of his bloody sacrifice
lasts for ever; but we deny that there is no need he should be offered
unbloudily any more because the psalmists words must be verified in him, viz.
that he being a Priest for ever after the order of Melchesedec, there must be
an everlasting sacrifice also after the the same order.

To what you farther say, viz. that Christ's intercession will continue until
the end of the world, we say so too, but that his intercession is a partial
sacrifice, (if you intend a strict sacrifice, such as we dispute of here) I
deny; for by his Intercession, you either understand his prayers as they are
offered for us in themselves, without a victim or by the mediation of a victim;
if without a victim, then they belong not to the function of his proper
Priesthood, and consequently they are no part of a strict sacrifice; if through
the mediation of a victim; then it necessarily follows, that Christ does always
offer victims; which is that our adversaries deny. Besides, by Christ's
intercession, there is nothing sensible and permanent destroyed, which is
requisite in a strict sacrifice.

To this I add, these inconveniences that would follow from the Mounsieurs
answer; first, it would follow that there would be no more Christian Religion
or Law here upon earth; because the Priesthood being translated into heaven,
Religion and Law must needs follow it, as the Apostle says, heb. 7. It would
follow also that there is no bare and (as we may say) naked truth in heaven;
but only shadows, figures, Types, and ceremonies of Truth; for all proper
sacrifices must be types of that of the Cross, and certain Religious
Ceremonies. It would follow also, that Christ's oblation must needs be often
repeated; a thing which our adversaries will by no means hear of. Therefore the
Mounsieur must seek after a better answer then this, or else his cause will be
quite lost.

Rodon, 26. Seaventhly, I answer, that in all the holy Scripture where the
Priesthood of Melchisedeck is spoken of, three things only are mentioned of
him, viz. that he was a Priest, that he was a Priest for ever, and that he was
so with an oath, according to the application that is made of it to Jesus
Christ in Psa. 110, and Heb. 7. in these words: the Lord has sworn, and will
not repent, thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck: But
there is nothing at all spoken of the sacrifice of Melchisedeck, nor is it said
wherein it did consist; for as it was fit that all the offices which we find,
were born by the greatest kings, Priests, and Prophets under the old Testament,
should be collected under the person of the Messiah; which was done by
proposing them as types and figures of Jesus Christ, and that the most
illustrious type was Melchisedeck; so it was more expedient not to speak of the
nature of the sacrifice of Melchisedeck, because it was not expedient then to
speak of the nature of the sacrifice of the Messiah. And therefore we know not
the nature and quality of the sacrifice of Melchisedeck; yet we know that he
was a Priest, Even as we know that Melchisedeck was a king, though we know not
in what manner he executed his kingly ^ffice.

Answ. Mounsieur as I told you before, that it is pity you were not with the
Apostles to help them concerning this question we are about; so I tell you now
that it is pity you were not one of Gods grand Counselors of the old time to
direct and tea^h the Patriarchs and Prophets of those times, what was
expedient, and what was not to be mentioned in holy writ, concerning their
rites and sacrifices, since all things (by your advice) must be done by
expedience or convenience; I pray tell us why was it expedient that Christ's
bloody sacrifice should be typified by the Priests of the Levitical Law, and
the things they were to offer, were particularly specified; and that it was not
expedient the things Melchisedeck offered as a type of Christ's sacrifice
whether bloody or unbloudy, should be mentioned or specified at all? what
mystical conceit have you in this? I pray let us hear it, or else if you keep it
to your self, we are never the wiser, nor the more illuminated by you, to
follow your opinion, and leave our own; and if you know not the nature and
quality of the sacrifice of Melchisedeck, God help you, the more is your
ignorance; but we are well enough satisfied as to that, because all the holy
fathers say unanimously, that he sacrificed unto God bread, and wine; and that
holy writ says, that he was a Priest; for if one should tell us, such a man is
a father, although he makes no mention of his son, nor of his nature or
quality; yet we presently know he has a son or a child; so also when we hear
the word Priest, we presently understand its correlative, sacrifice; so that
when holy Scripture thrice mentions Melchisedeck's Priesthood and makes mention
of bread and wine which he brought, or offered, without mentioning any other
kind of thing that he ever offered; and the holy fathers all agree that he
sacrificed bread and wine to God as types of his body and blood in the
Eucharist; we make no doubt of the nature and quality of the things he offered,
more then we do of his Priesthood, let Mr. de Rodon, and his party doubt of it
as long as they please.

Rodon. 28. Lastly, I answer, that it is false that the difference between the
Priesthood of Melchisedeck and that of Aaron did consist in this, viz. that
Aaron offered the bloody sacrifices of beasts, and Melchisedeck offered an
unbloudy sacrifice of bread and wine. It is also false that the likeness of the
Priesthoost of Melchisedeck to that of Jesus Christ does consist in this, viz.
that as Melchisedeck did sacrifice bread and wine, so Jesus Christ did
sacrifice his body and blood under the species of bread and wine, these are
humane inventions, and are founded neither on Scripture or reason; for on the
contrary, the Apostle writing to the hebrews, places the difference between
the Priesthood of Melchisedeck and that of Aaron, and its likeness to that of
Christ, in quite another thing, first he is called Melchisedeck which being
interpreted (as the Apostle says heb. 7.) is king of righteousness, and then
king of Salem, that is king of Peace; and herein he very well represents our
Lord Jesus Christ, who is truly king of Righteousness, not only because he is
righteous, and was always without sin; but also, because by his satisfaction he
has purchased righteousness for us, being made unto us of God righteousness;
he is also truly king of Peace, in that he has reconciled men unto God, made
their peace with the Angels, and has particularly recommended Peace to them:
As for Aaron, and other high Priests they were no kings; much less are the
Priests of the Romish Church so, and consequently cannot be after the order of
Melchisedeck. And they that have written the lives of the Popes, have
sufficiently declared what righteousness and Peace they have procured for the
true and faithful servants of Jesus Christ, as I shall show at large elsewhere.
Secondly, the Apostle heb. 7. represents Melchisedick to us as a man come from
heaven, without father, without mother, without descent, having neither
beginning of days, nor end of life: not that he was really such a one, but
because Moses has wholly concealed from us his father, mother, descent, birth,
and death, that he might be the type of Christ, who was without father as he is
man, without mother, as God, without descent, both as God and man; having
neither beginning of days, as God, nor end of life, as God, or as man. But the
fathers, descent, birth, and death of Aaron, and other high Priests, are
exactly described by Moses. And there were never any Popes, Bishops, or
Priests, whose Parents, birth, and death, were not known, and consequently they
cannot be after the order of Melchisedec. Thirdly, the Apostle adds, that
Melchisedec being made like unto the son of God, abides a Priest for ever*
because Moses makes no mention of his death, nor of any one that succeeds him
in his Priestly office; that so he might be the type of Jesus Christ, who never
less his Priestly office, but will exercise it until the end of the world,
always interceeding for those that are his, by presenting his sacrifice to God
the father continually. As for Aaron, and other Priests, they are dead, and
have had successors, and the Popes, Bishops, and Priests, die daily, and have
successors, and consequently are not after the order of Melchisedec: fourthly,
the Apostle says likewise, that Melchisedec took tithes of Abraham, and adds
that Melchisedec blessed him that had the Promises, viz. Abraham, and the less
is blessed of the greater: whence it appears that Melchisedec having taken
tithes of Abraham, and blessed him, and Levi, and all the Priests in his
person, was more evcellent then Abraham and all his successors, because he in
whom all the promises were fulfilled, must needs be incomparably more excellent
then he that received them only. But I do not believe that the Priests of the
Romish Church are so bold as to prefer themselves before Abraham, the father of
the faithful, in whose seed all the Nations of the Earth are blessed; and
consequently are not after the order of Melchisedec. fifthly, the Apostle never
spoke of the sacrifice of Melchisedec so far was he from comparing it with the
sacrifice of Jesus Christ, as being like it, or with that of Aaron, as being
unlike it, so that all that our Adversaries say, is nothing else but mere
humane invention.

Answ. This your last answer ( Mounsieur) is indeed very false, as to its two
first points, viz. that the difference between the Priesthood of Melchisedec
and that of Aaron did not consist in this, that Aaron offered the bloody
sacrifices of beasts, and Melchisedec offered an unbloudy sacrifice of bread
and wine; as also when you deny the likeness of the Priesthood of Melchisedec
to that of Jesus Christ does consist in this, that as Melehisedeck did
sacrifice bread and wine, so Christ did sacrifice his body and blood under the
species of bread and wine. This answer I say, is not only false, but also
impious, because it contradicts both scripture, and the unanimous opinion of
all the holy fathers. It contradicts scripture, because scripture says in plain
and express terms, that Christ took bread in his hand, and said of it, this is
my body, and took wine in a cup, and said of it; this is my blood; and yet you
pertinaciously say it is not founded in scripture or reason. It is (I confess)
above our reason to comprehend how Christ's body is in the host, and yet it is
not contrary to reason that it should be there; and yet we have reason to
believe it is there, both because Christ said it, and his word is truth and
omnipotent; as also because the words of the Royal prophet and of the Apostle
concerning the everlasting Priesthood and sacrifice of Melchisedec must needs
be verified in Christ, as I said before; which since they cannot be verified by
his bloody sacrifice, as is also proved, and there is no other strict sacrifice
imaginable whereby to verify them, but this of the Mass; it stands both with
scripture and reason, that as Melchisedec did sacrifice bread and wine; so
Christ did sacrifice his body and blood under the species of bread and wine;
and consequently that the likeness of both their Priesthoods did chiefly
consist in this manner of sacrificing.

To what you say, that these are but human inventions, I say, they are liker
divine inspirations (since all the holy fathers concur in them;) then your
impudent denial, without any proof but your own consident word, is of any force
or weight to weaken or hurt them.

You say further more that the Apostle writing to the hebrews, does place the
difference between the Priesthood of Melchisedec and Aaron and its likeness in
quite another thing: first, because being called Melchisedeck, which signifies
King of Righteousness, and being king of Salem, which signifies Peace, he was
the type of Jesus Christ, who is truly king of righteousness, and king of
peace: But Aaron (you say) and other high priests were no kings, and much less
are the Priests of the Romish Church so, and consequently cannot be after the
order of Melchisedeck. But good Sir, with your leave, the Apostle by this
disparity betwixt Melchisedeck and Aaron, viz. that Melchisedeck was a king and
Aaron not, that th'ones name signified Righteousness and Peace, and the others
not, places no difference between their Priesthood, but only between their
persons, viz. that Melchisedeck being both king and Priest, is a more perfect
type of Jesus Christ then Aaron was, who was but only a Priest and no king; and
all this we grant: But this shows no difference between their Priesthood as any
body may see; and yet the difference between their Priesthood, and not their
persons, is the thing you are to prove out of the Apostle, which you will never
be able to do, but by the difference of their sacrifices; therefore though
Aaron nor any of the Romish Priests were kings, your consequence has a huge
slaw in it. The same slaw has your second consequence, because all what you
say out of the Apostle Heb. 7. concerning Melchisedecs coming from heaven
without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of
days, nor end of life; all these I say, do show the difference between
Melchesedec, and Aarons persons, and that Melchisedec was a more perfect type
of Christ then Aaron was; but it shows no difference of their manner of
sacrificing, and consequently touches not their Priesthood, at least
reduplicatively, as it ought to do, to make the Mounsieurs consequence
slawless, your words out of the Apostle ( viz. Melchisedec being made like unto
the son of God, abides a Priest for ever) to make your third consequence
follow smoothly, are quite for us, and against you* for if the son of God
abides a Priest for ever, then it will follow that he will sacrifice for ever,
or that there must be a perpetual sacrifice; but the perpetual sacrifice cannot
be that of the cross, for though its effect be perpetual yet the sacrifice it
self is not so, for it is past and gone: and a new other bloody sacrifice he
cannot offer any more; because Christ can die no more. Romans 6. Therefore it
must be an unbloudy sacrifice, which is offered by his ministers; his mistical
members, that must correspond with Christ's everlasting Priesthood; and that is
the holy sacrifice of the Mass, offered under the species of bread and wine,
symbolized by the bread and wine sacrificed to God by Melchisedeck; and
consequently the sacrifice of the Mass (out of these words of the Apostle) is a
sacrifice according to the order of Melchisedeck. And Christ's continual
intercession for us in heaven, (as Mr. de Rodon surmizes) is not a sacrifice,
at least, not a strict one; (yet if Christ be a strict Priest for ever, there
must be a strict sacrifice answerable to hisstrict Priesthood for ever;) first,
because his Priesthood does not totally consist in his intercession, as Mr. de
Rodon himself confesses; secondly, because his intercession, unless it be
median^e victima, through the mediation of a victime, is no more sacrifice,
then the prayers of other people are; and if it be through the mediation of a
victime, then Christ offers new victimes continually, which our adversaries
will not admit of. Thirdly, the inconveniences I spoke of before, would
follow, if Christ's continual intercession for us in heaven were a strict and
rigorous sacrifice, viz. there would be no Christian Religion nor Law here upon
earth; nor no naked and pure truth in heaven, but only shadows and types of
truth; for the reasons there shown.

But the Mounsieur says, that Aaron, and the high Priests, all died; and that
the Popes, Bishops, and Priests, die daily, therefore (he concludes) our
sacrifice is not after the order of Melehisedeck, which is to last for ever.
Aaron (we confess) and all the Priests of the old Law died, and their
Priesthood is also quite destroyed; But although our Popes, Bishops, and
Priests die daily, we deny that our Priesthood dies, or is destroyed; no more
then the Kingship of a kingdom dies or is destroyed, when the King dies and
leaves a successor behind him to succeed; where is now your brave consequence
Mounsieur?

He will fetch it out smoothly with his fourth reason, which is, because
Melchisedeck took Tithes from Abraham, and the Levitical Priests who descended
from him; and consequently Melchisedeck was a type of Jesus Christ, who was
infinitely more excellent then Abraham and all his successors; because he in
whom all the promises were fulfilled, must needs be incomparably more excellent
then he that received them only: all this we grant: Then replies the Mounsieur
strongly; But I do not believe that the Priests of the Romish Church are so
bold a^ to prefer themselves before Abraham, the father of the faithful, in
whose seed all the Nations of the earth are blessed; No more do I also, and I
am sure on it too, that none of the Romish Priests, nay, nor the Pope himself,
dares prefer his own person before the person of Abraham, or of any of the
least Saints in heaven; But for his Priesthood or Priestly function, I am sure
both the Pope and all his Priests, will prefer theirs before Abraham's
priesthood, and all the priestly functions of the old Law. But all this will
not fetch out the consequence you aim at.

Lastly, both holy Scripture and the Apostle make mention that Melchisedeck
brought or offered bread and wine; and they say he was a priest, without
mentioning any other thing, that he ever brought or offered to be sacrificed,
but bread and wine; and they say also that Aarons offering or sacrifices were
beasts, soul, etc. and all the holy Fathers (as I shall presently show) do
compare and collect out of these different sort of sacrifices, the difference
betwixt Melchisedeck and Aarons priesthood; therefore if it be true, that
Christ promised his spirit to his Church until the consummation of the world
(as we believe he did) therefore (I say) if this be but a humane invention, I
dare maintain it is a very good and solid one, and a hundred thousand times of
more firmity and weight then Mr de Rodons divine inspirations (as he may think
them to be) or rather diabolical illusions (as I take them to be) with his own
silly bare word, without any kind of proof for the contrary.

Rodon 29. To conclude my answer with this argument, Jesus Christ has offered
no sacrifice but after the order whereof he was established a Priest, but he
was established a Priest after the order of Melchisedeck only, as the Apostle
observes; Therefore he has offered no sacrifice but after the order of
Melchisedeck: but (accocding to the Romish Doctors) there is no other sacrifice
after the order of Melchisedeck but that of the mass; therefore (according to
the Romish Doctors) Jesus Christ has offered no other sacrifice but that of
the mass; and seeing (according to them) the sacrifice of the mass is an
unbloudy sacrifice, it follows that Jesus Christ has offered no other
sacrifice; and consequently he has not offered a bloody sacrifice on the
Cross, which is blasphemy.

Answ. Mounsieur, as I followed and hunted you all along this Treatise, be sure
this captious and sophistical argument shall not save you; Therefore I answer,
that Christ's bloody sacrifice was not after the order of Melchisedeck nor of
Aaron either; but the proto-type of both; for both Melchisedeck and Aarons
sacrifices were but types of Christ's bloody sacrifice; Therefore since Christ's
bloody sacrifice cannot be a type of its own self, it cannot be a sacrifice
after the order of Melchisedeck or of Aaron, which were but mere types: and
consequently since Aarons Priesthood and sacrifices are quite abolisht and
destroyed; it is necessary for to uphold and maintain Christ's everlasting
Priesthood, that a sacrifice should be instituted after the order of
Melchisedeck, which is to remain for ever; and since this sacrifice cannot be a
bloody one, it must needs be an unbloudy one; which we say, (and have hitherto
defended) is no other then that of the Mass: and so we say, that although
Christ offered a bloody sacrifice (which we confess were blasphemy to deny) yet
his bloody sacrifice was not after the order of Melchisedeck, nor of the order
of Aaron; but the primitive, principal, and prototype sacrifice of both; But at
the In^itution of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, then (we say) he offered a
sacrifice after the order of Melchisedeck; and commanded this sacrifice should
be continued and ^terated unto the worlds end; when he said to the Apostles,
(and consequently to their successors) as often as y^u do this, do it in
remembrance of me. And so the fox is hunted through all his Blasphemous
Treatise and forced to end it in Blasphemy.

Yet since we had to deal with an obstina^e and stubborn enemy, and one that
will not acquiesce to S. Ieromes vulgar translation, but prefers his own bare
saying (as if every word of his were an oracle with him and his Translator)
before the Saints vulgar received version; since I say, he will not yield to
us, and we think we have no reason to yield to his bare word concerning the
Translation of s^ripture; and since he, or his, may think that our reasons to
prove that Melchisedec before he treated Abraham and his army with bread and
wine, sacrificed it first unto God, are not considerable or convincing; and we
on the other side to hold their reasons against our said proofs do be as
inconsiderable and weak; since neither of us will submit one to the other in
this point: who can be better umpiers to decide this obscure question, then the
holy ancient fathers of Christ's Church, who not only lived nearer the Apostles
times then we; but also far surpassed both Mr. de Rodon his party, and us, in
eminency of learning and sanctity of life; especially, when they are all
unanimous, and of the same opinion.

To these great ^eroes, to these holy fathers court of Judicature I humbly
appeal, and cite Mr. de Rodon with his whole party* these I choose for my
Umpiers and ^udges; and challenge de Rodon to this scripturistical combat
before them; and if he and his be not insolently proud, they cannot refuse the
Gantlet.

The first of them I pitch upon is Clemens Alexandrinus, whose words lib. 4.
stromat. be these: Melchisedec rex Salem, sacardos dei altissimi, qui vinum and
panem sanctificatum dedit nutrimentum, in ^ipum Eucharistiae: Melchisedec king
of Salem, Priest of the most high God, who gave wine and bread sanctified, a^
^ypes of the E^charist: where note that he says, not only wine and bread but
wine and bread sanctified, or sacrificed.

After him I rank S. Cyprian. lib. 2. Ep. 3. ad Caecilium. Nam quis (quoth he)
Magis sacerdos Dei summi, quam Dominus nester Jesus Christus, qui sacrificium
D^o patri obtulit, and obtulit hoc idem quod Melchisedec obtule^, id est panem
and vinum, suum scilicet c^rpus and sanguin^m? for who is more the Priest of
the (...), then our Lord Jesus Christ? who offered sacrifice to God the father,
and who offered the self same that Melchisedec offered, bread and wine, that is
to say, his own body and blood* what (I pray) could be said more clearly to our
purpose?

S. Jerome, the Mounsieurs adversary, shall come next: In his Ep. to Marcella
he writes thus, Recurre ad Genesim, and Melchisedec regem Salem, hujus
Principem invenies c^vitatis, qui jam tuno in typo Christi panem and vinum
obtulit, and misterium Christianum in salvatori^ sanguine and corpore
dedic^vit: search Genesis, and there you shall find Melchisedec king of this
city, who sometime offered bread and wine, in the type of Christ, and
dedicated the Christian Mystery, or Sacrament contained in the body and blood
of our Savior.

If these Testimonies and authorities of the abovementioned holy fathers
satisfy not the Reader; I refer him to all these ensuing renowned Interpreters
of holy writ; and every of them (if I be not mistaken) will over balance ten
thousand de Rodons with his partitoes. Let him then read Eusebius. Caesari^nsis
lib. 5. demonstrat. Evangelica cap. 3. S. Aug. Ep. 95. ad Innocentium Papam. S.
A^b. lib. 5. and sacram: c. 1. S. Epiph. haeres. 55. quae est
Melchisedechianorum. S. Chrysostom. hom. 35. in Genes. S. Theodoret in Comment.
Ps. 109. S. Leo. 1. sermon. de Annivers, assump, suae ad Pontific^t. Eusebius.
E^iss. sermon. 5. Arnob, in ps. 109. Eucher. lib. 2. cap. 18. in Gen: Primasius,
in Comment. c. 5. Epist. ad hebraeos. Cassiod. in ps. 109. Re^ig. Antisiod. and
Euthimius Zigabenus upon the same psalm. Damascenus. lib. 4. de side. c. 14.
O^cumen. in Comment. c. 5. Epist. ad hebraeos Theophilac. in cap. 5. ad
hebraeos. Ansel. in cap. 5. ad hebraeos. All these great ones, and many more,
which were too tedious to recount, do unanimously combine with the Romish
doctors against Mr. de Rodon and his party, in this principal point of our
controversy.

Therefore since all the Mounsieurs Arguments and keen arrows are all spent,
and all his solutions, glosses, and answers to our Objections, do band directly
against the whole to rent of holy fathers; and since he is not able to produce
one of them to stand of his side; I see no reason why he should not be hooted
at, like a mad dog, by all rational and impartial readers; for his bare word
against so many eminent Pillars of Gods Church, is but a mere vain barking and
consequently unworthy to be farther answered. Laus Deo.

FINIS.
The PREFACE OF M. de RODONS Translator.
THe author of this piece was one Mounsieur de Rodon, Philosophy Professor in
the Royal College at Nismes, a City of Languedo^ in France, where it was
written. But as soon as it was printed, it was suppressed by the command of
authority, prohibiting all persons to keep any of them, upon I know not what
severe penalties, and such copies as could be found, were publicly burnt by
the hangman, about 1660. whereupon the poor gentleman, for fear of being
condemned to keep company with his books was (...) to ^y to Geneva, where he
not long after dyed. These severities of our Adversaries bring to my
remembrance, what a learned and ingenious frenchman once told me, viz. that
this small Tract has more n^tled their party then any one piece that ever was
extant in France since the Reformation of Religion there. Whether that be a
mistake I know not, but this I dare affirm, that though many famous men of that
kingdom, have in the memory of this Age, written very smar^ly against the
Romish heresies, yet there is not one of them whose person and writings have
had such hard measure. Whence it appears that our Author (his very enemies
being Judges) has made good what he undertook, viz. he has destroyed that
great Diana, the Mass, and has also by way of prevention, destroyed all the
arguments made use of by the Romish doctors for the restoring and
re-establishing of her: which he has so well performed, that to this very day,
not one of them has dared so much as to attempt to revive her, by answering
his book: so that here you may see her, laid in her grave, without hope of
resurrection: and therefore the book may very fitly be termed The funeral of
the Mass; and consequently, the funeral of Romish heresies and Idolatries, as
the Author well observes. For the truth is, the Mass and the Romish Religion,
are almost convertible terms, so that if the former be destroyed, the latter
must vanish to its first nothing; and therefore our Author having destroyed the
Mass, has destroyed the thing called Popery too. As for the monstrous
absurdities and blasphemies which flow from this one Romish doctrine of the
sacrifice of the Mass, they would fill whole volumes: but I shall contem my
self to say that the Mass consists of more gross and abominable superstitions,
Phanaticismes, and Idolatries, then ever have been believed or practiced by the
most ignorant Pagans. What the tenets of the Romanists are, and what their
practices have been in reference to Protestant Magistrates and people, woeful
and sad experience has sufficiently taught the world; I only add, that they
are as pernicious to our bodies, and estates, as their heretical doctrines, and
Idolatrous services are to our souls. And consequently, to imtroduce Popery
into this kingdom, would be an act as unpolitick as Antichristian, as has
been demonstrated in that incomparable piece, entitled The established
Religion in opposition to Popery. But because (I know not by what strange
infatuation or enchantment, or rather by what wonderful judgment of God) this
monstrous, absurd, and destructive (shall I call it? Religion prevails amongst
us, I thought good to English and print this small Treatise, as the best
Antidote against Popery (the holy scripture excepted) that ever I read: and for
ought I know, it is not inferior to the best of this kind, that ever was yet
extant: to which opinion the harsh usage it has had from our Adversaries, as
aforesaid, does certainly give no small testimony. But I know that the holy
scripture it self cannot profit except God be pleased to give his blessing,
much less can this book: and therefore, I earnestly beseech him that he would
make it prosperous and successful for the good of souls; and if any shall
receive benefit by it, I desire them to give him all the glory, and then I
shall think my self infinitely recompensed for my pains in translating it.

AN ANSWER to the PREFACE, AND An Appendix to this book.
THe excellency of this famous Philosophy-Professors masterpiece, whom his
Translator does so highly extol and commend (gentle Reader) when it is
punctually compared with my answer, will evidently show you of what great
validity, depth and piety it consists; for I faithfully cited him word by word;
I did not cut or clip one tittle of his whole Tract; you have him whole and
entire in my book; nay, you have him in the full formal vigor or career of his
piercing philosophical shafts* therefore I leave the arbitration of our cause
to your own prudent and impartial judgment: his country, quality, or profession
is related to you by his translator, to render him the more famous; that is not
the thing we are to look upon here, but his doctrine. The traslator complains
of the great severity and hard usage his authors book received from his
adversaries. I answer him, that it is not harder nor more severe then the usage
our books have from his party; and the gentleman himself (if he had been taken
with his book) could not be more harshly used, by his adversarys, then our
Romish doctors are, when they are taken with, or without their books, by
theirs: so that as to this point the good translator has no more reason to
complain then we have; the severity on both sides being* sufficiently repayed
with a quid pro quo. If what the inge^ious french gentleman told the
translator, viz. (that his Authors small tract more nettled our party then any
one piece that ever was extant in France since the reformation of religion
there) be true, or whether he told an inge^ious lie, I know not; but supposing
it was true; I dare say, it more netled them for its blasphemy, then for any
solidity, piety, or semblance of veracity contained in it; as my answer does
clearly demonstrate. As to what the translator dares affirm, viz. that though
many famous men of that kingdom, have in the memory of this Age, written very
smartly against the Romish heresies, yet there is not one, etc. I dare affirm,
that the translator speaks very impertinently and improperly, when he calls our
Religion the Roman heresy, because he speaks contrary to the usage of all
nations, who generally by the Roman Religion, understand the Catholic
Religion; and Catholic is a word opposite to heresy: but what care we for his
scolding, barking, and playing the dog, at us, while we are sure he cannot
bite, hurt, nor produce one tittle of sound doctrine against our sacred and
orthodox Religion? That none else of your party, had such hard measure in their
persons and writings as his authors had from those of ours; shows rather the
lenity and great patience of our people toward you then it does evince, (we
our selves being judges, as you inconsequently infer) that he has made good
what he undertook, viz. that he has destroyed that great Diana the Mass, and
has also by way of prevention, etc. for all these puff-past words and darings
of yours, are evidently allayed and assuaged by my answer to his tract, as any
man of learning and judgment may easily perceive: so that if your party showed
any more harshness to your authors writings then they used to do to any of the
rest of your (as you term them) famous wtiters works; it must eirher be because
of its open blasphemous contents against the most blessed Sacrament: or because
of its wily sophistical formal method, to inveagle poor ignorant illiterate
souls; and not for any great depth or profundity of learning they could see in
it; for God knows that amongst good philosophers and eminent scholars, this
great masterpiece is not worth the reading, or to be answered; though some
weak brains, (especially being destitute of the light of faith) may perhaps
applaude and admire it.

As for the title of his tract or book, which (you say) may be very fitly
termed, the Funeral of the Mass; it brings unto my memory, what we read in
the history or book of Hester, viz. how graceles and wicked Haman, prepared and
reared a high Gallows for innocent Mardochaeus to hang on; but before he could
bring his ungodly achievement to pass, he himself was set up, and Mardochaeus
came off with glory and renown: the self-same is our Diana and de Redons case:
he prepared a funeral and grave for her, without any hopes of reviving or
recovery; but her cause, and his, being thoroughly scanned and examined in this
treatise; he himself is laid flat upon his back in his grave, to the view of
all judicious and impartial readers, without any hopes of recovery: for I took
him not by the arm or leg, I luggd him not by the ear, nor pulled him by the
nose; I gave him not a cuff or a kick; but griped him by the whole body of his
funesteous and false treatise, and so shook dis-jointed, and dismembered his
whole body, that there is now no more hopes left of his recovery or
reviviscence; but flat he must lie upon his back in his stinking grave of
heresy, which he prepared for our excellent and most virtuous Lady Diana, when
he made her funeral, while she remains still alive, as fresh, brisk, and
vigorous as ever she was; and so will be, inaugre de Rodon and all his parties
funesteous machinations, funerals, and wicked contrivements against her, unto
the worlds end.

But now I think it high time (gentle Reader) to let you know who, and what she
is: know then sir, that this Diana about whom Mr. de Rodon and I have so long
contested, is the Mass, by his translatour in derision, called our great Diana;
and in his opinion, his author has showed himself so gallant* and stout a
corypheus against her, that with his keen Philosophical arguments and darts* he
transfixt her heart through and through* so that to their thinking, she is
quite destroyed, and slain downright, without any hopes of recovery, and with
her, they say, is fallen Popery too; whereupon in a triumphing way, they
entitled their treatise, The funeral of the Mass: yet I think I have
sufficiently vindicated and cleared her from their false calumnies, and black
aspersions* and fully answered Mr de Rodo^s sophistical and funestuous treatise
from point to point, paying him in his own Philosophical coin, and retorting
his calumnies upon ^is own head. But as neither they no^ I, ought to be judges
in our own cause, so we ought to leave the decision of the matter to our
impartial Readers; the which for my part* I willingly assent unto. The motive
of my Appendix is this; because as (I hope) I have defended and secured this
unparalleled venerable Lady from the cruel bloudy-minded authors fury and force;
so by informing my contrymen (for most of them know ^ot who, or what s^e is)
of her noble extraction, virtues, and worth; I should likewise wipe away the
^oathsome and n^ufeous spots or blu^s of superstition, Phanaticism, and
Idolatry, wherewith his bitter Translator in the false scolding Preface of his
translation, most injuriously bespatters her; for I doubt not, if they knew her
as well as their pious Ancestors did, for many ages, since England was
converted to the Christian faith, until the dismal reign of king Henry the
Eighth, who was the first that (...) schism and subverted Catholic Religion
here in England, I doubt not (I say) but they would be en^moured of her, and
give her, her due veneration and respect*

Know the^ again (gentle Reader) that the Mass, (as we take it to be) ^s
nothing else, but the lyturgy which has be^n used by all Christians, since
Christ and his Apostles times in the Church; as to its essential parts, which
consists in the words of (...); it is the self-same Chrst himself and his
Apostles used; being commanded by him to do as he did* viz. to consec^ate bread
and wine into his body and blood; by virtue of which words he made them also
Priests, and Bishops: and gave them power to conse^rate other Bishops and
Priests who should s^cceed them; as Paul did Tymothy, Titus, and many others,
and all the other Apo^tles did the like; so that all Priestly power is derived
from them* As to the ceremonial parts of this Lyturgy, they were not all
instituted at once, but grew by succession of time, according as the Church
grew to be more and more in splendor; and especially since Constantine the
Greats time, who was the first Christian Monarch that enlarged and propagated
the Christian faith: ye^ some words and ceremonies that are this day in the
Mass, were used by the orthodox ministers of this Sacrament, before his time
also* as ancient aut^entick, and venerable authors do testify. But whatever
the ceremonies be, the essential parts of the Mass is always the self-same,
viz. the words of consecration, so that the Mass consists essentially, only in
this, vi^. that in it, the body and blood of Christ are offered and sacrificed
unbloudily to God the father, in remembrance of the once bloody sacrifice of
the Cross; which is nothing el^e, but the same Christ offered now unbloudily,
(because he can suffer no more again, his body being glorified; and being it is
the same Christ, it is still the same sacrifice, though not (...) after the
same manner; and being it is offer^d under the species of bread and wine* with
command to reiterate it in remembrance of his bloody sacrifice, we firmly
believe, that it is a sacrifice after the order of Melchisedec, who (as the
holy fathers unanimously assert) sacrificed bread and wine unto God.

That Christ's body and blood is really in the Eucharist, and consequently in
the Mass, is so clearly and plainly expressed in diverse places of the new
Testament, and especially in S. John. 6. that it is wonder any man that bears
the name of a Christian, should be so bold and impudent as to deny it; after
Christ himself said in most plain and manifest terms it is so; for when Christ
said of the bread he took in his hand, this is my body, either it was his real
body, or it was not* for betwixt it is, and it is not, when spoken of the same
thing in the present tense, and demonstrated with the Pronoun this, and it
relates to the absolute being of the thing whereof ^t is said, and not to its
manner of being; there can be no medium, but a mee^ contradiction; if it was
his real body, then it was as we say; and it could not be, the sign only or
representation of his body; for the mere sign of any thing is always
different from the thing signified, at least in representando, in its
significative being: if it was not his real body, as our adversaries hold it
was not, but only its sign; how can Christ's words be verified? since it is,
and it is not, in the sense I just now spoke of, be contradictions; and all
divines and Philosophers do unanimously concur in this, viz. that
contradictories cannot be at once true, or verified, also by the power of God:
what is it then to say, (after Christ said this is my body it is but the sign
of his body, but to contradict Christ's word? which is as much as to give him
the lie in his teeth. Suppose then the^e were no other passage in scripture to
prove the real presence of Christ's body in the host, (as there can be no
clearer) this alone would convince any Christian breath* ing, unless he would
wilfully fight against common sense and reason; for all those that maintain
that two contradictory propositions can be verified at once, do manife^tly
oppose and destroy reason.

Al^ when Christ said, Panis quem ego dabo, (...) est pro mundi vita: the bread
which I will give, is my slesh, for the life of the world; he said expre^ly,
that this bread is his s^h, he said no^, this bread is the bar^ sign or figure
of his flesh; but his real flesh; for it was his real flesh, and not its bare
figure that was offered or sacrificed for the lif^ of the world; therefore this
bread is ^ot a mere sign only of Christ's body, but his very real substantial
body, for it was his real body, and not its type only that was sacrificed for
the life or salvation of the world.

After our savior said to the Jews, I am the bread of life; I am the bread
which descended from heaven; and the Jews therefore murmured and g^umbled
among themselves, saying: is not this the son of Joseph whose father and Mother
we know? and again; how c^n this man give us his flesh to eat? our savior to
confirm that it was his real body; assevered it by oath or intermination,
saying Amen, Amen, (for that was his usual test) I say unto you, unless you
eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life
in you: here he calls it all along, his flesh and his blood, and not the signs
only of his flesh and blood; and for the farther confirmation thereof, he adds,
for my flesh is meat indeed: and my blood is drink indeed. What is but a figure
or type of a thing, cannot be the thing it self really and indeed. Therefore if
Christ's flesh be truly and really our meat in the Sacrament, or Sacramental
species; the Eucharist must needs be the true and real body and blood of Christ
indeed; and not in type or signification only.

S. Paul 1 Cor. 10. in clear terms shows it, The chalice (quoth he) of
benediction which we do bless, is it not the communication of the blood of
Christ? and the bread which we break* is it not the participation of the body
of our Lord? he says not the communication or participation of any signs or
types; but of his real body and blood. And in his 11th. chap. to the said Cor.
he mentions that our Lord took bread, and giving thanks, brake, and said:
take ye and eat, this is my body which shall be delivered unto you. These
words, I am sure, cannot be understood of a figurative or typical body; for it
was not a typical body that was offered or delivered for us, as the Mani^hees
falsely commented, but the real and substantial body of Christ, for it is
certain the Apostle Romans 8 when he said: proprio filio non pepe^cit, etc. he
has spared not also his own son, but for us all delivered him, spoke not of a
b^re type or figure, but of his ^eal body; as all these clear passages so well
cohering, do manifestly demonstrate.

This is also confirmed by these words of the said Apostle 1 Cor. 11. Qui^unque
mandu^averit panem, vel biberit calicem domini indigne, reus ^rit corporis and
sang^is domini. Therefore whosoever shall ^t this bread, or drink the chalice
of our Lord unworthily, he shall be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord:
how can this be, if it be but the figure or sign of his body and blood, and
not his real body and blood? those that did eat the Manna, and the Paschal
Lamb, were not said to be guilty of his body and blood, for eating them
unworthily, and yet they were signs of his bloody sacrifice. Therefore for
eating or drinking of a mee^ sign, or for tearing and destroying the mere
^mage or picture of any man, it is a very hard and severe Law to condemn him,
or make him guilty of his death. Therefore it is for eating and drinking of our
Lords real body and blood unworthily, and not for eating and drinking the
signs only of his body and blood, that the Apostle says, a man is guilty of
the body and blood of our Lord.

Hence any man of judgment may see, how clear and express these texts are for
the real presence of Christ's body in the ho^t; and how improperly and
wrongfully our advers^ries extort upon the clear Texts, to wrest them, and draw
them to their own sense of a sign or type.

But seeing scripture is so clear of our side; Let us see what the holy
fathers, the spiritual beacons, and true interpreters of Gods word say to it.

I will begin with ancient Tertullian, who says, Tertul de resurr. carn. n. 7.
our flesh eats the body and blood of Christ, that the soul may be fatted;
therefore they shall both have one reward at the resurrection. Next follows
Irenaeus, lib. 4. c. 14. whose words be these, how do they affirm that our
bodies be not capable of life everlasting, which are nourished by the b^dy and
blood of our Lord? S. Greg. Nyssene also ^aith, in orat. cathec. magna. that
lively body entering into our body, changes it, and makes it like and
immortal. Allexander 1. that venerable Prelate and Martyr says, There can be
nothing greater in sacrifices, then the body and blood of Christ: To these I
add the renowned S. Hylarie: there is no doubt left of the verity of the body
and blood of Christ; for now both by Christ's own confession, and by our belief,
it is truly flesh, and truly blood. If God was pleased to be made man (quoth
Damascene, lib. 4. de fide orth. c. 14.) and take flesh of the most pure blood
of the virgin without seed; can he not make bread his body, and wine and water
his blood? Great S. Augustine lib. sentent. Prosper. adds his sus^rage to these,
in these words, But we under the species of bread and wine, do honor invisible
things, viz. flesh and blood. S. Ambrose lib. de sacram. sides also with the
rest in these plain and express terms; it is ordinary bread at the Altar before
the sacramental words: But when it is consecrated, then of bread it is made
Christ's flesh. To these I add S. Jerome writing to Edibius. S Cyril of Alex. de
consecr. di. 2. c. necessario. S. Greghom. Pasch. S. Crysost. 3. dial. de
dignit. sacerd. c. 4. Theophilact. in comment. super Ioh. S. Anselme; and in a
word all the holy fathers and general councils that ever treated of this
mystery. Therefore all the greatest and most famous lights of Gods Church, do
hold with us as to this main point.

And although this Mystery be above humane reason, yet because it is not
contrary, nor destructive to reason; our divinos do give plausible congruityes
and reasons for it. The first whereof may be this: it is the nature of goodness
to impart or communicate it self to others, because (as the Philosophers says (
bonum est communicativum s^i; Goodness, is communicative of its own self; and
to say the truth, we know not a good or liberal man from a niggard but by
imparting of his goodness and liberality to others. If then it be the nature of
goodness to impart it self to others; it must be the nature of the highest and
chiefest goodness, to impart and communicate it self to others in the highest
degree; as we see Christ imparted himself to our humane nature in the highest
degree, by the mystery of his Incarnation, suppositating our nature
substantially, and covering it under his divine Personality. But it is a far
higher degree of communication, to impart himself to the rest of mankind,
really and corporally, for to make them his mystical members; then to impart
himself to them figuratively only, or typically; therefore this real
communication in the Sacrament, is more agreeable to Christ's infinite goodness,
then a typical or figurative communication is: and also his real body is of
more virtue and efficacy to incorporate us mystically, and make us his members,
then the type or sign of his body is.

The second reason is this. God the father, and God the son, are of equal power
and verity; therefore when God the father and God the son do express themselves
in the self-same manner of speaking; their words ought to be understood in the
same meaning and sense; But when God the father in the second of S. Matthew
said. This is my son, every one that heard him, understood that Christ was his
true and real son; and to understand his words otherwise, would be open
blasphemy. Therefore it is open blasphemy to deny, (when Christ said, This is
my body) that it is not his true real body, but the figure or sign of his body
only. The words were uttered alike; the power and verity of the u^terers were
alike; why then should not their words be understood alike? I see no reason for
it, because I see no disparity in the case.

Many other reasons and plausible proof^ do our Catholic divines, and Romish
doctors produce for the verity of this conclusion, deduced from holy scripture,
which are theological demonstrations. But what need I repeat any of them in
this place, where the case is so clear, out of sundry express texts of holy
writ, and backed by the unanimous consent of all the holy fathers, and General
Councils? all which to contradict, is not only an intolerable impudence, but a
mere frantic maddness. Therefore leaving such giddy-brain'd people to the
mercy of God, and to be more pitied, or prayed for, then farther refuted; I
conclude out of these irrefragable proofs, and premises, that the Mass, (whom
our adversaries in derision call the great Diana) is of the noblest, highest,
and most eminent extraction imaginable. This Diana whereof we here treat,
derives her immediate root and being from heaven, her descent, and pedigree
from Christ and his twelve Apostles; her father is the first person of the most
blessed Trinity, her mother a most pure and immaculate virgin, her Majesty and
glory none can parallel; her face is so resplendant and bright that the very
cherubins and seraphins are dazzled when they behold her. In a word, her
brightness is so eminent, that it is inaccessible, and the greatest beatitude
and felicity of Angel or man, consists in contemplating upon her beauty; and
yet notwithstanding all this, she endured many a harder shock from her
adversaries then Mr de Rodon, or his bitter translatour will ever be able to
give her; but yet she still comes off with glory and victory. All the
heathenish Philosophers, and their mighty Emperors she vanquished, the learned
Rabbis could never shake her, all the heretics from Simon Magus to the Quaker
she crushed and quasht; therefore she need not fear the Mounsieurs translator as
for matter of superstition, Phanaticism, or Idolatry; happy are we in her, and
thrice happy too, if we can but serve her as we ought; but as she deserves we
are not able in this frail life; however all our felicity and rest of
conscience, we own unto her, in this life also; for without her, we should
become restless and distracted or desperate.

Having hinted a little at her extraction or pedigree, which no Angel or tongue
is able to express or come near for its loftiness and celsitude; I must say
something of her virtue and worth; which because it is infinite and in
exhaustible, I confess, I know not how to begin: however this I am sure of,
that her father who is omnipotent, bequeathed unto her all power and dominion
over heaven and earth, Math. 28. so that there is no creature whatsoever, of
what rank, be it never so high, but must acknowledge his being, virtue, and
power, to depend wholly on hers. It is in her (as the Apostle says Acts 17.)
vivimus, movemur, and sumus, we live, we move, we be, whatever perfections are
dispersedly in every creature, are all united in her; and all their perfections
and virtues, are but shaddows, and a mere participation of her essential ones:
Christ by his Incarnation noblisied and raised our humane nature above all the
quires of Angels; by his bloody sacrifice of the Cross, he purchased our
Redemption; and by this unbloudy sacrifice of the Mass, he unites us unto
himself, and makes us his Mystical members: for he says Ioh. 6. qui manducat
meam carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem, in me manet, and ego in eo; he that eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood (he says not the signs of his flesh and blood)
abides in me, and I in him; that is to say, we shall be knit and united
together: and says again with an oath: ibid. Amen, amen, unless you eat the
flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall have no life in you.
And again, he that eats me, the same also shall live by me.

So that according to the clear expression of those texts, our union with
Christ consists in the Mass, or (which is the same thing) in eating the
sacramental bread which is offered in the Mass; and our disunion or separation
from Christ, consists in our not eating it; and by the third text we are
taught, that in it our life consists; for he says presently after; he that
e^teth this bread, shall live for ever.

The Angelical doctor S. Thom. Aquinas, to whose arbitration Mr de Rodon
profers, with his whole party to subscribe concerning the Eucharist, in opusc.
57. has these words: O pretiosum and admirandum convivium, salutiferum, and
omni suavitate repletum! quid enim hoc convivio pretiosius esse potest? in quo
non earnes vitulorum and hircorum, ut olim in lege, sed nobis Christus sumendus
proponitur, verus deus; quid hoc sacramento miralibius? in ipso namque panis
and vinum in corpus and sanguinem Christi substantialiter convertuntur. O
precious wonderful, and healthful banquet, replenished with all sweetness! for
what can be more precious then this banquet? in which not calves or goats
flesh, as in former times, but Christ, the true God is set before us to be
eaten; what is more wonderful then this Sacrament? for in it bread and wine are
substantially changed into the body and blood of Christ.

S. Cyril in Joan. admonishing the faithful people says, sciant igitur
baptizati homines, and divinae gratiae participes facti, si rarius in Ecclesiam
proficiscantur and longo temporum spatio propter simulatam Religionem mystice.
communicare Christo r^usent: ab aeterna se vita procul depellere; know ye all
that are christened, and made partakers of the divine favors and grace, if you
come to the Church but seldom, and out of a feigned kind of devotion, refuse
to communicate mistically with Christ, that you banish your selves far from
everlasting life.

Great S. Augustine tract. 26. in Joan. courts our 'Diana thus; O Sacramentum
pietatis! O signum unitatis! O vinculum charitatis! qui vult vivere, habet ubi
vivat, habet unde vivat; accedat, credat, incorporetur, ut vivificetur: O
Sacrament of piety! O sign of unity! O chain of charity! he that has a mind
to live, has wherewith to live, and how to live, let him approach, believe, be
incorporated, that he might live: See what efficacy and virtue this great
Doctor attributes to our Sacrament.

But hark what golden-mouthed Chrysostom says hom. 60. ad pop. Antiochen.
Quo^ nunc dicunt; vellem ipsius Christi formam aspicere, figuram, vestimenta,
calceamenta: Ecce cum vides, ipsum tangis, ipsum manducas; how many are there
that say now a days, I would fain see Christ's shape, his face, his clothes, his
shoes; Behold thou see him, thou touchest him, thou earest him; and again,
and tu quidem vestimenta; cupis videre: ipse vero tibi concedit non tantum
videre, verum and manducare, and tangere, and intra te sumere: And thou
desire to see his garments: but he allows thee not only to see him, but also
to eat and touch him, and to receive him into thy body. And in his 61. homely,
to the same people of Antioch he says, tanquam leones ignem spirantes ab hac
mensa recedamus, facti diabolo terribiles, and caput nostrum mente revolventes,
and charitatem quam nobis exhibuit: nam Parents quidem aliis saepe, silios
tradunt alendos: ego autem, inquit, non ita, sed carnibus meis alo, and meipsum
vobis appono, vos omnes generosos esse volens; etc. Therefore going from this
table, let us like Lions breath fire, being made terrible to the devil; and let
us ponder upon our captain and upon the charity he endowed us with; for other
parents do often send their children to be nursed by others; but I (quoth he) do
not so, but feed you with my own flesh, and do set my self to be eaten, before
you, for to make you all generous and noble hearted, etc.

And again the same holy doctor in his book de sacerdotio says; per idem tempus
quo sacerdos sacrificium perficit, and Angeli assident, and caelestium
Potestatum universus ordo clamores excitant, and locus altari vicinus in illius
honorem qui immolatur, Angelorum choris plenus est: during the whole time that
the Priest offers sacrifice; both the Angels stand by, and the whole order of
celestial Powers do make a harmony, and the place next to the Altar is filled
with Quirs of Angels in honor of him that is immolated or sacrificed.

Here you see (gentle reader) what esteem and value these holy doctors and
fathers had for the e^charist, and consequently for the mass; you see what
virtue and force they attribute unto it how, they say, it incorporates us with
Christ, how it works charity in us, how it makes us generous and resolute to go
through all crosses and hardship for the love of God; and how it renders us
terrible and formidable to the very devil himself. All these, and ten thousand
virtuous operations more are in the Mass, or unbloudy sacrifice which is
offered in it, if we of our part did not obstruct its operations; for there is
no glowing fire, ^evet so active and hot, to make iron, or any other metal as
this Sacrament is in it self, to inflame our souls with the love of God, if we
would put no obstacle to it; and nothing deba^s us more from its operation (as
S. Cyrill tells us) then our long abstinence from it: for as great S. Gregory
says: hoc distare, fratres charissimi, inter delicias corporis cordis solet;
quod corporales deliciae, cum non habentur, grave in se desiderium accendunt;
cum vero habitae eduntur, commedentem protinus in fastidium per satietatem
vertunt; at contra, spirituales deliciae, cum non habentur, in fastidio sunt,
cum vero habentur, in desiderio, etc. Brethren, this is the difference which is
usually betwixt spiritual and corporal delights or fare; that when the corporal
fare is not had it raises and stirrs in one an exceeding desire and longing
for it; but when it is had, the eater through saticty, presently begins to
loath it. But contrarily while one has not the spiritual fare, it is irksome
and loathsome to him; but when he has it, the more ^e feeds on it, the more
desire and likeness he has to it.

From what is hitherto said in this Appendix, considering the clear and express
Passages of scripture, the unanimous consent of the holy fathers concerning the
Eucharist, and consequently concerning the Mass, and their elogies of it; and
considering the reason I produced of its agreeableness with Gods infinite and
highest goodness to impart himself really to us; and my other reason or parity
betwixt the formal words of God the father and God the son; I think no man of
reason or understanding, unless he be a quite partial censurer can approve of
the bitter expression of Mr de Rodons Translator, in his preface to his authors
treatise, against our Diana: where he bespatters her with superstition,
Phanaticisme, and Idolatry, etc. for by upbraiding and accusing her with these
horrid crimes, he involves all her worshippers and well-wishers in them also;
and consequently not only the Papists, but also the holy fathers and doctors
whose clear testimonies I lately produced in her behalf; nay the very Angels,
and whole celestial court who as S. Chrysostom says, assist and sing at this
dreadful sacrifice; all these (if we believe the Translator) must be counted
superstitious, Phanaticks, and Idolaters, for adoring Diana; or if they be not
counted so for adoring her, there is no reason why we should be, fo doing as
they do.

But O perverseness and wickedness of heresy, and of heretical spirits! who
endeavor to ruin and destroy Christ's flock; for who could believe (but that
we know it by sad experience) that the devil, and all his ministers should be
so subtle and crafty as to bring it to pass, that this sacrifice which is of so
old a standing, and universally embraced, for so many ages, by all Christians,
and left as a perpetual testament by Christ to his Church; should be not only
rejected, and despised, by so many thousands that pass under the notion of
being Christians, but also that they should take a solemn oath, (and cause
others, upon severe penalties to do the like, or if they refuse it, to turn
them out of their livelihood, cast them into Prison, or banish them, etc.)
against the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament; whereas the thing in it
self, is not impossible to God, nor the verity of this oath revealed by him, to
any of them. But that which aggravates the sin the more, is, that in the thing
wherein God most obliged, and demonstrated his love to mankind, in that very
thing they disown and contradict his word: Christ says, by way of
intermination or oath: Amen, Amen, I say unto you, unless you eat the flesh of
the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you: And they
swear point blank against him, saying, it is not his flesh and blood, but bread
and wine, or at the best, nothing else but the sign of his flesh and blood.
But how, forsooth, is it possible for us to eat and drink the flesh and blood
of the son of man in the Sacrament, unless his flesh and blood be in it? what
perjury is, how grevious a sin, how distructive to human society, how infamous,
and how it may be committed, and what penalties are due to open perjurers; I
need not set down here; the laws of all Nations do sufficiently set it down.
But to be so ungrateful for a benefit of so high a nature as this is, and to
disown it flatly by confirmation of an oath, against Christ's express words, and
against so many clear testimonies of scripture, and all the holy fathers; must
needs in my opinion astonish any Christian of common reason and sense: yet from
whom God withdraws his grace, and the light of faith, he will fall (I must
confess) into these, and such like inconveniences and absurdities, and greater
too, if they can be possibly; for heresy is a bottomless gulf of darkness and
ignorance, that conveys those miserable reprobates that fall into it, into the
other bottomless pit or gulf of hell, out of which there is no redemption: and
so is the Psalmists words verified in these two gulfs, where he says, that
Abyssus Abysum invocat: one pit leads or draws a man to another.

As to all the rest of the Translators raylings against Popery, and its
tenants, against its practices in reference to Protestant Magistrates or civil
government, that as it is pernicious to their souls by its heretical doctrines
and Idolatrous services; so it is to their persons and estates, and
consequently, that to introduce it into this kingdom would be an act as
unpolitick as Antichristian; as has been demonstrated in that incomparable
piece entitled; The established Religion in opposition to Popery. All this old
fustian stuff is but to vent his bitterness, whereof he is so full, that unless
he gave it some passage, he must needs burst or crack; for until he shows this
established Religion, we will never own its demonstration: where no two are of
the same opinion concerning faith, how can there be a Religion established?
therefore I refer all his scolding-stuff to the oysterwomen of Billings-gate to
be answered, and I say that if our Religion be the only true Religion (as we
doubt not but she is, for she has all the marks of it, and there is but one
Religion that is good) certainly she cannot be pernicious to civil Government;
for Christ's Religion commands us to honor our king, and obey our superior
Powers: but all the world knows that when Popery is most in vigor and force,
and where it is in greatest ^lourish; it never int^enches or encroaches upon
their Monarchs temporal power, nor upon any of their Magistrates: It was never
read or heard of yet, that the Roman Catho^icks ever took up arms, against
their Catholic Princes, or any Catholic Prince against another upon the score
of Religion only: when they are at civil or foreign wars, it is never about
Religion, unless it be against the Turk, the common enemy of Christendom. But
the l^st civil wars of England, all men know, was commenced upon the pretext
of Religion, and upon a pretended score of defending the Gospel; a most
virtuous king was innocently murdered by his own subjects in this quarrel; the
Roman Catholics (allthough he was of a different Profession) had no hand in
his innocent blood; they abhominated, and detested so horrid a sacrilege from
the bottom of their hearts; they stuck to him, defended him, spent their lives
and estates for him, as long as they were able, and there was any hopes of his
safeguard; he was never betrayed by any of them, in any charge they bore under
him; his welfare and safety was their chief aim; and every one of them was
ready to sacrifice himself, his fortune, and estate for his sake. After they
saw, all was lost, that he was taken from them, and there was no resisting the
divine fate; as many of them as could, followed their Liege sovereign that now
is, (whom God long preserve) but then banished, (not by his Roman Catholic
subjects) and in foreign countries, they cleaved to him there, they, fought
for him; and many of them quitted their good employments, and honorable places
they had under foreign Princes, whereupon their whole livelihood and fortunes
depended, only for to follow and serve him, and hazard their lives for his
sake, in hopes to rei^throne him in his fathers (of happy mememory) royal
throne. Afterward, they accompanied and waited on him home at his
Restoration, and ever sines served him as Loyally and faithfully all along, as
any subjects can their Prince; and others of them that without evident danger
of ruining themselves for ever, could not follow and wayt upon him beyond Sea,
helped him with their hest Intelligences, and some of them underhand with their
means also. All these are fresh demonstrations of their Loyalty; and things
that happened in our own age; how can such people then be justly impeached with
di^loyalty? or how can their practices be pernicious in reference to his sacred
Majesty, and to his Protestant Magistrates and people? whereas they all live in
Peace and tranquillity with their fellow subjects, and never raised the least
commotion or mutiny against the government, though never so much provoked
thereunto.

That England was so glorious and happy a kingdom in it self, for many ages*
and was a terror to its neighbors that invaded it, and often conquered them
and their kingdoms, under Popish kings and their Papist subjects needs no
proof; for the very chronicles of England made by Protestant Authors
themselves, do su^ciently show that; as also many memorable worthy things done
by them, and many of their happy governments; we see also that all our
neighboring Popish kings, and absolute Princes do live and govern peacably and
quietly over their Papist subjects; which demonstrats evidently that Popery is
not incompatible or inconsistent with k^ngship, or civil government and
consequently, (if it be the only true Religion) as for matter of government or
state, it is neither unpolitick or Antichristian, ^o introduce it into any
kingdom or country whatsoever.

But O England, England, in former times famed through the whole world, for
sanctity, learning and Prowess; wheresore do thou not consider what Religion
made thee so glorious and renowned? S. Austin the monk, and his forty blessed
companions, were the first that brought the light of the Gospel from Rome to
the Angles, or english men; from whom thou have thy denomination: this Austin
and his fellow-Missioners were all Dianaists, or Mass Priests, and received
holy orders* This much thy own Protestant Chronicles can tell thee. To this
Austin ( Bake^ says) king E^helbert gave his chief city of ^anterbury, and his
own Royal Palace there, made sinc^ the Cathedral of that See; withdrawing
himself to Reculver in the I Will of Thanet, where he erected a Palace for
himself, and his successors. He gave him also an old Temple, standing without
the Eastwall of the city; which he honored with the name of S. Pa^cras: And
then added a Monastery to it, and dedicated it to S. Peter and Paul; appointing
it to be the place of the Kentish kings sepul^hres. But in regard of S. Austin
the procurer, both Pan^ras, Pet^r, and Paul were soon forgotten: and it was,
and is to this day called S. Austins: which Abbey S. Austin enriched with
diverse Relics, which he brought with him from Rome, which was a part of
Christ's seameless coat, and of Aarons Rodd: thus far Baker. Where you may
plainly see, out of one of your own Protestant Authors, how Christian Religion
was first brought into England, and planted here by Mass-Priests. Here you may
see how those that brought it in, did dedicate Churches unto them, with this
intention, that the Saints should patronize and protect all those that should
frequent their Churches with prayers. Here you may also see, how in those days
sacred Relics were held in esteem and veneration by the Propagators of
Christian Religion. Finally, any body may clearly see, by the very notions or
names of the festi^al times, viz. of Christ-Masse, Candle-Mass, Lamb-Mass,
Mi^hael-Mass, Martle-Mass; that the Mass was used and held in great veneration
by our devout Ancestors, ever since England was converted to the Christian
says. For it is certain these denominations of the holy times came first from
Christians, and not from Pagans. It is also sure, that sanctity, and Christian
learning, could never have been attributed to our heathenish Ancestors.
Therefore if they were attributed to our primitive Christian forefathers: why
do we swerve from their pious ways and Religion, which is well known, and
granted by all Historiographers, both Catholics and Protestants, to have been
the self same which was, and is now in communion with the Church of Rome; and
consequently, that of the Mass? Or with what Religion and conscience, can the
Reformists of our time, censure all the Primitive Christians of England since
Austin the Monks time, to be guilty of the horrid crimes of superstition,
Phanaticisme, and Idolatry? and yet by branding us with those crimes, they do
it; for we hold but the same doctrine of the Mass, which they practiced,
taught us, and delivered unto us: so that by attaching us with those horrid
crimes, they involve them with us in them also.

But who could not rather think, that any man of reason and understanding: any
man that has any spark of belief; of the love or fear of God in him; or that
has any sense or feeling of the hour of his death, of the immortallity of his
soul* of eternity, and of the terrible judgment of God. Who (I say) would not
think but he ought rather to ponder well, and consider with himself, how
dangerous a thing it is, and of what weight and concernment to his soul and
eternal salvation; not to shake of all antiquity, and the old lyturgy which
has been used and practiced by all the orthodox Christians of all ages, since
Christ's time until now; and which is now also in use amongst the most
universal Professors of Christianity? a lyturgy so well grounded upon many
clear and express texts of Scripture, backed and seconded by the unanimous
interpretations and definitions of all the General Councils, and holy fathers
of Gods Church in a word, a liturgy so well cohering and agreeing with the
infinite goodness, charity, and mercy of God to us; whereby he demonstrated his
love to us in the highest degree imaginable that could be in this life. This
mistical liturgy to reject, abandon, c^shiere and contemn, upon the bare words
of some self interessed calumnious opiniators, who in comparison with the Roman
Catholics of all ages; with the General Couneils: and with the whole torrent
of holy fathers, are for fanctity of life, for learning, and for veneration of
antiquity, but like a handful o^ wild, rude, illiterate cow*heards, to
compare with an innumerable multitude of grave, Counselors, or Judges. What
man I trow that has any belief or care of his soul, if he were not starkmadd,
would cl^ave to such kind of fellows, and swerve from all the grand heroes of
Gods Church? what thing else is this, but openly and manifestly to turn ones
back to Christ, and to contradict his express commandment, where he bids us
hear his Church, or he will count us but for heathens and publicans?

Did not the Apostle (forsooth) prophecy unto Titus, 2. Tit. 4. thus: for there
shall be a time when they will not hear sound doctrine, but according to their
own desires they will heap to themselves masters, having itching ears, and from
the truth certes they will avert their hearing etc. These words can in no wise
be alluded to the Roman Catholic, nor to their doctrine of the Mass, which is
of as old a standing as Popery is: for our adversaries say, that the Mass and
Popery are convertible terms: But all Ecclesiastical histories do attest that
there have been Popes, or Bishops of Rome, ever since the Apostles time:
therefore if Popery and the Mass be convertible terms; the Mass has been
immediately from the Apostles time, and consequently, it cannot be that unsound
doctrine the Apostle prophesied, or spoke of to Titus. Neither do we find in
the Acts of the Apostles, or elsewhere, that the Apostles ever opposed the
Mass, or Popery either; which if it were a Phanatick, superstitious, or
Idolatrous doctrine and liturgy, (as the good translator styles it to be)
doub^less they would have done tooth and nail; and would never have suffered it
to have ^rept into Christ's Church, and so venemously to have infected her; S.
Paul's faith, and the Romans was the same, when he wrote these words unto them:
for I desire to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual grace, to
confirm you; that is to say, to be comforted together in you, by that which is
common to us both, your faith and mine. Romans 1. did the Romans differ then in
Religion and Lyturgy from their first Bishop or Pope? no certainly; therefore
it is much to be seared; nay in all reason and probability, (if it be not a
theological demonstration) that the opposers of the Mass, be those people the
Apostle spoke of; for, it is a thing not only improbable, but incredible also,
that S. Peter, (or if not he, as our adversaries will have it) or any else of
the Apostles, or all of them together (if they had a hand in it) should
institute a Bishop of Rome (which all the world for ever after, called the
Pope, for his distinction from all other Bishops) who introduced this Liturgy,
which is convertible with his name, if the Lyturgy were at all disson^te from
that of the Apostles themselves. It is also both improbable and incredible, but
that S. John, who was both an Apostle, and Evangelist and a most eminent divine
withal; and who outlived S. Peter, and all the rest of the Apostles. It is, I
say a strange thing, that he should not take this first Roman Bishop or Pope in
hand, confute, quash, and trample down himself and his Lyturgy, if it was not
the selfsame, with his own, and the rest of the Apostles. But we see not a word
or syllable in S. John, or in any of the Apostles or Evangel^s (who were
contemporaneans of of this first Bishop or Pope of Rome with whom the Mass is
convertible) against the Lyturgy of the Mass. From whence we cannot but
conclude, that the Mass is the selfsame Lyturgy, that was practiced and used by
the Apostles themselves. Therefore let all the opposers of the Mass take good
^d, they are not the people the Apostle Prophesied of to Titus his disciple;
and consequently, let them take good heed, that by oppugning the incruent
sacrifice of the Mass; they turn not their backs to God, by rejecting and
vilisiing the universal Lyturgy of his Church, celebrated, and practiced by his
Apostle. Let them (I say) take good heed they hearken not too much to the
unsound doctrines of their new masters, their Ministers; whose ears do itch
after new opinions; certes they will and do daily avert their hearing from God
and the truth. And yet few of them agree in all points of their new opinions;
which is an evident sign their doctrine is false. Not to apprehend the
dreadful hour of death, and the terrible and strict Judgment of God that
follows it; and not to fear the great power of the severe Judge, who is able to
cast both body and soul headlong into everlasting helfire, to band against him,
and to contemn his Lyturgy, his Sacraments; and his Church, after he told us,
that unless we hear her, he will count us but as heathens and Publicans; is the
greatest s^upidity and madness imaginable: and yet the opposers and enemies of
our 'Diana* for swerving from Antiquity, from all the General Councils, and
holy others, whose authorities are so clear and manifest for* her; cannot but
be at least highly suspected to be in the wrong. They themselves, for the most
part, say that we can be saved* in our way; and yet they perse^te us more then
they do the Turks, Jews, and Pagans, who are open enemies to Christ* we hold
they cannot be saved in their way, because we would not have them be deluded,
for we believe none can be saved out of the Church, and there is but only one
Church of God: why then do not they follow the surest way, wherein both we and
they agree a man may be saved; and renounce that suspected way, which we who
are the far greater number (and not inferior to them for antiquity and
learning) do hold to be unsafe? or can the way to heaven be too to sure? Were
it so secure an estate or great parcel of money, nocare and diligence would be
wanting, great heed would be taken that no slaw, scruple, or doubt should be
^found in the Patent or Indenture; wherefore is it not so also in this case or
state of our souls safety, which ought to be the dearest, and of greatest
con^ernment to us of all things? why I say, do we not walk in the common and
sure Catholic road approved of by both parties? oh craftiness and guile of
Satan! oh vanity of worldly Pomp! oh sensuality of flesh and blood! But in
plain and open truth, our adversaries are clearly convicted concerning the
sacrifice of the Mass, and of the real presence of Christ's body in it: for how
(forsooth) is it possible to convince any Christian man more, then by plain and
express texts of scripture, backed and seconded by the clear authorities and
testimonies of all General Councils; by the unanimous consent of all the holy
fathers: and by sound and irrefragable reasons deduced from clear Philosophical
Principles? by all these Mediums, is the sacrifice of the Mass, and the real
presence of Christ's body in the host proved in this Appendix, and for to
convince a Christian, no other medium or argument can be more forcible or
convincing. Therefore whosoever yields and acquiesces not to these mediums has
nothing to plead for himself but mere obstinacy; and consequently, he wilfully
turns his back to God and his Church, and runs directly to his own infallible
damnation; he misprises our saviors precious blood and Passion; and vilifies
him and all his heavenly treasure and riches, with the promises Christ made
unto him of them. In a word, he has no more belief then a mere Athiest.

As for Mr. de Rodons sophistical and false treatise, I suppose, (and perhaps I
am not deceived) that his wily arguments did so work upon his zealous
translator, and totally convince him with his apparent Philosophical reasons,
that he took every one of them to be a palpable demonstration; and consequently
in his own judgment thinking his cause to be very clear, out of ^ pure zeal to
Religion; and taking ours to be but mere Idolat^y; that made him fall so
bitterly upon our bones.

But now when he reads this treatise, after he has seen my full answer to his
author, and how I have followed him through his whole tract, from point to
point, and refuted him manifestly every where, paying him also in his one
Philosophical coin: after (I say) the translatot has perused this book, and
examined the case better with himself, pondering well upon the arguments of
both sides, pro, and con: I hope he will become mild; and have a better
opinion and esteem for our Diana and Religion, then he had before. I hope also,
that his understanding being clarified and enlightened by my solutions, whereby
all de Rodons fallacious sophisms are detected, and made minifest to all men of
any learning or judgment, he finding him to be but an Impo^tor, and deluder of
weak ignorant souls; will soon disown both him and his damnable tract; finally;
I hope that no worldly interest (as alas it does thoufands of our adverse
party) will so blind and intoxicate him, as to make him lose the interest of
his soul, and refuse to be an incorporate mistical member of Christ; which
without the help of our Diana (as I have sufficiently proved already) is
impossible for him, or any man else to be.

As de Rodons weak arguments were not of force enough to pearce or annoy our
Diana in any thing the lea^t; so likewise his Translators railing and s^olding
at her, can do her no more harm, then a dogs barking can do to the Moon;
therefore he had better follow the good counsel of grave Gamaliel to the Jews
concerning how they should deal with the Apostles, whose words be these: And
now therefore I say unto you, depart from these men, and let them al^ne; for if
this counsel or work be of men, it will be diss^lved; but if it be of God, you
are not able to diss^lve them, lest perhaps you be found to ^esist God also,
Act, 5. Even so (in my poor judgment) had the Translator best do to the Mass;
for with railing and scolding at it, he will never be able to hurt it: It has
stood from all ages since Christ's time until now; and if it be of God, it is
not the Translator or I that shall be able to put it down; alas both he and I
shall be dead and rotten, while noble Diana will be as brisk, merry and fresh
as she was the very first day she came into this world.

However I cannot but ex^use the good Translator because of his great zeal, if
his bitterness toward us proceeded only from ignorance and not from malice or
interest^; for S. Paul himself out of his ardent zeal to the Synagogue (wherein
he was born and bred) was once a severe enemy, and violent Persecutor of Gods
Church. But after he was illuminated by Christ, and knew better things, who
ever after was more zealous for her honor and glory then he? and yet he
himself does confess, that God showed him his great mercy, quia ignorans feci:
because I did it (quoth he) ignorantly: so I beg God heartily, that this small
book of mine, by his blessing, may illuminate the minds of those that are
plunged ^n the Abyss of heresy and Ignorance, through the means of Mr de Rodon,
and such like Phanatick heretics, who by their false interpretations and
applications of holy scripture, set out, and garnished with their sophistical
arguments do deceive and mislead many thousands of poor ignorant souls to their
utter ruin, and everlasting damnation, for leaving their true Mother the
Church, out of which there is no salvation for any: And amongst the rest of the
illuminated, I wish the Translator were one.

To conclude this Appendix; I exhort all the Catholics of England* and I
earnestly beg and beseech them, for the love of our sweet savior Jesus Christ,
and the tender bowels of his infinite mercy toward them: to stick closly, and
cleave constantly to their precious Diana; and for her sake to be always ready,
and prepared to undergo all manner of persecutions, tribulations, and losses,
rather then forsake her: for whatever damage, or ill-entreatment they suffer
upon her account, they may be sure, she will requite them a hundredfold double
for it with full interest. Our savior himself did ^id us, Not fear them that
kill the body, and after this have no more to do; but I will show you (quoth
he) whom ye shall fear: fear him who after he has killed, has power to cast
into hell Luke 12. for your momentary sufferings in this life, for his sake,
your crown and reward will be everlasting hereafter. More then eye can see, ear
can hear, or understanding can comprehend: 1. Cor. 2. verity himself does
promise it, and his promise he can, and will perform. Expect him but a little
while with patience, and in your patience ye shall possess your souls: S. Luke.
21. It is far better for you to suffer a little and short famine, cold, want,
misery, imprisonment, nay death it self for her sakes then to live plentifully,
and abundantly here for a moment, and for ever after (for denying her) to be in
everlasting famine, imprisonment, torment misery and want: for unless we be
Christ's fellow sufferers in this life, we shall not be his copartners in glory
as the Apostle tells Timothy 2. If we shall sustain we shall also reign
together.

In a word, I conclude my book with the ^ame prayer, the Translator ends his
preface with, viz. I earnestly beseech my Lord and God he would make it
prosperous and successful for the good of souls; and if any shall receive
benefit by it, I desire them to give him all the glory, and I shall think my
self infinitely recompensed, for my pains in composing it, yet if there be any
thing in it that is not orthodox and sound, I humbly submit my poor judgment to
the censure of our holy mother the Church.

Errata.
PAge* 13. line ult. for it is not repugnant, r. is not repugnant. p. 37. for
John. he that, r. is mentioned in S. John 6. he that. p. 67. l. 19. for the
wine was destroyed, r. the water was destroyod* p. 85. l. 25. for charity sake,
r. clarity sake. p. 87. l. 21. for neither, r. either. p. 115. l* 5. for place,
r. places. p. 118. l. 8. for would, r. could. p. 130. l. 14. for between
corporal things, r. but between corporal things. p. 168. l. 27. for that
charity, r. that clarity. p. 171. l. 9. for therein, r. their. p. 175. l. 11.
for consure, r. censure. p. 192. l. 21. for next under the holy writ, r. next
unto holy writ. p. 204. l. 14. for in this glory, r. in his glory.

In the Appendix p. 3. l. 27. for your r. our. p. 24. l. 23. r. metal ^iery. p.
25. l. ^. r. corporis and cordis.

FINIS.
AN INDEX OF THE CHAPTERS Contained in this Book.
Chap. I Concerning the Exposition of these words, This is my Body. p. 1. Chap.
II. Concerning the Exposition of these wo^ds, He that eate^h my Flesh, and
drinks my Blood, has Everlasting Life. My Flesh is Meat indeed. p. 36. Chap.
III. Against Transubstantiation* p. 64. Chap. IV. Against the real presence of
Christ's Body in the Host, or Consecrated Wafer. p. 96. Chap. V. Against the
Adoration or Worshipping of the Host. p. 199. Chap. VI. Against taking away of
the Cup. p. 242. Chap. VII. Against the Mass. p, 293. Chap. VIII. Containing
Answers to the Objections of the Romish Doctors. p. 345. The Pre^ace of
Monsieur d^ Rodons Translator. p. 461. An Answer to the Preface, and an
Appendix to the Book. p. 1.
An INDEX of the chief things contained in this Book.
Christ's word is Creative, productive and effective. page 4* Transubstantiation
cannot be plainlier expressed, than by these wo^ds* This is my Body* p. 6.
Christ's words are practical Signs and causes of what they signify, other men's
words are but speculative signs only of things signi^fied by them. p. 12. An
Image has always an Essential relation to its Prototype. p. 11.
Transubstantiation both a Sacrament, and the thing signified. p. 13. It is not
repugnant that the same thing should signify its own self. p. Ibid. The Bread
and Wine were not made the Body and Blood of Christ by a bare Blessing or
Thanksgiving. p. 14. The words of Consecration ought to be understood according
to their immediate sense. p. 17. The B. Sacrament is the New Testament in
Christ's Blood, and not only of his Blood, p. 22. These words, This is my Body,
signify a substantial being, and not a Sacramental only. p. 23. The Protestant
Communion exhibits not Christ's Body and Blood to the Believers. p. 27. The
Sacramental Species receive^ worthily, makes the receiver a Mystical Member of
Christ. p. 30. Faith alone insufficient for this Sacrament. Ib. Faith is no
mouth literally or metapho^ically. p. 31. Christ's glorified Body never
damnified by the receiver of the B. Sacramen^. p. 32. To verify a proposition,
it suffices the thing be as the proposition says it is, p. 35. I^ is the
Sacrament that is the chief and whole cause of our spiritual refreshment, and
the thing which the Soul principally hungers and thirsts after: Faith is only a
con^ition requisite* so is Hope and Charity also, for to receive worthily, p.
38. Christ's Body worthily received, works spiritually upon the Soul, p. 40.
These words of St. Aug. To eat the ^lesh of Christ is a Figure, etc. which De
Rodon alleges against us, expounded* p. 43. Cardinal Cajetans* Authority
alleged against us expounded, p. 45. The action whereby we obtain remission of
sins, an^ sanctification ending in glo^ification, consists not in the spiritual
eating or drinking by Faith only, p. 5^. In these words, My Flesh* is mea^
indeed, no Figure falls upon the word ( Meat.) p. 55. Christ's Flesh is a
corporal food that nourishes spiritually only, p. 57. Objects of Divine Faith
not to he levelled by our reason and sense, p. 59. Christ come^ into the
Sacrament by an adductive power, p. 66. He is not produced there entitatively,
but modally only, p. Ibid. Certain passages of Scripture alleged against us by
De Rodon, viz. That there is ^reaking, givin^, ea^ing and drinking after
Consecra^ion, answered, p. 68. When Christ said, Drink ye all this, Mat. 26. he
meant his Blood. p. 71. Why the e^ects of the Sacramental Species ^emain after
Transubstantiation. p. 73. Transubstantiation is a total substantial
conversion, and not a formal substantial conversion only, p. 75. The
Sac^amental Species are something Subject* li^e, p. 77. Transubstantiation
destroys not the nature of Acci^ents, p. 79. Transubstantiation destroys not
the Nature o^ Sac^aments, p. 84. Corporal nourishment in the Sacramental
S^ecies, not requisite. p. 85. The Sacrament of the Eucharist ought to be
adored with a Latria. p. 88. If our adversaries give not a Latriacal adoration
to their Communion Bread, it may be lawfully given to Dogs. p. 89. If they
adore their Communion, they are greater Idolaters than we. p. 91. Christ gave
power to Priests to Consecrate. p. 97. Christ's Body is in the Sacrament
immediately by reason of its substance, p. 99. Its quantity is also there,
though not with its quantitative dimensions, p. 100. The definition of a proper
place, and how many manner of ways both Christian Divines and Philosophers hold
a thing may be in a place, p. 103. A glorious Body may be in its equivocal
place, p. 109. The Iacobins, and the Jesuits opinion concerning Christ's Body to
be brought, or produced in the Sacrament, saved, p. 112. Christ's Body is in all
things subject to his Soul, as his Soul is subject to his Divinity, p. 117. Why
the local extension of Christ's Body in the Sacrament is hindered, p. 119. De
Rodons Argument of to move, and not to move at the same time etc. answered. p.
121. Wherein a formal contradiction consists. p. 123 De Rodons ridiculous
quibbles and Unphilosophical illations, answered, p. 129. Distance is only
betwixt corporal things, whilst they are in their univocal places. p. 130 A
Sacramental place, is properly no place at all. p. 133. De Rodons Dropsical
Argument, of a drop of water that drowned many thousands etc. mouldred. p. 136.
Division is only between corporal things in their proper places. p. 138. God,
and Nature, are not obliged to do, what they can do. p. 140. De Rodon shoots at
Christ through Diana's side, p. 143. Christ is seen in the Sacrament by the
Spiritual Eye of our understanding, supported by the light of Faith, p. 146. It
is not convenient we should see Christ visibly with our Corporal Eyes in the
Blessed Sacrament, p. 148. Substances possess no place, p. 151. Christ's Body in
the Sacrament, whether taken substantially or quantitatively, has no posture or
situation in it, p. 154. His Body appears not more or less, for dividing or
sub-dividing the Host, p. 156. Christ is as glorious and happy in the Host, as
he is in Heaven, p. 161. What these terms Reduplicatively and specificatively,
what sensus compositus, and divisus, mean, p. Ibid. As Christ comes into the
Host without local (...) so he leaves it without local ^e* (...), p. 165. De
Rodon gives the Apostle the lie, p. 167. Christ, Diana, and the Apostle, saved
from De Rodons keen Arrow, p. 168. De Rodon jumps with the Jews against Christ,
p. 170. His Thunderbolt or Celestial Arrow shivered, p. 172. According to De
Rodons Principles, there ought to be no Sacrament of our Lords Supper at all,
p. 174. Cl^ud de Xaintes defended against De Rodon, p. Ibid. Exorcismes, p.
176. De Rodons miraculous Arrow put by, p. 179. Christ really in Heaven, and
really in the Blessed Sacrament at the same time* p. 182. He is not in the
Sacrament impanated, p. Ibid. He gave himself to Judas also, p. 18^. Bellormine
and Peron defende^. p. 186. The Sacraments of the old Testament had a relation
to those of the new, p. 187. The Mo^sieurs Scripturistical Arrows shat^ered, p.
190. The marks of the Roman Church, p. 193. The Seven Sacraments expounded, p.
195. Why we keep the Eucharist in our Pixes and (...), p. 197. Monsieur and his
Party, the false Prophets the Evangelist spoke of, p. Illid* God many manner of
ways in his Creatures, p. 202. External Adoration due to Christ, where he is
known to be personally present, p. 203. Heretics uncivil both to God and Man,
p. 206. According to De Rodons Principles, we may adore the Devil instead of
Christ, p. 209. Why External adoration is due to Christ in the Sacrament, more
than in the Water of Baptism, p. 210. Heaven and Hell destroyed by the
Monsieurs Principles, p. 211. The Monsieurs third Foundation built upon
Quicksands, p. 215. De Rodons very considerable Argument, pernicious to all
mankind, p. 218. Destructive to Go^s Providence, p. 222. A moral certitude of
being Christened, sufficient, p. 223. Pope Adrian defended against De Rodon, p.
226. Apostate Priests and Monks in credit and spiritual jurisdiction with De
Rodon and his Party, p. 228. The P^imitive Church adored the Host, p. 233.
Proved by the Testimonies of sundry Holy Fathers, p. Ibid. Our Diana, or Mass,
holds it out from all Ages maugre De Rodon, and all Heretics, p. 237. Diana
vindicated against Idolatry, p. 238. The Church makes no new Articles of Faith,
but only declare what belongs to those made by the Apostles, p. 245. That the
Constantian Canon or Statute concerning the taking away of the Cup, contradicts
not Christ or his Apostle, demonstrated, p. 247. De Rodon proved a jugler, p.
254. De Rodon proved a calumnions Liar, p. 256. What the Catholics do hold
concerning Merit, p. 257. Communion under one or both Species, of the same
value, p. 260. Christ gave the Sacrament under one Species, p. 262. De Rodons
negative Proofs against the Sacrifice of the Mass, answered, p. 266. De Rodon
proved an Heretic, p. 268. The Holy Fathers against De Rodon, p. Ibid. St.
Gregory and Bellarmine not for him, but quite against him, p. 272. Tradition
vindicated, p. 273. Christ the first that eve^ said Mass, p. 275. The Monsieur
belyes the Church, p. 276. The Sacrifices of the old Law, Types of Christ's
bloody Sacrifice, 277. The Sacrifice of the Mass has a Relation to that of the
Cross, and yet essentially both one, Ibid. The Monsieurs first crusher, or
Millstone shattered, 279. Christ's word surer than any visible or sensible
knowledge, 284. Christ can supernaturally put his substance in the accidents of
another Subject or substance, 285. Christ's Sacramental ubication, a Predicable,
not a Predicamental Accident, 286. The Sacramental Species being destroyed,
Christ's Entity or Substance is not therefore destroyed. 288 Christ's Entity
depends not upon the Sacramental Species, 289. De Rodons rushing absurdities,
which he says would ensue from the Doctrine of the Mass; all obstructed, 290.
The Sacrifice of the Mass, propitiatory for the living and the dead, 292. The
Monsieurs second Millstone crushed in pieces, 293. The Monsieurs Objection out
of Heb. 9. answered* 295* To be offered bloody or unbloody, is only an
accidental of a strict Sacrifice. p. 296. De Rodon falsifies Scripture. p. 298.
Christ's Passion applied unto us, by receiving the Blessed Sacrament. p. 301.
Christ's Body given to him, not only to be Sacrificed upon the Cross, but also
upon the Altar, proved by sundry express Testimonies of the Holy Fathers. p.
Ibid. De Rodons Objection out of Heb. 9. answered. p. 307. The Holy Fathers, De
Rodons Adversaries. p. 310. De Rodon, Luthers true follower. p. Ibid. Christ's
unbloody Sacrifice may be o^ered without su^ering. p. 314. De Rodons weighty
Argument as light as a Feather. p. 315. De Rodons illative exclamation makes
him an A^e. p. 317. His other Consequences not worth a Rush. p. 3^9. No
Priests, Ministers or Pastor^ according to De Rodon. p. 320. Rigorous
Sacrifices without death. p. 326. The representation of a thing need not always
differ from the thing represented, in its Entitative Being. p. 328. The
Sacrifice of the Mass is of an infinite value, as to the thing offered. p. 330.
The nature of Gods Justice not altered by the Sacrifice of the Mass. p. 334. De
Rodon found some good thing in the Mass. p. 337. St. Thomas Aquinas, Diana's
(...) Champion. p. 345. De Rodon an unequal Duellist. p. 346. These wor^s, This
is my Body, spoken by Christ without any Figure* p. 349. De Rodons Wiles
Sophistical, second Answer to the Romanists, insufficient. p. 353. His third
Answer to them, noxious to huma^e Society. p. 356. The Monsieur deserved his
Fee. p. 357. The formal words of all Christ's Sacraments not figurative, but
plain. p. 360. If De Rodon had lived in Christ's time, he would dispute with
him. p. 362. De Rodon must drink the Cup molten or unmolten himself. p. 363.
The Pa^eover a Type of the Eucharist also. p. 366. Those of the old Law had the
benefit of the Eucharist. p. 368. If by the words of Consec^ation Christ's Body
be not signi^, the bread is no Sacrament after (...) more than *it was before. p.
372. De Rodons last Answer to the Romanists, both impious and blasphemous. p.
374. Mr. De Rodon, and his learned Mr. Brugier, a couple of Ignoramus's in
Divinity and Philosophy. p 377. Spirits never properly distant from one
another, 378. Gods general ubication fills all places, 379. Christ's Sacramental
ubication in many places together, Ibid. A glorified Body depends not of a
place, 380. The Monsieurs, and his learned Brugiers other Answers, all
ridiculous, Ibid. Scripture falsified by De Rodon again, 384. He manifestly
contradicts the Text, 387. He deserves a double Fee for vilifying Christ's
Sacraments, and blaspheming against the Virginal Integrity of our Blessed Lady,
389, He incurs Gods Curse for glossing upon Scripuure falsely, 391.
Penetrability, a Dowry of a glorious Body, 393. De Rodon little versed in the
Romish Doctors Philosophy, 394. Incensation at a strict Sacrifice, 399. The
Reformists careful of Back and Belly, 400. The Catholics of England more
persecuted by the Reformists, than Turks, Jews or Pagans. 402. St. Paul,
according to De Rodons Principles, was to kill those Gentiles he converted to
Christ, Ibid. In a strict Sacrifice some sensible thing must be destroyed, and
offered with Incense, 404. De Rodon and his Parties Sacrifice, not pure, but
put^id and stinking. 412. Justification by inherent Justice: 414. Christ no
coverer of sin. Ibid. No union among the Reformists, but in banding against the
Catholics. 417. St. Ierom, De Rodons adversary. 422. De Rodon seated next to
the Devil, the Father of Lies. 423. De Rodon convinced in his own
Interpretation of the Text also. 424. De Rodon a better Dictionarist, than
Philosopher or Divine. 425. Melchizedech offered the Bread and Wine to God,
which he brought to refresh Abraham and his Soldiers. 429. The Holy Fathers
siding with us herein, do overbalance De Rodon, and his Parties Reasons to
the contrary. 432. De Rodons manifest Falsification-Argument against us,
answered. 434. Because Christ is a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchizedech, there must be a perpetual Sacrifice corresponding with his
Priesthood. 437. De Rodons assertions destroy Christian Religion here upon
Earth. 439.

